

















C ARY ’s
NEW and CORRECT
ENGLISH ATLAS:
BEING
A New Set of County Maps
FROM
ACTUAL SURVEYS.
E JT JII Ji I TI . A • a
. i// t//r 'j)//rrf (/Yz/sfioz/zh', ( z/zz.\\ Jnn’7zs t zz/zz/ //zzzsf zyz/z.\7z/z/y//z/z’ T J*z\ vy.r,
X AVI GAB LE C A X A L S £c.
fWrrz/rzZ />v a Ztzvzz/yzZ * M. i'l* z>f SzzzzfZz Ji/zh/i/z,
S II E M I ‘ Cr
4
The* Connexion of one Map with another.
X o
(Zz/ZZ7Y// j) Z’SZ 7 'Z/jfz ZZ7Z Zzf‘ ZY/f'/z ( 'oZZ/zfv ,
'Ji
directions for the junction of the Roads from one Comity to
ANOTHER.
LONDON.
Printed for JOHN CARY. Engraver, Map and Print-filler, the comer of Arundel Street. Strand.
Published as the Act directs Sept. Ist 1787.








CONTENTS.
GENERAL MAP OF SOUTH-BRITAIN AND WALES.
Bedforddnre.
Berkdiire.
Buckinghamftiirc.
Cambridgelhire.
Chediire.
Cornwall.
Cumberland,
Derby (hi re.
Devonfhire.
Dor(et(hirc.
Durham.
Effex.
Glocefterdiire,
Hampdiire.
Hereforddiire.
Hertforddiire.
Huntingdondiirc;
Kent,
Lancadiire,
Leicefterdiirc.
Lincolndiire.
Middlefex,
Monmouthdiire;
Norfolk.
Northamptondiire.
Northumberland.
Nottinghamlhire.
Oxforddure,
Rutlanddiire.
Shropdiire,
Somerfetlhire.
Stafforddiire.
Suffolk,
Surry.
Suffex.
Warwick (hire.
Weftmoreland.
Wilt (hi re.
Worcefterdiire.
Yorkfhire, a General Map.
Ditto, North Riding.
Ditto, Eaft Riding.
Ditto, Weft Riding,
North Wales, including the
Counties of
Anglefey,
Carnarvon.
Denbigh,
Flint.
Merioneth, and
Montgomery.
South Wales, including the
Counties of
Brecknock,
Carmarthen.
Cardigan.
Glamorgan.
Pembroke, and
Radnor,




ADVERTISEMENT.
T HE liberal encouragement which the Public are always ready in (hewing to works where utility and’
improvement have been a principal object, induced the Proprietor to undertake the prefent Publication,.,
full of the idea that his labours, in proportion to its merit, would find its reward ; poffeffed of that opinion,
he determined that no exertion on his part fhould be wanting to render the English Atlas as complete as
the fize of it could poffibly admit; that it is more fo than any other work of this kind now extant, he thinks
\
himfelf warranted in afferting; from having recourfe to better materials than hitherto ufed for a work of this
Nature. Ihe kind encouragement already (hewn to this publication, by a very numerous and refpecftable
fubfcription, has been a flattering teftimony of the approbation of the Public, to whom the Proprietor begs
leave to tender his fmcereft acknowledgements for the partiality they have (hewn him.
Added to the Defcriptions of the Counties, with Directions for the Junction of the Roads (which was all
that was at firft intended to accompany the Maps) a complete Alphabetical Lift of the Market Towns is
given, with the days on which their Markets are held, and theirDiftance from the metropolis; to which is
fubjoined, a Correct Lift of all the Poft and Sub-Poft Towns with the Receiving Houfes under each,
throughout England and Wales; (hewing the Rates of Poftage, the Time of Arrival of the Poft in the Coun-
try, and its Difpatch for London.—For which Information, as well as other Material Afiiftance in the
completion of this work, the Proprietor is indebted to the liberal permiftion he was honoured with by the
Comptroller General of the Poft Office, to refort to fuch official documents as enables him to vouch for
the corredlnefs and accuracy of thefe important articles.
Sanctioned by the kind protection the Public have (hewn him, he prefumes to offer to their notice a large
Map of England and Wales, which he is now engraving, upon afeale of five miles to an inch, a fize
which enables him to lay down every Parifh, (thofe excepted which are fituated in large Towns) with
the principal Gentlemen’s Seats, Roads, Rivers, and Navigable Canals, as well as other ufeful matter; and
a particular attention will be paid to the Orthography of this Map, a circumftance fo frequently complained
of, (owing to the difference of pronunciation from the locality of fituation) and which experience only
can obviate.
N. B. A Specimen of the Work may he feen at J. Cary’s, Strand.




LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
TJIS Grace the Duke of Argyle
Right Hon, V-lcountefs Sr. Afaph-
Right Hon. Fail of Ayltlbury
Right Hon. Earl of Albemarle
A’Court, William Pierce Alhe, efq. Heytelbur.y
Adams, , efq Upper Harley-ftrcet
Adams, Mr. Bread ftreet
Aldcrfon, Rev. Mr. M. A. Eckington
Alexander, WllLam, efq. Halifax
Alexander, Mr. South Lambeth
Allen, Geo. Edw. efq. Charlotte-ftreet, Bloomlbury
Anderfon, Mr. Lyme-ftreet
Andrefon, Mr. Upper Lufatia
And'ews, Rev. Mr. Leiccfter-
Aofcll, Mr Whitehall
Arden, Sir Richard Pepper
Arden, •, efq.
Arnott, Mr. Buckingham-ftreet
Afhe, Rev. Mr. Robert, Eling, Hants
Alkew, Mr. Ludgate hill
A (1011, William I honton, efq Clapham
Aihaws, , efq St. Martin’s-lane, Cannon-flrect
Atkinfon, , efq. Pall Mall
Aikinlon, Mr. Leeds
At waters, Mr John, Fordingbridge
A'.wood, Mr. Kmg ftreet, Cov<-nt Garden
Aurid, , elq. Stiaiford Place
A oil, G. efq. Whitehall
B. .
Bight Hon. Lord Vifcount Barrington
Right Hon. Lord B cadalbane
Baber, E. efq. Park ftreet
Bailey, Mr. Sunderland
Bailey, Mr. Hope
Bakewell, Mr.
Baker, Mr. Salilbury-fquare
Baker, Mr Bol'well-coort
Baldwin, J 'leph, efq Serjeants Inn
Ballard, Mi. W. A. Bratton, Wilts
Ball, Mr. Ludgate-hill
Bmkf, Sir Jo eph, Soho-fquare
Banks, J. C. c'q. Nunnidgion
Banner, M' - . 1 homas, Upper Thatrcs-flrect
Barclay, Mr. Hay-market
Barnaro, Henry Boidcro, efq. South Cave
Barnard, M'. Charles, Berkley-fquare
Barwis, Rev. Mr. M. D. Devizes
Barker, Rev. Mr. M. A. Cheftcrfield
Barker, Rev. Mr. ftudent of Chrift Church, Oxon.
Barker, Richard, efq. Taviftock-11 reet
Bantam, Mr. G.C. Chrift Church, Oxon
Bargns, Rev. Mr. Wmchefter
Barton, Mr. Nathaniel, Corflcy, Wilts
Barrett, William, efq. Palace Yard
Barret, Mr.
Barlow, , efq. EfTex-ftreet
Barlow, , efq. Clement’s Inn
Baftard, John, efq. Blandfoid
Bafclico, Mr. Whitehall
Bavcrftoke, Mr. Wmdfor
Bay ley, Thomas, efq. F.R.S. Hope, Derbyftlire
Bayley, James, efq. B lbopflrow, Wilts
Bayllffe, George Scarle, efq. Corfham, Will*
Bayne, , efq. Inner Temple
Beaufort, Rev. Dr M. R. 1. A. Dublin
Bratfon, Mr. Rotherham
Beckett, John, elq. Lteds
Beddome, Mr. Nflfwoith
Beeke, R.v Mr. fellow of Oriel College, Oxon,
Bellamy, Mr. Thomas, Standground, Hants
8.-11, Mr. James
Belcher, Mifs Great Ormond-ftreet
Bennett, Rev. Mr. Piccadilly
Bennett, Thumas, efq. Cobham Row
Benvon, Richard, elq Grolvenor-fquare
Bon well, Rev. Mr. Trinity College, Oxon
Benfon, Mr. Wadham College, Oxon
Benfon, Mr. Leeds
Bcmha-n, Rev. Thomas, M. A. fludent of Chrift
Church Oxon
Bernard, Scroope, efq. Fludyer-ftreet
Bertram, Mr. Hull
Bettilon, Jonas, efq. Holme Pierpoint, Notts
Bi wt 11, I homas, elq. W nitehall
B-fIV, Rev. Mr. Ham, Surry
B llingfley, John, efq. Alhwick
BilPnge, Mr. Catt-aton-ftreet
Billlborrow, Mr. William, Maucheftcr
Billington Mr. Poland-ftreet
Bingham, Mr. Robert
Blnns, Mr. John, Leeds
Birch, Thomas, elq New Bond-ftreet
Bilcoe, J feph Seym- ur, efq. Bury Hill, Notts
Bilchcft, Ni.holaS, elq. Leecs
Biihop, Mr. Duke-ftieet, St; James’s
Black, William, elq. Temple
Blackett, John, efq.
Blackett, Mr. Newcaftle
BLktway, , efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Blake, John, elq. Temple
ELand, Mr. Racquet-court
Block, Captain John, Fulham
Boddy, Mr, John
Bold, Thomas, M. A. Brazen Nofe College,Oxon
Bolton, , clq. South Cave
Bonnor, Charles, efq. Broad-ftreet
Bond, Rev. Mr. fellow of Wadham College, O.xon
Bond, Mr. Lambeth
Bomle, Edward Wilbraham, efq. Chrift Church,
Oxon
Eonough, Mr. Henley upon Thames
Bofanquet, Henry, efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Bottom ley, Mr. High H->lborn
Bourke, Richard, elq. Charloite-ftreet
Boucher, Rev. Mr. Epiom
Bourne, Mr. Thomas, K ngfton, Surry
Bowles, Mr. Charles, Shaftcibury
Bowman, John, efq. Betetley
Bowlber, Rev. Mr. Bath
Bradyle, Wilfon, efq. Bruton-llreet
Brand, Charles, efq. Lincoln’s lon
Brand, Rev. Mr. Seymour Place
Bracher, John, efq. Foothill, Wilts
Bramby, Martin, efq. Grinlborough
Bradley, Mr. Jofeph, Cheflcrtuld
Bray, Mr. G. Ruffel-ftreet, Bloomlbury
Bridgeman, Mr. Grocers Hal!
Broad!ey, Peter, efq. High-ftreet, Borough
Broadlty, Mr. Charles, Hull
Broderick, Hon. Mr,
Brooke, Mr. T Heath
Biook , Mr. Frederick, Dorchefler
Brook , Mr. John, Bridgewatcr-fquare
Brooks, Mr. Thomas, Curtain, Mjorfields
Broomhead, John, efq. Holies ftreet, Cavendilh-fquarei
Broughton Bryan, ifq.
Broughton, e q. G. C. Chrift Church, Oxon
Broughton, Rev. Mr. Tiverton
Bround, Charles, efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Browne, Mr. Thomas, Horton, Wilts
Browne, Mr. William, Ch.ffeldon, Wilts
Brown, William, efq. B-dford Row
Brown, Mi. William, Leeds
Brown, Mr. Jefeph, Bolton, Lancaihire
Brown, Mr. Chriftopher, Charles-ftreet, Hatton-ftr.
Brown, Mr. Effex-ftrcet
Brown, Mr. E. Canterbury
Brown, Mr. Strand
Bruges, Mr* Thomas, Melklham
Bc>er, Mr. Sirand
Biyanq Mr Ryegafe
Buckiand,Rev. M . fellow of Corpus’Chriftl Coll, Ox*
Buckn 11, Rev. Dr. Weymouth-ftreet
Bull, Mr. Bath
Bunbury, Mathew, efq.
Bunn, efq. Clement’s Inn
Bunn, Thomas, efq. Froome
Burgefs, Mr. William, Weftbury
Burrows, Mr. Chariotte-ftrcet
Burton, Robert, efq, Lincoln’s Inn
Burton, , efq. Grofvenor Place
Burton, R. LL. D.
Burke, Mr. M. A.
Borland, T. B. efq. Dorfet
Busfield, J. A. efq. Myrtle Grove, Blnghy
Butler, Mr. Edward, Warminfler
Butt, Mr. John, Warm nfter
Butt, Mr. Robert, Warminfter
Buxton, Mr. Bath
c.
R'ght Hon, Countefs of Courtcun.
R ight Hon. Earl of Cork
B ight Hi n. Lord Chcdwonh
Right Hon. Lord Caryfort
E. ght Hon. Lord J. CavendKh
Right Hon. Lord F. Cavendilh.
Calverley, John, efq. Leeds
Calveley. Mr. Huntingdon, Chclhirc
Calvert, Mr. Charles
Campbell, Matthew', efq. Uckficld, Suffex
Campbell, Mr. George ftreet, Portman-fquare
Campbell, M. clq. Charlton, Kent
Carew, Regnald Pole, efq. Charles-ftreet, Berkley-
liquate
Caitwright, W. R. efq. Chrift Church, Oxen
Carver, Rev. Mr. M. A. Chefterfitid
Carr, William, efq.
Carr, Mr. Thomas, Newcaflle
Carr, Mr. Dunningtoa ,
Carrington,


Carrington, Rev. Mr. Enford, Wilts
Carter, Mr. Duke-ftreet
Chadwick, , efq.
Chauntnll, T. efq. Highbury Place
Chaumette, Francis de la, efq. Spkal-fquarc
Chalie, John, efq. Bedford fquare
Chambre. ——, efq. Gray’s Inn
Cnaplm, Mr. Aylelbury
Chancey, , efq. Caftle-ftreet
'Chambers, Mr, Tiblhelf, Derby
Cheere, Charles, efq. Gower-fireet
Cheflbn, William, efq. New College
Churchill, Mr. Abingoon-ftreet
Church, efq. Sackville-ftreet
Clarke, Thomas, efq. K.rkby Hardwick, Notts
Clarke, T. F. efq. Witney, Oxon
Clark, Mr. Robert, Caftle Cary
Clark, Mr. Bank Buildings
Clapham, Mr. Trinity College, Cambridge
Clay, Mr. Thomas, Liverpool
Glayton, Rev. N. D, D. Nottingham
Clayton, Mifs, Carr Hall, Colne
C everley,-Mr. Lille-ftreet, Leicefter-fields
CLthero, , efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Clowes, Samuel, efq. Manchefler
Clucton, Rev. John, M. A. Kinnerf.ey, Hereford
Clutton, Rev. Mr. Birmingham
Cobb, Rev. Dr. fellow of St. John’s College, Oxon
Cockfield, Mr. Jofeph, Upton, Elfex
Cockle, Mr. John, Chapmanfladc, Wilts
Colebrooke, fir George, bare.
Collett, Richard, efq. Chancery-’a re
Collier, R?v. Mr. Trinity College, Cambrdre
Cokman, William, efq. Hatton Garden
Collins, Mr. Palfgrave Place
Coles, Mr. John, Trowbridge
Conftable, Marmaduke, efq. Waftand
Coaftable, William, efq. Burton Conftable
Conftable, Mrs. Beverley, Yorklhire
Conran, George, efq. Berkley-fquare
Coney, William, efq. fellow’ of Or el College
Cooke, George, efq. Streetthcrpe, Yorklhire
Coombs, Mr. Corlley, Wilts
Cootnbes, Mr. Chancois-ftreet
Cooper, Rev. Mi. Bix, Oxon
Cooper, Rev. Mr. Bratton. Wilts
Cooper, General, Charles ftreet, Berkley-fquare
Cooper, R, Lranlby, Newhoufe, Glocefter
Cooper, Mr. Featherftone Buildings
Cofta, Jolhua Mendez da, efq. Serjeant’s Inn
Cotton, Mr. Henry, Harley-flreet
Gotten, Thomas, efq. Haigh, Yorklhire
Gotten, Stapleton, efq.
Cotham, Mr A. Whatley, Lancafhire
Coulthard, Mrs. John-ftrcet, King’s Road
Coulthurft, John, efq.
Couchman, Mr. Warwick
Cox, Charles, efq.
Coxs, Capt. Charles, S’one Eaton
Cracherorde, Rev. Mr. Queen’s-fquare
Craig, Mr. Scotland Yard
Crane, Charles, efq. Budge Row
Crane, Mr. Token Houfe Yard
Crathorre, Thomas, efq. York
Crock, Mr. George, Liverpool
Crook, Mr, Thomas, Tytherton, Wilts
Crompton, Samuel, efq. Derby
Crompton, Mr. John, Derby
Crompton, Mr. G.lbert Drrby
Crompton, Peter, M. D. Derby
Croft, Mr. Greek-ftreet, Soho
Crutwell, Mr. Bach
Cunninrton, Mr. William, Heytelbury
Curtis, Mr. Oxford
Curtis, Mr. Canterbury
D.
Right Hon. Ear!
Da Cofia, J. M. efq. Serjeants Inn
Dftley, T. efq. Kingiland
Dalton, Nathaniel, efq. Shankfhocfe
D lton, R. efq.
Dampier, Rev. Mr. Weft Meon, Hants
Dannien, , efq. Cliffbrd-ftreet
Daafey, Mr. John, Blandford
Daniel, efq. C. C. Pembroke College, Oxen
Daniel, Air. Yeovil
Darnel, Mr. John,.Poultry
Darell, Major
Darbyihire, Mr. Manchcfter
Darby/hire, Mr. James, Bolton
Dafhwood, fir Henry, Lower Grofvenor-ftreet
Davenport, T. efq. Bi(hopfgate-ft reet
Davenport, , efq. Charles ftrect, St. James’s
Davidfcn, John, efq. Newcaftle
Davidfon, Mr. Leeds
Dmdfcn, Mr. Walth amflow
Davidlon, Mr. James, Walchamftow
Davis, Mr. Thomas, Longleat
Davy, Rev, C. M.B. fellow of Caius College, Cam-
bridge
Dawes, Edtvln, efq. Angel-court, Throgmorton-ftreet
Day, Mr. William, York
Dean?, Charles, efq. Warmley
Dt.ifofTe, Rev. Mr. Richmond, Surry
D-iigh , Mr. Ludgate-hill
Dmilon, Robert, elq. Kilnwick Percy
Denman, Dr. Old Burlington-ftreet
Denr.ifon, Mr. Featherftone Buildings
Deferetr, Mr. Fenchurch-ftreet
Dickenfon,Thomas, tfq. Bcdworth Clofe
Dickenfon, Mr. Edward, Drayton Manor, Stafford
Dickens, Mr, Jofeph, Higl n’s Park, Stafford
Dickens, Mr. Crown-ftreet
D Ikes, Capt. Upper Seymour-ftreet
Dilworth, T. efq, Leeds
D xon, Jerem ah, efq. Leeds
Dixon, Mr. R. Eaft Retford, Notts
Dixon, Rev. Mr.
Didwell, Rev. Henry, Harlaxton, Lincolnshire
D dwell, Robert, efq. Dodlort Commons
Dodl’wdl, T. efq.
Dominicus, Mr. Mark-lane
Dormer, Mr. Bury-ftreet, St. James’s
Dorrien, Thomas, efq. Portman-lquaie
Dorrington, Capt. Hull
Dover, Rev. Mr. Chichefter
Douce, W i 1 1 1 am H. elq. Fenchurch-ftieet
Douce, Mr. Francis, Gray’s Inn
Douglafs, , efq.
Douglafs, Capt. Leigh, Sorrerfet-ftreet
Dowiand, Mr. James, Mansfield, Woodhoufc, Notts
Downes, Rev. Mr. Wi ham, Elfex
Downes, , efq. Chrift Church College
Downing, Mr. P. A. Dudley
Draper, \\ i liana, efq. W Often Deddington, Oxon
Draper, Cape.
Drax, Edward, efq.
Druce, Mr. Chancery-lane
Drummond, J ,hn, efq.
Drummond, A. efq. Spring Gardens
Drummond, Rev. H. Spring Gardens
Drummond. George Hay, D .mealier
Dunnage, T. efq. Phi!pot-l ane
Durnsford, Mr. George, Tiverton
Durrs'ord, Mr. Mart n T.venon
Du Pan T. Gourgas, efq. Leeds, Yorklhire
■Dury, Coicnel
Dyfon, Thomas, efq. Halifax
E.
Right Hon. Earl of Effingh am
Eaftborn, Mr. Aldgate
Eaton, Mr. A. B. Trinity College
Echerial), efq. Charles-ftreet, Sr. James’s
Eddowcs, Mr. T.
'Eddowes, Mr. William
Edgar, Mr. indent of Chrift Church, Oxon
Edce l, Harry, efq. Sffanderwick, Somerfet
Edmonds, Mr. Chancerv-lane
Edridge, Efmead, efq. Chippenham
Edwards, John, efq. Chalcot Houfe
Edwards, Mr. Carlton Place
Egerton, Mr. Gray’s Inn
Egerton, Mr, Bentinck-ftreet, Soho
D’Einfeedel, Count, Reibersdorf,Upper Lufatia
Eldridge, Mr.
Eiliot, Mr Emanuel College
Ellis, Charles, efq. Dean-ftreet, Soho
Ellis, John, efq.
Emmatt, Mrs. Elizabeth, Longleat
England, Mr. T. Dorchefter
Enouy, Mr. Rockingham Row
Entwftle, John, efq. Leeds
Eldaile, , jun. efq. Duke-ftreet, We ft min Her
Etches, Mr. R. Cadman, Fenchurch-ftreet
Evans, Mr. J.
Evans, Mr.
Everett, John, efq. Heytefbury
Eveiett, W. efq, Heytefbury
Everett, Mr. W. Horninglham, Wilts
Evereft, , efq. Greenwich
Ewart, James, efq. Portland-ftreet
Ewer, , efq.
Eyre, Vincent, efq,
Eyre, Col. Lpper Grofvenor-ftreet
F.
Eanfhaw, Mrs. Shiplake, Oxon
Farilh, Mr. Magdalen College, Oxon
Farrer, Oliver, efq. Bedford-fquare
F ner, James, efq. Chancery-lane
Fawcett, Gen. Sir W. George-ftreet, Portman-fquare
Fawkes, Mr. Upper Thames-ltreec
Fellows, Mr. New Inn
Fellows, Mi, [obn
Fellows, Mr. Timothy
Fenton, Mifs Ann, Carr Hoofs
Ferrand, Benjamin, efq. St. Ives Binglev
Field, Mr. Cornhill
Filkes, Mr. Abel, D.vjzes
Finch, W.lliam, efq. Grofvenor fquare
Finch, Rev. Dr. fellow of Sr. John’s College, Oxon
Pinch, Rev. Henry. Greatham, Rutland
Filher, Rev. R. A. M. fellow of Caius College,
Cambridge
Finer, Rev. John, fellow of Caius College, Cambridge
Fifher, Mr. Richard, Newcaftle
Fitzgerald, James, efq.
Fletcher, Mr. Joleph, Liverpool
Fletcher, Mr. Chatfworth
F'letchcr, M% Wbitwell, Derbyfhire
Foleet, Mr. G. Temple
Foote, Mr. JelTe, Dean-ftreet, Soho
Ford, , efq. Baliol College, Oxon
Ford, Rev. Dr, Melton Mowbray
Ford, Mr. Temple
Ford, Mr. Henley upon Thames
Fortefcue, Mr.
Fofter, Mr. Fulneck
Fofter, Mr. Fetter-lane
Fothergill, Rev. James, M A. Dalton fa Dale, Durh.
Fothergi.l, Rev. T. M. A. fellow of Queen’; College,
Oxon
Frampton, James, efq. fell.com. St. John’s Coll. Oxca
Frankland, Sir Thomas
Prancilin, Mr. Xewman-ftreet
Fraier, R. efq. Pimlico
Frafer^


Prefer, William, efq.
Feoff, John, efq. Spring Garden#
Froud, Mr. Richard, Bnxton Devercll, Wilts
Frewen, Chari, s, efq. Cluer, Berks
Fry, Mr. Peter, A ;bridge
Fry, Mr. St. John’s-lquare
Fynts, Rev. C. D. D. Cromwell, Notts
G.
Right Hon. Lord Vifcount Galway
Gagg, Rev. Mr. AxbritLge
Gall, Mr. John, Sie.t, Wilts
Garfnell, Mr.
Garfed, Mr. Btiftol
Gazeley, Mr. Gray’s Inn
Gcdtles, Dr. Clipftone ffreet
Gee, Mr. Wimhorn Minflcr
George, Mr. George, Froome
Gibbs, Vickery, efq. Bloonis
Gibbons, Rev. Mr. New Cavendifh-ftreet
Gibfon, , efq Loompit Hill, Kent
Gibfo.i, Mr.
Glover, Mr. A. Ryegate, Surry
Glynn, Anthony, efq. New College, Oxon
Goddard, Rev. Mr. Wood Hay, Hants
Goddaid, , efq.
Goddard, Rev. Mr. Winchcffer College
Goddard, Mr. Beaufort Buildings
Goldborn, , efq.
Golt, Mr. Leeds
Good, Rev. Mr. South Brent, Somerfet
Goodinge, Thomas, LL. D. Leeds
Goodenougb, Major, Ahingdon-ftreet
Gordon, Rev. Mr. Air-flrect, Piccadilly
Gore, Mr. T. Liverpool
Gofncll, Mr. R< Us Buildings
Gough, Richard, efq. Enfic.d
Gower, Mr. C. Ncw lon
Gray, Chides Gordon, efq. Warminffcr
Gray, Mr. Lancaller
Greig, Mr. Thomas, Colclhi l, Heits
Greeton, Rev. Mr. Hitcham
Greene, Chapman, elq. Emanuel College
Greene, Rev. Henry, R> lleflon, Lciceffer
Green, Major Gen. Sir William
Giecnhill, Robeit, efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Greenland, , elq. Newman-ff icet
Greenup, William, elq. Derfey Hay, \ olklhire
Gregory, Rev. Mr. Lmgar, Notts
Gregory, , efq. Charlotte ffrcct
Gregory, Mr. Leadcnhail-fi reet
Gregory, Rev, Mr. Minor Canon, Canterbury
Grcv lie, Hon. bulke, Uiton
Grcville, Hon. Mr. King s Mews
Gtey, Mr.
Grice, Re> - . Charles le, Bn f y, Suffjlk
Griffith, Mr. New Bond ffreet
Griffiths, , c q.
Grimftc n, Henrv, efq. Weftow
Grinfield, Col. Old Burlington-ftrcct
Gnnfield, Rev. T. Bath
Grove, William, efq. Lichfield
Grundy, Mr. James, Liverpool
Guorgas, Mr. Leeds
H.
Right Hon. Lady Howe
Hacker, Andrew, efq. Great Margarel-flreet
Haodon, Rev. Mr. Leeds
Haigh, Rev. Mr. Newcaftle
Hale, Rev. Mi. Sr. Paul’s Church Yard
Hall,- , efq. fellow commoner of Tiinity College,
Cambridge
Hall, John, M. D.
Hallam, Capt. Park-ftreet
Hamilton, Hon. Mr. Htlles-ftrect
Hamilton, Rev. Dr. Lelcefter-fquare
Hamilton, Rev. Dr. Lemcn-llrcet, Goodman’s Fields
Hamilton, Mr. ditto
Hamilton, Mr. Lincoln’s Inn Fields
Hamilton, Mr. Bolton Row
Hammerfley, , efq. Pall Mall
Hammerfley, Mr. Temple
Hammond, Mr. Charlotte ffreet
Hanharr, Sir William, bart.
Hanmer, Sir Thomas
Hanmer, E. efq.
Hanmer, William, efq,
Hardifly,Mr. Great Marlbcrough-ff rect
Hare wood, Rev. Mr. Sowerby
Hargrave, Francis, efq. Bofwell Court
Hargreaves, John, efq. Full Edge', Lancafhire
Harrifon, R. A. efq. Hull
Harrifon, Rev. H. G. Thorpe Morleux, Suffolk
Harrifon, , efq. Temple
Hanington, Rev. Dr. Fluxion
Harman, Mr. Anthony, Gravcfend
Harman, Mr. Pnnces-llreet
Hanley, Col. Bedford-fquare
Hartley, , efq. ditto
Harr, , efq. Temple
Harvey, Mr. Robert, Blithfisld
Haflang, Count
Haverfield, Mr. Kew Green
Havel), Rev. Mr. Knarcfborough
Hawes, John, efq. Manfell-ff reet
Hawkins, Rev. Mr. Barebone Hal!, Worceffcrfhire
Hawflev, Mr. Wortley
Hawkcfworlh, Walter, efq. fellow commoner of Tri-
nity College
Haycer, Francis Thomas, efq,
Haydons, Meffrs. Plymouth
Hazard, Mr. Bath
Heaoeach, Mr. Flect-ffreet
Hearne, Mr. Macclesfield-firect
Heath, Rev. Mr. Eton College
Hebcrden, Mr. A.B. fellow of St. John’s College,
Cambridge
Hiron, Rev. Mr. Warrington, Lancafhire
Htflop, Mr.
Flctherington, T. efq. Black Friars Road
Hev, Rev. Dr. Stony Stratford
Heywood, Mr. Nottingham
Hioberr, T. efq. Upper Grofvenor-ftrcet
Hlbbcrt, Mrs.
Higder, William, efq.
Hill, Walter, efq. Gray’s Inn
Hill, Mr.
Hinchman, Mr. New Burling'o"-ftreet
Hincliffe, Mr. Lincoln’s Inn Fields
Hinckes, P. T. efq. TettcHball, Stafford
Hinckes, Rev. Mr. New Palace Yard
Hinckes, ■, efq. Mancheller
Hippelley, Mr. Wimpole-llrect
Hoare, Charles, efq. I leet-ffrcet
Hoare, Henry, efq. ditto
Hobbnufe, Mr. T. Temple
llodgfon, Henry, efq. Reading
Hodgfon, Mr. Leeds
Hoghton, Henry, efq. fellow commoner of St. John’s
College
Hole, Mr. A. B. Trinity College, Cambridge
Holt, John, efq. Temple
Holwcll, , efq. fellow commoner of Exiter Col-
lege, Oxun
Ilolyoake, Francis, efq. Tottenhnll, Stafford
Holland, Rev. John, Bolton
Holton, T. efq. Grittlctcn, Wilts
Holroyd, T. efq.
Hornby, William, efq. Upper Harley-(lrcet
Horner, Thomas, efq. Mclls Park, Somerfet
Homer, Thomas Suangeways, efq. ditto
Hofkins, Mr. A. Burton upon Trent
Howard, , efq. Heath, York (hire
Howard, , efq. Argylc-ffreet
Howe, Hon. Mrs. Grafton-flreet
Hudfon, Rev. Mr. Tipperholine, Notts
Hughes, Mr. Putney
Hughes, Rev. Thomas, Dorchefler
Hughes, Mr. A, B. Trinity College, Cambridge
Hughes, Mr.
Hughes, Rev. Mr. Burton Joice, Notts
Hughes, Mr. John, Warminflcr
Hugonin, Major
Huilh, Mark, efq. Notts
Hulfe, Edward, efq. Portman-fquare
Humble, R. efq. Middleton
Hunn, Mr. Richard, Briflol
Hunter, Dr. York.
Huntingford, Rev. George James, Warminflcr
Hurlock, Mr. Sr. Paul’s Church Yard
Hutton, Rev. Mr. M. A. Magdalen College, Oxou
Hutton, Mr.
Hyde, Mr. Halifax
I.
Right Hon. Lady Vifcountds Irwin
Jacob, Rev. Edward, Shillingftone, Dorfct
Jacob, Mr. Nackington, Kent
Jackfon, Cyril, D. D. dean of Chrift Church,
Jackfon, Mr. Clerkenwcll Clofe
Jackfon, Rev. Mr. Lincoln’s Inn
Jacques, Thoma c , efq. Leeds
Jagger, Mr. Maryfcone-ffreet
James, Mr. Ten ace, Walworth
Jamefon, , efq. Maidflone
Jarratt, Mr. Effex ffreet
lobetlon, Mr. Ludgate*hill
Idefon, Luke, efq Poland-ffreet
Jeckell, John, efq. Temple
Jekyll, Jofeph, efq. Spetilbury, Dorfet
Jemmett, Mr. Canterbury
Jennings, Mr. Chifwell-ffreet
Jennings, Mr, Coleman-ffreet Buildings
J-nkins, John, efq.
Jerningham, Sir William
jeffyman, Mr. York
Jeffop, Mr. Southampton-flrcet
liifte, Mr.
logham, Rev. Mr. S'ump’s Crofs
Johnfon, Dr. Beverley
Johnfon, Ifaac, efq. Gray’s Inn
Johnfon, , efq. Gray’s Inn
Johnfon, Mr. General Pod Office
Johnfon, Thomas, efq. Holbeck
John, Sir Harry S . ban, Dogmersfield, Hants
John, Rev. Mr. S'. Dogmersfield
John, Sir Andrew St. Weafenham Hall, Norfolk
Jones, Rev. John, Bhndford
Jones, William, efq. Wellington
Ireland, Mr. Staples Inn
Irving, Lieutenant Col.
Jupe, Mr. Lilkcard
K.
Kaye, Richard, LL. D. dean of Lincoln
Kedi gton, Rev. R. Rongham Hall, Suffolk
Kelfon, Samuel, efq. Midlummer Norton
Kcmpfon, Rev. Mr. Sardon, Stafford
Kemble, Francis, efq. Smithin’s-lane
Kent, Nathaniel, efq. Fulham
Kerffiaw, James, efq. Shawhill, Yorklbire
Kerffiaw, Rev. Mr. Leeds
Key fall, Rev. Mr. Long Melford
Keyworth, Mifs
Kilburn, Mr. Richard, S'. John’s-ftreet
Kinnard, Mr. Holborn
King, Mr. William, Richmond, Yorklbire
Kirby,


Kirby, Lieut, of the 4th Dragoons
Kirby, Rev. Mr. Barham, Suft'olk
Knight Thomas, efq. Goci.nerlham Park, Kent
Knight, Mr. James, Longlsat, ilts
Knight, M.. C iffe, Kent
Knowlefley, ——, eiq. Hull
Krchn, D . Scu. hampton-ftrect
Kuiitner, Mr. Eton
L. _
Right Rev. Lord Bifhop of Lincoln
Right Hon. Lord Louvain
Right H.m. Lara Lifmorc
Lacey, Mr. Thomas, Froome
Lambert, , efq Temple
Lambert, Mr. St Mar.in’s-Jane
Lane, Richard, tfq.
Lane, Rev. Mr. fellow of Chrift’s College, Cambridge
Landon, Dr. Warwick
Lsngton. Mr. Hatton Garden
La gfton, T. efq. C iftord-ftreet
Langfton, Mr. Cneapfidc
Lapidge, Mr. Samuel, Hampton Court
Lafcelles, , efq.
Lawrence, Mr. Sergeant, Temple
Leciard, Mr. Sa.tiur], Road Bridge, Somerfct
Lee, Launcelot, efq. fellow of New College
Lee, Henry, efq. Oriel College
Lee, Rev. Henry, fellow of New College
Lee, Mr. Frith-Itreet
L:e, Rev. Mr.
Leigh, , efq. fellow commoner of Chrift Church
College, Oxon
Lcir, Rev. Thomas, Diicheatt
Lcroux, , efq. Somers Town
Lsthieullier, , efq.
L cknagany, Mr, Old Broad-ftreet
Lilly, Mr- Pancras-lane
Liprrott, Rev. John
L veus, Peter, elq. Duke-flreet, Portland Place
Lloyd, Thomas, efq. Leeds
Lloyd, Mils, York
Lloyd, Gamaliel, efq, Parfcn’s Green
Lobley, , efq. BingTy
Locke, Wadham, efq. Devizes
Locge, Edmund, efq. Willow Hall, Yorkffilre
LoJgt, Richard, efq. Leeds
Lom.x, Mr. Lower Grofvenor-fireet
Lrng. Richard, efq. Row’d Ashton, Wilts
Long. Robert, efq, Eaft-tLeer, Red Lion Square
Long, Edward, efq Wimpolc-ftreet
Lounder, Mr. North-ftreet
Lowe, Jeremiah, efq. Oriel College
Lowndcf, Mr. R chard, Southampton Row
Lowth, Rev. Mr. Wmchefter
Lucas, Rev, Mr. Shrewsbury
Lucas, Capta n, Leeds
Luckombe, Mr. Johnfbn’s Court, Flcet-ftreet
Lumley, Mr. Bell Yard
Lye, Mr. George, Warmiofter
Lyon, George, elq.
M.
R'ght Hon. Lord Macartney
Right Hon. Lord Mulgtave
Macgeorge, William, efq. Hamilton-fireet
Mackworth, Sir Herbert, CavendKh-fquare
Mackey, Richard, eiq. Bedxord-llreec
Magee, Mr.
Mainfionc, , e r q. Eft>x-ftre«t
Maire, Henry, efq. Lartingtoa
Ma r, Mr. James, Gravcfcnd
Major, Mr.
Manby, Mr. Knarcfborough
Maitic, James, elq. Downing-ftrect
Martin, Edwin, efq. Priory, Berks
Martin, Mr.
Marlball, Mr. Bath
Marlh, Rev. Mr. George, Blandford
Marih, Mr. l!iam, Biook-ftreet
MafcHl, Mr. Mi:re Court, Mi!k-flrect
Maffey, Rev. Millington, Warmintter
Malkelyn, Mr, John, Warminller
Mathias, Mr. Thomas, Scotland Yard
Mathews, Mr. J. Strand
M-v<»r, William, efq. Woodftock, Oxon
Maude. Mr. Trinity College
Maxwell, Capt. Edward
Mcars, Mr. John, Froome
M eaux, Richard, efq. Bb-omfbury
Meech, Mr. Thomas, Wedbury
Meggit, Mr. John, Wakefield
Mellin, Mr. Leeds
Menfa, Mr. Pafqual, Cadiz
Mercer, George, efq. Great Margaret-fireet
Merrill, Meffis. T. and J, Cambridge
Mertiter, Mr. R. Wmcanton
Meyricke, , efq. Parliament-fireet
Michel!, David Robert, efq. Dewl.lh, Dorfet
Middleton, Sir Charles, Hertlord-ftrcet
Middleton, Sir W iliam
Middleton, Mr, William, Froome
M Iner, , efq. Prefton Hall, Maidftone, Kent
Millcy ——efq. fellow commoner of St. John’s
College
Milner, Sir WiWiana, hart. Nun Appleton
M loes, John, elq. Wakefield
Mlines, James, efq. Tnorne Houfe
Milnes, , efq. Calfton, Baflett, Notts
M 11s, Mr. C. South Audley-lireet
Mills, Mr. ditto
Millington, Mr. Great George-ftrcet
Mill, James, efq. Gate-ftreet
Mobeily, Mr.
Money, William, efq.
M ’ore, Rev. John, St. Paul’s Cathedral
Moore, Mr. Peter, Hadley
Moody, Mr. Robert, Bath
Mordaunr, Sir John, bart. Walton
Morewood, George, efq. Alfreton Hall, Derby
Morewood, Rev. Mr. Highficld, Derby
Morgan, C. efq. Bath
Morgan, Rev. B. Devizes
Morgan, Edward, efq.
Morgan, Mr.
Mornfon, , efq. fellow of New College
Morton, —■—, efq. Leadenhall-ftrcet
N.
His Grace the Duke of Norfolk
His Grace the Duke of Northumberland
Her Grace the Duchefs of Northumberland
Nairoe, George, efq. Bucklerlbury
Nairn, Capt. Bury ftreet, Sr. James’s
Nsres, Edward, efq.
Nares, , efq. South Molton-ftreet
Nares, , tlq. Lincoln’s Inn
Narley, B. efq.
Nailiu, Hon. George, Clifford-ftreet
Neate, Mr. Thomas, Devizes
Needham, Mr. Cork ftreet
Nettleffiip, Rev. Mr. Twickenham
Neville, Mr.
Newby, William, efq. Skircoat, Yorkffi're
Newdick, , efq. Ely Place, Holbora
Newdigate, M s. Eaft Bridgetord
Newhoufe, Mr. fellow cf New College, Oxon
Newman, Mr. Paul, Melkfhana
Newman, Mr. J hn, ditto
Ntwman, Mr. Oid Bond-ftrcet
Newton, Mr. Tames Antrobus, Stockport
Nhhoh, Mr. John, Red Lion Paffage, Fleet-ftreet
rvicholls, ivi • i cctits, ntar Romford
Nicholfon, Mr. Mithcw, Manchefier
Nicholfon, Mr. jun. Manchcfter
Nicholfon, Mr. Notts
Kind, Rev. Mr. Philip, Wargrav?, Berks
N irth, Mr. G r eat ltreci
Nnyfe, Rev. Mr. ftadent of Cnrift Church Ocon
Nutts, Mrs. '
O.
Oates, S. H. efq. L°eds
Oj es, Mr. Joftah, Leeds
Edmund, eiq. Shafton
Ogilvie, Scroope, efq. Sackville-ftreet
Oglander, Rev. Mr. fdlow of Wmchefter College
Ol erlhaw, Rev. Mr. fellow of Emanuel College
Oldfield, Dr. Halifax °
Olipf.an*, Robert, efq. Lincoln's Inn
Oliver, Rev. Mr.
Onflow, Re*. Dr. canon of Chrift Church, Qxon
Orchard, Paul, e!q Chetttrfield ftrecc
Orme, . efq. Manchefter
O Reilly, Mr. Oid Broad-ftreet
Oircll, Mr. Temple
Olborn, J' hm, efq. New Norfolk-ftreet
Oftnurne, Mr. William, Hull
Overend, Mr. lile*ortn
Owen, Mi*. Temple
P.
Right Rev. Lord Bifhcpof Peterborough
R ght Hon. Earl Pawls
Right Hon. Lord Parker
Right Hon. Lad) Polworth
Padley, Robert, efq_
Page, John, efq. Gough Squire
Pagett, Rev. Mn C >mrton YmyeatS, Notts
Palmer, , elq. T.mlbury
Panton, Paul, efq. L oco.n’s Inn Fields
Pa ry, John, efq. Bernard’s Inn
Parlous, Sir Willi am
Parker, Mr. M Ik-ftreet
Parker, Mr. Chancery Lane
Partridge, Capt. Normanton, Wilts
Parkes, Mr, Palfgravc Place
Parke, Rev, Gilbert, Germains, Norfolk
Pafcall, Major
Palhiey, Rev. Mr. M. A. Bailbcrough
Palleur, , efq.
Patton, Thomas, efq.
Partin, Mr. Botcher Row
Pattin, , efq.
Peachey, , efq.
Pearkes, Mr. S . Paul’s Church'Yird
Pearfon, Mr. Leeds
Peckell, A ugufrus, efq. Portman Squire
Pennant, Thomas, efo. Upper Brook-ftreet
Penwan, Rev. Mr. sc. Germains
Peryn, M r . B a ron
Perkins, Mr. Canterbury
Pet, Rev, Mr. ftudent of Chrift Cherch, Oxen
Phoen x Fire Office, D redtorn of
Phillips, John L-igh, efq. Manchefter
Phillips, Rev. Mr. Exeter
Phillips, Mr.
Philis, Mr. Robert
Philips, Capt. Stanley Place, Chefler
Philips, Edward, efq. Calftock, Dorfct
Phil.ot, Mr. Henry, Bach
Phipps, Hon. Mr. Lincoln’s Inn
Phipp«, A. efq. Lincoln’s Inn
Phipps, Mr.
Pickering, Rev. Mr. Bifhop Cleave
Pilkicgton, William, efq. Manchester Buildings
Pir.c,


Pin*, Charles James, cfq. Old Palace Yard
Pitman, Mr. Watling-flreet
Pittrr, Mr. T. Strand
Plafkctt, M. A. B. Queen’s College
Plafkett, Mr. Thomas, Clift'ord-ftreet
Plowes, Mr. Leeds
Plumer, Mr. Billcier Square
Poggenpohl, William Henry, efq. Upper Marybonc-
ftreet
Pole, Rev. Mr. Milton, Kent
Portman, H. W. efq. Bryanftone, Dorfet
Porny, Mr. Windfor
Pote, Rev. Mr. Milton, Kent
Potengcr, Mr. Windfor
Potis, , efq.
Powell, Mr. A. B. Merton College
Powletr, Pawlett, efq. Somborn, Hants
Powys, Rev. Mr. Shrewlbury
Pratt, Jofeph Steven, efq. Devonfhire-ftreet
Precious, Mr. Colcman-ftieet
Prime, John Marfhall, cfq. Sravcley, Derby
Pri nee, Mr. George, Water-ftrect
Price, Mr. B. Salilbury Clofe
Price, Mr. Salilbury
Prieftly, , cfq. Bradford
Prieftly, John, efq. Pend, near Halifax
Prieltly, Jofeph, efq. White Window, near Halifax
ProdUr, Mr. Major, Wolverhampton
Prycc, Mr. Benjamin, Sarum
Pye, Hmry A. cfq. fellow of Merton College, Oxon
Pve, H nry James, efq. Old Palace Yard
Pym, Rev. Wollafton, Hafcll Hall, Bedford
Pym, Francis, efq. Hafell Hall
R.
Right Hon. Earl of Rochford
Right Hon. Lord Rivers
RadclifTe, Rev. Dr. Manchefter
Radciiff, Mr. New Inn
Raine, Mr. Furnival’s Inn
Ram, Mr. C. Sclwin, Oxford
Ramlden, R. cfq. Carlton Hall, Notts
Ramfden, Thomas, cfq. Upper Bvook-ftrcet
Randolp, Rev. Mr.
Randolp, Rev. Dr.canon of Chrift Church and Regius
profelfor of divinity, Oxon
Randolp, Rev. Mr. Wimbledon, Suny
Rawfon, William, efq. Halifax
Read, Mr. Griat Jatnes-ftrtet, Bedford Row
Reading, Mr. Southampton
Reafton, F.B. efq. Temple
Reeves, , cfq. Thanet Place
Remlin, Mr. Stephen
Rennell, Major, SufFolk-ftreet
Rcnlhaw, Mr. Owthorpe Hall, Notts
Repington, Charles Edward, cfq. Armington, Wavw.
Rhode, Mr. Well Clofe Square
Rhodes, Mr. Leeds
Ritharefon, Mr. Richard, Devizes
Richardfon, Mrs. Curver E/heton, Yorkfhire
Richardfon, Mr. York
Ridding, Mr. Winchelfer
Ridley, Nicholas, efq. Gray’s Inn
Ridout, Mr. Jefus College
Roake, John, efq. Lower Halliford, Middlefex
Robertlon, Rev. Abram, M A. Chrift Church, Oxon
Roberts, , efq. Brentford
Roberts, Rev, Mr. William, Eton College
Roberts, , efq. King’s Road
Robinfon, Mr. Francis, Lichfield
Robinfon, , cfq.
Robinfon, Mr. Temple
Robinfon, A. efq. Pall Mall
Rob nfon, Mr. A. Ramfey, Kenfington
Robinfon, Mr. Silkworth, near Sundcilaud
Robinfon, Mr. Piccadilly
Rodbard, T. efa. Leeds
' L
Rodef. C. H. efq. Bsrlborough Hall, Dejbyfliire
Rogers, Rev. John Met'uen, Berkley
Rogers, Mr. Edward, Liverpool
Rolleffon, Stephen, efq.
Rooke, Hayman, efq. Woodhoufe Place, Notes
Roope, Mr. Bennett’s College, Oxon
Rofs, , efq. Old Burlington-flrtec
Rofs, Mr. fen. Crown- ftrect
Routh, , tfq. Gray’s Inn
Rowonh, Mr.
Royds, Richard, efq. Halifax
Rundell, Mrs. Bath
Ruflell, Mr. Queen-flreet, Weftminfter
S.
His Grace the Duke of Somcrfct
Right Hon. Earl of Stafford
Right Hon, Lord Stamford
Lord William Seymour
Salmon, Rev. Mr. fellow of St. [ohn’s College
Salilbury, R. A. efq. Chapel Town
Sandford, H. efq. Bath
Sarjeant, Mr. Qu en-ftreer, Lincoln’s Inn Fields
Sauthier, Mr. Northumberland Houfe
Sawbridge, Rev. Mr. Chrift Church, Oxon
Saxton, Charles, efq. South Molton-ftrect
Saycr, John, efq. Bedford Row
Schaw, , efq. Adelphi
Schaw, Mr. Edward
Scholefield, Rev. Mr. Birmingham
Scholfield, Mr. Trinity College, Cambridge
Schomberg, Rev. Mr. fellow ot Magdalen College,
Oxon
Scott, William, efq. Woodhall
Sourr, Mr. Leeds
Searles, , efq. Powis Place
Sechtr, John, efq. Wmdfor
Sewell, , efq. Terrace, Adelphi
Seymour, Mr. Norfolk Houfe
Shaw, Mr. Alhford, Middlefcx
Shaw, , efq.
Shaw, Mr. S. Temple
Shaw, Mr. J. St. Martln’s-lane
Shecplhanks, Rev. Mr. Leeds
Sheldon, William, efq.
Sheppcrfon, Mr. W. Mansfield Woodhoufe, Notts
Sheppard, William, efq. Froome
Sheppard, Mr. William, Froome
Sheppard, Mr. John, ditto
Sheppard, Mr, BafinghaM-flreet
Shepperd, Mr. Carey-ffreet
Sherfon, Mr. Thomas, Biidge-ffreet, Black Fryars
Shropllon, Mr. William, Wrenbury, Chefhirc
Sibley, , efq. Hatton Garden
Silvefter, , efq. Chancery-lane
Simpfon, T. efq. Babworth, Notts
Simpfon, Mr. Thomas, George ffreet, Adelphi
Simpfon, Rev. Mr. fellow of Hniverfity College, Oxon
Simfon, Mr. George, Sr. Paul’s Church Yard
Simmons, Mr. Butt Houfe, Leicefterfhire
Singer, Mr. Thomas, Corllcy
Sivale, ——, efq.
Sivewrighr, Mr. Strand
Skirne, , jun. efq. Buh
Skynner, Mr. Workfop, Notts
Smalley, , efq. King’s Arms Yard, Coleman flr.
Smelt, Rev. Mr. Gilden, Notts
Smithfon, Gill, efq. Leeds
Smith, Rev. Mr. Aldmonbury
Smith, Mr. John, Trinity College
Smith, Mr. Chailotte-llreet
Smith, Mr. CowLy-ffreet
Smith, Mr. Beely, Derby
Smith, Rev. Mr. fellow of Pembroke College
Smith, Mr. Oriel College
Smith, Mr. J. fen. A. B, Trinity College, Cambridge
Smith, Mr. William, A. B. Trinity College, Cambridge
Smith, —-—, efq. Bath
Smith, Mils, Somersford, Wilts
Snivinoe, , efq. Upper Marybone-flreet
Soame, Mrs. Cavendilh Square
Sellers, Mr. Blandford
Southgate, Rev. Mr. Britifli Mufeum
Spendlove, Mr. Swithin’s-lane
Spink, Mr. Bed ford-ftreet, Cnvent Garden
Spranger, , efq. Chancery-lane
Spurgeon, Rev. T. G. Melton, Suffolk
Squire, Mr. S. Temple
Stainforth, George, efq. Berkley Square
Stainforth, , efq. Old Broad-fireec
Stamford, Mr. J.
Stamford, Mr. William
Stathan, Mr.
Stanhope, , efq. Temple
Stanger, , efq. Gray’s Jnn
Stangcr, Mr. Cheapfide
Stedman, Rev. Mr.
Stephenfon, Mr.
Stevenfon, Mr. Fark-ftreet, Wcflmlnftcr
Stevenfon, Mr.
Stevenfon, Mr. William, Cobham frail, Kent
Stillman, Mr. Thomas, Steeple Alluon
Stiles, Mr. Robert, Gravefend
Stiles, William, efq. Tower
St inton, Rev. Dr. retfor of Exeter College, Oxon
Stokes, Mr. William, Lon^leac
Stone, Mr. Holborn Court, Gray’s Inn
Stopford, Mr. Halifax
Storey, John, efq. Notts
Stroud, Rev. Mr. Southill, Somerfet
Stroud, Mr. Somerfet-ftrcct
Sunderland, Mr.
Surtees, Rev. Mr. fellow of Univerfity College, Oxon
Sutton, Mr. Francis, Devizes
Sutton, Rev. Charles, Norwich
Sutton, , efq.
Swamfon, J. T. efq. Dover Place
Swain, Mis. Halifax
Swaffield, Mr. Clement’s Inn
Swale, T. efq. Gower- Hreet, Bedford Square
Swertner, Rev. John, Neville’s Court
Swinnerton, Rev. Mr. Hough, Chelhire
Symmonds, John, efq.
T.
Right Hon. Lady Townfend
Tappin, Mr. Kew Bridge
Tayler, Mr. F. Audio Friars
Tayler, Andrew, efq. Norfon-ftreet
Tayler, Rev. Mr. Lincoln’s Inn Fields
Tayler, Mr. Auflin Friars
Taylor, M. B. efq. Wolverhampton
Taylor, John, efq. Kirby Houfe, Berks
Taylor, Mr. Panton-flreet
Taylor, Rev. Thomas, Wotton, Surry
Taylor, Richard, efq. Norton-ftreet
Taylor, Mr. Chatham Place
Templer, George, efq. Shapwick, Somerfet
Temple, G. efq. Mortlake
Templeton, Mr. N. B. Tiinity College, Cambridge
Tenant, Mr, Leeds
Tetley, Mr. Leeds
Tcfchemacher, M. R. Nottingham
Thompfon, Mr. John, Croydon
Thompfon, Dr. Kenfmgton
Thomas, David, efq. Pay Office
Thomas, Harry, efq. Parliament-fired
Thorold, Sir John, hart.
Thornton, Godfrey, efq, Auftin Friars
Thornbury, Rev. Mr.
Thoroton, Rev. Mr. Trinity College
Thricg,


Thring, Mr. John, Warminfter
Thynne, Hon. Thomas, Longleat, Wilts
Tilfon, , efq. G. C. Chrift Church, Oxon
Timms, Mr.
Timbrell, Mr. Thomas, jun. Trowbridge
Todd, Mr. York
Todd, Rev. Henry, M. A. Wotton Baffet, Wilts
Tomlinc, Marmaduke
Tomkins, William, efq. Abingdon, Birks
Tomkins, Jofeph, efq. Abingdon, Berks
Tomkins, Mr. Benjamin, Upper Thames-ftreet
Toplis, Mr. Cuckney, Notts
Topham, John, efq. Gray’s Inn
Toulmin, Mr. Hackney
Towles, Mr. High-ftreet, Borough
Townfend, Marmaduke, efq. Riby Grove, Lincoln
Townfend, Air. Chelfea
Tracey, Hon. and Rev. Dr. All Souls College
Trant, Air. Leeds
Tremells, Mr. Roger, Northumberland
Trevelyan, Sir John, bart. Nectlecomb
Tripp, Henry, efq. Temple
Trollope, Sir Thomas, Lincolnihire
Tryon, Air. Grofvenor Square
Tuke, Mr H-mry, York
Tuke, Mr. John, ditto
Tunftall, Marmaduke, efq. Wycliffe, Yorklhirc
Turton, Thomas, efq. Aleanwood
Turner, Rev. Air. Newcaftle
Tumor, efq. Sackville-ftreetj
Tufon, Edward, efq. Wells
Tyley, Mr, Thomas, Wedmore
Tyi-e, Mr. John, Devizes
U.
Valpy, Rev. Richard, Reading
Vanderbergh, Air. Kenfington Gore
Vcre, , efq. Biihopfgate-ftreec
Vigor, Mr. Robert, Briftoi
Vincent, Mr. A. B. Trinity College, Cambiidge
Vincent, , efq.
Uppleby, Mrs.
w.
Right Hon. Lord Vifcount Weymouth
Right Hon. A ifeountefs Weymouth
R’ght Hon. Lord Vifcount Wentworth
Wade, Benjamin, efq. New Grange
Wakefield, Air. William S;.sele, Andover
4
Walpole, , efq. Sowerby Bridge, York/hire
Walker, Jofeph, M. D. Leeds
Walker, William, efq. Leeds
Walker, Jofeph, efq. Eaftwood
W r alker, , efq.
Walker, E. efq. Serjeants Inn
Walcot, , efq. Temple
Walter, Mr.
Walter, Mr. Labour-in-vain Hill
Walters, Mr. Thomas, Shadweli
Walton, Mr. Bank
Walton, Mr. Gridlers Hall
Waller, T. G, efq. Winchefter
Wale, Gregory, efq. Shelford, Cambridgefhire
Wallh, John, efq Chefterfield-ttreet
Ward, Rev. Mr. Netherthorpe
Ward, Air. Thon.as, Devonlhire-flreet
"Ward, , efq. Gower-ftreet
Warde), , efq. St. James’s-ftreet
W r athen, Mr. James, Hereford
Watts, Mr. Bath
W r atts, Mr. Scotland Yard
Watfon, William, efq. Bath
Watfon, Mr. Holland, Stockport
Watfon, Mr. Park-lane
VUebb, Mr. Francis, Sarum
Webb, Mr. Charles, Warminfter
Webb, Mr. Benjamin, Melklham
Webb, John, efq. Dodlors Commons
Webfter, Rev. Mr. Tiblhelf, Derby
Webftcr, Mr. Morley
W T elby, , efq. fellow of Emanuel College
Weld, Thomas, efq. Lullworth Caftle
W r eftern, Mr. Gainfborough
Whalley, Mr. Minories
Whitaker, Mr. James, Froome
W T hitaker, Mifs
Whitting, Mr. Broad ftreet, Ratcliff
W r hitfield, Rev. Dr. Lothbury
White, S. M. D. Nottingham
White, Mr. William, Wedmore
W T hite, Mr. J. Garlick Hill
White, Mr. Queen’s-ftreet, Southwark
White, John, efq. Weymouth-ftreet
Wick, Nathaniel, efq. Bath
Wickham, William, efq.
Wickham, Mr. James, Froome
Wicken, Mr. John, jun.
Wiggs, Mr. Wapping
Wigley, , efq. Tempic
W : ght, Rev. Ofborn, Ponibury
Wight, Rev. Henry, Lichfield Cathedral
WiliLmfon, Mr. Little Smith-ftrect
William?, Mr. Thomas, Bratton
Wilfon, Capt. Farnham, Surry
Wilfon, Robert, efq. Froome
Wilfon, Mr. Leeds
Wilßn, Rev. Mr.
Wilfon, Thomas efq. Leeds
Wilfon, Mr. Vauxhail
Wilfon, Mr.
Wil'or, Mr. H*tkney
W r ilkin(on, Edward, efq. Leeds
\\ ilkmlon, , elq. fcilow commoner of Trinity
Hall ‘ 1
Wilkiafon, Abram, efq. Dublin
WTkinfon, Mr. Leaden nali-iireet
Wilmot, Mr.
Wibraham. Rundle, efq. Rode Hall. Chelhlre
Windle, Mr. Leeds
W.ndham, Wihiam, efq. Chandois-ftreer, Cavendilh
Square
Windham, Dr. Corton, Dorfet
\S Indus, Mr. Aithur, \S ar Office
Windus, Mr. Bilhopfgatt-flreet
Winter, T. B. efq. Fr.ome
\\ ife, Mr. Ncwgate-ftreet
Wolfe, , efq. Temple
W ood, Rev. Mr. Leeds
Wood, Mr. P. Mansfield
\v aid, , efq. Holiio Clofe, Rmpon, Ycrkfhire
Wood fa 11, Mr ftreet
W ood ward, , efq. Chavenage
Woolcombe, Mr. Oriel College
Wollm, Mr. Fetter-lane
organ, Rev. Mr. Andover
W ot;oc, , efq. Lower Brook-ftreet
W right, Mr. J.
Wright, Mr Leadechall-ftitet
W r )atr, Mr. Eflex-ftreet
Wyatt, Mr. Samuel, Burton upon Trent
Y.
Yarde, Mr.
Yates, Jihn, efq. Charter Houfe Square
Yeatman, Rev, John, fellow of Oriel College
Yorke, Philip, efq. New C i vend ilh-ftreet
Yorke, Charles, efq. Linto'n's Ina
"ioung, Rev. Mr. Wading-ftrccc










BEDFORDSHIRE
IS a fmall inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia 4it is now in the province of
Canterbury, bilhoprick of Lincoln, and the Norfolk circuit; being 35 miles from north to fouth ; 20 miles broad from eaft to
weft; and 145 in circuit; containing an area of 480 fquare miles, or 307,200 fquare acres, divided into 9 hundreds, i24parifties,
with 10 market towns, viz. Bedford, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the-title of Duke to the
Ruftel family; Ampthill; Bigglefwade; Dunftable; Leighton Beaudefart; Luton; Potton; Shefford; Tuddington; and Woburn,
Among the villages Turvey gives the title of Baron to the Mordaunt family ; and Bromham the fame title to the Trevor family.
It fends 4 members to parliament, 2 for the county, and 2 as before mentioned ; pays 7 parts of the land-tax, and provides 400 men
to the national militia. Its rivers are the Oufe, navigable to Bedford, and divides the county into two parts ; the Ivel, Lea, and
other fmall ftreams. It produces abundance of corn, cattle, wood, barley, woad for dying, and rich paftures; its chief manu-
factures are malt, bone-lace, and ftraw goods.. Its moft noted places are Dane’s Fields, remarkable for two pits 15 feet diameter.
It is a pleafant county, diverftfied with fruitful plains and rifing hills. The air is healthy, and the foil in general a deep clay. It
produces fullers earth, an excellent ingredient for our woollen manufactures. There are many remains cf Roman, Saxon, andDaniftx
antiquities.
The moft confiderable Seats in this county are,.
Ampthill Park, near Ampthill,
Bafmead, near Hale Weldon.
Battelfden, near Woburn.
Beachwood Park, near Luton.
B let foe Park, near Thurleigh.
Brolborough Park, near Ampthill.
Chlckfand Abbey, near Shcffcrd.
near Bedford.
Eaton Bray Houfe, near Dunftable.-
Eaton Socon Houfe.
Hafell Hall, near Potton.
Hinwick near Puddington.
Hockliffe, near Tuddington.
Houghton Conqueft Park, near Ampthill.
Luton Park, near Luton.
Melchburne Park, near Rifeley.
Oakky.
Odell, near Harr old.
Sandy, near Potton,
Southill, near Shefford.
Sutton, near Potton.
Tuddingham Park, near Tuddington,
Woburn Park, near Wobum,
VVreft Park, near Shefibrd,








BERKSHIRE
XS an inland county, which gives the title of Earl to the Howard family, and fends 2 members to parliament. During the Saxort
heptarchy it belonged to the Weil Saxons. It is now in the province of Canterbury 7 , diocefe of Saliibury, and circuit of Oxford ;
containing 467,500 fquare acres, or 730 fquare miles ; being 40 miles long, 29 broad, and about 180 in circuit, divided into 20
hundreds ; has 140 pariihes, 62 vicarages; 12 market towns, viz. Windfor, which gives the title of Baron to the Hickman family, and
fends 2 members to parliament; Abingdon, gives the title of Earl to the family of Bertie, and fends one member to parliament;
Hungerford, gives the title of Baron to the Haftings family ; Newbury 7 , gives the title of Baron to the Cholmondeley family;
Reading, fends 2 members to parliament; Wallingford, fends 2 members to parliament; befides Eaft Ilfley, Lower Lambourne,
Maidenhead, Ockingham, and Wantage. It has about 671 villages, among whom Mortimer gives the title of Earl to the family of
Harley. This county fends 9 members to parliament, pays but 10 parts of the land tax, and fupplies but 560 men to the national
militia. Its principal river is the Thames; befldes which, it has the Ills, the Kennet, the Loddon, the Ocke, and the Lambourne,
the latter, contrary to all others, is always the highefl in fummer, and Ikrinks as winter approaches. The moft remarkable places in
this county are the Royal Callle of Windfor, the fertile Vale of White Hone, and White Horfe Hill, where the rude figure of a
horfe takes up near an acre of ground on the fide of a green hill, faid to have been made to commemorate the defert of the Danes by
Alfred, in 841, on Alhdown, now the feat of Lord Craven. The air of this county is healthy, even in the vales, which are remark-
ably pleafant. It is well ftored with fine timber, particularly oak, elm, and beech, and produces great plenty of grain ; and the rivers
produce fine trouts and craw-filh. It has manufactures of woollen cloth, fail cloth, and malt.
The moft confiderable Seats in this county are,
Aldermarfton Park, near Aldermarfton-
Alhamftead Park, near Eaft Ilflev.
7 J
Afhdown Park, near Eaft Ilfley.
Afhley Hill, near Henley.
Bagfhot Rails, and Baglhot Green, near Windfor.
Baffeldon Park, near Pangboum.
Beaumont Lodge, near Old Windfor.
Bill Hill.
Binfield.
Coley, near Reading.
Compton Park, near Alhbury,
Cranbury Park, at Windfor.
Dunfton Park, near Newbury.
Eafthamftead, near Ockinghara.
Englefield Houfe, near Englehelo.
Fawley, near Welford.
Frogmore, near Windfor.
The Grove, near Newburv.
H*ll Place, near >laideuhe^d.
Hemftead Marfhall Park, near Kintbury..
Hurft Park, near Reading.
New Lodge, near Windfor.
Oakfield Houfe, near Reading.
Oakley, near Abingdon.
Oxenwood, near Bullermere.
Park Place, near Henley.
Purley Hall, near Pangboum.
Radley Hall, near Sunningweli.
Strately.
Shottelbrooke, near Waltham.
Sunninghill Park, near Windfor,
Swallowfield Park, near Reading-.
Sparfholt Houfe, near Wantage.
Swinley Rails, near Bracknell.
Thatcham, near Newbury.
Uffingham.
Welford, near Winterborn.
White Knights, near Reading.
White Waltham.
Windfor Caftle.
Windfor Great Lodge.
Wittenham Little, near Dorchefter.
Wooley, near Famborough.
Wodley, near Farringdon.
Yattenden Park, near Pangboum.
Th: mojl remarkable and exttnfivs Views In this Cue s
are from
Cumner Hurft, near Appleton.
Cooper’s Hill, near Windfor; St. Leonard’s Hill, r.:_r
Windfor ; Windfor Terrace, and Cranbournc I,ode*.
The Road from Reading to Wallingford.
White Horfe Hill, near Woolfton.
The Road from Wantage to Sparfholt.
The Hill between Maidenhead and He ley.








BUCKINGHAMSHIRE
IS an inland county, which gives title of Earl to the Hobart family. During the Saxon heptarchy it belonged to the kingdom of
Mercia, and is now included in the province of Canterbury, in the diocefe of Lincoln, and in the Norfolk circuit. Its form is oblong,
the greateft extent from North to South is 46 miles long, 23 broad, and no in circuit, containing 467,000 fquare acres, or 730
fquarc miles, divided into 8 hundreds, having 185 parifhes, and 15 market-towns, viz. Buckingham, the county town, which
gives the title of Marquis to the Temple family, and fends 2 members to parliament; Aylefbury, which gives the title of Earl
to the Brudenel family, and fends 2 members to parliament; Wycomb, which gives the title of Baron to the Petty family, and fends
2 members to parliament; Marlow, Wendover, and Amerfham, each fends 2 members to parliament; Newport Pagnel, Window,
Beaconsfield, Chefham, Stony Stratford, Colnbrook, Ivinghoe, Oulney, and Rifborough; befides the confiderable villages of Eton,
Fenny Stratford, Burnham, Brickhill, Hanflope, Iver, &x. It fends 14 members to parliament, pays 12 parts of the land-tax, and
provides 360 men to the national militia. Its rivers are the Thames, Oufe, Coin, Wickham, Amerfham, Ifis, Tame, and Loddon.
The mod noted places are the Chiltern Hills, Vale of Aylefbury, Bernwood Foreft, and Wooburn Heath. Its chief manufactures
are bone lace, paper, and malt. It produces fine wool, beech wood, cattle, fheep, and is noted for its breed of rams, and woad for
dying. The air is generally good, and the foil is moftly chalk or marie.
The moft remarkable Seats in this county are,
A'bridge, near Ivlnghoe.
Black Park, near Langley.
:Bulftrode, near Bcaconsfield.
Cheynefs, near Amerfham.
j
Clifden Houfe, near - Hedfor.
Chefham.
Denham Court, near Uxbridge.
Ditton Park, near Windfor.
Dudderfhall Park, near Queynton.
Downey Court.
Eythorp.
Gregor’s, near Beaconsfield-
Hall Barn, near Beacpnsh^ld.
Latimer’s near Chefham.
Langley, near Colnbrook.
New Houfe, near Charlfont, St. Giles’s#
Nettleden, near Great Gaddefden.
Oving, near Whitchurch.
Percy Lodge near Colnbrook.
Shardloe, near Amerfham.
Stanton, near Hayerfham.
Stoke Park, near Eaton.
Stow Park, near Buckingham.
Turfield Court near Henley.
Tythorpe, near Thame.
Whitton Park, near Beacor.sficld,
Weft and High Wycomb.
Wine Park., near Leighton Buzzard.
Wotton, near Brill.
The moji remarkable Places for extcnjivc ptofpcfls ar: 3
Taplow, on the Thames.
Pvoot Houfe and Bapfey Point.
Great Marlow.
Cawlev Wood.
Harleyford, near Marlow.
Prince Rilborough.
The Road from Hadfor to Great Marlow.








CAMBRIDGESHIRE
Is an inland county, which, during the heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of the Eaft-Angles. It is now in the province
of Canterbury, dioce.e ot Ely, except a fmall part in the diocefe of Norwich, and it is included in the Norfolk circuit. It is
44 miles long, 26 broad, and 160 in circumference; containing 428,800 fquare acres, or 670 fquare miles; divided into 1 7
hundreds, 163 parifhes, 83 vicarages, 279 villages, one city, viz. Ely, which is a biflioprick, whofe bifliop is a prince palatine
within its dinner, and appoints a judge to try all criminal caufes; one univerfity, viz. Cambridge, the fecond in the kingdom,
founded in 531, confuting of 12 colleges and 4 halls, and containing about 1500 fludents, and fends 2 members to parliament;
the town contains 14 parifh churches, fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Duke to the Royal family ; Royfton,
which givea the title of Vifcount to the \orke family, and enjoys a market; as does Linton, Wifbeach, Caxton, Merlh,
Thorney, Soham; and Newmarket, remarkable for its horfe-races, is part in this county. Among the villages Horfeheath gives
tae tide of Baron Mountford to the family of Bromley, The rivers are the Oufe, Cam, Welney, and Nene. The molt remark-
able places are, Balfham and Gogmagog Hills, Newmarket-heath, Soham and Streatham Meers ; Royfton Cave, the Devil’s
Diich, Sturbridge Field, See, The Ifle of Ely is an inland fpot, furrounded by the Oufe and other ftreams, and is the Northern
divifton of the county, conftfting of a fpacious level, containing 300,000 acres of land, extending into the counties of Norfolk,
Suffolk, Huntingdonfhire, and Lincolnfliire, divided by innumerable channels and drains. The whole level, of which this is a
part, forms a rude kind of femicircle refembling a horfe-ftioe. In the Ifle the air is damp, foul, and unwholefome ; but in the
fomh-eaft parts of this county it is more pure and falubrious. The foil alfo is very different: in the Ifle of Ely it is fenny and
ver> f P on gy> } et affords excellent pafture ; in the Uplands it is fruitful in grain. Its chief products are cattle, faffron, game,
ponltr), and ii\ei fifli ; and they make great quantities of malt. It fends 6 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the county, and
4as abo\ e fliewn ; pays 9 parts of the land-tax; and provides 480 men to the national militia.
The Gentlemens’ feats in this County are.
Abington, near Linton.
Baberhatn, near Linton.
Barrington, near Cambridge.
Bottifham, near Newmarket.
-Bourne, near Cambridge.
Cadldge, near Newmarket.
Cherriton, near Cambridge*
Cheveley, near Newmarket.
Chippenham, near Newmarket.
Connington, near Caxton.
Croxton, near Caxton,
Doddington, Ille of Ely.
Dullingham, near Newmaket.
Foudham Abbey, near Newmarket,
Fulburn, near Cambridge.
Gogmagog Hills, near Cambridge,
Hllderlham, near Linton.
Hinkefion, near Linton.
Horfeheath, near Linton.
Impington, near Linton.
Kneefworth, near Royfton.
Long Stanton, near Cambridge,
Madingley, near Cambridge.
Milton, near Linton.
Newton, near Cambridge.
Shady Camps, near Linton.
Snallwell, near Newmarket.
Soham, near Ely.
Swafham, near Newmarket.
VVhaddon, near Royfton.
Wimple, near Caxton.
Wratcing, near Linton,
The m'fi extenjlvt Views are froffty
Gogmagog Hills, near Cambridge.
Cambridge Caftle Hill,
Newmarket Heath,








CHESHIRE
Ts a maritime county. During the Saxon heptarchy, it belonged to the kingdom of Mercia ; and William the Conqueror
made it a county palatine, and granted it peculiar privileges, viz. having its own judge for all criminal cafes, a court of exche-
quer, &c. It is included in the province of York, and a diocefe of its own name. It is 50 miles long from eaft to weft, 33
broad from north to fouth, and 200 miles in circumference; containing 1050 fquare miles, or 672,000 fquare acres ; divided
into 7 hundreds, 101 parifhes, 20 vicarages, 670 \illages, one city, Chefter, which is a bifhop’s fee, and gives the title of Earl
to the Prince of Wales, as eldeft fon of the King of England, firft conferred in 124.7 by Henry 111. It fends 2 members to par-
liament. It has 11 market-towns, viz. Nantwich, which gives title of Baron to the family of Cholmondelcy ; Macclesfield,
gives the title of Earl to the family of Parker ; Malpas, gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Cholmoadeley ,* Middlewich,
Northwich, Congleton, Altringham, Fordfham, Knotsford, Stockport, and Sandbach, Among the villages, Kinderton gives the
title of Baron to the family of Vernon ; Cholmoadeley, thofe of Earl and Baron to the noble family of that name ; Dutton,
that of Baron to the family of Hamilton. The principal rivers in this county are the Merfey, Dee, Whelock, Croc, Dane,
Wever, Goyte, Bollin, and Tame. It fends 4 members to parliament, 2 for the county, and 2 for Chefter as before mentioned ;
pays 7 parts of the land-tax, and provides 560 men to the national militia. On the coaft is the Ifle of Hilbree, with Black
Rock, Burbo, Dove and Hoyle Sands, with Bugg Wharf, and Middle, and High Lake ; alfo Warren Bay, with the Entrances
of the Merfey and Dee Rivers, and a peninfula between both. It enjoys the moft extenfive and beneficial inland navigation in
the kingdom, that of the Duke of Bridgewater defending particular attention. Among the other remarkables are Mowcop,
Erodfham, Alderley, and Shutlingflow Hills; the forefts of Delamere and Macclesfield ; with feveral lakes, meers, pools,
heaths and moftes. It produces excellent cheefe, cattle, corn, coals, iron, mill-ftones, timber, an immenfe quantity of fine
fait, &c, The foil rich and fertile.
The following are the moft remarkable Seat?,
Adlirgton Hall, near Macclesheld.
Arlcy Hall, near Knutsford.
Afron Hal!, near Frodlham.
Belvedere, near Whitchurch.
Boulfworth, near Barnhill.
Brereton Hall, near Sandbach.
Calueley Hall, near Nantwich,
Capefthorne, near Macclesfield.
Cholmondelcy, rear Malpas.
Combermere, near Nantwich,
Crewe Hall, near Sandbach
Davenport Hall, near Congleton,
Delatnere Lodge,
Doddington Hall, near Nantwich.
Dorfold Hall, near Ditto.
Dunham Park, near Altringbam,
Eaton, near Cheßer.
Henbury Hall, near MacclesfielcL
Lower Tabley, r.ear Knuttford.
Lyme Park, near D.fiey.
Marbury Hall, near Badworth.
Mere Hall, near Knutsford.
Mottram St. Andrew', near Stockport*
Norton Priory, near Frodlham.
Oulton Hall, near Torporley.
Peover Hall, near Knutsford.
Poynton, near Stockport.
Rode Hall, near Congletom
Tatter. Park, near Knutsfcrd*
Toft Hall.
Wincham,
Tbi mofi remarkable foliations for beautiful end xxtr\ far
Vitus art y
Belvedere, near Whitchurch.
Delamere Foreft North Eaft of Chether.
Co t Vale.
Difley Hill, In the P.oad from Buxton,
Hiulton Caftle,
Hellfcy Tor,








CORNWALL
Is a maritime county, the moft weftern extremity of Great Britain, and give, the title of Duke to the eldeft fon of the K,a
of England as foon as born. It was included in the county of Devon by Alfred in his dmfton of the kingdom into county -..i
belonged to the Weft Saxons daring the heptarchy. It is now belonging to the province of Canterbury and d.ocefe of .r.
and is included in the Weftern circuit. All writs iffued here are in the Prince of Wales s name, as Duke of Cornw.d, tt. n
in the name of the King. The Prince appoints the fheriff for this county; which is 75 m.les long from eaft to weft 1 an. 4,
broad at its eaftern end, but not above five miles broad at its weftern extremity; and .t u about 250 miles m circum. u c .
containing .450 fquare miles, or 908,800 fquare acres at this time, though in the reign of Edward I according to a f ey
then made, it'contained 1,500,000 acres; a fufficient proof that large traft. of it have been fwallowed up by the «>*
fuppofed the Iflands of Scilly alfo did formerly, though now feparated from it by the fea, at the d.l.ance of 40 r. .... a., are
■4r in number, of which St. Mary’s Ifland, though only 9 miles round, is the Urged. This county is divided into 9 hundred,.
2 pariflres, 89 vicarages, and a 7 market-towns, via. Launccfton, the county town, which fends a members to Parliament,
Falmouth, which gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Bolcawen ; Helfton, with Truro, Salulh, Boum.n, . ve
Tregony, Camelford, Fowey, St. Germain, Penryn, Calllngton, Bofiiney, Eaft and Weft Loo, Grampound, Lelkard, Loftvut k.,
St Mawes, St. Michael, and Newport, each fend 2 members to parliament; but the three laft places have d.fufed their mar .ets;
but the following enjoy that privilege, viz. Padftow, St. Columb, Penfance, and Market Jew. The village of Bocconcc gives the
title of Baron to the family of Pitt ; Port Elliot the fame honour to the family of Eliot j and that 0. Bolcawen to the f.m. y ot
the fame name. Its numerous remarkable places are thofe of the Land’s End, Cape Lizard, Cape Cornwall, Deadman s-hea ,
Rame-head Nate-point, Stopper-point, Trevoza-point, Gogmagog’s-leap, Predannor-point, Pengwenion point, Lamorney-pomr,
Tallart-pomt, Gudreny Ifle, Meneg Peninfula, The Scilly Iflands, Pcndennis and St. Mawes Cadies, Michael’s Mount, Padftow
Haven St Ive’s Bay, Mount’s Bay, Falmouth Harbour, Trewardreth Bay, Fowey Haven, Beed’s Haven, Duck Pool, Heifie.d
Haven’ Cary Bav, Gumdrath Bay, Predmouth Bay, Sythe Bay, Hamoze Bay ; the Godolphin Hill, Flengilon and Pcndennis
Kills Rofeland Temple Moores, St. Anftle, St. Milan and Hellion Dow ns, Loophole Lake, and The Hurlers. Its pnncipal
rivers are the Tamer, Cober, Loo, Camel, Fowey, Haile, and Liver. It produces the beft tin in the world, with copper, lead,
fine {lone, blue flate, filver ore, mundick, cryftal, moor done, load none, pafture, cattle, corn, poultry, game, fifli ot every kmn,
particularly herrings and pilchards. It fends 44 members to parli ament, 2 for the county, and 42 as already fhewn, which is
more than any county in England, and within one as many as the whole kingdom of Scotland. It abounds with Druidical mo-
numents ; and St. Germains and Bodmin were biftiopricks as early as 905. The coinage-towns for tin are Lelkard, Loftwithiel,
Truro Helfton, and Penfance. The packets fail from Falmouth for Spain, Portugal, and the Weft Indies. The rams are frequent
in this’county, but not excefiive, but floras frequent. The air healthy, and feldom annoyed with fogs. The winters are milder
here than in any other part of the kingdom ; fo that myrtles flourifii in the open air without being (heltered in the winter;
and fnow feldom remains on the ground above two or three days ; and large hail hardly ev«r falls here. It lupphes 640 men to
the national militia, and pays S parts of the land-tax.
The moil remarkable Seats in this County are,
Anthony Houfe, near Eaft Anthony.
Bocconcc Houfe, near Loftwithiel*
Bolcawen Park.
Bofworgcy, near St. Coin mb,
Botham, near Helfton.
Carcltw, near Penryn.
Caftle Horoeck, near Penfance.
Caryhayes, near Tregony.
Clowance, near Redouth.
Coldriniek, near Lilkard.
Crockercon Houfe, near Calllngton.
Glyn, near Loftwithiel.
Godolphin Parle, near St. Hillary,
Guinnap, rear Penryn.
Her.worthy, near Launccfton,
Lanhorn, near St. Cole rob.
Luny, near Sr. Auftle.
Menabilly, near Fowey.
Morvall Houfe, near St. Leo.
Kanfwhydn Houfe, St, Coiamb.
Pencarrow, near
Pengreap, near Redruth.
Penheal, near Launccfton.
Penrofe, near Htlfton.
Penwarn, rear Mefagczcy.
Finchley Park, near Bodmin,
port Elliot, near St. Germains,
Rofcrow, near Penryn.
Stow, near Kilharopton.
Tehidy, near Redruth.
Trefulis, near Falmouth.
Tfcgotha.', near Faimowth.
Trelawney, near Loo,
Trelowarren, near Hellion.
Trer'ce, near St. Michael’s*
Trcvethoe, rear Lelant.
WerringtM, near Launcefioa.
'Tbt mojl cottfutrable View art [roar. ,
G/dolphin Hills, near Market Jew.
Hrrgfton Hills.
Launccfton Caftle.
Msd.-rn Hills, near St. Hes.
Pendennis and St. Mawes GaiVe.
S’.. Michael’s Mount.
’l uuaecS Caftle.
•>








CUMBERLAND
Is a maritime county, which gives the title of Duke to a branch of the Royal Family; and, during the Saxon heptarchy,
belonged to the kingdom of the Northumbrians, though by fome fuppofed to have belonged to the kingdom of Scotland, on
the borders of which it is fituated. It is now in the province of York, in the diocefes of Chefter and Carlifle, and in the
Northern Circuit. It is 53 miles long, 45 miles broad, and 225 miles in circuit; containing miles, 01979,200 fquare
acres, divided into 3 wards, having 58 parifhes, 77 vicarages, 447 villages, one city, Carlifle, which gives the title of Earl to
the family of Howard, is a bifhop’s fee, and fends 2 members to parliament; and 14 market-towns, viz. Cockermouth, which
gives the title of Baron to the Wyndham family, and fends 2 members to parliament; Egremont, which gives the title of Earl
to the fame noble family ; Penrith, Whitehaven, Kefwick, Ravenglafs, Alncefter, Holm, Brampton, Alfton Moor, Ireby, Kirk-
Ofwald, Longtown, and Wigton ; among the villages, Delaval gives the title of Baron to a family of that name ; Greyfiock, the
fame honour to the family of Howard ; Gillefland, the title of Baron to the fame noble family. Its principal rivers are the
Eden, Ain, Irt, Pettcrel, Caude, Darwent, Cocker, Duddon, Leven, Efk, Wiza, and Tyne. Remarkable places in this
county are Moricambo Bay, Derwent Foot Haven, and Solway Frith; with Cheviot Hills, Hard Knot Hills, Mole Hill,
Dentfhill, Skiddaw Mount, and Wrynofe ; The Fells, Penrith Fells, Newton Beacon ; Derwent, Ulies, and Broad-water Lakes ;
as well as thofe of Baftingthwaite, Lovvater, Wafdale and Dal garth Lakes, with a few other fmalier ones ; Geltfdale, We ft ward,
Copeland, and Englewood Forefts. This county is very mountainous, and has more Roman antiquities than any other in the
kingdom ; of which the Pints’ Wall, which paffes through this county, is no inconftderable part, built by Adrian in 121, which
crofted the whole iftand from fea to fea about 100 miles, was 8 feet broad, and 12 high ; beftdes which there were 25 ftrong
caftles, and all the houfes of the nobility and gentry were built caftle-wife, to defend them from the incurfions of the Scots
and Picls; here alfo ended the great Roman highway. This county produces black lead, copper, iron, coals, lapis calaminaris,
game, fifli, See. and has manufactories of fuftians, coarfe woollens, linen, &c. It fends 6 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the
county, and 4 others as above mentioned ; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides 200 men to the national militia*
There is a medical fpring in Lanecrcft.
%
The moft remarkable Seats are.
Allerhy Hall, near Cockei mouth.
Erayton Hall, near Wigton.
Camerton Hall, near Workington.
CLa Hall, near Wilton.
Corby Gallic, near Carlifte,
Crookrake Hall, near Wigton.
Gowbarrow Park, near Penrith.
Greyfiock, neir Penrith.
Hail Hill, near -Egremoivt.
How Hall, near Ennerdale.
Hutton Park, near Penrith.
Irton, near Rjvenglafs.
Ifle, near Cockermouth,
Moncaftle Hall, near Raverglafs.
Kaward Caftle, near Brampton,
Ulpha Park.
Whitehall, near Hdkctt,
‘The m r jfi remarkable Vic’voi art tbje from,
Kefwlck Lake, or Der.rent-water, at the of
Skiddow.
Ullefwater.
Irton Hall.
The Weft Side of Dunmallert-hl!I.
Borodale, and the Top of Craig Caftle,
Lawdown Waterfall and Grange.
Braithwalte Brewes.
Beacon-Hill, near Penrith.
Warna!, near Rofe Caftle,
Mole, at Brampton.
Bafliogthwaite Water.
From Ewforidge.
Eiackomb, near Milium, has in extended view of
100 Miles.








DERBYSHIRE
Is an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia ; it is now in the piovince of C ai\-
terbury, the diocefe of Litchfield and Coventry, and in the Midland circuit. It is 55 miles long, 34. broad, and 173 in ciicum-
ference ; containing 988 fquare miles, 632,320 fquare acres, and is divided into 6 hundreds, and 106 parillies ; has 53 vicarages,
CO3 villages, and jo market-towns, viz. Derby, the county town, which gives the title of Earl to the Stanley family, and fends 2
members to parliament ; Cheflerfield, which gives the title of Earl to the family of Stanhope ; W irkfvvorth ; Bakewell ; Afii-
borne ; Bolfover; Alfreton ; Chapel in Frith ; Dronfield; and Tidefwell ; among the villages, Elvaflon gi\es the tide of Baron
to the Stanhope family; Haddon, that of Baron to the family of Manners; Hartington, that of Marquis to the Cavendiili
family ; Hardwicke, the title of Baron to the Cavendifh family alfo ; Stanley, that of Baron to the Murray family; and
dale, that of Baron to the Cnrzon family. Its principal rivers are the Derwent, Trent, Wye, Erifh, Crawlock, Dove, Compton,
Rother, Ibber, and Nore. It fends 4 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the county, and 2 for Derby town ; pays 6 pares of the
land-tax, and provides 560 men to the national militia. It produces great quantities of lead, antimony, mid-hones, giinding-
(tones, marble, alabafler, ccarfe cryilal, azure fpar, green and white vitriol, allum, pit coal, and iron. Its chief manmaclories
are hofiery, China-ware, malt and beer, and tobacco pipes. The weflern parts on the fide of the Derwent, which divines the
county in two parts, are barren, chiefly confiftLng of bleak hills; and its vallies feed great flocks of fheep, and other cattle.
The foil of the eaft and fouth parts are fertile, and abound with Gentlemens’ feats. It has feveral mecucinal iprings, viz.
Buxton, Quarn, Matlock, &c. with feveral woods, many parks, and Peak forefl. The Peak is the higheit hill in England, under
which is the cavern called the Devil’s Arfe, which has a horizontal entrance, 30 feet perpendicular, and at leaft twice as broad.
Near Byrchover is a large rocking-ftone, 4 yards over, and 12 in circumference, eahly moveable by a fmgle perlon. At the
bottom of feveral mountains are cavities called Swallows, becaufe they receive flreams of which there appears no vent. Mam
Tor, near Caflleton, under which are feveral lead mines, is a perpendicular height of 123 yards, which is continually crumbling
away, and yet does not apparently diminifh. Another remarkable, called one of the Wonders of the Peak, is Elden-hole, a
horrible chafm in the fide of a mountain, which, with a line of BS4 yards, could not be fathomed. At Tidefwe.l is a ipring that
ebbs and flows irregularly. Poole’s Hole is a cave a: the foot of a mountain, called Coitmofs, with a fmall entrance, but or great
extent within, abounding with petrifactions ; and near it are two fmall brooks, whole water is hot and co.d, united in one
llream, fo that you may put your Anger in the hot and your thumb in the cold.
The moil remarkable Sent-s .are,
Kre bv Hell, near Burton.
j t
Caulk, near A:tby de la Zouch.
Cun ("worth Park, near Bakewell.
DrakeloW; near Burton.
Hadden Hall, near Bakewell.
Hardwickc Hall, near Bolfover.
Kedlefton Park, near Derby,
Lafcou, near Burton.
Sudbury Park, near Uttoxeter.
Sutton, rear Bolfover.
Warfop Park, near Mansfield.
Wingworth Hall, near Chdkrfield.
follorMt- Place: are remarkable f.r extenjlve Vlews:
From the Devil’s Arfe in the Peak, near Cafiieton,
and the Defcent into Hripedale.
pool's and Elden’s Hole, W. and N. E. of Cafiletcn,
and from'Mam Ter.
Matlock, near the Derwent, and from H.gh Tor,
‘Dove Dale, three miles N. of Athbourne.
Monfal Dale, tv/o miles N. W. of Bakewell.
Eham, or Middleton Dale, E. of Tidefwell.
Upper Dove Dale, five miles N. of Aihbourac.
Pennington Cliff on the Trent, five Miles S. E. of
Derby.
H ipping Mill Ware on the Derwent, five mile* S. E.
of Derby.
Chee Tor on the Wye, rear Buxton.
Near Afhford In the Water, in the Road from
Tidefwell to Bakewell.
Wicdley Hill between Derby and Wirkfwortb,








DEVONSHIRE
Is a maritime county, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Duke to the fami'y of Cavendifli. During
the Saxon heptarchy, it belonged to the kingdom of the Weft Saxons ; it is now in the province of Canterbury, diocefe of
Exeter, and is included in the Weftern circuit* It is 70 miles from North to South ; 65 from Eaft to Weft ; and 280 miles in
circumference ; containing 2520 fquare miles, or 1,612,800 fquare acres ; divided into 33 hundreds, 394 pariflies, 117 vicarage?,
and 1733 villages ; one city, Exeter, whichffs a county of itfelf, is the fee of a Bifhop, fends 2 members to parliament, and gives
cne title of Earl to the Cecil family ; and 37 market-towns, viz. Plymouth, one of the principal arfenals for the naval ftores cf
the kingdom, which gives the title of Earl to the family of Windfor-Hickman, and fends 2 members to parliament; Taviftock,
which lends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Marquis to the family of Ruflel ; Dartmouth, fends alio 2 members
to pari. ament, and give.-. the title of Earl and Baron to the family of Legg ; Afhburton, which fends 2 members to-parliament,
and gives the title of Baron to the family of Dunning ; Barnftaple, Tiverton, Oakhampton, Honiton, Plymton, Totnefs, and
Beeralfton, each lend 2 members to parliament ; Torrington, gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Bvng ; belides thefe
there are the following market-towns, viz. Crediton, Biddeford, Topfham, Axminfter, Hampton, Newton Abbot, Lyfton, Bowe,
Bradninch, Brent, Kinglbridge, Dodbrook ; Chudleigh, which gives the title of Baron to the family of Clifford ; Chimleigh,
Golumpton, Comb Martin, Culliton, Hartland, Hatherley,. Holdfworthy, Ilfracomb, Modbury, Morton, Sidmouth, and South-
molton. The following villages are remarkable for giving the following titles, viz.-Edgecumbe,.which gives the title of Vifcount
to the family of the fame name ; and Boringdon,. which gives the title of Baron to the family of Parker. Its rivers are the
Tame, Exe, Plym, Torndge, Taw, Yalm, Otter, Oke, Dart, Tavy, Aven, Erme, Culm, Teigne, Ax, and Loman. The moft
remarkable places are Lydford CataraCf ; Start, Hartland, Combes, Bag, Brul, Store, and Otterton Points, Bolt Head,. Bury-
point, Bob’s Nofe, Lundy Ifland Eddiftone Rock and Light-Houfe ; Tor Bay, Dartmouth Haven, Salcomb Haven, Start Bay,
Plymouth Sound, Barnftaple Bay, Portlidge Mouth, Hamoaze, Catwater, St. Nicholas Ifland, Sutton Pool, Exmore, EEther
Rocks, Halden Hills, Crockern Tor, Brent Tor, Dartmore Foreft, Morley, &c. It fends 2 5 members to parliament as already
fhewn, pays 21 parts of the land-tax, and provides 1600 men to the national militia. It produces copper, tin, lead, iron, timber,
flafe, marble, free-ftone, moorftone, loadftones, corn, apples, cyder, perry, fowls, game, fifh in abundance, pill corn, wild
madder, and woad. Its chief manufactures are the different kinds of woollen cloths to an enormous amount. Near Tor Bay is a
remarkable well that ebbs and flows, never freezes, is very tranfparent, and fome times bubbles up like a boiling pot. In Exeter
Cathedral is- the largeu organ in the world, fome of the pipes being 15 inches in diameter. There are mineral waters at
Taviftock,Cleave, Lamerton, Bampton, and Lefton. The air is fharp and healthy, and the foil hilly, woody, and barren, till
rendered fruitful by manure brought from the fea-flde.
Abbey, near Hartford.
Berry Barton, near Hatherly.
Berry Po mcroy Caftle, near Totnefs.
Bickton, near Otterton.
Slatchford, near Cornwocd.
Buckleigh Court, near Bradnineh*
Caftle Hill, near Southmolton.
Cleave, near Exeter.
Cockington, near Tor Bay,
Creedy, near Creditor*.
Downs, near Crediton.
Eggesford, near Chimleigh.
Eftcott,.near Honiton..
Ford Abby, near Axminfter,
Ford, near Newton Abbo*.
Furfdon, near Silverton.
Great Fulford, near Dunsford,
Little Fulford, near Crediton.
Gittifham, near St. Mary Ottery.
Haccombe, near Torbav.
Haldon Houfe, near Exeter.
Heanton, near Hatherlev.
J
Heanton Court, near Heanton Puncharduc.
Hembury Fort, near Honiton.
The chief Seats in this county are,
J *
Holn Park, near Athburton.
Kelleton, near Bradninch.
K rtley, near Plyftock. -
Mamhead, near Haldown.
Monks Buckland, near Taviftock.
Mount Edgecumb, near Plymouth,
Mount Radford, near Exeter,
Netherton, near Hoaiton.
New Court, near Topfham.
New Place, near Chimleigh.
Oakhampton Park, Oakhampton.
Otrerton, near Sidmouth.
Peamore, near Exeter.
Pickwell, near Barnftaple.
%
Pilton ,near Barnftaple.
Poltimore, near Exeter.
Powderham Caftle, near Starcrofs.
9 i
Pynes, near Exeter,
Rockbeer Houfe, near Honiton Clyft.
Saltren, near Plymouth.
Shute, near Honiton.
Stevenftone, near Torringtoru
near Biddeford, .
Tawftock, near Barnftaple*
Tiverton Ca3le,
Wear, near Topfham.
Werrington Houfe, near Launccilon.
Whiteway, near Chudleigh.
Zhulfton, near Barnftiple.
The rr.yft tx'enfivt Views and Situations
JEther Rocks on the Edge of Dun more, near
Illington.
Haldon Kilt, near Exeter.
Mamhead Obelifk.
Barley Houfe, near Exeter.
Thacker Rock, in Toibay.
Bibicombe.
Between Exeter and Tiverton,
Knowles Hill, near Newtca.
Atfel Hill, near Alhburtcn.
Miibcrdown', near Newton.
Stoke Common.
OyveH Hill, near Newton,
Near Honiton.
Edd (tone Light Houfe.
Mount Edgecumbe.
Cafile Walls of Exeter.








DORSETSHIRE
Is a maritime county, which gives the title of Duke and Earl to the family of Sackville ; and, during the Saxon heptarchy,
belonged to the kingdom of the Weft Saxons. It is now in the province of Canterbury, diocefe of Bnftol, and in the \V citern
Circuit. It is 58 miles long, 36 broad, and 200 miles in circumference; containing 1250 fquare miles, or Son,coo fquare
acres; containing 5 diftriris, fub-divided into 60 liberties or hundreds, having 250 pariihes, and 14 market-towns, viz. Dor-
chefter, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament, and was formerly a biflioprick j Shaftelbury, lends 2
members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the Cooper family ; Lyme, fends 2 members to parliament; as does
Pool, Bridport, and Wareham, 2 members each; Melcomb-Regis, incorporated with Weymouth, fends four; the latter place
gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Thynne ; the market-towns, beftdes thofe before-mentioned, are Milton Abbas,
which gives the title of Baron to the family of Darner ; Beaminfter, Winborne, Cerne, and Sherborne which gives the title ot
Baron to the Digby family ; Corfe Caftle, fends 2 members to parliament; and Cranborne, which gives the title of k ilcount
to the Cecil family ; the village of Woodford gives the title of Baron to the family of Strangeways-Fox ; and the Ifle of
Portland gives the title of Duke and Earl to the family of Bentinck. The moft confiderahle rivers are the Froom, Birt,
Piddle, Stour, and Liddon. On the coaft are Chefil Bank, Portland Road and Ifle, Weymouth and Rmgftead Bays, bt. Alban’s
Head, Durlfton Head, and Swanage Bay, Handfaft Point, and StudUnd Bay, Pool Harbour, Furze, Green and Round Wes,
with Brankfea, Sandsfoot, and Portland Caflles. The moft remarkable inland places are the Vale ot Whttehart ; Marik-,vood
Vale; Whitehart, Gillingham, and Holt Forefts ; Cranborne Chace ; Black Moor; Luckford Lake ; and Fordmgton Moor.
The chief produfl is abundance of flieep, cattle, fowls, and game of every kind; with plenty of river and fea-filh; freeftone,
marble, marie, timber, and hemp. The manufadures are linen and woollen goods, bone-lace, and tobacco-pipes. This
was the county where the Saxons made their firft fettlement; and in it are upwards of thirty Roman and Saxon camps to
be traced. It fends 20 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the county, and iS as above (hewn ; pays 9 parts ot the land-tax ;
and provides 640 men to the national militia. The air of this county is in general healthy, and the foil rich and fruitful, and
has often been filled the Garden of England. On the hills it is fomewhat fliarp ; but mild and pleafant in the Tallies. Here
are extenfive woods of very fine timber, efpecially in the Northern parts of the county.
The moft conftderable Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Abbot fbury.
Blandford.
B jwridge, near Cranbourn.
Came, near Dorchefter.
Charborough, near Winborn Minfter.
Cranbourn.
Eattbury Houfe, near Elandford.
Horton, near Winborn Minfter.
-Lewefton, near Sherborne.
.JLytchett Matravers, near Wareharric
•Maperton, near Beaminfter.
Meibury, near Everfhot.
Merley, near Winborn Minfter.
Milbourn Sc. Andrew, near Picloletown.
Milton Abbey, near Piddletown.
More Critchill, near \\ inborn Minfter.
Moreton near Piddletown.
Parnham, near Beaminfter.
Sherborne Cattle,
Scalbridge.
Sydling St. Nicholas, near Frampton,
Winborn Sc. Giles, neat-Cranbourn.
7be tftofl extenjhe Trofpeßs are j'rote ?
A Hill 10 miles from Dorchefter in the Read Id
Exeter.
Charmouth Hill, near Lyme.
Chefil Bank.
Corfe Cattle, in the Ifle of Porbcck.
Maumbury, near Dorchefter.
Portman's Cliff, near Dorchefter.
Quarnes, near the Old Church in the I*.e of Pert'
land.
Ridgeway Hill, near Upway.
Shutehill, near Pool.
Well Lulworth Cove and Dern Doer.
-Zeatman’s Walk under the Reiki.








DURHAM
Is a maritime county, with the privileges cf a principality, or county palatine, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, mad*
part of the kingdom of the Northumbrians. It is in the dioccfe of its own name, the province of York, and is included in the
Northern circuit. It is 40 miles long from eaft to wed, 35 broad from north to fouth, and 160 in circumference, containing
920 fquare miles, or 588,800 fquare acres; divided into 4 wards, having 120 parifhes, 21 vicarages, 223 villages, one city,
Durham, the fee of a bifhop, which fends 2 members to parliament; and 9 market-towns, viz. Barnard Caille, which gives
the title of Vifcount to the Vane family ; Darlington, which gives the title of Earl to the fame family ; Stanhope, which gives
the title of Baron to the family of the fame name; Stockton ; Sunderland, which gives the title of Earl to the Spencer family ;
Hartlepool; Auckland; Harwood; Waliingham ; and Staindrop. Among the villages, Lumley gives the title of Baron to a
family of the fame name; as does Harrington in the fame manner. The principal rivers are the Tees, Tyne, Were, Tame,
Lane, Danvent, Gaundlefs, and Skern. The moft noted places, Sunderland Point and Hartlepool Point; the Tees Mouth and
Tynemouth PLirbour and Bar; the Lune and Teefdale Foreirs ; Weredale, and feveral conftderable Hills* Oxen nail Fits, with
the Cataract cf the Tees River. The foil is various, the fouth part rich, but the weftern rocky and moorilh. It produces lead,
abundance of coal, iron, excellent corn, and fine paftures ; has extenfive manufactories of glafs, fait, muftard, and fine aie. It
fends but 4 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the county, and 2 for the city of Durham, as betore mentioned; pays 3 parts of
the land-tax, and provides 400 men to the national militia. The air of the county is healthy, but feverely co.d in winter.
The moft remarkable Seats in this county are*
Axwcll Park, near NewcaAle.
BHhop Auckland.
Branctbeth Caftle, near Durham,
Gareflread Park, near Newcallle,
Gibfidc, near Newcallle.
Hardwick, near Sedgehcld,
Helton le Hale.
Hilton Caftle, near Sunderland.
Lambton Houle, near Daihana a
Lumlev Cafile, near Durham.
J *
Raby Park, near S.aindrop.
Ravenfwcrth Caille, near KewcafUe.
Stanhope Caille.
Strealhatn Cattle, near Barnard Cafile,
Whitworth, near B.fhop Auckland.
Wlndlefton, nearßilhop Auckland.
Wilton Caille, near B.ihop Auckland,
To: rr-fi cxten/.vt Vhivi in ibis County an from ,
The Banks of the Were, near Durham.
Giliygate Church-yard, above the Rare Fit-’d and
through Fallow Wood to Clu Durham.
Butterby Hill, S. ofDuiham.
The Force of Teefda’.e.
V/inilon oa the Tees.
Few Field, E. of Were.
The Black. Halls, fix miles from Hactlepcd*
Mugglsfwlck Park, near the Darwent.








ESSEX
Is a maritime county on the Eaftern fide of the ifland, which gives the title of Earl to the Capel family ; and during the heptarchy
was comprized in the kingdom of the Eaft Saxons; it now belongs to the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of London, and is in-
cluded in the Home circuit; being from Eaft to Weft 46 miles long, and from North to South 42 miles broad, and 200 in circuit ;
containing ftjuare miles, or 889,600 fejuare acres ; di\ided into 19 hundreds, including 4*5 pttrifties, 173 vicarages, near 1100
villages, and 27 market towns, viz. Colchefter, which fends 2 members to parliament; Harwich, which gives the title of Baron to
the family of Hill, and fends 2 members to parliament ; Malden, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Vif-
count to the Capel family ; Rochford gives the title of Earl to the family of Naflau de Zuleftein ; Walden, which gives the title of
Baron to the family of Griffin; alfo Chelmsford, wffiere the county bufmefs is tranfacled, Manningtree, Witham, Epping, Barking,
Rumford, Billericay, Harlow, Dunmow, Waltham Abbey, Bradfield, Braintree, Brentwood, Rayleigh, Ongar, Coggeftiall, Dedham,
Greys, Halftead, Hatfield, Horndon, and Thaxfted. The principal rivers are Thames, Blackwater, Stour, Coin, Lea, Crouch,
Chdmer, and Roding. It fends 8 members to parliament, 6as above mentioned, and 2 for the county j pays 24 parts of the land-
tax, and provides 960 men to the national militia. The moft remarkable places are Epping or Waltham, Henhault, Dunmow, Hat-
field, and Broad Oak Foreft. Its product is faffron, corn, hay, oyfters, variety of excellent fifti, hops, game, cattle, butter, and
wood; and has the manufactures of woollens, gunpowder, and copperas. The air moift, the foil clayey ; it has 3 excellent havens,
and a great number of elegant villas and parks; among which
The following are moll remarkable;
Albury Hall, near Barking.
Albyn's, near Chigwell.
Arnold’s, near Brentwood,
Afhdon, near Walden.
Audley Houfe, near Walden.
Aythorp Roding, near Hatfield.
Barking.
Barrington Hall, near Hatfield Broad Oak.
Birch, near Colchefter.
Bower Hall, at Steeple Bumpftead.
Braxted, near Witham.
Britton’s, near Rumford.
Coptfold Hall, near Ingatftone.
Copthall, near Epping.
Dagnam Park, near Brentwood.
Danbury Place, near Chelmsford.
Debden Hall, near Thaxfted.
Dew’s Hall, near Chigwell.
Donyland, near Colchefter.
Felix Hall, near Kelvedon.
Gosfield Hall, near Halftead.
Gofton Lodge, near Dunmow.
Hallingbury Place, near Hatfield Broad Oak.
Hyde, near Ingatftone.
Ilford, near Barking.
Kelvedon Hatch, near Cheping Ongar.
Langley’s, near Chelmsford.
Luxborough Houfe, near Chigwell.
Marks, near Rumford.
Miftley, near Manningtree.
Mylefs, near Cheping Ongar.
New Hall, near Chelmsford.
Naveftock Hall, near Cheping Ongar.
Newport, near Thaxfted.
St. Ofyth’s Priory.
Paidlow, near Rumford.
Pirgo, near Brentwood.
Quendon Hall, near Thaxfted.
Ravenhall Place, near Coggeftiall
Ray Hall, near Chigwell.
Rolls, near Chigwell.
Shellow Bowells, near Cheping Ongar.
Terllng Place, near Witham.
Thorndall Hall, near Brentwood.
Tinpinhoe, near Colchefter.
Valence, near Rumford.
Walton's, near Saffron Walden.
Wanfted Houfe, Epping Foreft,
Weald Hall, near Brentwood.
Widford, near Chelmsford.
Willingale, near Cheping Ongar,
Wivenhoe, near Colchefter.
Writtle Park, near Ingatftone.
The »:oJI remarkable Situations and Views are,
Afhden Parfonage Houle, near Linton.
Bartlow Hills.
Beaumont, near Walton.
Borley Church, near Sudbury.
Great Bradfield Church, near Thaxfted.
Little Chefterford Manor Houfe, near Walden.
Between Billericay and Chelmsford.
Chigwell Row, near Chigwell.
Chingford, near Epping Foreft.
Corringham, near the Hope.
Danbury Hill, near Boreham.
Eafton Lodge, near Dunmow,
Horndon on the Hill.
Kelvedon Hall, near Ongar.
Langdon Hills, near Horndon.
Liflon, near Sudbury.
Mount Bures, near Earl’s Colne,
Ongar Caftle.
Parley, near Malden,
Raleigh Caftle.
Southchurch Wick, near Rochford.
Tolieihunt Knights, near Malden.
Wanfted on Epping Foreft.
Warley Houfe, near Brentwood.
Great Wigborough Church, near Colchefter.








GLOCESTERSHIRE
■JIS an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia, It is now in the province o.
j* Canterbury, the diocefe of its own name, and is included in the Oxford Circuit. It contains i3ooiouare miles, or 832,000! [ -
A acres, being 63 miles long, 47 broad, and 260 miles in circumference ; divided into 30 hundreds, having 2SO pariib.es, 90 vicarage.,
1229 villages, one city, Glocefier, the fee of a bifliop, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the tide ot Duke to a oran. 1
•(' of the Royal family ; and in this county is the greatefl part of the city of Briflol, which is alfo a bifhop’s lee, lends 2 member .
J parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the Hervey family ; bur, being a county of itfelf, d 0.5 not belong to this county. It ■
26 market-towns, viz. Tewkefbury, which fends 2 members to parliament; Cirencefter, which alio fends 2 members to parliament,,
gives the title of Baron to the family of Bentinck ; Berkeley, gi\es the title of Earl to the family of the lame name ; Fa.rfcic#, and
which gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Hill, and gives the title of Vifcount to the family or Noel; Durfley ado
( the title of Vifcount to the family of Berkeley ; befides which towns there are the following, Colford, Dean, Stow, \\ legate,
Lechlade, Marfhfield, Cheltenham, vifited by the King in July 1788, Sodbury, Campden, Miachin Hampton, Newent, Norti.-
Painfvvick, Stanley, Stroud, whofe navigation is extended to Lechlade, Tctbury, Thornbury,. Vv inchcomb, \\ otton, dnu
M» Biiley. Amongfl the villages the following places give titles, viz. Avalon, that of Vifcount to the Mordaunt family ; Clarenuou,
of Earl to the family of Villiers ; Hardwick, that of Earl and Baron to the family of Yorke; Hawkefbury,,-that of BaiOn
•U to the family of Jenkinfon ; Tortworth, that of Baron to the family of Morton ; Shirborne, that of Baron to the family c-.
; and Sudley Caflle, that of Baron to the Bridges family. The rivers are the Severn, Wye, Coin, Chern, Stroud cx.ce -
Client for dying fcarlet, Ifis, Avons, Fromes, Swiliate, Caron, Wintlrufli, Evendole, Leven, Lache, Ilbonrne, Chii r , Badgweu
‘'•Evelm, Berkeley, and Trim. In the river Severn are the Lies of Condicote, and the Alney. The moil noted places are King-
road and The Fill, St. Vincent’s Rocks, Fenpark Hole near Clifton, Cotfwold Hills 450 yards above the Severn, , and Downs,
nWale of Stroud Water, Vale of Evelham, Dean and Kingfwood Forefls, Mycklewood Chace, and Crols Wood, and an Oak ioco
old, 32 feet round, at Toetfworth. Its preduft is coal and iron mines, cattle, fheep, excellent wool, corn, timber, falmo.i,
- and other river flfh, Its chief manufactures are excellent cheefe, {lockings, muftard bails, mens hats, leather, pins* paper, irom
|[2ware, tinned plates, brafs, Heel, and variety of woollens. There are mineral waters at Cheltenham, and at Hyde near it ; at
jiSt, Anthony’s Well at Abenh dl ; at Barrow and Moreden near Bodington ; at Afh-church near Tewkefbury ; at Dumbleton
near Winchcomb ; at Eafmgton near Durfley; and thofe of Briflol Wells near Clilton, It fends 8 members to parliament, 2
b-for the county, and 6 for thofe above mentioned ; it pays 12 parts of the land-tax, and provides 960 men to the national militia,.-
The King, Queen, and fome of the Frincefles vTited different places in this County in July 371:0, made Cheltenham their re.**—
fence, and drank its waters.
The moil confderable Gentlemens’ Seats are,
*,\trpney, near Cirencefter.
• ladmir.lon, near Scdbury.
Park, near Cirencefter.
Tierkley Caflle.
' 'irencefter Park.
'levc-hall, near Cheltenham,
loberly, near Cheltenham,
lompton Park, near Northleach,
Irorrehill, near Thornbury.
)ean Magna,
)odding;on, near Sodbury.
airford Park.
auconberg H >ufe r near Cheltenham,
‘laxley, near Little Dean,
lathrop, near Fairford.
ligh Meadow, near Coleford.
Hghnam, near Gioccfter.
ling’s Wefton, near Briftol.
Inowle, near Thornbury,
.idney, near Biakeney.
A ilVetden, .neap Stroud.
’ nbury Pari, near Cirencefter.
’rinkalh Park, near Gloeehcr,
tendon Paik, near Cirencefter.
la ideomb Park, near Cirencefter.
andywcll Park, near Cheltenham.
Shirborne Lodge and Park, near Northkach,
Sneed Park, N. W. 3 miles of Brillol.
Spoonhall, near Coleford.
Spring Park, near Leonard Stanley.
Stowcil, near Northleach.
Tudir.gton Park, near Winchcombe.
Whitcliffe Park, near Berkley.
Wcitccmbe Park, near Glocefier.
1
The rscjl remarkable Views, Scents, and Situations are
from,
Kamblborough Caftle Hill, or Caftle Godwin, near
PainfwickjS, of Glocefter.
Alveften, or Allifton, near Auft Ferry, on a Hill
called the Old Abbey.
Frocefter Hill, S. W. of Stanley, on the Road from
Bath to Glocefter,
The Road from Glcucefler to Newnham.
St. Vincent’s Rock, near Eriftol Hot Wells.
Brandon Hill, near Briftol.
Libcry, on the Road between Cirencefter and Burford.
Crickley Hill, on the Road from Oxford to Glocefter.
Stinchcorrbe Hill, near Durfley.
May Hill, between Glocefter and Rofs.
Bird lip Hills, 3 miles S. E. of Glocefter on the Road
to Chefter.
Barrow Hill. near the Severn, N. of Berkeley, near'
Bod : r gron. From hence 36 churches are vifioie.
Churchc'own, near Briftol.
Painfwlck Hill, 4 miles S. E. of Glocefter, and >
thence to the left through Painfwlck. Wood into
the Birdlip Read.
Broad Bridge Green, near Haresf.eld, 4 miles S. of
Glocefier.
Blaife Caftle, near Henbury, 3 miles N. W. of Bnftci*
Shunlow Hill, 4 miles N. W. of Banbury.
Staunton Hill, 3 miles E. of Monmouth.
Tower Hill, near Tytherington, S. of Thornburg
Woolfton, 4 miles N, of Cheltenham, 3 miles WE of
Winchcombe.
Che tenham Wells;
Cleve Hill, rear Cheltenham.
Broadway Hrll* on the Road between Morten and
Evelham.
Clifton, near Eiiftol,
W:olridge Hi i, in the Malvern Road, 4 miles N, W.
of Gioccfter.
Rob n Hood? Hill, a- milci S. E. of Glocefter.
' if
Lane of. Hill,on the Wye, mile fiom CheptfovtV
A>cnhili near the Severn, 3 milu Rorn-GioccEcr.
Little Dean.








HAMPSHIRE
Is a maritime county on the 1011th coaft or the Kingdom, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Weftex,
is now included in the province of Canterbury, the diocefe of Winchefter, and the Weftern Circuit. Including the Ifle of Wight, it is
55 miles long from North to South, 40 miles broad from Eaft to Weft, and 220 in circumference. It contains 1540 fquare miles, or
985,600 fquare acres, including alfo the Ifle of Wight; divided into 39 hundreds, having 250 parifhes, 77 vicarages, and above 1060
■ullages ; with one city 9 Winchefter, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Warquis to the Powlett family j
and 20 market towns, mz. Southampton, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Baron to the Fitzroy family ;
Portfmouth, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the Wallop family ; Andover, which gives the title
of \ ifeount to the Howard family, and fends 2 members to parliament ; Lymington, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives
the title of Vifcount to the family of Wallop ; Chriftchurch fends 2 members to parliament; as does Stockbridge, Whitchurch, Peteff-
field ; w ith New port, New ton, and \ armoutn, in the Ifle of Wight; alfo the following market towns, w’hich do not fend reprefenta-
ti\e?, \ iz. Baftngftoke, Alresford, Alton, Fareham, Fordingbridge, Havant, Kingfclere, Odingham, Ringwood, Rumfey, and Waltham;
among the Milages Titchfield gi\es the title of IMarquis to the Bentinck family ; Portchefter, the title of Baron to the Herbert family ;
and Baling, the title of Baion to the family of Powlett. The Ifles of Jerfey and Guernfey are both fubjedt to the jurifdidtion of the
Bifliop of Winchefter, and are included as parts of this county ; the former of which gives the title of Earl to the family of Villiers ;
and the latter that of Baron to the Finch family. This county fends 26 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the {hire, and the others as
expreffed abo\e; pa}3 14 paits of the land tax, and provides 960 men to the national militia. Its principal rivers are the Ithing or
Aire, tne Tees or x eft, Anton, A\on, Stour, Wey, Loddon, and Auborn. It has the harbours of Spithead, Portfmouth, St. Helen’s,
Eaft Cowes, Hampton Water or Southampton Bay, Titchneld Bay, Langfton and Hamble Havens, Sec, ; with a great number of
points, headlands, ifles, forts, caftles, Sec, This county has alio New Foreft, near 30 miles in circuit; Wulmer, and 7 others; with
a greai number of paiks, downs, &c. Its chief product is corn, cattle, paftures, wood, iron, wool, fifli. and hops. It is noted for
its honey, and tne beft bacon in the kingdom. It has manufactures of woollen ; and contains the extenftve magazine of naval ftores a?
Portfmouth. The air of this county is fertile and healthy, and aoounds with extenftve views and elegant villas ; among which
The following are the moil confiderable ;
Appuldercomb, Ifle of Weight.
Afhley Lodge, near Fordingbridge.
Bellvue, near Southampton.
Bc\ is Mount, near Southampton.
Beftom, New Foreft.
Bortfwood, near New Foreft.
Boldcrwood Lodge, New Foreft.
Bramble Hill, near Fordingbridge,
Bramfhill Park, near Heckfield.
Brittlesford, Ifle of Wight.
Burley Lodge, New Foreft.
Cadland Park upon the New Foreft.
Cannon Park, near Kingfclere.
Chapman’s Ford, near Winchefter.
Chilton Candover.
Dogmersfield, near Odiham.
Dinny Lodge, New Foreft.
Eaft Stretton.
Evelham.
Farmborough.
Frecmantle Park.
Gatcombe Houfe, Ifte of Wight.
Hack wood Park, near Bafingftoke,
Havant Park.
Headley Park, near Alton.
Heckfield Park, near Odiham.
High Cliff, near Chrift Church.
Holmeley, New Foreft.
Hurfley Lodge, near Winchefter.
Iver Lodge, near Fordingbridge.
Idefworth Park.
Mallwood Lodge, near Weft Minfted.
New Park, New Foreft,
Pitt Place, Ifle of Wight.
Polton’s, near Rumfey.
Ringfield Lodge, New Foreft.
Rotherfield, near Alton.
Southwick Park, near Fareham.
North Stoneham, near Southampton.
Red Rice, near Andover.
St ratfield Saye Park, near Odiham.
Stubbington, near Crofton.
Sydmonton, near Kingfclere.
Tilney Hall, near Odiham.
Walbuiy, near Comb.
Wulverton, near Winchefter.
7he mojl remarkable Views and Situations a:-r s
Portfdown, five miles North of Portfraouth.
Weft Lodge, in Bere Foreft.
The Needle Rock and Weft End of the Ifle of Wight)
feen from the fea, with the Cavern.
From Frefh Water, fix miles from Yarmouth.
Between Cowes and Newport, and thence toHurft Stoke.
Shanklin Chine.
Afhlev Down.
Nunwell Down.
From Ride and Troublefield, as well as from Apply
under Cliff.
From Dun Nofe on the South Eaft Coaft.
From Carifbrook Caftlc.








HEREFORDSHIRE
Is an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia It is now in the province or
Canterbury, the dioccfe of its own name, and in the Oxford circuit ; being 46 miles long, 40 miles broad, and 220 miles in
circumference ; containing 1200 fquare miles, or 768,000 fquare acres; divided into 11 hundreds, 176 parishes, 87 vicarages,
cue city, Hereford, which is the fee of a bifhop, gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Devereux, and fends 2 member*
10 parliament ; and 7 market-towns, viz. Leominfter or Lempfter, which gives the title of ifeount to the family of Fermor,
and fends 2 members to parliament; Rofs, which gives the title of Baron to the Herbert family ; Weobley, which fends 2 mem-
bers to parliament; Pembridge, Lidbury, Bromyard, and Kineton. Its rivers are the Wye, Lugg, Munnovv, Arrow, frame,
Loir, Leddon, and Tame. The raoft noted places are Marfhy Hill, Malvern Hills, Hatteral Hills, Frome Hill, Black Mount,
Giiden Vale, Bringwood Chace, Hawood and Derefold Forefts, Creden Hill, Brynmaur Wood, and feveral Caftles. It fends 8
members to parliament, 2 for the county, and the others as above-mentioned ; pays 5 parts of the land-tax, and provides 4SO
men to the national militia. Before the Conqueft, this county was reckoned a part of Wales; and being then a frontier
between England and Wales, it had 28 ftrong caftles, a few of whom now remain. It boafts that it exceeds in wood, wheat,
wool, and w r ater, and the beft cyder of all the counties in England. Its principal manufacture is in iron. The climate is very
healthy, and the country abounds with ancient encampments. It enjoys fome medicinal fprings, particularly near Leominfter
and Malvern Hills.
The principal Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Allen (moor, near Hereford.
Benincrton, near Leominfter.
o *
Bill Mill, near Refs.
Tromptcn Bryar, near Prefteign.
Bucknall, near Bromyard.
Cannon Bridge, near Hereford.
Croft Cathie, near Leominfter#
Devereux Park, near Hereford.
Eaton Bifhop, near Hereford.
Eywood, near K-neton.
Foxley, near Weobley.
Cainftone, near Weobley.
K rnpten Courr, near. Leon iafter.
Karewood, near Rofs,
Hay Park, near Ludlow.
Kay wood Houfe, near Hereford#
Hill, near Rofs.
Holm Court, near Hereford.
Horn, near Weobley.
Kinnerliey, near Kineton.
Lvons Hall, near Kineton.
r *
Mcend Park, near Hereford.
Moccas.
Morehampton Park, rear Hereford,
Kewpor, near Kineton.
Pengethlcy, near Rofs.
ShobcScn Court, near Prtftcign.
S'.reei, near Pern bridge.
Til;'ngt« n, near Hereford.
T T rifn Hay.
W'n u-fitia, near Hereford,
V. overluv/ Park, near Bromyard#
*Tbi V'fUJi that arc Wifi remarkable are jrerr,
"Hampton Court Park.
The GiHen Vale on the Dore, W. of Hereford.
Creden-fcill, near K-nchefter.
The Ambrey in Croft Caftle Park, cn the
W. N. \V. of Leominfter,
Copley-hill, near Holm Lacy.
Rofs Church.
Sutton Walls from the Hill on the Lug-, N. of
Hereford.
Brynmour Wood, near Hereford.
The Road from Rofs to \lonmouth, viz.
Goodrich Gallic.
Ccldwel! Rocks,
Symono’s Yate,
River Dean Church.
JCew Wt-ar,
Xj j i.. .l *. nc.
mi








HERTFORDSHIRE
J S an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged part to the kingdom of Eaft Saxons, and the other part to the
Mercians. It is new included in the province of Canterbury, in the diocefes of Lincoln and London, and in the Home circuit. Its
form is nearly circular, being 35 miles from Eaft to Weft, 27 miles from North to South, and not lefs than 190 in circuit, containing
660 fquare miles, or 422,400 fquare acres, divided into 8 hundreds, having 18 market towns, viz. Hertford, the county town, which
fends 2 members to parliament, and gives title of Earl to the Conway family; St. Alban’s, which fends 2 members to parliament, and
gives the title of Duke to the Beauclerk family ; part of Royfton, which gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Yorke ; and part
of Barnet, with Ware, Hitching, Baldock, Bifhop’s Stortford, Berkhamftead, Buntingford, Hemel Hampfted, Hatfield, Hoddefdon,
Rickmanfworth, Standon, Stevenage, Tring, and Watford ; including 120 parifhes, 54 vicarages, and 930 villages. The principal
rivers are the Lea, Coin, Stort, Gade, Bean, Tame, and Rib ; befides the New River, which fupplies London with Water. This
county fends 6 members to parliament, 2 for the fhire, and the other 4as above fhewn ; pays 11 parts of the land-tax, and provides
560 men to the national militia. It has feveral fine woods, mineral fprings and a great number of beautiful parks, &c. Its produfts
are fat cattle, fheep, and river fifli. Its air being temperate, fweet, and healthful, and the foil fertile and rich, it abounds with ele-
gant feats.
«
The moft remarkable of which are,
Albury Hall, near Albury.
Aihridge Park, near Gaddefden.
Balls, near Hertford.
Bayford Bury, near Hertford.
Beachwood Park, near Gaddefden.
Bcdwell Park, near Effenden.
Blake’s Ware, near Ware.
Bramheld Place, near Hertford.
Brickendonbury, near Hertford.
Brocket Hall, near Wheathampfled.
Brookman’s, near North Mims.
Broxbournbury, near Hoddefdon.
Bury Park, near Rickmanfworth.
Bufh Hall, near Hatfield.
Camfield Place, near Hatfield.
Cafhioburv Park, near Watford.
J 7
Chefhunt Houfe.
Chivefield Lodge, near Stevenage.
Cockenhatch, near Barkway.
Cole-green Park, near Hertford.
Digfwell, near Welwyn.
Gobions, near Wellom Green.
Goldens, near Hertford.
Gothambury, near St. Alban’s,
Grove Park, near Watford.
Hamell’s, near Watford.
Hartingfordbury Park, near Hertford.
Hatfield Houfe, near Hatfield.
Hoo, near Kimpton.
King’s Walden Park, near Preflow.
Knebworth Place, near Stevenage.
Lamer Place, near Welwyn.
Locklev’s, near Welwyn.
J ' J
Miller’s Park, near Hatfield.
Moor Park, near Rickmanfworth.
Moor Place, near Bifhop’s Stortford,
New Place, near Ware.
Newfell’s, near Royflon.
North Mims Place.
Offley Place, near Hitching.
Panfhanger, near Hertford.
Pelham Hall, near Pelham.
Pilhobury, near Sawbridgeworth.
Pope’s, near Hatfield.
Porter’s, near Shenley.
Quick's Wood, near Wallington.
Rothamfled, near Redburn.
Roxford, near Hertford.
Ruffel’s Farm, near Watford;
Sacombe Park, near Ware.
Stagenhoe Park, near Stevenage.
Temple, near Ware.
Tewin Houfe, near Welwyn.
Tewin Water, near Welwyn.
' J
Tittenb anger, near London Colney.
Totteridge, near Barnet.
Tring Houfe.
Throcking, near Buntingford.
Ware Park,
Wood Hall, near Hatfield.
Wood Hall, near Ware.
Woolman’s, near Hertford.
The mcjl remarkable and extenjive View art from
Bufhy Heath, N. W. of Edgeworth.
Brockley Hill, near Stanraore.
Little Gaddefden.
Afhridge Park.
Kingfworth Green, S. of Dunftable,
A little S. E. of Ivinghoe.
Brockman’s, near North Mims,
K neb worth, near Stevenage.








HUNTINGDONSHIRE
Is an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia; it is now’ in the province of Can*
terbury, diocefe of Lincoln, and included in the Norfolk circuit. It is 30 miles long, 24 broad, and 130 in circuit; containing 414
fquare miles, 264,960 acres, divided into 4 hundreds, 78 parilhes, and 6 market towns, viz. Huntingdon, the county town, which
fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the family of Mailings; Kimbolton, which gives the title of Baron to the
Montagu family; St. Neots, which gives the title of Baron to another branch of the Montagu family; Ramfey; Yaxley; and St.
Ives: among the villages, Hinchinbroke gives the title of Vifcount to another branch of the Montagu family. It fends 4 members to
parliament; 2 for the county, and 2as Ihewn above ; pays 4 parts of the land-tax; and fends 350 men to the national militia. The
principal rivers are the Oufe, Nen, and Cam, with fome fmaller Rreams. The moll remarkable places are King’s Delf and Dyke?*
Ramfey, Whittlefea, Benwick, Brig, and Ug Meers, Wabrklge Forell ; with Salom and Alconbury Woods. This is one of
they counties that are contiguous without a city in either, viz. Bedford, Huntingdon, Bucks, Berks, Hertford, ElTex, and Suffolk.
The produdls of this county are corn, cattle, vrood, game, fifh from the meers, rich pallure, excellent cheefe, and fine butter. The
foil is rich, and the air, except in fenny parts, good, Huntingdon is remarkable for having been the birth-place of Oliver Cromwell;
and St. Ives for the largell market in England for cattle, except Smithlield; and at Warbois are the moll beautiful meadows on the
banks of the Oufe that are to be feen in England. This county formerly was the greatell part of it forell land, and peculiarly adapted
to the Chafe ; w'hence the name of the county took its rife*
The moll confiderable Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Brampton, near Huntingdon.
Bugden Palace, near Huntingdon.
Bulhmcad, near Stoughton Parva.
Chefterton, near Alwalton.
Doddington.
Elton Hall, near Elton.
Fcancy Staunton, near St. Ivor.
Godmancheftcr, near Huntingdon.
Grafham, near Kimbolton.
■Great Stoughton. '
Hertford, near Huntingdon.
Hinchinbroke Houfe, near Huntingdoa#
St. Ives.
Kimbolton Caftlei
Little Paxton, near St. Neots.
Longthorpe, near Peterborough.
St. Neots.
Overton Longville, near Peterborough.
Ramfey Abbey.
Ripton Abbots, near Stcwkley.
Walhingley Houfe, near Caldecot.








KENT
X S a maritime county, at the fouth eaft extremity of the kingdom, being feparated from Flanders and Holland by the Straits of
Dover. During the Saxon heptarchy, this county was an entire kingdom ; and its kings kept their court at Canterbury, which now
is an archbiflioprick, and the primary of all England. It is in the diocefes of Canterbury and Rochefter, and is included in the
Home circuit. Its form is an irregular oblong, 65 miles long from eaft to weft, 37 broad from north to fouth, and 193 miles in cir-
cuit, containing 1300 fquare miles, or 960,000 acres, divided into 3 laths, that are fubdivided in 62 hundreds; comprizing 4a 8 parifhes,
and 2 cities, viz. Canterbury, the feat of the metropolitan fee, which fends 2 members to parliament; and Rochefter, - the fee of a
biftiop, that fends 2 members alfo to parliament; 33 market-towns, viz. Maidftone, the county town, fends 2 members to parlia-
ment, and gives the title of Vifcount to the Finch family ; Chatham, which gives the title of Earl and Baron to the family of Pitt; one
of the complete!! arfenals in the world for naval ftores ; Queenborougb, which fends 2 members to parliament; Dover, a cinque port,
where the packets are ftationed for France, &c.; Sandwich, another cinque port, which gives the title of Earl to the Montagu family ;
Romney, alio a cinque port, which gives the title of Baron to the Marfham family ; Hythe, which is alfo a cinque port; each of which,
as cinque ports, fends 2 members to parliament; Tunbridge, remarkable for its medical waters, gives the title of Vifcount to the
IViaftau de Zuleftein family ; Fordwich, which gives the title of Vifcount to th£ Cowper family; Feverfliam; Folkftone, which gives
the titie of Vifcount to the family of Bouverie ; Aylesford, gives that of Earl to the Finch family; Greenwich, diftinguifhed by its
royal Park, and obfervatory, and a moft noble hofpital for fuperannuated feamen, gives the title of Baron to the Townfhend family ;
\\ oohvich, eminent for its dock-yards, elaboratory, &c. and being the mother-dock of the royal navy of Great Britain ; Deal, where
C aefar landed in his defeent on Britain ; Gravefend, whence all {hipping from London take their departure for foreign voyages; Mil-
ton, remarkable for its oyfters fent to London ; Appledore ; Dartford ; Aftiford, which gives the title of Baronto the Keppel family ;
Bromley; Cranbrook; Fltham; Goudhurft; Lenham; Lidd; Mailing; Sevenoak ; Smarden ; Tenterden; Weftram Wrotham ;
Wye ; Northflect; and Eleham : among the numerous confiderable villages, Sundridge gives the title of Baron to the Camp-'
b-ftl family ; Lewifham, that of Vifcount to the Legg family ; Eaftwell, that of Baron to the Finch family; Camden, which
ghes the title of Earl and Baron to the Pratt family; and the Ifte of Thanet gives the title of Earl to the Tufton family. Its
riveis aie the Thames, Medway, Stour, Rother, Darent, Tun, Ravenfboume, and Wantfheim. The moft noted places are the North
tmd South Forelands, Dungenefs, Oxney, Thanet and Shepey Hies, Ifte of Grains, the Downs, Godwin Sands, Sheernefs Fort,
and le\eral caftles, more particularly that of Dover, and St. Margaret, Hope, and Hythe Bays, Sec. Sec. It produces cattle, flieep,
wild-fowl, iron, corn, hops, wood, cherries, and all other fruits and garden fluffs, excellent fifli, chalk, timber, fand for the glafs
manufactories, &c. &c. The moft remarkable places are Shooter’s Hill, Mount Zion, Mount Ephraim, Idle Hill, Camphurft and
Randall Woods, Blackheath, where is Morden College, with Greenwich Park, Romney Marfh, Weald of Kent, Sec. See. It has a
great number of Roman, Saxon, and Danifti encampments, and other antiquities ; and the waters of Tunbridge are much reforted to
by invalids. In the large fpace that this county covers there is a great diverftty of foil. It fends 18 members to parliament, 2.
ior the county, and 16 as above ftiewn ; pays 22 parts of the land tax, and provides 960 men to the national militia.
This county abounds with Gentlemens’ Seats, the moft remarkable are,
Aylesford Place.
St. Alban’s.
Bedgcbury, near Goudhurft.
Beverley Park, near Canterbury.
Boughton Place, near Maidftone.
Chepftcd Place, near Sevcnoak.
Ghilhara, near Wve.
* J
Chilrton, near Lenham.
Cobham Hall, near Rochcfter,
Comb Bank, near Sundridge.
Danfon Hall, near Dart ford.
Dean Pack, near Canterbury.
Eaft well Park, near Afhford.
Ford Park, near Wve.
Gabriel’s Houfc, near Edenbridge,
Greenwich.
Goddingtor, near Afhford.
Great Ollantigh, near Wye.
Gunfton Place, Gunfton.
Hallied Place, near Sevcnoak,
Hayes, near Bromley.
Hothfield Place, near Afhford.
Hunton Park, near Maidftone,
King’s Gate, near Romfgatc.
Knolc, or Knowl Park, near Sevcnoak,
Knowlton Court, Knowlton,
Langley, near Bromley.
Lee Houfc, near Bleakburn.
Lee Place, near Greenwich.
Lced’s Abbey, near Lenham.
Lced’s Caftle, near Lenham.
Linfion Lodge, near Fcvcrfham.
Linton Place, near Boughton Monchclfea,
Lullingftonc Park.
Mareworth Caftle, Eaft Peckham.
Merfham Hatch, near Afhford.
Mote Park, near Maidftone.
The Mote, near Canterbury.
Nafh,. near Fcvcrfham.
Ottcfuen Place, near Lenham.
Penihurft Place, near Tunbridge.
Roy don Hall, near Eaft Pcckham,
Smethe Hall, near Afhford.
Somer Hill, near Tunbridge.
Squerries, near Wcfterham.
Surrender, near Afhford.
Walderfham, near Dover.
Waimer Caftle, near Deal,
The mojl rtmarkuble Situations for extenjive Proffers ur' }
Beachborough, near Folkftone.
Boughron Hill, W. of Canterbury.
Boxley Hill, four miles from Maidftone to Roche/tcr.
Dover Caftle and Cliffs.
From Ram%are to Broadftairs.
Frendfbuiy to Upnor on the Medway,
Greenwich Park.
Goudhurft, on every fide.
The High Grounds near Chatham.
Madam s Court Hill, near Socioak.
Minfter Church Yard in the Ifie of Shepe'*,
Northflcet, S. W. of Gravcfend.
Otford Palace, near Sevcnoak.
The Ramparts at Shccmds.
Rivers, a village near Dover.
St. Margaret’s Bay, N. E. of Dover,
Shooter’s Hill.
Shome and Throng, near Rochcficr.
Windmill Hill, near Gravcfend.








LANCASHIRE
lb a maritime county and a county palatine, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Northumber-
land ; it is now in the province of York, the diocefe of Chefter, and Northern circuit. It is 73 miles long, 41 broad/and
290 in circumference ; containing 1,700 fquare miles, or 1,088,000 fquare acres; divided into 6 hundreds, 61 parifhes, 12
\ icarages, 894 villages, and 26 market-towns, viz. Lancafler, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament; as does
Preflon, Luerpool, W igan, Newton, and Chthero; Mancheftcr, which gives the title of Duke to the Montagu family ; Black-
burn, Bolton, Warrington, Burnley, Bury, Chorley, Colne, Garftang, Haflingden, Hawkefliead, Leigh, Ormfkirk, Boulton,
Kirkham, Prefect, Rochdale, Ulverton, Dalton and Cartmel. Its principal rivers are the Duddon, Crake, Leven, Winder, Lon
or Lune, Wyer, C alder, Hodder, Wenmng, Kibble, Douglafs, Yarrow, Darwent, Irwell, Roch, Alt, Merfey, Tame, Medlock,
and Irk. The moic remarkable places on its conft are Sunderland and Formby points ; the ifles of Walney, Barrow, Roe,
Streen, Foulney, and Pile of Foudre ; bay of Morecambe; Duddon, Kibble, Merfey, and Wyer Mouths. Other remarkable
places are Pendle and Clougho Hills; Cartmel, Fournefs, and Longridge Fells; Biackftone Edge; Wulf and Warton Craggs,
and War ton Beacon; Wyerfdale, Bolland, and Siraonfwood Forefts; the lakes called Winander Meer and Conifton water \
l ourneis abbey near Ulverfton ; Latham Park ; Spaw and the burning well near Wigan. On the coaft near Poulton, and
between Befpham and Layton, is Black-Pool, heretofore an inconfiderable place, but much reforted to for fea-bathing, on ac-
count of the purenefs or the fea : of late years it has been much improved, and feveral elegant houfes have been built. This
county produces corn, flax, hemp, falmon, and a variety of river and fea fifh, befldes char, which are caught in the lakes or
meers, canel coal, turf, and a variety of ftone. Its chief manufadures are thofe of Mancheftcr goods, with kerfies, checks and
bedding. It enjoys great intercourfe by the various canals, particularly thofe from Liverpool and Mancheftcr.’ It fends 14
members to parliament, 2 for the fliire, and 12 as above ftiewn; pays five parts of the land-tax ; and provides 800 men to the
national militia. The air is in general very healthy. The foil may be confldered under three different claffes, the hilly parts
are ftony and barren ; the level ground produces plenty of corn; and there is a vaft quantity of mofs ground, which affords
little eife but turf and trees, that are frequently found lying under the furface to a confiderable depth.
The moft confiderable Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Arlington Hall, near Chorley,
Hall, near Liverpool,
Ardwick, near Mancheftcr.
Afhton, near Lancafter.
Atherton Hall, near Wigan.
Blakeley Hurft, near Sc. Helen.
Chadderton Hall, near Mancheftcr.
Childwall Houfe, near Liverpool,
Dunken Hall, near Hafliugden.
Eton Houfe, near Haflingden.
Garfwood Hall, near St. Helen.
Hall on the Hill, near Chorley,
Ha : gh Hall, near Wigan.
Heaton Houfe, near Mancheftcr#
Ho.her Hall, near Cartmel,
Hornby Caftle, near Hornby,
Hulton Hall, near Bolton.
Ince Blundell, near Ormfkirk.
Kirkby Hall, near Broughton.
Knowfley Hall, near Liverpool,
Latham Hall, near Ormfkirk.
Lever Hall, near Bolton.
Lttle Crolby, near Ormfkirk.
Kewton.
Park Hall, near Lancafter.
Pennington Hall, near Wigan.
Speak Hall, near Liverpool.
Standifh Hall, near Ormlkirk.’
Strangeway Hall, near Mancheftcr.
Tonge, near Mancheftcr.
Stonyhurft, near Clithero.
Trafford Hall, near Mancheftcr.
Towuley Park, near Burnley.
W alton Hail, near Preftoa.
Warrington.
*lbe principal Views and Situations are y
Bigland, north of Cartmel, over the Ken and Leven,
Dunold Mill Hole, 3 miles from Lancafter, near the
Road from Kirkby Lonfdale.
Eafegrll Kirk, a Cavern near Leek, eaft of Kirkby
Lonfdale.
Road from Lancafter to Hornby,
Road from Ulverfton to Kendal,








LEICESTERSHIRE
I S an inland county, which gives the title of Earl to the Townfhend family. During the Saxon heptarchy it belonged to the
kingdom of Mercia; it is now in the province of Canterbury, in the diocefe of Lincoln, and in the Midland circuit. It is nearly or
an elliptical form, being 35 miles long, 30 miles broad, and 170 in circuit, containing 790 fquare miles, or 305,600 fquare acres,
divided into 6 hundreds, 200 parifhes, and 12 market-towns, viz. Leicefter, the county town, which fends 2 members to par-
liament ; Hinckley, which formerly gave title to the hereditary lord high ftewards of England : Harborough, which gives title of
Earl to the Sherrard family ; Loughborough, which gives title of Baron to the family of Wedderburn ; Melton Mowbray ; Bofworth ;
Lutterworth; Afhby de la Zouch; Mount Sorrel; Hallaton ; Bilfdon; and Waltham on the Wold ; among the villages, that of
Carleton gives the title of Baron to the Boyle family. Its chief rivers are the Stour, Welland, Wreck, Avon, Anker, Swift, Seme,
and the Eye. The moft noted places are Mount Sorrel, Charnwood and Leicefter Forefts, Dalby W ood, the \ ale of Beivoir, ana
the memorable Bofworth field. It fends 4 members to parliament, pays 9 parts of the land-tax, and provides 560 men to the national
militia. The chief products are corn, beans, cattle, hogs, fine flieep, large horfes, rich paftures, long wool, and pit-coal. The air
is gentle, mild, and temperate ; the foil fertile. There is a mineral water at Afhby de la Zouch.
The moft confiderable Gentlemens’ Seats in this county are,
Alton Grange, near Afhby de la Zouch.
Badgewoith, near Bofworth.
Broadgate, near Leicefter.
Stanton Harold, near Afhby de la Zouch.
Gopfal, N. W. of Bofworth.
Donnington Park, near Kegworth.
Garendon, near Loughborough.
Belvoir Caftle, N. of Melton Mowbray.
Goadby, near Belvoir.
Croxton, near Goadby.
Edmond Thorp, E. of Melton Mowbray.
Stanford Hall, near Lutterworth.
Tooley Park, near Leicefter.
Kirkby Mallory, near Bofworth.
Stapleford, E. of Melton Mowbray.
Beaumont Leys, near Leiccfter.
Frith Hall, rear Leiccfter.
Brickman Hall, near Leicefter.
Burbach Houfe, near Hinckley. -
Groby, near Leicefter.
The mojl remarkable Views in this County are,
Brandon Hill.
Cbarnwoodj or Charley Fcreft, W. of Movin'. Soiic*.








LINCOLNSHIRE
Is a maritime county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia. It is now in the province
Canterbury, and diocefe of Lincoln, and is included in the Midland circuit. It is 77 miles long, 48 broad, and 300 miles in.
circumference; containing 2958 fquare miles, or 1,893,120 fquare acres; divided into three provinces, namely, Holland,
which gives the title of Baron to the family of Fox ; Kefteven and Lindfay; the former of which gives the title of Duke, and
the latter that of Marquis and Earl, to the faintly or Bertie; the lafl of which divifioiis is far the larged, including all that
lies North of the chy of Lincoln, and the FofTe Dyke, which Henry I. cut between the Witham and the Trent; thefe pro-
vinces are fubdivided into 30 hundreds, containing 630 pariOies ; one city, Lincoln, which is the fee of a bifliop, fends 2 menu
bers to parliament, is the county town, and gives tne title of Earl to the family of Clinton ; and has 31 market-towns, viz,
Stamfoid, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the family of Grev ; Boilon, the title of Baron
to the family of lib\, and fends 2 members to pailiament ; Grantham, the title of Baron to the family r of Robinfon j Gainf-
borough, the title of Earl to the family of Noel; Burton, the title of Baron to the family of Monfon; Grimfby, which fends
2 membeis to pailiament; Barton, Dunnington, Alford, Binbroke, Bolinbroke, Bourne, Burgh, Saltfieet, South Folkingham,
Kirton, Caiitor, Crowland, Deeping, Glandford Bridge, Holbeach, Horncafrle, Raifin, Sleaford, Spalding, Spilfby, Stanton,
Tatterfhall, Vain.ieet, and Crowle. Among the villages, Ancafler gives the title of Duke to the Bertie family; Belton, that of
Baron to the Brow mow family,; Belvoir, the fame dignity to the family of Manners ; Harrowby, the like dignity to. the Rider
family ; and Erefoy, the fame dignity to the Burrell family. The places of note on the fea-coaft are, Sunk Illand, in the
Mouth of tne Humbei ; Axholm Ifle inland ; and a light-houfe near Eaft Fen ; Boitcn and Lynn Deeps; the Humber Mouth j
Fofle Dyke, and feveral dangerous fands; inland there are Lincoln Heath, Eaft and Weft Holland Fens ; two Foflc Dykes j
Bourne and Walcot Spaw’s ; and part of the Vale of Belvoir. The principal rivers are the Humber, Trent, Witham, Welland,
Ancam, Bane, Nen, Dun, and Idle. This county produces fine fiieep, large oxen, a fine breed of horfes, corn, pafhires,
hemp, remarkable fine wool, fifli in great plenty, and all kinds of wild fowl; puettes, godwitts, knotts, dotterels, See, The
air in fome parts is thick and foggy, yet wholefome. The foil in the North and Weft parts abundantly fertile, pleafant, and
rich; but the South and Eait are brackifh and barren. The antiquities of this county are very numerous, particularly in reli-
gious foundations. It lends 12 members to parliament ; viz, 2 for the county 7 , and the others as above fliewn ; it pays 10 parts
of the land-tax ; and provides 1200 men to the national militia.
Tke moil remarkable Seats in this County are,
Afv/üby, near Folkingham.
Belton, near Grantham.
Blcx olm, near Sleaford.
Burton, near Lincoln.
Blankney, near Lincoln,
Branfton, near Lincoln.
Brocklelby, near Grimlby.
Burwell Park, near Louth,
Cafwick, near Stamford.
Culverthorpe, near Grantham,
Doddingtor, near Lincoln.
El'ham, near Barton.
Orimfthorpe, near Bourne,
Canby, near Waicfleet.
Hleatwonh, near Kirton.
Goutby, near Horncafile,
Haydor Lodge, near Grantham.
Hanbv, near Folkingham.
J ' O
Hainton, near Wragby,
Haverhome Priory.
Iraham, near Folkingham.
Kettlethorpe, near Lincoln.
Langton, near Spillbr.
Norton Place, near Kirton.
O'mfby Park, near S. tHby.
Panton Houfe, near Wragby.
Ribv, near Caiftor.
J 1
Rsvtlby Abbey, near Horne a file.
Scrivellby, near Horncaftle.
Sommer CaSle, nea/ Lincoln.
Sotnerby, near Giandford Bridge.
S 3 Iron, near Grantham.
Thonock, near Gainfoorough.
Temple Beil Wood, in the Hie of Axholnr.
UlEngton, near Stamford.
Well, near Alford*
Tht rr.'Jl exHrf.-vt Vlzivs cr: frcn i
BeWcir Caule, near Grantham.
On the Road between Uppingham and Stamfcfi,
Colton Church itceple.








MIDDLESEX
T
> fituated near the center of the principal part of the kingdom, gives the title of Earl to the family of SackvUle, and, during the
oaxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of the Eaft Saxons; is now in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of London. It con-
: m " S 2 , + ° . qUare mi ‘ eS ’ ° r 217)600 fc > Uare acres • is 2 3 miles long, about 14 broad, and nearly ttj miles in circuit; is divided into
un te s and , hbert.es; has nearly .00 parifl.es, bef.des thofe in London and Weftminfcr; with 4. vicarages 5 a cities, London
6 m ‘" er ’ 1 6 ormer the metropolis (to enumerate whofe particulars, as to buildings, manufaflures, ike. would fill a volume)
" f f l f nCe ° f thC 10,18 and Kis C ° Urt) the Courts of nobility, & c. sit has 7 market towns, viz. Uxbridge, which
dTr h" 6 u° t. a - t 0 the famil> ° f Pa§et: Brentford) the Count >' town > where are chofen the members for the county; Enfield
1 u ed w hich gives rule of Baron ,0 the family of Naflau de Zuleftein ; Barnet, Staines, Edgeworth, and Hounflow; with a con!
.erable number callages, many of which are larger than fome market towns.. It fends but 8 members .0 parliament, 4 London,
mm er, a or t.ie county. It .s one of the fmalleft counties in the kingdom for extent, yet, on account of London, &c. it
pajs o parts out of 5r 3 of tae land tax. It provides 1600 men to the national militia, befides the Trainbands and Artillery Com-
pany ot the cuy of London. Its principal rivers are the Thames (whofe tide flows above 70 miles from its mouth, and fo extenfive
a trade isby .teamed on, that m fome years there have arrived .0.000 Britifh and Foreign veflels) the Lea, the Coin, the Brent.
and the New R.ver, w.th whofe water the greateft part of London, &c. are conftantly fupplied. The only navigable canal in this
.ountt .s from Lunehoufe to the river Lea at Bromley. From London Stone, in Cannon Street, all the Roman roads took their center,
•m proceeded ,0 the extrem.t.es of the k.ngdom in every direction. The principal natural produa of this countv is the bell of all
*ege.a es and eatables of every kind ; but the prodt.aion of artifts and manufaflures exceed comprehenfion. There are mineral
waters at Hampflead, Iflington, Barnet, Ki.bourne, Bagnrgge, and Aa o n. Amongft the numerous elegant Villas belonging to
noblemen, gentlemen, &c. we fhall mention the following as moft confpicuous:
Bruce Caftle, near Tottenham.
Belhammonds, near Rickmanfworth.
Bofton Houfe, near Old Brentford.
Bufli Hill.
Bufhy Park, near Hampton Court.
Caen Wood, near Hampftead.
Cranford Place, near Colnbrook.
Cannons, near Edgware.
Chifwick Houfe.
Dawley, near Hayes.
Derham Park, near Barnet.
Enfield Park, near Enfield.
Fitzroy Farm, near Highgate.
Fortcy Hull, Enfield.
Fulham Palace.
prove Houfe, ncir Chifwick.
Gunnertbury Houfe, near Brentford.
Hampton Court Palace.
Hanwell Park, near Brentford.-
Hanworth Park, neai- Hounflow.
Harefield Houfe.
Holland Houfe, near Kenfmgton.
Ickenham, near Uxbridge.
Kenfmgton Palace.
Kempton Park, near Sunbury.
Littleton, near Laleham.
Marble Hall, near Twickenham.
Minchingdon Hall, near Southgate.
Ofterley Park, near Brentford.
Ruffcl Park, near Bamet.
Sion Houfe, near Brentford.
South Lodge, on Enfield Chace.
Weft Lodge, on Enfield Chacc,
Twickenham Park.
Whitton Park, near Hounflow.
Wortham Park, near Bamet.
The mojl remarkable Places for txtenftzt Projpefis art,
Highbury Place, near Iflington.
Canonbury Houfe, near Ditto.
Harrow on the Hill.
Mill Hill, near Hendon.
T wickenham.
Highgate Hill.
Hampftead Heath.
Datchet Bridge,
Buftjy Heath, near Edgcware.








MONMOUTHSHIRE,
IC H is a maritime county, formerly part of Wales, is now reckoned part of England, but was not included In the
Saxon heptarchy. It is in the province of Canterbury, diocefe of Llandaff, and in the Oxford circuit. It is 30 miles long,
26 broad, and 110 in circumference ; di\ided into 6 hundreds, containing 55® fquare miles, or 352,000 fquare acres 5 having
127 parilhes, and 7 market-towns, viz. Monmouth, which gives the title of Earl to the Mordaimt family, is the county town,
and fends one member to parliament; Aoergavenny, which gives the titles of Earl and Baron to the family of Neville ; Ulk,
Chepftow, Newport, Caerleon, and Pontypool. The noted places are Goldciiff-point, Denny Ifland, Charfton Rock, St. Treacle
Chapel, the Severn Mouth, and Ulk Mouth, with the Hatteral Hills, Peny-Vale Hill, Valire Hill, and feveral other high hills ;
Erfes and Wentfe Woods. The principal rivers are the Severn, Monow, Wye, Ulk, Rimney, and Avon. It produces wood,
coin, cattle, flieep, goats, fuine, falmon, trout, and pit-coal. The chief manufacture is plated and japan iron-ware. It is
hilly and woody, but healthy and fertile. The tide rifes at Chepllow frequently 60 feet perpendicular, which is higher than
any other place in Europe. It fends 3 members to parliament, 2 for the county, and one for Monmouth ; pays not one part of the
land-tax, but provides 84 men to the national militia. The village of Ragland gives the title of Baron to the Somerfet family;
and that of Cardiffe the fame Honour to the family of Stuart,
The principal Gentlemens* feats are,
Tredegar, near Newport.'
Langftone, near Caerleon.
Fetaplace, near Caerleon,
Langibby, near Uilc.
Penhow Caftle, near Caerleon.
Wentwood Lodge, near Caerleon.
Etton, near Chepftow.
Piercefield, near Chepftow.
Ulk Caftle.
Argoed, near Monmouth.
Troy Houfe, Monmouth.
Woneftow, near Monmouth.
Clytha, near Ulk.
Catchmayd, near Monmouth,
Lanvihangle Crancornau, near
Landilo, near Abergavenny.
*S!he mijl remariahle Vieua: are fron f
The Road from Chepftow to Ragland and Monmowthi
The Sugar Loaf Mountain.
On the Wye from Monmouth to Chepftow.
The Vale of Abergavenny.
Colebrooke Park.
Pena-y-Vale, 21 miles from Chepftow,
At Whitbroob, Pllfan,or Llaadaggcr.
Tiatern Abbey Orchard.








NORFOLK
Is a maritime county, which gives the title of Duke to the noble family of Howard, the firft peer of the realm ; and was,
during the Saxon heptarchy, included in the kingdom of the Eaft Angles. It is in the province of Canterbury, diocefe of Nor-
wich, and m the Norfolk circuit. This county is nearly an ifland of an elliptical form, being furrounded by the fea and four
rners. It is 70 miles long, 46 broad, and 210 miles in circumference ; containing zjjofquare miles, or 1,504,000 fquare acres;
divided into 3 t hundreds, 660 parifhes, 164 vicarages, 1499 villages, one city, Norwich, which gives the” title of Earl to the
family of Gordon, fends 2 members to parliament, is the refidence of its bifliop, and is one of the firft cities in the kingdom for
trade, &c. containing 36 parifli churches, befides its cathedral, and is 6 miles in circumference. It has 30 market-towns, viz.
Thetford, in part, which gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Fitzroy, and fends 2 members to parliament ; Lynn, or
King’s Lynn, which gives the title of Baron to the family of Townfliend, and fends 2 members to parliament; Walfmgbara
gives the title of Baron to the family of Grey, and fends 2 members to parliament ; and Yarmouth, which fends 2 members to
parliament alfo ; Burnham, Aylefham, North Waltham, Buckenham, Harletlon, Harling, Attleborough, Fakenham, Loddon,
Cation, Cromer, Dereham, Difs, Downham, Foultham, Hingham, Holt, Methwold, Reepham, Seeching, Snettham, Swaftham’
Watton, Windham or Wymondham, and Wortled. Amongll the villages, Catlle Riftng gives the title of Baron to the family of
Howard, and fends 2 members to parliament; Wolverton gives the title of Baron to the Walpole family ; and Raynham that of
Jlarquis to the family of Townthend. The rivers are the Great and LetTer Oufe, Witbeach, the Yare, Waveney, Windfor
Thyrn, Lynn, and feme letfer tlreams. The motl remarkable places are Winterton Nefs, Eafton Nefs, Yarmouth Sands’, Botlon and’
Lynn Deeps, Well’s Harbour, Clay Harbour, Havens Mouth, Hitcham Haven, Weyborne Hope, Yarmouth Roads, Cromer Bav
the bait Marthes, feveral Meers, and Liden Trees near Deepham. This county produces rich paflures, corn, honey, faffron'
great plenty of various game and water fowl; all kinds of river and fea fifh, rabbits, flieep, cattle, wood, &c. It abounds with
heaths; the marfliy and watery places are aguilh and unwholefome ; but in the fandy or clayey part it is pleafant and healthy
The villages are large and well inhabited, particularly in the eallern part; and the foil in this county is more various than per’
haps in any other county, and comprehends all the forts that are to be found in the ifland. It fends 12 members to parliament
3 for the county, and 10 as above fliewn; pays 22 parts of the land-tax, and provides 960 men to the national militia.
The moft confiderable Gentlemens’ Seats in this County are,
Beefton, near Norwich.
Eixley, near Norwich.
Blickling, near Ayllham.
Carlton, near Wymondham.
Cotefley, near Norwich.
Crofwick, near North Walfham.
Ditching Lam, near Bungay.
Felbridge, near Cromer.
Garboldilham, near New Buckenham.
St. Giles’s, near Norwich.
Gunton, near Aylfham.
Hillington Hall, near Caftle Riling,
Holkam, near Burnham.
Houghton, near Lynn.
Kimberley Park, near Hingham.
Kimbly Hall, near Wymondham.
Melton Conftable, near Holt.
Narford, near Swaffham.
Oldiftiarr, near Thetford.
Oxburgh, near Stokefcrry.
Raynham.
Ringfted, near Hunftanton.
S netlham Lodge.
Sprowfton, near Norwich.
Stow, near Downham.
Sufheld, near North Walftiam.
Tafborough, near Shottilham,
Walfingham.
Walterton, near Ayllharn.
‘The moji txtenfive ProfpeSi art front,
The Church at Swaffham,
Holkham.
Norwich Caftle.
Buckenham Caftle.
Yarmouth.
Eafton, N. W. of Norwich*








NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
XS an inland county, near the center of the kingdom, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia; it is
now included in the province of Canterbury, the diocefe of Peterborough, and in the Midland circuit. It is 68 miles long from North
Eaft to South Weft, 24 miles broad, and 210 miles in circuit; containing 1000 fquare miles, or 640,000 fquare acres, divided into 20
hundreds, 330 parifhes, 85 vicarages, and 551 villages; with one city, Peterborough, which fends 2 members to parliament, and
gives the title of Earl to the family of Mordaunt; alfo 12 market towns, viz. Northampton, the county town, which fends 2 members
to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the Compton family; Brackley, which likewife fends 2 members to parliament, and gives
the title of Marquis and Vifcount to the Egerton family ; and Higham Ferrers, which fends one member to parliament; Daventry,
the title of Baron to the family of Finch; Rockingham, Wellingborough, Thrapfton, Oundle, Cliffe, Kettering, Rothwell, and
Towcefter; the village of Boughton gives the title of Baron to the Brudenell family; Burleigh, the fame title to the Cecil family ;
Althorpe, the title of Vifcount to the Spencer family; Thomhaugh, the title of Baron to the Ruflel family; and Grafton, which
gives the title of Duke to the Fitzroy family. The principal rivers are the Oufe, Nen, Welland, Cherwell, and the Learn. This
county fends 9 members to parliament, viz. 2 for the county, and the others as exprefted above ; it pays 12 parts of the land-tax,
and provides 640 men to the national militia. The moft remarkable places are Aubery Mounts, Sacy and Rockingham Forefts, Dunf-
more Heath, Nafeby Field, Holmeby Houfe, where Charles I. was confined, and Fotheringay Caftle, where Mary Queen of Scots
was beheaded. Its chief product is corn, cattle, ftone, &c.
The moft confiderable Seats in this county are,
Abingdon, near Northampton.*
Althorpe Park, near Harleftone.
Alhby Lodge, near Daventry.
Blatherwick, near Kingfcliff.
Burghley Hall, near Stamford.
Canon’s Alhby, near Towcefter.
Carlton.
Caftle Afhby, near Northampton.
Dean upon Rockingham Foreft.
Delapre Abbey, near Northampton.
Dingley.
Drayton Houfe, near Thrapfton.
Eafton Mauduit, near Bozeat.
Eafton Nefton, near Towcefter.
Fawflcy, near Daventry.
Furtho, near Stony Stratford.
Harleftone, near Northampton.
Harringworth Park, Rockingham Forcft.
Higham Park, near Highara Ferrers.
Horton, Yardley Chace.
Knufton Hall, near Knufton.
Moulton Park, near Northampton.
Milton Park, near Peterborough.
Newbottle Hall, near Brackley.
Newboitle Lodge, near Defborough.
Overfton Park, near Wellingborough.
Steane, near Brackley.
Stoke Park, near Towcefter.
Upton, near Northampton.
Watford, near Daventry.
The moji remarkable J r ie r xs are from y
Between Great Sibling and Overtcn.
Near Kettering.
Hard Mill Meer, between Kingftead and Rams.
Bulh Hill, near Wellingborough.
From Clifford to E<fton Mills.
On the Welland from Stamford.
A little Weft of Nafeby.
Burrow Hill, Weft of Daventry..
Near St. Martin’s Stamford, and en towards Eaftoa.








NORTHUMBERLAND
Is a maritime county, which gives the title of Duke and Ear! to the family of Percy; during the Saxon heptarchy, it belonged
to tiie kingdom of the Northumbrians; it is now in the province of York, diocefe of Durham, and in the Northern circuit.
It is 30 miles long, 24 broad, and 130 miles in circumference ; containing 414 fquare miles, or 264,960 fquare acres, divided
into 6 wards, 460 parilbes, 9 vicarages, 279 villages, and 12 market-towns, viz. Newcaftle, the county town, which gives the
title of Duke to the Clinton family, and fends 2 members to parliament; Berwick, fends 2 members to parliament, and gives
the title of Baron to the family of Hill; Morpeth, alfo fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Vifcount to the
Howard family; Alnwick gives the title of Baron to the Percy family ; Belford the fame honour to the family of Graham ; alfo
Hexham, Billmgham, Woller, Rothbury, Haltwefel, Ellefdon, and Learmouth. Among the villages, Tyndall gives the title of
Baron to the family of Scott. The rivers are the Tweed, Tyne, North and South Tyne, Alne, Wenlbeck, Coquet, Bramifli,
Uiway, Blythe, Till, Eaft and Weft Alou. The moft noted places are Sunderland Point, Cape Bothal; Holy, Fernand
Coquet Iflea , Stapie s Rocks, Black Middens, Cliftord s Fort, Dunftanburg Caftle, Bamburgh and Tinemouth, and feveral other
Cattles ; Tweed Mouth, Alnemouth, Tinemouth, and Wenfbeckmouth Havens; Felton Bridge, Cheviot, Flodden, and
Stainmore Hills, Hexham and Lowes Forefts; with the Piets’ Wall. The produd of the county is game, corn, falmon, fait,
alhim, iron, and lead, with an mexhauftible fund of coals. Its chief manufactures, glafs, wrought-iron, and fait. The air is
fharp and cold, fubjed to boifterous winds, froft and fnow. It fends 8 members to parliament, as before (hewn ; pays 4 parts
of the land-tax, and provides 500 men to the national militia. It abounds with Roman antiquities, and affords an infinite fund
for the Antiquarian.
The principal Gentlemens’ feats are.
Abby of Alnwick.
Alnwick Caftle.
Aydon, near Hexham.*
Backworth, near Earfdon.
Bavington, near Stamfordham*
Beaufort, near Hexham.
Leanridge, near Ponteland.
Belford.
Belfay Caftle, near Stamfordhanu
Benwell, near Newcaftle.
Biddlefton, near Allenton.
Biagdon, near Scanning:on.
Broom Park, near Alnwick,
Callaly Caftle, near Whitt Ingham.
Capheaton Caftle, near Stamfordham.
Carrington Caftle, near Rothbury.
Cawfway Park, near Morpeth.
Cheefeburn Grange, near Stamfordham.
Chillington, near Wooller.
Chinton, near North Shields.
Clofe Houfe, near Ovingham.
Cretfwell Hall, near Woodham.
Egling, near Alnwick.
Efslington, near Whiitingham,
E.a’l Hall, near Ford.
Falloden, near Alnw’ck,
Fenham, near Newcaftle.
Fiand Hall, at Ponteland.
Ford Caftle, at Ford.
Gosforth Hall, near Newcaftle*
Grecnhen, near Shotley.
Hallington Hall, near Stamfordham.
Hawk lev, near Wsrkworth.
Hazclyfide, near Bellingham.
Heaton Hall, near Newcaftle.
Heppel, near Rothbury.
Hepfcot, near Morpeth.
Highamdlk.es, near Ponteland.
Howick, near Alnwick.
-Kcnnell Park.
Kirkley, near Ponteland.
Landhoe, near Hexham.
Lee Hall, near Birtley.
Longhorfley.
Matfen, near Stamfordham.
Minfter Acres, near Shotley,
Mitford, near Morpeth.
Morpeth.
Newbrough, rear Hexham.
New Hall, near Belford.
Newton Hall, near Rothbury.
North Leaton, near Woodham.
Oakerland, neat Hexham.
Ogle C?lfle,. near Whalton.
Pallinfborn Hall, near Branxton.
Ridley Hall, near Bellingham,
Roadley Caftle, near Hartburn.
Rock, near Alnwick.
Roddam, near Ildefton,
Rofedcan, near Ildefton.
Searon Delaval, near Earfden.
Shotlev Kali.
a
Stob Hall, near Newcaftle.
Sevansfield Hall, near Alnwick,
Swarland Hall, near Rothbury.
Sw-nburn Caftle, near Chollerton.
Threep*ood, near Hexham.
,Tone, rear Bellingham.
Wallingron.
Whitley, near Earfden.
Widdington Caftle.
Witton, near Hartburn,
Woolfington, near Ponteland.
i ————.—
*2be txtenjive Views and Situations are ?
Vale of Tyne from Newcaftle to Hexham.
Reedfdale, and the fall of the Chetlup, which falls
70 fee*, near Cxtchigh and Reedftiire.
Cheviot Hills S. W. of Wooller.
Chriftenbury Crag, on the borders of Cumberland,
S. W. of Rew Caftle.
Crag Lough, to the N. the’Roman Wall, and the
31 Mile-ftone on the Military Road,
A acket, near Simondburn, N. W. of Walwick, the
Fall of the Rivulet and Cavern.
Staward le Peel, E. of the Allen.
High Sta-ward along the Alien, S. 5. E. of Belting,
ham.
Newb.'ggen, from the Church-yard on the Coaft E.
of Rothall.
K tlcy, five miles N. of Belford, on the Berwick.
Road.
Cornhill, S. of the Tweed, and near the New Bridge.
r l llmouth Chapel, at the junction of that River and
the Tweed.
Shidlaw Hill, near Carham and Wark Caftle.
atchlaw H !J, four miles from Etall.
Clanton P;ko, near the Wooller Road and Whitting-
ham,
Liaie! Law, near Eftlee, N. W. of Morpeth.
Ernrgton on the River Erirg.








NOTTINGHAM SHIRE
Lan inland count* which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia. It is now in the province of York
“* 6 ’ an r “ th£ Mld ' and drCUit ' C ° ntainS 778 fqU3re mil 6S ’ ° r 77 ’ 8o ° %are acres, being 48 miles long, 2 j
broad, and i6 S in circumference, nearly of an oval form; divided into 8 hundreds, .68 pariflies, 94 vicarages, 45 o villages, and o
iTalnt “n S ’ T I N °“ lnSham : the C ° Unty tOWn ’ Whkh th <= *le of Earl to the family of Finch, and fends a members to par-
B - : Newaik ’ 2 members to parliament; Retford, fends alfo a members to parliament; Mansfield, which gives the title of
Bron and Earl to the Murray family; Bingham, Southwell, Workfop, Tuxford, and Blith; among the villages Langar gives the
me of V ■fcount to the family of Howe ; and Granby that of Marquis to the family of Manners. The principal rivers are the Trent,
7 th’ I d d d fendS 8 memb6rS t 0 ParUament ’ ViZ ‘ 2 f ° rthe 311(1 6 ° therS aS above-mentioned; pays
reft of Sh 6 a V X ,’ 7*T ““ ‘° n3ti ° n3l The noted P laces are the Cells *ar Nottingham, the Fo-
wood e ™°°‘ ’ 3e 0 6 Volre ’ Thorney and Lmdhurft Woods, &c. It produces corn, hops, lead, coals, alabafter, liquorice.
If 57; 7r a : *^-“«**•*•« *.**ve^am l th :
mMtmvardstheeaft; and, towards the weft, is well fumifhed with wood and canal coal. The Chefterfield Canal, which joins
« itn the Trent, pafles through the northern part of this county.
The remarkable Seats in this county are,.
Anneftey, near Mansfield.
Avelham Park, near Newark,
Brenny.
Clifton, near Nottingham.
Clipfton Park, near Ollerton.
Clumber Park, near Workfop,
Eaft Stoke, near Newark.
Grove, near Eaft Retford.
Haughton Park, near Eaft Retford.
Headon Hall, near Ditto,
Langar,
Newftead Abbey, near Mansfield.
Norwood, near Southwell.
Nottingham Caftle.
Nuthall, near Nottingham.
Rufford, near Ollerton.
Seilby, near Blyth.
Shire Oaks, near Workfop.
Stanford Hall, near Remfton.
Thoreftjy Park, near Ollerton.
Wei beck Abbey, near Workfop.
W.inthorp, near Newark.
Wollaton Hall, near Nottingham*
Workfop Manor.
The moJI exterjlve Views arc from
Clifton, three miles from Nottingham.
Nottingham Caftle.
Crefwell Crag, W. of WeUbank.
B-oad from Newark to Nottingham, near the Trent,
Wollaton Hail ; three miles from Nottingham,








OXFORDSHIRE
-*• ~ -- -<w
, told, contaming 43;, 20 ofquare acres, or 680 fquare miles; is ar miles lone Abroad
and 190 miles in circuit, being divided into 14 hundreds 280 narifliee , n H ■ . . 5 broad *
of Ear! to the Harley family, is an Univerfity in l h ! 92 V ’ CaraSeS * wWch title
complete their education. It has alfo « market towns TzZITTT ““ * hal ' S ’ WhCrein ° f3 °°°
...... . . , r Ct tOWnS) VIZ - Woodftock - which gives title of Vifconnt to the Bentinck family • Bur
11: nt t r " “" i “ iy • btM " ■—» n.,». CMbi „ ■ z
“'I S ““ H “”. - Vito.. ..d to. ,e ~. to to of Vito.. „ .he to,
to I,’” TrfT" ”• ’ “*<«•“'* 1 for the Univerlity, ~d .
Tame S °fT"V 6 nv 3nd Pr ° V ‘ deS 56 ° men *° the natlonal militia - Its principal rivers are the Thames, Cherwell Ifis
Tame, Swere, Chm, Rea, Oke, Windrulh, Evanlode, and Sorbrook. The moft remarkable places are the Chi,tern Hi ,s W h
F ”'f' "7 -7 - '-"■ 1 ™. to,, produces to ’ P . b .„.
Tth T‘l 1 CV^ m 5 and the nvers fine fifll - Its chief ma nufa6lure is coarfe woollens and blankets. The air is healthy
a- d the foil dry aboundmg w.th ftreams of excellent water. There are mineral fprings at Afton and Somerton. A canal goes from
Oxford tn a north duefton to Warwickfhire, which is of enumerable advantage to the county, particularly to Oxford. ‘
Tlic moil remarkable Seats in this county are.
A Iderfbury, near Banbury,
Biandford Park, near Charlbury.
, Blechingdon, near Iflip.
Blenheim, near Woodftock, built by Parliament, and
given to the late Duke of Marlborough.
Brcuern Abbey, near Lyneham.
Caverfham Park, near Caverlham.
Charlbury.
Cockthorp, near Stanton Harcourt.
Cornwall Houfe, near Chipping Norton.
Crowfley Park, near Henley.
Ditchley Park, near Charlbury.
Great Tew Park, near Deddmgton.
Grey’s Court, near Henley.
Heythorp, near Chipping Norton.
Holton, near Wheatley.
Hanwell Park, near Banbury.
Kirklington Park, near WoodUock.
Middleton Park, near Middleton Stony.
Newnham Courtney.
Ricot Park, near Thame.
Roufham, near Woodftock.
Shirburn CaMe, near Watlington.
Swinbrook, near Burford.
Thame Park, near Thame.
Wellington Park, ne*r Watlingto^.
The mjl remarkable Places for extenfwe Profess ait,
Teynton, near Burford.
Salpiake on the Thames, near Henley.
Stokenchurch Hill, N.E. of Watlington,
Whiteham Hill, N. W. of Oxford.
Quinton Hill, near Ayleloury.
Edgehill, near Banbury.
J
iNettlcbed Hill, luppofed the higheft in England,
Shotovcr Hill, near Wheatly.








RUTLAND
Ts an imand county, which'gives tiie title of Duke to the Manners family, and, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the
kingdom of Mercia. It continued, from Alfred’s divifion of England into counties, to the reign of Henry 11. as part of North-
amptonfhire. It is in the province of Canterbury, the diocefe of Peterborough, and belongs to the Midland Circuit. It is 19
miles long, 18 broad, and 70 miles in circumference ; containing 210 fcpjare miles, or 134,4,00 fcpiare acres ; divided into
hundreds, containing 48 parities, and 2 market-towns, viz. Oakham, the county town; and Uppingham. Among
■the villages, Efenden gives the title of Baron to the family of Cecil; as does Bidlington the fame dignity to that of Noeh
The moll remarkable places are the Quarries; the old Forefl of Liefield; the Vale of Catmos; Witchley Heath;
•and Five Mile Crofs. The rivers are the Gnafii, Eye, Chater, and Welland. This county produces limeflone, corn, cattle,
flieep, wood, &c. It fends only 2 members to parliament, viz. for the Shire ; pays 2 parts of the land tax, and provides 120
men to the national militia. 1 his i» the imalleii county in the kingdom, but the molt fruitful. The air is good ; and the foil
rich, efpecially the Vale of Catmos. Its form is nearly circular. There is an old cußom -eftablifhed at Oakham, when a No-
bleman comes, loi the hift time, within its precincts, he is obliged to pay homage of a fliee from one of his horfes, or to com-
mute for it in money.
The moil confklerable Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Eutley Houfe, near Oakham.
Exton, near Oakham.
Northmanton, near Oakham.
Pilton, near Uppingham.
1 ©vert on.
The beautiful and extenfve Views an frofy
North Lu-ffenham, near Stamford.
The Read from Stamford to Uppingham,








SHROPSHIRE
Is an inland county, which fends 2 members to parliament, and, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of
Mercia; it is new in the province of Canterbury, the diocefes of Hereford in part, and the remainder in that of Litchfield and
Coventry, and is included in the Oxford circuit. It is 47 miles long, 38 broad, and 210 in circumference; containing 1320
fquare miles, or 844,800 fquare acres ; divided into 15 hundreds, 170 parifhes, 52 vicarages, 1500 villages, and 15 market-towns,
viz Shrewfbury, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the Talbot family ; Ludlow,
fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Herbert ; Bridgenorth, fends 2 membe'rs to paf-
Lament. as does Wenlock and Biihop’s-Cadle ; befides which, there are Drayton, Wem, Ofwedry, which gives the title of Baron to
the Howard family ; Whitchurch, Church Stretton, Giebury, Newport, Shefnal, and Wellington j with Eilefmere, which gives the
,itle of Baron to the Egerton family. The following villages give titles to noble families, viz. dun, that of Baron to the
family of Howard ; Cherbury, the fame title to that of Herbert; Harley, to that of Harley ; and Powis, that of Earl and Baron
to the family of Herbert. The principal rivers are the Tweed, Severn, Teem, Clun, Ony, Warren, Torn, Corve, Rea, Kemlot,
and Mele, The mod remarkable places are Wire, Morf and Hockfto Forefts ; St. Gilbert’s Caradock, Wrekin, Stiperdon, Tit-
terfton Hill, Browncle, Brethen, Clebury Mount, Burning-Well, Bifliop’s Mott, Corvefdaie, and Blaze Heath j Bofcobel Houfe
ano Grove, Caractacus s Camp, Afion Burnell Caflle and Barn. It fends 12 members to parliament as before fhewn ; pays 7
parts of the land-tax ; and provides 640 men to the national militia. The air of this county is healthy, but cold. The foil
in the vallies produces different forts of grain; and upon the hills pafhire for black cattle and fheep ; befides which its chief
product is fruits, river fifli, pitcoal, copper, lead,, iron, done, lime done,, pitch and tar. Its manufaflures are gloves and
dockings, woollen clothes, dannels and cannon. It is reckoned the larged inland county in the kingdom.
The moft remarkable Seats are,
Afton Burnell, near Shrew/bury.
Adderley Hall, near Drayton.
Bellaport, near Drayton,
Belferdine, near Shrew/bury.
Buntingfdalc Hall, near Drayton.
Candover Park, near Shrewfbury.
Chetwynd Park, near Newport.
Cleobury Park, near Bridgenorth.
Cond Hall, near Shrewsbury.
Cowe/hall Hall, near Drayton.
EP.efmcre.
Frodefiey Park, near Shrewsbury.
JHarcotl Park, by Hadfcotr.
Haughtcn Hall, rear SbifnaL
Kinlet Hall, near Mortimer.
Longnor Park, near Shrewsbury.
Loton Hall, near Shrewlbury.
Oakley Park, near Ludlow.
Patfbull Hall, near Albrighfon,
Pitchford Park, near Shrewfbury.
Ryton Hall.
Sanfaw Hall, near Lee.
Shawbury Park, near Shrewfbury,
Shavington Hall, near Drayton,
Tong Park, near Albrigfuon.
Wefton, near Hodnet
*Tbe mojl extenjive and beautiful Views are frvm t
Bridgenorth on the Banks of the Severn.
rdoc Hill, near Church Stratton.
Wreking Hill, 1398 feet high, near Shrew/bury.
Colebrooke Dale, near Shiffnall.
Endlefs Woods, near Bridgenorth,
The Road from Kidderrainftcr to Bridgenorth.
Quatford Church Yard.
The Road from Ludlow to Montgomery.
Stipperfion Cloe, near Norbury, 1800 feet high,
Ellcfmere Bowling Green.
Amen Hill, five miles from Shrewfbury.
Between Ludlow and Church Srretton.
Tltterfion Hill, or the Glee, between Ludlow and
Bcwdley.
P.m hill Hill, near Shrew/bury.
Between Welchpool and Ofweftry.
The Morf near Bridgenorth.
The Edge, near Wenlock,
The Parthy, near Zllefmcre,








SOMERSETSHIRE
Is a maritime county, and gives the title of Duke to the ancient family of Seymour, and fends 2 member? to parliament.
During the Saxon heptarchy, it belonged to the kingdom of the Weft Saxons j it is now in the province of Canterbury, in the
diocefe of Bath and and is included in the Weftern circuit. It is 68 miles long, 47 broad, and 240 in circumference ;
containing 1520 fquare miles, or 972,800 fquare acres, divided into 42 hundreds, 383 parifties, 132 vicarages, 1060 villages;
2 cities entire, viz, Bath, which fends 2 members to parliament; and Wells, which alfo fends 2 members, and, in conjunction
with Bath, is a biftioprick that comprehends the county 7 ; beiides which, this county contains a great part of the city of Briftol,
which is alfo a biftioprick, fends .2 members to parliament, is a county of itfelf, and gives the title of Earl to the family of
Hervey, It has 31 market-towns, viz, Taunton, which fends 2 members to parliament j Bridgewater, alfo fends 2 members to
parliament, and gives the title of Duke to the Egerton family 7 ; Ilchefter, gives title of Earl and Baron to the family of Strange-
ways-Fox, and fends 2 members to parliament; Somerton, from whence the county’ had its name, gives the title of Baron to the
Legg family ; Minehead, which fends 2 members to parliament ; as does alfo Milborne Porte ; beftdes thefe, there are the
market-towns of Pensford, Frome, North Curry, Bruton, Langport, Philip’s Norton, W T incaunton, Wellington, Dunfter, DuU
verton, Axbridge, Caftle Cary 7, Chard, Nether Stowey, South Petherton, Crewkerne, Glaftonbury, Wrington, Wivelefcomb,
Watcher, Ilminfter, Keynftiam, Porlock, Shepton Mallet, and Yeovil. Among the villages, Lanfdown gives the title of Marquis
to the family of Petty • Poulet, gives title of Earl, Vifcount, and Baron to the family of the fame name, and that of Baron to
the family 7 of Cooper; Redlinch and Stoverdale the title of Baron to the family of Strangeways-Fox ; Rodney-Stoke, the title of
Baron to that of Rodney ; Hinton St. George, the titles of Vifcount and Baron to the Poulet family ; Burton Pynfent, the title
of Vifcount to the family 7 of Pitt; and Enmore Caftle, that of Baron to the Percival family. Its principal rivers are the Severn,
Avon, IveJ, Ax, Car, Exe, Frome, Brent, Parret, Brue, and Tone. The Points of Land and Ifies are Ports-head,
Anchor-head, St. Thomas’s head, Stert-point, Boleftall-poiut, Flatholms and Steepholm Iftes, and the Ifte of Athelney;
Bridgewater Bay, Porlock Bay, Severn-mouth, and Hung Road, The moft remarkable places are, The Wedding at Stanton-
Drew, Wookey-hole, Cheddar Rocks and Caverns, Vallis Rocks near Frome, Cadbury Caftle, Mendip Hills; Quantock, Black-
down and Poulton Hills ; Brackley Comb near Wrington, Camalet Mount, Brent Knoll; Selwood and Neroche Foreft ; Sedge-
moor, Exmoor, Heathmoor, Kingfwood, and Odins Downs. The foil for the moft part rich and fertile, particularly the S. and
S. W. parts. The fertility of the Vale of Taunton Dean has long been proverbial. Its productions are various, and compre-
hends almoft every thing neceftary for the life of man, viz. paftures, corn, cattle, very large oxen ; fruits, checfe, and cyder ; nor
are its excellences confined to the furface ; within its bowels are rich veins of coals, copper, lead, iron, lapis caiaminaris, lime
• ftonc, fullers’ earth, very fine cryftal, yellow ochre, excellent freeftone, and alabafter ; and its mineral waters of Bath, Briftol,
Wells, Alford, and Glaftonbury, are well known throughout the world. Its manufactures of woollens, flax, hemp, glafs, and
ftockings are very conftderable. It has a fait fpring at Eaft Chernock, 20 miles from the fea. It fends 18 members to parlia-
ment as before fliewn j pay’s 19 parts of the land-tax, and provides S4O men to the national militia. It abounds with Roman
encampments near Bath and Glaftonbury ; and has a great number of antique building* within its limits.
The moft conftderable Gentlemens’ Seats in this county are,
Afbton Court, rear Briftol.
Babington, near Frome.
Barrow Court, near Briftol.
Berkley, near Frome.
Brewham Lodge, near Bruton,
Brockley Court, near Wrington.
Bruton Abbey, near Bruton.
Burton Pynfent, near Langport.
Batleigh, near Somerton,
tamerton, near Bath,
Charlton Adam, near Somerton.
Chilconopton, near Bath.
Cleeve Cctrage, near Briftol.
Comb Hay, near Bath.
Compton Pauncefo’ot, near Caftie Cary.
Crickttt, near Crewkerne.
Crowcombe, near Srogumber.
Dillington, near Ilminfter.
Dunfter Caftle, near Dunfter.
Fumore Caftle near Bridgewater.
Bvercreech, near Shepton Mallet.
Farley, near Bath.
Hadfpur, near Burton,
HafweM, near Bridgewater.
Hatch Beauchamp, near Taunton.
Heatherfton, near Taunton.
Hill, near Taunton.
Hinton St. George, near Crewkerne.
Houndftreet, near Bath.
Heftercombe, near Taunton,
King’s Wefton, near Somerton.
Langford Court, near Wringtca.
Marfton B’gott, near Frome.
M-.lls Park, near Frome.
Midford Caftle, near Bath.
Mappeftc-n Houfc, near V* incaunton.
Kettlecomb, near Taunton.
Newton Park, near Bath.
Orchardlev, near Frome.
J '
p:ll, ncarShiplon Millet.
Prior Park, near Buh.
Pyrland, near Taunton.
Redlynch, near Bruton,
Roundhill, near Wincaunton#
Shapwick, near Bridgewater.
Spargrove, near Barton,
Standerwick, near Frcmfc.
Stone Esfton, near Wells.
"Stowe v-, near Pensfcrd.
v *
Sutton Court, near Pcrsford,
Vew, near Milborne Port.
Wellington Court, near Wellington
Weft Monckton, near Taunton.
Wraxall Court, near BriftH.
C "be vtoji remarkable f'ierv; crr.S Situations are,
A’fieo's Tower, rear Stour Head,
Glaftonbury Tor.
J
Cuthelefton Lodge, near Taunton.
Polden Hill.
Cslamet H.II, or Arthur’s Palace, near Yeotii.
Qjantock Hills, near Watcher,
Brent Knoll, near Huntfpill.
Mendip Kills. «
Landfdown and CUvertoa Down, near Path,
Near Bath, on the Upper Briftol Road.
Stantonbjry Hil! # near Stanton Drew,








STAFFORDSHIRE
I S an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia, is now belonging to the province of
Canterbury, in the diocefe of Lichfield and Coventry, and is included in the Oxford circuit. It is in the form o'f a lozenge, being
pointed at both ends, and the broadeft in the middle ; is fituated near the center of England. It is 30 miles broad, 48 long, and
220 in circuit, containing 8-4 fquare miles, or 558,360 fquare acres, divided into 5 hundreds, t 3 o pariflres. It has one city,
Lichfield, which Sends 2 members to parliament, and enjoys the fee of a bifliop in conjunction with Coventry ; and 17 market towns,
viz. Stafford, which gives the title of Marquis to the Gower family, and fends 2 members to parliament; Newcaftle-under-line,
which gives the title of Duke to the Clinton family, and fends 2 members to parliamentTamworth, which gives the title of Vifcount
to the Ferrers family, and fends 2 members to parliament; befides thofe, there are Burton, Uttoxeter, Tutbury, Wolverhampton,
Ecclefhall, C ncadle. Abbot’s Bromley, Betley, Brewood, Leek, Penkridge, Rudgeley, Stone, and Walfall. The village of Tren-
tham gives the title of Baron to the Gower family, as does Beaudefart to the Paget family; Ingeftrie, the title of Vifcount to the
Talbot family ; Audley, the title of Baron to the Touchet family ; Stourton Caftle, the title of Baron to the Stourton family; and
Dudley Caftle, the fame honour to the family of Ward. Its principal rivers are the Trent, Manyfold, Chernet, Lime, Penk, Stour,
Tern, Dove, Borne, Sow, Blith, Tean, and Smeftall, with very extenfive navigable Canals. The moll noted places are Eclon, Moon
and Mowcap Hills, the Cloud, Needwood Foreft, Cannock Wood or Chace, and Black Meer. It fends 10 members to parliament,
pays 7 parts ot the land-tax, and provides 560 men to the national militia ; produces corn, fifh, coals, iron, copper, lead, alabafter,
ftone, hme-ftone, marble, &c.; its manufactures are chiefly woollens, iron, and earthen-ware, and the town of Burton is famous for
its ale. The air is good and \ery healthy, but lharp in the North and Moorlands.
The moil principal Seats in this county are,
Bagot’s Park, near Abbot’s Bromley.
Batchacre Park, near EcclcfhalL
Beaudefart Park, near Lichfield.
Blithfield.
Chartley Park, near Uttoxeter.
Drayton Park, near Tamworth.
Ecclelhall.
Envil.
Fifherwick Park, near Tamworth.
Hitton Hall, near firewood.
Himley.
Hoarcrofs Hall, near Abbot’s Bromley.
Ingeftrie Park, near Stafford.
Loxley Hall, near Uttoxeter.
Park, near Newcaftle.
New Park, near Newcaftle.
Oakley, near Drayton.
Patelhill Park, near Wolverhampton,
Sandon.
Sandwell Park, near WalfalL
Shenfton.
Shuckbcrough, near Colwick.
Stourton.
Swinfin, near Lichfield.
Toddefty Coppice, near Rudgeley.
Trcntham Park, near Newcaftle.
Wefton Park, near firewood.
Wichnor, near Lichfield.
Wolefey Park, near Stafford.
Womburn Park, near Dudley.
Wooten Park, near Cheadlc.
Wrotteflcy.
7he mofi remarkable Views art from %
■Stafford Caftle Hill.
Narrowdale, N. W. of Oakover.
Abbot s Caftle, near Wolverhampton.
Leek Hills, in the road to Congleton.
Eclon Hill, between Newcaftle and Leek.
Barbicon de Miles, N. of Birmingham.
Sinai Park.
Tutbury CadUe.








SUFFOLK
L a maritime count)’, which gives the title of Ear. to the family of Howard, and, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to
the kingdom of the Eaft Angles; it is now in the province of Canterbuiy. diocefe of Norwich, and is included I the ifolk
7T,; :‘! 7 ” . 635 7 d ’ and : 23 ° *** in d ‘ CUmfe rence ; containing 1460 fquare miles, or 984,400 fquare acres.
‘ ” ’’ 1 ‘ ' P " ‘ >S 'sl° villages, and 3 e martet-towvw, via. Ipfwich. the county town, which
• “ b 7 ” “ d S "“ tolly of fitatey, ** . mmb „, „
parliament, and gives the title of Vifcount to the family nf c ju ,• , r ,
. .. , - , 6 ° f Ke PP cl 5 Sudbury, which fends a members to parliament, and gives
the title of Baron to the family of Fitzrov • OrfnrH u u , s
. . . ,_ . u f ro> ’ Or - ord> " hlch S‘ ves the tttle E"1 to the family of Walpole, Brandon, which
gwes the title o Duke to the famfty of Hamilton ; Eye, which fends a members to par.iament, and gives the tit.e of Baron to the
family ° omwa is, kkvorth, which gives the title of Baron to the family of Harvey, Alborough, which fends a members to
parliament; Dunv .ch, which alfo fends a members to parliament, Clare, LeoftofF, Woodbridge, Billion, Southwold, Budefdale.
Bungaj, ecc.es Hadley, Stowmarket, Debenham, Halefworth, Lavcnham, Mendlelham, Mildenhall, Needham, Saxmundham.
p,t ’ ■ ey ’ r ngham ’ and part of Haverill ! among the villages, Aflif.eld gives the title of Baron to the family of Thur-
low, Bolebrook, the fame honour to the family of Germaine, Eufton, that of Earl to the family of Fitzroy , Houghton, that of
Baron to t e \\ alpole family , and Suffield, the fame dignity to the family of Harboard. The principal rivers are the Little Oufe
Waveney, Blyth, Ore, Stour, Berton, Orwel, Deben, and Aid. It produces corn, cattle, .ye, hemp, cheefe, fait, excellent but!
ter, See. game m great plenty of all kinds, fifli of every fort, timber, wood, manufaftories of bone-lace, woollen goods, fine and
coarfc, &c. and carries on extenhve commerce to Holland. Germany, Sweden, Ruffia, Pruffia, &c. It fends 16 members to par-
liament, 2 for the county, and 1+ for the different boroughs, as above (hewn; pays 20 parts of the land-tax, and provides 960 men to
the national militia. On its coafi are Leoftoff Point, Eafton Nefs, Orford Nefs, Bftrgh Caftle, &c. with Sowl Bay, Mifmere, Orford.
Baudfe_\ and On ell Hai ens, v.ith Alborough Harbour. The moft noted places are Angel Hill, Slaughden Valley, feveral Woods
and Stour Meer.
The moft remarkable Seats in this county are,
Adton Place, near Sudburv.
Ampton, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Alh Park, near Wickham Market.
Badmondesfield Hall, Lidgate.
Barton Hall, near Bury' St. Edmunds.
Benacre Park.
Bcnhall Lodge, near Saxmundham.
Botefdalc.
Great Boughton, near Ipfwich,
Boxted Hall, near Clare.
Bramfield Hall, near Ipfwich.
Branches Hall, near Cooling.
Brettenham Hall, near Sudbury.
Cavenham Ha!!, near Mildenham.
Coldham Hall.
Crow field Hall, near Needham.
Culford, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Dunfton Hall.
Eafton, near Wickham Market.
Eullon, near Thetford.
FUxton Hall, near Bungay'.
Gazeley, near Newmarket.
Glenham Parva, near Saxmundham.
St. Gcnovevc.
Hclmingham, near Debenham.
Hcnnave, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Herillam Park, near Southwold.
Hcflcl, near Woolpit.
Hcvcningham Hall, near Halefworth.
Hintlciham, near Ipfwich.
Holbrook, near Ipfwich.
Hoxne.
Ickworth, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Kentwell Hall, near Sudbury.
Loudhall Hall, near Wickham Market.
Melford Hall, near Sudbury,
Natflon, near Ipfwich.
Oufdcn Hall, near Newmarket.
Polftead.
Red Houfc, near Ipfwich.
Rufhbrook, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Great Saxham, near Bury St. Edmunds.
Shrublaud Hall, near Noedhcirn.
Sibton.
Sotterly Hall.
Sproughton Chauntry, near Ipfwich.
Sudburn Hall, near Orford.
S avender Park, near Orford.
Thiflow Hall.
Thorington Hall, near Halefworth.
Welnetham, near Bury Sc. Edmunds,
Z ax ford.
The Place s mcjl remarkable for beautiful and extenjive
Views are
Wickham Steeple, S. of Framlingham,
Burftall, \V. of Ipfwich.
Stoke Neyland, S. E. of Sudbury.
From Ipfwich to Harwich by water.
The High Grounds in Stoke.








SURRY
13 an inland county, which gives the title of Earl to the family of Howard. During the Saxon heptarchy it belonged to the South
Saxons j is now in the province of Canterbury, the diocefe of Winchefter, and is included in the Home circuit. It is 39 milts long,
a 6 broad, and 146 in circuit; containing 499,200 fquare acres, or 780 fquare miles ; is divided into 13 hundreds, having 140 parilhes,
and 11 market towns, \iz. Guilford, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the family
ot Noith ; Kingflon ; Hailemere, which fends 2 members to parliament; Ryegate, which gives the title of Baron to the Mordaunt
family, and alio fends 2 members to parliament; Croydon; Epfom; Chertfey; Dorking; Ewell; Farnham; and Godaiming;
Southwark is a fuburo to London, fends 2 members to parliament, as does Gatton and Bletchingly, neither of which enjoys a market.
Tne ullage ot Batterfea ghes the title ot Baron to the family of St. John ; Compton, the title of Baron to the families of both Ferrars
and Compton ; Effingham, the title of Earl to the family of Howard : Streatham, the title of Baron to the family of Ruflel; Peter-
fham, the title of Baron to the Stanhope family; and Cranley, the title of Baron to the Onflow family. It is almofl fquare in its
iorm; the principal rivers are the Thames, Wandel, Mole, Wey, and Loddon ; producing rich paflure, flieep, com, hops, fruit,
wood, game, poultry, fifh, and abundance of every kind of garden-fluff. It has a great variety of extenfive manufactures of glafs,
iron, &.C. &c. The S. E. and N. W. parts have abundance of uncultivated grounds; but the other parts are remarkably fertile,
and its air particularly wholeiome and plealant; which formerly induced feveral of our Kings to ere£t palaces in it for their refidencies.
It fends 14 members to parliament, pays 18 parts of the land-tax, andfupplies 800 men to the national militia ; and, forks extent, has
more gentlemens’ villas than any other county in the kingdom ; among whom the following are mofl remarkable :
Albury Park, near Albury.
Aftited Park, near Epfom.
Abbs Court, near Moulfcy.
Barrow’s Green.
Bagfhot Park.
Beach worth, near Ryegate,
Bcddington Place.
Blctchingly Place.
Bookham.
Botlcy Houfe, near Ch.ertfcy.
Eurwood Park.
B'.ifbridgc, near Godaiming.
Byfteet, near Cobham.
Bury Hill, near Dorking.
Carlhalton.
Ch.art Park, near Dorking.
Chertfey.
Clandon Park, near Guilford.
Clermount, near Efher.
Cobham.
Comb houfe, near Klngfton.
Comb Park.
Comb.
Dtepden, near Dorking.
Denbigh, near Dorking.
Dodfley Place, near Guilford,
Efher Place, near Ether.
Eaftwick Park, near Leatherhead.
Ember Court.
Farnham Park.
Felbridgc Park.
Fetcham Park, near Leatherhead.
Flower Houfe, near Godftone.
Gatton Park, near Ryegate.
Gatton, near Chipftead.
Katchland Park, near E. Clandon.
Henley Park.
Hern Haw, near Chcrtfcy.
Horfley Eaft, near Bookham.
Horfley Weft, near Clandon.
Kcw Palace.
Ladbroke Houfe, near Gatton.
Lambert Oaks, near Banfted.
Marden Park, near Godftone.
Mafcall’s Grove, near Chcrtfev.
0 J
Mitcham.
Moor Park, near Famham.
Norbury, near Leatherhead.
Oatlands, near Weybridge.
Oakham, near Ripley.
Painftiill Park, near Cobham.
Pepper Harrow, near Godaiming.
Peferfham, near Richmond.
Pierpont Lodge, near Famhamu
Polfdon, near Micklehara.
Potter’s Park, near Cobham.
Roehampton.
Shillingly Park.
Shine, near Bagfhot.
Waverlcy Abbey, near Famham.
Weltbrook Place, near Godaiming.
Wimbleton Park.
Wood cote Park, near Epfom.
Woburn Farm, near Wcybridge.
The mojl remarkable Views are from ,
Richmond Park and Hill.
Terrace in Richmond Gardens.
Wandfworth Hill.
St. Ann’s Hill, near Chenfey.
Box Hill, near Dorking.
Leith Hill, near Wotton.
Road from Dorking to Guilford.
Banfted Downs.
Hind Hill, near Godaiming.
Grace wood Hill near Godaiming.








S USS EX
Is a maritime county on the fouthern boimdarv nf i• i , .
the Saxon heptarchy it belonged to the kingdom of the ** ° f Ye,verton - During
of Chichefter, and is included in the Home circuit. It is 7 ; mi |e s lonl Zb "“d “ in the diocefe
fquare mi.es, or fquare acres; divided into 6 rapes! which
"5 vicarages, 1060 villages; one city, Chichefter, which fends a members ,• 5 d ’ ; containin g n* pariihes,
towns, viz. Lewes, which fends a members to plr, lament ; ““ B ** ° ? 3 -ket!
to the Howard family (and has the Angularity of being the only local diynit • r T ? P3rl ' ament ’ and S ives title of Earl
on whoever is its poffefTor, without any patent or creation) • Eaft Griead" 1 h"h 7 C ° nfemng the di g nit P of an Earl
hlidhurft, Shoreham, Horlham, and Steyning ; Bramber, fends I mel!s T 0 "IIT b T • *° Parf “ » « *>es
ford, Haftings, and Rye, are Cinque Ports, and each fends a members to parliament • th ’ “° ! Winchelfea . Sea-
which gives the title of Earl to the family of Finch and Seaford L . i two .alter enjoy markets; but Winchelfea,
mentioned, are Chiddingford, Petworth, Battel, Brighihelmfton, Cu’ckfield HayiLm'lTr Befi<ieS market - to ' vns ab-e-
-thts county, the following give titles: Alhburnham, gives the titles of Earl’and R ’ t fT g 5 amo " g the ° ther P !aces m
that of Vifcount to the family of Pratt • Buckhnrft that nfR , , aron to the family of Alhburnham ; Bayham
„ , ta .Tufion. k »»- * *«»'
Harbour, Bognor Rocks ; Arundel, Shoreham, and Newhaven Harbours • R . Chlchefter Harbour, Selfey Bill and
hours; Crowborough and Beacon Hills; Aflidown, St. Leonard’s WaterZwn DalZ t’ ' Rye Har ‘
Petlor, Darum, and Vent Woods; the Dyke, the Downs, and watering or bat’hin* pUceT Forefts; Holm,
mere, Little Oufe, Rother, Aclur, Rye, and Arun Its nmr!,A • o g g P The P rmci P al nvers are the Cock-
that delicate bird the Wheat-ear. The manufactures are charcoal C °™’ wood > t,mber > wild fowl . &a and river fifh, and
the foil, yet not unwholefome. It fends ao members to parliament • fZI " ’ 311 lr ° n '"’ ork ' The air is various; as is alfo
thC C ‘ nqUC PcnS: payS 9 parts of the Hnd-tax, and provides 640 men to the natioZZiliria 8 ” abo '* beCdes thofe for
■S
The principal Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Arundel Park.
Afhburnham Park, near Battel.
Baily Park, near Haillham.
Broadhurft Park, near Eaft Grinftead.
Buckingham Houfe, near Shoreham,
Burton Park, near Petworth,
Coombe, near Lewes.
Coney Burrows, near Lewes.
Cowdry Park, near Midhurft.
Crowhorft Park, near Haftings,
Danfey, near Diichling.
Den Park, near Horlham,
Eades, near I ewes.
Ear ege Park, near Eaft Grinftead,
Finden, near Weft Tarring.
F.rle, near Lewes,
Frifton Place, rear Haiiftiam.
Goodwoi d Houfe, near Chichefter.
Halnaker Houfe, near Chichefter.
Hookland Park, near Steyning.
Horftmonceux Park, near Battel,
Ladyhclt, near Midhurft,
Michelgrove, near Arundel.
Muntham, near Weft Tarring.
Offiagton, near Weft Tarring.
Petworth.
Sedgwick Park, near Horfioam.
Selhurft Park, near Arundel.
Shillingby Park, near Midhurft,
Slaugham Park, near Cuckfield,
Slindon Houfe, near Arundel.
South Bourne, near Hailftiam.
Starftead Houfe, near Eaft Bourne,
Sranmer, near Lewes.
Uppark, near Midhurft.
Wakhurft Park, near Eaft Grinftead.
Wellingdon Park, near Haiiftiam.
Vv eft Grinftead Park, near Steyning.
W ifton Park, near Steyning.
Worminghurft Park, near Steyning.
The mojl exterfve and beautiful Profit are front,
Beachy Head.
The Windmill, near Lewes.
A Hill near Rye.
South Downs.
Rooke Hill,
Devil’s D vke.
Mountfield Court Lodge.
Durford, near Peterfield,








WARWICKSHIRE
Is an inland county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the kingdom of Mercia, It is now in the province of
Canterbury, diocefes of Worcefter, and Litchfield and Coventry, and is included in the Midland circuit. It is 50 miles long, 32
broad, and 210 in circumference ; containing 980 fquare miles, or 627,200 fquare acres ; divided into 4 hundreds and 1 Liberty,
1:8 parifhes, 87 vicarages, 391 villages; one city, Coventry, which fends 2 members to parliament, and, in conjunction with
Litchfield, is the fee of a Bifhop, and gives the title of Earl and Baron to the family of Coventry ; and 14 market-towns, viz.
Warwick, the county town, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives title of Earl to the family of Greville; Tamworth,
which is partly in this county, fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Vifcount to the family of Shirley; Bir-
mingham, gives the title of Baron to the family of Ward ; Stratford; Henley; Colefhill ; Atherfton ; Alcefter; Kyneton ;
Nun-Eaton; Rugby; Southam ; and Sutton-Coifield; among the villages, Beachamp Court gives the title of Baron to the
Greville family j Beachamp, that of Vifcount to the family of Conway; Middleton, that of Baron to the Willoughby family *
Nevvnham-Paddock, thofe of Vifcount and Baron to the Fielding family; Overfley, that of Baron to the family of Wentworth;
and Wormleighton, the fame dignity to the Spencer family. Its principal rivers are the Avon, Tame, Alne, Anker, and Cole.
It produces corn, iron, cattle ; with manufactories of thread, flannel, linen, pins, woollen fluffs, the moft extenfive in iron-works,
Japan-w r are, plated goods, &c, and the water of Sherborn, noted for the beft blue dye. This county fends 6 members to par-
liament, viz. 2 for the fhire, and 4 for the towns as above-mentioned; pays 10 parts of the land-tax, and provides 640 men to
the national militia. This county is in the center of the kingdom, and has a moft wholefome air; divided into two parts by
the river Avon, which runs through it, called Feldon and Woodland. The foil is fruitful, efpccially the fouth parts. The moft
noted places are Edgehill, Aubery Mounts, Vale of Red Horfe, Dunfmore Heath, and the antient Roman Military Watlingftreet
and Fofs Way, This county enjoys great advantage from the inland navigable canals, which join the Severn and Humber.
The moft eminent Seats in this county are,
Alton End.
Allelby Park.
Arbury, near Coventry.
Bagglnton, near Coventry.
Baxterley Hall, near Polefworth.
Bilton, near Rugby.
Bramcote, near Polefworth,
Brandon, near Coventry.
Chadlhunt, near Kineton,
Cheflerton.
Comb Abbey, near Coventry,
four Oaks Hall, near Sutton.
Kenilworth Caftle, near Warwick.
Litde Lawford, near Rugby.
Mount Grevil, near Stratford.
Kewbold Ravel, near Rugby,
Parkington, near Colefhill.
Ragley, near Alcefter.
Stanley Abbey, near Warwick*
Umbei flade.
Warwick Caftle.
Wefton, near Coventry,
Wolverfhilk
Tie wojl extenf.ve Prohens are frcw t
Aubury Mounts.
Edgehill.
Guy’s Cliff.
Ragley.








WESTMORELAND
Is an inland county, which gives the title of Earl to the family of Fane; and, during the Saxon heptarchy, belonged to the king-
dom of Northumberland. It is now in the province of York, diocefes of Carlifle and Chefter, and is included in the Northern circuit.
It is 40 miles long from eaft to weft, 33 from north to foiith, and 140 in circumference ; containing 770 fquare miles, or 492,800
fquare acres; divided into 4 wards, though generally into two baronies, 32 pariflies, 220 villages, and 8 market towns, viz. Appleby,
which is the county town, fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Baron to the Southwell family ; Kendal which
gives the fame honour to the family of Herbert ; Lonfdale, which gives the title of Earl and Vifcount to the family of Lowther ;
Brough, which gives the title of Baron to the fame family ; Amblefide, Kirkby Steven, Burton, and Orton. The principal rivers are
the Eden, Kent, Lune, Tees, Bern, Lowther, Roatha, and Emont, The chief products are corn, wood, fheep, copper mines, va-
rious river fifli, particularly falmon, trout, char, &c. Its chief manufactures are woollens of various kinds, ftockings, hats, and fine
hams, and cotton in a gieat many branches. Here are many noble ftone-bridges, feveral catarafts, and fome chalibeat waters. There
are Thornthwate, Martendale, Melton, Mallerfiane, Milbume, Stanmore and Winfield Forefts; Ulles, Broad and Horns waters; and
that extenfive piece called Winander Meer, the largeft in England, being 10 miles long, 2 broad, with feveral iflands in it, and its
bottom one continued rock : Farleton-knot-hili, Winfield-hill, Murton, Dufton and Knocke Points; Roman and Rumary Fells ;
Lonfdale and Stanmore Vales. The air of the county is fweet and pleafant, as well as healthy ; but, in the mountainous parts, fiiarp
and piercing. It fends 4 members to parliament, 2 for the county, and 2 for Appleby, as above-mentioned ; pays one part only of the
land-tax, and fupplies 240 men to the national militia.
The principal Gentlemens’ Seats in this county are,
Appleby.
Brigfiur Park.
Capplethwaite, near Sudbury.
Clifton.
Hartley Caftle, near Kirkby Steven.
Ingmire Hall, near Sedborg.
Kidlington Park, near Sedborg.
Kirkby Steven.
1-even’s Park, near Milthorpe.
Lowthcr.
Milthorpe.
Pendragon Cafrle, rear Kirkby Steven.
Rvdal, near Amblefide.
Shap.
Syzergh Park, near Kendal.
Troutbeck Park, near Amblefide.
Warcop, near Brough.
Wharton Park, near Kirkby Steven.
The mojl txtvjxv e Views aye front
Rydale Hail and Head, N. of Amblefide.
The Falls of the Ken, five miles from Kendal.
The Road from Appleby to Penrith.
High Point of Land overlooking Winander Mecr.
The Road from Amblcfide to Kendal.
Foils of Water near Amblefide.
Greyridge Hill, between Brough and Kendal.
Grafmeer Water, N. of Amblefide.
Whltbarrow Seats, near Milthorpe.








WILTSHIRE
I » -I- = -.h fc ffl. of E.„ » tail, .f Po.lott, „d fa* . M
P “ ° ,he y° f “” “ ,h ‘ <=“—■* 1- .»• .f S.lita,, Ju fafafa,
~ creu.., I. . S 4 n.,„ tag, S 4 b.o.d, „ d 100 in cta „,
d,„* d .» .9y,. d ., 3 » 4 p.,,o,, d;vic .„ ge , at« u , 9S o villages, . wbfch ttdds
■" E ™ t E “ *° <h ’ C '“' ‘ *• Mavltadagh, wkleh fends . „.. b .„ „
.nd g ,„. ,h. „e n, Duke .« ,h. tall, of Speuee, , Devi.es, fend. . n.e.be„ ,o p.eli.n.en.. „. d . . „
ps'liamenl, Wd.on, ,h,eh give. she ,1.1. of B.ron ,o ,he Eg„»„ tail,, .nd fend. . n.. m be„ ,o , Chippe.b.., fend.
. member. ,o p.,; Cine, tad, tend, . member. perltaenr, „ d g ,„. the , id . 0 f „ , b , , tails' • Clek-
Me fends z members to parhament; Downton, alfo fends z members to parliament; Heytefburv, fends, z members to parliament.
° n ’ “ S *™ t 0 P arl,ament » Luggerfhall, fends z members to parliament; Weftbury, fends z members to parliament ;
V otton Ba et, fends z members to parhament j befides which there is Caftle Comb, Warminfter, Amefbury, Auburn, Bradford,
Highworth, Lav.ngton, Swindon, Trowbridge, and Mere : the villages of Old Sarum and Great Bedwin, though they enjoy neither
market nor fa.r, fend each z members to parliament; but Clarendon gives the title of Earl to the ViUiers family ; Charlton,' the title
of Baron to the Hovard family ; Lydiard Tregoze, the title of Baron to the family of St. John; and Wardour Caftle, the title of
Baron to the Arundel family. This county fends 34 members to parliament, pays but .3 parts of the land tax, and provides Soo men
to the national militia. Its chief rivers are the two Avons, the Kennet, Willey, Adder, Nadder, Duril, Were, Caine, Ms, Rev and-
VVellyborae. Wfttfture is generally divided into two parts, North and South. The moft remarkable part of South Wiltlhire is’that
extenfive plain called Salilbury Plain, on which vaft numbers of fheep are bred and depaftured, and on which, near Amefbury, Hand,
that noble and undent monument of antiquity called Stonehenge. This part of the county produces vaft quantities of corn, fupply-
mg not only its own confumption, but frequently Bath and Briftol, and the eaftern 'part of the county of Somerfet. The Northern
abounds With rich paftures, producing that moft excellent cheefe called North Wiltlhire, and frequently (in London) Glocefter
cheefe. The am is generally fharp on the Downs, but mild in the vales. Wiltlhire carries on very large manufactures of different
k.nds of woollen goods, &c. viz. Salilbury, flannels and fancy goods; Wilton, carpets, marbled cloths, &c. Devizes, fancy goods
and ferges; Bradford, Trowbridge, Melklham, Warminfter, Weftbury, and Heytclbury. fuperfine and coarfe broad cloths and
kerfeymeres,. and about Mere a very large trade is carried on in dowlas, ticking, and other coarfe linens. It has a great number of
Roman, Saxon, Britilh, and Daniflr encampments in different parts of the county ; and three of the Roman roads pafs through it. It
has feveral antiquities lemaining, and many Gentlemen’s feats; the moll remarkable are,
Amelbury Park, near Amefbury.
Aihcombe, near Shaftfbury.
Baynton, near Eddingtons
Bowood, near Caine.
Boyton, near Heytefburv,
Bradley Houfe, at Maiden Bradley,
Brimllade, near Marlborough.
Bromham, near Devizes.
Bardrop, near Swindon.
Chariton Park, near Marlborough.
Cheverell Park, near Eaft Lavington.
Chilton Lodge, near Chilton Foliat.
Chute Lodge, near Chute-
Clarendon Park, near Salifbury.
Cole Park, near Malmlburv.
J
Comberwell, near Bradford.
Compton Houfe, near Caine.
Compton Houfe, near Wilton.
Coriham Houfe, near Corlham.
Crow W ood, near Auburne.
Cutteridge Houfe, near North Bradley.
Dantzey Houfe, near Dantzev.
Draycot Houfe, near Chippenham.
Eaft well Houfe, near Devizes.
Fern, near Shaftfbury.
Foxley Houfe, near Malmfbury.
lonthill, near Hindon.
Grovcley Lodge, near Wilton.
Hartham, near Biddlefton.
Hcytcfbury Houfe, at Heytclbury.
Heywood Houfe, near Weftbury.
Imber, near Weft Lavington.
Ivy Houfe, near Chippenham.
Langford Houfe, near Downton.
Liddington Caftle, near Chifleldon.
Laycock Nunnery, near Corfharn.
Lydiard Tregoze, near Wotton Baffef.
Lydiard Millicent, near Purton.
Littlecot, near Chilton Foliat.
Longford Caftle, near Salilbury.
Longleat, near Warminfter.
Luckram, near Biddlefton.
LuHunger, near Downton.
Maddenton, near Shrewton.
Monkton Farley, near Bath.
New Houfe, near Downton.-
Oare, near Wotton.
Overton, near Swindon.
Park Houfe, near Amefbury,
Park Houfe, near Devizes.
Pinkey Houfe, near Eaft Shrenton.
Ramlbury Park, near Marlborough.
Rowd Aihton. near North Bradlev.
Ruihmorc Lodge, near Shaftfbury.
Rulley, near Auburne.
Salthorp, near Wotton Baftet.
Sandridge, near Melklham.
Seagrey, near Stanton St. Quintin.
Seend Green, near Seend.
Spy Park, near Broomhana.
Standlynch, near Downton.
Stanton St. Quintin.
Stour Head, near Merc.
Studley Hill, near Caine.
Swindon Houfe, at Swindon.
Tokenham Houfe, near Wotron Ballet.
Totenham Park, near Bedwin.
Wardour Cafrle, near Shaftfbury,
With am, near Caine.
Wyck, near Sapworth.
Welbury Houfe, near Amefburyl
Wilcot Houfe, near Wilcot.
Wilton Houfe, near Wilton.
Winterflow Houfe, near Salifbury.
W raxhall Houfe, near Monkton parity.
Wolf Hall, near Luggerfhall
Zeal s Houfe, near Merc.
The mojl exttnjive views art fi7r* t
Martinfall Hill, near Old Sarum.
Alfred’s Tower, at Stour Head.
Roundaway Hill, near Devizes.
Clay Hill, Weft of Warminfter.
Highworfh Hill.
Lufh Hill, near Hannington Wick.
Barry Hill, in Brandon Porcft.
Chidbury Hill Caftlc, near Lvggerfhali.








WORCESTERSHIRE
J ' , 3 ’ r ; r ng ; he n heptarchj '’ belonged t 0 ,he kin § dom of Mercia ;it is now in the province of
Canterbury, the d.oeefe of Worcefter, and in the Oxford circuit. It is 34 miles long. a 8 broad, and aao in cireLferencc ■
containing .58,400 fquare acres, or 660 fquare miles , divided into 5 hundreds and a limits, containing t;a parifiie* 5- vica
rages, 5 00 villages, one city Worcefter, the fee of a bifi.op, which fends a members to payment, and Jves the tide,*
Marquis, Ear! and \.(count to the family of Somerfet ; and n market-towns, vie. Kidderminfter, which gives the title of
" ° " wh.ch fends , members to pariiament; Droitwich, which fends a members alfo ; and
Bewdley, which fends one ; Dudley. Broomfgrove, Upton, Perfhore, Stourbridge, Shipton. and Tenbury. Amongft the village,,
Omberfley gives the title of Baron to the family of Sandy, ; and Bagiey, the fame dignity to the family of Conway.
principal rivers are the Severn. Avon, Teem, and Stour, but, enjoying the benefit of fome of the ia.e confined cLals, it
has, by the inland navigation, communication with the moil confiderable rivers in the kingdom, which navigation, including
!?! ’ T m f'’ * * 500 m!,es throUgh different counties - The moft remarkable places in the countv are, Malvern^
Aber.ey, Woodberg, Bredon, and dent Hilis , the Vale of Evefham, Malvern Chace, Feekingham and Half oi Wire Foreft !
feveral woods, and two med.cmal fprings on Malvern Hills. Its chief produrts are paftures, corn, cattle, flieep, wood’
C) er, perrj, coal, hops, very fine fait, river fifit, fruits, and common meadow faffron. The county is of a triangular form -
has a fweet and temperate air ; and foil fertile, interfperfed with hills that feed large flocks of fheep. The chief manufadurei
are carpettmg. china and earthen ware, woollens, fait, and ftockings. It fends 9 members to parliament, a for the county.
and 7as above-mentioned , pays 9 parts of the land-tax, and provides s 6o men to the national militia.
The mo ft confiderable Gentlemens’ Seats in this County are,
Bufhly Park, near Tewkefbury.
Cotheridge, near Worcefter.
Crome Park, near Perfhore,
Dudley Lodge, near Dudley,
Elmley Park, near Eveftiam.
Grafshampton, near Great Whitley,
Grafton.
Hidfor, near Droitwich.
Hagley Park, near Dudley.
Ham Caftle Park, near Clifton,
Htnbury Hall, near Droitwich,
Hewell Grange, near Bromfgrove.
Henlip, near Worcefter,
near Upton.
Holtcaftle, near Worcefter.
Madersficld, near Great Malvern.
Middlehill, near Broadway.
Nonhwich Park, near Cambden.
Omberfley Court, near Droitwich.
Overbury Park, near Tewkefbury,
Ribbesford, near Bewdlev.
Roufe Linch, near Droitwich,
Saddington, near Bewdley,
Stonford Park, near Tenbury.
Shipping, near Machorn.
Wayfley Green, near Bewdley.
Weftwood Park, near Droitwich,
Witley Park, near Worcefter.
'lbe rnofl Vuvjz ar.d Silujticv.z &n t
Bewdley on the Severn.
Perry Wood, near Worcefter.
The Road from Eveftiam to Worceffier.
Clint Hill, rear Haglcy,
Malvern Hills.
» Pvoad from Eewdley to Worcefter.
Bed Hill, by Ribbesford.
Pool’s Hole.
Hundred Houfe and WitJcy.
Crookbury Hill, two mile* from Worcefter,
Cleeve Prior, near Evdk**,








YORKSHIRE
Is a maritime county, which, during the Saxon heptarchy, was included in the kingdom of Northumberland • and at the
divifion of England, by Alfred, into counties it included thofe of Durham and Lancafhire, though now, without’ them it is
bigger than any two counties in the kingdom, and in extent exceeds either the Dukedoms of Wirtemburg Mecklenburg
Courland, Savoy, the Principality of Heffc Cal Tel, the Electorate of Mentz, the Dominion of Genoa, &c. and all the Seven
United Provinces of Holland conneded. It is in the diocefe of York, and province of the fame name, except Richmondfhire in
the North Riding, which belongs to the diocefe of Cbetter. It is 130 miles long, 90 broad, and 460 in circumference ; con-
taining 5490 fquare miles, or 3,313,600 fquare acres; in form nearly fquare ; divided into Three Ridings, of which we have
given diilina maps, viz. North, Eaft, and Weft Ridings, of which the laft-mentioned is both the larged" and richeft: belides
thefe, there is a fourth divifion called Richmondfhire ; as alfo Cleveland, formerly a Dukedom ; Holdernefs, which had the title
of Earl ; and Craven, formerly an Earldom, now a Barony in the family of the fame name. It is divided into 24 wapentakes
or hundreds, including 563 panthes, 242 vicarages, 2330-viUages, 38 market-towns, which are mentioned in their diftina
Ridings, and one city, \ ork, the fecond m rank : whofe cathedral is one of the fineft in Europe, whofe Archbifhop is Primate and
Metropolitan of England, and crowns the Queen to whom he is perpetual chaplain. The Mayor of York has the title of Lord
like that of London. Henry VII. gave the title of Duke of York to his fon; and ever fmee that time the title has been given
to the fecond fon of the Kings ot England. This city was in great eftimation in the time of the Romans ; and is memorable
for the death of two of the Emperors, Severus and Conftantius-Chlorus; as alfo for the nativity of Conftantine the Great.
It abounds with \enerable remains of religious ftruftures. The city of York has the dignity of being a county of itfelf; and
has a diftria that adjoins it called Anfty Liberty. There are more antiquities in this county than any part of England ; and it
abounds with Roman roads, camps, &c.; among which are the remains of a temple at Godmandham, near Market Weighton •
encampments at Caftle Hill, near Almondbury; near Huddersfield ; at Cockridge, near Otley ; at Merton, near Bernard’s
Caftle; at Alborough ; at Baint Brig, near Alkrig ; at Catterick, near Richmond; near Ripponden ; on Toot-hill between
ELnd and Wakefield; near Old Richmond; at Middleton, near Stokefley ; near Pickering; at Nutwith, near Tanfield • on
Black-hill, near Eramhope ; at Caltleford ; on Brough-hill, near Rotherham ; at W inco Baul, near Rotherham ; on Barnbv-
Moor ; Temple-brough, near Conilborough ; and a Roman Road from the Tees to the Swale river. The air and foil of this
county varies extremely, which is fhewn in the defeription of each Riding. The whole number of members of parliament is - 0
2 of which ate for the county, 2 for the city of York, and 2 for each of the following boroughs, viz. Aldborough, Borough-
bridge, Beverley, Hedon, Rippon’, Scarborough, Thirfk, Knarefborough, Kingfton-upon-Hull, Malton, Northallerton, Pontcfraft
and Richmond ; pays 24 parts of the land tax, and provides 2360 men to the national militia. The principal places on the coaft
aic Flamboiough Head and Light-houfe, Spurn-Head and Lighthoufe, Horlar and Scarborough Caftles; Whitby Harbour
Robin Hood’s and Burlington Bays. The moft remarkable places in the county are York Wolds ; Afgarth Force ; St. Robert's
Cct’.e; Ingleborough, Hutton, Morvill, W harnlide, Find, Pinnow, Cam, W 7 helpftone, Pcnaigent and Hamilton Hills*
Applegarth, Swaledale, Pickering, Bolland, New, Stainmore, Gantries, Lune, and Hardwick Foret!s ; Blackftone Edge, and New
Milftone Edge; Peter’s Poft, Hatfield Chace, King’s and Grange W r oods, Heath Moor; VVenfley, Baulder, Swale, Slide, Lune
and W harf Dales; Hambleton Down, Scarborough, Beverley, Harrowgate and Knarett>orough Spaws. Its rivers are the
Humber, Oufe, Youre, Wharfe, Swale, Tees, Nid, Calder, Aire, Hull, Don, Derwent, Rye, Walk, Ribble, Elk, Skelfer, Recall
Lune, Barnes, W r ent, Rother, Greta, Foulney, and Leven. It produces fine paftures, corn, cattle, deer, ftieep, goats, excellent
horles, river and fea fifti, game, fowls, copper, brafs, lead, iron, coal, wood, malt, oatmeal, liquorice, rape-feed, free-ftone
lime-ftone, jet, alum, black amber, marble, copperas, and kelp ; wdth the manufactures of woollens, alum, copperas fine
ale, pins, bone-lace, ftockings, cutlery wares, and ironwork, which employs at leaft 40,000 hands. It has an extenfive trade
from Kingfton-upon-Hull to Hamborough, and all parts of the Baltick, Germany, Holland, &c. &c.








NORTH-RIDING OF YORKSHIRE
Is one of the divifions of the mod extenfive county in-Great Britain, which, with the other two divifions, will be more fully
defcribed under its general name. On the Eaft it is bounded by the German Ocean ; on the North by Durham ; on the Weft
by Weftmoreland ; but on the South extends over both Haft and Weft Ridings, the two other divifions of the county of York.
This diftridt is divided into i 2 Wapentakes, comprehending that di drift formerly termed Richmondfhire. It is 85 miles long,
44 broad, and :8o miles in circumference; containing 2000 fquare miles, or 1,280,000 fquare acres; and contains 18 market-
towns viz, Richmond, which fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Duke to the family of Lenox ; Scarbo-
routrh ’ which alfo fends 2 members to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the family of Saunderfon ; Thirfk, Mahon, and
Northallerton, each of which towns fends 2 members to parliament ; befides thefe there are the following market-towns, viz.
Whitbv Bedal, Alkrig, Thorn, Eaftngwold, Gilhorough, Helmfley, Kirby Moorfide, Midlam, Malham, Pickering, Stokefley, T- hirfk,
and Yarm. On its coaft are Robin Hood’s Bay, Whitby Harbour, Huntcliff, and Scarborough Caftle. This Riding in general
exceeds the other two in the falubrity and coldnefs of the air: the worft parts breed lean cattle ; but on the fxdes of the hills, in
the vallies and plains, it produces good corn, and rich paftures for large cattle ; nor is it wanting in fubterraneous riches, as
marble, pit-coal, copperas, allura ; and between the cliffs of the rocks on the fea coaft is found the beft fort of jet. The Ealrern
part of this Riding is called Blackmoor, and confifts of a hilly, rocky, woody country ; and that part, teimed Richmondihiie,
confifts of one continued eminence or ridge of rocks and vaft mountains. The principal rivers in this RiUxng are the Lre,.
Warf, Swale, Teeie, Don, Lune, Rye, Wyflc, Eden, Elk, Codleach, Leven, and Rccal, with the North Bank of the Derwent.
The principal Gentlemens’ Seats are,
Acklam, near Stockton.
Barningham Park, near Stockton,
Bolton Hall, near Middelham.
Caftle Howard, near New Malton*
Clift', at Confcliff.
Cowling, near Bedal,
Danby, near Middleham.
Buncombe Park, at Helmfley,
Foal Park, near Middleham.
Forcctt Hall, near Richmond,
Gilhng, near Helmfley*
Hornby Caftle, near Richmond.
Kirkkaton Park, near Gtlborougb.
Mulgrave Caftle and Hall, .near Whitby.
Newby Park, near Malham.
Newbrough Park, near Eafmgwold.
Nefs, near Kirby Moorfrde.
Norton Conyers, near Rippon.
P.avenfwonh Caltk, near Richmond.
Sedbury, near Richmond.
Snape Park, near Malham.
Stanwick. near Richmond.
Tanfield Hall, near Malham.
Thirkleby, near Thrrfk.
Thornton Vv r atlas, near Mafliau.
Thcrp, near Beda’.
¥b< waft remarkable Jhuatlcr.i and estenjivt Vinss are,
Afgarth Force, E. of Afkrig,. on the Ure, near
Swinwate.
Cam Fell, W. of Afkrig, from its fummtt.
Cotter Hill, on the Borders of Weftmoreland, ana
Its higheft part called Shunner Fell, at the Head
of the Swakdale, where rile the rivers Eden,
Swale, and Ure.
Hardraw Force, W, N. W. of A/krlg, with Whit*-
held Gill and Mill C ill Forces, near Aik rig.
Harknefs Vale, 3 miles N. W. of Scarborough.
Hell Gill, near the Head of the Eden, N. W. cC
Aficrig, on Cotter Hill.
Rofcberry Topping, near Gitborougk.
Rowclift on the Coaft, N. E. of G.thorough.
Sc art nick, W. of Richmond, near the Afkrig Road.
"Wenfledale, on the Ure W. cl Altcrig,
Whiffoa Cliff, on Black Hamhlston, near Thlrflu








EAST RIDING OF YORKSHIRE
X)OaDERS on the German or Brltifh Ocean, being one of the diviftons of the very extenftve county of York, which will be
fully deferibed under its general name. It is feparated by the Oufe from the Weft Riding, and is the fmalleft of the three
Ridings which the county is divided into ; and is feparated from the TCorth Riding by the river Derwent, It is 33 miles Ion 5
from noi .h /.eft to fouth eaft, and 33 from north to fouth, and 173 in circumference ; containing 1040 fquare miles, or 663,6-0
fquare acres. In this divifion aie 12 viz, Kingfton upon Hull, Beverley, and Hedon, fending each 2 members to
parliament; Bridlington, or Burlington ; Hunnanby ; Frodingham ; Hornfey; Howden ; Kilham ; Patrington ; Pocklington ;
and VVighton. On the coaft are the Spurn-head and Flamborough-head ; with Filey Bay, Bridlington Bay, and Kingfton upon
Hull Harbour. The moft confiderable rivers in this divifxon are The Humber, Hull, Oufe, Derwent, and Foulnefs. It has the
Meer of Hornfey; together with York Wolds; and in the Humber is Sunk Ifland, with feveral Sands. The air of this
Riding, on account of its neighbourhood to the German Ocean and the great eftuary of the Humber, is lefs pure and healthy
than that of the other two ; yet on the hilly parts towards the north weft, in the large tract called The Wolds, the air is lefs
aSc-iec tne waters, Ine foil, however, is in general dry, Tandy, and barren ; but the fea-coaft and vallies are fruitful,
lac V. o.d produces corn, and feeds great numbers of blacK. cattle, horfes, and flieep, whole wool is reckoned equal to any in
England. Phis diviiion yields plenty of wood, pit-coal, turf, jet, and alum ftone ; with great plenty of all kinds of fea and
river filh. Its principal manufacture is woollen cloth.
The following are the moft confiderable Seats,
Burton upon Kingdom
Ereringham, near Market Weighton.
Loncrfbroogh, near Market '.Vcighton.
Moorby. near Cawood.
4 f
Kun Appleton.
Kilby, near Beverley.
Rife, near Hornfey.
Scampfton, near New Mahon.
South Dalron,
Waffand, near Hornfev,
Wighill Park, near Tadcafier.
Wincftead Hall, near Patrington,
Tit mof: rem irkable ar.d txttnjxvc J'ii'tvs art,
Flimborcugh-head and its cavern.
Spurn-head,








WEST-RIDING OF YORKSHIRE.
fr
1 HIS vis the moft inland divifion of this extenfve county, and by far the largeft and richeit. It is divided from the Eaf.
Riding by the river Oufe, and is bounded on the North by the North-Riding. It is 95 miles long, 48 miles broad, and 320 in
circumference ; containing 1,568,c00 fquare acres, or 2450 fquare miles ; divided into lowapentakes or hundreds ; containing 29
market-towns, viz. Leeds, which gives the title of Duke to the family of Ofborne ; Wakefield, the titles of Earl and Baron to
the family of Kerr , Skipton, the title of Lord of the Honour or Skipton to the Tufton family; Doncafler, the title of Earl
to the family of Scott ; Pontefract, or Pomtret, the title of Earl to the Fermor family; with Rippon, Boroughbridge, Aldbo-
jongh, and Knarefborough, which fends 2 members each to parliament; Halifax, Sheffield, Baulry, Sher-
borne, Bradforth, Cawood, Gifborne, Hutherfield, Ottley, Ripley, Rotherham, Selby, Settle, Snaith, Tadcaller, Tickhill,
Wetherby, and Ferrybridge. Araonglt the numerous villages the following give titles, viz. Strafford, that of Earl to the family
of Wentworth ; Stainfborough, that of Baron, and Wentworth, .that of Vifcount to the fame family ; Wentworth gives the titles
of Vifcount and Baron to the Noel family ; Kiveton, the title of Baron to the Ofborne family ; Rawdon, the title of Baron to
the family of the fame name ; Towton, the fame Honour to the York family ; Wortley, the like Honour to the Stuart family;
Markenfield, the dignity of Baron to the family of Norton ; the Tra£l called the Craven, gives the honour of Baron to a family
of that name. The chief rivers are the Ure, Don or Dune, Went, Calder, Aire, Kibble, Wharfe, Dearn, Nidd, and Hodder ;
with a variety of fmaller ftreams. The mod conflderable hills are the Ingleborough, Pendle, Pennigent, Whelptow, Cam, and
\\harnflde. Here aie mines of pit-coal, lime-iconc, alium, See. The air is fharper and healthier than either of the other two
•divifions of the county ; the foil on the weflern fide is hilly and flony ; but the vallies afford good pafture and meadow ground.
It is famous for fine horfes, &c. It abounds with parks and ehaces ; and its chief manufactures are cloth and iron wares, which
by means of the canals that this divifion of the county has lately been enriched with, it has communication with the inland
parts of the kingdom, and has confiderably enlarged its trade,
■4
The moff conflderable Gentlemens’ Seats in this Divifion are,
Ackworth, near Pontefraft.
Allerton Manliverer, near Knareftorough,
Artbington Nunnery, near Harewood.
Afton,
Bramham Park, near Tadcafter,
Bretton Park, near Barnfley.
Broughton, near Skipton,
Byrom, near Pontefrafb.
Cowick, near Snalth.
Cufworth, at Doncafter.
Bunholme Park, near Keighley.
Bunion Hall, near Otley,
Beg Park, near Otley.
Fixby Hall, near Huddersfield,
Cargrave.
Gifburn Park, near Gilburn.
Goldfbrough, near Knarefborough.
Grange Park, near Huddersfield.
Grantley Hall, near Rippon.
Greave Hall, near Pontefradb.
Gunthwaite Hall, near Penefton,
Harewood Houfe, at Harewood.
Heatey, near Sheffield,
Helaby Hall, near Rolheram,
Holling Hall, near Rippon.
Holme, near Rotherham.
Houfley Hall, at Chapehown.
Howley Hall, near Wakefield.
Keveton Park, at South Afion.
Kirklees Hall, near Huddersfield.
Klppax, near PontefrafV.
Kirkthorpe, near Wakefield.
Ledftone Lodre, near Pontefraft.
Melton on the Hill, near Doncafter.
Methley Park, near Wakefield.
Newiand Hall, near Wakefield.
Park Hill, near Tickhill.
Parlington, near Abberford.
Plumpton Hall, near Knarefborough.
Ravenfield, near Rotherham.
Ripley Park, at Ripley.
Rudding Hall, near Harewood.
Sandbeck Park, near Tickhill.
Saxton, near Abberford.
Skelbrook, near Pontefraft.
Stapleton Park, near Pontefra<fl.
Studley Royal.
Tankerfley Park, near Chapehown.
Temple Ncwfham, near Leeds,
Thornviil, near Wetherby.
Thriburg, near Rotherham.
Walding Wells, near Tirbeck.
Weatworth Park, near Rotherham,
Wentworth Caftle, near Barnfley,
Woolley Park, near Eamftey.
principal Scenes^Situations} or txtenji'je Vtcvosy art a* f
Skipton in Craven, N. W. of Otley.
The \ ale about Aberforth N. of Pontefra&.
Kiln fey Crag on the Wharfe N. W.of Burnfall.
Gordale, 6 miles S. E. of Seule, at Maiham.
Michael Haw Hill and Laver Banks to Hackfall
W, of Rippon.
Laughton, near Sheffield.,
Blackftone Edge, near Halifax.
Otley Chaven S. of Otley.
The Pyramid at Wentworth Houfe.
P'rom a Ridge of Rocks, near Leyburn and Middle-
ham.
Apperley Bridge N. W. of Leeds.
Stetin Bank S. of Skipton,
Vale of Calder.
Eland Edge, near Halifax,
Harwood Caftle N. of Leeds on the Wharfe.
Chaverler Hill, near Leeds.
Brimhatn Crags, N. W. of Ripley, near Pauley
Bridge Road to Rippon.
Pendlc Hill, and Pennigcnr, near Wakefield
From Ingleton to Settle Turnpike,
From Skipton to Otley.
j'rom a Field, near Rotherham.








NORTH WALES
CONTAINS
ANGLESEY, CARNARVON, DENBIGH, FLINT, MERIONETH, and
MONTGOMERY SHIRES.
Anglesey is an idand at the north weft part of this divifion, that was fubdued and brought under the fubjeaion of
England by Edward I. It is in the province of Canterbury and diocefe of Bangor; is 28 miles long, 13 broad, and about So in
circumference; containing ISO fquare miles, or 1135200 acres ; divided into 6 hundreds, and contains 74 pari/hes, with 2
market-towns, viz. Beaumaris, which fends one member to parliament, and is the principal town in the ifland ; and Newburgh -
but the village of Holyhead is the place from whence the Irifli packets ufually embark. North of Anglefey is the ifland of
•Skerries, whereon is a light-houfe. The principal rivers are the Menai and Keveny ; on the coafl Aberfraw Bay, Gregory Point,
Weak Ifland, North Stack, Holyhead Ifland, Carnan Point, Kemlyn Harbour, Hilary Point, Dulas Bay, and Red Wharf Bay
and Harbour, \>ith Pjieft Holme Ifland, and the Straits of .Menai, It produces copper, mill and grind flones, red, yellow, and
blue ocher ; flue paflures, with plenty of corn and cattle. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one as
before-mentioned; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides 120 men to-the national militia,
CARNARVONSHIRE is a maritime county, divided from Anglefey by the Straits of Menai, It lies in the province of Car>
terbury and the diocefe of Bangor; is 48 miles long, 23 broad, and 150 in circumference; containing 430 fquare miles, or
275,200 acres; divided into 7 hundreds, has 6S parilhes, one city, Bangor, the diocefe of a bifliop ; and 5 market-towns, viz,
Carnarvon, which gives the title of Marquis and Earl to the family of Brydges, and fends one member to parliament; Aber-
conway, Krekith, Pulhely, and Nevin, The principal rivers are the Conway, and the Seint ; it has alfo feveral Lakes. Tire
principal curiofities in this county are the numerous mountains, rocks, See. the tops of which are 8 or 9 months in the year
covered with fnow. On the coafls are Traweth Mawr, Pulhely Bay, St. Tudwell’s Chapel and Morcrofs Ifle, Ynys Gwilin,
Bardley or Bully Ifle and Sound, Porthdinlleyn Head, Llanhaiurn Road, Carnarvon Bay, and Great Orme’s Head. It has
£ waterfall near Snowdon Peak, and Gaunhant 3 miles from Fenmaen Mawr. Its products are timber, goats, fifb, Sec. It fends
2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one as before mentioned; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides So
men to the national militia,
DENBIGHSHIRE is a maritime county, in the province of Canterbury, and the diocefes of St. Afaph and Bangor; being 30
miles long, 20 broad, and 170 in circumference ; containing 670 fquare miles, or 428,800 acres ; divided into 12 hundreds, hav-
ing 37 parifhes, and 4 market-towns, viz. Denbigh, the county town, which fends one member to parliament, and gives the title
of Earl to the Fielding family ; Ruthin, which gives the title of Baron to the family of Yelverton ; Wrexham and Llanroft. Its
principal rivers are theCluyd, Dee,Conway, Allen, Keriog, Kelyn, and Elwy. Its manufactures arc thofe of gloves and flannels;
and its products corn, hojned cattle, and lead. The Vale of Cluyd is remarkably fertile and pleafant. This county is very
mountainous, and abounds with Druidical monuments and Bj itifli antiquities. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the
county, and one as already mentioned ; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides 280 men to the national militia.
FLINTSHIRE


FLINTSHIRE is alfo a maritime county, which gives the title of Earl to the Prince of Wales; is m the provmce of Canter,
bury, and diocefes of St. Afaph and Chefler; it is 33 miles long, t. broad, and too miles in circumference s contam.ng 250 fquare
miles, or :60,0c0 acres, divided into 5 hundreds, and has 28 parifltes, with one city, St. Afaph, whtch ,s the fee of a bdhop,
:nd gives the title of Vifcount to the Afhburnham family ; and has 1 market-towns, viz. Holywell, and Caere is. Flint, the
county town, though it has no market, fends one member to parliament. The principal rivers are the Dee, Clnyd Elwy, and
Allen': the moll remarkable places are the Dee’s Mouth, the Cluyd’s Mouth, and St. Winifred s Well. It produces cattle,
butter, honey, coal, and lead. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one as above Ihewn ; pats hall ot one
part of the land-tax, and provides 120 men to the national militia,
«
• %
MERIONETHSHIRE is another maritime county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of Bangor ; it is 40 miles long,
56 broad, and 160 in circumference j containing 790 fquare miles, or 505,600 acres; divided into 6 hundreds, and has 37 pa-
fillies, with 4 market-towns, viz. Harieigh, Dolgele, Dinafmouthy, and Bala. Its principal rivers are the Dee, Douay, Avon,
and Defunny. The moll noted places on the coaft areTraeth Bychan, Barmouth Bay, Sarnabuch Point, and North Bar; and in-
land are Dolgele Vale, Pemble Meer, and fome very high mountains. It abounds with cattle, Iheep, filh, and game ; and its
chief manufadlure is Wellh Cottons. The foil of this county is rocky ; has many Bntilli or Roman antiquities; fends one
member only to parliament,, and that for the county ; pays half of one part of the land-tax, and fupplies So men to the national
militia*-
MONTGOMERYSHIRE is an inland county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefes of St. Afaph, Bangor, and Here-
ford. It is 40 miles long, 37 broad, and 170 in circumference ; containing 860 fquare miles, or 550,400 acres; divided into 6
hundreds, and 47 parifhes, with 6 market-towns, viz. Montgomery, the county town, which gives the title of Earl to the family
of Herbert, and fends one member to parliament; Llanvilling, Welchpool, Newtown, Machynleth, and Llanydlos. The prim
cipal rivers are the Severn, Rayder, Turgh, and Tanat, Verniew, and fome fmaller ftreams. it has numerous hills and moun-
tains, which abound with antio.uities of the Britons and Druids; plenty of filh and fowl; with a breed of large black cattle and'
horfes j and lead. Its principal manufaflure is flannel. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one at,
before-mentioned ; pays, one part of the land-tax, and fupplies 240 men to the national militia.






SOUTH WALES
CONTAINS
BRECKNOCK, CARDIGAN, CARMARTHEN, GLAMORGAN,,
PEMBROKE, and RADNOR SHIRES.
Brecknockshire is an inland county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of St. David’s; 33 miles long, 32
broad, and 120 miles in circumference; containing 590 fquare miles, or 377,600 acres, divided into 6 hundreds, having 61
pariflies, and four market-towns, viz. Brecknock, the county town, which fends one member to parliament; Builth, Hay, and-
Grickhowel. Its principal rivers are the Hodney, Wye, Ufk, and the Yrvon ; its manufactures are woollen huffs and ftockings ;
and its product, corn, paftures, cattle, otters, and river fifh, with an abundance of fowl. It is very pleafant, but mountainous,,
and in the vallies fertile. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one as above-mentioned ; it pays one
part of the land-tax, and provides 160 men to the national militia.
CARDIGANSHIRE is a maritime county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of St. David’s; 47 miles long, 20
broad, and 130,111 circumference; containing 590 fquare miles, or 377,600 acres, divided into 5 hundreds, 64 pariflies, and 6 ’
market-towns, viz. Cardigan, the county town, which fends one member to parliament, and gives the title of Earl to the
Brudenell family; Aberifhvith, Tregaron, and Lanpiter or Llanbeder, Lanbadernvawr, and Llannarth. Its principal rivers are
the Tavy, Rhidal,. and Iflwith. On its coaft are Cardigan Ifland, Mount Head, and Cardigan Bay ; it has feveral lakes, and
Refcob foreh. It produces corn, plenty of cattle, game, with fea and river fifh; has mines of lead, copper, and filver ore ; and
cnioys a milder air than any other county in Wales. It fends 2 members to parliament, one for the county, and one as above*
mentioned ; pays one part of the land-tax, and fupplies 120 men to the national militia,
CARMARTHENSHIRE is a maritime county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of St. David’s; 48 miles long,.
it broad, and 150 in circumference ; containing 800 fquare miles, or 512,000 acres, divided into 6 hundreds, and 87 pariflies,
with 8 market-towns, viz. Carmarthen, the county town, which fends one member to parliament, and gives the title of
Marquis to the family of Ofborne ; Kidwelly, Llandilovawr, Llanimdovery, Llangadoc, Llangharn, Newcaflle, and Llanelly.
The village of Brewfe gives the title of Baron to the families of Howard and Bulkeley ; and that of Dinever the like honour
to that of Cardcnnel late Talbot. Its principal rivers are the Tavy, Cathy, Towy, Brane, and Gwilly. This county is well
cloathed with wood, and feeds vafl numbers of cattle, it abounds with fowl, fifh, and game; it has coal and lead mines ; and
on the coafl is Machunis Ifk, Kidwelly Point, Lianftephen Point, Langharn Point, and Carmarthen Bay. It fends 2 members to
parliament, one for the county, and one as above-mentioned; pays one part of the land-tax, and fupplies 200 men to the-
national militia,
GLAMORGANSHIRE is a maritime county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefes of Landaff and St. David’s ; is ;o
miles long, 24 broad, and 145 in circumference; containing 660 fquare miles, or 422,400 acres, divided info 10 hundreds, having
118 faiilhes, one city, Lamlaff, which is the fee of a bilhop, and 8 market-towns, viz. CardiSe, which fends one member to
parliament, and gives the title of Baron to the families of Stewart and Herbert; Swanfea, Caerfilly, Penrice, Neath, Bridgend, •
Llantriffent, and Cowbridge. The village of Henfol gives the title of-Baron to the family of Talbot Chetwyn. Its principal
rivers are the Taff, Rhvmny, Ogmore, Avon, Cledaugh, and Tavy; it produces pallures, corn, pit-coal and culm-; and lead ore. ■
It is moimtan.CK.s and cold'in the north, but mild and fertile in the fouth. There are feveral ancient monuments in this county,
imputed


imputed to the Romans and Britons; and on the coaft are Scilly Ifle, Barr)' Ifle, and Scarcer Ifle ; with Eieaßiea Point, Xith
Point, The Mumbles Point, Swanfea Bay, Cafwell Bay, Penarth Point, Oxwich Point, Port Inon Point, Wormfhead, and Whit-
ford Point. Alio a warm fpring, called Tave Well, and Swanfea mineral fpring. It fends 2 members to parliament, one of
which is for the county, and one as before-mentioned; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides 360 men to the national
militia.
PEMBROKESHIRE is a maritime county, the fouth wed extremity of Wales, and in a great part furrounded by the Irifh fea ;
tis in the province of Canterbury, and diocefe of St. David’s ; being 35 miles long, 29 broad, and 140 in circumference ; con-
taining 340 fquare miles, or 345,600 acres, divided into 7 hundreds, and 145 parifhes, having one city, St. David’s, the fee of a
-bifliop, and 8 market-towns, viz. Pembroke, the county town, which fends one member to parliament, and gives the title of Earl
to the family of Herbert; Haverford Weft, which gives the title of Baron to the family of De la Poer, and fends one member
to parliament; Tenby, Fifligard, Kilgarren, Newport, Narbath, and Wifton. Its rivers are the Clethy, the Dongledye, and the
Tavy, with feveral lelfer dreams; it produces corn, fheep, and cattle, fowls and fifli, with coal mines and marl. On the coad
are Tenby Point, St. Margaret’s and Calely Ides, Stackpolc Head, Broad Haven, St. Gowen’s Point, Pofheflon Meer, Pulflater
.Bay, Head of Man, Frefhwater Bay, Sheppy Ifle, Milford Haven, St. Ann’s Point, Merlas Bay; Skokum, Gatholm, and Skomar
Ides ; the Mewftone and Yarland Stone ; Stock Rock, Durfton Haven, Dinas Manu, Bifhop’s Store, Bifhop and Clerks Rocks,
Ramfey Ille, Whitefand Bay, St. David’s Head, Aberithy Bay, Abercadle, Penbnghto Head, Strumble Head, Fifgard Bay, New-
port Bay, Aberkibor Haven, and Pen Kemys Point. The air of the county is healthy, the foil fertile, and the coad abounds
with wild fowl of various kinds feldom feen in other parts of Britain. It fends 3 members to parliament, one for the county,
and two as above-mentioned; pays one part of the land-tax, and fupplies 160 men to the national militia.
f
RADNORSHIRE is an inland county, in the province of Canterbury, and diocefes of Hereford and St. David’s ; is 30 miles
long, 25 broad, and 100 in circumference ; containing 390 fquare miles, or 249,600 acres, divided into 6 hundreds, and 52
parifhes, including 4 market-towns, viz. Radnor, or New Randor, the county town, which gives the title of Earl to the family
of Stanley, and fends one member to parliament; Prefteign, Knighton, and Riadergowey. Its principal rivers are the Wye,
Lug, Terne, Arrow, Somergill, Tame, and feveral fmall ftreams ; and its product is cattle, fheep, horfes, and cheele ; and its
only manufacture malt. On the Wye is a remarkable waterfall called Rhajadr-gwy. It fends 2 members to parliament, viz.
-one for the county, and one as above fhewn ; pays one part of the land-tax, and provides 120 men to the national militia. It
has an excellent mineral water at the village of Llandrindod,


DIRECTIONS
FOR
THE JUNCTION OF THE ROADS
OF
ENGLAND AND WALES
THROUGH ALL THE COUNTIES.
ROUTE r.
From LONDON to the LAND’s END
in Cornwall.
Set toe A[ap of Towns , c, puffed through.
Middlcfex . . . Kcnfington
Brentford
Hounflow
Staines
Surry .... Egham
Bagfhot
Hampfhire . . . Blackwater
Murrel Green
Baftngftoke
Whitchurch
Andover
Wilt* .... Lapcombe’s Corner
Salifbury
Vemditch Chace
Dorfet .... Woodyates Inn
Blandford
Piddleton
Dorchefter
Winterborn Abbas
Bridport
Chidiock
Charmouth
Devonfture . . . Axminfter
Honiton
Exeter
Chudleigh
Afhburton
Brent
Ivybridgc
Plymton Earl
Plymouth
ComwaU . . . Saltafh
Lifkard
Loftwithiel
St. Blazey
Sc. Auftle
Grampond
Truro
Penryn
Falmouth
Helfton
Marazioa or Market Jew
Penzance
Land’s End
ROUTE 2.
LONDON to TRURO through Launceston.
See the Map of Towns, &c. pajfed through.
Hampfhire ... Baftngftoke, as in Route 1.
Popham Lane
Stock bridge
Wiltfhire . . . Lapcombe’s Corner
Salifbury
Tippet
Dorfetfhirc . . , Shaftefbury
Somerfetfhire . . Milborn Port
Dorfetfhirc . . . Sherborne
Somerfetfhire . . Yeovil
Crewkerne
Chard
Devonfhire . , . Honiton
Exeter
Cheriton Bifhop’s Crofs
South Zeal
Oakham pton
Bridiftow
Lifton
Dorfet . » , . Launceftoa
Bodmin
St. Michael
Truro
ROUTE 3.
LONDON to WINCHESTER, POOL, and
WEYMOUTH.
S urr 7 Bagfhot, as in Route 1.
Hampfhire . . . Firmley Bridge
Surry ..... Famham
Hampfhire . . . Alton
Alresford
Wincheftcr
Rumfey
Ringwood
Palmer’s Ford
Dorfet .... Pool
Lytchet Mi after
Wareham
Mclcomb Regis
Weymouth
ROUTE 4.
LONDON to SOUTHAMPTON.
See the Map of Towns, sS fc. pajfed through.
Hampfhire . Winchefter, as in Route 3.
Otterbomc
South Stoneham
Southampton
ROUTE 5.
LONDON to GOSPORT.
Hampfhire . • . Alton, as in Route 3.
Weft Meon
Wickham
Fareham
Gofport
ROUTE 6.
LONDON to PORTSMOUTH.
Hampfhire . . . Alton, as in Route 3.
Tifted
Peters field
Horndean
Po rtf down
Portfraouth
ROUTE 7.
LONDON to WELLS, BRIDGEWATER,
and MINEHEAD.
Hampfhire . . . Andover, as in Route 1.
Wevhill
*
Quarley
Wiltshire ... Amcfbury
Shrewtoa
Heytdbury
Warminfter
Somcrfctlhirc . . Fromc
Whatley
Shcpton Maikt
Wells
Glaftonbury
Bridgewater
Netherftowcy
Watch et
Minchead
A ROUTE


ROUTE 8.
LONDON to EXETER by TAUNTON,
continued to DARTMOUTH.
See the Map of Towns, &c. paffed through, !
Wiltfhire . . . Salifbury, as in Route 2.
Wilton
Chilmark
Hindon
Stourhead
Somerfetftiirc . . Caftle Cary
Somerton
Langport
T aunton
Wellington
Devon fhirc . . . Redball
Collumptcn
Bradninch
Exeter
Newton Bufhel
Dartmouth
ROUTE 9.
LONDON to BARNSTAPLE and
ILFRACOMB.
Somerfetihire . . Wellington, as in Route 8.
Devonfhire . . . Stampford Peverell
Tiverton
South Moulton
Barnftaple
llfracomb
route 10.
LONDON to STRATTON.
Devonfhire . . - Exeter, as in Route I.
Crediton
Hatherly
Holdfworthy
Cornwall . . . Stratton
ROUTE ii*
LONDON to PORTSMOUTH, through
Guildford.
Surry .... Wandlworth
Kingfton
Efher
Guildford
Godalraing
Devil’s Punch Bowl
Hampfhirc • • • Liphook
Petersfield
Homdean
Portfmouth
ROUTE 12.
LONDON to CHICHESTER, through
Guildford.
Surry .... Godaiming, as in Route 11
* Haflemere
Suffex .... Suffex Bells
Midhurft
Chichefter
ROUTE 13.
LONDON to ARUNDEL, through
Dorking.
See the Map of Towns, &c. Raffed through,
Surry .... Clapham
Upper Tooting
Tooting
- Morden
Leatherhead
Mickleham
Dorking
Ockley
Suffex .... Slingford
Billinghurft
Pulborough
Arundel
ROUTE 14-
LONDON to NEW SHOREHAM and
BRIGHTHELMSTONE.
Surry .... Darkmg, as in Route 13.
Capel
Suffex .... Wamham
Horfham
Weft Grinfted
Steyning
Bramber
Shoreham
Brighthelmftone
ROUTE 15.
LONDON to BRIGHTHELMSTONE,
through Dorking.
Suffex .... Horfham, as in Route 14.
Hendfield
Poinings
Brighthelmftone
ROUTE 16.
LONDON to BRIGHTHELMSTONE,
through Rye gate.
Surry . . ..» Clapham
Tooting
Mitcham
Sutton
Ryegate
Povy Crofs
Suffex .... Crawley
Cuckfield
Clayton
Brighthelmftone
ROUTE 17.
LONDON to BRIGHTHELMSTONE,
through Croydon and Lindfield.
Surry .... Streatham
Croydon
Goaftone Green
Felbridge
Suffex .... Lindfield
Ditchling
Brighthelmftone
ROUTE xS.
LONDON to LEWES and BRIGHT-
HELMSTONE.
See the Map of Towns, &c. Raffed through,
Surry .... Felbridge, as in Route 17.
Suffex .... Eaft Grinftead
Sheffield Bridge
Lewes
palmer
Brighthelmftone
ROUTE 19.
LONDON to LEWES, through Sevenoaxs.
Surry .... New Crofs
Kent Lewifham
Bromley
Sevenoaks
Tunbridge
Tunbridge Wells
Suffex . . - •- Crowborow Beacon
Uckfield
Lewes
ROUTE 20.
LONDON to EAST BOURNE.
Kent .... Tunbridge Wells, as in
Route 19.
Suffex .... Frant
Mayfield
Haillham
Willingdon
Eaft Bourne
ROUTE 21.
LONDON to HASTINGS.
Kent .... Tunbridge, as in Route 19.
Lamberhurft
Suffex .... Hurft Green
Battel
Haftings
ROUTE 22.
LONDON to DOVER.
Surry .... New Crofs
Kent .... Dartford
Northfleet
Rochefter
Feveriham
Canterbury
Dover
ROUTE 23.
LONDON to MARGATE.
Kent .... Canterbury, as in Route zx.
Sturry
Sarr
Acol
Margate
ROUTE


ROUTE 24.
LONDON to HYTHE and FOLKSTONE.
See the Map of Towns, &c. pajfed through.
Surry .... New Crofs
Kent .... Eltham
Farningham
Wroth am
Maidftone
Burfted
Harriotfhara
Afhford
Hythe
Folkitone
ROUTE 25.
LONDON to NEW ROMNEY.
.... Tunbridge, as in Route 19.
Brenchley
Goudhurft
Cranbrook
T enterden
Appledore
New Romney
ROUTE 26.
LONDON to BATH, BRISTOL, and
MILFORD HAVEN.
Middlefex . • • Hounflow, as in Route 1.
Longford
Bucks . . . : Colnbrook
Slough
Maidenhead Bridge
Berks .... Maidenhead
Reading
Newbury
Hungerford
Wiltfhire . . . Foxficld
Marlborough
Fifield
Beckhampton Houfe
Caine
Chippenham
Box
Somerfetfhirc . . Bathford
Batheafton
Bath
Keynfham
Briftol
Henbury
Glocefterfhire . . Red wick Green
New Paftage
Monmouthfhire. . • St. Pire
Caerwent
Newport
St. Mellons
Rumney Bridge
Glamorganfhire . . Rumpncy Bridge
Cardiff
Cowbridgc -
Neath
Swanfea
Pontarddullais
Ste the Map of Towns, &c. pajfed through .
CaermarthenJhire . Llanethy
Kidiwelly
Caermarthen
Pembrokefhire . . Elanguido
Haverfordweft
Milford Haven
ROUTE 27.
LONDON to BATH, through Devizes.
Wiltfhire . . - Beckhampton Houfe, as in
Route 26.
Shepherd’s Shore
Devizes
Seend
Milkfham
Somerfetfhlre . . Bathford
Bath.
ROUTE 28.
LONDON to WELLS, thro’ Marlborough.
Wiltfhire . . . Beckhampton Houfe, as in
Route 26.
Devizes
Seend
T rowbridge
Somerfetfhirc . - Rode
Frome
Shepton Mallet
Wells
ROUTE 29.
LONDON to GLOCESTER and ST. DAVID s.
Beiks .... Maidenhead, as in Route 26.
Oxfordfhire , . Henley
Nettlebed
Turnes Court
Berkfhire . . Wallingford
Wantage
Faringdon
Glocefterfhire . . Lechlade
Fair ford
Cirenccfter
Birlip
Glocefter
Bulley
Michael Dean
Coleford
Monmouthfhire . . Monmouth
Rockficld
Lanvaply
Abergavenny
Brecknockfhire . . Crickhowcl
Brecon
T recaftlc
Caermarthcnfhire . Llanymdovry
Rue Rhadnor
Caermarthen
Whitland
Pembrokcfhire . . Haverfordweft
St. David’s
ROUTE 3©.
LONDON to BRISTOL, thro’ Abtxgdoj?.
See the Map oj Towns, &c. pajfed through.
Oxfordfhire . . Hunter comb End, as in
Route 29.
Benfington
Dorchefter
Burcot
Clifton
Berkfhirc . . . Abingdon
Fi field
Faringdon
Wiltfhire . . • Highworth
Purton
Malmfbury
Luckington
Glocefterfhire . . Afton Turville
Briftol
ROUTE 31.
LONDON to GLOCESTER, HEREFORD,
NEW RADNOR, and CARDIGAN,
through Oxford.
Ox ford (hire . • Huntercomb End, as in
Route 29.
Benfington
Dorchefter
Oxford
Berkfhire . . - Botley
Oxfordfhirs . . Enfham
Whitney
Burford
Glocefterihire . . Little Barrington
Northleach
Frogmill
Little Whitcomb
Glocefter
Bulley
Herefordfhire . • Riford
Weftcn
Rofs
Peterftow
Llandinaba
Hereford
Weobley
Kyneton
The Whetfton
Brecknockfhire . • Builth
Tavern y Pryd
Caermarthcnfhire . Ludlovach
Llanymdovry
Cardiganfhire . • Llanbeder
Rheed Owen
Newcaftle
Cardigan
ROUTE 3 2 *
LONDON to OXFORD, WORCESTER,
and ABERISTWITH.
M iddkfex . • • Bay Tv ate r
Adlon
Uxbridge
Beaconsheld
Buck-


See the Map of Towns, &c. faffed trough.
Buckinghamlhirc . Loudwater
High Wycomb
Oxfordlhire . . Stoken Chuich
T etfworth
Wheatley
Oxford
Wolvercot
Woodftock
Over Kiddington
Chapel Houfe
Little Rolwright
Gloccftcrihirc . . Four Shire Stone
Morton in the Marfh
Worcefterfhirc . . Broaaway Street
Evefham
Perfhore
W orcefter
Dedenham
Herefordfhire . . Bromyard
Docklow
Leomi after
Kingfland
Shobdon
Raduorfhire . . Comb
Prefteign
Difcoyd
Cafcob
Llanyhangle Chap
Rhydergowy
Montgomeryfhire . Taley Brook
Cardiganfhire . , Ecomiftwith Brook
Mowen Glowth
Llanbadern Vawr
Aberiftwith
ROUTE 33.
LONDON to HOLYHEAD, thro’ Worc e s t e r
Worcefterfhirc . . Worcefter, as in Route 32.
Hallow
Great Whitley
Stockton
Tenbury
Shropfhire . . . Burford
Herefordfhire . . Little Hereford
Shropfhire . . . Alhford Boulder
Ludlow
Onnybury
Basford Gate
Biihop’s Caftle
Montgomeryfhire . Montgomery
Welchpool
Llanviiling
Merionethlhire . . Bala
Llanroft
Denbigh . . '. Conway
Caemarvonfhire . . Bangor
Anglefea . . . Holyhead
ROUTE 34.
LONDON to HOL\ HEAD, through Buck-
ingham and Shrewsbury.
Middlefex . . . Uxbridge, as in Route 32.
Buckingharalhirc . Charlfont St, Peter
See thi Map of Towns, &c. paffed through,
Buckingharalhirc . Charlfont St. Giles
Amerfham
Wendover
Aylelhury
Weedon
Winflow
Buckingham
Tingwick
Oxfordlhire • . Finmore
Mixbury
Northamptonfhire . Barley Mow
Croughton
Aynhoe
Oxfordlhire . . Nell Bridge
Adderbury
Banbury
Drayton
Wrox ton
Warwickfhire . . Upton
Lower Pillerton
Worcefterfhirc . . Goldicot
\\ arwickfhire . , Stratford upon Avon
Hafeler
Alcefter
Coughton
Beoley
Worcefterfhirc . . Crab’s Crofs
Headlefs Crofs
Warwickfhire . . Tardebig
Worcefterfhirc . . Bromfgrove
Chaddcfley Corbet
Winterford
Kidderminfter
Staffordlhire . . Turnpike
Shatterford
Shropfhire . . . Qu at
Quatford
Bridgenorth
Morvill
Much Wcnlock
Harley
Shrewfbury
Mont ford Bridge
Ofweftry
Salatin
Denbighfhire . . Llangollen
Merionethlhire . . Corwen
Denbighfhire . . Llanroft
Caernarvon . . . Bangor
Anglefea . . . Holyhead
ROUTE 35.
LONDON to HOLYHEAD, through
Birmingham.
Y arwickfhire . . Stratford upon Avon, as in
Route 34.
Henlev
J
Birmingham
Staffordlhire . . Hockley Brook
Wolverhampton
Tettenhall
Shropfhire , . . Boningale
Shefnal
Wombiidge
S ee the Map tf Towns, &c, paffed tLrou* 4.
Shropfhire . . . Wellington
Shrewfbury
Albrighton
Ellefmere
Flintfhire Overton
Denbighfhire Wrexham
Ruthin
Denbigh
Cacrmarthcnihire . Abcrconway
Bangor
Holyhead or
Anglefea . . . Beaumaris
Holyhead
ROUTE 36.
LONDON to HOLYHEAD, through
CHESTER.
Middlefex . . . Iflington
Highgate
Hertfordfhire . . Chipping Barnet
Middlefex . . . South Mims
Hertfordfhire . . St. Albans
Redburne
Bedfordfhire . . Dunftable
HocklitFe
Bucks .... Fenny Stratford
Stony Stratford
Northamptonfhire . Towccfter
Daventry
Brawnfton
Warwickfhire . . Willoughby
Dunchurch
Coventry
Meriden
Colefhill
Moxhull
Langley Hall
Sutton
Staffordlhire . . Sutton Colefield
Watling Street
Wefton under Lizard
Shropfhire . . . Woodcot Hall
Church Afton
Newport
Chetwynd
Ternhili
Bletchly
Whitchurch
Chefhire , . . Cum Grindlcy
Chefter
Flintfhire . . . St. Afaph
Denbighfhire . . Abergeley
Cacrmarthcnihire . Aberconway
Beaumaris or
Bangor
Anglefea . . . Holyhead
ROUTE 37.
LONDON to CHESTER, through
Birmingham.
Warwickfhire . . Birmingham, as inßoutc 35.
Staffordlhire . . Walfall
Bloxwich
Stafford-


See the Map of Towns, ¥C. pffcj tWcgh.
Staffordlhire . . Cannock
Stafford
Ecclcfhall
Aihley Heath
Mucklefton
Shropfhlrc . . Dormoton
Woore
Chefhire . . . Namptwich
Tarperley
Cheftcr
ROUTE 38.
LONDON to AYLESBURY, BICESTER,
and OXFORD, through Trinc.
Middlefex . . . Paddington
Edgware
Sranmore
Hcrtfordihire . . Bufhy Heath
Watford
Berkhamftcd
Tring
Bucklngham'hlrc . Aylefbury
Flcetmarfton
Oxfordihire . - Biceftcr
Oxford
ROUTE 39.
LONDON to WARRINGTON, LANCAS-
TER, and CARLISLE.
Warwickihire . . Meriden, as in Route 36.
Cole (hill
Moxhull
Staffordlhire. . . Baffet's Crofs,
Wecford
Litchfield
Longdon
Colwich
Stone
Newcaftlc
Talk
Chefhire ... Lawton
Smallwood
Holmes Chapel
Grange Hall
Knutsford
Lancafhire . . . Warrington
Newton
Wigan
Standifh
Prefton
Lancaftcr
Bolton
Weftmorland . . Burton
Kendal
Patton
Gatefide
Birbeck Fells
Cumberland . . Penrith
Petriana
Carllftc
ROUTE 40.
LONDON to PRESTON and MANCHES-
TER, thro’Derby and Northampton.
See the Map of Towns, Ct pejTeJ through.
Bcdfordihire . . Dunftahle, as in Route 36.
Wooburn
Buckinghamfhire . Wavcdon
Newport Pagnel
Stoke Coldington
Northamptonfhire . Horton
Northampton
Kingfthorp
Brix worth
Kelmarfh
Leicefterfhire . . Harborough
Glen Magna
Leicefter
Mount Sorrel
Loughborough
Kegworth
Dcrbyfhire . . «■ Cavendilh Bridge
Shardlowe
Derby
Mack worth
Afhbome
Red Houfe
Alfon
New Haven
Buxton
Elner Lane
Chefhire . . Whally Bridge
Difley
Stockport
Lancafnlrc . . . Manchefter
Bolton in the Moors
Chorley
Prefton
ROUTE 41.
LONDON to SHEFFIELD, SETTLE, KIRBY
LONSDALE, and WHITEHAVEN,
through Derby.
Derbyfhirc . . • Derby, as in Route 40.
Duffield
Heage
Chefterfield
Dronfield
Yorkihire , . • Sheffield
Chapel Town
Barnfley
Wakefield
Leeds
Cookridge
Otley
Skipton
Settle
Clapham
Ingleton
Weft Houfe
Weftmorland . . Kirby Lonfdale
Crofs Lands
Kendal
Stavelcy
Amblefice
See the Map of Towns, pjJTed through.
T ownhead
Cumberland . . Wifhbum
Kefwick
Crofsthwaite
Cockcrmouth
Little Clifton
Whitehaven
:ROUTE 4*-
LONDON to HALIFAX and CLITHERO,
through. Bedford, Nottingham,
and Rotherham.
Hertford Ihire . . St. Alban’s, as in Route 36.
Harp Jen
Bcdfordihire . . Luton
Silfoe
Willfhamfted
Elveftow
Bedford
Bletfoe
Northamptonfhire . Higham Ferrars
Kettering
Rockingham
Rutlandlhire . . Uppingham
Oakham
Langham
Leicefterfhire . . Melton Mowlfray
Nether Boughton
Nottinghamfhirc . Over Boughton
Nottingham
Mansfield
Yorkfhire . . . Rotherham
Chapel Town
Worley Chapel
Penifton
Huddersfield
Halifax
Lancaihlrc . . . Burnley
Clithero
ROUTE 43.
LONDON to MANCHESTER and CLI-
THERO, through Leek, Uttoxe-
ter, and Hinckley.
Northampton (hire . Northampton, as in Route
40.
Wei ford
Leicefterfhire . . Kilwoith
Lutterworth
Hinckley
Atherfton
T am worth
Staffordlhire . ; Buxton
Uttoxetcr
Cheadlc
Leek
Chefhire . . . Macclesfield
Stockport
Lancaihirc . . . Manchefter
Bury
Hallingdon
Clither
B ROUTE


ROUTE 44.
LONDON to BERWICK, through York.
See the Map of Towns, £-f c. paffed through,
Middlefex . . . Highgate
Barnet
Herts .... Hatfield
Welwyn
Baldock
Biggie fwade
Sandy
Eaton Socoit
Huntingdon . . Buckden
Alconbury
Stilton
Walmsford
Lincolnfhire . . Stamford
Rutlandlhire . . Bridge Coffertott
Colfterworth
Grantham
Nottingham fhi re . Newark
Tuxford
Eaft Retford
Yorkfhire . . . Bawtry
Doncafter
Pontefract
Sherborne
T adcafter
York
Eafingwold
Thirfk
North Allcrton
0
Crofr
Durham . • . Darlington
Aycliffe
Durham
Chdter le Street
Northumberland . Ncwcaftle
Morpeth
Alnwick
Eelford
Durham ... Berwick
ROUTE 45.
LONDON to PENRITH, through Borough-
bridge and Applesy.
Yorklhire . . . Pontefract, as in Route
44-
Wetherby
Boroughbridgc
Leeming
Catterick
Greta Bridge
Bowes
Weffmorland . . Brough
Appleby
Cumberland . . Penrith
ROUTE 46.
LONDON to SCARBOROUGH, through
Lincoln and Huntingdon.
Middlefex . . . Stoke Newington
Tottenham
Endfield Wafh
See the Map of Towns, &c. paffed th ough,
Herts , . . . C lie (hunt
Ware
Puckeridge
Buntingford
Cambridge . . Royfton
Kneefworth
Caxton
Huntingdonfhire . Godmancheftcf
Huntingdon
Stilton
Y axley
Northampton fhi re Peterborough
Clinton
Lincolnfhire . . Market Deeping
Bourne
Folkingham
Sleaford
Lincoln
Spittle
Retburne
Glanford Bridge
Barton
Yorkfhire . . . Kingfton upon Hull
Beverley
Great Driffield
Langtoft
Foxholes
Scarborough
ROUTE 47.
LONDON to LYNN REGIS, through
Cambridge.
Hertfordfhirc . . Puckeridge, as in Route 46.
Barkway
Barley
Cambridgeffxire . . Foulmere
Cambridge
Elv
Littleport
Norfolk . . . Southery
Downhara
Lynn Regis
ROUTE 48.
LONDON to NORWICH, through
New Market.
Middlefex . . . Hackney
Clapton
Effex .... Walthamffow
Epping
Harlow
Herts .... Sawbridgeworth
Bifhop’s Stortford
Effex .... Saffron Walden
Cambridgefhire . . Chefterford
Abington
New Market
Suffolk .... Mildenhall
Thetford
Norfolk .... Attleborough
Wyndham
Norwich
ROUTE 49.
LONDON to NORWICH, through
Ipswich.
See the Map of Towns, &c. paffed through
Middlefex . . . Bow
Effex . . . > Stratford
Romford
Brentwood
Ingatftone
Chelmsford
With am
Colchelter
Suffolk .... Stratford
Ipfwich
T wake
Norfolk . . . Schole Inn
Norwich
ROUTE 50.
LONDON to NORWICH, through
Sudbury.
Effex. Chelmsford, as in Route 49,
Braintree
Halftead
Sudbury
Suffolk .... Lavenham
Bildeftow
Stow Market
Mendlefhaia
Norfolk . . . Difs
Buckenham
Norwich
ROUTE 51.
LONDON to LYNN REGIS, through
Brandon' and New Market.
Cambridgeihirc . . New Market, as in Rout*
48.
Suffolk .... Brandon
Norfolk . - . Methwold
Seeching
Lynn Regis
ROUTE 52.
LONDON to YARMOUTH, through
Ipswich.
Suffolk . . • Ipfwich, as in Route 49.
Woodbridge
Saxmundham
Blithborough
Beccles
Norfolk . . . Hcrringfleet
Suffolk .... Bradweli
Norfolk . . . Yarmouth


THE
MARKET AND BOROUGH TOWNS
IN
ENGLAND AND WALES
■ft ith the DAIS their MARKETS are held, and their DISTANCE from LONDON.
K. B. The Borough Towns are d-ffmguilked by being in Italic, and their Number of Reprefentativesby * ; and the Cities and Univerfitics in Small Capitals.
ABBOTSBURY, Dotfejhire, Th
128
Aberconway, Carmar. F. 231
Aberford, York. W. 184
Abergavenny, Monm. T. 140
Aberiftwith, Card. M. 204
* Abingdon, Berks. M. F. 57
** St. Albans, Hertf. W. S. 21
* Aldboiough, York. W. 203
**Aidborougb, Suff. W. S. 93
Alford, Line. T. 140
Alfreton, Derby . M. 139
Alnwick, Nortbumb. S. 306
Alresford, Hamp. Th. 37
Alffon Moor, Cumb. S. 206
Alton, Hants. S. 48
Altringham, Chef. T. 184
Amefbury, Wilts. F. 78
Amblefide, IVef.m. W. 271
***Amerfham, Bucks, T. 26
Amptbill, Bedf. Th. 46
** Andover, Hants. S. 63
" "Appleby, Weffra. S. 266
Appledore, Kent. S. 63
* * Arundel, Suffex, W. S. 53
St. Afaph, Flint. S. 211
Afhborn, Derby. S. 139
Ajkburton, Devon. T. 190
Afhby de la Zouch, Lcic. S. 114
Afhford, Kent. T. 57
Afkrig, York. Th. 241
Athcrftone, Warw. T. 93
Attleborough, Norf. Th. 94
Aubourn, Wilts. T. 73
Auckland, Biih. Durh. Th. 230
Aulccffer, Wariv. T. 102
St. Auftle, Cornw. F. 236
Axbridgc, Som. Th. 131
Axmlnffer, Devon. S. 146
**Aylefhury, Bucks. S. 40
Ayleihara, Norf. S. m
Bakewell, Derby. M. 13 \
Bala, Merion. S. 192
Baldock, Hert. Th. 37
Bampton, Oxf. W. 69
Bampton, Devon. S. 167
* Banbury, Oxf. Th. 73
Bangor, Caern. W. 248
Barking, EJJex. S. 9
Barkway, Hert. S. 33
Barnard Caftle, Durh. W. 247
Barnet, Hert. M. 12
Bamefley, York. W. 178
**Barnfahle, Devon. F. 193
Barton, Line. M. 166
Bafingftoke, Hants. W. 46
Battel, SuJJ. Th. 37
**Bath, Som. W. S. 107
Bawtry, York. S. 153
Beaconsfield, Bucks, Th. 23
Beaumaris, AnglcC W. 242
Beccles, Suff. S. 108
Bedal, York. T. 219
rßedford, Bedf. T. S. 51
Bidwin, Wilts. T. 71
Belford, Nortbumb. Th. 320
Beltingham, Nortbumb. 293
Bemilher, Dorfet. Th. 140
Bere Regis, Dorfet. W. 113
■- ■• Berealfion, Devon. 21Z
Berkhamftead, Hertf. S. 26
Berkley, Glou. W. 113
rßerwick, Ncrthumb. S. 336
Betley, Staff. T. 137
** Beverley, York. W. S. 182
*Bevudley, Wore. S. 128
Bicefter, Oxf. F. 57
Biddeford, Devon. T. 202
Bigglefwade, Bedf. T. 46
Bildefton, Suff. W. 67
Billericay, EJJex. T. 23
Billingham, Nortbumb. T. S. 299
Billeidon, or Blis, Lcic. F. 97
Binbrook, Line. W. 139
Bingham, Nott. Th. 10S
Birmingham, Warw. Th. 116
'Bijkop's Cafle, Shrop. F. 132
Bilhop’s Stortford, Hertf. Th. 29
Bifley, Glou. Th. 97
Bitford, Warw. F. 100
Blackbourn, Lane. M. 203
Blandford, Dorfet. S. 106
* ~ B let thing ley, Surry, 31
Blythe, Nett. Th. 148
■■'■ Cornw. S. 232
Bolingbroke, Line. T. 134
Bolfover, Derby. F. 147
Bolton, Lane. M. 195
Bootle, Cumb. W. 277
Borne, or Bourn, Line. S. 97
■- *Boroughbridge, York. S. 203
Bofs-caffle, Cornw. Th. 230
' BoJJnty, Cornw. 233
*-- : Bofion, Line. W. S. 119
Bofworth, Lcic. W. 105
Bow, Devon. Th. 189
Brack/cy, Northamp. W. 64
Bradfield, EJJex. Th. 47
Bradford, Wilts. M. 93
Bradford, York. Th. 202
Bradnich, Devon, S. 167
Braintree, EJJex. W. 40
Bramber, Suffex. 47
Brampton, Cumb. T. 311
Brandon, Sujf. F. 78
* Brecknock, Breck. W. F. 162
■*-'Bridgenortb, Shrop. S. 139
Bridgewater, Som. Th. S. 142
- : ~ 'Bridport, Dorfet. S. 138
Brighthelmffone, SuJJ. Th. 60
--•Bristol, ScmerJ. W. S. 113
Bromley, Kent. Th. 10
Bromley, Staf. M. 129
Bromyard, Henf. T. 125
Bromfgrove, I Yore. T. 113
Brough, Wejlm. Th. 258
Bruton, Somerj. S. no
Buckenham, Norf. S. 96
rßuckingham, Bucks, S. 38
Buddefdale, Sujf. Th. 87
Builth, Breck. M. 166
Bungay, Sujf. Th. 107
Buntingford, Hertf. M. 31
Burford, Oxf. S. 71
Burgh, Line. Th. 138
Burlington, York. S. 208
Burnham, Norf. M. S. 120
Burnley, Lane. S. 207
Burton Stather, Line. T. 160
Burton on Trent, Staf. Th. X 23
Burton, hVefim. T. 243
Bury, Lane. Th. 190
r rßury, St. Edmund's, Suff. W. 74
Caerfilly, Glam. Th. 134
Caerleon, Monm. Th. 148
* Caermarthen, Cacrm. W. S. 2cS
Ca ling ton, Cornw. W. 213
Caerweis, Flint. T. 026
** Caine, Wilts. T. 88
Camb. T. S. 52
Camelford’, Cornw. F. 228
Campden, Glou. W. 89
s *Can'terburt, Kent. W. S. 36
* Car Jif fy Glam. W. S. 136
* Cardigan, Card. T. S. 223
■--Carlisle, Cumh. S. 299
Caern. S. 248
Cartmel, Lane. M. 260
Caftle Car)', SomcrJ. T. 117
-*-*CaJlle Riftng, Norf. 102
Cawfton, Norf T. 114
Caftor, Line. M. 137
Cawood, York. W. iSS
Caxton, Camb. T. 49
Cerne, Dorfet. W. 123
Chapel in Frith, Derby. Th. 163
Chard, Somerj. M. 141
Chatham, Kent. S. 31
Cheadle, Staf. S. 144
Chelmsford, EJJex. F. 29
Cheltenham, G.ou. Th. 94
Chepftow, Monm. S. 133
Chertfey, Surry. W. 20
Chefham, Bucks. W. 29
CheJ. W. S. IS2
Chellerfield, Derby. S. 149
Suff. W. S. 63
Chumleigh, Devon. Th. 190
Chippenham, Wilts. Th. 93
Chipping-Ncrton, Oxf. W. 74
**Chip.Wycomb, Bucks, F. 33
Church, Hants, M. 102
Chudlcigh, Devon. S. IS2
Church Stretton, Sbrop. Th. 133
*Cirtncejhr , Glouc. M. F. 89
Clare, Suff. F. 56
Clay, Norf. S. 123
Chorley, Lane. T. 203
Cleobury, Sbrop. Th. 136
Cliffe, Kortbamp. T. 81
Cl it hero, Lane. S. 213
* 'Eockermoutb, Curab. M. 299
Cogjefhall, EJJex. S. 44
* 'Colchfur, EJJex. S. 3 1
Coln-


Colnbrrok, Bu4ks. W. 17
Colcfhill, ff'erw. W. icj
Colford, T. 124
Cclne, /.awe. W. 215
Colurab, St. Corn'll’. Th. 249
Collumpton, Devon. S. 164
Congletou, Chef. S. 161
Corby, Line. W. 90
**Ccrjfe Cafle, Dor let. Th. 120
* -Coventry, I* at -w. F. 91
Cowbridge, Cilam, I. 165
Cranboum, Dofa. Th. 94
Cranbrook, Ben.. S« 49
Crayford, Kent. T. 14
Creditor!, Devon. S. 176
Crickhowel, Breck. Th. 749
* : *CricklaJe, Wilts. S. 83
Cromer, Norf. S. 127.
Crookhorn, Sum. S. 132
Crowland, Line. S. 94
Crowle, L:r,c. S. 163
Crovdon, Surry. S. 10
Cuckfield, Stiff. T. 39
Culliton, Devon. Th. 154
Dalton, Lane. S. 271
Darlington, Durh. M. 238
Dartford, Kent. S. 15
** Dartmouth, Devon. F. 203
Daventry, Northamp. W. 72
St. David’s, Petnb. W. 256
Deal, Kent. Th. 72
Dean Mitchel, G.hu. M. Ji6
Debenham, Suf. F. 83
Dtddington, Oxf. S. 62
Dedham, EJJex. T. 5S
Deeping, Line. Th. 90
Dcerham, Eaft, Norf. F. 100
Denbigh f Denb. W. 210
u
Derby, Derbyfh. F. 126
** Devizes, Wilts. Th. 88.
Dinafmouthy, Merton. F. 192
Dils, Norf. F. 94
Dodbroke, Devon. W. 218
Dolegelly, Merlon. T. 202
Doncarter, Turk. S. 160
Donnington, Line. S. 117
* -Dorcbfjler, Dorfet. S. 120
Dorking, Surry. Th. 23
v* Dover, Kent. W. S. 72
Downham, Norf, S. 86
Dc'ii’nton, or Dunekion, Wilts. F. S_
Drayton, Shop. W r . 153
•• oDroltwicb, Wore. F. lIS
Dronfield, Derby. Th. 134
Dudley, Wore. S. 120
Dulvcrton, Som. S. 169
Dunrnov;, EJJex. S. 40
Dunnington, Line. S. 99
Dunftable, Bedf. W. 34
Dunfter, Som. F. 163
♦ Durrwich, Suff. S. 99
Durb. S. 256
Durfley, Glou. Th. 107
r Fall Grinftead, Sfj. Th. 30
Loci, Corn*. S. 23*
Ecclefhall, Staf. F. 142
Eccleftonc, Lane. S. 205
Edgwarc, Midd. Th. 8
Egrcmont, Cv&ib. S. 298
Elhain, Kent. M. 66
Ellefraere, Shi op. T. 172
Eltham, Kent. M. 7
Ely, Camh. S. 63
Enfield, Midd. S. IO
Epping, EJfcX. F. 16
Epfom, Surry. Daily, 15
Eafingwold, Tork. F. 210
EveviEot, Dorfet. F. 128
Evcfiam, Wore. M. 95
Ewell, Surry. Th. 13
Devon. W. F.
* Eye , SutF. S. 90
Fairford, Glm. Th. 81
Fakenham, Norf. Th. no
Falmouth, Corniv. Th. 263
Farcham, Hamp. W. 73
Farnham, Surry. Th, 38
Farringdon, Berks. T. 7°
Fenny Stratford, Bucks. M. 45
Feveriham, Kent. W. S. 47
Fifkard, P»mb. F. 242
Flint, Flint. 196
Folkingham, Line. Th. 107
Folkftone, Kent. Th. 73
Fordingbridge, Hamp. S. 91
Foulfham, Norf. T. 109
; r -Fowey, or Toy, Cornw. S. 240
Framlingham, Sujf. S. 87
Frodefham, Chef. \V. 183
Frodlingham, Tork. Th. 197
Froome, Som. \V. icB
Gainfborough, Line. T. 150
Garftang, Lane. Th. 224
Gatton, Surry, 19
'■* : *St. Germans , Cornw. F. 223
Gilborough, Tork. M. 246
Gifbourne, Tork. M. 219
Glandford-b;idge, Line. Th. 156
Glaftonbury, Som. T. 132
**Glouceter, Glou. W. S. ico
Godaiming, Surry. S. 34
Gofport, Hamp. S. 7^
Goudhurft, Kent. W. 43
Grampound, Cornw. S. 243
G rant her m, Line. S. xio
Gravefend, Kent. W. S. 22
Graves, EJfex. Th. 25
■v 'iGnnfby Great, Einc. W. 1 63
Guilford, Surry. S. 30
Hadley, Suff. M. 63
Halefworth, Suff. T. 101
Halifax, Tork. S. 202
Hallaton, Leic. Th. 93
Halltead, EJfex. F. 47
Harborough, Leic. T. 83
Harlech, Merion. S. 22c
Hadefton, Nvf. W. ill
Hading, Norf. T. 83
Harlow, EJJix. S. 23
Hartland, Devon. S. 21S
Hartlepoole, Durb. S. 259
** Harwich, ElTex. T. 7-
**Ha/lemcre, Surry, T. 43
Hailingdon, Lav:. Vv • 195
-■'HaJhngSf Suflex. W. S. 64
Hatfield, EJfex. S. 30
Hatfield, Hertf. Th. 19
Hatherly, Devon. F. 200
Haulton, Chef. S. 185
Havant, Hump. S. 66
■■■ Have! fordwefl, Pemb. T. S- 246
Haveril, & uff • W. 5 5
Hawklhead, Lars. M. 272
Halyfham, Sujf. S. 58
Hav, Breck. S. 152
Haywood Great, Staff. S'. 130
** Hey den, York. Th. i3l
Helmfley, York. S. 221
■■ Heflon, Cornw. M. 270
Hemel Hemplted, Hens. Th. 20
Healey, Oxf. W. F. S. 35
Henley, Warnu. T. 102
■■ -■Hereford, Here/. S. 130
** Hertford, Herts. S. 21
Hexham, Not thumb. T. 285
: ~HeytJbury, Wilts. 93
- tHigham Ferrers, Northamp. S. 71
High worth, Wilts. W. 77
Hindon, Wilts. Th. 96
Hingham, No>f. S. 98
Hinckley, Lite. M. 102
Hitching, Hertf. T. 34
Hoddefdon, Hertf. Th. xj
Holbeach, Line. Th. 115
Home, Cumb. S. 310
Holt, Norf. S. 120
Holywell, Flint. F. 2ix
XX-Honiton, Devon. S. 155
Hornby, Lane. M. 258
Horncaftle, Line. S. 142
Horndon, EJfex. S. 29
Hornfev, York. M. 1 83
**Horfham, Sufiex, S. 37
Houlfworthy, Devon. S. 215
Hounflow, Midd. Th. 10
Hovingham, York. S. 214
Howden, York. S. 179
**HuU, York. T. S. 173
Hungerford, Hilts. W. 65
Hunmandby, York. T. 209
Huntingdon, Hunt. S. 59
Huthersfield, York. T. 195
; .r# Hythe, Kent. S. 69
**llchefer, Somerf. W. 128
Ilfracomb, Devon. S. IS6
llminfter, Som. S. 142-
Ilfley, Berks W. 59
Ipfwich, Suff. W. F. S. 69
Ireby, Cumb. Th. 3®!
St. IvtS} Cornw. S. 274
St. Ives, Hunt. M. 64
Ivinghoc, Bucks. F. 3 s
Jxworth, Suff. F. 79
Kellington, Cornw. W. 215
Kendal, Wrjim. S. 257
Kefwick, Cumb. S. 287
Kettering, Nertbctmp. S. 77
Keynfham, Som. Th. 115
Kidderminfter, U arc. Th. ii£
Kidwelly, Oust mar. T. 216
Killgarron, Pemb. W. 228
Kilham, York, S. 200
Kimbolton, Hunt. F. 63
Kiucton, ll'anv. T. 88
King’s-bridge, Devon. S. 217
Kingfclear, Hamp. T. 55
Kingfton, Sum. S. 12
Kington, Heref. \V. 151
Kirkby LonfdS'ic, JVcJlm. Th. 25 j
Kirkby Moorfide, York. W. 222
Kirkby Stephen, Wejlm. M. 259
Kirkham, Lane. T. 221
Kirkofwald, Cumb. Th. 291
Kirkton Lindfey, Line. S. 150
vKnare/borougb, York. W. 199
Knighton, Radnor. Th. 157
Knutsford, Chef. S. 183
Krekhithe, Caern. W. 233
Kyneton, Heref. W. 151
Lambourn, Berks. F. 68
** Lane after, Lane. S. 285
: * : %L*unceJion f Cornw. S. 214
Landaf f, Glamorg. M. 15S
Langport, Som. S. 133
Lanruft, Denb. T. 230
Lavenham, Suff. T. 63
Lavington, Hilts, W. 89
Lechlade, Glou. T. 77
Ledbury, Heref. T. 116
Leeds, York. T. S. 197
Leek, Staff. W. 154
Leicejier , Leic. S. 98
Leighton Buzzard, Bedf. T. 4*
Lenham, Kent. T. 45
Leotnirfler, Heref. F. 13?
■**LeJkard, Cornw. S. 221
Loweftoffe, Suff. W. in
Leflvjithiel, Cornw. F. 229
&%-LeweSy Suffex, S. 5 0
Lidncy, Glouc. W. 124
Dorfet. F. 147
Line. F. 133
Linton, Camb. Th. 145
Staff. T. F. 119
■'r-r-Liverpool, Lane. S. 195
Lanellthy, Caerm. T . 208
Llandilovaur, Caerm. T. 195
Llanarch, Card. T. 213
Llangadock, Caerm. Th. 187
Llanpeter, Card. T. T 97
Llanymdovry, Caerm. F. ISI
Llangharn, Caerm. W. S. 233
Llanvdios, Mont. S. i~7


Llantrificnt, Glum, F. 161
Llanvelhng, T. 173
Loddon, Norf. F. 116
•i : ; rSLoNDONj MidJ. every Day ex-
cept Sunday
Longtown, Cumb. Th. 313
Loughborough, Lae. Th. 109
Louth, Line. VV 7 . S. 13 3
** Ludlow, Shrop. M. 139
'? y Ludgtrfhall, Wilts. 73
Luton, Bedf. M. 32
Lutterworth, Leic. Th. 87
Lvdd, Kent. Th. 70
:yy Lyrmngton, Hamp. S. 97
; * y L-nn Regis, or King's Lynn, Norf.
T. S. 98
Lvllon, Devon. S. 208
a *
Macclesfield, Chef. M. 170
Machynlcth, Montg, M. 193
Maiden Bradley, Wilts. 105
Maidenhead, Berks. VV. 26
Afaid/tone, Kent, Th. 36
Malden, Effex, S. 37
Maling, Kent, S. 29
yy Maltnfbury, Wilts, S. 93
Malpas, Chef. M. 166
Malton, York. S. 213
Manchefter, Lane. S. 182
Manningtree, Effex, T. 60
Mansfield, Nott. Th. 140
Marlh, Camb. F. 80
Market Deeping, Line, 90
Market Raifin, Line. Th. 150
Market Jew, Comw. Th. 286
Wilts. S. 73
yy Marlow, Bucks, S. 31
Marfhfield, Giou. T. 104
Mafham, York. T, 218
-■r :y St. Mawes, Cornw. 268
■e : 'rMclcomb Regis, Dorfet. T. F. 130
Melton Mowbray, Leic. T. 108
Melford, Long, Suff. T. 39
Mendlelham, Suff. T. 82
Mere, Wilts. T. 104
Mcthwold, Norf. T. 86
:y 'St. Michael, Cornw. 247
Middleham, York. M, 2, 4 5
Middlewich, Chef. T. 166
Midbutf, Suffex, Th. '2
Mi I bourn Port, Som. 113
Mildsnhall, Suff. F. 69
Milton, Kent, S. 4’
Milton-Abbey, Dorfet. T. 113
Minching Hampton, Giou. T. 90
** Mine head, Som. VV. 166
Michel Dean, Giou. M. 116
Modbury, Devon. Th. 207
'■* Monmouth, Monm. S. 129
- Montgomery, Mont. T. 138
Mount-Sorrel, Leic. M. 105
Moreton Hampficd, Devon. S. 182
Morpeth, Northumb. VV 7 . 287
Mould, Flirt. S. 2CO
Namptwich, Chef. S. 161
Narboth, Pemb. W. 250
Neath, Giant. S. 192
Needham, Suff. VV. 73
St. Neots, Hunt. Th. 38
Netherfrowey, Som. T. 130
* : Newark, Nott. VV. 124
Newburgh, Angl. T,
Newbcry, Berks. Th. 36
' v "‘ Neweafllc, Northumb. T. S. 272
• : Neweaftlc-under-Line, Stafford. M
149
Newxaftlc, Guam. F. 216
Ncwent, Giou. F. 114
New Inn, Cacrn. S. 146
Newmarket, Cumb. Th. 60
Ncwnham, Giou. F. 116
** Newport, Hamp. VV. S. 97
* ' Newport, Comw. S. 214
Newport, Monm. S. 141
Newport, Pemb. S. 235
Newport, Shrop. S. 140
Newport Pagnel, Bucks. S. 32
Newton Bulhel, Devon. VV. 187
y ' Newton, Lane. S. 188
Newtow n, Mont. S. 166
Neyland, Suff. F. 57
-v Not t bailer ton, York. VV. 223
* "Northampton, Northamp. S. 66
North Curry, Som. T. S. 139
Northlech, Giou. VV 7 . 80
Northwich, Chef. F. 172
* 'Norwich, Norf VV. F. S. 109
**Nottingham, Nott. VV. S. 123
Nuneaton, Warw. S. 98
Oakingham, Berks, T. 32
Odiam, Hamp. S. 41
Oakham, Rut I, S. 96
'Oakhampton, Devon. S. 193
Ongar, Effex, S. 21
Or ford, Suff. M. S 3
Ormfkirk Lane. T. 203
Orton, Weftm. VV. 276
Ofweftry, Shrop. VV 7 . 171
Otley, York. T. 2cB
Ottery, St. Mary, Devon. T. 160
Oulney, Bucks. M. 37
"Oundle, Northamp. S. 76
Oxford, Oxf. VV 7 . S. 54
Padftow, Cornw. S. 243
Painfwick, Giou. T. ico
Patrington, York. S. 191
Pembridge, Heref. T. 146
•' Pembroke, Pemb. S. 238
Penkridge, Staf. T. 123
Penrith, Cumb. T. 253
Pcnrice, Glam. Th. 219
:y -P enr yn, Comw. VV 7 . F. S. 261
Penzance, Cornw. Th. 289
Pensford, Som. T. 117
Perfhore, Wore. T. 102
:y:y Peterborough, Northamp. S. 81
yy Petersfield, Hamp. S. 53
Petworth, Suff. S. 49
Philips Norton, Som. Th. icz
Pickering, York, M. 224
Pillerton, Warw. 87
Plymouth, Devon. M, T. 217
:y Plympton, Devon. S. 209
Pocklington, York. S. 196
Pontefract, York. S. 173
Pontly Pool, Monm. S. 147
**Poole, Dorfet. M. 106
** Portsmouth , Hamp. Th. S. 73
Potten, Bcdf. S. 49
Pculton, Lane. M. 229
Prefect, Lane. T. 195
Prcfteign, Radnor. S, 150
r ' y Preflon. Lane. VV. F. S. 213
Pulhely, Caerm. VV. 240
* y Queen borough, Kent, M. Th. 46
'Radnor, New, Rad. Th. 137
Ramfey, Hunt. S. 68
Ravenglafs, Cumb. S. 282
Raleigh, Effex, S. 34
Reading, Berks. S. 39
Reephsm, Norf. S. 109
Retford, Eajl, Nott. S. 143
Riadergowy, Radnor. VV. 174
**Richmond, York. S. 231
Rickmanfworth, Hertf. S. 19
Ring wood, Hamp. VV. 94
Ripley, York. F. 203
Rippon, York. Th. 209
Ri(borough, Bucks. S. 37
Rochdale, Lane. T. 196
**Roch ester, Kent, F. 30
Rockingham, Northamp. Th. 84
Rofs, He ref. Th. 119
Rotherham, York. M. 165
Rothwcll, Northamp. M. 79
Roy (ton, Hertf. VV. 38
Rugby, IVarvc. S. 85
Rudgeley, St of. T. 126
Rumford, Effex, T. VV. 12
Rurnney, New, Kent, Th. 7 z
Rumfey, Hamp. S. 76
Ruthin, Denb. M. 205
‘* : *Rye, Suff. VV. S. 64
Rye gate, Surry, T. 21
Saffron Walden, Effex, S. A 2
* : Salisbury, Hilts. T. S. 82
x
:yy Saltafh, Cornw. S. 220
Saltfleet, Line. S. 163
Sandbach, Chef. Th. i6r
Sandwich, Kent, VV. S. 67
:yy Sarutn, Old, Wilts. 83
Saxmundham, Suff. Th. 89
Scarborough, York. Th. 237
% ’Seaford, Suffex, 61
Seeching, Norf. T. 93
Scdgefield, Durh. T. 261
Selby, York M. 182
Settle, York. T. 239
Sevenoaks, Kent, S 23
: * ; *SbaftJbury, Dorfet. S. 103
Sheffield, York. T. 160
Shefnal, Shrop. F. 136
Shelford, Bcdf. F. 40
Shepton Mallet, Som. F. 117
Sherboum, Dorfet. Th. S. 119
Sherburn, York. S. iSI
Shipfton, Wore. F. 83
* : *Sboreham, New, Suffex, S. 57
*Shrenvjhury, Shrop. W. F. S. 154.
Skipton, York. S. 224
Sleaford, Line. M. u 5
Smarden, Kent, F. <; 5
Snathe, York. F. 174
Snetlham, Nof. F. 111
Sodbury, Giou. Th. iii
Soham, Camb. S. 70
Somerton, Som. T. 123
Southam, Warw. M. S 3
* Southampton, Hamp. T. Th. S. 75
South Molton, Devon. S. 182
South Petherton, Som. T. 136
Southwell, Nett. S. 14a
Southwold, Suff. Th. 103
Spalding, Line. T. 104
Speen, Berks. M, 57
Spilfby, Line. M. 136
** Stafford, Staff. S. 135
Staines, Midd. F. 17
Stalbridge, Dorfet. T. ill
** Stamford, Line. M. F. 89
Standon, Hcrtf. F. 27
Stanhope, Durh. T. 266
Stanley, Glou, S. 104
Stanton, Line, M. 155
Stevenage, Her if. VV. 31
Steyning, Suffex, VV. 11
- y ' : Stcckbridge, Hamp. Th. 67
Stockport, Chef. F. 175
Stockton, Durb. W. 248
Stokefiy, York. S. 238
Stone, Staff. T. 140
Stoney Stratford, Bucks. F. 52
Stow, Giou. Th. 81
Stow Market, Suff. Th. 75
Stowev, Som. T. 150
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warw. Th. 94
Stretton, Cornw. -T. 222
Stretton Church, Shrop. Th. 133
Stroud, Kent , F. 29
Stroud, Giou. F. 101
Sturminffer, Dorfet. Th. lit
Sudbury, Suffolk, S. 56
Sunderland, Durh. F. 269
Sutton Colficld, Warai, M. 106
S waff ham, Ncrf. S. 94
Swanfea, Glam. W. S. 197
Swindon, i JClts. M. 83
Tadcafter, Yah. Th. 189
Tame, OxJ. T. 46
Tam worth, Staff. S. 113
Tarring, Suff. S. 58
Tatterihall, Line. F. 134
*>'T* avif ock, Det on. S. 203
:yy Yauntori, Som. W. S. 145
Tenbury, Wore. T. 130
Tenby, Pemb. W. S. 247
Tenterden, Lent, F. 58
Tetbury, Clou. W. 99
C *yTevclff-


r 'rYenvkfbury, Glou. W. S. 103
Thaxted, Effex, F. 42
« Thelper d, Norf. S. 79
Thorn, York. W. 166
Thornburv, Glou. S. 120
Thrapfton, ffortbamp. T. 75
: **Thirfk, York. M. 220
Tickhill, York. F- 155
Tidefwell, Derby. W. 158
Tiverton, Devon. T. 166
Topfham, Devon. S. 175
Torrington, Devon. S. 196
% otnefs, Devon. S. 195
Towceiter, Northamp. T. 60
Trcgarron, Card. Th. 202
* 'Tregony, Comw. S. 256
Tring, Hertf. F. 31
Trowbridge, lints. S. 98
** Truro, Comw. W. S. 251
Tuddington, Bedf. Th. 39
Tunbridge, Kent, F. 35
Tutbury, Staff T. 128
Tuxford, Nett. M. 138
Ulverilon, Lane. M. 265
Uppingham, Rut I. W. 92
Upton, Wore. Th. 109
Uikc, Moran. M. 14*
Uttoxeter, Staff. W. 134
Uxbridge, Midi. Th. 15
WainHeet, Line. S. 135
Wakefield, York. Th. F. 188
* r IKallingford, Berks. Tu. F.
Walfall, Staff. T. 116
Walfham, Norf. Th. 123
Walfingham, Norf, F. 118
Waltham Abbey, Effex, T. 12
Waltham,' Hamp. F. 67
Waltham, hue. Th. 113
Waltham, Little, Effex, 33
Wantage, Berks. S. 59
Wardbridge, Cornw. S. 241
Ware, Hertf. T. 21
** kVartham, Dorfet. S. 115
Warminfter, Wilts. S, 97
Warrington, Lane. W. IS3
**Warwick, Warw. S. 93
Watchct, Som. S. 138
Watford, Hertf. T. 15
Watlington, Oxf. S. 45
Watton, Norf. W. 90
Welch Pool, Mont. M. 165
Weldon, Northar f. W. 86
Wellingborough, Nortkamp. W. 68
Wellington, Ssm. Th. 152
•r Wells, Som. W. S. 122
Wem, Sbrop* Th. 1 56
*' : lVendover, Bucks, Th. 35
■*'*Wenlock, Shrop. M. 143
■Vv ■■ IVcobiy, Hercf. T. 142
**/Kef bury, Wilts. F. lor
-v pf'flowe, Cornw. 232
Wefterham, Kent, \V. 21
Wetherby, York. Th. 191
Weymouth, Dorfet. T. F. 13 0
Whitby, York. S. 244
hit church, Hamp. F.
Whitchurch, Shrop. F. 161
Whitehaven, Cumb. T. 312
Wickwar, Glou. M. 112
: £*}Vtgan, Lane. M. F. 195
Wighton, York. W. 191
Wigton, Cumb. T. 306
** Wilton, Wilts. W. 85
Wimbourn, Dorfet. F. icB
Wincanton, Som. W. 112
Winchcomb, Glou. S. 93
-' ■ IVinchclfea, SulTcx, S. 67
*-W IN CHESTER, Hamp. W. S. 63
Windham, Ncrf. F. 100
Berks. S. 21
Window, Bucks. T. 50
Winder, Derby. S. 146
Wirklworth, Derby. T. 138
Wilbeach; Canto. S. 89
Wifton, Pemb. S. 236
Witham, Effex, T. 37
Witney, Oxf. Th. 64
Wivelfcomb, Sent. T. 154
Wooburn, Bedf. F. 42
Wooking, Surry, T. 28
Woodbridge, Suff. W. 76
**lVood/lock, Oxf. T. 6z
Wooler, Korthumb. Th. 317
Wolverhampton, Staff. W. 124
Woolwich, Kent, F. 10
S ' WoRCE S TE R, Wore. W. F S. lit
Workfop, Nott. W. 152
Wotton-under-Edge, G.'ou. F. 10S
; r ff'ctton-Boffl , Wilts. F. 190
Wrexham, Denb. M. Th. 187
Wrington, Som. T. 130
Wrotham, Kent, T. 24
Wurfted, Norf. S. 120
Wycomb, Bucks. F. 29
Wye, Kent. Th. 57
-*-*Yaimb:tth, Hamp. F. rci
Yarmouth, Norf. S. 123-
Yarum, York. Th. 237
Yaxley, Hunt. T. 77
Yeo\il, Som. F. 123
ft-YoRK, York. T. Th. S. 197


A LIST OF THE
Principal Poft and Sub-Poft-Towns, with their Receiving Houfes,
In ENGLAND and WALES,
With the Price of Portage, and the Time of Arrival from, and Departure to, London,
B. The Sub-Poft-Towns are indented, the Receiving Houfes are in Italic.— m. implies Morning, or between the Hours of Twelve at Night, to Twelve ©’Clock at
Noon ; and af. implies Afternoon, or from Twelve o’clock at Noon to Twelve o’Clock at Night; 2d. D. implies Second Day ;N. D. next Day ;
and S. N. lame Night of tire Arrival of the Poll from London.
V •
V- 5
Arrive. ‘I .11%
b- ft,
ABERCONWAY, Carnarvonfhire ——2 d. D. icm. 2af. 6
Abergavenny, Monmouthfhire ——2 d. D. 12m. 4m. 5
Abergelly, Denbighlhire 2d. D. Bm. 4af. 6
Aberiftwith, Carciganfhire 2d. D. 9af. fm. 6
Froady, Why ad
Abingdon, Berks, N. D. 7m. 7af. 4
King ft on Inn, Pew-fey Furx
Acle, Norfolk - N. D. laf. 2af. f
St. Albans, Hertfordfhire S. N. xiaf. 11m. 3
Aldborough, Suffolk ■ N. D. 6af. 12m. f
Alnwick, Northumberland - 2d. D. 4af. 4m. 6
Forth Charlton, Felton
Alresford, Hants N. D. 4m. iiaf, 4
Alton, Hants N. D. 3m. im. 4
IVeJI Meon, Warnford, Dr oxford, llambledon
Amefbury, Wiltfhire N- D. icm. faf. 4
Amerlham, Bucks N. D. Bm. yaf. 4
Ampthill, Bedfordlhire N. D. fm. yaf. f
Andover, Hants N. D. fm. 9m. 4
Annan 2d. D. faf. fra. 7
Appleby, Weftmoreland - 2d. D. icm. lira, 6
Arundel, Suflex - -- N. D. 12m. faf. 4
Pitt .champion, Angmtring
St. Afaph, Flintlhire —-2 d. D. 7m. faf. 6
Afhbom, Derbylhire ■ ■ N. D. 4af. Bm. f
Athburton, Devonlhire - • 2d. D. 6m. 9af. 6
Ivy bridge, Brent, Buckfajl/eigh
Afhford, Kent —... . N. D. 11m. faf. 4
Acherflone, Warwicklhire N. D. 12m. laf. f
Attleborough, Norfolk N. D. 9m. 6af. f
Auckland Bilhop, Durham 2d. D. 9m. 1 laf. 6
Wefl Auckland
Aulcefter, Warwicklhire N. D. 11m. faf. f
St. Auftle, Cornwall 2d. D. Saf. gaf. 6
Pengrugle, Grampond, Prebus, St. Blazty, and the
Tollbar to Loffwitbiel
Axminfter, Devonlhire . N. D. 6af. Bm. f
Colliion, Sidford, Beer, Seaton
Aylefburv, Bucks N. D. 4m. Saf. 4
Baglhot, Surry S. N. iiaf. 3m. 4
Bakewell, Derbylhire N- D. Saf. 4m. 6
Mat lot k
Bala, Merionethlhire - ■ 2d. D. 2 af. 3m. 6
Banbury, Oxfordlhire . N. D. 11m. 4af. 4
Bangor, Carnarvonlhire .1. 2d. D. laf. 11m. 6
Barmouth, •Merionethlhire 3d. D. 6m. 9m. 6
Barnard Caftle, Durham —— - 2d. D. 6m. 2af. 6
Stamdrop
Barnet, Hertfordlhirc —— ——— S. N. loaf. fm. 2
_ \s ■
t V. L V v>
c> <S O'- 2S fcxQ
V, .& * ~
Arrive. .§ £ %
£ ft,
►S
Barnfley, Yorkfhire —_ 2d. D- im. 2m. 6
Barnftaple, Devonlhire . 2d. D. 10m. saf. 6-
Ifracomb
Baflngftoke, Hants N. D. 3m. iaaf. 4
Battle, Suflex N. D. 9m. 4af. 4
Catsfild-green, Ninfield-flocks, Bonham Street
Bath, Someneflhire N. D. icm. faf. B
Bawtry, Yorklhire N. D. 6m. 6m. G<
Beaconsfleld, Bucks N. D. leaf. 4m. 3
Beaumaris, Anglefea < 2d. D. faf. 7m. 6
Beccles, Suffolk —.— N- D. 3af. lira. B
Bedal, Yorklhire 2d. D. 7m. 2af. 6
Middleham, Leyburn, JVenfley, AJkrlg , Havocs
Bedford, Bedfordlhire ■ N. Dr fm. 4-
Bed win, Wiltfhire - - N. D. T l 3 9at. 4
BelforJ, Northumberland ■ - 2d. D. 7af. 2m. 6
Benfington, Oxford ——— N. D. 9m. 3af. 4
Berkharaftead, Herts —— N. D. 2m. iiaf. 4
Berkeley, Glocefterfhire —— N. D. faf. 9m. 5
Berwick, Northumberland -- - 2cLD. 9af. iaaf. S
CoIJJI ream
Beverley, Yorkfhire ■ 2d. D. 6m. faf* 6>
Driffield
Bewdley, Worcefterlhire ■ ■ N. D. 7af. 4m. 5
Bicefter, Oxford ——— N. D. Sm. 6af. 4
Biddeford, Devonfhire ■■■-■ ■■ 2d. D. Sm. 4af. 6
Biddenden, Kent N. D. 9m. 4af. 4
Bigglefwade, Bedfordlhire —— hi. D. 6m. 6af. 4
Billericay, Effcx N. D. 6m. 6af. 3
Bingley, Yorklhire 2d. D. Bm. 2af. 6
Birmingham, Warwick (hire ——— N. D. laf. faf. 5
Sutton-Cofcld, Dudley, Bilflon, Meriden, Cajile-
Brormvicb, iVeff Bromwich, IValjal, Willenhall
Bilhop’s Caftle, Shroplhire 2d. D. 9m. 4af. 6
Chen
Bilhop’s Stortford, Herts —— —* S. N. I2af. 3m. 3
Stanjled, Fhtendon, Newport
Blackburn, Lancafhire 1 ■ ~ 24 - 9 m *
Blandford, Dorfetfhire —** N. D. nm. fat. 5
Milborne St. Andrew, Piddletown
Blechingley, Surry —— N. D. 12 m. 2m. 3
Bozeat, Northaraptonfhire N. D. iaf. laf. 4
Bodmin, Cornwall • 2d. D. faf. nm. 6
Bolton, Lancafhire —— 2d. D. 3m. caf. 6
Bourne, Lincolnfhire N. D. icm. leaf. f
Boroughbtidge, Yorkfhire - N. D. I2af. Baf. 6
Bofton, Lincolnfhire N. D. faf. Bm. f
BolHngbroke, Alfred, Spilfhy
Boxford, Suflex N ' D ‘ I2af ' 4
Brack ley.


Arrival. Depat t. Pofl.
Brackler, Northamptonlhire N. D. gm. 2af. 4
Bradford, Yorklhire ...... 2d. D. 6m. gaf. 6
Bradford, Wiltlhire ——« N. D. I ora. saf. 5
Braintree, Eflex —■ N. D. 3m. Baf. 4
Brandon, Suffolk N. D. 7m. Baf. 4
Hilborough, Mundford, Metbwold
Brecknock, Brecknocklhire 2d. D. 3m. izaf. 6
Brentwood, Eflex ..■■ ■ ■ S. N. naf. sm. 3
Briddeftow, Devonihire -—.— 6
Bridgenorth, Shropshire —— N. D. yaf. Bm. 5
Bridgewater, Somerfetihire N. D. saf. 10m. 5
Bridlington, Yorkshire - -- ■ ■ - 2d. D. gm. laf. 6
Bridport, Dorfetlhire N. D. 4af. lira. 5
Cbarmoutb, Chediock, Morcornbe's Lake, The Hut,
Traveller s Red, JVinterborne
Brighthelmftone, Suflex N. D. Bm. yaf. 4
Briftol, Somerfetfliire N-D. nm. 4af. g
Chepfow, Newport, Keynfloam
Broadway, Gioceflerlhire - N. D. 10m. 6af. 5
Bromlev, Kent S. N. roaf. 4m. 2
Bromyard, Herefordlhire ■■■ ■* N. D. yaf. Bra. 5
Bromfgrove, Worcefterlhire N. D. yaf. ym. 5
Brough, Weflmoreland »--- ■ ——2 d. D. gm. laf. 6
Kirkby Stephen
Bruton, Somerfetihire —■- —■ - N. D. 4af. Saf. 5
Buckingham, Bucks N. D. ym. 6af. 4
Builth, Brecknocklhire ——.— 2d. D. Bm. 2af. 6
Bungay, Suffolk . ■ N. D. im. gaf. 5
Burford, Oxfordlhire N. D. ym. Saf. 4
Sto w in the H old
Burnham, Norfolk ■——.-.. .. N. D. saf. Bm. 5
Burnley, Lancalhire 2d. D. 2af. Bm. 6
a '
Burton upon Treat, Staffordshire ~ N. D. saf. naf. 5
Bury St. Edmund’s, Suffolk —— N. D. ym. yaf. 4
Buxton, Derbylhire K- D. gaf. 12m. 6
Carmarthen, Carmarthenlhire 2d. D. 12m. 2af. 6
L'.angadack, Llanely, Kidwelly
Caine, Wiltlhire ■ - N. D. Bm. Saf. 5
Cambridge, Cambridgelhirc —— N. D. ym. Baf. 4
Camelford, Cornwall ■■■ 2d. D. 4af. gm. 6
Campden, Gioceflerlhire -■■■ N. D. 12m. 4af. 5
Canterbury, Kent - N. D. sm. gaf. 4
Cardiff, Glamorganlhire - N. D. gaf. 4m. 6
Cowibndge, Bridge End, Pyle, Blargarn
Cardigan, Cardiganlhire 2d. D. 2af. sm. 6
Carlisle, Cumberland ■ 2d. D. 2af. 6m. 6
Brampton, IVigton
Carnarvon, Camarvonlhire 2d. D. gaf. Bm. 6
Caftle Alhby, Bucks 4
Caftle Cary, Somerfetihire -—— N. D. gaf. sm. 5
Critleton, Ifle of Man 8
Caxton N. D. 3m. gaf. 4
An ington
o
Chapel in Frith, Derbylhire 2d. D 6m. leaf. 6
Chard N. D. saf. Bm. 5
Chapel Houfe, Oxfordlhire N. D. ym. Saf. 4
Chatteris, Cambridgefhire - —N. D. Bm. 4af. 4
Chatham, Kent N. D. 6m. gaf. 4
Chelmsford, Eflex S. N. naf. gm. 4
Danbury, Bradvoell
Cheltenham, Glocefterlhire N. D. lira. 4af. 5
CheJham, Bucks - N. D. 4
Chefter, Chelhire —> ■- 2d. D. im. naf. 6
Par kg ate, Nef.cn
Arrival. Depart. Pof,
Chefterfield, Derbylhire —— N. D. Saf. 6m. 5
Chichefter, Suflex N. D, lira. 4af. 4
Chimleigb, Devonihire 2d. D. 6m. 9af. 6
Chipping Norton, Oxfordlhire —— N. D. 7m. Baf. 4
Chippenham, Wiltlhire —— N. D. 9m. 9m. 5
Marshfield N. D. 10m. 4af. 5
Chorley, Lancalhire —.— zd. D. 7m. 7af. 6
Croft on, Lay land
Chriftchurcb, Hants N. D. 12 m. 3m. 5
Cirencefler, Gioceflerlhire —— N. D. nm. 4af. 3
Clare, Suffolk. N. D. lira. laf. 4
Haverhill, Batborns-end, Yeldon, Sible Htdingham
Clay, Norfolk —•— N. D. 4af. rcm. 5
Cobham, Surry S. N. naf. 4m. 3
Cockermouth, Cumberland 2d. D. naf. naf. 6
Colchefter, Eflex ——.— N. D. 3m. naf. 4
Didhant, Stratford St. Mary
Colnbrook, Bucks S. N. naf. 4m. 3
Coldhill, Warwickfhire - N. D. 12m. 2af. 5
Colne, Lancalhire 2d. D. lira. 9m. 6
Colterfworth, Lincolnshire N. D. nm. 2af. 5
St. Columb, Cornwall - —•— 6
Collumpton, Devonihire N. D. leaf. 6m. 6
Congleton, Che Shire N. D. gaf. saf. 6
Corfe Caftle, DorfetShire - N. D. 4af. 9m. 5
CorSham, Hampshire K. D. sm. Baf. 4
Coventry, Warwickshire N. D. 9m. 4af. 5
Cranbourn, DorfetShire - N. D. 12m. laf. 5
Cranbrook, Kent —•- N. D. 6m. saf. 4
Crcditon, Devonihire 2d. D. 3m. naf. 6
Crewkerne, Somerfetihire —— N. D. 4af. lorn. 5
South Pether ton
Crofs-hills, Yorklhire - . - 2d. D. 10m. 12m. 5
Crofs Hands, Suflex N. D. 9m. 2af. 4
Croydon, Surry ■ S. N. gaf. sm. 2
Carjhaltony JJ'addon, Sutton
Darking, Surry - S. N. im. gaf. 3
Bart Green, Betchvoorth
Darlington, Durham - 2d. D. ym. 3 6
Pearce Bridge, Gainfotd , Saberg, Longnrwton,
Stahidoop
Dartford, Kent - S. N. leaf. 3m. 2
Dartmouth, Devonihire zd. D. icm. gaf. 6
Brixbam
Daventry, Northamptonshire N. D. 7m. yaf. 4
Duncburch
Deal, Kent N. D. gm. saf. 4
Deddington, Oxfordshire N. D. 12m. 12m. 4
Deerham Eaft, Norfolk N. D. lira. 4af. 5
Woodnorton
Denbigh, Denbighshire 2d. D. gm. 3af. 6
Derby, Derbyshire N. D. 3af. lora. 5
Matlock N. D. 6m. 6af. 5
Devizes, Wiltlhire N. D. Bm. yaf. 5
Difs, Norfolk N. D. lira. gaf. 5
B oddef dale
Dolgelly, Merionethshire 2d. D. yaf. urn. 6
Doncafter, Yorklhire N. D. yaf. sm. 6
Hatfeld
Dorchefter, Dorfetlhire -■ - N. D. laf. 12m. 5
Upvjay
Dover, Kent N. D. ym. 6at. 4
Downham, Noifolk N. D. lira. 4af. 5
Hading , Ayl/hant , Long Stratton
S J Drayton,


Arrival. Dcp. Pojl.
Drayton, Shropshire —•— N. D. loaf. saf. 6
Dunmow, Eflcx N. D. 10m. laf. 4
Dunftable, Bedfordihirc N. D. im. zaf. 4
Dunkirk, Gloceftcrfhirn, N. D. zm. zaf. 5
Durham, Durham zd. D. 10m. izaf. 6
Shipdam, Helbam, Guijl, Houghton le Spring, and
Cbejicr le Street
Durfley, Glocefterfhirc N. D. 4af. 10m. 5
Eahngwold, Yorkfhire zd. D. zm. Baf. 6
Eaft Grinftead, Suffex N. D. zm. izaf. 4
Uckjield, IVeft Hoadley, Ardinghy , Cuckjield, Lin-
Juld, Horjled Caines, Crawley, Hartjield and
Maresjield
Eaft Bourne, Suflex N. D. 10m. 3 af. 4
Eaft Looc, Cornwall zd D. 7m. zaf. 6
Edgcware, Middlefex —•— S. N. loaf. ioaf. z
Stanmore
Ellefmere, Shropfhire zd. D. sm. 4af. 6
Ely, Cambridgeshire N. D. zm. im. 4
Milton Tollbar, St ret ham
Enfton, Oxfordfhire N. D. 6m. 9af. 4
Epping, Effex S. N. ioaf. ioaf. z
Epfom, Surry S. N. naf. 12m. z
Efher, Surry S. N. ioaf. 4m. 3
Evefhara, Worcefterfhire N. D. lorn. 53ft 5
Exeter, Devon {hire N. D. ioaf. sm. 6
Otterton, Budlcy, Salter ten
Eye, Suffolk N. D. lira. 43ft 5
Scale Inn
Fairford, Glzccfterfhire N. D. zm. saf. 5
Fakenham, Norfolk N. D. laf. zaf. 5
Little IValffngham
Falkenham, Lincoln N. D. izra. yaf. 5
Falmouth, Cornwall zd. D. Baf. 6m. 6
Fareham, Hants N. D. Bm. saf. 4
Titcbjield
Farnham, Surry _ N. D. zm. 3 m. 4
Farringdon, Berkshire _ __ N. D. 7af. 6af. 4
Fenny Stratford, Buckinghamfhire N. D. 3 m. im. 4
Ferrybridge, Yorkfhire N. D. Baf. 3 m. 6
Sherborne, Kippax, JVentbridge, Robin Hood's Well
Feverfham, Kent N. D. 3 m. ioaf. 4
Findon, Suffex N. D. im. 10m. 4
Five Lanes, Cornwall —.— za D. 6
Folkeftone, Kent N. D. 10m. 4af. 4
Foot’s Cray, Kent S. N. naf. 9 af. 1
St. Mary's Cray, Orpington
Fordingbridgc, Hants N. D. 9m. 3 af. 5
Fowey, Cornwall zd. D. yaf. 2 af. 6
Fro-defham, Cheftcr 2d. D. 2m. y a f. 6
Frogmill, Gloceftcrfhi'-e N. D. 11m. saf. 5
Froome, Soraerfctfhire N. D. 11m. 3 af. 5
Gargrave, Yorkfhire 2 d. D. izm. 9m. 6
Gainfborough, Lincoln N. D. yaf. 4m. 5
Kir ton, Brigg, Barton
Garftang, Lanca.'hire 2d D. Bm. 3 af. 6
Gatefhead, Durham zd D. 12m. icm. 6
St. Germains, Cornwall ■ 2d D. 4af. 4m. 6
Gtrram’s Crofs, Bucks __ S. N. iraf. sm. 3
Glaflonbury, Somerletfhire N. D. xaf. laf. 5
Gtocefter, Glocefterfhirc N. D. iaf. 3 af. 5
Nezvnbam, Mitchel Dean, Neic ent
Godaiming, Surry N. D. im. zm. 4
Arrival. Dep. Vofc
Godftone, Surry S. N. izaf. 3 m. 3
Bhchingley
Gofport, Hants N. D. 7m, 6af. 4
Goudhurft, Kent N. D. Bm. 6af. 4
Grantham, Lincolnshire N. D. 10m. xaf. 5
Gravefend, Kent S. N. izaf. 3 m. 3
Greta Bridge, Yorkshire ad. D. sm. 3 af. 6
Bowes
Grayes, Effex S. N. 9 af. 6m. 3
Grirafby Great, Lincolnfhire - N. D. 9m. laf. 6
Guilford, Surry S. N. izaf. am. 3
Gwyndu, Carnarvonshire 2d. D. 4af. 9m. 6
Hales Owen, Shropfhire N. D. laf. 3 af. 5
Halifax, \ orkfhire 2d. D. 7m. 3 af. 6
Heptonftall, Elland, Rippondon, Light cliff-, High-
town, Dewjbury
Halftead, Effex N. D. 6m. 6af. 4
Earljcolne, Hedingham Sible and Ca/Ile, Yeldbam,
Stoke , Bytborne-end, Haverill', RidgeweU
Harlfton, Norfolk. N. D. 12m. 4af. 5
Harlow, Eflcx S. N. naf. 4m. 3
Hartfordbridge, Hants N. D. im. im. 4
Harwich, Effex N. D. Bm. yaf. 4
Colnefs Ferry, Walton, Carton, Felixf.ow, Land-
guard Fort
Haflemeer, Surry N. D. sm. leaf. 4
Hafling, Norfolk N. D. 9m. 6af. 5
Haftings, Suffex —.— N. D. icm. 3 af. 4
Hatfield, Herts S. N. naf. im. 3
Havant, Hants N. D. 9m. 5-af. 4
Haverford Weft, Pembrokefhire zd. D. gaf. Sm. 6
Hawkehurft, Suflex N. D. Bm. 6af. 4
Sandburjl
Hay, Brecknock (hire —•— N. D. izaf. 4m. 6
Bredwardine
Helmfley, Yorkfhire -- zd. D. 10m. 3 af. 6
Ktrkby Moorjide
Helftone, Cornwall zd. D. im. zm. 6
Hemel Hempfted, Herts - N. D. im. zm. 4
Gaddejden , Ivingbo, H'ing
Henley, Oxfordfhire N. D. im. 3 m. 4
Henficld, Suflex ■— N. D. urn. izm. 4
Henley, Warwickfhire N. D. 11m. faf. 5
Hereford, Herefordshire N. D. p&i. Sm. 5
Harenvaod-end , Birch , Callow , Goodrich, Wejlon
Crofs, Huntley
Hertford, Hertfcrdihire N. D. Bm. Baf. 3
Heytfbury, Wiltfhire N. D. 12m. zaf. 5
Higham Ferrars, Northamptonshire N. D. 11m. laf. 4
Highworth, Wiltfhire N. D, zm. 4af. 4
Swindon, Woottoa Bajfet, Brinhvortb, Cricilade,
Malmfbury
Hindoo, Wiltfhire N. D. Bm. izm. 5
Hinckley, Leicefterlhirc N. D. lira. zat. 5
Market Bo heartb, Nuneaton
Hitching, Hertfordshire N. D. 3m. S-f. 4
Baldoch
Holt, Norfolk N. D. llm. 5
Holkham, Norfolk N. D. 5
Holyhead, Anglefea D. 7-af. 7m. 6
Holywell, Flintfhire D. 3 m * loa *-
Honiton, Devonshire —• ' a -‘ ? m *
Wbimph, Stockland, Broad Hemhury, Ottery
Horncoftle, Lincolnshire N. D. Saf. laf. 5
p Hor/lum


Arrival. Dtp- P 'oft*
Ror'ham, Suffex N. D. 3 m - 7®*- 4
Hounikrv, Middlefex * —*• IC ’ sm>5 m>
Houghton, Norfolk. • N. D. 12m. 4 af - 5
Howden, Yorkfhire, N. D. 11 af. 4
Hubbcrftone, Pcmbrokefhire 2d D. 9af. 3m. 6
Hull, Yorkfhire 2d D. Bm. 3af. 6
Hungerford, Wiitfhire N-D. sm. liaf. 4
Huntingdon, Huntingdonfhire N. D. 5 m * " at * 4
Bugden, Rnm/ey
Huddersfield, Yorkfhire 2d D. 9m. ?af- 6
Hurft Green N. D. 6m. 6af. 4
Robet tjhridge
Hvthe, Kent N. D. 10m. 2af. 4
J '
Jevington, Suflex N. D. 10m. icm. 4
Ilchefter, Somerfetfhirc N* D.
Ilminfter, Scmcrfetfhire N. D. saf. Bm. 5
Ingateftone, Effex - S. N. 12 m. 4»f. 3
Ipfwich, Suffolk N. D. 6ra. loaf. 4
Stratton, Woodbndge , Melton , Wickham, Tratn-
lingham, Hadleigb
lileworth, Middlefex ■— S. N. liaf. jaf. 2
Richmond, Ptttrjham, Ham, Thames Ditton, Hamp-
ton Wick, Twickenham, TedcUngton, Hampton,
Hajl and Wejl Moulfey, Walton, U eybridge,
Witten, Hanoxorth, Sunbury, Littleton, Sbe-
perten
St. Ives, Cornwall 2d D. 4
IHe of Wight, Hampfhire —* N. D. 9m. 3af. 5
St. Ives, Huntingdonfhire N. D. 6m. 5-tf. 4
Keighley, Yorklhire 2d D. Bm. laf. 6
Kellington or Callington, Cornwall 2d D. ?m. Baf. 6
Kelvedon, Effex N. D. im. im. 4
Coggejkall
Kendal, Weftmoreland 2d D. laf. icm. 6
Kefwick, Cumberland 2d D. leaf. 3m. 6
Kettering, Norlhamptonfhire • N. D. 10m. laf. 4
Kidderminfier, Worcefterfhire N. D. 6af. sm. 5
Keldwick, Yorklhire 2d D. nm. 12m. 6
Kimbolton, Huntingdonfhire N. D. Sm. 3a!. 4
B ) thorn, Great Cativorth
Kineton, Warwickshire N. D. 12m. 2af. 5
Kingffon, Surry S - IC3 ** 3 m - 2
Kirkby Lonfdale, Weffmoreland 2d D. 6af. 3m. 6
Coioen Bridge, Topbam-Smitby, Ingleton , Clapham
Knarefborough, Yorkfhire 2d D. 7m. faf. 6
Harrow gate, Rip.'ey •
Knutsford, Chefhire N. D. liaf. 3m. 6
Ahringbam
Lamberhurft, Kent N. D. 4m. Saf. 4
Lancafter, Lancafhirc 2d D. 9m. 2af. 6
Launcefton, Cornwall 2d D. icm. 3af. 6
Langley, Herts S. N. 2m. 3
Langport, Somerfetfhirc N. D. saf. 9m. 5
Lawton, Staffordfhire N. D. yaf. 6m. 6
Lsatherhead, Surry N. D. im. laf. 3
Lechlade, Glocefterfhire N. D. Bm. 6af. 4
Ledbury, Herefordihirc —•— N. D. 4af. Sm. 5
Leeds, Yorklhire • 2m>
Adixalton
Leek, Staffordfhire ” *“ N. D. 7af. 6m. 6
Leiceffer, Leicefterlhire N. D. nm. 3af. 5
Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordfhire - « N. D. 9m. 3a!. 4
Leeming, Yorkfhire 2d D. 3m. 6af. 6
Xeominfter, Herefordihirc N. D. izaf. 4m. 5
Arrival T>ep. ToJ! %
Lifkard, Cornwall D. 4m. sm. 6
LoweSoffe, Suffolk N. D. saf. 9m.
Lojhuitbiel, Cornwall — 1 2dD. 6
Lewes, Suflex *“ N. D. 6m. Baf. 4
Eaji Hoathley, Waldron, Haifham
Lime, Dorfedhire ■- ■- N. D. saf. Bm. 5
Lincoln, Lincolnshire • N. D. 5 5
IVragby
Linton, Cambridgeshire N. D. Bm. 7af. 4
Bourne Bridge, Wejl JVratting, Great Thurlow
Litchfield, Staffordshire N. D. laf. urn. 5
Can’ll-:!!, Black brook, Longdon, Rudgeley , Sutton,
Wo If (ley, Fenkridgs, Abbott Bromley, Wichnor
Bridge
Liverpool, Lancafhire ■■ * id D. 4 m * 1 laf. 6
Llanarchymead, Anglefea 2d D. Baf. saf. 6
Llanymdovry, Cardiganshire —•— 2d D. 7m. 7af. 6
Liangadock, Cayo
Llandillo, Montgomeryshire 2d D. 6af. 7m. 6
Lampeter, Cardiganshire 2d D, zaf. 3af. 6
Clwtyf’wm, Rbydown, Fennylont, Ar-Cerden, Ebe-
nezcr, Pemhi’ivllan, Pont y Aber, At par Gate,
C'wmcoy, Llanartb, Ne~M dheay, Tftrad, Pandy,
Ne’io Bridge End, Aberayon, Tahjarn, Rbiw-
las, Dujfrin, Frwdywhiad, Llanruijied, Chan-
cery, Penybive, Pimpfai/it, Brynbope , YJlrad-
meyrick, Kilgunll
LongSone, Cornwall 2d D. ■— 6
Looe, Cornwall 2d D. 7af. 12m. 6
Loughborough, LeicefterSiire N. D. 12m. laf. 5
Aby de la Zoucb , Mount Sorrel, Kegwortb
Louth, Lincolnihire N. D. I2af. lorn. 5
Ludlow, ShropSiire —— N. D. gaf. Bm. 5
Luton, Bedfordshire S. N. leaf. 9af. 4
Barton in the Clay, Margaret Street, Rsdbourne,
Harpenden
Lutterworth, LeiceScrShire N. D. 9m. gaf. 4
LyndhurS, HampSiire N. D. I cm. yaf. 4
Brokenburjt
Lymington, HampSiire N. D. 11m, 4af. 5
Lynn Regis, Norfolk N. D. 12m. 4af. 5
Macclesfield, Che Shire N. D. Baf. 4m. 6
Machynleth, Montgomeryshire 2d D. 6af. loaf. 6
Tafarn, Dolardin, Llanfair, Llanerfil, Can Office,
Mallwyd, Canines
Maidenhead, Berk Sure N. D. im. 3m, 3
Tuiford
Maidftone, Kent N. D. 7m. Baf. 4
Malden, Eflex N. D. Bm. 7af. 4
Makon, York Shire 2d D. 4m. 7af. 6
Manchefter, LancaSxire N. D. naf. 2ra. 6
AJhton under Lyne, Bury
Manningtrce, Eflex N. D. sm. loaf. 4
Mansfield, Nottinghamshire N. D. saf. Bro. 5
Marlh, Cambridge N. D. 9m. 3af. 5
Margate, Kent N. D. 11m. 3af. 4
St. Peters
Market Harborough, LeiceSerSvire N. D. 9m. 7af. 9 *
Gian, Kebnvortb
Market Raifin, LincolnSiire —■ N. D. 6af. 7af. 6
Caijior
Market Jew, Cornwall 3d D. 2m. 7af. 6
Marlborough, WikSiire « ■— N. D. 6m. loaf. 4
Beckbampton
St. Mawes,


Arrival. Dep, Pof.
St. Mawes, Cornwall ad D. 10m. aaf. C
MelkSham, Wiltshire N. D. 9m. 6af. 5
Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire N. D. faf. 6m. 5
Mere, Wiltshire N. D. iaf. Bm. 5
MevagiSTey, Cornwall ad D. loaf. Baf. 6
Middles ich, Cheshire ad D. Bm. 4af. 6
Holnxs Chapel
MidhurSt, SuSTex N. D. 7m. yaf. 4
Compton , Halting, ElJiead, Wejlboume, Emfvjortb,
IVejimarden, Singleton, Lavant
Hampton, GloceSlerShire N. D. 12m. aaf. 5
Minehcad, SomerfetShire N. D. 4af. am. 6
Dunfter, Tarr, Tardmills, Ajhhear, Handy-Crofs
Miffendcn, Buckinghamshire N. D. 10m. saf. 4
Monmouth, Monmouthshire N. D. Baf. Bm. 5
Montgomery, Montgomeryshire ad D. 7m. aaf. 6
Morpeth, Northumberland ad D. 3af. 6m. 6
Morton in the MarSh, GloceSlerShire N. D. Bm. yaf. 5
Mould, Flintshire ad D. sm. 6af. 6
Namptwich, Cheshire N. D. 9af. loaf. 6
Totperlay N. D. naf. 3m. 6
Narbeth, Pembrokeshire ad D. 4af. 9m. 6
Lauvharne ad D. 6
O
Neath, Glamorganshire - ad D. 3m. leaf. 3
Needham Market, Suffolk N. D. Bm. saf. 4
St. Neot’s, Huntingdonshire - - N. D. 6m. 4af. 4
Slaughton Highway
Nettlebed, Oxfordshire N. D. im. am. 4
Sbillingford, Donbefter, JVatl'mgtcn
Newark, Nottinghamshire N. D> im. 10m. 5
Southwall, Carlton upon Trent, Collingham
Newbury, Berkshire N. D. 9m. leaf. 4
Newcastle, Northumberland ’ ao D. iaf. icm. 6
Hexham
Newcastle under Line, Staffordshire N. D. yaf. ym. 5
Newhaven, SuSTex N. D. Bm. saf. 4
Newmarket, Cambridgeshire ■ N. D. 4m. liaf. 4
Newport, LTe of Wight, Hampshire N. D. 12m. aaf. 5
Newport, Shropshire N. D. paf. 6m. 5
Newport Pagnel, Buckinghamshire N. D. 3m. iaaf. 4
Newton, Lincolnshire - N. D. 3af. 6ra. 5
Newton, Montgomeryshire ad D. 9m. 12m. 6
Nevland, Suffolk N. D. 10m. 6at. 4
J 7
Northallerton, Yorkshire ad D. sm. saf. 6
Gufborough ad D. 9m. lira. 6
Noithampton, Northamptonshire N. D. 6m. yaf. 4
Lamport, Higbgate Houfe, We ford
Northlech, GloceSlerShire N. D. 9m. 6af. 5
Northorp, Flintshire —“ D. 3 m * loaf. 6
Hawarden
North Shields, Northumberland - —• ad D. aaf. 6m. 6
Norfhwich, Cheshire - D. sm. 6af. 6
Norwich, Norfolk —* N. D. 11m. 4 aI * 5
A\!(fham, Cromer, Long Stratton
Nothiam, Hampshire 4
Nottingham, Nottinghamshire N. D. 3af. urn. 5
Odiam, Hampshire N. D. 7m. jaf. 4
Southern borough
Oakham, Rutlandshire N. D. 3 5
Oakhampton, Devonshire —* 7 m *
Ollerton, Nottinghamshire - -5
Ongar, Effex S. N. I oaf. loaf. 3
Stanford Rivers, Pijfmgford Bridge, Abridge
Orford, Suffolk N. D. 7 m * aaf. 5
Arrival. Deft. PoJl»
Ormfltirk, Lancashire ad D. 6m. yaf. 6
Ofweflry, Shropshire ad D. am. 6
Mont ford Bridge, Nefc'ijfe, Felton, Chirk, Plaff-
newydd, Llangollen, Brynhelma, Convert
Oulney, Buckinghamshire —•— N. D. Bm. 4
Emberton, Clifton , Newton Turvey, Brafield, La-
vendon, Cat I ton, Harr old, IVefion, Raven-
flon
Oundle, Northamptonshire N. D. 9m. aaf, J
Barnwell Caftle, Tborfe Turnpike
Overton, Hampshire N. D. 4m. liaf. 4
Oxford, Oxfordshire N. D. 4m. naf. 4
PadiSham, Yorkshire ad D. aaf. 9af. 6
Painfwick, GloceSlerShire N. D. 4af. aaf. 5
Pembroke, Pembrokeshire ad D. yaf. 6m. 6
Pennybout, Radnorshire ad D. 11m. 11m. 6
Penrith, Cumberland ad D. urn. 9m. 6’
Penryn, Cornwall ad D. Baf. 6m. 6'
Penzance, Cornwall —■ ad D. 3m. 6af. 6
PcrShore, Worcestershire N. D. 12m. 4af. 5
Peterborough, Northamptonshire - N. D. Bm. 4af. 4
Thomey, Cray land
Petersfield, Hampshire - N. D. 4m. leaf. A
Petworth, SuSTex N- D. am. im. 4-’
Fittlebcrough, Fulborougb, Udfhorough Green, Bil-
lingburjl
Pewfey, Wiltshire N. D. icm. saf. 5
Plymouth, Devonshire ad D. icm. caf. 6
Plympton, Devonshire ad D. 9m. saf. 6
Pontefradl, Yorkshire ad D. sm, 6af. 6
Poole, DorfctShire N. D. 12m. 4af. 5
Portfmouth, Hampshire N. D. 6m. Baf. 4
Corfham
Prefcot, Lancashire ad D. im. laaf. 6
Prefteign, Radnorshire ad D. sm. 6af. 6
PreSlon, Lancashire 2d D. 6m. 6af. 6
Pulhely, Carmarthenshire ad D. 9af. 6af. 6
Queenborough, Kent N. D. 7m. 7af. 4
Sbeernefs
New Radnor, Radnorshire 2d D. 9m. 3af. 6
Raleigh, ESTex N. D. Bm. Baf. 3
RamSbury, Wiltshire - hi. D. ym. 6af. 4
Ramfgate, Kent N. D. icm. 4af. 4
Rawcliff, Yorkshire N. D. loaf. 6af. 6
Snaitb
Reading, Berkshire N. D. 6ra. leaf. 4
Then!, Jack's Booth, Beckenham
Eaft Retford, Nottinghamshire N. D. 4af. 7m. 5
Rhavader, Breconihire ad D. aaf. 3af. 6
Riadergowy, Radnorshire - ‘
Richmond, Yorkshire ad D. 9m. aaf. 6
Reeth, Gilling, Aldborcugh, Kirby Hill, Middle
ton TyaS
Ride, Hie of Wight ~ N. D. aaf. icm. 5
Ringwood, Hampshire N. D. icm. 6af. 5
Ripley, Surry - - S ‘ N. naf. 3™. 3
Rippon, Yorkshire 6af *
Palely Bridge
Rochdale, Lancashire D< Iom * 2af * 6
Hafhngton, Bacop
Rocbefter, Kent - - S. N. I*m. laf. 3
Rochfoid, Eflex N. D. 10m. 3 af - 4
Pnttlewell, Wake ring
Rockingham, Northampton —* N * D ' iaf. icm. 3
i New


Arrival Dtp. Poji.
New Romney, Kent —•— N. D. 2af. 12m. 5
Lvdd , Brcoklar.d
Rofs, Herefordshire N. D. faf. nm. 5
Rougham, Suffolk N. D. lat. 3af. 5
Royfton, Hertfordshire N. D. im. naf. 4
Arrington, Buntingford, Puckendge, IVadfmill
Rugby, Warwickshire N. D. 9m. 321. 4
Dunchurcb
Rumford, ESlex ~ S. N. leaf. 4m. 2
Rumfey, Hampshire N. D. 10m. 6af. 4
Ruiheford, Durham - zd D. Bm. lat. 6
Sedgefe/d, Tarry hi!!
Ruthin, Denbigh - zd D. Bm. 4af. 6
Rve, Suffex N. D. 9m. 3af. 4
Rvegate, Surry N. D. Bm. Saf. 4
Saffron Walden, Effex N. D. 3m. 2m. 4
Sar.djord , Sarfon
Salisbury, Wiltshire N. D. yra. 6af. 5
H'ilton, Donvnton
Salterfgate, Yorkshire 2d D. 3af. 3af. 6
Sandbach, Cheshire 2d D. 9m. 10m. 6
Sandwich, Kent N. D. 9m. saf. 4
St. Peter's
Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire *— S. N. izaf. 4m. 3
Saxmundham, Suffolk N. D. icm. 3af. 5
Toxford, Halefwortb, Blithborough, JVangford
Southzvold
Scarborough, Yorkshire zd'D. Sm. zaf. 6
Scaford, Suffex *— N. D. 9m. 43ft 4
Alfnjlon
Selby, Yorkshire 2d D. ym. 4af. 6
Settle, Yorkshire zd D. iaf. 6m. 6
Brunton, Clapham , Ingleton, Topham, Smithy,
Convert Bridge
Sevenoaks, Kent S. N. izaf. im. 3
S her chan, Braifted, IVefterkam, Wrotham
Shafrfburv, DorfetShire N. D. nm. 3af. x 5
Sheffield, Yorkshire N. D. gaf. 4m. 6
Rotherham
Snefnal, Shropshire N. D. yaf. icm. 3
Wenlock, Btofeley, Madc/y Wood *
ghepton Mallet, Somerfetfluce N. D. 43ft nm. 5
Evercreecb
Sherboum, DorfetShire N. D. zaf. iaf. 5
Shipfton, Worcestershire N. D. Bm. Saf. 5
New Shoreham, Suffex N- D. Sm. Bm. 4
Shrewsbury, Shropshire —•— N. D. 9af. ym. 6
Hem
Sidmouth, Devonshire zd D. Bm. 6
Silfoe, Bedfordshire N. D. 3m. Saf. 4
Sittingbourn, Kent N. D. 3m. naf. 4
Skipton, Yorkshire zd D. nm. icaf. 6
Cor eft on , Hejijield, Long Prejlon
Sleaford, Lincolnshire N. D. zaf. 4af, s;
Sodburv, Glocefterlhire - N.D. 32E nm. 5
Somcrton, Somcrfetlhire N. D. ;af. 9m. 5
Southam, Warwickshire N. D. 9m. 5?.f. 5
Southampton, Hampshire N. D. ym. Baf. 4
ReedhriJge, Totten, -Hythe, Beiv ey
Southall, Middlesex S. N. leaf. 6m. z
Hayes, Drayton, Harmondf.uorth, Hartington,
Harrow, Pinner, RickmanJ\Vortb
South Shields, Durham zd D. zaf. 6m. 6
Spalding, Lincolnshire K. D. izru. 11m. 3
Anivsl. Dep. VoJ*,
Surfeit , Gojhirtorhy Sutlertw
Stafford, Staffordshire —•— N. D. saf. Bm. 5
Ecclejhall
Staines, Middlefex S. N. loaf. sm. 3
Egham, Chert fey
Stamford, Lincolnshire N. D. Bm. 3af. 5
Ste\#>.age, Hertfordshire- N. D. 3m. gaf. 4
Steyning, Suffex **•’ N. D. 2af. 3af. 4
Stilton, Huntingdonshire 4 - N. D. 6m. saf. 4
Stockbridge, Hampfhirc —< N. D. 4af. 4af. 4
Stockport, Cheshire N. D. iiaf. 3m. 6
Stockton, Durham 2d D. 9m. 10m. 6
Stoke, Chelhire 2d D. 10m. 6af. 6
Stoke, Norfolk N. D. 10m. yaf. 5
Wereham, Stradfet, Setcbe, Methwofd
Stone, Staffordshire N. D. saf. Bm. 3
Haywood, JVolfeley, Radge ley, Trentham, Sandon,
Cheadle, JVeJion
Stone Crouch, Kent N. D. sm. yaf. 4
Flinraitll, YVadburJi
Stoneham, Suffolk N- D. Bm. Baf. 4
Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire N. D. 3m. naf. 4
Storrington, Suffex N. D. zaf. ym. 4
Stow-market, Suffolk —•— N. D. 9m. 4af. 3
Coldir.gbam, Claydon
Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire N. D. 9m. faf. 3
IVclleJlourne
Stourbridge, Worcestershire N- D. 5 6m. 5
Stroud, GlocefterShire N. D. laf. laf. 5
Sudbury, Suffolk N. D. yra. 4af. 4
Bures, Melford, Lavenham
Sunderland, 'Durham 2d D. laf. 6m. 6
Swaffham, Norfolk - N. D. nm. faf.\ 3
Caftic Acre
Swanfea, Glamorganshire 2d D. 4m. Baf. 6
Tadcaftcr, Yorkshire N. D. leaf. nm. 9
Abberfard, Bramham, Thorp-Arch, Sherbunt
Tame, Oxfordshire N. D. Bm. Oaf. 4
Tamworlh, 'Staffordshire N. D. zaf. 12m. 5
Tavillock, Devonshire 2d. D. 11m. 3af. 6
Taunton, Somersetshire N- D. saf. 9m. 6
Tenburv, Worceftrrfhire N. D. Saf. icm. 5
Tenby, Pembrokeshire 2d D. 4af. 6m. 6
Tenterden, Kent • N- D. 9m. 3af. 4
Tetbury, GlocefterShire N. D. 12m. zaf. 5
Tetfworth, Oxfordshire • N. D. zm. im. 4
TewkSbury, GlocefterShire N. D. laf. 2af. 3
Thetford, Norfolk N. D. ym. Saf. 5
Thorn, Yorkshire - N. D. Saf. Saf. 6
Thornbury, GlocefterShire N. D. nm. laf. 5
Thrapfton, Northamptonshire N. D. nm. iaf. 5
ThirSk, Yorkshire 2d D. 4m. yaf. 6
Thwaite, Suffolk N. D. 5
Tidefwell, Derbyshire . N. D. 9af. zm. 6
Tiverton, Devonshire 2d D. Sm. 6at. 6
Top Sham, Devonshire zd D. zm. zm. t>
Totnefs, Devonshire 2a D. ym. ym. 6
King {bridge
Towcefter, Northamptonshire N. D. 6m. leaf. 4
Tregony, Cornwall 2d D. ym. 52L 6
Tring, Hertfordshire N. D. 3m. ic». 4
Prir.ce Rifborougb
Trowbridge, Wiltshire N. D. icm. f,af. 5
Truro, Cornwall zd D. 6af. Bm. 6
T anbr idge,


Arrival. Depart. Pof.
Tunbridge, Kent N. D. 2m. icaf. 4
Woodgate, Lambtrhurf, Goudhurf, Tunbridge WtllsN. D. 4m. leaf. 4
Tuxford, Nottingham flu re N. D. 3 af. Bra. c
Uppingham, Rutland N. D. laf. 9 m. 5
Ufk, Monmouthfliire 2d D. nm. 12m. 5
Caerleon
Uttoxeter, Staffordfhire N. D. yaf. 6m. 5
Abbots Bromley
Uxbrid D e, Middlefex S. N. ioaf. 4m. 2
Wakefield, Yorklhirc «d D/ 2m. i 2 af. 6
Deerjlury
Wallingford, Berkfhire N. g m .
WalTmgham, Norfolk N.D. lira. nm. 5
Waltham Crofs, Effex S. N. ioaf. 4m. 3
Enfield, Fortyhill, Nurthaw, Hoddejdon, Wonnle\,
Chefount Street, Cbur.bg ate, Carbuncle Street,
Waltham Abbey
Waltham, Hants N. D. 10m. 4af. 4
Walton, Norfolk
Wantage, Berkfhire N. D. 10m. 6af. 4
Alarket Jfey, Eambourne
Ware, Hertfordflure S. N. naf. 2m. 3
Buntmgford, Puckndge, JVadeJmill
Wareham, Dorfetfhire - N. D. 3 af. icra 5
Wavminder, Wiltfhire N. D. 12m. 3 af. 5
Warrington, Lancaihire 2d D. 2m. nnv 6
Prejcot, Newton, Aft on
Warwick, Warwicklhirc N. D. 12m. 3 af. 5
Watford, Hertfordflure S. N. naf. 3 m. 3
Watton, Norfolk N. D. icm. 3 af. 5
Welch-pool, Montgomeryflure 2d D. 4m. 6
Wellingborough, Northamptonfhire N. D. Bm. 4af. 4
Wellington, Somerfctlhire N. D. yaf. Bm. 6
JVivelfcomb, Milverton
Wells, Somerfctlhire N. D. laf. laf. 5
Axbridge
Wells, Norfolk - N. D. 4af. 10m; 5
Welwin, Hertfordflure —N.D. im. naf. 4
Wendover, Buckinghamftiire N. D. Bm. 4af. 4
Weflbury, Wiltfhire N. D. nm. 4af. 5
Wetherby, Yorkfhire N.D. leaf. 9 af. 6
Spoffortb, Plumpton, Harwood, Pool, Artbir.gton,
Otlcy
Weymouth, Dorfetfhire N. D. 2af. I2af. 5
Wheatley, Oxfordlhire N. D. naf. 3 m. 4
Whitby, Yorkfhire 2d D. 9 m. laf. 6
Robin Hood's Bay, Staiths, Lyth, Sands-end
Arrival Depart. Prjl.
Whitchurch, Hants N. D. 3 m. leaf. 4
Whitchurch, Shroplhire 2d D. 3 m. 6af. 6
Whitehaven, Cumberland 3 d D. 3 m. Baf. 6
Whitehaven, Me of Man .
Whittlefea, Cambridgefhire _ N- D. Baf. 12m. 4
Wickwar, Gloceflerfhire _ N. D. lira. 2 af. 5
Wigan, Lancaihire 2d D. 4111. loaf. 6
Standifo
Wimbourn, Dorfetfhire N. D. urn. 2 af. 5
Wincanton, Somerfctlhire N. D. 2af. 6m. 5
Winchefter, Hampfhire N. D. 6m. loaf. 4
Windham, Norfolk N.D. nm. saf. 5
Windfor, Berkfhire N. D. Sm. Baf. 3
lEaton
Wingham, Kent, N. D. 7m. 9 af. 4
Winflow, Buckinghamfhirc N. D. 7m 9 sf. 4
Wirkfworth, Derbyihire N. D. 3 af. 6af. 5
Wifbeach, Cambridgelhire N. D. urn. laf. 5
icw Sutton
o
Witham, Effex N. D. im. 2m. 4
Witney, Oxfordlhire N. D. 6m. 9 af. 4
Hampton
Wokingham, Berkfhire N. D. Bm. 4af. 4
W'oobounv Bedfordlhire N.D. 2m. naf. 4
Woodcock, Oxfordlhire N. D. 6m. ioaf. 4
Charlbury
%
Wocdverhampton, Staffordfhire N. D. 4af. 12m. 5
Worcefter, Worcefterfhire N. D. 2m. 3 af. 5
Droitwicb
Wore, Staffordfhire N. D. 7af. sm. ?
Workington, Cumberland 3 d D. sm. 9 af. 6
Workfop, Nottinghamlhire —•— N. D. 7a£. sm. 5
Welbeck, Norton, Cuckney, Cuckney Mill, Ollcrtor. r,
Clipfcn, Edmondfow
Wotton, Norfolk -
Wotton under Edge, Gloceflerfhire N.D. 2af. nm. 5
Wickefar, —11 m. 2 af. 5
Wrexham, Etenbigh 2d D. sm. 4af. 9
Pulford, Marford Hill
Wycorab, High, Buckinghamfhirc S. N. I2af. 3 m. 3
Gnat Alar low, H' cjl IVycomb
Yarmouth, Norfolk N. D. 4af. 12m. 5
Burgh, Got!ejior.
Yarm, Yorkfhire 2d D. 9 m. 12m. 6
Yeovil, Somerfetfhirc —■ N. D. 3 af. 12m. 5
York, Yorkfhire —N.D. naf. 12m. 6
The above Table, it is prefumed, will prove both acceptable and ufeful, and at once point out the great Importance of the prefect
Mode of conducting the Mails, by which it is conveyed in one Half of the time it ufed to be, to mod: parts of the Kingdom, and in
one Third, and even in one Fourth to many of the Crofs Polls; and theie Polls are all made Daily, inftead of Three times a "Week,
to 320 Towns, likewife the fame additional convenience is given to 201 Towns on the General Polls this, together with its affording
a like expeditious and fafe conveyance to Palfengers, with a Guard, to molt parts of the Kingdom, is a comenience which no
other country in Europe can boalt of.—The Departure of the Mails for London from any place where a Ciols Poll is eltabhlhed,
will generally Ihew the Arrival of the Crofs Poll at fuch place, thofe Arrivals being mollly lo timed, as to enable the Poll Mailers
to feleCl from the contents of the Crofs Mails fuch Letters as are to be forwarded directly to London.
E














