



W


THE
WINES OF AUSTRALIA.
[?]
BY
J. T. FALLON.
A Paper read before the Royal Colonial Institute,
on the 20 th of June, 1876.
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS,
LONDON AND CHILWORTH.
1876.




THE
WINES OF AUSTRALIA.
BY
J. T. FALLON.
A Paper read before the Royal Colonial Institute,
on the-20th of June, 1876.
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS,
LONDON AND CHILWOETH.
1876.




INTRODUCTION.
The immense capabilities of Australia as a wine-producing
country are very imperfectly understood in Europe, where there
exists a widely-spread impression that the vine cannot bo success-
fully cultivated for wine-making purposes outside the districts which
have for generations formed almost the only sources from which
the universally popular beverage could be obtained. Many portions
of the Australian Colonies arc, however, so admirably adapted, as
regards both soil and climate, for growing the finest descriptions of
vines, that almost in the infancy of this portion of the British
dominions the production of wine was regarded as a description of
manufacturing industry which would amply remunerate those who
devoted themselves to the labour of introducing and steadily de-
veloping it on a largo and systematic scale. That these anticipa-
tions were based upon good and solid grounds is shown by the
present extent and condition of the Australian wine-manufacturing
industry. In Now South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia
many thousands of acres are devoted to vino culture, and each
succeeding year witnesses an increase in the extent of land thus
occupied. The vines have been reared from cuttings of the best
European varieties, under the superintendence of experienced
vignerons, engaged in Germany and France expressly for the
purpose. The quantity of wine already produced each season is
enormous, a large proportion requiring only a certain amount of
time to render it equal to the finest kinds produced in the Rhine
Valley and other famous European wine districts. In several
respects the character of the Australian soil and climate is so
superior to what is known in Europe, that the natural strength
of many Colonial wines is far higher than even the brandied pro-
ducts of Spain and Portugal.
In fact, the high percentage of alcohol found in some Australian
wines is so contrary to all European experience, that men of high
scientific attainments like Dr. Thudichum have not hesitated to
express their conviction that the excess of strength was artificially
produced. This misconception forms the basis of all the difficulties
with which the Australian vignerons have had to contend in placing
a 2


their wines in competition with those of European origin. When
the English Government sought, by reducing the duties on wine,
to encourage the use of less fiery beverages than ardent spirits, the
question arose as to what should be the limit of alcoholic strength
of wines permitted to enter at the minimum duty, it being pointed
out that unless some effective precautions were taken, large quan-
tities of spirits would bo imported under the name of wines.
Official inquiries were made, and the information obtained—
almost exclusively from European sources—appeared to fix the
highest strength of pure wines at 20 per cent. Any higher degree
of strength, save in a few exceptional instances, such as certain
descriptions of port and sherry, could be obtained only by fortifying
the wines with proportionate quantities of spirit. Acting on these
conclusions, the English Government resolved to allow all wines
not containing a higher percentage than 26 of proof spirit to be
imported on payment of a duty not exceeding one shilling per
gallon; all wines containing more than 26 per cent, of alcohol
being subjected to an extra eightoenpence, making a total duty
of two shillings and sixpence per gallon. As the English Govern-
ment were at that time advised, this appeared a perfectly fair and
equitable arrangement—one which would allow of nearly every
description of pure and natural wine being admitted at the lowest
rate of duty.
Unfortunately, the inquiries instituted by direction of the Eng-
lish Government did not include the wines produced in Australia,
many of which, in consequence of the superior capabilities of the
soil, contain from 26 to 30, and even 34, per cent, of proof spirit.
The consequence has been that nearly the whole of the produce of
the Australian vineyards is practically excluded from the English
market, being saddled with a duty of two shillings and sixpence
per gallon, while the wines of France and Germany pay one
shilling only. Of course, the Australian vignerons were not slow
in pointing out the injustice and absurdity of this unintentional
anomaly; and on the 3rd of December, 1873, Mr. James T. Fallon,
of Albury, one of the leading Australian vignerons, read a Paper
before the Society of Arts, in which he explained the whole
question in the clearest possible manner, and asked that something
should be done to prevent a continuance of the system of favouring
the foreigner at the expense of the Australian colonist. He did
not ask for any exceptional measures in favour of himself and his
brethren, but simply that they should be placed on terms of
equality with their Continental rivals. In the discussion which
followed, Dr. Thudichum expressed his disbelief in the great


strength of Australian wines being the result of natural causes;
because, if it were otherwise, “it would simply upset the whole
scientific facts hitherto established throughout the world.” In
other words, Science, for once disregarding the assistance of actual
experiment, had decided that it was impossible to produce natural
wines possessing more than 26 per cent, of proof spirit.
In the face of such an expression of opinion, it was manifestly
impossible to expect that the English Government would listen to
the representations of the colonists. Before asking the Government
to assent to a modification of the wine duties, Dr. Thudichum’s
assertions would have to be disproved in the most effectual manner.
How this has been done, Mr. Fallon’s second paper, read on the
20th of June before the Eoyal Colonial Institute, will clearly show'.
Never have objections, based on mere assumptions, been more
mercilessly exposed; and the completeness of the testimonies with
which the arguments of Dr. Thudichum and Mr. Keene have been
met, makes one regret that they should have ever been deemed
worthy of the least consideration, however conscientious may have
been the belief in which they originated. Now that the true state
of the case has been made public, it is to be hoped that there will
be no hesitation on the part of the English Government to modify
the present system of wine duties in accordance with the principle
on which it was originally framed. The interests of English com-
merce and manufacturing industry would gain largely by the
change, for with the increasing use of Australian wine in the
mother country would come a larger demand for English goods
in the Colonies, thereby assisting in providing for the employment
of English artisans, and preventing the reoccurrence of such
seasons of industrial depression as the present. This fact is so
self-evident as to require no comment. The interests of England
and Australia are identical ; one cannot suffer without the other
being endangered also. And so it is with their success and pros-
perity : that which conduces to the welfare of one promotes also the
social and industrial progress of both.




THE WINES OF AUSTRALIA.
When I had the honour of appearing in the hall of the Society
of Arts on the 3rd December, 1873, for the purpose of reading my
Paper on “ Vines and Wines,” I stated that in many favourable
districts in Australia pure natural wines, as a rule, range above the
maximum strength fixed by the English Customs tariff of 26 per
cent, of proof spirit, and I thought it unjust that the Australian
producer should be charged for an article made from the pure juice
of the grape the maximum duty of 2s. Gd. per gallon, which in effect
excludes Australian producersfrom the Englishmarket. A discussion
ensued, in which several gentlemen took part. Dr. Thudichum, in
reply, entered a protest against the statement that Australian wine
was produced from a must which would yield a larger percentage
of proof spirit than 26. The must, he said, “ had been measured
by one of the Australian companies, and the result published in
the Australian Mercury *of May 6th, 1865. From the density
there given by simple calculations, it was easy to be seen there was
no grape in Australia, as there was none anywhere else, which by
the ordinary method of vinification could give wine of the strength
mentioned. As to the duty, he could not assume that Australian
wines were above the standard of 26, If in Australia there were
grapes grown which, by a natural course of fermentation, produced
a wine with 29 per cent, of proof spirit, that fact ought to be
established by a scientific commission and thoroughly authenticated,
because it would simply upset the whole scientific facts established
throughout the world.”
In reply to Dr. Thudichum and the other gentlemen who had
spoken on my Paper, I said I had no figures to prove that
Australian wines exceeded 26 per cent., but I nevertheless asserted
* There is no such paper as the Australian Mercury .


most strongly that grapes had been grown on my own vineyard,
which in favourable seasons gave a higher amount of alcohol
than that mentioned. The grapes mentioned in my paper,
Reisling, Verdeilho, Aucarot, Shiraz, Burgundy, Carbinet, I had
tested frequently, and found them to yield from 26 to upwards of
80 per cent, of proof spirit in good seasons. The same result
could be obtained from many of the vineyards in the country
bordering on the river Murray, from the Albury and Corowa
district on the New South Wales side of that river, from Wagunyah,
the Ovens, and the Sandhurst districts in Victoria, and from the
wines of South Australia as a rule. In fact, the wine-producing
country in New South Wales and Victoria may be said to be fairly
divided by the great Australian Alps, or dividing range! The wines
produced on the south side, although possessing rare excellencies of
their own which commend them to the public, are of a compara-
tively low spirit strength, and very few of them, whether grown in
New South Wales or Victoria, would contain anything approaching
26. On the north side, the climate, soil, and seasons are different;
the rains, which set in early in autumn along the seaboard seldom
reach north of the dividing range, which acts as a kind of natural
barrier, and as the rain, when it approaches so far inland, expends
itself upon the mountain ridges, the vineyards on the north side
enjoy perfect immunity not only from rain, but from the chilling
influence of the south wind. The grape is exposed for a consider-
able time before and at the vintage to a warm sun from a cloudless
sky. The result is a continuous dry heat, which is considerably
intensified by the radiation from the level forest and plains of
Eiverina. By this means a “ must ”of far greater density is pro-
duced, and consequently wines of a higher spirit strength. Thus
it will be seen that although a correct test may be had of the
wines produced on the south side of the dividing range, it affords
no proof, nor does it even give an idea, of what can be produced on
the north side. It would bo as unreasonable to expect a similar
quality of wine from localities as diverse as Spain, Prance,
Switzerland, or the Rhineland.
Many persons who may have probably had inferior samples of
Australian wine put before them, which had been imperfectly made
and from an unfavourable locality, condemn Australian wines
generally. I met a gentleman who was a connoisseur of wine, and
who said he had tasted Australian wines, but did not like them. I
asked him to come and taste some samples which I had. He did
so, and went away with a very different impression. We have such
diversity of climate and soil, and the extent over which Australian


wines are produced is so great, that no wonder that persons not
conversant with these facts should be induced to form erroneous
impressions. To the Australian the above remarks are quite clear,
for he knows that in grapes, as in wheat and other cereals, a far larger
amount of alcohol can be obtained than the European article can
yield. An English farmer would be surprised to learn that because
a bushel of wheat cannot be grown here above 02 lbs., that in
Australia a bushel of wheat will turn the scale at 09 and even
70 lbs. Practical experience has often upset theories fixed as a
standard for years by the scientific world. Although fully convinced
myself of the strength of Australian natural wines, I was unable
to place any figures before the meeting to prove what I then most
positively asserted. I promised that as early as possible after my
return to the Colony I would obtain, through the Governments of the
Colonies of Victoria and New South Wales, the proofs of what I
then asserted; and that, notwithstanding the doctrine laid down by
scientists and theorists, I would prove I was right in what I
stated.
Having that object in view, and in pursuance of my promise, I
communicated with the Hon. the Commissioner of Trade and
Customs in Victoria, and with the Hon. the Colonial Treasurer,
who is the head of the Customs department in New South Wales,
requesting them to appoint thoroughly competent officers to examine
and report upon the must produced from the vineyards in 1875.
My request was favourably entertained by the respective Govern-
ments, who saw that the interests of an important and leading
industry were at stake; and the result was that the chief inspector of
distilleries in each Colony was appointed to conduct precise technical
examinations, to obtain samples of must and grapes, and by means
of the most rigorous tests, ascertain the spirit strength of our pure
natural wines, with the view of setting at rest a question of much
importance not only to the Australian vigneron, but to the scientific
world.
The officers of both Governments met by appointment in Albury,
viz. Mr. Lesley A. Moody, chief inspector of distilleries, Victoria;
Mr. Heath, inspector ; and Mr. H. A. Lumsdaine, chief inspector of
distilleries for New South Wales. The better to enable them to cer-
tify to tests made by them, they operated upon fruit instead of a must,
reduced to a liquid. They took their own men into the vineyard, and
had the fruit picked under their personal inspection, brought to the
press, and the juice expressed under their own immediate directions.
They had the liquid put into jars which they brought with them
for that purpose. The samples collected each day were taken


to Albury and placed in charge of Mr. Singleton, the inspector of
police, who is also an Inspector of Distilleries for the district
of Albury, to be taken care of, and to prevent the samples being
tampered with, until Messrs. Moody and Lumsdaine had done their
researches, and were ready to leave. While Messrs. Moody and
Lumsdaine were selecting samples of grapes from the different vine-
yards on the New South Wales side of the Murray, Mr. Heath was
pursuing his researches among the vineyards on the Victorian side.
The result was that samples were thus secured from the principal
vineyards in the districts bordering on the Murray and Ovens, in
the north-east part of Victoria, and operated upon by the officers
above-named. The results I intend now to lay before you. I may
here observe how much more satisfactory it was to the public and
to myself, instead of having a Royal Commission appointed,with an
expensive official staff to superintend the investigation, making a
pretence of inquiring into a matter of which they knew really
nothing, to have had skilled officers of the highest position and
integrity. The appointment of Messrs. Moody, Lumsdaine, and
Heath was beyond question the very best that could have been
made. Their position places them above the suspicion of having
allowed themselves to be influenced by anyone, while to their task
they brought not only practical skill, but scientific experience, and
the results reported therefore come before the British public in a
creditable and authoritative aspect, which conclusively “ upset the
whole scientific facts ” which Dr. Thudichum behoves to bo “ esta-
blished throughout the world.” I submit, therefore, that in this
matter experiment has upset a widely-received scientific “ fact.”
The authority on which I venture to form this opinion is given in
the following official reports, viz.:—
The Chief Inspector of Distilleries and Refineries to The Under
Secretary for Finance and Trade.
Department of Distilleries and Refineries,
Chief Inspector’s Office, Sydney,
September 20, 1875.
. Sir,—l do myself the honour to submit, for the information of the Hon.
the Finance Minister, the result of experiments conducted by me on
certain samples of Colonial wine made from grape must, personally
collected by Mr. Moody and myself at vineyards in the Albury and adjacent
districts.
My instructions being to act in concert with Mr. Moody, I visited, in
company with that officer, several principal vineyards in the immediate


vicinity of Albnry, and procured such samples as were obtainable at the
time of our visit. At a later period of the vintage I collected additional
samples of must at Albury and at vineyards in the neighbourhood of How-
long and Corowa, conveying the samples to Albury, and leaving them in
charge of Superintendent Singleton, of the Police Force, who also holds an
appointment as an Inspector of Distilleries in this Colony, for delivery to
the Chief Inspector of Distilleries of Victoria.
The arrangement being that the samples should be taken to Melbourne
and remain there till fermented and tested by Mr. Moody, that gentleman
most obligingly and with much care forwarded to me in the latter part of
June ten samples for analysis in Sydney.
Allowing a short interval after the arrival of the wine, I proceeded, with
the help of a gentleman who was then in my department and was well
qualified by his antecedents to assist in the operation, to submit the sam-
ples to very careful analysis—repeating the distillation of each sample three
or four times to ensure accuracy.
The experiments have been conducted according to recognised formula,
and the results are shown in the accompanying statement. There is suffi-
cient agreement between them and those obtained by Mr. Moody to
controvert the opinions which have been pronounced by high authorities as
to the limit within which spirit is capable of being naturally developed in
grape wines.
The hypothesis that 2G per cent., and in rare and very exceptional cases
28 per cent., is the highest percentage capable of development, is certainly
not supported by the recent experiments made in this Colony and in
Victoria.
The value of the experiments now reported is enhanced by the fact that
they were carried out separately by Mr. Moody and myself, and without
the interference of interested persons; and that the wines operated on were
unquestionably pure and unadulterated.
The reasonable and sufficient agreement between the tests thus separately
and independently made indicates the correctness of the instruments used,
and of the procedure adopted. On this point I may observe that I was
fortunate in procuring from the Branch Royal Mint in Sydney a newly-
imported chemical balance, by Oertling, by which I was enabled to obtain
accurately to the tenth of a grain the specific gravity of the several
distillates.
In concluding my observations, I consider it not inconsistent with my
duty to point out that the determination of a higher percentage than 20 and
28 per cent, of proof spirit in Australian wines having now been, as it
appears to me, conclusively established, it will be alike unjust and discou-
raging to the wine-makers of this and other wine-producing Colonies of
Australia if the present tariff bo adhered to by the Imperial Government.
Such an adherence is tantamount to a differential duty in favour of meagre
Continental wines, and against many superior wines of New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia, which, though containing more natural
alcohol than wines of the Continent, are at the same time richer in other
properties which give excellence to the quality of wines generally.


Name and Mark of Wine,
Original gravity
of Must.
Specific Gravity
of Wine before
distillation.
Percentage of
Proof Spirit.
Standard *ul9G
@ 60? F.
1142-2
9909
32-4
Muscat F
1132-5
9890
31-6
11231
988-8
28*7
1142-5
1008-9
293
1132-2
990-1
31'8
1134-3
1000-1
29'2
1135-5
986-1
30*8
11200
989-0
28‘4
11200
988-5
30*0
Verdeilho C
11250
988-7
*280
Having communicated with the proprietors of some celebrated vineyards
in this Colony with the view of obtaining samples of pure and unforlitied
wine for the purpose of further investigation, I hope to be in a position to
make another report on the subject which has called forth the present
communication.
In conclusion, I desire to express my acknowledgments to Professor
Liversidge, of the Sydney University, and Mr. C. 'Watt, Government
Analyst, for assistance cheerfully accorded on more than one occasion of
reference during the course of my investigation.
I have, &c.,
HENRY LUMSDAINE,
Chief Inspector of Distilleries, &.c.
Statement showing the alcoholic strength of the undermentioned samples of
wine, made from grape-must, collected at Albury and other Murray River
vineyards, during the vintage of 1875, by the Chief Inspector of Distilleries
of Victoria and the Chief Inspector of Distilleries, New South Wales, as
ascertained by distillation conducted by the latter officer in Sydney.
• This distillate tried by Ilydrcmeteronly.
HENRY LUMSDAINE,
Chief Inspector of Distilleries.
Chief Inspector of Distilleries’ Office, Sydney,
September 21, 1875.


Office of Chief Inspector of Distilleries, Melbourne,
September 4, 1875.
Sir, —In pursuance of the investigation of the alcoholic strength of
Australian wines, a progress report of which was made by me on the 10th
June last, I have now the honour to state that, assisted by Mr. George Heath,
Inspector of Distilleries, I have completed the alcoholic analysis of 201
samples of must and wine collected from various vineyards throughout the
Colony, of which I append a tabulated statement.
Of these, 25 are the produce of musts which were collected in the Beech-
worth and Murray districts, as stated in ray report above-mentioned, and
treated in a similar manner to those collected by H. Lumsdaine, Esq., the
Chief Inspector of Distilleries, of New South Wales, and myself, in the
neighbourhood of Albury. A certificate signed by Mr. Heath is appended.
The remaining 165 are from wines sent to me from the various vineyards
and persons enumerated; the senders having assured me that the wines
were perfectly pure, without any addition of adventitious spirit.
Some few samples forwarded were so exceptional in spirit contents, that,
having no written assurance of their not being fortified, I omitted them
from the list.
The quality of the wines tested was in general very good, and in many
cases might be called excellent.
The speciality of most of the produce of the vineyards situated in the
northern portion of the Colony is that it is full-bodied, rich, and fruity,
caused doubtless by the greater warmth and dryness of climate there,
which ripen the grape thoroughly and give a very high gravity of must.
The characteristics of these wibes are similar to those of Spain and Portugal,
while those made in the southern districts resemble the wines of Germany
and the Rhine and the northern and midland districts of France.
The produce of the same description of grape grown in the districts to
the north of the dividing range and that grown to the southward or sea-
ward side, makes wine of a distinctive character.
My experience of some years of the vineyards of the Colony leads me
to the conclusion that the character of the wine made is improving year by
year; and as Victoria possesses soils and climates of such variety, and so
suitable for the growth of wines of so many descriptions and of a superior
class, I am sanguine of a great future for this produce, when greater expe-
rience, knowledge, and capital are brought to bear on it, and vignerons
can be induced to see the policy of limiting their vines grown to those
only which experience shows to be suitable to the soil and climate of their
vineyards.
One or two good wines will find a readier market, be easier and more
cheaply manufactured, and therefore more profitable, than a large variety
of medium quality.
The return which accompanies this letter shows that the musts collected
by Mr. Lumsdaine, Mr. Heath, and myself, which were pressed in our
presence and fermented under our charge, and therefore could not have
been tampered with by interested persons, contain a percentage of proof


spirits much higher than it has hitherto been supposed a wine would
develop naturally; the limit, unless under exceptional circumstances, being
supposed not to exceed 20 per cent. (J. B. Keene, Esq., of H.M. Customs,
London, considers that the cases in which the wines of Australia are past
the strength of 28 per cent, of proof spirit naturally are so rare as to be
quite isolated). It cannot therefore be now said that wines which exceed
that limit are necessarily artificially fortified.
I believe that the practice of fortifying wines in Victoria is by no means
general, and only resorted to to bring up wines of a low and inferior
quality and for particular trades ; the better class of wines do not
require it.
The process adopted in the alcoholic analysis of the wines is similar to
that pursued by the Customs in England for ascertaining duty, and laid
down by J. B. Keene, Esq., in his work on gauging, and has been carefully
followed out, except that the hydrometer has not been wholly depended on ;
each sample of the distillate having been weighed to the tenth of a grain,
and the strengths calculated by specific gravity according to Sykes’
tables.
The instrument sused were stills, similarto those employed by the Customs
in England, thermometer and specific gravity bottles tested at the Mel-
bourne Observatory, and delicate Oertling balance ; and in order to ensure
the greatest amount of accuracy, the experiments were conducted by Mr.
H eath and myself at our respective private residences, where our attention
would not be disturbed by our ordinary official work.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
LESLEY C. MOODY,
Chief Inspector of Distilleries.
The Assistant-Commissioner of Trades and Customs.
Office of Chief Inspector of Distilleries,
Melbourne, Ist September, 1875.
I hereby certify that the distillates numbered 100 to 130 (25) in the
accompanying list, are from the produce of grapes collected in the Murray
and Beechworth districts of Victoria, in April, 1875, and the juice pressed
out before me. The musts, as pressed, were given into my charge, in which
they remained till distilled in August of this year, and the percentage of
proof spirits, British standard, carefully determined according to the English
Customs formula. I further certify that no adventitious spirit whatever
has been added to any of the samples referred to.
GEORGE HEATH,
Inspector of Distilleries.


ikwi«MOO(»N®U'**MHHoO(iO k Jcn)(‘«WM
/ No. of Sample. -
. —
1=5*
5 r< i-j
2B'22 2g2cs
8382:3.53 Sj3g2.3.g£|S.Se.8g .
PNMb®0n*!N-092 2,2.£,2 2.S e
<Z ■
S‘|
cr; :
o . .
: ©: : : . uco r ooo«o
W = W
ft b* t*
S3
c9’p‘ , <9
o. o- c. c- c. o- o- a. 5 a. o- o. • o-o. o. o-o- o- g
5?SS ~ S-’ o SS: £•• l3l SSS r*-’rr *r 3
S3
0=0
COOOOOOOfpOOOoOOOOOOc,
s S*
o Si tr
9 *< 5
■ s
£
1
tr'ti
c-3
coo
00000000C5000000 o o
co
P. CD
S.o
c _ _y
Samples of Must, col*
lected by Henry Lums-
s
daine, Esq., Chief In-
B
CD
spector of Distilleries
fr p
of .New South Wales,
O
and Lesley A. Moody.
Esq., Chief Inspector
of Distilleries, Victo-
3
ft<
ria, referred to in re-
p
port of the 10th June
2-
last Copies of certifl-
cates attached hereto.
S3» 3 s’ So I-|s_ | & 6a 0.0.0. aiS?
&S.&2 hS.h s o . & g:o ro «2 o o o o o - 2
-2 ft
c
CD CO
3 ffl [5 CD CD 3 CD 3
CD P
h-> K-» h-*
fmU t-J H- 1 W M H M
Vintage.
M U W W W M M w H K) W Ci t’l Ui Vi n O. n f tnoi W
tO tO 05 tO 05 05 tO t>: IO W CO 1-0 l>i W lO ti W K 03 M to w W
Percentage of proof Spirits,
4- to
MiNO^woooowb’tiocbcitiMHM
British Standard.
Statement showing the percentage of Proof Spirits British Standard of
the following Wines collected in Albury, N.S.W., and various districts of
Victoria, and distilled under the supervision of the Chief Inspector of
Distilleries, Victoria.
Commission from His Excellency the Governor.
/His Excellency Anthony Musgrave, Esquire, Com-
panion of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint
- Michael and Saint George, Governor and Com-
USGUAVJ.. jnander-inChief in and over the Province of South
, Australia and its Dependencies, &c.:
To the Honourable William Milne, President of the Legislative Council;
John William Lewis, of Adelaide, Esquire, Collector of Customs;
Richard Sciiomeurok, of Adelaide, Esquire, Dr. Phil., Director of
the Botanic Gardens ; Samuel Davenport, of Adelaide, Esquire,
J.P.; and Robert Dalrymrle Ross, of Adelaide, Esquire, J.P.,
greeting:
Know ye that I, relying on your prudence and fidelity, have appointed
you, and by these presents do give unto you, or any three of you, full power
and authority diligently to inquire and report what alcoholic strength is
attained by the juice of grapes shown in this Province by or under the


ordinary and natural process of fermentation, and for the purpose aforesaid
to examine and re-examine, viva voce or in writing, or both viva voce and in
writing, all witnesses who shall attend before you for the purpose of giving
evidence on the matter aforesaid; and I give to you, or any three of you,
full power and authority to do all such other acts and things as may be
necessary and lawfully done for the due execution hereof: And I require
you, without delay, to report to me the result of your inquiries in the matter
aforesaid.
Given under my hand and the public seal of the said Province, at
Adelaide, in the Province aforesaid, this eighteenth day of
March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and seventy-four, and in the thirty-seventh year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By command,
•
ARTHUR BLYTH,
Chief Secretary.
The above Special Commission was appointed by the South Australian
Governor, who, after careful examination into this matter, brought up a
very elaborate report, showing results as to the proportion of alcohol,
corresponding to, if not exceeding, the proportion found in the wines of New
South Wales and Victoria.
Notwithstanding the discrepancies which occur in the statements
which I now lay before you, they all pretty fairly agree as to the
specific gravity of the must, and these alone cannot fail to interest
inquirers on this question. They show that Australia is capable of
producing full-bodied natural wines of a high order, and that the
statement made by me upwards of two years ago, “ that Australian
wines by the ordinary course of fermentation produced a wine con-
taining upwards of 26 per cent, of proof spirit” was perfectly
correct. The figures which I place before you not only support me,
but prove that those who differed from me, and hold that “ there
were no grapes produced in Australia, as there were none any-
where else, which by the ordinary laws of fermentation could give
upwards of 26 per cent.,” were labouring under a wrong impression
in adopting the popular theory of the day. The discrepancy in
the spirit strength of the samples tested arose partly from some of
the grapes not being thoroughly ripe. Other samples may have
been grown on low-lying situations, and some of the samples of
must were too now, and had not fully generated all the alcohol
they were capable of developing, at the time of distillation. My
experience in shipping wines from Australia to London is, that
whatever may be the spirit strength before shipment, the wine
acquires additional strength during the voyage.


It will be seen from the above statement that the great bulk of
Australian wines exceed 20 per cent, of natural spirit, and could
not be admitted' into Great Britain without paying 2s. Gd. per
gallon duty, thus exposing the Australian producer to adverse com-
petition in the markets of the mother country equal to a surcharge
of one hundred and fifty per cent. The effect of this difference in
duty is to exclude almost entirely the colonists from sending
their pure, generous, and unadulterated wines to a market where
they are so heavily handicapped. I believe it was the in-
tention of the framers of the present Customs Act of 1801, to fix
the standard or maximum so as to admit all pure natural wines at
the minimum duty ; and for the'purpose of enabling them to fix the
limit, they adopted the report of a Eoyal Commission which had been
appointed to collect statistics from the different wine-producing
countries in Europe. Now, by the figures shown above, it is clearly
proved that Australian wines exceed the limit stated in that report,
and I therefore submit that the Australian vignerons have a right to
ask the British Government to alter the maximum from 20 to 30.
This would to a great extent meet the case, and would place the
Australian product in fan- competition with European wines, and
afford encouragement to an industry which is doubtless destined to
be one of the leading staple articles of produce in Australia, and one
which will not only give healthful employment to a number of
Australian vignerons, but also open up a largo field for the occupation
of the surplus labour of Great Britain. In my opinion it would be the
interest, if not the duty, of this country to afford encouragement to
settle her surplus labour in her own Colonies, when the fact is known
that there is a far better field for the industrious labourer there than
is to be found elsewhere. In America at the present time, in the
centres of population, it is more difficult to obtain employment
than it is in England ; in Australia there is a wide field, no com-
petition in this industry under notice, and by honest exertion in a
few years a man could purchase his homestead and be his own
master.
It may here be argued that by altering the maximum from 20 to
80, it would admit brandied Continental wines, and hence would
be a loss to the revenue. I believe the quantity of European wanes
that would come within the range of this alteration would be very
small indeed, and inconsiderable as regards revenue. As the wanes
of Spain and Portugal are fortified to a much greater extent than
the limit named, and as the taste is formed in this country to drank
those spirituous wines, the producers are bound to furnish the
articles they have been in the habit of supplying this market with,
B


and upon the continuance of the supply of a uniform article their
reputation is based: they neither could nor would make any alter-
ations in the articles to be shipped to the English market. The
result would be (without any perceptible loss to the revenue), that a
pure and unadulterated wine would be placed before the British
public, and a taste cultivated for the unsophisticated juice of the
grape, instead of strong spirits, thereby encouraging sobriety
and morality among the people of this country. It might be
put in another way: “Why don’t you make your wines so as to
come within the Is. duty?” In reply to this I should say: “In ask-
ing us to do so, you ask us to forego the superior advantages
which it has pleased Providence to bestow on Australia beyond
almost any other country, and instead of the rich, generous, full-
bodied wines which we can produce naturally, to reduce the quality
to a low inferior standard. This must be done in either of two
ways, viz. by pulling the grapes before they are properly ripe, or
by adding water to the must, either before or after pressing.
Of the two, I should prefer the latter alternative, for although you
manifestly reduce the quality of the wine, still the component parts
are more evenly balanced, and a better article can be produced than
from unripe fruit; as, in the latter instance, you invariably
have a superabundance of acid in proportion to the quantity
of saccharine produced, or, in other words, you introduce an adulte-
rated article.”
In putting my case forward, it is necessary to point out that the
Australian Colonies form a very considerable portion of Her Majesty's
dependencies, and afford a profitable field for the surplus labour and
capital of this country. Also that the trade, both in imports and
exports, is expanding daily, and at present is only exceeded by India
with her millions of population. We furnish this country with much
raw material, in yvool, tallow, gold, copper, tin, wheat, meat, &c.,
and as a rule take as payment various manufactured articles,
thereby to a large extent supporting the artisans and manufacturers
of this country, and proving how much it would be to the interest of
this country to encourage every new industry which has for its
object the advancement of Her Majesty’s Colonial possessions.
Under these circumstances, I consider the Australian colonists may
fairly ask the Government to amend the present Customs law, so far
as to alter the maximum strength from 26 to 30, thereby admitting
our wines at the minimum duty; or, if this cannot be granted,
that they may be admitted on such a scale as will allow of a pro
rata advance upon the extra strength.
I trust I have in the preceding remarks sufficiently made it clear


that the alcoholic strength of our Australian wines, in their pure
and unfortified condition, really places them at a serious com-
mercial disadvantage in the markets of this country, and I hope
that I may rely upon any assistance that this valuable society can
render, in giving shape and effect to some practical movement hav-
ing for its object the readjustment of the Customs duty, which, as
I have shown, bears with such peculiar hardship upon our Aus-
tralian wine industry. I feel sure that the Government and the
Legislature only require to be put in possession of reliable infor-
mation on the subject, to give their serious attention to this matter;
and with a view of supplying such information in the most influ-
ential quarters, I would suggest, in conclusion, that some of the
gentlemen now present be requested to act as a committee for the
purpose of bringing the subject under the notice of the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, by deputation or otherwise, and solicit his
assistance in getting a suitable alteration made in the Customs’
tariff. I feel that a practical step of this kind is essential in order
to give effect to the arguments I have brought forward in this
paper, and I earnestly invite your co-operation in the matter.
Since writing the above, I have received a copy of the Melbourne
Ar/jus, of the 18th of April, in which appears an ably-written article
fully bearing out the views I have stated, from which I quote
the following:—
“ Mr. Moody is aware of the objection of the Imperial Customs,
that no differential duty in favour of Australian wine is possible ;
and that if the standard is raised to 34 per cent., the result will bo
that other countries will be importing brandy in wine casks ; and
he proposes nothing revolutionary. All difficulties, he submits,
would be met by a sliding scale, according to the strength of the
wine. For instance, assuming 2G per cent, of proof as the maxi-
mum for Is. per gallon duty, allow wines of the strength above 26
and under 30 per cent, to be introduced at Is. 3d. per gallon;
above 30 and under 36 per cent, to be introduced at Is. 9d. per
gallon ; above 36 per cent, and under 42 per cent, to be introduced
at 2s. 6d. per gallon.’ As the Imperial law now stands, Mr. Moody
shows that it is capable of evasion, for a wine-merchant can take
a gallon of wine of 26 per cent, strength, on which Is. per gallon
has been paid, and a gallon of wine of 42 per cent., on which
2s. 6d. per gallon has been paid, and by blending the two together
he has a 34 per cent, wine, on which he will have paid a duty of
Is. 9d. per gallon. Thus a manufactured wine can be put upon
the English market at a comparatively low duty, but the natural
wine of Australia—because it is a natural wine—must pay at a
b 2


rate which, if not prohibitive, is at least a serious impediment in
the way of an increased demand. And all that is now asked is,
that the same facility should be afforded the honest vigneron in
putting a 34 per cent, wine on the market as is enjoyed by the
judicious blender. This end will be attained by the sliding scale
proposed by Mr. Moody, which would leave 20 per cent, as the
ordinary maximum, and make stronger and better wines pay in
proportion to their superiority, but would free them from a crushing
and undiscriminating burden, and from an unmerited stigma. The
plan commends itself at once as equitable to the revenue and to the
producer; it would appear to shut the door upon the tricks and
stratagems of which the Imperial Customs have been apprehensive,
and wo have Mr, Moody’s assurance, first, that it is practicable,
and, secondly, that the Australian vigneron asks for no further
concession. We hope to hear that this report has been brought
under the notice of the select committee (moved for in the House
of Commons by Mr. Cartwright), if it be appointed and if the docu-
ment can arrive in England in time, and that under any circum-
stances it has been pressed upon the attention of a Government
which, we are sure, would not willingly and knowingly do the
Colonies a manifest injustice.”
Discussion.
Mr. Alexander McArthur, M.P., remarked that he had no inten-
tion of taking part in the discussion had he not been asked to do so.
He fully corroborated the statements made in the paper with refer-
ence to the natural strength of the Australian wines. Australia
was placed at a disadvantage with respect to Continental wines,
having to pay a higher duty in consequence of their superior
strength. Australian wines had also suffered in this country in con-
sequence of inferior samples being sent from different parts of
Australia by parties knowing nothing whatever about wine. Some
of the wines ho had tried tasted very much like sugar, vinegar, and
water, and were not likely to commend themselves to the palates of
the English people. On the other hand, there were some excellent
samples ; and were persons making wines to thoroughly understand
how to do so, they would really have a very sound and an excellent
article. Many persons in this country regarded the superior strength
of wines as objectionable; but, inasmuch as the strength of the
Australian wines is a natural one, and did not arise from their being
fortified by brandy and other spirits, he thought the objection, to a
great extent, was lessened. If they were to have wines, it was much


better to have them of natural strength than to have them supple-
mented by ingredients injurious to health. He had no doubt that the
Government were desirous of doing what was fair and right towards
the Colonies. He behoved they never had a more honourable or fairer
Chancellor of the Exchequer than Sir Stafford Northcotc; and it
was certain that if the Government could meet the views of the
colonists they would do so. He thought the proposal for. a
Committee to be appointed to consider the matter, and, if necessary,
to wait upon the Chancellor of the Exchequer, a desirable step to
take. If he could render any service in the matter he would be
happy to do so. It was of importance that our Colonics should have
fair play. It was not at all right that wo could receive Continental
winep, sometimes of a very inferior quality, which were able to
supplant Australian wines because of the extra duty which the
latter were compelled to pay. So far as his experience went when in
Australia, there really was not much room for exportation of wines,
owhig to the consumption of them by the colonists themselves. He
had no doubt that in the course of a few years, however, by proper
skill and management, that Australia would become an extensive
wine-producing country. With regard to the wine question, many
medical men of the present day disapproved of wines altogether;
but ho thought sound wholesome wines were very much better than
adulterated wines. Those who have visited the Continent must have
been struck with the fact that in wine-producing countries there
was very little intemperance. The author of this paper (Mr. Fallon)
had informed him there was a similar result in Australia ; that in
the locality where he resided there had been a great deal of intem-
perance, but that since wine had become a common beverage there
was little or no drunkenness, and it was a rare thing to see a man
the worse for liquor. Looking at the matter also in this light, he
thought it would bo very desirable to encourage the introduction of
good sound Australian wines into this country, and he hoped they
would be able to do something to promote the object they had
in view.
Mr. J. B. Keene (of Her Majesty’s Customs) said: The ques-
tion of Australian wines had been one of great interest to him
for many years. He had had many opportunities of testing wines
of various kinds, and from the very first time he saw these wines,
under circumstances very much against them, in 1802, in the
Exhibition, thought they possessed properties of a very high cha-
racter. The difiiculty of the question of duty lay in drawing a
line anywhere. If the duties chargeable on wines could be
charged in the manner that would press equally upon them all, they


would not be charged upon strength, but theoretically upon
value. The main question at issue was that relating to the actual
strength of the wine, and the question of raising the degree at
which the duties change, from 20° to a higher point. They could
not make a change in the duties on natural wines of a high strength
without at the same time admitting with equal freedom wines that
had been fortified, and although he felt sure the Australian vineyards
produced wines of a far higher natural strength than most other
countries, yet the latter were in greater demand. If a lino is to be
drawn, marking the point at which the wine should be produced by
the imposition of a certain duty, it struck him the point at which it
should be drawn would be one that would include the bulk of the
very best natural wines, but not stretched so as to include those
which were rare, and not even always best, or so suitable for general
drinking. So far as the report of Messrs. Lumsdaine and Moody
went, he did not doubt the bond fides of their operations; but he
could not help remarking that there must be a great difference
between a wine manufactured on the large scale in which it is pro-
duced in the vineyards, and the smaller scale in which it would be
produced in the chemical laboratory. In the most careful chemical
operations it was often difficult to produce actually the special
balances of the changes that take place from one organic substance
to another. At the same time the change was such that if a grape
had a largo quantity of sugar in it, it naturally would produce a
larger quantity of alcohol. But there were very many instances in
which, though the grapes produced large quantities of sugar, the
sugar would not complete its conversion into alcohol. That was
the case with some Constantia wines from the Cape, which had, in
many cases, not more than 18 per cent, of spirit in them, and
yet the wines were permanent, though still sweet. On the other
hand, the grape that produced the largest amount of sugar would,
if its conversion were complete, be perfectly dry, with more alcohol,
and free from the taste of sugar. There was another element in
the Australian wine question in this way. So far as he could
judge, not merely from examination of the wines, but from reports
from residents in Australia and from manufacturers themselves,
there was a strong tendency to fortify. He did not impute any such
thing to Mr. Fallon, some of whose wines were of excellent
character ; but he remembered a Mr. Bear, from Melbourne, who
brought over some wines to this country. One of these had been
fortified in order to try the experiment of how it would bear the
voyage; but the samples that were left natural were better in every
way. Some time ago ho had his attention called by the Rev. Dr.


Bleasdale, of Melbourne, to discrepancies between the strengths in
his report to the Commissioners of Customs, and those on the same
wines as tried by Dr. Bleasdale before they were sent for exhibition.
It was found that where the Victorian Commissioners had selected
certain wines submitted to them, and left the manufacturers to make
up and forward the samples to England, spirit had been largely
added in the interim; while, where the Commissioners themselves
forwarded the samples, there was no difference between the two tests
beyond what might be expected between two operators. The change
produced hy the voyage here was somewhat over-rated in its action
upon the wine. It was possible in some wipes, where the sugar
had not been entirely converted, and which were sent to England
before they had been fully ripened—say under two years old—that
the rolling and shaking of the ship produced an effect upon the wine
which continued the fermentation, and in the case of a good sound
wine would improve it, and although it would arrive here in such a
thick and muddy condition that it would be denominated as simply
rubbish, yet after a few weeks or months it would become fined and
settled, and be more ripened than it would in the same time had it
remained in the Colonies. With reference to the question of the
duty: to take the separate degrees, after the 26th, would be very
difficult to carry out, and, perhaps, would not have as good an effect
as some might anticipate. At the same time, he had often thought
that the difference between 26 and 40 might be met with
an immediate duty; but ho should not consider it proper in his
position to offer any opinion upon the question of duties, as it was
outside his province. He had only to examine the wines for their
alcoholic strength and qualities, and his belief was that the
Australian wines had a great future before them. He would bear
out Mr. Burton’s remark as to the great benefit it would be if the
bad wines were left out of the market, and a still greater benefit if
those who made the wines could be convinced of the bad way in
which they made them. He believed the great difficulty arose in
the selection of the grape, and in the want of proper judgment in
the admixture of spirits. The vines from the continent of Europe
transplanted to Australia would produce a different wine. With
reference to the question of the names of wines, it had often struck
him that it was a great mistake on the part of Australian wine
makers that they should call their wines after the names of known
wines. Everybody tasting a wine so named judges it from the wines
he has been accustomed to. English taste was so formed on port
and sherry that there was scarcely another wine to which they could
make comparison, and they would ask if it was not like one of them,


or perhaps sometimes it was like Claret or Burgundy. But Australian
wines had an individuality of character of their own, which, if pro-
perly cultivated and developed, was of great value. Spanish or
German wines were valuable for them own special characters, and
people would not admire a French wine the more if it had the
same character. He therefore urged that they should stop the use
of names that could create comparison between known and high
quality vintages. The Australian names, or some of them, were
highly musical and characteristic, and he liked to see wines named
after the vineyards from which they were made. He should also
like to see the design carried out of cultivating a knowledge of the
vines and of the grape best suited to the various localities. Some
of the best wines he had met with in this country were those made
in the neighbourhood of the Hunter Eiver and in the Adelaide
district, and he had noticed that in some of the finest and most
delicate wines, the average degree of spirit scarcely ever went
beyond 24°, and many of the finest had not exceeded 21°. The
question of the strength had nothing to do with the quality of the
wine, nor with the permanent retention of its qualities. He had
tested a French wine 111 years old, and though containing only
18-9 degrees of proof spirit, it was sound as possible, though not
in the finest drinking order for flavour. This showed that the
endurance of wine did not depend upon the strength. Some years
ago he had tasted a sample of wine made from Portuguese grapes
by Mr. Forrester without added spirit. It was made in 1880, bottled
in the April following the vintage, and tested in 1862. It was
simply undrinkable, being coarse and astringent, and with a strength
of about 28°. It was deep and intense in colour, and anything but
like ordinary port wine, which becomes discoloured by age—a sign
of the action of added spirit on the colouring matter of the wine.
There was a kind of marriage in the case between the spirit which
was naturally in the wine and the wine itself. But in the other case,
there was a connection which was not so permanent, and which
tended rather to its deterioration than to its advantage.
Mr. Michie said that although he was prepared to sympathise
with the enthusiasm of Mr. Fallon, he could not be blind to the
practical difficulties of his case. As a drinker of Australian wines
for the last twenty years he could speak as to their merits, but in
dealing with the matter in a financial shape ho was confronted
with many obstacles. Mr. Moody had dealt with that portion of
the subject by suggesting a graduated scale of duties, by which
they might to some extent be enabled to escape from the difficulty
in which they were placed. He had discussed this matter some


years ago with the then Secretary of State, and had very soon dis-
covered, as he thought, that to a considerable extent in questions
of this kind the Government must be guided by experts. These
experts in England differed altogether with the Colonial growers as
to the natural strength of our Australian wines. We were met by
the assurance of competent, practical men that the Colonial
representations were inconsistent with the facts, and that the pro-
ducers apparently laboured under a misconception as to the inherent
strength of these wines. It was suggested by the growers that
the duty of 2s. 6d. upon wines above 26 (being a hard and fast
line) should be relaxed by the introduction and adoption of some
such suggestion as that of Mr. Moody. But, on the other hand,
it was put by those who opposed a change, that even if what they
were contending for were conceded, the effect of the concession
would only be, unless we were to have differential duties (in this
free trade country not to be thought of), to involve us in, possibly, a
still greater difficulty. In the proposal to remove the obstacle to
the introduction of Australian wines, by raising the maximum of
26 up to 30, they would (it is said) necessarily bring in under that
higher standard a number of competing wines from the Continent,
which at the present time pay the higher duty of 2s. 6d. Thus in
the very afet of attempting to remove the disability under which
the Colonies labour, they would, it was alleged, expose them to the
further and more effectual competition of foreign growers, whose
wines, ranging up to 30, would come in under the same duty as that
payable by the Australian ■wines. Mr. Moody was evidently alive
to this, and thus had proposed to meet this aspect of the ease by
the suggestion of the graduated scale. Sefcretaries of State could
not be expected to possess more practical knowledge on such a
subject than the meeting. They must be guided, as all Ministers
were in matters outside the range of their personal experience, by
those who were practically engaged in the business ; and if Mr.
Keene could not report in favour of the suggestions of Mr. Moody,
the committee or deputation, he feared, would be found of very
little use. Some twelve months ago he had read a very able and
exhaustive report by Mr. Keene, which, he must admit, almost com-
pelled him to the conclusion that there was either a mistake or a
want of candour on the part of those gentlemen who had sent pro-
testations from the Colony, to the effect that they were not arti-
ficially fortifying their wines. Mr. Keene, however, was not in the
position of Messrs. Lumsdaine and Moody, nor disposed to ignore
their experience and conclusions, and therefore assuming the facts
to be as stated by those two gentlemen, a deputation might possibly


succeed in carrying conviction to the mind even of the Chancellor
of the Exchequer. But supposing this end gained, there was still
another phase of the case, not altogether agreeable to those who
were proposing largely to import these wines. It was notorious to
consumers that they could get a respectable wine at a far lower price
than Mr. Fallon apparently was prepared to accept. The cheap
clarets coming to the English market had no prejudices to contend
with. They were recommended by long usage, amounting almost
to a superstition, which gave them an immense advantage to start
with over the Colonial product. There was a great prejudice
against the latter, as they all knew. Only that afternoon he
had met a gentleman, who had spent many years in the Colonies,
who expressed himself in unmistakably unflattering terms about
Australian wines. This, doubtless, was an unjustifiable prejudice,
but still he must bo recognised as a very fair “ foolometer.” Pre-
judiced as he was against the Colonial article, such prejudice was
shared by tons of thousands of people here. Only five minutes
ago the lion, member for Leicester had stated in that very room
that much of this wine tasted like “ sugar and water.” Two or
three years ago a sample of the wine was sent to a gentleman
holding such a position in this country which would have enabled
him to advance the interest in the wines, and from whom he had
hoped to receive a favourable report. Whether the wine had
suffered in transit, or whatever the cause, his friend rather took
him aback by reporting that, although he was averse from looking
at his (Mr. Michie’s) gift in the mouth, he was equally averse after
the first taste from taking it into his own. Unless Mr. Fallon
could see his way to putting these wines on the market at a price
which would effectually compete with the cheaper Continental
products, he would not be lively to find a larger additional con-
sumption of his wines than ho had at present.
Dr. Tiiudichum said he had listened to Mr. Fallon’s paper with
mixed feelings of pleasure and dissatisfaction —pleasure at finding
that the experimental way of solving the question at issue had, by
his advice, been entered upon; dissatisfaction at the manner in
which the experiments relied upon had been performed. Without
entering into details, ho would criticise the experiments at their
vital points. Thus it was stated that the specific quantities of the
distillates had been obtained with the' aid of a balance which
enabled the operator to weigh to the tenth of a grain. Specific
gravities of alcoholic liquids, however, could not be determined with
such a rough balance, but required a balance which could draw at
least a thousand groins in each span and turn with the one thou


sandth part of a grain on either side. The reports given by Mr.
Fallon were, therefore, not bulletins of a new science, but records
of blunderings in matters of detail, and were not worth the paper
on which they were printed. As regarded the report of the Eoyal
Commission at Sydney, alluded to by Mr. Fallon, he (Dr. Thudi-
chum) must animadvert strongly on the fact that the details of
that report had been suppressed by the author of the paper. The
chemists appointed by the Commission had all three analysed por-
tions of the same selection of grapes, and yet had come to widely
differing results. If he (Dr. Thudichum) had been a Commissioner,
or the Governor, in this case, he would have declined to receive such
a report, which must discredit the chemists who made it, the Com-
mission which published it, and stultify the very object for which the
inquiry was undertaken. These chemists must at least have agreed
amongst each other, though they might have been uniformly wrong,
as were the employers of the balance which could weigh the tenth
of a grain. But as their differences amounted to several per cents,
in so simple a matter as a sugar determination, one or other, or all,
must be wrong. But they were wrong not only in their facts so
called, but equally so in their arguments. For they assumed that
all the sugar contained in a grape-must would, by fermentation, be
transformed into alcohol. This was a great mistake, an erroneous
assumption, ■which they had not supported by a single experiment;
and it was, in fact, begging the question, as the amount of alcohol
obtainable in Australian grape-must was the question to be deter-
mined. Two years ago he (Dr. Thudichum) had made many ex-
periments on must from Spanish grapes, with a view of ascertain-
ing the maximum of alcohol obtainable by fermentation. All arts
were tried that could raise the alcohol, such as exclusion of air from
the must, fanning of air through the must, addition of active yeast,
addition of sugar fermentation with the husks and without the
husks, maintaining of the fermentation vessels day and night at the
best temperature for fermentation, and so on; no artifice was left un-
tried to produce the strongest wine; and what was the result ? In
no case out of more than thirty was a wine obtained which con-
tained more than 22 per cent, of proof spirit. These experiments,
therefore, supported fully the teaching of science as maintained by
him hitherto. Thus he had come to the conclusion that the new
matter contained in Mr. Fallon’s paper was rather an exposure
than a scientific achievement, and contained nothing with which to
go before the Chancellor of the Exchequer or a Parliamentary
Committee without the risk of damaging the cause to be advocated.
He took great interest in Australian wines, and believed many to


liave excellent qualities, amongst tlicm, first, that they were not over-
alcoholic. He had records of more than 200 Victorian wines, pub-
lished by the Victorian Government, in none of which the alcohol
was above 20 per cent, of proof spirit. The move which brought
forth the present discussion seemed, therefore, to have at least a very
narrow area even in Australia, and could be controverted easily by
Australian data exclusively. He hoped Mr. Fallon would have the
experiments repeated by persons who could analyse sugar without
differing too widely, who could weigh specific gravities with more
accuracy than the limitation of a tenth of a grain; in short, repeated
by competent persons, as the term was understood in this country,
and then they might again discuss this matter at a future oppor-
tunity. By that time, also, Mr. Fallon might perhaps see that
“facts” could not be exploded by “experiments,” inasmuch as
there were many facts, ascertained by observation, requiring no
experiments, while “ experiments,” if properly made, would yield
“ facts,” and could not upset any. But what they would always
upset were fallacies and preconceived opinions.*
Mr. Michie, whilst disclaiming any desire to dispute Dr.
Thudichum’s pretensions in connection with chemistry, must never-
theless take leave to say that he could not defer to him as a
reasoner. His argument was only paralleled by those persons of
whom they had read, who doubted the existence of ice because it
had never come within their experience to see water take that form.
The Doctor charged the reader with an attempt to upset all previous
reasonings, and “was not going to have his science upset by any-
thing coming’from the Antipodes.” If Dr. Thudichum had any
respect for inductive reasoning, he must be prepared to keep his
mind open to all experience, whether coming from tho Antipodes or
elsewhere. Nor could he or his “ minute balances ”be admitted to
tho privilege of putting a limitation upon the functions of nature.
The salient facts put forward by Messrs. Lumsdainc and Moody
had not been contradicted, nor were they to be disposed of by any
* The statement made in a footnote by Mr. Fallon, that there was no
Australian Mercury is liable to bo looked upon as an imputing insinuation
against me. I therefore bog to state that I have not spoken of an Australian
Mercury anywhere in my writings. The publication containing tho statement
concerning the densities of Australian must obtained at Dalwood, on tho estate
of the “ Hunter River Vineyard Association” —a statement, let it be remembered,
given in a speech by Mr. Wyndham, at tho Annual Meeting of tho Association —
is reported in tho Maitland (Australian) Mercury, of May 0, 1805. This full
quotation is given in Thudichum and Duprd, “On tho Origin, Nature, and
Varieties of Wines,” p. 042. From his ignoring these and tho Victorian obser-
vations, it appears that Mr. Fallon is but imperfectly acquainted with tho
Australian as wellasEuropeau literature concerning his subject. —{Note by
Dr. Thudichum.)


such process as that proposed to them from the laboratory of Dr.
Thudichum, or anyone else.
Mr. W. H. Burton, having had great experience in the Customs’
Department of London, and being at present deeply interested in
Colonial wine, ventured to make a few remarks on the subject.
He tendered his sincere thanks to Mr. Fallon for his untiring zeal
in advocating the cause of Australian wine. He thought, however,
he had directed his energies in a wrong direction when he attempted
to get the Government of this country to favour the Australian
■wines by any sort of special legislation. His conviction was that
the wines required no such nursing, they had sufficient merit to
make their way in this country, let the alcoholic test be what it
might. Indeed, if the proposed change were made, he could only
anticipate a like fate to the wines of Australia which happened to
the wines of the Cape Colony, when the concession of duty in
their favour was removed in 1860. Instead of the colonists asking
for a special reduction in the duty on wine which would favour
their produce, it would tend more to the permanent benefit of the
Colonies, and to the speedy development of the wine interest, if each
Colony could appoint an export committee, whose duty it would bo
to prevent the sending of wines to this country and elsewhere
which would bring discredit on the name of Australian wine. It
would in the end be cheaper to let the wine run into the sea than
allow it to come over here to increase the prejudice which was already
too prevalent. With regard to the question of duties, it ought not
to be overlooked that wine is now greatly favoured as compared to
any other liquid which contains spirit. Wine containing 25 per
cent, of proof spirit can now be admitted at a duty of Is. per
gallon, and wine of 41 per cent, of proof spirit can be admitted at
a duty of 2s. Gd. per gallon. The duty on British spirit being 10s.
per proof gallon, it follows that if 25 degrees of spirit are admitted
at Is., 15 of such degrees pass duty free ; or if wine containing 40
degrees of spirit be passed at 2s. Gd. per gallon, it is clear that.if
the spirit in wine were taxed according to its alcoholic strength, as
all other spirituous liquids are, the duty charged should be 45.,
instead of 2s. Gd., to place it on a level with British spirit, which is
charged at the rate of Is. for every 10 degrees. Speaking generally,
it might be affirmed that were the alcoholic test strictly applied,
wine would have to pay Is. per gallon more than the duty now
charged. In the face of such facts, how could the wine importer
ask for further remissions ? His fear was that if the Chancellor of
the Exchequer came to look into the matter, and that more revenue
were required, the wine duties would bo increased instead of


lowered. If all articles coming into this country, whether contain-
ing spirit or that spirit were used in the manufacture, pay duty to the
uttermost tenth of such spirit, why should wine be an exception ?
If chloroform, ethers, lotions, and all kinds of medicines intended
for the alleviation of suffering were so charged ; if, for instance, an
article known as “ Pain Killer ” were charged a duty of 14s. per
gallon, why should the pain producer—the vile decoctions coming
in under the guise of wine—be admitted, because they assume that
name, at a duty of 2s. 6d. per gallon ? He felt sure that the agita-
tion of this question would not benefit the producer or importer of
good honest wine.
Mr, Strangways said that the question of Colonial wines had
presented itself in different aspects : the producers’ view, the official,
and the scientific, which latter, he confessed, he could not under-
stand. He would say a view words on the most important view of
all, i.e. the consumers’. Mr. Fallon asked to be allowed to import
Australian wines into this country at 30 degrees strength at Is.
per gallon duty. That was too strong. With regard to the Conti-
nental wines we are drinking, he referred to a book on the ‘ ‘ Adul-
teration of Food,” in which ho found this passage on wine:—
“ Probable adulterations : extracts of the rhatany, logwood, brazil-
wood, elderberry, the berries of the Virginian poke, purple holyoak,
&c.; colum, glucose, cyder, plain spirit, caramel, catechu, and
water.” In another place he found “ beetroot, litumus or orchil,
petals of red poppy, privet berries, and myrtle ” alluded to. As to the
strength of wines, he found the actual strength of the Continental
wines as made, not as imported here, from 0 to 23 per cent, by
volume, that is, wines as they are made in the country. He was
not a wine-maker, though he hjid often drunk Colonial wine in
Australia and at the Cape; but he must say that the Australian
wine-makers had nobody to thank but themselves for the bad
character the wines got in this country. When he came home ho
brought some wine with him. When he got to the docks he Asked
the Customs’ officer how much of it would get through, when
he confidentially assured him that it was quite safe, adding that the
officers had been too often done with such stuff, and he might
depend upon it none of them would touch it. He knew from
experience that Australian wines had increased in production
largely within the past few years, and he was sure that nearly all
the best wines made there would do well to send over to this
country; but they, until latterly, consumed it all themselves, and it
was only the inferior material that had'been forwarded to this
country. The effect of this he took leave to call attention to. In
The Wines of Australia,


a paragraph of a London newspaper, published on the 12th June
instant, which professed to be a review of the statistics of South
Australia, the following was the opinion of the reviewer on the
wines : “ Much as we sympathise with Australian energy and pro-
gress, we must put in a mild protest against Mr. Boothby’s state-
ment that ‘ the wines of South Australia are, as a rule, of a high
character.’ Viler and more acrid compounds we have never tasted.”
He had not seen that any person connected with the Australian
wine interest had the public spirit to contradict it. To go to the
question of fortification of wines, perhaps Mr. Miohie and himself
had had something to do with the framing of some of the Austra-
lian laws as to distillation and customs, and to hear and receive a
great deal of information on the subject of the strength of wine.
Every South Australian wine-grower had a still—not a common,
old-fashioned still, but generally one with the latest improvements
—wherein they put all the old wines and wine refuse at one end,
and run the spirit out at the other 60 degrees or more over proof.
In making the wine, the wine-makers had told him that they were
obliged to keep in their cellars spirits ready for use, in order, if they
had a second fermentation of the wine, that they might have the
power to check it, and they might consider how much of that added
to the natural strength of the wine ; and they rinse the cask with
spirit, which, owing to the nature of the climate there, became
perfectly dry, and not a drop of moisture in it. The casks were
frequently rinsed out with a strong spirit, 60 over proof. The dry
casks absorb large quantities of the spirit, and when the wine was
put in, all the spirit was absorbed into the wine, and of course
increased its strength. With regard to the difficulty of getting the
wine to England, he had over and over again seen the Australian
wines carted along the roads without any protection, exposed to the
heat of an almost vertical sun; and he had seen the wines lying on
the wharves hours at the time exposed to the sun. The wines were
generally not bottled before being shipped on board, and were liable
in cask to a further fermentation; they were frequently sent home
in a wool ship, and were stowed away in places of 93 degrees and
94 degrees of heat. A delicate wine kept in such a temperature for
weeks at a time was likely to get spoilt,unless very strongly brandied.
Many of the Australian and Cape wines were exceedingly good, and
some no good at all. With respect to the scientific point, his own
impression was that the experience of Dr. Thudichum, with regard
to fermentation carried on by means of bottles in a laboratory, was
utterly valueless in respect of the effect that might be produced
upon the large quantities of wine in a wine-maker’s cellar.


Mr. Fked. Young ; It is my agreeable duty to propose a vote of
thanks to Mr. Fallon for the interesting paper he has read. In the
discussion which succeeded it, I observe that Mr. MacArthur con-
fined his remarks principally to]tho doubt ho considered there was,
whether the Australians had done sufficient justice to that important
industry by exporting inferior classes of wine. He also stated that
he considered it was an important thing that the good natural wines
of Australia should be encouraged to be drank in this country instead
of the artificial and impure wines of other countries, because he
thought it would produce temperance among the people, and be
productive of other great benefits. Mr. Michie, who followed,
indulged us with one of his interesting and characteristic speeches,
and he called our attention, among other things, to the prejudice
which undoubtedly exists in this country, to a largo extent probably
on every subject, and he very properly alluded to that important
personage who occupies such a large amount of attention in this
country, the “ foolometer,” before whom so many of us are too apt
to bow. I must confess I felt with him on the subject of Australian
wines, as on other subjects, that there is a great deal of undue and
unfair prejudice with regard to them. There are Australian wines
and Australian wines, no doubt; but there are some which Mr.
Fallon can produce in the English market which are very fine
wines, and merit much greater appreciation than they have hitherto
attained in this country. We have had an important importation
into this discussion of two gentlemen having official experience—
Mr. Burton and Mr. Keene—and I am sure we are much indebted to
them for the testimony they have given, and to the way in which
they have treated this subject from a professional and scientific
point of view. Dr. Thudichum followed, and it was very natural,
as he had been somewhat severely attacked, that he should maintain
this side of the question with vigour and confidence. We all know
the danger we incur, particularly when we do not happen to be
scientific people, if we attempt to upset any of the doctrines of
science ; and it was quite clear, at all events as far as he was con-
cerned, that there could bo no question whatever in his own mind
of the truth of his experiments, and that anything militating
against them must be, in his opinion, utterly valueless and worth-
less. lam not here to take one side or the other on such an
abstruse question as this; but I must leave it in the hands of
those better able to judge than myself. Mr. Strangways fol-
lowed, and gave some exceedingly interesting information; and
Ihnust confess that I have gathered from the whole of this discus-
sion this impression, that we have all talked about the occasional


inferiority of the Australian wines produced in this country, hut
we have not exactly grappled with the particular point which Mr.
Fallon wished to bring before our attention, viz. that there is a
natural value in [the Australian wines which our national taste
prevents our "being able to appreciate, and the mode of levying
our Customs’ duties in this country places them at a disadvantage
with respect to other fortified wines. It seems to me that al-
though science has not yet discovered a remedy, still any injustice,
if injustice it is, should be removed by some additional means
being adopted of levying the duties in a proper way, so as to give
the justice and fair play to the Australian wines which their natural
merits demand. I cannot see that there is any difficulty as far as
the Customs are concerned, or as far as any scientific points which
have been brought before us this evening go. Because these wines
are only natural wines, and happen to be of a superior quality, that
they should be compelled to pay the duties which are levied upon
other fortified wines, seems to be unjust. I propose that you should
give a hearty vote of thanks to Mr. Fallon for his excellent paper
of this evening, which is an important one as connected with a
valuable industry of the great Colonies of Australia. I will mention
that it is quite understood on these occasions that, while we are
glad to give a platform to the discussion of any important questions
of this kind, we do not promise to take up deputations, or pledge
ourselves to any subsequent action. We simply desire at these
meetings to give opportunities for gentlemen to ventilate their
opinions and views on questions of importance to Colonial interests.
But as to whether wo shall take any special or particular action
afterwards, must be left entirely to those who direct the policy of
the Eoyal Colonial Institute.
Mr. Fallon, in reply : As time is late I will just note the remarks
of the different speakers. Mr. Michie, Mr. Keene, and Mr. Burton
appeared to be under the impression that we wished to have dif-
ferential duties with regard to Australia. In my paper I wished for
nothing of the kind. We simply wish to have the tariff altered
from 26 to 30. The principle on which we seek to have this altera-
tion made is quite clear. There can be no question that it was the
intention of the framer of the present Customs’ Act in 1861 to em-
brace within the low rate of duty all wines produced from pressure
and fermentation alone, in the usual way from the grape in its
natural state, as it is gathered from the vine. For that purpose a
special Eoyal Commission was appointed, and upon their report
this Customs’ Act of the Government of the day was framed and
the limit fixed. At that time Australian wines were scarcely
c


known; in fact, it is since that period the Australian wine has
come into existence; and I simply say now, that as it was then the
intention of the Government to include all natural wines within the
shilling duty, the Government will merely he carrying out its
original resolve by acceding to our wishes. But if’this cannot bo
done, we are willing to accept and pay a pro rata advance up to 30
per cent., but I think it is unfair to the Australian growers, simply
because the Australian product naturally gives beyond the 26 per
cent., that it should be surcharged 150 per cent, beyond the regular
amount of duty. It is too bad that the Australian producer of
pure wines should be placed on a level with those who send their
branched compounds measuring up to 42 per cent, of proof spirit.
Indeed, it seems to me very hard that because nature has favoured
us with soil and climate to produce unusual results, the British
Customs should intervene, and practically force us out of the
market. As to the alterations of the Customs, we do not want any-
thing of the kind. Differential duties have long been expunged
from the British tariff, and it is not our wish that the Government
should reintroduce any such measure by adopting a principle
applicable to Australia alone. All we ask for is a fair field and no
favour. As to the Continental wines, I would not interfere in any
way with the Customs, because all the French and German wines
are below 26 per cent., and the Spanish and Portuguese wines arc
far beyond it. Ayith reference to Dr. Thudichum’s remarks in
reference to the instruments used by the officer who conducted the
investigations in Victoria, I maintain that a balance that will
measure to the one-tenth part of a grain is quite sufficient for our
purpose. Even Dr. Thudichum’s balance, that could measure
to one-hundredth part of a grain, could produce no perceptible
results as to spirit strength, and, if at all definable, would most
undoubtedly tell in favour of the arguments I have endeavoured to
lay before the meeting. The gentlemen who conducted those
experiments are very well known in Australia, at all events, for their
ability and integrity. They went, and, instead—as Dr .Thudicum
would lead the meeting to believe—of handing the must or the juice
to chemists—they did notliing of the kind: they went into the vine-
yard, and took their men with them, and had the grapes pressed
out, carried the juice away with them, and placed in charge of an
officer of their department; so that the must had never gone out of
their possession until they gave their report; and you have here
Mr. Heath’s certificate to show that the samples he collected never
departed from his possession until ho gave his return.


Mr. Michie ; Are some of the Spanish and Portuguese wines
unfortified under 20 ?
Mr. Fallon : I presume they are. The principle on which I ask
for the change is this—that because our wines are pure and natural,
that I think we have a right to ask that the change should be
made; but if the Government will not alter the maximum from 20
to 30, we are then willing to pay a proportionate advance on the
extra strength. It would be highly satisfactory to us if the Govern-
ment adopted a sliding scale such as that recommended by Mr.
Moody. If it is possible to carry on a sliding scale from 42 and
upwards, then I cannot see why it cannot be carried from 20 up-
wards. With reference to Dr. Thudichum’s invitation to carry on
the investigations, I do not think it will be necessary to follow his
advice, inasmuch as the scientific men who have considered this
subject, the general public, and all the vignerons interested, are
fully satisfied that pure natural wines can bo produced from grapes
grown in Australian vineyards, which, by fermentation, will yield
a wine possessing up to 80 per cent, and upwards of proof spirit,
notwithstanding Dr. Thudichum’s opinion to the contrary. And
although Dr. Thudichum may still remain a sceptic, I think I shall
be perfectly satisfied, and my friends too, to allow him to enjoy his
opinions, and Ido not think we shall suffer from it, I thank you
all very much for your kind vote.
The Chairman announced it was the concluding meeting.
Mr. Burton proposed a vote of thanks to the Chairman, which
was seconded and carried unanimously, for which the Chairman
returned his thanks.
The meeting then concluded.


APPENDIX.
From the WINE TRADE REVIEW.
It is satisfactory that the subject of Australian wines was so fully dis-
cussed at the last meeting of the lloyal Colonial Institute. In the first
place, an interesting paper by Mr. J. T. Fallon, of Australia, was read, and
the discussion which ensued upon it was certainly of an important character.
Mr. Fallon’s propositions are simple. He complains that our present
method of levying the wine duties is excessive, so far as Australian wines
are concerned, and that these wines are so heavily handicapped in the way
of fiscal imposition, as practically to be put out of competition in the English
market. He makes out his case pretty strongly. The Australian wines,
he says, have naturally a higher spirit-strength than 20. In their pure
unfortified condition they are beyond that limit; consequently they are
placed on the 2s. Cd. rate, and in that rests the unfair handicapping referred
to by Mr. Fallon. To remedy this state of things, and to give the Australian
vignerons a fair chance in the English market, Mr. Fallon proposes that
the limit should be raised from 20 to 30, by which means Australian wines
would be admitted at the Is. rate, and would be thus placed on equitable
terms with the Continental wines which come in at that rate, and now prac-
tically monopolise the trade. Little importance is to be attached to the
statements of Dr. Thudichum to the effect that the pure, unfortified wines of
Australia cannot, as a rule, contain more than 26 per cent, proof spirit, and
that, therefore, no alteration in their favour is needed. Dr. Thudichum’s
scientific theories are, to our thinking, overwhelmed by the direct practical
experiments which have been made in the matter. The chief inspectors of
Colonial distilleries, after most careful and complete investigation and
analysis, show that the natural wines of Australia are higher than 20, and
in the face of such evidence, it was rather bad taste on the part of Dr.
Thudichum to make such a speech as the one he delivered the other evening
at the Colonial Institute. The Agent-General of Victoria (Mr. Michie), in
replying to Dr. Thudichum’s strictures, gave that gentleman a few whole-
some home-truths, which he did not seem to relish particularly. Other
speakers showed that there are revenue difficulties in the way of our accept-
ance of Mr. Fallon’s proposition; but it does not appear to us that these
difficulties are at all formidable. It was suggested to form a committee to
work in the matter, and if desirable to have a deputation to the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and we trust that as both these ideas are good, they will
not be lost sight of. There is no doubt that our present wine duties operate
unfavourably for the vitioultural history of the Colonies. The 2s. Od. rate


drives the wines virtually out of the market; and surely it is not desirable,
on any grounds of political expediency, that Colonial production should be
thus unnecessarily depressed. As was pointed out at the meeting, Austra-
lian wines have sufficient to fight against in the prejudices entertained
against them by the public without the imposition of exceptionally heavy
fiscal burdens. Many of the speakers made too little of these prejudices.
It is idle to deny that a great quantity of very had wine from Australia has
been received in this country —wine which will do more to ruin the trade
than any heavy duties which are levied upon it. These wines, being offered
to consumers as fine Australian vintages, have of course engendered the
prejudice largely existing against such products. Much will have to be
done ere this prejudice is removed, and the English taste directed in favour
of the consumption of Colonial wines. A very good suggestion was made
by Mr. Burton, to the effect that committees of export should be formed in
the Colonies, whose business it should be to prevent any bad wine being
shipped to the English market, and he predicted that the result would be
that Australian wines would speedily become more popular with consumers
here. There is no doubt that the adoption of this suggestion would do
great good.
From Ike Times, July 20th.
On Thursday the Chancellor of the Exchequer received at his official
residence in Downing-street a deputation on this subject. The deputation
consisted of Mr. J. Holms, M.P., Mr. A. M‘Arthur, M.P., Mr. A. Michie,
Agent-General for Victoria, Mr. F. Dutton, Agent-General for South
Australia, and several gentlemen from various parts of the Australian
colonies.
Mr. Holms, M.P., introduced the deputation, which, he said, was
composed of gentlemen interested in the Australian colonies, and especially
interested in the wine-growing trade of Australia.
Mr. A.M‘Arthur, M.P., observed that the Australian wines were found to be
a “ shade ” above the standard now fixed, in consequence of which the duty
was 2s. 6d. a gallon, whereas foreign wines were admitted at Is. a gallon.
The effect of this was almost to shut the Australian wines from this market.
He knew a good deal about these colonies, and in Australia there was a
range of country and climate and a variety of soil admirably suited to the
production’of the vine, which had been cultivated to a considerable extent,
and for many years, in all the Australian colonies. The cultivation of the
vine had produced great moral effects on the people, who now consumed
a pure and wholesome wine, whereas they formerlj' drank bad brandy and
ardent spirits.
Mr. Jennings, of New South Wales, spoke of the effect on the pros-
perity of the Australian colonies of the cultivation of the vine. The
wines produced were pure, natural, wholesome, and unfortified. He
then spoke of the various investigations made, which had shown the
superiority of the Australian wines, but the difference in the duty was a
very great handicap to the Australian grower.


Mr. Michie thought that if the concession they asked for were granted,
the actual revenue of the country would he very much higher, while a
very important boon would he conferred on the Australian colonies.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, in reply, said he was very much
obliged for the information which had been given. The deputation
would, of course, understand that at the present period of the Session,
the questions submitted could not he taken up, as all the arrangements
for the year were made. Even if the changes were in contemplation,
that would not he the time at which they could he entertained; and
it would only he disturbing trade and doing all sorts of mischief if
they held out the idea that these questions were being considered
with a view to an alteration. The wine trade was a very interesting
one, and he and the Chairman of the Customs were always anxious to
receive any information about it. He thought the general principle upon
which the wine duties were settled—he believed in 1860 —was that the low
duty of Is. should be applied to natural wines. The first idea was that
there should bo alow duty upon wines below 18 degrees, another duty between
18 and 26 degrees, and a third duty on a higher grade; but it was found
that this caused inconvenience, and so the low duty was carried up to the
point of 26. Mr. Michie, however, had spoken of 28J, while Mr. Jennings
had mentioned 30 and 32 degrees. If any change were to be made, it
must, of course, be made on wines generally. He then asked several
questions of the deputation, and in reply Mr. Jepuings said the vinos
grown on the coast side of Australia—the main range, or Alps—should
make light wines, which, perhaps would come below 26 degrees.
Mr. Fallon said they could sell here the best wines for about £2O a pipe, and
the strength would vary from 26 to about 30 degrees. The wines, whether
grown in "Victoria or New South Wales, were pretty nearly the same. The
wines he had mentioned would compare with Burgundy and even Roussillon.
The wines sent here had given great satisfaction, and ho thought they
would come into general consumption. They were consumed generally in
Australia.
Mr. Dutton, Agent-General for South Australia, said the wines from
that colony were not “ brandied.’’
Sir Stafford Northcote said he did not know that they could go any
further on that occasion, and he thanked the deputation for their sug-
gestions and remarks.
The deputation then thanked the right bon. gentleman and withdrew;
From the Mousing Advertise?., July 28, 1876.
Yesterday the Chancellor of the Exchequer received a deputation on the
subject of Australian wines, at his official residence, in Downing-street.
The deputation consisted of the following gentlemen : —Mr. J. Holms, M.P.;
Mr. A. M‘Arthur, M.P.; Mr. P. A. Jennings, of New South Wales; Mr. A.
Michie, Agent-General for Victoria; Mr. F. Dutton, Agent-General for
South Australia; Mr. John Todd, Mr. W. Clarke, and Mr. W. Clarson, of
Melbourne; Mr. James Croyle, Mr. J. T. Fallon, and Mr. John Plummer.


M. Holms, M.P., briefly introduced the deputation, which, he stated, was
composed of gentlemen who had lived for a long time, and were still living,
in the Australian colonies. They were especially interested in the wine-
growing trade of Australia, and the object they had in approaching Sir
Stafford was to state the difficulties surrounding the extension of that
trade.
Mr. A. M‘Arthur, M.P., said that as the Australian wines were a shade
above the standard at present fixed on, they were subjected to a duty of
2s. Cd. a gallon, while foreign wines were admitted at Is. a gallon. The
effect of this very great difference was almost to shut the Australian colonies
from this market. He was quite sure that the Chancellor of the Exchequer
did not wish to do anything unfair to the Australian colonies, but would act
in a spirit of fairness and generosity towards them. He had lived for many
years at the Colonies, and he knew a good deal about them; and in
Australia there was a range of country and climate and a variety of soil
admirably suited for the production of the vine, and in all the Australian
colonies the vine had been cultivated to a considerable extent for many
years past. The increase of production had been very rapid, and would
have been much more rapid had it not been for the gold discoveries, which
acted as a temporary check. The cultivation of this industry was of great
importance to the welfare of the Australian colonies, and much to the ad-
vantage of this country. It was a very rapidly increasing industry, and
would give very large employment to the colonists.
Mr. Jennings said he regarded the subject from the Australian point of
view, as one who for half a century had watched the growth of the wine
trade, and seen its effects on the prosperity of the Colonies. After speaking
as to the superiority of the Australian wine, he said it was pure, natural,
wholesome, and unfortified, and had shown itself to be of greater strength
than that which could be introduced at the Is. duty. The yield of wine in
Australia was now something over 2,000,000 gallons, and they naturally
looked to be placed in as favourable a light as possible in the market of Great
Britain in order that the production might be increased. They were in the
same position to supply as pure, wholesome, and natural wines as the French
and Rhenish, but having to pay Is. Cd. a gallon more for duty it was a very
great handicap to the Australian wine-growers.
Mr. Miohie said that they were all conscious of the great difficulties they
bad to deal with as to the strength and the value of the wines, but the
recent evidence to his mind was conclusive on these points. There would
be no question that very many of the wines, although not nearly reaching
34 degrees, yet substantially exceed 26 degrees, and anything over the latter
point subjected them to a duty of 2s. Cd. a gallon. He thought—assuming
what they might from the ordinary experience of the world—that exactly as
they reduced the price of an article, they might look for an extension of its
consumption ; so with the reduced duty they might look for an increased
importation to this country, and that the actual revenue would bo higher
than it was under the existing duty. He hoped that they might live to sec
the granting of this very important boon, or rather important concession, of
justice to the Australian vineyards.


The Chancellor of the Exchequer said that he was very much obliged for
the information given him, and also for Mr. Fallon’s pamphlet. They
would understand that at the present period of the session—all the arrange-
ments for the year being made —the question could not he taken up; and
even if changes were in contemplation, that would not be the time at which
they could be entertained, and it would only he disturbing trade and doing
various mischief if they held out the idea that the questions were being con-
sidered with a view to any alteration. As to the wine trade, they were very
glad to receive all the information they could, for it was a trade of a very
interesting character. He thought that the general principle upon which
the wine duties were' settled in 1800 was that the low duty of Is. should he
applied to natural wines. The first idea was that there should he a low
duty below 18 degrees, and that there should he another rate between 16
and 26 degrees, and a third rate for a higher grade. It was found, however,
that this caused inconvenience, so the low duty was carried up to the point
of 26 degrees; but now, as he understood, Mr. Michie spoke of 28J and Mr.
Jennings of 30 and 32 degrees. He asked whether there was much differ-
ence between the wines of Australia, whether there was a taste for those
wines in this country, and where the demand for them was likely to arise—
whether from the upper classes or from the general consumer. It was
rather difficult to get tho English people to take to new wines.
Mr. Fallon said that they could send the best wine here and sell it at
T2O a pipe, and the strength would vary from 26 to 30 degrees. From his
experience the wines were pretty nearly the same, whether grown in Victoria
or New South Wales. He had sent wines to this country, and they had
given very great satisfaction. He thought that they would come into
general consumption, as they possessed a peculiar flavour and quality of
their own. They had some difficulty at first in getting these wines consumed
in the Australian colonies themselves, but they were now generally
consumed.
Mr. Dutton, the Agent-General of South Australia, said that the wines
from the colony were not hrandied. 1
The Chancellor of the Exchequer said ho did not know that they need go
any further with the subject then, hut ho was very glad he had heard the
suggestions and remarks which had been made.
After thanking Sir Stafford, the deputation withdrew.
From the Wine Trade Review.
A deputation of Australian colonists interested in tho wine trade waited
on the Chancellor of tho Exchequer the other day, in order to lay before
him the difficulties which obstruct the free development and extension of
the Australian wine trade. Our readers are aware that these difficulties are
mostly of a fiscal nature —that is to say, tho present system of levying tho
wine duties in this country presses very heavy on colonial wines; in fact,
virtually excludes them from competing in tho English market. Although
pure and unfortified, some Australian wines, as has been clearly shown,


have a higher percentage of proof spirit than twenty-six degrees; conse-
quently they are obliged to come in at the 2s. 6d. rate of duty, while the
light continental wines are imported at 150 per cent, less duty. The
Australian vignerons complain that this is a very heavy style of handi-
capping them, and they have reasonable ground for asking the Government
for relief. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, of course, must show the
usual official reticence. At present he says he can do nothing, the
arrangements for the revenue, &c., being all made for the year, and he is
not in a position, even if he had the desire (which he has not) to make any
alteration. He is kind enough, however, to make a statement which the
most churlish minister could hardly refuse—he will, of course, give the
subject his best consideration. But Sir Stafford Northcote was even more
courteous. He said he was always glad to receive information concerning
the wine trade, and he characterised this branch of commerce as being one
of “an interesting character.” This is very nice to hear. Whenever we
want a pleasant euphemism for the trade in future we shall know where to
find it—it is one of an interesting character 1 So far so good; but we wish
the Chancellor of the Exchequer had given our colonial friends a little
more hope. This subject is one to which he may very usefully devote his
attention, so as to afford relief in a direction where it would really prove
advantageous. He need not go to the trouble of making any original
scheme of his own. The suggestion of Messrs. Moody and Lumsdaine for
the adoption of a graduated scale is a capital one, and could not fail to be
beneficial in its working. That a matter of two or three degrees above
20 degrees should make a difference of Is. Cd. a gallon seems hardly
rational. Let the few extra degrees be charged for, certainly; but on a fair
proportionate scale. This surely would satisfy all interests. The interests
of the revenue would rather be served than damaged by the increased
consumption which would result.
An important deputation waited on the Chancellor of the Exchequer on
the 27th ult, in reference to the subject of Australian wines, and the way
they are affected by the English system of levying the wine duties. The
deputation consisted of the following gentlemen;—Mr. J. Holms, M.P.:
Mr, A. M‘Arthur, M.P.; Mr. P. A. Jennings, of New South Wales; Mr.
A. Michie, Agent-General for Victoria ; Mr. F. Dutton, Agent-General for
South Australia; Mr. John Todd, Mr. W. Clarke, and Mr. W. Clarson, of
Melbourne; Mr. James Croyle, Mr. J. T. Fallon, and Mr. John Plummer.
Mr. Holms, M.P., in introducing the deputation, said that it was com-
posed of gentlemen interested in the Colonies, many of those present having
lived for a long time, and were still living, in the Colonies, and being
specially interested in the wine trade. The object of the deputation was to
submit to the Chancellor of the Exchequer some difficulties which they felt
surrounded the extension of that trade, owing to the natural strength of the
wine, which seemed to be beyond the extent of the maximum of the duties
for the Is. rate. The speakers would put before him with some little
detail, though with regard to the value of his time, their views on the
subject. The first speaker would be the hon. member for Leicester, Mr.
M‘Arthur, who was greatly interested in the Australian Colonies.


Mr. M‘Arthur said he would not occupy much of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer’s time. Several other gentlemen who had been in the Colonies
since he had been would supplement what he said. The Australian wines
were found to be a shade above the standard which is now fixed, and in
consequence they had to pay 2s. Cd. a gallon duty, while the Continental
wines were admitted at Is. The effect of this great difference was to exclude
the Australian produce from the English market. He was quite sure it was
not the wish of the English Government or of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer to do anything unfair to the Colonies, nor to place the Australian
produce in an unfavourable position, but would act in a spirit of fairness
and generosity to the Colonies. Having lived for many years in the
Colonies ho knew a great deal about them; and in Australia there was a
range of country and climate and a variety of soil admirably suited to the
growth of the vine, and in many of the Australian colonies the vine had
been cultivated to a considerable extent for many years past. Wine had
been made for many years past, and the production had increased rapidly.
It would have been much more rapid had it not been for the gold dis-
coveries, which acted as a temporary check, largo numbers of the people
going there. This question was of great importance to the welfare of the
Colonies and this country also. The effect produced in a moral point of
view on the Colonies was beneficial. Formerly there was a very large
quantity of bad brandy and other ardent spirits consumed, but since wine
had been made there on a largo scale there had not been so much brandy,
Ac., drunk, while another result was that there had been a much smaller
quantity of inferior wines introduced into the Colonies. The decrease in
these wines was very noticeable, in consequence of the extension of vineyard
cultivation. The industry, generally, was a rapidly increasing one, and
gave employment to large numbers in the Colonies. It would be a benefit
to this country also if they could introduce a good sound wine at a moderate
price, and if people could be induced to drink it instead of ardent spirits he
did not think there would be any injurious result to the revenue. He was
quite sure that the Chancellor of the Exchequer would take this subject
nto consideration, and would endeavour to meet the views of the Colonies.
Mr. Jennings said ho looked upon this question from an Australian point
of view, having been for the last quarter of a century resident in the
Colonies, and having seen the growth of this wine trade and the good results
likely to flow from it Most persons denied the prosperity of these new
Colonies, and were willing to admit that it was not wise to base their pros-
perity on the mere growing of wool or wheat; the wine trade, in fact, ought
to be encouraged as a great industry. In Queensland, Victoria, &c., the
vine could he grown, and good wine made. It was evident that there was
no other British possession likely to be so large a producer of wine as the
Australian Colonies. Those who were entitled to authority admitted that
Australian wines contained qualities of the highest order. The wine being
a pure, natural, and unfortified drink, had shown itself to be of a greater
strength than could bo admitted at Is. per gallon duty. It was assumed, he
believed, that it was desirable on the part of this Government to foster a
taste for a light wholesome wine rather than stronger intoxicating liquors ;


and 20° proof spirit was assumed to be the maximum strength of these light
wines. He did not think any account was taken in these investigations of
Australian wine. It had, however, been since proved that the yield of wine
in Australia was something over two million gallons, and they naturally
looked to be placed in as favourable a position as possible with regard to
the markets of Great Britain, in order to give them the chance of increased
production. The Chancellor of the Exchequer was no doubt aware that
some time ago the colonists might have come and asked for some protection
with regard to their products. They did not ask for anything like that, they
only wished to be placed on the same footing as any other nation. In
consequence of their wines being over 20° proof spirit, they had to pay the
same duty as fortified wines prepared in Spain. It was not for him to point
out in what way the Chancellor of the Exchequer could give them relief,
but it was sufficient to point out that their wines were natural, unfortified,
and did exceed this 20°. Their friend, Mr. Fallon, who had taken a great
interest in this matter, had proved that there was no doubt whatever that
their wines wore above that strength without any addition of spirit. The
Government of New South Wales and Victoria, by their • own officers,
gentlemen well-skilled in the matter, and thoroughly honest and impartial,
had investigated the matter. These gentlemen had gone into the wine-
growing districts, had pulled the grapes from the vines, had seen them
pressed under their own supervision, had analysed them, and found they
contained a much higher degree of strength than what was said to he pos-
sible without the addition of spirit. They had done their best to prove that
pure unfortified wine might contain more than 20° proof spirit. They had
no doubt of the results, which showed that their wine went as high as 30
and 32, whereby they had to pay 2s. Gd. a gallon duty instead of Is.; not-
withstanding that they were in the same position to supply pure, wholesome
natural wines, as were the producers of the French and Rhenish wines, they
had to pay Is. Cd. per gallon more duty. This was a very serious matter
to them, considering that the whole of the expenses contingent on the
formation of vineyards were so heavy, and it constituted a very hard system
of handicapping for the Australian wine growers. They had no doubt that
they had only to lay these facts before him (the Chancellor of the Exchequer)
to secure for the trade the justice they required. On behalf of the Colonies
ho asked him to give a favourable consideration to this question as far as
possible.
Mr. Miehie said that Mr. Jennings had gone so carefully into detail
that he should make very few remarks. The heavy handicapping which
Mr. Jenning had referred to, necessarily tended to an enhancement of the
price of colonial wines to the extent of 3s. a dozen. This, of course, was a
disadvantage to the Australian producer. They were all aware of the
difficulties they had to deal with in the official testimouy on this point,
this testimony being founded on the experience at the disposal of experts,
on which they have expressed their judgment as to the accuracy of the
reports from the Colonies. The late evidence on the point ho thought they
would find to be overwhelming. The lecture of Mr. Fallon before the
Colonial Institute (fully reported in the last issue of The Wine Trade


Review) showed this very clearly. Then particular reference was made to
the recent report of Messrs. Moody and Lumsdaine, two officials in the
employment of the Colonial Government, whose evidence seemed to he
quite conclusive. These gentlemen were of the highest respectability, and
their evidence was altogether beyond suspicion. The cause of this difference
in the strength of the wine was that it had been found thatthere was a real
difference of quantity, and quality also, in the saccharine properties of the
grapes of the coast side of the Australian Alps as distinguished from the other
side; and he believed it was a fact that the saccharine matter of the grapes
in the vineyards of the interior of the country was so much greater than
that of the vineyard of the coast side of the range, that when converted
into alcohol, the wine produced there was inherently stronger. He must
admit that the application made to his (the Chancellor of the Exchequer's)
predecessor was asking too much. They then ventured to ask that this
minimum of 26 per cent, should be extended to as high a point as 34.
That he thought he must recognise as scarcely reasonable, but there could
be no question that there were many of these wines, although not reaching
34, yet substantially exceeded 26. He might say as a close approximation
to the facts that in the interval between 20 and 28 lay a considerable range
of wines, all of which were exposed to the Ss. 6d. duty; and thus those
wines were, to the extent of the operation of the excess of duty, excluded
from access to the cellars of the London wine merchants, and from the con-
sumption of the British public. The difficulties have been dealt with to
a certain extent by the suggestion of Messrs. Lumsdaine and Moody that
it might be within the organisation at the disposal of the British authorities
that the duty should be charged on a graduated scale according to the
actual strength of the wine; that was, that wine going as high as 28 was
not necessarily to be admitted at Is., but at some higher rate commensurate
with the ascertained strength of the wine. That would rather recommend
itself to the consideration of every Chancellor of the Exchequer, who in
their highly responsible position must view this question in an aspect
which did not attract the attention of those who dealt with the question
from this point of view. He had assumed from the ordinary experience of
the world that exactly in proportion as they reduced the price of an
did they look for an extension of its consumption; so there > would be an
increased amount of the imports to this country, and he thought it was not
by any means a wild anticipation that with a reduced duty on the wines
the actual revenue would be very much higher than they found it to be
under the present duties.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer; I am much obliged to you for the
information given, and for this pamphlet of Mr. Fallon’s; of course you
will understand that at the present period of the session this is a question
which cannot be taken up. All the arrangements for the year are made,
and everything is going en, and even if changes were in contemplation they
could not be entertained just now; it would be disturbing trade and doing
all sorts of mischief if wo were to hold out that these questions were to bo
considered in view of alterations. In regard to the wine trade, lam always
glad to receive all the information that comes to us. This is a trade of an


interesting character, and we are always glad to watch and receive any
further information. I think the general principle on which the wine
duties were settled in 1800 was that the low duty of Is. should he applied to
natural wines, and the first idea was that there should be a low duty on
wines below 18 degrees, and that there should be another rate of duty
between 18 and 20 degrees, with a third for a higher grade. It was found
that caused inconvenience, and so the low duty was carried up to 26. Now
I understand Mr. Michie speaks of 28i degrees, and Mr. Jennings of 30 and
32 degrees. It is rather difficult to know what is the limit of natural vine
production, because we must not consider only Australian wine. We must
have reference to wine generally; any alteration you make in carrying the
alcoholic point higher will make the pressure still greater. I should like to
know whether there is much difference between the wines of different parts
of Australia. Is there much difference ?
Mr. Jennings supplied some figures giving the desired information. As
far as his knowledge went, the description given by Mr. Michie applied to
these Colonies; the wines grown on the coast side of the Australian range
usually were alight wine coming below 26 degrees. There was nothing as
dry as a Bordeaux, but something of the same quality without the dryness.
There was also something resembling in character the Rhenish wine.
Inside the range they had wine resembling sherry, and oven Marsala. It
was not so much the difference between North and South as the altitude
which made the difference in strength.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: What is the value of the wines ?
Mr. Fallon : We can send a wine here at about £2O a pipe—our best
wines grown on the coast side of the range can be produced for a smaller
sum. But the wines from the inland and the north side of the range have
to pay a higher rate of freight to bring them to the sea-board, and they are
of a stronger character. We can send them over at about £2O a pipe.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: What would be the strength?
Mr. Fallon : It would vary from 26 to 30 degrees. I may here mention
that the wines, whether grown in Victoria or New South Wales, are pretty
nearly the same.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: With regard to the wines you speak of
at .£2O a pipe, what would they compare with in French wines ?
Mr. Fallon : Rich Burgundies—Rousillon.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: Do you think there is a taste for
Australian wines in this country ?
Mr. Fallon: Wherever I have sent wines to this country they have given
great satisfaction. • The trade is but in its infancy yet.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: Where is the demand for Australian
wines likely to arise—in the upper circles or in general consumption ?
Mr. Fallon: I think in general consumption and in the upper circles.
These wines have a special peculiarity of their own which would commend
itself if they were properly introduced here.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: It is difficult to get the English to
have new wines.
Mr. Fallon ; We had to overcome the same prejudices in the Colonies to


get them to take to these wines, and now not only the better classes drink
them, hut also the working men, who instead of drinking brandy and other
spirits as they used to do, are now content to take their own wines.
Mr. M’Arthur; Some years ago unfavourable impressions were induced
by bad wine sent here, hut latterly these have been removed, and the Colony
now produces very excellent wine.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: Are the wines sent brandied from
Australia? Will they carry without it?
Mr. Fallon: They will, sir; I have sent them often. We get a high
quality of Australian wines which are not brandied—which are not fortified
and in their natural state. The cheaper wines we are not obliged to brandy.
Wines intended for immediate use may he treated that way, hut not wines
for export.
Mr. Dutton (Agent-General for South Australia) said the South Austra-
lian growers showed that the wines they sent were not brandied.
Mr. Miohie said there were many instances of good wine leaving the
Colonies and arriving here in a bad condition, and the transition which the
wine had undergone came about again, it was good again after passing
through its sickness. He had a remarkable proof of this in some wine
which lie had in his cellar which at first was awful rubbish, but at the end
of two years it was all right and had a bouquet which surprised everyone.
That wine would most certainly have come in at the 2s. 6d. duty. It was
beyond 2G Q and certainly below 28°.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: I do not know that we can go much
further. lam glad of the information.
After thanking the right hon. gentleman for his courtesy the deputation
withdrew.
From Eidley & Co.’s Circular.
On the 27th ultimo, a deputation representing the Australian Wine
Growers, was received by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in Downing
Street; consisting of Mr. John Holms, M.P., Mr. Alexander M’Arthur,
M.P., Mr. A. Michie, the Agent-General for Victoria, Mr. F. Dutton, the
Agent-General for South Australia, Mr. P. A. Jennings, of New South
Wales, Mr. J. T. Fallon, and other gentlemen interested.
Mr. Holms having introduced the deputation, Mr.. M’Arthur said that
Australian wines were found to be a shade over the standard of strength
admitted at the shilling duty, and the effect was that they were practically
excluded from the English market. The climate and soil of Australia were
admirably suited to the production of wine, and the cultivation of the vine
had of late years been greatly extended. This had been found very bene-
ficial from a moral point of view in the Colonies, as wine had to a great
extent taken the place of spirits, which were formerly largely consumed, and
he thought the introduction of wholesome natural wine at a moderate price
would have a similar effect here. He did not think an alteration in the
tariff would injure the revenue, as there would be a much larger quantity
consumed.


Mr. Jennings followed with similar arguments, and Mr. Miohie, who
declared that there was a considerable range of wines between 20 and 2Si-
degrees, thought that if the concession they asked for— i.e. that wines up
to 30 per cent, should be admitted at the shilling rate—were granted, the
revenue of the country would be benefited, while a very important boon
would be conferred on the Colonies.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, in reply, said the deputation would, of
course, understand that at the present period of the Session the questions
submitted could not be taken up, as all the arrangements for the year were
made. Even if the changes were in contemplation, that would not be the
time at which they could be entertained ; and it would be only disturbing
trade, and doing all sorts of mischief, if they held out the idea that these
questions were being considered with a view to an alteration. The wine
trade was a very interesting one, and he and the Chairman of the Customs
were always anxious to receive any information about it. He thought the
general principle upon which the wine duties were settled—he believed in
1860—was that the low duty of Is. should be applied to natural wines. The
first idea was, that there should be a low duty upon wines below 18 degrees,
another duty between 18 and 26 degrees, and a third duty on a higher
grade; but it was found that this caused inconvenience, and so the low
duty was carried up to the point of 26. Mr. Michie, however, had spoken
of 28J, while Mr. Jennings bad mentioned 30 and 32 degrees. If any
change were to be made, it must, of course, be made on wines generally.
He then asked several questions of the deputation, and in reply Mr.
Jennings said the vines grown on the coast side of Australia should make
light wines, which, perhaps, would come below 26 degrees. Mr. Fallon
said they could sell here the best wines for about £2O a pipe, and the
strength would vary from 20 to about 30 degrees. The wines, whether
grown in Victoria or New South Wales, were pretty nearly the same. The
wines he had mentioned would compare with Burgundy and even Roussillon.
Those sent here had given great satisfaction, arid he thought they would
come into general consumption. They were consumed generally in Aus-
tralia. Mr. Dutton, Agent-General for South Australia, said the wines from
that colony were not brandied. Sir Stafford Northcote said he did not
know that they could go any further on that occasion, and having thanked
the deputation for their suggestions and remarks, the interview terminated
uswis BROTiiKns, iTJSTr.r.s, i.osjdov axu cmiwoiiTir.




, £xi7S//r//-'
