

S I
*' Ek,lA IO ♦’AMT.
Bo* . >S
CHURCH AND STATE.
MUTUAL RELATIONS AND DUTIES
CHURCH & STATE.
THE
REV. DR. CAIRNS.
MELBOURNE;
WILSON, MACKINNON & FAIRFAX, COLLINS STREET.
1856.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
cTJ~, "cfl.3 , _ Ci-J cjp /j'J r r
''sk' 'i» yv «?
\ *




CHUECH AND STATE.
A LECTURE
ON THE
MUTUAL RELATIONS AND DUTIES
CHURCH & STATE.
THE
KEY. DE. CAIENS.
MELBOURNE;
WILSON, MACKINNON & FAIRFAX, COLLINS STREET.
1856.




PREFACE.
The following Lecture is published at the request of some
friends. I have willingly complied, because I wish, not only
to evince my respect for them, but to record my testimony, feeble
though it be, in favor of the great principles set forth in
this discourse, and which I believe to be as indispensable to the
welfare of a Nation, as to the faithfulness of a Church. I have
kept by the mere elements of the subject, in the hope that
a simple exhibition of scriptural truth may convey instruction
to some, suggest new enquiries to others, and induce a few,
perhaps, to suspect the validity of conclusions too hastily adopted ;
and, in a more liberal spirit, to reconsider a question that involves
the highest doctrines of revelation, and is fraught with issues
the most momentous. That my voice will be heard in the din
of party strife, or that my views of duty will be relished by any
class of politicians, I am neither so ignorant, nor so vain, as to
suppose. Of nothing am I now more firmly persuaded, than
that this young nation must purchase wisdom at the usual price.
But, strong in my faith of ultimate success, I cast my morsel
on the waters. Who knows, but that it may be found after
many days ?
ADAM CAIRNS.
East Melbourne,
July 31, 1856.




LECTURE.
“ Jesus Christ...the Prince of the kings of the earth." — Rev. i. 5.
The sole object I have in view, in addressing my congregation
on a subject that is, at present, engaging a large share of public
attention, is to lead them to an intelligent consideration of first
principles, and to a just appreciation of the truths involved in
the settlement of the question. I cannot expect that I shall be
able to convince all who hear me, that my opinions are absolutely
sound or in accordance with the doctrine of Scripture, but I may
hope, surely, without presumption that a simple statement of this
subject in its relation to the will of God, and the glory of his Son,
may suggest such trains of thought as may abate excitement of
feeling, and strengthen the cause of Christian patriotism. The
connection of Church and State, or the special relation which the
one bears to the other, is a matter of no importance to us, but in
as much as it is taught in the Word of God, and revealed there as
an essential part of his system of moral government. If there be
in the Bible any distinct doctrine on this subject, it is our interest
to know and our privilege to obey it; and in instituting such an
inquiry, I need not [say, that a teachable mind is indispensable
to success, —a spirit that has no will of its own, except that
expressed in the answer of Samuel, “ Speak, Lord, for thy
servant heareth.”
All who have read that venerated standard of our Church, the
“ Confession of Faith,” will be aware that the duty of the State to
the Church, is there set forth as a fundamental tenet of. Scripture,
in language which some think exaggerated and dangerous, but
which leaves no doubt as to the strong convictions entertained in
this matter, by the celebrated authors of that document. Had
they lived in our very different times, they would assuredly have
availed themselves of the lessons of experience, and perhaps
embodied their sentiments in terms less open to misconstniction,
and better fitted to attest their abhorrence of every claim, on the


part of the State, to interfere with the independence or to abridge
the liberties of the church of Christ, But, knowing intimately, as
we do, the principles and the character of the illustrious men who
were honored to vindicate the cause of the Gospel Church, from
the assumptions of civil power on the one hand, and the errors of
superstition on the other, and to frame for the guidance of after
ages those marvellous summaries of truth, known as the “ Con-
fession of Faith,” and the larger and shorter “ Catechisms,” we
can vouch for their entire freedom from the slightest taint, either
of Erastianism or Popery,—from any such obscurity, or any such
imperfection as would dispose them to sacrifice one iota of the
privileges of the sanctuary, or yield to Ceesar the place or the
prerogative that belong exclusively to God,*
That Henderson, who led the van of the second Refor-
mation—that Gillespie, the wonder of his time, and whose
disquisitions, on this very question, form not only a monu-
ment of exquisite reasoning, but a treasury of principles, to
which modern statesmen would do well to apply, —that these men
and their compeers, the very princes of Israel, the anointed
witnesses of truth, either misunderstood the question, or per-
verted it to the ends of party, will not be affirmed, and will
scarcely be believed, by any who are conversant with their
writings, or who have contemplated the martyr-like course of their
lives. Would to God we had such leaders now ! —the church,
and the world too, have sore need of them ! Men of the eagle eye
and fervent heart, the eldest of the sons of light, whose sagacity
no mysticism could deceive, and whose disinterestedness neither
smiles nor frowns, neither promises nor threatenings, could for a
moment shake or overcome ! The longer we live, and the more
earnestly we revolve this ever-recurring subject, the deeper grows
our conviction, that the principles so rigorously expounded by
these incomparable divines, are vital in their nature, are clearly
founded in Scripture, and will ultimately emerge from the strife
and confusion of ages, as the confession of every faithful church,
and as the strength of every prosperous community.
* In the twentieth cap. of the “ Confession of Faith,” the ruling principle, on this
subject, is expressed with admirable precision, thus, —“God alone is Lord of the
conscience, and hath left it free from the doctrines and commandments of men, which
are in anything contrary to His word, or beside it in matters of faith and worship.”
The axiomatic principle, thus stated, is the key by which to ascertain the meaning
and value of all subsequent propositions. The authors of the “ Confession” were
as great in logic as in theology; and minds of the highest order, and richest accom-
plishment, will pause before they venture to dissent from their deliberate judgment.


1. In the first place, we remark that God has separated man-
kind into families, or kingdoms, and appointed to each the bounds
of its inheritance. This characteristic feature of a nation is not
altered by its expansion into a vast multitude, although the
people come to be reckoned by thousands instead of hundreds,
and by millions instead of thousands. Though thus divided into
many parts, and planted in far distant regions, they still retain
their original relation to God, and owe to him the same acknow-
ledgment and homage as at first. We should remembei that,
however many and disastrous the changes wrought by sin, no
change whatever has taken place in the mind or purpose of
God, his will is the same, his authority is unaffected, and his
name demands its glory undiminished. Having created families,
he made provision for their welfare. They were not left to grope
in uncertainty, nor were they abandoned to caprice or passion.
He declared himself to be the Governor of nations, ordained
magistrates to rule, or to give to the people the benefit of just
and equitable government. The kingly office is, therefore, the
ordinance of God, by means of which he carries on the affairs of
nations, —is a terror to evil doers, a praise and a protection
to them that do well. Thus stated, we see at once that they
who fill the office of the king or magistrate, are bound to know
that it is the ordinance of God for good, that the ruler is God s
officer, that the law of his office is God’s will, that the good he
is to realise, is that which is good in God’s sight, and the means
he is to employ, those only which are agreeable to him, who is
God over all, blessed for evermore.
3. This admitted, it follows that a nation, as such, is a moral
agent, is charged with moral obligation, and is responsible to
God for its official acts. All see and allow this, in common or
mere secular concerns, A nation, for example, is bound by its
treaties with another nation. A national compact is a sacred
pledge which cannot be broken without guilt. A covenant
between two states, is binding on both, until abrogated or
modified by mutual consent. And this obligation has respect to
the conscience of the state, as of a party who is morally
responsible, irrespective, altogether, of individuals, as such.
Thus the treaty remains, though individuals die, it remains,
though a generation dies, for the covenant binds posteiity as
well as ourselves. It is a national act; the good faith, or con-
science of the nation, is pledged for its observance. A State
which should violate its treaties, would be held up to universal
infamy, and a repetition of such a crime, Avould call down the


vengeance of an indignant world; which would demand, in the
spirit of ancient Rome, that perfidious Carthage should be
destroyed.
On this principle, God deals with communities. If in their
public capacity, by their laws, by their customs, by their govern-
ment, they recognise his sovereignty, and honor his will, his
blessing will visibly rest upon them; his ordinance, justly
administered, will confer the good which he designs. But, if
they pervert his ordinance to some unrighteous purpose, and
wield the power of the State, not in obedience to his law, —not for
the attainment of his promised good, and not for the maintenance
and display of his glory as supreme, but for the subversion of
his government, and the promotion of a system of iniquity,—then
his displeasure will be incurred, and the tokens of his wrath will
consume the vigor, and disappoint the hopes of an apostate race.
And this truth is mournfully exemplified in that saddest of all
tragic dramas, the history of nations. It is little better than
a sickening narrative of tyrants, and slaves. We have, in one
page, the story of the conqueror; in another, the fate of the van-
quished ; and these scenes of judicial woe proclaim, in every ear,
that, verily there is a God that reigneth amongst men, that he has
let loose the demons of war, because his throne has been betrayed,
and his will rejected. The misery and tumults of the
people are a judgment inflicted by the hand of a forsaken God,
nor is it possible that he can cease from his anger, until his
ordinance of government is restored to its proper use, or so exer-
cised as to give some honor to his name". Open the Bible where
we may, we find this doctrine emphatically taught, while it is
illustrated by the successive dispensations of Providence, from
the beginning of the world. The heathens are those who have
cast themselves away, whose sins have provoked a fearful
retribution. They are lying in the valley and shadow of
death, as the consequence of their own evil-doing,—the penalty
of their wilful disobedience. But, degraded as they are, still they
bear the responsibility with which the Divine ordinance is
charged. True, they know it not, but that is because of their
sin. It is their blame, and not God’s, that they are in ignorance
of his law, and therefore, heatiip though they be, he holds
them accountable as ever, and will visit, their abuse of the kingly
office with adequate punishment. Hence, for their sins, the
heathen nations of antiquity, were first judged, and then
destroyed. Hence, the burden of the prophets to Egypt and to
Edom, to Nineveh and to Babylon, to Moab and the Ammonites,


to Tyre and Sidon, affording accumulative proof that States, as
such, are morally responsible to God, and that their national acts
and policy are weighed in the balances of righteousness.
3. We now proceed a step farther, and introduce the dispensa-
tion of grace in the person of our Lord, and we will find that this
highest manifestation of the glory of God, affects the duties of
States, as well as the souls of men, raises the civil ordinance
to a loftier eminence, and invests it with more excellent attiibutes.
Had there been no economy of redemption, the governments of
the world would have been conducted on the principle of
obedience to the will of God, as naturally revealed; and, where
Christianity is unknown, this primeval arrangement retains its
authority. But God informs us, by his word, that to his Son, as
Mediator, he has committed all authority and power. And this
grant extends, not only to the government of the Church, or to all
things directly pertaining to the worship of God, but also to
government universally,—to that of the State, as well as of the
Church, to the civil, as well as to the sacred, so that the Mediator
is, in virtue of his office, Lord of lords, and King of kings, the
Sovereign of nations, as well as of individuals, lequiiing them
to know, to confess, and to obey him, and solemnly warning
them, that the nation that will not serve him will perish. This
is the clear and reiterated declaration of God, in his holy Word.
This truth is distinctly comprehended, in the last message
addressed, by our Lord, to his disciples : “ All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth, go ye therefore and teach all
nations, and lo ! lam with you alway.” Here, he assures us that
all power is given unto him. There is no limitation, and no excep-
tion. He does not say that power is given him of one kind, more
than another, or over one department of things, more than
another. But, in a sense absolutely unqualified, he affirms, that
all power in heaven, and all power in earth, has been given him,
on account of his merits and work as Mediator. And such a
grant was necessary to his success, as the Saviour of sinners.
Were he not supreme over nations as well as enthroned in Zion,
were he not the Prince of the kings of the earth, as well as the
Holy One of Israel, the governments of men would defy the
utmost power of his grace. No door of entrance would ever be
opened into the lands of the heathen, and the kingdoms of the
world severed from his control, or placed beyond the reach of his
sceptre, would present an insuperable barrier to the progress of
his truth, and would by violence suppress it, whensoever it might
appear. But, as Lord of all, he causes providence to co-operate


with grace, he touches the hearts of kings, and turns them as
rivers of water, he restrains enmity, he compels favor, he
makes the wrath of man to praise him, and he restrains the
remainder of wrath, he calls Cyrus from the east, and makes
Babylon herself contribute to the glory of his name. But
observe, this power over the State is not simply a superior and
over-ruling power,—it is that power itself. It is not a sovereignty
independent of the State, it is that sovereignty itself. The throne
is his throne, the office of the magistrate is his ordinance, and the
magistrate himself is his public functionary and servant. There
is unfaithfulness, therefore, when the magistrate, for any reason
whatever, refuses to acknowledge the Mediator’s supremacy
over him, and to fulfill his office as a servant, giving honor to
Christ as Lord. He is guilty, not of an error, merely, but of a
sin, when he refuses to make the word of God the law of his
government, and to discharge his duties so as to forward the
interests of the mediatorial administration. This doctrine runs
through Scripture, as a tissue of gold. Prophets and apostles
are alike its heralds and its champions. The Church is an abiding
witness for this great truth, and all creation groans for the
fulfilment of the pi’omise which it conveys. We read that,
“ when Christ was raised from the dead, God set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and
power, and might, and hath put all things under his feet, and
given him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his
body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.” The Old Testa-
ment accords with the New in publishing this doctrine of hope.
Kings and nations will not, indeed, believe it. No, they not only
disrelish, but they hate a truth which exposes their wickedness,
and puts them to shame. Incensed by the proposal to give their
power to the Son of God, to hold it as in trust for him, to exert
it in submission to his will, to devote it to the cause of his
glory, they band themselves together, and take counsel against
him; for if the doctrine of his Cross offends, that of his Crown is
intolerable. But does he consent to their denial of his sove-
reignty over them—to their conspiracy to defraud him of his
right as Lord ? Does he consent that the powers of States shall
be employed either in opposition to his Church or in ignoring its
existence ? Certainly he does not, and hence the ceaseless
troubles of the nations. They are set against Christ; he is con-
tending with them ; a bitter warfare it is, and long has it raged
without abatement, —nor will it cease, until he, whose right it is
to reign, shall have obtained his own, and in token of his victory,


every people shall confess and adore him, not merely as the
Redeemer of guilty souls, but as the Prince of the kings of the
earth. The fate of hostile nations is fixed and inevitable; they
imagine a vain thing, the Lord holds them in derision, and
by-and-bye he will break them with a rod of iron, he will dash
them in pieces as a potter’s vessel.” What means this emphatic
counsel ? “Be wise now, 0 kings, be instructed ye judges of
the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling ;
kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way when his
wrath is kindled hut a little?” Does it not mean, that if kings
and judges were wise, they would serve the Lord and rejoice in
his favor, they would kiss him in token of their love, and
cherish him with the cordiality of sincere attachment, that
they would fear to offend him, and tremble at the very thought of
his wrath, the first kindlings of which would consume them
utterly, as fire consumes the stubble ? True, they have scorned
this counsel, and they scorn it still. Bereft of wisdom, and
averse to instruction, they set themselves in array against the
inalienable rights of Zion’s King. They will not have him to reign
over them; nay, they will not even permit him to rule in his
own house. But they imagine a vain thing. They cannot
procure success to their policy. They can by no means com-
mand a blessing on their governments. They cannot reign
without his concurrence, while he will speedily dispense with
them, for he will strike through kings in the day of his wrath, he
will judge among the heathen, he will overturn, overturn, and
make a clean end of these usurpers of his sovereignty; nor
will he sheath his glittering sword, until he ride forth in his
glorious apparel, on his head many crowns, —welcomed by the
hosannahs of the ransomed nations, as King of kings, and Lord
of lords. This, surely, is the common faith of his people, as it is
the confident hope of his Church ; and we could not suppose that
any difference of opinion would exist amongst Christians, on a
subject revealed with such affluence of light, on purpose to
prevent misgiving, and to encourage in the very darkest trials,
were it not that the spirit of our unquiet and feverish times has
fancied or dreamed some strange objections.
1. It is alleged, that while magistrates have, as individuals,
and in their private capacity, as intimate a connection with
the duties and interests of the Christian life as others, yet,
as magistrates administering public affairs, they have no concern
with religion —they are neither directly to promote it, nor officially
to recognise it. Now the question concerns not a man,


but an office ; not the opinions of a private individual, but the
nature and design of an ordinance of God. If that ordinance
does not require, and necessarily require, both the acknowledg-
ment and the worship of its Author, in accordance with his
declared will, then it is needless to regard it as of divine authority.
For, on this hypothesis, God has no visible connection with it;
and the magistrate may, in the spirit of his office, avow himself
an infidel, and govern the people on any principle that approves
itself to his own mind. But how absurd is this idea. Surely,
the nature of an office determines the qualifications of its
possessor. Take the case of an ambassador; he personates the
majesty of the king or nation, whom he represents. You see, at
once, that not every subject, and not even every loyal subject, is fit
for such an office. It requires peculiar gifts, and without them
the ambassador would lose his errand, and disgrace his appoint-
ment. Or take the case of the Christian ministry. Not every
professing Christian, not even every true Christian, is qualified for
this sacred calling ; and whosoever engages in it, without appro-
priate qualifications, brings discredit not only on himself but on
Him whose minister he professes to be. Even so, the office of
civil ruler, being a Divine ordinance, requires that it be in the
hands of persons competently qualified. It demands that the
magistrate be a servant of God ; that he fill his high office, as
under the eye of his Judge, and the sanctions of his law; that
he discharge his functions so as to please him, whose sceptre he
wields, and to secure for the people the benefits of his gracious
approval.
This principle is not only safe and true, but it is full of all
excellency and deserving of all praise. It instructs us not to
lower the office to the condition of a man, but to raise the man
to the dignity of the office. It teaches us that the ordinance
defines the character of the magistrate, not the opinions or virtues
of any individual; that it is the office that ennobles the chair of
government, and places a crown upon the head of him that
occupies it, —and not a man, or any man, viewed in his private
capacity. Why, my friends, it was the office of the mediator,
that required those marvellous attributes, which so richly adorn,
and so brightly glorify the person of our Saviour; and, with awe
be it said, it is the throne of infinite majesty, on which God is
seated, that invests him with his glorious perfections, as the
Governor of the universe, and the righteous Judge of all.
The ordinance of civil magistracy is no paltry device of human
wisdom, no little contrivance, no ambiguous expedient, no pageant


of a day, in which any man, of any faith, may figure as creditably
as another. It is the ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, and he
demands that it be administered by one worthy of the task, and
suited to the service; by one who knows and loves him ; who
delights in his law, and believes in his word; who obeys with
fear, and rejoices with trembling; who aims at the glory of his
name, and who cherishes the interests of his cause. This is the
character which the office requires, and in seeking for magistrates
we are bound to seek these essential qualifications. We may not
find such men, indeed; alas ! there are few such to be found.
For the abounding of iniquity has deprived us of godly coun-
sellors, even as it has robbed us of the grace of godliness; still the
office demands its honor, and in the dearth of merit which at pre-
sent afflicts us, let us plead with God, to raise up for us, of his great
mercy, qualified rulers, to govern our country in a spirit of true
wisdom, and to preserve us from the guilt and the shame of denying
or forgetting God.
2. But another objection is, that the magistrate cannot ascer-
tain the truth, or that it is morally impossible that he can dis-
tinguish it from error. If it he morally impossible, then, though
he be ignorant of it, or though he disown it, he is guiltless ; hut
if there be no moral impossibility in the case, then his ignorance
or denial of the truth is sin,—which will bear its bitter fruit, and meet
with its deserved chastisement in due time. The objection resolves
into the exploded fallacy, that we are not accountable for our belief;
for if the ruler cannot discern the truth, how can the subject dis-
cern it ? The argument implies that no one is under any obliga-
tion to know and to believe what God hath spoken. It is
surprising with what facility a very plain and obvious principle is
lost sight of, when applied as a universal law. The experiences of
all ages seems to contradict it, the very excesses of sin are
received as a proof that the principle is void. Let me remind
you, once more, that the disorders which prevail in the world are
the consequences of unbelief; and in no degree are they attribut-
able to the nature of things or the ordinance of God. We see
nothing but a confusion, verging on chaos, in the kingdoms of the
earth. On one hand, the progress of ambition—on the other, the
struggles of parties. But this universal embarrassment proves that
to forsake God, is to plunge into an abyss of wretchedness, and
that our doctrine is sound, that recognises the magistrate as the
Lord’s servant, and rests his authority on the basis of revelation.
The magistrate, whatever the outward form of his state, is as
capable of knowing the truth, as he is responsible for performing


his duty; and if he know it not, the results will soon attest that
he has erred grievously, and that he has incurred the Divine dis-
pleasure. He is bound to know God, as revealed in his word,
and to follow the light of that word as his official law. He is
bound by the very nature of his office—by the very ordinance
which appoints him, to know and to obey the truth. He must
know it, and he must confess it, or he will cover himself with con-
fusion, and expose every interest of his people to be smitten with
a blight. His refusal will not excuse his sin, nor prevent its
lamentable issues. His ignorance will not neutralise his offence,
nor shield him from inevitable calamity. Confronted he is with
the Lord in person—with him he has to do. There he is before the
Lord ; and what will follow ? He must look on him, and recognise
him, 'and worship him too. He must believe and reverence him,
or he must disbelieve and deny him, —he must hear his voice,
and bow to his sovereignty, or he must close his ear and harden
his heart, hate him without a cause, and take part with his mur-
derers. Unable to know the truth, as the ancient reprobate and
the modern trifler protest! And has it come to this sad pass with
us, that Christians urge the threadbare argument of a dotard
scepticism ; that, as if ashamed of the Saviour who died on the
cross for their sakes, they join with the crew of his revilers, and
sympathise with the impious spirit that mocked him with the
sneer, “What is truth?” What is truth, God has made known
with infinite condescension ; and you hearing me must know it
and believe it, or deliberately refuse to know it, and abide in un-
belief to your own condemnation. Do you not fear to impute
folly to God ? to treat him as the lying oracles of the heathen,
whose responses were riddles, which the more they were pondered,
the less they were understood ? Do you really say, that God hath
spoken so ambiguously, that it is impossible to ascertain his
meaning, that his revelation is a myth, that his word is a
puzzle ? and is there one of my congregation who has a doubt as to
the true nature of this resuscitated pagan blasphemy ? We are
not left to conjecture what may be the motive which prevents the
most frank and joyful acknowledgment of the truth. There is no
such impossibility as objectors allege. “ This is the condemnation,
that light hath come to us, but men like darkness better than
light, because their deeds are evil.” In God’s name, we not only
invite, but we command every one to believe the truth, or to reject
it, at his peril. Once Christ stood at the bar of Pilate, who in his
own person then represented Csesar, or the rulers of states.
Pilate was bound to know that panel at his bar ; he was bound to


hear and to believe his word as truth; and that he was the
sent of God, the King of Israel, whose kingdom was not of this
world. He was bound to acquit him as one without a fault, and
to protect him from the violence of his enemies. He was bound
to confess that he was Lord, as he said, and to submit to his
Almighty power as well as to his saving grace. He did not. He
was of the mind of our modern theorists—he refused to believe,
and took refuge in the foolish question, What is truth ? But his
scepticism was as vain as his refuge was worthless. His ignorance
did not justify his sin, and his excuse did not shelter him from
the reprobate’s doom ; and so that magistrate, because he did not
exert his official authority in behalf of God’s dear Son, was hurled
in ignominy from his throne, and made a spectacle of wrath to all
future time.
Eulers and statesmen are under obligation to know and believe
the truth of God, as declared in his word. This is the very point
and burthen of the message we are commanded to deliver to them
all. With this Gospel we address the tyrants of the earth, we
bid them believe and obey; and we warn them, that if they do not,
they will suffer. We go to every throne in turn, from that of the
despot to that of the republican, we publish to all the very same
doctrine. We exhort them to believe and obey ; we warn them
that if they do not, they will suffer. They may deceive them-
selves, but God is not mocked. And no resource of human
ingenuity will either ensure his continued long-suffering, or miti-
gate the severity of his righteous visitations. His truth despised,
and his glory slighted, then the fairest region of the earth shall
be tumed into a desolation—England herself will degenerate into
another Italy; and this colony, so radiant with promise, will
rival in its baseness some sin-blighted land.
Passing over the heathen nations which are a warning and not
an example, and fixing our attention on a Christian State, the
question arises, In what manner, and to what effects, should
the magistrate exercise his power for the benefit of the Church
of God ?
Now the Church is complete in 'itself, the spiritual kingdom of
the Mediator. The magistrate is bound to recognise it, just as he
xecognises the Lord. He can no more alter it, than he can destroy
it. It is Christ’s gracious workmanship, and woe to him who
would pollute this fine gold of heaven with the dross of religious
error, or a mixture of human inventions. The Church consists of
the body of believers, of the doctrines believed, and of the ordi-
nances observed. This is the Constitution of Zion, the Lord’s


holy temple, and no man can add thereto, or take therefrom, without
presumptuous sin. The magistrate cannot prescribe a doctrine to
be believed, nor frame a law for the service of the sanctuary.
God’s work is perfect; and the arm will be withered, as Uzziah’s
was, that is unwarrantably laid on the ark of the covenant.
The Church is as independent of the State, as the State is of
the Church, Both are kingdoms, the Head of both being Christ.
They are sisters, not aliens. Kindred and sympathising, not
antagonistic and uncongenial institutions. If the Church intrude
into the domain of the State, she is guilty of usurpation, and evil
will come out of it. If the State intrude into the jurisdiction of
the Church, it is guilty of a trespass, and will suffer for the
wrong. It is Popery that makes the Church lord it over the State,
and it is Erastianism that makes the State interfere with the
affairs of the Church. In both cases alike, as all experience
pi’oves, the greatness of the offence is attested by the enormous
mischief that is done. They are to be regarded as two distinct
and separate powers, respecting each other with a just intelligence,
and encouraging each other as stedfast friends, —the Church, by
her purity and zeal, giving virtue and enlargement to the State, —
the State, by legislation and government, lending a valuable
support to the Church. Dealing with the subject as one of
principle, we speak of the Church as one, and take no notice of
those shades of difference, which prevail amongst the various
branches of the Church universal. Now in what manner should
the magistrate fulfil the very highest duties of his office ?
1. He must officially recognise God as his God, the Bible as his
statute-book, the glorified Mediator as his supreme Lord and Judge.
2. He must reign in the spirit of his Lord. The temper of the
State should be decidedly Christian. The breath of government
should he hallowed by the influence of divine revelation. In the
providence of God, wisdom combines with power, and mercy
tempers justice, yea, love is the fulfilling of the law. Therefore,
persecution and injustice, oppression and cruelty, would be
impossible under the regime of a truly Christian administration.
Such a State would study what was right, and strive to perform
it; but it would also study what was kind, punish the criminal
with sorrow, and have compassion on the ignorant.
3. The laws of the State must reflect the mind of the sovereign
Lawgiver, accord with the precepts of the Divine law, enjoin what
is there commanded, prohibit what is there forbidden; thus
seeking for justice and judgment, in the way of perfect
righteousness.


4. God must be acknowledged in the dispensations of his provi-
dence, thanksgivings offered for signal mercies, and repentance
professed in the time of national perplexity and rebuke.
6. The ordinance of the .Sabbath must be honored as the law of
the State, as it is of the whole world, as the universal privilege—
the inalienable right both of man and beast, the memorial of past
and the pledge of future blessing.
6. The children of the nation must be carefully educated in the
fear of God, and in the knowledge of his will.
The State cannot forego her care of the young, nor devolve even
on parents the entire charge and responsibility of training them
for future usefulness. It is a trite remark, that if the State has a
right to punish crime, it is her duty, if possible, to prevent it; that
if the State is bound to frame good laws, she is also bound to take
measures to enable every member of the commonwealth both to
lead and to appreciate them. And assuredly if civil government
be the ordinance of God, one of its primary objects is, that the
subject should obey not for wrath, but for conscience sake—con-
science purged and enlightened by the word of the living God.
t. But may the State use its revenues, or any portion of them,
as a means of promoting religion amongst the people? It will be
admitted that, as it was the duty of Pilate to acquit the Lord of
the offence imputed to him, and to shield him from the rage of
his persecutors, so it is still the duty of Caesar to acknowledge
Christ in the person of his Church, which is his witness, and to
extend over her the protection which was due to himself. But
the question is, should the State actually endow the Church, or in
other words, provide for the ministrations of the Gospel out of the
public or national resources? Our answer is, not necessarily;
and perhaps never in the manner and to the extent which has
hitherto marked the connection between Church and State.
Looking at the corruption which pervaded the Established
Churches, and the fact of their political subserviency, we do not
wonder that a strong feeling was excited against them, and that it
became the deep-rooted conviction of thousands, that the system
was in itself radically vitious, and should be plucked up by the
roots as a reproach to the Gospel. The indignation aroused by
the unfaithfulness of the great majority of national churches, led
many to confound a principle with its misapplication, so that the
opinion is current that there should be no union whatever be-
tween Church and State ; such union necessarily implying that the
Church has sacrificed her privileges, and that the State has made
the Church a political tool, or an obsequious dependant. Thus


one error breeds another, and rebounding from one extreme, the
impetuosity of nature hurries us into the opposite extreme, and in
their spirit and consequences extremes always meet.
Again : The voluntary principle, correctly defined, is in our
judgment a scriptural principle. It has indeed been frequently
overlooked, and sometimes buried in a total oblivion, but its exist-
ence and obligation cannot be disputed by any who admit the
authority of the Bible. In the 9th chap, of Ist Corinthians, the
Apostle teaches that they which wait at the altar are partakers
with the altar, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel; and while to the Galatian Church, he writes, “ Let
him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teacheth
in all good things,” in his epistle to the Romans, he counsels,
“ If they have been partakers of their spiritual things, their duty
is to minister to them in carnal things.” If we will give a dis-
passionate consideration to these and similar passages of the New
Testament Scriptures, especially the Bth and 9th chapters of the
2nd Corinthians, it must, we think, be conceded that the duty of
the christiap people who are enjoying the ministrations of reli-
gion, is to provide with liberality for the support of divine ordi-
nances, or the comfort of him who is placed over them in the Lord.
This clearly determines the duty of every Church of Christ; and
as it is the fruit of a grace —a soul-enriching grace—the neglect of
the duty indicates a decay of spiritual life, and the non-performance
of it is a melancholy proof that the heavenly mind is yet un-
formed.
The principle which prompts the free-will offerings of a Chris-
tian people, making it their privilege and honor to maintainj in a
becoming manner, the solemn work of the ministry, is distinctly a
Gospel doctrine, the practical exemplification of which is an evi-
dence of inward grace. And we frankly say, that the churches of
Christ are all far behind their duty, and below their privilege, in
the exercise of this grace of the Holy Spirit. The Bth and 9th
chapters of 2nd Corinthians, rebuke the best, and condemn us
all. Oh for enlargement of heart, the fulness of the spirit of the
cheerful giver ! the uncounted wealth of the soul that is enriched
by its very bountifulness !—Of whom can it be now said, that the
abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the
riches of their liberality,—that to their power, and beyond their
power, they are willing of themselves ? And thus persuaded, we
say that the churches fail in a sacred duty, when they do not
boldly declare this doctrine to their people, and exhort them in the
name of the Lord, and as they love him, to abound in this grace


of a flowing liberality; and we further say, that the State is en-
titled to assume the validity of this principle, and to act towards
the Church on the belief, that this service is esteemed as a privi-
lege, and supported as an honor. There is something wrong,
when the policy of the State implies that a Christian people are
not alive to one of their foremost duties, and are wilfully untrue to
their Saviour and themselves, in this essential particular. And
there is something wrong, and far wrong, with a congregation that
has in itself the means of providing for the altar, and yet refuses to
use them ; which expects the State to supercede its exertions, and
reward its apathy, by an exercise of the very grace which its own
example condemns. But this concession to voluntaryism neither
exhausts the question, nor satisfies the requirements of scripture
doctrine. The duty of the magistrate to the Church still remains
to be considered, and it can never be admitted that he owes the
cause of religion no countenance or aid, because the body of the
faithful is charged with certain responsibilities. For say that our
circumstances were as prosperous as we could wish, that every
congregation was self-sustaining, and that neither minister nor
people lacked anything needful to their welfare, still the relation
of the State to the Church would remain to be defined, and the
duty incumbent on the magistrate towards those out-lying multi-
tudes who are living and dying without hope of salvation. And
here I take my stand, as on a rock, against that immense perver-
sion of the voluntary principle which so widely prevails. I ask, is
the magistrate entitled to keep coldly aloof from the necessities of
myriads, and see them sink into an abyss of shame without an effort
to avert the frightful danger, or to shield them from ruin ? Is the
State guiltless, which contemplates the abandonment to a life of sin,
with all its probable aggravations, of any number of its own sub-
jects, and sternly to withhold the means it possesses for their moral
and their spiritual good ?
So startling and so monstrous is such an application of this
voluntary principle, that we could as soon consent to a denial of
God, as the righteous Governor of the world, as face the cold-
blooded cruelty and impious selfishness which it clearly implies.
It is nothing to the purpose to argue that it belongs to the wor-
shippers to maintain the altar. The duty and ability of the
Church is one thing, and the duty and ability of the State is
another. And whatever the Church may do, or may not do, the
state that deliberately allows any portion of her people to lapse
into a condition of practical heathenism, is abdicating the highest
of her functions, and converting the ordinance of God, designed


for good, into an apology for the most ruthless neglect. The doc-
trine that would degrade the magistrate from his place, as a moral
governor, to be the head of an armed police, or a mere collector of
taxes, —the doctrine that would confine the rule of his sceptre, and
the operation of his influence, to the little sphere of the grossly
material, —that would forbid him to deal with the conscience, and
to legislate for the chief good of man, is a doctrine that inculcates
crime against the interests of the people, and basest treachery to
the cause of the throne. Assuredly such indifference will soon
meet an appropriate recompense ; and in the turbulance and de-
pravity of a misused and deserted people, it will soon become
apparent that the State that overlooked the religion of its subjects,
was guilty of a political suicide. Are we to believe —are we
seriously asked to believe —that the State may raise armies, and
engage in war ; may enact laws, and compel obedience; may build
prisons, and put convicts to death ; but may not send a mission-
ary of the Gospel to visit the outcasts, nor pay a single shilling for
the services of the ministers of peace ? What, my friends ! The
warrior may be employed and paid fly the State ! The merchant
may be employed and paid by the State ! The philosopher with
his dreams, and the politician with his utopianism, may he wel-
comed and paid by the State! But if God come, and offer the
wisdom, the righteousness, and the felicity of his kingdom, the
State must spurn Him from its gate, with there pulsive sentiment, I
know you not; I cannot know you. Speak not to me ;I am deaf to
your voice. Go, let me alone, for with you I can have no concern !
We abhor the sentiment, and reject it as criminal. God
forbid that it should find a moment’s sympathy in any soul within
these walls. We hold, decidedly, that if the State can send a
minister of Christ to a people who otherwise must be left
spiritually destitute, then is it bound, and imperatively bound, to
prevent this calamity. If it can ensure the true welfare of any
class or section of its subjects, otherwise abandoned to religious
ignorance, it is not only lawful for the State to expend money in
such a work, but we affirm it will sin, and sin grievously, in the
sight of God, if for any consideration of expediency, it does not so
spend it. Yes, my friends, a Christian State will seek the praise
of the good, by doing the good that is deserving of praise. The
ally of no faction, and a party to no injustice, intent on preventing
evil, and caring for the helpless, it is certain that its measures,
though comprehending the support of religion, would earn the
heartfelt favor of an intelligent community, while the good achieved
would nobly vindicate the wisdom of the means employed.


As to the assistance granted to religion by the State of this
Colony, there are two conflicting opinions which demand our
consideration. .-
1. One party defends the present system on the ground that, it
the aid now given be discontinued, vast districts of the countiy
will be deprived of the means of religious instruction and worship.
It is the settled conviction, not of a few speculative minds, hut of
many of the most thoughtful and sagacious of our godly men,
that without extraneous help it will be impossible to make the
means of grace commensurate with the wants of the community,
or even to retain them, in some important localities where they
are now provided. The great majority of ministers of the gospel
are of this opinion. They fear that if the religion of this country
be, in present circumstances, cast on the strength of the voluntaiy
principle alone, the cause of Christianity will suffer in many a
place where it is beginning to take root; while large tracts of the
bush, and several of the gold fields, must be left to spiiitual
destitution. This is their honest opinion ; and, appalled by the
gloom of such a prospect, they prefer the present system, defecthe
though it be, to a policy that would expose this infant common-
wealth to so great a danger. Now instead of ridiculing the
sentiments of these my Christian brethAn, or sympathising with
the temper which would hold them up to public odium, because
they entertaiif these views, I say they are deserving of respect for
their feelings as patriots, and for their apprehensions as the
ministers of God ; for, assuredly, there is some reason foi tlieii
fears. If the State withdraw the aid now granted, that some evils
will follow may be freely admitted. The change will have its
disadvantages, no doubt. The voluntary principle is good, so far
as vital Christianity extends, but no further. We can rely upon
its efficacy within the sphere of religious motives, but not beyond
it. And the statesman who governs, not for the satisfaction of a
class, but for the benefit of the whole body of the people,—as
well as the Christian minister, who longs to reclaim the world to
the empire of the Redeemer, and to carry the gift of salvation to
every household, and to every heart,—may well be excused, if
they think that the State, which is God’s ordinance for good,
should supply the deep void which voluntaryism leaves behind it.
Here, as I am, to speak the truth for my heavenly Master’s sake,
and for the souls of my guilty fellow men, I am not to be
deterred, either by the rancor of invidious feeling, or by the
bitterness of party-spirit, from declaring my firm belief, that evils,
neither few nor small, will inevitably result from the inability 01


disinclination of the State to fulfil this part of her great mission.
It is foolish to evade the difficulty, and needless to deny it. Let us
confess it with candor, and treat it with a manly courage. For nearly
three years, I have used every argument my reason could form,
and every entreaty and mode of appeal my heart could suggest, to
induce able ministers of the gospel to quit the quiet of their
Scottish homes, and join our feeble ranks, in this most interesting
and necessitous field; but all in vain. The supposed privations
of ministerial life in this Colony, aided perhaps by fancy and the
haze of distance, are so formidable in their eyes, that they posi-
tively refuse to come; they recoil from us with a feeling of
dismay. They will go cheerfully to the backwoods of Canada, or
to the sultry plains of Hindostan, to publish to dying sinners the
glorious tidings of mercy. But such is their idea of the hard-
ships to which ministers are subjected here, that, with a most
painful unanimity, they decline our pressing invitations, and seem
panic-struck by every proposal to help us in our anxious endea-
vours to evangelise Victoria. Let no man make light of this evil.
To me and to all it is a sad reality; and he who can despise it,
is not entitled to deference. How this evil is to be obviated,
is a most serious question, and one not to be solved by the
rashness of a novice, or the fearless assurance of a sanguine
mind.
Most sincerely, therefore, do I respect the scruples of my
brethren, and appreciate the consideration which leads them to
shrink from the responsibility of advising the State to withhold
its pecuniary aid.
2. But, after maturely weighing the difficulties that beset the
question, and comparing and balancing one danger with another,
I am disposed to concur with those who think that it would
be better in the end, for every interest of religion, were this
system entirely abolished, than were it perpetuated in its present
form.
To the assertion that it is a national recognition of Christianity,
even as it is, —my answer is, that certainly it is not. So far as I
see, it is a positive refusal to recognise the will of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Instead of acknowledging the claims of Christianity, the
State decidedly refuses to entertain the question. Under the
general name of religion, it confounds right with wrong,—and truth
with falsehood; it accepts Christ and antichrist as alike worthy,
and sanctions, nay fosters, the most pernicious delusions as
equally desirable with the doctrines of revelation. To suppose
that the maintenance of this incongruous system is a public


homage to the religion of the Bible, or that the total abolition of
it would invest the State with the attributes of infidelity, is an
egregious mistake. We would rather argue that the State’s
reverence for the word of God, its very sense of the excellence
of Christian truth, should not only incline but constrain it to
abandon a policy that shocks the moral sense, and which is
irreconcilable with either faith or rectitude.
A more forcible objection is stated thus : this country is, upon
the whole, a Christian country; five-sixths of the inhabitants are
avowedly of the same creed, that is, they are Protestants ; why
then allow the discontent of a minority to overawe the State, or
to restrain it in the performance of its duties ? Now, although
the feelings, and even the prejudices, of a minority should not be
lightly disregarded, and will never be contemned by a Christian
government, the objection now referred to is not easily repelled.
In so far as the papal church is concerned, the objection admits of
no satisfactory reply. The question is, what is the duty of the
Christian magistrate to the Church of Christ ? That, my friends,
is the question. And on what principle is it to be solved ? Appeal
to any Eoman Catholic tribunal, and the decisive answer will be
that, to encourage, and much more to foster heresy, is a mortal
sin; that the highest of all reasons, duty to God, forbids the
church to sanction, or the magistrate to tolerate it. Yes, the State
which, for any object of temporal gain, should promote the spread
of error, and contribute to the promotion of a corrupt religion, is
guilty of flagrant unfaithfulness, and is to be denounced as the
abettor of apostacy. And if the principle be sound, that duty to
God is incompatible with the endowment of a false faith, then
how can the Romanist expect, or ask, of a Protestant State, the
recognition or the support of his religion? To a Protestant
nation, Popery is essentially an elaborate and most mischievous
delusion, —a perversion of all truth, an offence to God, and a
degradation to man. And even mere honesty should compel the
State to answer this clamorous faction, whether we should obey
God or patronise you, let your own doctrine judge, let your own
practice declare. Would you have us relinquish the very highest
of our duties ? Would you wish us to trample on a good con-
science, and pay that reverence to a pernicious heresy which is
due to Divine truth alone ?
This argument leaves, or should leave, the Romanist speech-
less ;it should silence, if it did not put him to shame. But what
avails the plea ? Rome, true to herself, counts on our inconsis-
tency. She adheres to her error, and she reckons that we will not


abide by our truth. She grants nothing to us, but she calculates
that she will entice or frighten us to concede everything to her.
She will not forego one of her lordly pretensions, but she
confidently expects that we will humble our heads at her footstool.
It is exquisitely painful to witness the perplexity of governments
at this critical juncture. Cowed by the audacity of Eome, instead
of resolutely facing the foe, they weakly shrink from the
encounter; and, a prey to cowardice, they sacrifice the interests
of eternal truth, in a miserable attempt to purchase conciliation.
We grant, nay, we teach that no Christian State should trifle with
the convictions or opinions of any body of its subjects; and that, to
the very utmost verge of duty, it should go in its desire, and in its
endeavour, to reconcile differences, and to ensure the peace of the
commonwealth. And be it remembered that, while the policy of
Home creates embarrassment, the divisions that rend the Protestant
Church on this very subject, aggravate the evil an hundred fold.
But whilst these facts must be regarded as important
elements, in the consideration of statesmen, our grand objection,
to an indiscriminating endowment, is the deleterious influence
the system must exercise on the conscience and life of the nation.
The law of a State is the expression of its faith. If accepted by
the people, it becomes the standard of opinion, and the measure of
right and wrong. We can scarcely exaggerate the power of a law
that is in universal and unceasing operation. It is the director of
thought, and the rule of duty; and obedience to it implies that
it is imbedded in the affections, and reproduced in the character
of the loyal subject. It is, therefore, no matter of conjecture or
probability, but one of absolute certainty, that the continuance of
the present law will produce a general, if not a universal indif-
ference. Beyond question, it will damage the public conscience,
and pervert the moral perceptions of the nation. It is the pro-
perty of law to create opinion, and to give a bias to the mind.
And, if law declare that all religions are alike good and true, then
the opinion will grow that it is mere folly to prefer one to another,
and a proof of intolerance to care much for any. If the people
of this Colony approve of the present undistinguishing system,
they must drink into its spirit; and as the inevitable consequence,
a sickly lukewarmness will infect the popular mind, or it may be
the colder spirit of a reckless scepticism. This objection, we
repeat, is our main difficulty. It seems so formidable that we
tremble to contemplate it. It fairly swallows up all other consi-
derations, and leaves us no alternative but to turn and flee.
Therefore, of two evils, I choose the less. I would rather have


no State aid, than have it at such a price. Let the evils, that may
attend the abolition of this system, be what they may, surely they
will be in measure modified by the zeal of the churches, and the
increased liberality of our Christian congregations. But the effect
of the present law, in demoralising and vitiating the conscience of
the entire community, is, I think, an unmitigated misfortune, —
an evil that admits of no modification ; for it is of the nature of
sin, which, to be cured, must he destroyed. Prudence, therefore,
earnestly counsels to abandon a policy which is fraught with so
complex a danger.
But it is possible, to say the least, that a greater sin may he
committed, and a mightier risk incurred. It is asserted, with
an ominous pertinacity, that the State has nothing to do with religion,
and should have no connection with it in any way. We do not
remember that in the annals of the world, there is mention of any
nation that adopted the principle thus avowed, as the characteristic
of its government. Once indeed, and only once, it was pro-
claimed with a shout that astonished both heaven and earth. The
hapless French, first enslaved by superstition, then drugged with
infidelity, in the height of revolutionary frenzy, decreed that there
was no God, and in token of their sincerity, first bedizened a
harlot, and then paid her worship as the goddess of reason. Well
aware we are, that the modern advocates of this tremendous prin-
ciple mean not this. No, they mean not such revolting profane-
ness. They execrate, as we do, these excesses of a delirious
licentiousness. But it is in the principle they honor as the founda-
tion of the State, nevertheless. All this iniquity is in it; is its
essential spirit —its natural tendency; and will in time be evolved
from its secret powers, even as the oak, the future monarch of the
wood, will grow out of the tiny germ that is shut up in an acorn. If
the State has in no way a connection with religion, then the con-
fession of the State is, no religion. This is atheism, gild it and
varnish it as you may. If the office of the magistrate be the 01 di-
nance of God, then assuredly he must know that God, who
created the office, and the purpose for which it was ordained,—that
is to say, he must know God, as he has revealed himself in his
word, and from that word he must derive the rule of his govern-
ment. If, however, the civil magistrate has no connection with
religion in any way, then he must, in his official capacity, be fis
ignorant of God as of Mahomet; as ignorant of the Bible as of the
Koran; as ignorant of the truths of revelation, as of the creed of
the Brahmin; and this, we repeat, is rank atheism, qualify it 01


dissemble it as you may. We have no great hope that the views
we are now expounding will be favorably received by the mass of
our fellow-colonists. There is no want of intellectual ability, nor
of general intelligence, nor of patriotic intentions. But, if we are
not deceived, there is not amongst any class of public men, faith
in God, faith in divine truth, faith in the grand principles and
promises of revelation, sufficient to preserve us from a course that
will theoretically ignore the existence, and practically supercede
the authority, of genuine religion. It is an easy matter to descend
to a lower position. The wrong way offers few impediments.
There is no difficulty in yielding to inclination, and acting on a
system of perpetual compromise. If you sink the question of re-
ligious duty, you will please every one who is careless about
religion. But if our State be stript of its attributes, as the ordi-
nance of God, now subjected to the Mediator, —if we are as a
nation to refuse an express and becoming acknowledgement of the
authority of God, and the glory of his Son, —then, we say, the
acquiescence of a misguided people, and the loudest acclamations
of all the tribes of infidelity, will prove a miserable compensation
for the certain wreck of public morality, and the inevitable decay
of every social interest. It is truth that proclaims “ that God
shall be known by the judgment which he works : that the wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God. ”
Through clouds and darkness we look for the rise of a brighter
era, when the kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdoms
of our God and his Christ. That happier time we shall not live
to see. But after generations of turmoil and vexation, the fruit of
unteachable folly, the great promise shall be fulfilled —“ kings shall
be the nursing fathers, and queens the nursing mothers, of the
Church of Christ.” In this belief we sow beside all waters, our
present trials will usher in the millennial morn, our present con-
flict, weary and protracted though it be, is the providential prepa-
ration for a world-wide and glorious triumph. Amen.


NOTE.
In a memoir, just published, of the late Dr. Wardlaw of Glasgow,—a name held
in honor by all lovers of the Gospel,—by his friend, Dr. L. Alexander of
Edinburgh, there occurs a statement of the present question, which we can accept as
our own. Dr. Wardlaw went to an extreme, in his views of the voluntary principle.
Dr. Alexander holds that principle also, but in a modified and more reasonable
sense; and if the doctrine expounded by him, in the following passage, be generally
received in Scotland, as sound and scriptural, then one main obstacle to the union of
at least, the Free and United Presbyterian churches will have been removed.
“The conclusion at which he (Dr. Wardlaw) arrives, is the extreme one of volun-
taryism, viz., * That the true and legitimate province of the magistrate, in regard to
religion, is to have no province at all,’ —a conclusion so startling and unwelcome, that
it had need to be founded on very cogent reasons to command our assent. On what
grounds, then, has Dr. Wardlaw rested this conslusion? In the first instance, on the
assertion that Scripture has confined the magistrate’s functions within the sphere of
civil matters. But has not the lecturer stumbled here, at the very threshold ? If
the magistrate have no province, in regard to religion, at all, with what consistency
can he be appealed to the Bible, the standard of religious truth and duty, to deter-
mine what his proper province is ? or, if he may be summoned legitimately, as a
magistrate, to learn his functions from the Bible, how can it be justly said that he
has nothing whatever, as a magistrate, to do with religion ?
“ But, waiving this, let us come to the question, What saith the Bible in regard
to the functions of the civil magistrate ? On this point, Dr. Wardlaw is far from
being explicit. He asserts the incompetency of the civil magistrate to decide for his
subjects what is religious truth, and constantly affirms that all that is properly reli-
gious lies between God and the conscience. I presume that no modem advocate of
civil establishments of religion, will deny or question either of these positions. All
he will plead for is, that the magistrate may lawfully, for the great ends of civil
government, provide the means of religiously educating the people,—a claim which
neither interferes between the conscience of the people and God, nor assumes to
determine for the people what is truth in religion. It would not be fair to represent
men of Dr. Chalmers’s way of thinking on this subject, as if they contended for the
right of magistrates to compel men to believe, or pretend to believe, a given set of
dogmas, when all they assert is the right of the magistrate to make provision for
the religious instruction of the community, leaving it free to all to accept that
instruction, or not, as they please. On this point, I frankly confess, I cannot see how
the negative can be maintained, as an abstract general proposition, without reducing
the functions of the civil magistrate to those of a mere policeman, set up to enforce
the will of the majority. If governments are to proceed on the recognition of moral


distinctions; if they are bound to enact only what is consistent with moral truth;
if, above all, they are to receive and obey the Bible, and recognise its declarations
in their enactments; then they not only have a province, in regard to religion, but
it very greatly concerns them that their subjects should be instructed in those prin-
ciples which can alone enable them to appreciate aright such legislation. Moreover,
if government is to be regarded in the light of a trust reposed in the hands of the
magistrate, for the welfare of the community,—not merely their protection from
robbery and wrong, but their welfare, in the healthy development of all their facul-
ties of social improvement,—it is surely most unreasonable to forbid the magistrate
to use the only means by which such a result can be certainly attained. Of all
tyranny, the most exorbitant is that which ties a man to an end, but refuses to him
the means by which alone that end can be reached, —not only commanding him to
make bricks, without supplying him with straw, but forbidding him to use the straw
even when he has managed to procure it. Of this worse than Egyptian tyranny,
are those theoretically guilty who would bind the magistrate to secure the order and
well-being of the community, and yet forbid him, under any circumstances, to pro-
vide that education by which alone this end can be effectually secured.
WILSON, MACKINNON AND FAIRFAX, GENERAL STEAM PRINTING-OFFICES, COLLINS STREET.




