

MADE DniINO THE INTRODUCTION, LATERALIZATION,
AND REARi .'0 OF THE FIRST STOCK IN QUEENSLAND AND NtAY' SOUI’H
WAX.ES, AND AFFORDING SOME ELEMENTARY INFORMATION FOR
THE BENEFIT OP PERSONS CONTEMPT v;
COMMERCTA L OROWTH OF
AITANT COCOONS IN AUSTRALIA.
CONTRIBUTED BY
CHARLES BRADY.
“No amount of failure can destroy the effect of a single instance of success ; for
“ where one experiment has succeeded there is every reason to believe that fu ther
“ investigation must lead to the discovery of the elements which will render success •
“ certain.” —Report of the Acclimatization Society of London, 1562.
1-ij autftontp;
i 3 RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—IS6S.
L "J **




THE ATT,AWT SILKWORM
OBSERVATIONS ON ITS
HABIT, MANAGEMENT, FOOD, AND VALUE,
MADE DURING THE INTRODUCTION, NATURALIZATION,
AND BEARING OE THE PIEST STOCK IN QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH
WALES, AND AEEOEDING SOME ELEMENTARY INFORMATION POE
THE BENEFIT OF PERSONS CONTEMPLATING THE
COMMERCIAL GROWTH OF
AILANT COCOONS IN AUSTRALIA.
CONTRIBUTED BY
CHARLES BRADY.
“No amount of failure can destroy the effect of a single instance of success; for
“ where one experiment has succeeded there is every reason to believe that further
“ investigation must lead to the discovery of the elements which will render success
“ certain.” —Report of the Acclimatization Society of London, 1862.
13b :
SYDNEY; THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—IBGS.




PF RI -F 4
~-V “S
THE AILANT SILKWORM.
The ailant silkworm is of a very different nature to the
well-known mulberry silkworm; in fact, the two have little
in common but that part of their names which implies that
both produce a commodity which everyone recognizes as silk,
by its appearance. The two products are quite distinct
articles, are grown in different modes, and prepared by
different processes, are manufactured for such various pur-
poses that the two materials may be contrasted as having
some such relation to each other as linen has to cotton; and
there are especial qualities in ailantine (the produce of the
ailant silkworm) which distinguish it from common silk.
Thus, common mulberry silk is more lustrous, but it will not
bear washing, and soon frays and wears through the creases ;
while the ailant silk, cleansed with cold water and soap,
improves in lustre, and comfort in wear, every time it is
washed, for years, and is much more durable; ailantine,
besides, takes no permanent injury from oil or grease, but
the fabric made from it must never be boiled nor washed in
hot water.
Silk generally is a material obtained from a sort of pod
or purse—that remarkable envelope which very many kinds
of caterpillars make, of more or less value and quantity,
and within -which they enfold, or rather weave around them-
selves, preparatory to undergoing the greatest of several
transformations peculiar to this class of animals. This pod,
■when of a superior kind, and especially such as is obtained
from domesticated worms, is distinctively termed a cocoon.


The caterpillar during its growth, acquires, and gradually
accumulates in two long bags in its inside (mostly during
the latter part of its last stage, that is, after the last moult)
the liquid silky matter, which in process of building the
cocoon, the animal emits or trails out from two minute
holes or orifices in the head, and lays up and down, back-
wards and forwards, in short zigzags (but in one continuous
double thread) forming a web, until, in the instances of the
mulberry and ailant silkworms, the caterpillar is completely
closed in, hid from view, and thus protected from the
intrusion of any other insect, as well as from injury by
weather or other vicissitudes. This double fibre joins as
it issues from the orifices, which are very close together,
and becomes one strand, and very quickly hardens.
When a number of these strands, say 15, 20, 25, or even
perhaps as many as 60, are wound off or reeled off together
at one operation by a particular method which lays them
straight, and binds them all at the first hanselling of the
cocoons into one even solid thread, the whole is called a
“single.” Singles vary in bulk and quality, according to the
peculiar nature of the cocoons, their lustre and fineness, and
the use for which they are designed ; a quantity of cocoons
must be reeled so as to form one homogeneous continuous
line, —that is to say, of uniform substance, stoutness, or
solidity and quality all along, without the ends or joints
being perceptible, and so managed that a portion of the
natural glue or gum of the cocoon being deterged in the
operation of reeling, the remainder binds the whole of the
strands into a perfectly round warp, with the strands laid
straight along, not twisted like a cable. The silk of cocoons
varies very muchin coarseness, color, andbrightness, according
to the food, management, health, season of the year &c.,
when reared, as well as the special kinds or races of the
worms, and are suitably sorted ; but the fibre or strand of
every sort at the commencement of unwinding the cocoons
is much stouter and better than the middle portion, and the
4


middle than the latter part or extremity last emitted from
the worm, therefore in the process of reeling, the strands
off fresh cocoons are added from time to time, so that the
bulk of some makes up for the tenuity or deficiency of others
partially or wholly wound off —the number of individual
cocoons used to make up the bulk of a single is ordi-
narily from 25 to 45, according to the special quality of
the silk, and the technical size which is desired. Singles
when wound off in lengths or reels full, of about a pound
weight, and properly made up into hanks, constitute the
“ raw silk” of commerce. In this shape raw silk is saleable
to the merchants and to the throwsters, who recombine the
singles yet further, and prepare the raw silk as a staple
ready for the manufacturer. Imperfect and spoilt cocoons,
and also the waste and floss from both good and bad, are
assorted and then carded. The operations comprehended
in the term “ carding” render valuable weak and inferior,
as well as broken and damaged silks, which are unsuitable
for the reeling process ; and the staple obtained (which is
analogous to the “ yarns” formed in a similar manner from
wool, flax, cotton, &c.) is applicable to very many useful
purposes, such as sewing-silk, cords, felts, shawls, &c.
Carded silk is often worked up together with wool, cotton,
and other materials, or spun alone, and woven by itself
into various textile fabrics.
As the silky matter becomes expended in forming the
cocoon, the animal of necessity shrinks in size, and alters
in shape ; it collapses, so to speak, from the last skin which
served it as a caterpillar, and inside another new sort of
skin or husk becomes a chrysalis or grub. The liquid and
solid matters which remain of the caterpillar now encased
within the husk are rearranged, undergo a truly
transformation, and in time, shorter or longer according
to circumstances, these constituent matters resolve them-
selves into an entirely new creature. Its body, with
eighteen breathing holes, eight feet, six arms or hands,


besides the bead in front, and grippers or claspers behind
each one, and all with tbeir several seta of nerves, muscles,
&c., merge and disappear. Instead of the crawling cater-
pillar, a new form is organized, and forth comes a moth or
butterfly, furnished with four wings and six legs. Instead
of a body naked, or partially covered with hairs or tubercles
and a coating of w r ax, more or less complete, which erewhile
served for its convenience or defence, the new creature
is clothed all over, both wings and body, with the finest
down or feathers, resplendent with various colors, quite
different to those in any former stage.
When mature, the ailant grub or chrysalis, or, as we
may now call it, the embryo moth, warned by instinct, or
enticed by a consciousness that the weather, or season, food,
and other circumstances are favourable for its exit, by a
sudden effort bursts the husk first about the head, thus disen-
gaging the antennae. These antennae are two long moustache-
like limbs in the front of the head, shaped and with teeth
similar to flat double combs, or like the frame bones of a
flat fish, but having the middle teeth longest, so that the
outline is more or less arched, and the end teeth so short
that the antennae appear to end in a point. In the males
the teeth of the antennae are longer, but the antennae
themselves shorter as well as apparently stronger than in
the females, while the teeth of the antennae of the females
are shorter and more even, but the antennae longer,
straighter, and more slender. The teeth of these antennae
exactly correspond with the zigzag layers of the fibre of
the cocoon, and in the case of the ailant, the antennae
themselves fit the peculiar loose longitudinal layers and loops
which form a sort of neck or collar, and effectually close the
opening left for exit in the original construction of the
cocoon. Wriggling about from side to side, the yet unborn
moth, by plying its antennae all round, gradually removes
the fibres aside, and as it does so and struggles forward,
both back and front teeth of the combs, right and left,


come into action, and help or drag the body forward until
the head reaches the outside, when one leg is thrust out;
squeezing and swaying, still with the help of the antenna?,
the forepart of the body from side to side, an opposite leg
and one wing are advanced, then the next leg behind
the first—these help the rest well forward; now, the
moth makes safe hold on the outside with the front legs,
and exerting them and the other legs and antennae together,
drags the whole body through the neck of the cocoon (which
being tight, peels off and retains the husk), and at last
drops the limp wings and almost jelly-like body out over
clear of the cocoon. For a few moments the new-born
clings spasmodically, with eager anxious delight, about
its now vacant birth-place, clambers here and there a little
way, and adj lists itself as soon as possible, clutching hold on
the empty cocoon itself, or on some near object, in such a
position as to allow both body and wings to hang down clear
of each other, and free of contact with any other matter.
The wings, fully expanded, measure from four to nearly six
inches across, and two and a half deep, yet, while in the
cocoon, are so closely packed as to lie together with the
body included, in a space only one and a quarter inch long
(often much less) and not half an inch wide. Hence will
be seen the absolute necessity of the wings and body while
yet wet and slack, having space to unfold and extend to
their fullest proportions before setting. By hanging as
described, their natural weight gradually and gently draws
them dowm, helps to stretch and distend as well as to
expand and display them, while the air acts upon their damp
surfaces. Presently the imago, as the moth in its perfect
state is correctly termed, gently waves its wings, as if to
court admiration and salute the looker on. This action
completes the drying and arrangement of its downy feathers,
and also commences the fluttering movement which perfects
the condition of the body, and at the same time both
renders it capable and manifests its desire of pursuing its
natural functions.
7


Many people fancy that the moth eats through the cocoon.
This is an error, or at any rate a most inappropriate term, for
neither the ailant nor the mulberry moth is furnished with
that general yet troublesome convenience, a mouth, nor other
channels for food, and therefore cannot he said to eat in any
correct sense of the term; besides, these animals only take
food in one (the caterpillar) stage of their existence. In the
case of the mulberry worm, the cocoon is what is called whole
or closed, that is, the fibres are so arranged equally all over as
to leave no outlet to facilitate its escape. The mulberry moth
is provided with a tiny bladder, like a very small pearl or bead,
on the forehead. This bladder is filled with a liquid which
possesses the property of dissolving the glue that binds the
fibres of the cocoon to each other. When the husk of the
chrysalis is split about the head, this bead is protruded against
the cocoon and is burst and smeared about the end, the fibres
are thereby loosened and the antennae easily remove them
aside. In good cocoons, very seldom is even one single fibre
broken—the thread remains continuous, though it requires a
different method of reeling to that which answers with cocoons
not perforated. The ailant chrysalis, after its cocoon is built,
and as the animal collapses from the last skin of the cater-
pillar, diffuses a curious liquor which spreads all over the
inside of the cocoon, and being quickly absorbed, fills up
the interstices —in a word, varnishes, and thus renders the
inner surface hard, smooth, and polished, like the inside of
a nutshell. But, as has been already hinted, the ailant
caterpillar, when weaving the cocoon, did not make it whole,
but left a sort of neck, formed by arranging a certain
number of fibres longways at that part, rather than cross-
wise, as in the rest of the interior, the ends of these fibres
of course cannot take up varnish so freely as the flat web,
and therefore the neck is not affected by the varnish to the
same extent as the rest of the cocoon, but remains almost
loose and pervious. The ailant cocoon is formed in layers,
and one of these layers at the neck is fashioned in gathers


with the loops on the outside of the openingsomewhat like
a welt or collar with a frill. This welt is stretchable, and
so masks the opening that it is not readily perceived,
therefore other insects can very seldom get in to molest
the chrysalis during the critical time while maturing for the
great change. The ailant moth, therefore, does not require,
and is not provided with the pearly drop in the forehead,
but probably the wetness from the body may, in some
degree, slacken the fibres about the opening and facilitate
egress. Moreover, the glue of the mulberry cocoon
softens in cold, and very quickly melts away in hot water,
while neither hot nor cold water have any effect on the
glue or varnish which consolidates the ailant cocoon; hence
will be understood an essential difference in the products
of the two animals, and also the necessity of quite different
treatment in the processes of unfolding the fibres and
making them into raw silk. The ailant, and other varieties
similarly constituted, are termed open or flask-shaped
cocoons.
Now, what to do with the moths or images:—ln this
state of their existence they are what is termed nocturnal,
that is, naturally active only at night; during the day they
remain quiet, when they can be easily handled—left for a
few hours if dark, or as soon as dusk commences, they will
exercise their wings, and if neglected, the males especially,
may fly off and be lost; the females do not so readily move
about, and if properly attended do not roam away; but if
they once depart they never return, though the males
not unfrequently do come back in search of their mates
left behind; it is, therefore, necessary to secure all the
moths before evening. On a large scale, and for economic
considerations, it is obviously best to let the images pair
naturally of their own accord. To manage this, hang
selected cocoons threaded together in fifties or hundreds, by
running a needle and fine strong line across through the
rough outer part of the middle of the body of each cocoon,


enough to hold hut not pierce it; suspend the lines horizon-
tally so as to keep them tightly stretched about three inches
apartj the cocoons on their own several lines may touch or
nearly so, and a good many thousands may thus be kept in
low flat square perforated zinc cases, or in a closed room. At
first it may be sufficient to have the strings of cocoons hung
anywhere convenient about the house, and to make use of
cages or cylinders of the same cheap and durable material.
These cylinders should be made in two sets of four or five,
say in all, eight or ten, and they may be obtained at little
cost, by having the common perforated sheet zinc cut into
slips 10 or inches wide, and sufficiently long that when
bent round and the lips soldered, each one will be 8 or Si-
inches or a little more in diameter, one slightly larger than
the next, but all of the same height, so that those of each
set will pack close one inside another for convenience when
not in actual use. The zinc must be thoroughly scoured
with hot water, soap, and soda, to take off the grease and
dirt, and well rinsed afterwards in pure water. To complete
them, the cylinders may be furnished with loose tops and
bottoms ; the bottoms of inch wood planed, and the tops of
perforated zinc (properly cleansed) 10 inches square, stout
glass A or i inch plate may do as well or better for either
top or bottom. If cases are used, they might be made of
the same materials, the sides each about 3 feet long, of the
same depth as the cylinders, or rather less, in separate
pieces, with a bend at each end, cut and fashioned like a
hinge, so that a pin stuck through at each corner will hold
all together.
One special advantage in the use of perforated zinc is>
that the metal takes very little of the mucus or glutinous
matter with which the eggs are covered; the metallic surface
just holds the clots of eggs (which are not unfrequently
laid in and through the perforations and stick on the out-
side), yet they can be rubbed off with great facility with-
out breaking the eggs, and without wasting the grume or


mucus. This is important, for the grume is very beneficial
to aid incubation, as well as to make the egg adhere to
slips of paper or linen, and to the leaflets afterwards, when
placed upon the bush ; besides, the holes or perforations
are very convenient for the moth to hold on by— they let
in the air (which can be easily damped, if needful, by hang-
ing a wet rag over or round the cylinder), and admit of
examination at all times, without interference with the
occupants —altogether, the moths seem to entertain a sense
of security and content, somewhat as cattle, sheep, &c., feel
within an efficient enclosure, which releases them, to a
great extent, from the fear of intrusion, as well as keeps
them in safety. The cylinders of course stand upright. The
life of the moth is from three to eight or nine days ; but if
they do not pair within about thirty-four hours after emerg-
ing, they seldom are of any service.
The moths seldom or never pair except at night, and
most generally at the quietest and most dewy time the
same night, or between the day and the morning next
following their emerging. It will be well, and make an
essential difference, if a large number is kept, to let them
pair of their own accord. At all times it is best to avoid
handling, as the less they are interfered with, much larger
and more numerous are the eggs obtained, and they are
also of a superior quality. In the morning, open the place
where the cocoons are suspended, and with a pair of
scissors clip the tip of one wing of all the females that are
coupled. This can be easily done without disturbing either
male or female; and it may be here mentioned that the
females are almost invariably the uppermost. Then remove
all that are not paired, and, if required, place them, both
males and females, together in one or more cylinders, as
there may be room. Those left coupled will separate to-
wards dusk, and as the female commences laying imme-
diately, the males should be at once removed. The females
may be left in the cases, or may be carefully collected and


placed where they are required to lay their eggs. For this
purpose the cylinders are admirably adapted, and twenty,
thirty, or even more may he placed (of course now without
the males, which are best destroyed) in each, and during tha
first night every female will probably lay from sixty to
sometimes even over two hundred eggs, and the first-laid
eggs are generally the finest. The moths, as already
notified, rest during the daylight; and it will he convenient
to take occasion during the morning or day to collect the
eggs. To do this, if there are more than a very few in the
cylinders or cases, remove the moths into others, taking them
gently by the shoulders or two wings held together a little
way above the base, and setting them one by one on the sides
of the fresh cylinder; rub off the eggs with the finger, place
them aside, and the cylinder is ready for another batch. The
eggs are very hard and tough, and there is little risk of injuring
them. Keep all one day’s laying together, in a cup, glass, or
any convenient dish or phial, with a note of the date of
laying. The stale and surplus males should be destroyed
and given to the fowls, and also all the females not wanted,
or considered not fine enough to maintain or improve the
quality of the stock.
The sexes are recognized by the evidently larger and
plumper body of the females—by the lower pair of wings
being both rounder and larger than in the male —by the
curves of the upper wings being less deep in the females
than in the males —by the form of the hinder part of the
body, which in the females is bent or peaked down, as if ready
to deposit the eggs—and by the difference in the antemne
already alluded to. The two last are the most ready signs,
but even they may not always make the case quite obvious,
for sometimes when the males are peculiarly fine, they seem
in shape and bulk so like the females as not to be readily
distinguished at first glance ; generally the females appear
the finest.


If only a few are expected, it may be beat to collect the
imagos soon after they are dry. Three hours is ordinarily
enough after emerging, but they must on no account be
touched until the development is thoroughly complete and
the limbs and body quite set, for the moths would be
rendered worthless if meddled with prematurely. Place
them in a cylinder to couple, and then proceed as before
recommended.
In dry weather, before a change, and during rough
evenings or nights, the moths keep back or but few emerge,
but the day or evening or night after rain, and while the
atmosphere is yet moist and quiet, they come out freely as
they mature; this circumstance will often assist the observer
and enable him to make arrangements, two, three, or even
more days beforehand. Cripples and imperfectly developed
moths of either sex seldom or never breed, and this should
be a caution not to handle cocoons set apart for stock too
roughly. Moths, more especially the males, become of
little value from over excitement, if they do not pair before
the expiration of the second night after emerging.
The females continue laying for three or more consecutive
nights, but it is advisable to dispense with more than the
first and second nights’ laying, as the later eggs are seldom
so fine as the early ones from the same female. In all, one
female effectually fecundated will lay from 160 to 360 or
more eggs.
About the eggs:—lt will be noted that the writer has
always insisted not only on the advantage but on the positive
necessity of a certain degree of moisture or humidity in the
atmosphere, to obtain the best results with all sorts of
animals which pass through the egg state. The air of Aus-
tralia is sultry—sometimes parching; and if eggs of any kind
are kept very dry, the yet immature animal in the shell is
impoverished or withered, by its own proper liquid elements
being too largely drawn upon to make good the absorption
outwards through the pores of the shell, and either perishes


unborn or becomes poor, attenuated, weazened, and lives a
spiritless and profitless existence. It will be seen that
ailant eggs, especially the fine ones of good females copiously
fecundated by tbe male, have a considerable amount of a
viscid substance, grume, or mucus about them. This mucus
serves several purposes; first, it plumps out the egg, making
it fertile, then it is useful to secure the eggs to some solid
substance, which will prevent their being washed or blown
away or otherwise lost. The mucus also nourishes the after-
growth and development of the contents of the egg, by its
own inherent moisture, and by what it collects and perhaps
modifies and passes in through the pores of the shell. If
the ailant egg is always kept in one position, it is very
noticeable how much better the germ settles in posture, and
how singularly well the yet unborn little caterpillar selects
the most appropriate spot at which to eat through the shell
and get at its future food. It is recommended that each
day after the eggs are collected they be placed on little
slips of damp, stout, unsized paper, (thick blotting-paper
is good for the purpose, as it can be used time after time
without waste), say from 50 to 200 eggs sprinkled on each
slip, which may be three inches by four in size, so that each
egg is separate, or not too close to its neighbour, but about
half a hundred is a convenient number, on a slip 2% or
3 inches by 3|. These slips may be best of paper tinted
the same colour as the leaflet, to partially avoid attracting
the attention of birds and flying ants, which are very
quick to observe, and who having once noticed a novelty
on the bushes, do not fail to find out that there is some-
thing for them to eat there. Either damp them once a
day, at evening, which is preferable, as allowing them to
become nearly dry and damp alternately ; or, to save
trouble, place the papers, with a wet cloth underneath,
on a sheet of glass, or the like, which will maintain the
the moisture for several days, especially if the whole is
covered over with a close frame and glass, so as to prevent


evaporation. Eggs should not be kept in too dark a place,
but certainly not in tbe sun, and rather in the shade than
in very much light.
Slips of linen or grass-cloth may be employed with
advantage instead of paper, but it is not expedient to use
fabric made of cotton. It is a curious fact that all silk-
yielding caterpillars have an innate aversion to hemp and
flax, and to textures woven from them or from similar
fibrous materials ; they have a partiality for cotton and
some other substances, and this partly explains why grass-
cloth and linen in the management of the eggs answer
better than paper, which is most frequently made of cotton
stuff ; the little caterpillars are too contented and pleased,
if perchance, as many do, they get out of the egg-shells on
to the cotton slips or paper instead of on to the leaf; they
remain too long fasting on the cotton, and thus become weak
before starting in search of food, but with linen and grass-
cloth their antipathy sets them at once to the leaflet; at least,
such is the conjecture formed by the writer from his own
observation, which induces him to prefer and adopt the use
of grass-cloth.
The writer would impress upon the reader’s attention
his experience that care in the management of the eggs in
this simple particular, namely, the nurturing the embryo
or germ while yet in the shell is, in this climate at any rate ?
a matter of considerable importance. He has observed
t the caterpillars hatched from judiciously tended eggs
are always fuller sized and more active, from, and even at
the moment of birth; the little fellows set to at once, and
from the very first, feed vigorously, and thus distend and
strengthen their frames at a period of essential conse-
quence. This power of eating, well begun, is maintained,
or perhaps improved during the whole time of the cater-
pillar’s short life, in direct proportion according as the first
hours immediately after hatching are well employed. The


caterpillar is less dainty or capricious, and thrives better
under all vicissitudes, whether of drought or of continued
rain; it acquires a bigger bulk, and completes its utmost
growth in a shorter time. It may, therefore, be easily
comprehended why the ailant do better in the open on the
trees than nursed in-doors. The fresh food, cool, crisp, and
succulent, perhaps damp with morning dew, is clearly better
than any half dry, tough, flavourless substitute grown in a
house or conservatory, or gathered beforehand. It is very
plain that, the greater the bulk of the animal, the larger the
cocoon ; but, to comprehend the case, add to this the well-
established fact, that with the ailant, as well as with all
varieties of mulberry and of other silkworms, the shorter the
period of feeding up, in an increasing and accumulating ratio
of proportion as the period is more or less brief, superior in
quality as well as in quantity is the silk obtained. It is a
well-ascertained principle of old, that if a certain number of
mulberry caterpillars fed up and progressed according to
unaided nature, will yield (say) 100 grains of silk, if matured,
in thirty-two to thirty-five days, the same will yield 150 to
180 grains, if laid up in twenty-seven or twenty-eight days
while, if the worms complete a healthy feeding up, which
they very well may do, if skilfully treated, in twenty-four
days, the result is a yield of 250 grains from the identical
number of worms. These figures speak largely in favour of
discrimination in management, and the benefits of fore-
thought, and of knowledge of what to aim at. In the case
of mulberry silkworms, this fact has long borne the character
of almost mathematical precision as to its results, and may
well be a source of amazement or mystery to those not
familar with the subject. The ailant is not, as is the mulberry
worm, a thorough creature of domestication, but experience
of the writer tends, as far as it goes, to instance the same
characteristics in the ailant, though in a much inferior
degree; and we must bear in mind that the ailant, feeding
out of doors, is yet in some sort wild or only partially


domesticated. To sum up:—A fine egg means a fine cater-
pillar, a fine caterpillar means a fine cocoon, or, in other
words, fine silk, and plenty of it, as well as a fine imago, and
a fine imago implies fine eggs, and abundance of them;
therefore, let the reader understand the value in this climate
of attention to a due amount of moisture. According to
the degree of judgment and skill devoted to this point, equal
to it will be the amount of success in obtaining fine cocoons ;
and not only this main consideration, but success as well in
obviating disappointments and degeneration of stock, and
in multiplying numbers and improving the breed. It should
not be omitted, that this matter of a slight degree of moisture
or damp (not wet) aifects likewise the moths, which emerge
larger and develop more fully in a suitable atmosphere,
than in one where the animal dries too quickly. Besides,
as has been hinted before, the pairs couple more readily, and
with less loss of animal energy and vital matter, in dewy
nights than dry.
The increase from one fertile pair of moths may be at
something like this rate : —Say the pair may yield, along with
others, an average of 150 eggs. If these should arrive
(which is extremely improbable) safely at maturity, and all
become images in due time, they might become seventy-five
pairs ; but instead of seventy-five pairs, let us assume that
we begin the second generation with twenty-five couples.
These couples, at the average of 150, should give 3,750 eggs.
If these (which is again exceedingly improbable) all escape
casualty, and become moths, the number of pairs would be
1,875 ; but let us once more take only a third part, or less,
and call the stock to commence the third generation GOO
pairs. These, giving the same average as before, would
furnish the ailantery with not less than 90,000 worms.
Now let us suppose that one pair give an average of 200
eggs. These 200 eggs, without losses, would become 100
pairs of moths, and these 100 pairs, at the same rate of


«
increase, would give 20,000 eggs, or, without losses, 10,000
pairs of moths ; and these, in like manner, at 200 eggs per
pair, would make the number of the third generation
2,000,000. This will shew the absurdity of calculations
founded on theory only, and the nonsense of computations
of this kind; but at the same time it will speak t y the
intelligent mind rather forcibly that something can be done
with food so cheap to grow, and so easily, abundantly, and
permanently reproductive, where once planted, as the ailantus,
if even a very small value can be attached to the cocoons of
caterpillars, which multiply at the rate at which the animals
in question are known to propagate.
Thus far the average increase in Australia of such moths,
as paired, was over 200 eggs per pair ; the highest score in
the first season (January to June, 1867) was 365; the
highest noticed in the present season (commencing with
September, 1867), 413 eggs laid byone female. It should
be noted as a general rule that the more numerous the batch
the finer is each egg individually. Let the reader, however,
at once disabuse his mind that he can begin breeding ailants
with any chance of success with a small number. If he has
but a slight stock, the chapter of accidents must be dead
against him. If he has only a few, it will be a very great
chance if they emerge in pairs male and female at the
same time or sufficiently near, and if they do come in pairs
he may fail to get them to couple, or some accident or over-
sight occur to spoil the opportunity. He should have
enough, at first, to override all mishaps, and while his atten-
tion is awake, season and food propitious, obtain a few
couples with which to continue. After having once mas-
tered the knack, he need never fear having a short supply of
fertile eggs at all times to stock the ailantery.
In Australia, ailant eggs most generally hatch on the
ninth or tenth morning from the night on which they were
laid; the period is seldom less than eight days, and is some-


times fourteen and even more. It will soon be perceived
that the sound eggs indicate by their appearance that they
are sound ; in about a week the eggs have become dark, the
shell dryer, thinner, and more crisp ; close observation will
reveal the young worm curled and cooped up within, and
just ready to take the first step in life. The slips of
paper or grass-cloth with the eggs on, should be placed
on the ailantus trees a day or two before the eggs are
likely to hatch. This may be effected in several simple
ways—we find this plan most convenient; place a slip with
the eggs upon it under one or two leaflets, the best about
the middle of the leaf, not the youngest, but full grown or
nearly so, clean and tender, and bringing the sides of the slip
over, pin with a single pin the two lips of the paper and
the enclosed leaflet together, so that the eggs be held in
gentle contact both with the paper and the under part of
the leaflet, and yet admit of a free passage for the air all
through ; there is no fear of a single egg being lost in this
way, if nattily done, wet or dry the glue will hold them, and
when'the animals come out, they crawl at once on to the
leaf, their next home and food ; they can be easily observed,
and as soon as they are all right carefully remove the pin
and paper, which may be used over and over again; the
animals will require no further handling until it is time to
take the cocoons and secure the crop.
The natural food proper for the ailaut caterpillar is the
leaf of the ailantus tree, a tree common in Australia, and
very easily propagated. The tree is called Ailantusylandu-
Jgsa. The word ailantus is a latinized term coined by
botanists (to serve for both a botanical and the English name)
as a translation of the Chinese name, which signifies “ tree
of heaven,” partly because of the beauty of the tree itself
and partly on account of its great value, for it supplies
now, as it has supplied for centuries, the chief means of
support and luxury to many millions of the most wealthy
and thriving people in China; and the specific name of


f/landulosa is added to distinguish this species from others of
the genus, by reason of its having near the base of each
leaf one or more swellings or knots in the outer corner
which are termed glands. This ailantus is indigenous to
India, China, and a great portion of Asia, besides the
islands from thence to Australia ; and it is also indigenous to
some parts of the continent of Australia itself, though the
plants about Sydney and Brisbane have been derived from
Europe, where the tree has been in use for ornament for
more than a century. The ailantus is readily propagated by
seeds, but most quickly from suckers and from cuttings of
the root; plants may be obtained of all the nurserymen in
Brisbane and Sydney. The tree itself will grow, if per-
mitted, to a height of from 60 to 100 feet, and the timber
is of excellent quality and durability, though of singularly
rapid growth ; but for the purposes of producing silk, the
ailantus should be kept cut close back, and never allowed
to attain a greater height than 5 or 6 feet, which it will do
in a single season, and in a few weeks every time as often
as it is cut back, yielding a better and more luxuriant
foliage as the stump acquires size and the roots extend
their hold below. A. plantation of ailantus is called an
ailantery.
To form an ailantery, an excellent plan is to set the
ailantus seeds, seedlings, suckers, or root-cuttings in treble
rows, quincunx fashion, so as to have each plant about
30 inches to 4 feet apart; a lane 10 or 12 feet or wider
should be left between every clump or treble row r , and
across the ends of the rows, according to the quality and
nature of the ground. If practicable, let the rows run cross-
wise to the prevailing or most violent winds, and horizontal
rather than up and down the slopes. Each treble row or
clump might conveniently comprise an equal number, about
200 plants in all, say about 4,000 plants per acre. The
ailantus likes plenty of room, yet thrives in any soil, and
in any situation, but the better the soil the better the


plant, and as the tree is deciduous (that is, casts its leaves
regularly in autumn, and becomes bare during winter), even
if it is not cut back, the falling leaves, &c., decaying, soon
accumulate a vegetable mould, and greatly improve the
land. The ailantus makes an admirable shelter for cattle,
sheep, or horses, as no creature besides the ailant cater-
pillar, not even a goat will touch it, and it harbours no
vermin of any kind. The odour is peculiar and remarkable
in that the same scent is given out by every part of the
tree, leaves, root, and stem alike; and this odour is so
offensive and repulsive to almost all animals, that very seldom
are even insects found on any part of the ailantus, but the
scent is only perceptible to human beings when the plant
is bruized. The tree is singularly well adapted to sandy
and sterile soils, and would be of great value if planted
extensively on the wide open plains which are now turned
to so little account in these Colonies. Millions of these trees
have of late years been planted in Europe as forests, with
the objects of enriching the land, and protecting the surface
from droughts, in times of scarcity, and, in times of heavy
rains, modifying the tendency to disastrous floods. The
plan has been found very effective, and now the use of the
ailant silkworm would add another powerful motive to all
persons interested in land to improve and protect their
property, add to the comfort and security of their stock ;
and yet while doing so, not only immediately repay all
cost of planting, but give a money profit besides. The
foliage of the ailantus varies a good deal according to
the dimensions of the tree ; the leaves of the large tree
being much fewer in proportion, smaller, and more woody
than those of the young bush. The leaves have long leaf-
stalks starting direct from the branch or stem, and these
leaf-stalks sometimes B to 6 feet long and more, have
numerous leaflets growing in pairs along their whole
length. These leaflets in strong plants, well cut back, are
very fine and succulent, and are found in this climate to


suit the ailant silkworm exceedingly well. The finer and
firmer the foliage the less silk is expended in securing the
leaflet to the footstalk or the footstalk to the branch, there-
fore more silk (and the best as being the first emitted) is
laid up in the cocoon itself, and a more valuable article
obtained for sale ; the animal’s instinct in this particular is
a very remarkable characteristic.
Upon these leaflets the eggs are placed as before recom-
mended, and for the most part will be found hatched by
8 o’clock on the morning of the tenth day from that on
which they were laid. At birth they are indeed tiny little
fellows, and having taken a short run about the leaflet and
a nibble, will soon huddle together head and tail and rest
till evening, when and during the night and early morning
they will take the little food they require and thus go on
for about five days, when from a dirty-looking yellow color
covered with rows of dark hairs, spines, or tubercles, they
will gain a clearer and better appearance. Now, having
grown much larger, eaten till they are so distended that
thet are in fact hide-bound, they find it necessary to leave
off eating; this they do, and soon slightly shrink in size,
when they literally walk out of their skins. As the period
of moulting or sloughing is a most precarious time of their
existence, and when they are subject to most mishaps, it is
well to explain that when caterpillars cast their outer or
scarf skins, so complete is the operation that a coating comes
off every part of their body, the eyes, the teeth, even the
very nails or claws shed their outer layer. This happens in
this wise: —Finding a change necessary and unavoidable, the
little animal fastens the claspers with which it grips hold
at the extremity, its eight real feet, and six hands, or front
feet as they are occasionally called, each with a small but
secure band of silk to the leaflet; it remains thus secured,
inactive and fasting until the body is shrunk and the outer
skin thereby loosened and shrivelled enough; presently
the caterpillar, by moving its head about, cracks the dry skin


in front, and as it curls off, the head is liberated and then
the feelers or hands ; with these it makes a forward move-
ment, and with a little exertion the body and legs all come
out, leaving an entire perfect skin adhering to the leaflet.
It is on such occasions as this that its enemies ply their
attentions most assiduously, and the helpless animals suffer
most; the ants particularly seem to have the intelligence
to understand and watch their opportunity. It should also
be mentioned that, if the wind is violent when the sloughing
takes place, the caterpillars are often knocked off or miss
their hold; if so, they are seldom hurt by the fall, and if
not picked up by the ants or other enemies, will, if there
be no weed, grass, or other difficulty to impede or perplex
them, crawl back on to the bush or rising suckers, and get
on all right again.
Upon casting their skins the second time, the worms have
a clear golden yellow look, and grow apace, until, in a few
days, they again become too big for their clothes, and cast
them off for a new suit, which this time is white with little
blackish spots, the tubercles like a number of points covered
with a white greasy substance, as if they were little frosted
knobs. This white is very general over the body, and is
more or less due to a sort of sperm or wax which throws off
rain or dew, instead of the hairs or spines, which, while the
animal was smaller, necessarily lay closer together and
served the same purpose before, as well as a partial pro-
tection from its foes. Again another moult occurs, and
now the color, which here and there before faintly showed
through, becomes a stronger tinge of blue and green, the
tubercles more developed, and more elegant, lines or rims
on head, feet, claspers, &c., edged or tipped with gold and
blue. By the time the caterpillar has reached its fourth
and last moult it is about an inch and a quarter long.
Now indeed they eat in earnest, and may be seen almost
hourly to increase in size and beauty. As they grow, the
colors become more intense, the brilliant white wax some-


times tinged here and there with a rosy hue, and the whole
frame portly and singularly noble in aspect. By the time
they are full-grown, they measure 2£ to 3 inches long in
their natural position, and even more if displayed. Their
appearance is very attractive, and it would be difficult to
imagine a more interesting and gratifying sight than a
flourishing plantation with hundreds of thousands of these
magnificent silkworms ready to yield their stores of treasured
wealth. Since the ailant has been naturalized in Australia
the caterpillars in every stage appear to thrive, but it is
mostly after the last moult that the effect of the climate
becomes most manifest. In Europe the caterpillars in the
last stage are of an emerald green ; here some are green,
others of a brilliant cobalt blue, others white and green and
white and blue tipped with gold and spotted with black—
the whole appearance indicating the perfection of condition
and content. The caterpillars, including their four moults,
take but four or five weeks to accomplish their full develop-
ment.
It must- be noted that caterpillars hatched on the same
day from eggs laid on the same day, and as far as may be
similarly placed to all conditions, will not all progress
alike; there will be a great difference as to the period of
their laying up, the range is from about twenty-seven days
to fifty or sixty days, therefore they cannot be expected
all to become moths at the same time. Practically the
irregularity in the rate of progress in all stages keeps the
grower constantly occupied, and on a certain scale this
irregularity itself neutralizes the inconvenience, which on
a small scale would be a serious difficulty, and establishes
an average which enables their attentive and expert hand
to do all he desires, at the time most opportune or agree-
able to himself.
When the caterpillar has attained its extreme growth, a
marked change evidently pervades its system—it appears to
be turned into a mass of rich liquid silk. The animal seems


scarcely able to hold in the subtle fluid, peers and moves
about uneasily, as if in quest of a place of rest and relief.
If molested at this time or handled, the caterpillar will
probably be lost, for at this moment the worm is peculiarly
sensitive. Like almost all animals, it has an aversion to
contact with those of every other kind ; but the delicate,
refined organization of this silkworm evinces the revulsion
of disgust, if meddled with when just ripe and about to
prepare a habitation which is to be the scene of the mar-
vellous transformatiou already spoken of, and the loathing
of interference provoked at this time so overcomes its
nervous frame, as to divert or incapacitate the system for
healthy action. The result is an abortion.
But, as will always be the case if left alone, the ripe
caterpillar soon commences its work. The reader will
recollect what has been said about the tree ; the ailantus
is deciduous; in time the leaflets will fall, and the main
leaves with the long footstalks will only remain for a while.
Now the caterpillar seems to be conscious of this danger,
and, to provide against it for so long as its own safety
may require, commences operations by making a strong
band of fine silk close round the junction of the leaflet and
leafstalk, and partly a little way up the leafstalk also, if
the leaf is sound, but if weak, or it is one of the small
early leaves, then the band is continued right up to the
stem, passed round, securing the whole firmly to the main
branch. The caterpillar then goes back to the leaflet
selected originally, and having coated one side with a film
of silk, as the film dries it curls the leaflet, and so enables
the caterpillar easily to strap the edges towards each other
and wrap itself inside the w T eb, which it very speedily forms,
by moving its head about in zigzags and trailing the liquid
silk out in an uninterrupted stream; this very rapidly
consolidates, and the caterpillar disappears from view. The
silk as it is trailed out is coated with a sort of gum or glue
given out by the worm at the same time as the silk; this


gum joins the double fibre as it issues, rendering it one
strand. The powerful glue has the property of withstanding
wet, and neither hot nor cold water alone will loosen the
fibres.
When just made, the cocoon is always of an agreeable
white or grey, but generally soon darkens more or less into
different shades of grey, drab, or brown. Some fine cocoons,
however, retain externally, and more or less internally, a
permanent light silvery complexion, and the judicious culti-
vator will always select, assort, and place aside the best in
form and quality for breeding of these apart, as well as
choice ones of the others separate. To allow time for the
exhausted caterpillar to pass into its new form and acquire
consistence, the cocoons should not be disturbed for a few
days, but in about four or five days or a week according to
the weather and the leaf they are on after they are completed,
the cocoons may be gathered; this is done readily enough by
seizing the loose part (the lower end is best), and plucking it
off the leaflet. Stripped from the green leaflet, the pod comes
away perfectly clean, and as much of the loose silk should
be brought away as possible, for this adds to the value of
the article. The cocoons not required for breeding should
soon be scalded in hot or boiling water, or steamed for a
few minutes, to destroy the life within, and when thoroughly
dried in the air are ready for market.
If it is desired to wind off or card the cocoons, they must
be first slackened by soaking in a ley of wood ashes for an
hour or two. Trom the ley they should be put wet into an
earthern pot, and as they become soft (in a few days) they
may be wound off or reeled with the common reels. A
solution of potash (ley of wood ashes) contains the principle
that turns grease into soap, and must be used with dis-
crimination. The art of reeling, &c., to render raw silk as
used for manufacture, is a special handicraft and branch of
industry quite distinct from the growing of cocoons. It is


considered that for the present, the cultivator will do well
to concentrate his attention on the production of the
cocoons only.
The fabrics manufactured from ailantine are of many
sorts; some are known by such names as “ washing silk,”
“ Chinese silk,” tussore, corah, foulard, &c.; great quantities
are required particularly to supply England and Spain with
the silk pocket-handkerchiefs in common use, printed and
plain, by gentlemen, and for ladies’ aprons; many substances
used for ladies’ and children’s dresses that will wash, and
for gentlemen’s summer coats, &c. Ailantine is also made
into the finest crapes, as well as into a number of exquisite
tissues, which are too new to commerce to have yet obtained
distinctive European names. This staple has only recently
come to light, though many fabrics made from it have been
known for a long while. The close of the China war, and
the facilities afforded by the treaty rendering access to the
interior of that empire practicable, have given us this
valuable addition to the resources of the landowner as also
of trade and manufacture.
The value of and profit to be derived from the cocoons
may be stated in a very brief form. The pods full or empty
may be worth from ten-pence to thirteen-pence a thousand;
at fifty caterpillars or cocoons per bush and four thousand
bushes to the acre, the yield of cocoons should be 200,000;
these, at one shilling per thousand, equal in money value
£lO per acre for one generation.
The period of emerging of the moths is a very difficult
matter to understand, and yet more troublesome to forecast.
It might be said, and not without substantial truth, that
experience indicates that the chrysalis matures or progresses
so far as to be ready to assume the moth state, in about
twenty-four to forty days under ordinary circumstances,
and would, as it frequently does, reproduce several times
in a season; but practically this experience is not uniform,


even under what are apparently identical conditions ; for
instance, it by no means follows that if 1,000 ailant
caterpillars lay up upon one and the same day, the whole
1,000 will emerge as imagoes at the same time —in fact
they do not so emerge, A number, perhaps a few, will
shew out on the 24th, 25th, 26th, and next following days,
others, few or many, every day for several days during a
protracted period, according to the weather, condition of
the atmosphere, unseen or unknown influences, and perhaps
not issue from their seclusion, though mature, until the
next season; possibly some may even remain dormant for
years, and still be alive and sound in the pod. The late
cocoons, those completed in autumn, will generally remain
dormant during winter, and the moths commence to issue
forth rather late in spring—a few about the time the
ailantus tree has burst the bud and the leaf begins to
enlarge, but the majority afterwards, when the tree shall
have gained a sufficiency of foliage, namely, towards the
end of September and in October, or later —the ailantus is
scarcely in full leaf before November. It must be again
noted that the cocoons should not be kept in too dry an
atmosphere; though so well protected by the cocoon, the
chrysalis may become parched and hard, and thus perish —
moderated humidity tends to facilitate a greater and more
healthy development of the imago, and promotes its dis-
position for activity.
It will be very judicious to devote the utmost attention
and discrimination to the selection of the finest cocoons
for breeding, and whenever practicable, to set apart the
handsomest, quietest, most vigorous, and most fully
developed moths of both sexes, that may appear from
day to day, so as ever to obtain the highest results in the
progeny from one generation to another. Perseverance in
this course cannot fail with time, to ensure a high degree
of excellence, and in all probability surpass the present fair
standard, Climate and food, in these Colonies, afford every


encouragement to look for the same success in breeding
and improving silkworms, that has rewarded the skill and
judgment and enterprise so signally displayed in the
management of sheep, and which have redounded so greatly
to the personal advantage of the wool-grower individually,
as well as to the reputation, honor, and benefit of
Australia.
The main drawback and difficulty in growing cocoons
out of doors, consists in the very imminent danger of the
caterpillars being preyed upon and devoured by birds or
other animals and insects. Throughout the whole economy
of animated nature the order of Providence appears mani-
fest—that as food is more or less plentiful, so are the
mouths to eat it. The abundance of insects or animals of
one sort never fails to call forth and multiply those of
another, to reduce and keep down a redundance, or the
disposition of any one sort to usurp and retain an inordi-
nate preponderance. It is the province of the human
mind, by forethought and timely action, to incite, assist,
and stimulate the natural tendency of such animals as are
of direct value or immediate use to man, to increase, to
sustain, and protect them according to their several special
habits and peculiarities ; and while so doing, to be not less
careful in removing all adverse influences, in subduing,
destroying, or preventing the access of other animals which
would militate against their prosperity. A constant regard
to these considerations, so to influence and adjust the
circumstances that may concur to avail and profit him by
the dispensation to increase and multiply, so evident and
so beneficial in the creatures now under discussion, will be,
to the intelligent thinker and doer, the groundwork and
measure of his success in cultivating silk in the open air.
To grow ailantus is the easiest of all agri- ot horti- cultural
operations; it is easier to grow than grass. Permanent
and constantly improving a plantation of this hardy and


most prolifically-reproducing bush furnishes a never-failing,
ever-abundant, and seasonable supply to the ailant cater-
pillar—the only animal which touches this its appropriate
food, and which is now naturalized and found to thrive
exceedingly well in the climate of Australia.
In a country like this, where insect life teems in such
plenty, enemies to the new comer are numerous, and of
many kinds ; the observations and local knowledge of each
person must watch for, and suggest measures for the pro-
tection of his stock ; but the foremost, probably, and most
active and unrelenting destroyers will be the ants of all
varieties, on foot and on wing—those universal scavengers
alike in town and bush. These pests must be got rid of and
permanently exterminated. Besides the ants, birds and
beetles, wasps and hornets, spiders and tree frogs, the
horned wood-bug, and the elegant and useful insect called
the praying mantis (familiarly known as the “ native lady”)
and many others, will be found to make some inroad upon
the worms ; but their depredations will bp insignificant
compared to the havoc made by ants, if permitted.
It is a great point, however, that the casualties mostly
happen to the caterpillars when very young and small, and
that after the third moult but few losses occur. The
amount of food consumed by the caterpillars while very
young is too insignificant to be worthy of notice, and care
will readily make good, if necessary, where wanting, the
the number so that each bush will yield the full burden of
cocoons it is able to bear. This, however, must be done
with circumspection, so as to under rather than overdo the
load, to keep the rows or clumps progressing uniformly,
to allow of gathering the cocoons quickly and with economy
of labour; also, to admit of all the bushes in one clump
being rigorously cut back, which should be done immediately,
without reference to season, or as soon as possible after the
leaves are wholly or partially consumed.


It must be said, as a general caution to the grower of silk
out of doors, not less than to the cultivator of domesticated
worms, too great attention cannot he paid to cleanliness ;
slovenliness and neglect will inevitably deprive the ailantery
of its best resources and results; the ground should be kept
clear of all encumbrance, especially of loose rubbish and
of whatever may harbour slugs (which are very fond of
caterpillars) and any kind of vermin. Insects of one species
bring those of others, and birds and other animals as well
to devour both, and these one and all would soon make
havock with the young stock. It would be well to have no
vegetation besides the ailantus on the ground. The ailants
not unfrequently please to change their diet. ’When this
caprice takes them, they quietly dfbp themselves off the
bush or crawl down the stem on to the ground, and travel
in quest of another plant the leaf of which may be more
agreeable to their appetites. They are never hurt by the
tumble, for the tubercles act as springs to break the fall;
the friction of the leaves against each other by the wind
now and then rubs them off the leaflets, and a sudden jerk
while they are caught napping sometimes dislodges the
burly, fat, sleepy ones, but few’ healthy caterpillars if of
any size will be lost if the ailantery is kept clean.
The reader will have gathered, in the course of the fore-
going, that the range of life of the ailant is comprised
within the brief period of from about nine to thirteen weeks,
say in the egg eight or nine to fourteen days, in the cater-
pillar from twenty-six to forty, in the cocoon twenty-
four to forty days, if the emerging be not delayed (as
possibly may be most advantageous) until the following
season. He will have remarked the number of eggs indicat-
ing a progeny equal to a multiplication of the stock (half of
160 to 360) 80 to 180-fold, and occasionally even over 200-
fold. Assuming all these to reproduce in like manner only
once more or a second time within the year, the increase
will be enormous. In reality, how r ever, there are many


impediments and fallings short of what might be the case,
were there no failings with the moths and no enemies to
devour the caterpillars. The knowledge, tact, and judgment
of the cultivator should, therefore, be energetically directed
to place his stock, and maintain the conditions under which
their wonderful rate of increase will most avail for their
prosperity and for his benefit.
It is necessary to be very cautious if occasion should
arise to remove the caterpillars, especially when very young,
not to injure them. The feet of the ailant are armed with
claws or talons as well as with suckers, with which they
hold on with such extreme tenacity that any attempt to
dislodge them cannot fail to cause injury. If hurt, they
may not die immediately, they may feed all right apparently,
but they will very seldom get over the next moult. If
needful to interfere, it is best to let them get by their own
natural progression on to a leaflet, and then pin the leaflet; or,
cut off the leaflet, and then pin it to a leafstalk, from whence
they will take care of themselves. When large they may be
deftly handled and placed lengthwise on the leafstalk,
which they will immediately seize and grip with feet and
claspers, but the less they are meddled with in any way the
better.
Sometimes, and principally in the early part of the season,
the moths may emerge very disproportionally as to the
sexes, the females at first being not infrequently alone or
by far the moat numerous ; at the latter end the males more
generally preponderate, while during the middle season the
sexes are for the most part well matched. A little manage-
ment will always ensure a daily supply of moths and of
fertilized eggs throughout the late spring, as well as during
summer and autumn, and he can scarcely help having the
living stock in every stage of progression at the same time*
so the grower can be always employed for months, and can
always turn to account whatever food he may have to sustain
the worms.


The progress of the silk industry in Australia may,
probably, in the commencement, be like that of wool. In
its early days it was disparaged, and objected that there was
no market for wool in the Colony. llow different is now
the case ! All objections and arguments as to “ how it can’t
be done” of very wise and prudent people are forgotten,
or recalled to mind with contemptuous derision. Let it not
be supposed that the production of silk can possibly be
overdone. Insatiable markets are ready to take all, even
as many millions of pounds as can be produced. Country
storekeepers and merchants will soon be as eager to pur-
chase cocoons as they now are to secure a clip of wool.
Meanwhile, in default of other purchasers, and to afford
assistance to cultivators, Messrs. Asselin and Brady, of
Brisbane and Sydney, are willing to make arrangements to
take either ailant or other cocoons, at a specific price, for
cash. It is more easy to overdo the production of wool than
of silk, and, paradoxical as it may seem, it is yet true that
the lower in money value the raw material, the less proba-
bility of a glut, the more uniform the return, and more
profitable to the grower, for, as in the case of cotton,
a very small reduction in price of a material largely
consumed, invariably brings it into request for new purposes.
The ailant culture may be advantageously commenced on
the farmsteads of settlers, on sheep stations, on unimproved
purchased lands, and particularly on the long, bare downs
or plains at present so imperfectly utilized. As an adjunct
to the growth of wool, the writer has no hesitation in
saying that the ailant may be made to pay the station
expenses of every run, in fact increase the profit to the
squatter from wool by 2d. to 4d. a pound, and thus without
involving any extra outlay of capital, enlarge the capabilities
of the run for general purposes. To the farmer the ailant
may be a great resource, striving women and industrious
children may better the circumstances of the family, and
bring into the common stock from time to time no incon-
siderable amount of ready money.


The writer wishes to impress upon the reader that this
sketch is draw r n, not to give an irksome detail of minute
instructions, but rather a general idea or inkling of the
subject, and an explanation as brief as may be of such
particular essentials as but few people could be expected
to find out and investigate, or possess the means and
education, time and opportunity, to ascertain for them-
selves. Indeed much more might be said, but this paper is
already too long; it is thought that all absolutely necessary
to say has been said, and the grower must rely in some
degree on his own good sense and discernment.
The writer also wishes it to be very distinctly understood,
that the (Government, intaking the exceptional course of circu-
lating the information contained herein, adopts no respon-
sibility whatever as to its contents or omissions. It may
be believed the Government is not prepared to afford any
encouragement, inducement, or reward, to Messrs. Asselin
and Brady, nor to any person whomsoever in connection with
this industry, which it is represented may very well dispense
with adventitious aid. The Grovernment, in consideration
of the great disadvantage at which the scattered population
of the interior is placed, has simply acceded to a proposal
to lay some elementary information within reach of such
as may desire and seek it.
He would also earnestly advise intending cultivators to
fully comprehend, that, even as an experiment, unless the
cultivation is commenced at the very first on an adequate
scale, nothing but failure and disappointment can possibly
ensue. At the first, in all matters, (and the production of
silk is assuredly no exception to the general rule) experience
must be gained ; and to gain the experience contemplated, a
certain extent of food must be at hand, and a sufficient
number of worms must be reared, in order that enough
may escape and survive the large reductions which will
inevitably happen in spite of the best pains, even to the
most attentive and skilful, during the first essays. The


beginner must not only have a large enough plantation to
get into stock, but he must bare this ready beforehand, so
that as he gets on he will not be stinted for food —have to
entertain no misgiving, but that at whatever time he may
wholly or partially succeed (and let him not imagine he
will succeed without trouble), in the management and
increase of the worms, all may be in order. Ten acres of
ailantus will not generally cost more laying down than one
acre in wheat or maize, therefore an experiment to be real
may still be made cheaply enough. Unless carried out to a
certain extent, it would be long before any appreciable
benefit could be achieved, while with adequate preparation,
some return, small perhaps at first, may be looked for
within a reasonable time, to encourage the pursuit by a
sense of substantial profit, and warrant further effort.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB6B,




Messes. aistd* Beadt, having made a tender fo place T
~hy may of gift, at the disposal of the Government, for gratu-
itous distribution, any number of Ailant Silkworms which may
he needed to effect the general dispersion of this valuable
animal, of which they are yet the exclusive proprietors, through-
out the Colony, —it is notified, for general information, that
persons desirous of obtaining the stock, may either address
those gentlemen (Jug letter only) direct, or apply to the
Librarian at the Botanical Gardens, Sydney, on Mondays and
Thursdays, from II to lo’ clock. The only restriction as to
the distribution is, that provision be made, beforehand, for the
sustenance of the Worms in quantity, to be of more than mere
nominal value.
All applications should state —
1. Name of applicant in full.
Occupation.
Address.
Nearest post town.
2. The extent of land in cultivation or prepared to form
an Ailantery, whieh should not be less than 10 acres.
3. The ( approximate) number of ailantus plants actually
rooted, in leaf, and groiving on the same; the place
where the Ailantery is situated.
And unless the applicant is a Magistrate or Minister of
Religion, the name and address of some Magistrate or other
respectable person resident in the district, who is able of his
own knowledge to authenticate the fact of the Ailantery being
in leaf, must be given.
37


