

DELIVERED TO THE
MEMBERS OE THE CHTJRGH OE ENGLAND
BY THE
BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
TUESDAY EVENING, FEBRUARY 23rd, 1864,
ON THE OCCASION OF HIS RETURN TO HIS DIOCESE
AFTER A VISIT TO ENGLAND.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEOROE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1864.




lf Y rtfc WtH 2
“Z.
The Annual Meeting of the Sydney Diocesan Committee of the
Societies for the Propagation of the Gospel and for Promoting
Christian Knowledge, was held on Tuesday evening, 23rd February,
in St. James’s Infant School-room, Castlereagh-street. The large
room was crowded in every part, a large number of the Clergy,
and of the most influential lay members of the Church of England
in the diocese of Sydney being present. The Bishop of Sydney
presided. After the business of the meeting was concluded the
Bishop delivered the following
ADDEESS*
I have invited you, my dear friends, to meet me on the present
occasion, in order that I may give you some account of my recent
visit to England, and of its results, and will take the opportunity
of adding such information on other topics as may be interesting
to the members of the Church of England in this colony.
I thank Almighty God that He has been pleased to restore me
to my diocese in health and peace, and that the enjoyment of my
visit to England has been greatly increased by the tidings I have
received during my absence, “joying and beholding your order in
Christ.” The sorrows which must ever surround the death of
those we truly love, have not been wanting to me during my
absence and upon my return, but even in them thanksgiving has
also found a place, and if anxieties for the future cannot be wholly
excluded, such cares are greatly lightened by the consideration
of the past and of the mercies received therein.
My visit to England was decided upon in consequence of the
proposed formation of the Goulbum bishopric. For several years
this subject had been pressed upon my attention. I had delayed
to act because I was neither fully assured of the necessity for the


division of my diocese, nor of tlie sufficiency of the proposed
endowment. I have had no reason to regret that delay. My last
journey before going to England extended over 3,000 miles. In
the course of it I became satisfied that if the Church of England
was to keep pace with the increase of the population, and to
anticipate their wants —if large portions of the country were not
to be left destitute of the ordinances of religion and the means of
education, we must provide additional episcopal oversight.
A subsequent meeting at Goulburn appeared to have removed
the second difficulty. With so large a commencement of an
endowment fund as the munificent gift of the Messrs. Campbell,
with other local subscriptions, and the help which might be
expected from England, it appeared certain that £15,000 would be
provided; and it was stated that this amount would be eventually
raised to £lB,OOO or £20,000.
I may here observe that without such an endowment it is
unwise, to say the least, to attempt the formation of additional
bishoprics. It is for this reason that beyond the payment of the
liberal gift of £2,000 by Mr. Clark Irving, no actual progress has
been made towards the appointment of a Bishop to Grafton and
Armidale, notwithstanding the guarantee of a similar amount by
the Bishop of Newcastle. It may be possible on the first forma-
tion of a new See to find a clergyman who, having other sources
of income, is willing to accept the appointment, but ultimately
the difficulty of filling up insufficiently endowed Sees will be
found to be great, and in truth the difficulty is already beginning
to render itself felt.
The resolution of the Goulburn meeting, by which the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury was requested to make the first appointment
to the bishopric, was sanctioned by the Duke of Newcastle, and
acted upon by the late Archbishop. Many persons were named
from different quarters, and when his Grace selected Dr. Thomas,
he did so with a very strong expression of his gratification and
confidence. The communication of his selection to the Govern-
ment was one of his last official acts. The death of the Arch-
bishop, combined with other causes, occasioned considerable delay
in the Consecration of the Bishop of Goulburn. The nomination


was made in July, 1862, the consecration was held eight months
after, in the Cathedral at Canterbury. There, where the first
Bishop of Australia lies entombed, the Metropolitan of all England,
assisted by the Bishop of Worcester, and two Australian Bishops,
set apart the Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol and the Bishop of
Goulburn for the oversight of the Lord’s work in their respective
Dioceses. It will be satisfactory to some to know this fact, that
it was the express appointment of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
that he should be assisted in the consecration of an English
Bishop by the Bishop of Sydney and the Bishop of Melbourne,
the presence of a third English prelate not being deemed necessary
to the integrity of the service. The oath of due obedience was
made by the newly appointed Bishop to myself as Metropolitan.
The choir of the Cathedral was filled with a congregation deeply
interested in the solemn service. The sermon was preached by
the Dean of Canterbury, who also kindly appropriated the offertory
to the Diocesan Eund of the newly erected See.
Erom the time of his consecration the Bishop was laboriously and
successfully occupied in obtaining funds for his Diocese, and
would long ere this have entered upon his work in the colony,
had it not been found imperatively necessary that some further
additions should be made to the Endowment Eund. This delay
is to be regretted, but I have every confidence that in time all
persons will agree that the division of the Diocese was necessary,
and that the appointment is one which, under the good Providence
of God, will confer large and lasting benefits upon the Australian
Church.
Erom the period of my arrival in England, I received numerous
communications from clergymen and candidates for Holy Orders
who desired employment in Australia.
It is believed by some persons in the colonies that the advan-
tages of Australia are so great and evident, that it is very easy
to obtain clergymen for the service of the Church in this country.
It is also believed by some persons in England that any clergy-
men are sufficiently good for the colonies. It was my business
to assure my numerous correspondents that only the best men
we could find would be acceptable in this colony. On an average,


I had an application every week. At first they were very
numerous, and the applicants, in nearly all cases, unsuitable.
My excellent friend and Chaplain, Mr. Stnue, consented at my
request to come out again, soon after my arrival, and resumed his
valuable Missionary and organizing labours. Mr. Spexcer and
Mr. Creext sailed in the middle and before the end of 1862.
Mr. Corlette, Mr. Ixxes, and Mr. Boss early in 1863,
Mr. Uzzel, a student for Moore College, and the Eevhs. J.
Fletcher, and C. E. Ord, were the last of nine who have come
out to help us in the work of our Master.
This number might have been largely increased, had I not felt
the necessity of being very careful to select only suitable
Clergymen. A few were, perhaps, lost by this caution, but I felt
obliged to decline where I could not he tolerably certain that
neither to them nor to us would the applications end in
disappointment.
The difficulty experienced in meeting with suitable Clergymen
strengthened the conviction I had long entertained that, for a
continuous supply of Pastors, we must chiefly depend upon the
colony itself. I was confirmed in this conviction by the testimony
of my Eight Eev. Brethren of other Colonial Dioceses who were
in England during the period of my visit, and by communications
from others with whom I corresponded on the subject. This
difficulty was not lessened by finding that Her Majesty’s advisers
recommended the Crown to assent to the State-Aid Abolition
Bill. It is a serious discouragement to an English Clergyman
enquiring about the colony as a field of labour, to be told that
instead of a G-overnment Stipend, supplemented by his congrega-
tion, he must be wholly dependent upon some modification of the
voluntary system.
During the former part of my stay in England I was much
occupied in preaching and attending meetings for different Societies
—the Propagation of the GrOspel, the Church Missionary, and
the Colonial and Continental Church Societies; and a considerable
sum was raised by collections on their behalf. It was at length
suggested by an influential clerical friend that as I had expended
much time and labour upon other objects, he and others were


prepared to assist me in obtaining aid for my own diocesan fund.
The suggestion came at a time when my mind had been dwelling
upon the difficulty of supplying clergymen for the diocese, and
after further thought and consultation, I put forth a statement,
which many of you have seen, in which I asked for £7,000 for the
endowment and enlargement of Moore College. Prom that time
to the last Sunday but one of my stay in England, I was, with
only two exceptions, occupied on behalf of my diocese. I was
disappointed in some quarters where I had been led to expect
assistance; but my own friends, particularly in Liverpool, where
I obtained nearly £2,000, assisted me liberally. I had no very
large donations, but I preached diligently, held thirty meetings,
wrote many letters, and obtained for all purposes about £4,000.
One result of my efforts was, that nearly forty persons, including
children, were brought to the colony without any expense to the
land of their adoption.
I was not very successful in my applications for assistance
towards the Cathedral window fund. A few contributions were
given for the Eastern Memorial window, by friends of the late
Bishop, to whom I applied. One of these was formerly the second
master of the College, Grantham, where I received my education.
My former preceptor, the Eev. Canon Gilbert, met me in Canter-
bury, where I had gone for the Propagation Society’s annual
sermon and meeting, and saying “ Come, I will show you some-
thing you have not seen,” led me to the south side of the nave of
the Cathedral, where is the last resting place and beautiful mo-
nument of my revered predecessor.
The Eloor of our own Cathedral is to be after the pattern of
Lichfield as recently restored by Mr. Scott, and will be presented
to the Committee as a gift.
The Windows are being executed by Hardman, one of the
principal manufacturers of stained glass, and all that taste and
skill can effect in this line will no doubt be there displayed.
On the constitution of the Cathedral body, and the government
of the Church by Synods, I had frequent opportunities of
communicating with competent advisers in England, and with
African and Canadian Bishops. The latter I found quite satisfied


with their own amended Synod Bill; both Provincial and Diocesan
Synods work harmoniously and efficiently under it.
On the subject of Education I consulted persons in England
and Ireland who could give me information, and have myself
arrived at conclusions which, I think, might lead to a satisfactory
settlement of the vexed question even in this colony.
My journeys on behalf of my diocese afforded me an opportunity
of learning the condition of the Church of England in many parts
of the mother country, and I will now proceed to lay before you
the result of my observations.
I preached in Westminster Abbey and in the Cathedrals of
Canterbury, Lichfield, and Carlisle; at Chester, in the Abbey
Church, Bath; in Liverpool and Manchester, and Derby; in
Cheltenham, Clifton, and Shrewsbury; in country parishes in all
the northern, and in some of the midland, western, and southern
dioceses.
Twice I was invited to address large bodies of the metropolitan
clergy, and everywhere found a lively interest taken in my object
and a readiness to help it forward. One clergyman voluntarily
brought me a collection amounting to £4O which he had made
for my diocese, and invited me to preach in his church for the
same object, the result being another collection to the same
amount.
In the metropolis I was struck with the increase in the number
of able men amongst the clergy. On every side good appoint-
ments had been made. The churches which I attended were a
full. Whether in the most crowded part of Westminster, where
Miss Burdett Coutts has built and endowed a church, or in the
suburbs, or in Stepney, or Hampstead, or the Begent s Park,
everywhere the same, the churches filled. Westminster Abbey
and St. Paul’s were overflowing at the evening services. The
latter is the most beautiful sight of the kind I ever beheld.
Underneath that wondrous dome where rest the ashes of the
mighty dead, a living mass of human beings is crowded together.
A golden circle of light from 1000 burners springs from the lower
rim of the dome, and sheds a soft clear radiance on all below.


Far away, down the nave, underneath the arches —far, indeed, as
the eye can reach, still multitudes of people with faces upturned
towards the preacher. A large proportion, I was assured, were
regular attendants. The responses were heartily said, and the
hymns printed and distributed amongst the people, were as
heartily sung by a congregation of 5,000 persons, assisted by a
volunteer choir of 500.
In Westminster Abbey the general appearance was the same.
The numbers were not so great, and the form of the building not
calculated to produce the same fine effect. It was a cheering
sight to see these great centres of England’s worship containing
within their walls such vast numbers of attentive, intelligent
worshippers, listening week after week to the discourses of men
selected for their power of instructing and edifying the people.
And yet it is a melancholy fact, if indeed it be as represented,
that when all Places of Worship, Cathedrals, Churches, Chapels,
School-rooms, and even Theatres are filled, not more than three
persons in a hundred attend a Place of Worship at all; for three
persons who do, ninety-seven persons do not.
The annual increase of the metropolis alone is equal to the
population of a large city, requiring for its own accommodation
each year more Churches than are built for the whole population
of London and the suburbs. The Bishop of London is making
great exertions, and is well supported in many quarters. Not
only Churches, but Mission School-rooms, additional Missionaries,
Catechists, and all the machinery by which a district is rescued
from heathenism and raised to a Christian condition, are to be
provided out of the Million Fund which is now being raised. The
neglect of ages has to be overtaken, new and pressing wants to be
supplied. It is said that during the episcopate of Bishop
Porteus not a single Church was founded by him in the Diocese
of London. In the ancient Diocese of Chester, including the
manufacturing districts of Lancashire, only one Church was built
in the first ten years of the present century. Contrast with these
facts the fifty new Churches at one time in London, of the late
Bishop Blomfield, and the 240 new Churches of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury during his twenty years episcopate at


Chester. The impetus then given has never ceased to act, it has
gone on with accelerated speed from year to year, so that at the
Manchester Congress one of the writers was able to show that in
Manchester and the suburbs they had supplied the omissions of
former years, and were proceeding to meet and overcome the
difficulties of a rapidly increasing population. This spirit of
Church building and of Church restoration pervades the whole
country. Cathedrals—Worcester, Hereford, Chichester, Lichfield,
Carlisle, St. Patrick’s, Dublin, the last by the munificence of one
individual Mr. G-uinness ; parish churches, in the large country
towns, village churches innumerable —give evidence of the
liberality and public spirit of individuals or of parishes. I assisted
at the laying of a foundation stone for a Church in a densely
populated part of Liverpool, of which the site had been presented
by one of the members for the county, at a cost of £2,000. My
first act in my former parish of Edgehill was of a similar kind;
the church was the fifth in a district where, when I first took
charge of it, there was only one. In the only three parishes with
which in my ministry in England I was connected, the same work
has been going on ; new or restored churches, new schools, more
clergy —evidences of sound, satisfactory progress and of spiritual
good. There never was a period in the history of the Church in
England in which so much was being done for the supply of the
ordinances of religion. I am well aware that evils, great evils
exist —nay may connect themselves with this very movement.
Church buildings may be undertaken from other motives than
from a desire to edify the Church of Christ, but no one can
contrast the miserable apathy of the beginning of the present
century, with the spirit which now pervades the land, without
rejoicing at the change.
While, however, this increase in the number of churches is
going forward, a complaint has arisen that candidates for Holy
Orders have not increased in the required proportion, that in fact
they have diminished, and that the material is not of the same
quality as formerly.
The returns of the Bishops’ ordinations are adduced in evidence
of these facts, and the causes appear to be principally these three: —


1. The competitive examinations have thrown open the Indian
and civil services to all comers. I heard of instances of young
men who had intended entering the Church, being induced
by their success in the competitive examinations to take an
Indian appointment. 2. The number of small livings has been
increased by the facilities afforded for building churches, by the
operation of Acts against pluralities and non-residence, and by
changes made in the appointments to cathedral preferment. The
effect has been to diminish the number of “ prizes,” as they are
termed; so that while the demand for clergymen has greatly
increased, the worldly advantages of entering the ministry are
much diminished. 3. Another and graver cause is to be traced
to the condition of the Universities, and to the consequent state
of mind of many of the young men in England. A recent infidel
writer observes, “We should say that there are great moral
influences running through the world, like epidemics, without
distinction of frontier or of race.” — Renan, 308. The present
century has seen several of these “ moral epidemics.” We have
passed through them with more or less injury, and it is generally
found that there are certain constitutions of which it may be
predicted that they will imbibe whatever of miasma may be
floating in the moral atmosphere. At present the University of
Oxford is afflicted with those influences which are exhibited in
the “Essays and Reviews,” and the writings of Jowett and
Stanley. It is impossible for young men who have embraced the
principles, or are at all influenced by the teaching of these writers,
to retain the commonly received ideas of the Inspiration of the
Scriptures, the nature and necessity of the Atonement, or the
authority of the Creeds and Articles. Their early notions on
these and similar subjects are not only shaken, they are uprooted
and destroyed. The question of subscription to the formularies
of the Church also occupies the public mind, and there is a
growing disinclination to be bound by the strict terms imposed by
the Act of Uniformity, and consequently, an increased reluctance
to enter the ministry of the Church of England.
Under these circumstances, it has become necessary that


literates (persons who have not graduated at one of the Univer-
sities) should, in increased numbers, be admitted to Holy Orders.
This is deplored by some; very unreasonably, as it appears to
me. It is surely better that men who are anxious to serve in the
ministry of the Church and who offer the guarantee of the training
of a theological college, and of the Bishop’s examination, for their
fitness for the ministry, should be employed in our large towns
and in the mining and manufacturing districts, than that the
population should be left as sheep without a shepherd. Bor this
is the alternative, either these labourers must be employed, or
none. It would be desirable, no doubt, that every candidate for
Holy Orders should have a University education, but since this is
impossible, the next best thing is that the vacancies in the
ministry should be filled by men who have at least the qualifi-
cations of zeal, and love and competent knowledge. In this
manner it may be observed some valuable men have been
introduced into the ministry of the Church of England; men who
are now occupying important positions, with credit to themselves,
and to the great advantage of the Church. In my opinion, if
some such modification of existing regulations as necessity has
now forced upon us had been adopted in times past, w r e should
have had less irreligion and less dissent.
I may further add that I regard the causes of the deficiency
I have named as being temporary in their operation. I believe
that the Church will recover, and is indeed already recovering
from them.
Though one class of students may have been for the time
withdrawn from the ministry, others will present themselves. In
the last term there was a considerable increase in the number of
undergraduates at the Universities. The reproach and hindrance
of poverty will, I believe, be in time removed. A very general
feeling exists that endowments ought to be provided for the
poorer benefices. The sale of the Chancellor’s crown livings has
this object in view—the purchase money being added to the
endowment. The Ecclesiastical Commissioners are doing much.
Already where the population reaches 10,000 persons they give
£3OO per annum, and they will shortly have larger means at their


disposal. In Southwark every living is now £3OO a year. In
Liverpool a large scheme was to be launched under the auspices
of the Earl of Derby and the rector of the parish. At the
Manchester Congress the necessity for some great and general
effort in this direction was forcibly set forth by several speakers.
I trust also that a more healthy tone of public opinion will grow
up amongst our young men. The answers to Bishop Colenso’s
book are in number between seventy and eighty. Profound
learning, acute criticism, accurate biblical scholarship, mathe-
matical science, topographical knowledge, and the practical common
sense of working men, have all been brought to bear upon the
subjects discussed by the Bishop, and the result has been most
satisfactory. The public mind is at rest. After the interest and
curiosity excited by such a production from such a quarter had
subsided, and the replies had come forth, the second and third
parts of the bishop’s work were received with indifference and
neglect.
Another reproach will, I trust, now be removed. Men
occupying influential positions in the Church of England will not
be permitted, with impunity, to propagate opinions in opposition
to the authorised teaching of the Church. The proceedings
before the judicial Committee of the Privy Council against two
of the writers in the Essays and Beviews, and the condemnation
of the Bishop of Natal by his Metropolitan, will show that there
is yet such health and vigour in the Church, and such authority
in her tribunals, as to enable her to cast off from her communion,
or at least from her ministry, members proved to be unhealthy
and unsound. Nor should we omit in this connection to notice
the very able, wise, and convincing protest of Canon Wordsworth
against the recent appointment to the deanery of Westminster.
It is a cause of great thankfulness that one whose reputation for
learning is deservedly high, and whose position, while it laid him
under a weighty responsibility, yet exposed him to the danger
of being misunderstood, should have been willing to incur the
odium of exposing the glaring inconsistency between the published
opinions of Canon Stanley, and the subscriptions and declarations
required from the Dean of Westminster.


The epidemic, of which I spoke, has recently exhibited itself
in France in a somewhat novel form in Eenan’s Life of Christ.
I do not think that much harm can arise from a book which is
full of inconsistencies and contradictions of the writer’s own
theory, and in which it is proposed to account for the existence of
Christianity without miracles and without inspiration, solely by
the moral force and beauty of the character of our Lord, who yet
is represented as conspiring with Lazarus to produce the fiction
of His restoration to life, and whose own resurrection is to be
accounted for by Mary Magdalene, or the gardener, or the
disciples, or some one having stolen the body of Jesus!
Minds which can receive injury from the perusal of such
absurdities as these must be already far gone in the moral
epidemic of infidelity.
I have already said that the question of subscription is attracting
much attention. For the sake of the laity, it is requisite that the
opinions of their teachers should be subject to some test; and yet
it is held by many that the language and requirements of the
Act of Uniformity might with advantage be modified. The clergy
in these colonies are, indeed, already in the position in which one
of Lord Ebury’s bills proposed to place the English clergy. They
are not required to “ declare their unfeigned assent and consent
to all and everything contained and prescribed in and by the
Book of Common Prayer.”
I was invited by the Archbishop of Canterbury to be present
at a meeting of the Archbishops and Bishops, to consider the
proposal made in some quarters, to alter the Burial Service. The
general feeling was against any change, I took no part in the
discussion, but I cannot agree in the opinion of the majority,
nor do I think the question is set at rest. It appears to me
that as there is no point of doctrine involved in the proposed
change in the Burial Service, and that many are offended by the
retention of what appear to them to be objectionable expressions,
it would be wise to take advantage of a very wide-spread feeling
in favour of a change, and to remove a stumbling block from the
way of those who are disposed to join the Church of England.


To decline to do this through fear of encouraging demands for
further alterations in the Liturgy, I hold to be impolitic and
dangerous. A wise and timely concession on this one point would
prevent moderate men from joining in unreasonable clamours for
further and greater changes.*
It also appears to me that by refusing to admit the necessity of
any change whatever, there is a danger of alienating some of the
lay members of the Church.
There is great activity amongst the laity. I was much struck
with the development of it in every direction, and yet I am not
without apprehension that an impatience of restraint, a forward-
ness to undertake those duties which are usually committed to
the clergy, and a disposition to dwell upon the defects of the
Church of England, may lead to disunion and separation. It will
tend to weaken their attachment to the Church if they are
compelled to conclude that under no possible circumstances is any
change to be made. Especially will this be the case if practices
are permitted which tend to give just offence to attached members
of the Reformed Church of England. No one can read the life
of the late Bishop of London without seeing how difficult and
delicate a matter it is even in England, where law and custom are
so well known and generally regarded, for a Bishop to exercise
his episcopal authority in matters of ritual. There are some
things against which Bishop Blomfield wrote and spoke strongly
and with authority which appear at present to pass unheeded and
unreproved. If the rulers of our Church are careful to preserve
the true character of our Protestant communion, I have no fear
for the result of the present agitation in the public mind. Let
them hold that admirable mean into which our English Reformers
were guided, when primitive order and scriptural doctrine were
freed from superstition and error, and the confidence of the laity
will be retained. A united body will be opposed to the vast array
of moral and social ills with which the Church of Christ has yet
* In making these observations I mast not be understood as expressing any
dissatisfaction with the language of the Burial Service, or as desiring for my
own sake any change. I speak only of that which under existing circumstances
seems to me to he the wisest course to pursue.


to contend. A united body! How greatly is this to be desired I
How much the efficiency of the Church is impaired when any
portion of her energy is turned against herself. In this respect
there is room for improvement in England. To seek peace, to
follow after peace, and to be peace-makers, these are the charac-
teristic marks of true Christianity. To exaggerate differences, to
make rash and unfounded statements, to give no credit for good
motives where these may possibly exist, to make no distinctions or
allowances, is to advocate religion in the spirit of a partisan and
of a politician, and of this I saw more than I wished.
I have great hope than an increase of union may be one of the
results of the meetings of the Church Congress. This annual
meeting of the lay and clerical members of the Church in one of
our large cities seems to be an established institution. It has been
held at Cambridge, Oxford, and Manchester, and this year is to be
held at Bristol, under the presidency of the Bishop of the diocese.
The Manchester Congress, held in the magnificent Eree Trade
Hall, was a wonderful sight. One thousand clergymen from every
part of the United Kingdom were present. A vast number of
spectators, male and female, attended the sittings, which were held
three times a day for part of three days. At the evening meetings
five thousand persons were present. The proceedings commenced
with service in the Cathedral, and an historical sermon by the
Dean of Chichester, Dr. Hook. The Bishop of the diocese
presided; the Bishop of Oxford took the chair at certain sectional
meetings ; papers on subjects connected with the ministry and the
church, ecclesiastical law, church synods and open churches,
education, church music and architecture, were read by eminent
clergymen and laymen; speakers appointed by the congress com-
mittee discussed the subjects, commenting on the papers, and
adding the result of their own experience and observation. Missions
and the Colonial Church came in for their share in these discus-
sions, and one of the most valuable speeches made there was by
my right reverend brother the Bishop of Melbourne on the con-
stitution of church synods, while he also assisted me in the
discussion upon the supply of a native clergy. The congress appears
to me to be a more real representation of the Church of England


than Convocation. No donbt, the theory of representation of the
Church of England is that of the laity in the Commons and the
Bishops in the Lords. Convocation, originally summoned for
purposes of finance, has become a deliberative body, with these
great defects, that it is not a representation of the Church, and
that it cannot give effect to its own decisions. The Church
Congress does fairly and fully represent the whole body of the
Church, and avoids coming to any decision at all upon the questions
brought before it. And this I regard as an advantage, since in the
mere discussion of principles and in the expression of sentiments,
which are not to be embodied in a resolution, men can aftord to be
more calm and dispassionate than if some important practical
question was to be decided by vote. At all events it is good for
Churchmen of different sentiments to meet together and to learn by
actual observation what manner of men their brethren are.
Prejudices are removed, and respect gives place to suspicion and
dislike. Collisions may occur, but they will be fewer at each
succeeding congress. Men will learn, in the wise language of the
Bishop of Melbourne, to reason and not to declaim, and possibly
to reserve the expression of their assent or dissent till they have
heard all the speakers had to say. It will be seen that I regard
the Church congress as one of the most important of modern
institutions. I used any influence I had, to induce my friends to
attend, and to give a practical turn to the discussion, and on
meeting some who were charged with the arrangements for the
next meeting, I ventured to point out what seemed to be desirable
in order to ensure more complete success.
Another assembly which interested me greatly was a Meeting
of the Mechanics of the Midland Railway at Derby. In a large
building constructed by the Company for the men to dine in, the
Mechanics assembled at half-past twelve o’clock. The Bishop of
the Diocese, the Archdeacon of Derby, and some clergy and
friends were present. The Bishop read a few Collects, I addressed
upwards of 1000 men, who filled every corner of the large
building, while others clustered around the open windows. The
Bishops of Loudon and Oxford had addressed them on former
occasions. I received an invitation to do so from a Committee of


the workmen, one of whom, in the name of the rest, thanked me
for my address, which they undertook to publish. The Manager
of the department kindly extended the dinner hour to half-past
one, in order that the service might not be shortened ot its due
proportions. I learned that many of the men met every
morning at their breakfast hour, when one of the Clergy, or, in
his absence, one of themselves, conducted their devotions and
read a portion of Scripture.
I also visited several Institutions where females are employed
as trained nurses or as deaconesses. My friend, the Bev.
Dr. Howson, supplied me with valuable information on the
subject, and few persons have done so much as he to diffuse
correct and practical views upon it. My impression was decidedly
favourable, and I see no reason why some modification of such
a plan should not he adopted in this city.
It will he gathered from what I have said that my visit to
England was one of great interest, of much enjoyment, and, I
trust, of some benefit. Strangely constituted indeed must he be
who can visit that great and blessed country, the very cradle and
asylum of Bible truth and human freedom, the source and centre
of all that can elevate and sanctify the human race, without deep
emotions of gratitude to Glod that there is such a kingdom in this
fallen world, and that it is his privilege to be a subject of the
British Crown. Eor there he sees a constitutional monarch,
mindful only of the well-being of the people; a Court in which
every domestic virtue has received the highest exemplification, and
where the deep sorrows of life have drawn forth the sympathy of
a nation, while high and low alike feel that they have the help and
affection of the mother of her people, ever ready to be directed
towards themselves; where all classes are being bound together by
the consideration of the peer for the labouring man —by education
diffused through all ranks —by religion acting as salt in the land,
by Christian effort meeting all the ills of life by the diffusion of
every good, and by legislation wisely seeking the relief of the
masses, yet declining to entrust the affairs of a great nation to
those who have the least stake in its prosperity. The recognition
on the part of the rich that wealth has its duties and responsibil-


ities, has been nobly met in the case of the distressed operatives
of Lancashire with intelligence, patience, and gratitude. There
were other sources of enjoyment common to all who return to find
friends and relatives with loving hearts and open arms, rejoicing
to receive them. To me there was given the peculiar satisfaction
of seeing the progress that had been made in the three parishes
which once claimed me as their pastor. In each of them my visit
was a source of mutual gratification and thankfulness. In the
two country parishes the clergy are doubled in number, and
excelling in labour. At Edge Hill, the parish near to Liverpool,
all that I could desire, was wisely and successfully accomplished.
My reception by the authorities of the ancient borough, the
munificent body which governs the town of Liverpool, was
gratifying to one who, for twenty years, had gone in and out
amongst them.
Erom the Archbishops and Bishops of the United Church, I
received all the kindness and sympathy which they might be
expected to show to a missionary or to a colonial brother in the
episcopate. It was instructive and edifying to be again permitted
to see how Christian work is carried on in every land by the great
societies of the Church, and to share the enjoyment of Christian
households, to see the children of beloved friends, for whom we
had answered at the font, growing up in the fear of Con, and
devoted to His service in their respective stations. It was useful
to be brought into an atmosphere in which to love and honour
God was the end of life, and in which the servants of a Heavenly
Master moved joyously onward to meet their Lord. In Ireland
especially was I struck with the warmth and energy displayed in
carrying on the Redeemer's work, and more especially by young
men of family and education.
The interest of my visit would have been less had I not the
satisfaction of knowing that it was in many ways useful to the
colony and to the Church.
In thirty different places in England, Scotland, and Ireland, I
delivered lectures on Australia, besides the sermons in which the
subject was mentioned, and the effect of what was said may be
judged of by the fact that I had frequent applications for


information as to the best mode of getting to that delightful land,
where the sun is so bright, the wages are so good, and land is to
be had on such easy terms. lam sorry to be obliged to add that
the circuitous procedure of assisted emigration seemed to throw
the already great distance into the region of the indefinite and
impossible. One advantage at least of my lectures was to give to
many persons a lesson on geography, and to impart to them some
idea of the position of New South Wales. The Coptic Patriarch
at Cairo was the only instance of my want of success. Notwith-
standing the efforts of my intelligent friend, Rev. J. T. Lieder, it was
impossible to convey to him a notion of the Southern hemisphere.
A lively interest is taken in England on the subject of
emigration to these colonies. I had early an interview with Miss
Rye and her friends; assisted at a meeting at Mr. S. Grurney’s,
where our friend Mr. Browne gave the ladies and gentlemen
assembled under the presidency of Lord Radstock, and with Sir
E. Buxton in the Company, some excellent advice. I was also
present and spoke at a meeting (of which Lord Lyttleton was the
Chairman) of the National Emigration Society, Mr. Arthur
Hodgson being the Secretary, and representatives of the colonies
being on the Committee. I also visited the Government
Emigration Office under its able Secretary (now Commissioner)
Mr. Walcot. There is every desire on the part of philanthropy,
and all readiness on the part of Grovernment, to assist in sending
out suitable persons—and I must confess to a feeling of great
regret when, in reply to able-bodied labourers and intelligent
mechanics, and excellent female servants, I could only say that if
anyone in Sydney paid the required deposit they would in time
reach the colony. It was no part of my business to speculate in
such a scheme, or I might have sent out great numbers who
would have been valuable additions to the orderly and intelligent
portion of this community.
The munificent contribution of this colony to the Lancashire
Relief Fund every where called forth warm expressions of gratitude
and admiration. In justice to the gentlemen to whom the
disposal of it was entrusted, I must say that the application of it
to the support of Schools was regarded as very judicious. The


Schools were the means of preserving multitudes from one of the
worst effects of the Cotton Famine —enforced idleness. Young
persons were removed from great temptation; numbers of them
received a degree of education which their early employment as
children had prevented them from before attaining; young men
became qualified for a higher position ; young women, learned to
sew and cook, and many of all ages heard the Word of G-on, and
were taught to pray by means of these Schools. Moreover they
received a meal for their sustenance as well as food for their
minds. The application of the New South Wales subscription
gave a distinctness and prominence to that contribution which, in
addition to the great usefulness of the object, I for one supposed
would have been very gratifying to the subscribers.
On the much agitated question of transportation I may venture
to observe that there is not any ground for supposing that the
British people will sanction, or the Government propose, a
scheme of transportation to any part of Australia. I was
frequently appealed to, and I never met with any one who, on
being made acquainted with the evils of the system, and with the
facilities for passing from one colony to another, did not at once
acknowledge that it would be a grevious wrong and an injury to
be resisted in every possible way, to send convicts to any part of
Australia. We have much more to fear from New Caledonia,
which, it is understood, is about to become a penal settlement.
In conclusion, I would observe that while both in England and
the colonies the Church may be said to have fallen upon evil
times, I am disposed to adopt the advice of the Wise Preacher—
“ Say not thou what is the cause that the former days were better
than these ? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.”
If you say that new and strange forms ot evil appear, I admit
this fact; but I ask you to admit another, that never in modern
times was the Church more active in the diftusion of the principles
of truth and righteousness than now. If the powers of evil are
mustered for the war, the opposing powers are not wanting in
numbers, courage, and fidelity. It the Church of Borne is
everywhere putting forth its efforts, it is met in Italy and in
Ireland by the free and increased circulation of the AV ord ot God.


If infidelity is audacious, the advocates of truth are numerous,
able, and successful. The work of Archbishop Sumner on the
“ Evidences ” is accepted by the French Clergy as a satisfactory
reply to one of the recent attacks upon Christianity. Pure
literature displaces the corrupting wickedness of infidel or
licentious publications. “ Woman’s work is never done,” and we
see this newly exemplified in Bible women, trained nurses, and
deaconesses of various kinds. A sentiment expressed by a
departed friend of my own, the late Bishop Shirley, has often
occurred to me: “Itis a glorious age to live in.” It is an age of
activity, energy, progress, in which if a man wishes to advance
right principles in any direction, he finds free scope for all his
powers- —many to help him, many to pray for him, many to work
with him —a great door, and effectual, is opened, though there be
many adversaries.
The practical lesson I desire to learn and to impress on your
minds, is to seize the present opportunities of doing our Master’s
work. Gfon has largely blessed the Church of England in this
colony. The wise administration of the diocese, by our friend,
the Dean of Sydney, during my absence, has greatly increased
our union, and consequently our strength. The able management
of the Church Society by Canon Alewood, seconded by the
Committee, is sufficiently evident in its prosperous condition.
I thank them and the clergy and laity for all that they have done.
I thank the Giver of all Good for the evidences of peace, order,
and progress which meet me on my return. I see no reasons for
despondency, many for encouragement and hope.
Let us then pray and labour. Let us look to our Divine
Master for direction and strength.
Let us learn His meek and lowly lessons, let us make His
work the end and satisfaction of our life, and we shall be blessed
and prospered by Him.
There are difficulties, no doubt —let us meet them in prayerfid
dependence upon His help, and in the spirit of union and
confidence. We have opponents, let us disarm them by the
purity of our motives, by kindness, by blamelessness of life. Let
us thus engage the sympathies of all that is good, and wise, and


truly great in the sight of (xOD, and we may rest satisfied that
neither by our Master, nor by those who love Him, shall we be
lightly esteemed. Every true well-wisher to the Colony will
bless us in our work and pray for our peace and well-being in the
land. Above all we shall enjoy His favour and receive His
blessing in whose favour is life and whose loving-kindness is better
than life.
Mr. Stuart said that, from the attention with which that
large assembly had received the interesting address of their
revered Bishop, he felt sure that he was not out of place in
asking the persons present to accord to him their most hearty
thanks. The Bishop had shown that while far from them his
thoughts had still been with them, and that, while seeking to
regain his own health and vigour, he had been actively engaged
in furthering the interests of their Church in the Colony. They
might also ask to have the address which had just been delivered
printed, so that by its distribution the Members of the Church of
England in the Colony might rise to a full appreciation of the
privileges they enjoyed, and that it might be seen that their
Church was a Church of reform, of progress, and of the people.
The Dean oe Sydney trusted that he might not be considered
out of place in suggesting that the thanks of the audience be
given to the Bishop by acclamation. The suggestion was
concurred in, and the vote was carried amidst warm applause.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George Street, Sydney.


