

CA \
o </- y
QUEENSLAND MINERALS AT THE COLONIES
EXHIBITION, 1886.
FROM THE MINING JOURNAL.
The metalliferous ores exhibited by the Queensland Commis-
sioners and a few private exhibitors are arranged round the
south-eastern portion of their Court, and opposite to the
equally fine display of ores and other mining products sent by
the Department of Mines, Sydney, New South Wales, The
centre of the Court is occupied by a gold trophy, about 21 ft.
high, designed and erected by Mr. J. N. Longden, engineer to
the Queensland Commissioners. The base of the trophy is
divided into compartments containing specimens of ore from the
following eight gold fields : ?The Palmer, Ravenswood, Charters
Towers, Norton, Mount Morgan, the Etheridge, and Gympie.
Selected specimens of gold quartz are associated with these,
prominent amongst which are those of Messrs. Mossman and
Pearen, Although in themselves rich, these examples cannot
vie with the dazzling specimens of gold shown by the Commis-
sioners of New South Wales and Victoria. Surmounting the
base of the trophy is the frustum of a pyramid, ] 2 ft. in. in
height. At the top it is 3 ft. 8f in square, and at the bottom
6 ft, 54 in. The cubic contents as per Mint measurement is
332 ft. The frustum is gilded to imitate a solid mass of gold,
representing the 4,840,564 ozs. procured from the Queensland
mines since the first discovery of gold in 1861, after the separa-
tion from New South Wales. This quantity is valued at
17,623,284/., and gives an average of 1 oz. 10 dwts. 16 grs. to the
ton of quartz raised, and is said to be the highest average
known. A large gilt cube has also been prepared to illustrate
this, the edge measuring 6 ft. 4T in., and a series of smaller
ones to represent the gold output of the more important
gold fields. In the general collection each ore or vein-stone
is accompanied by examples of its country rock with hanging and
footwall. By this arrangement a comprehensive view is at once
obtained of the associated rocks of the lode, whether aqueous,
igneous, or metamorphic. Tailings are freely shown, and a few
metallurgical products. An excellent catalogue has been pre-
pared for the Commission, with much descriptive and local infor-
mation, and from which we have drawn freely for the facts com-
municated in our article. The ore exhibits commence with those
of the Palmer gold field, which is situated in Capo York Penin-
sula, and is the most northerly gold field in the Australian con-
tinent. When first opened mining operations were confined to
alluvial workings, but these gradually gave place to ? reefing.?
The aurifereus belt covers an area of 2000 square miles, and has
yielded nuggets of from 2 to 100 ozs. and over. The Palmer gold
is very pure, and with two exceptions only, fetches the highest
price of any in the market. When first opened the alluvial dig-
gings supported a population of 20,000, but this number is now
greatly diminished. The cube constructed by the Brisbane Com-
missioners to represent the gold from the Palmer, measures along
its edge 4'044 ft. Bulk specimens of the ore, forwarded by Mr.
H. St. George, will be found in the trophy.
The following figures illustrate the comparative richness of
some of the claims on the field:?
Name. Quartz raised. Gold.
Comet reef Tons 1,665 Ozs. 3,619
Queen of the North 6,884 .18,849
Hart?s Content 678 2,368
St. Patrick 977 1,060
Much of the auriferous quartz ot the Palmer is accompanied
by a sulphur yellow deposit through the laminae, which is locally
held to be the best indication of the presence of gold. Argenti-
ferous galena is said to occur, and a specimen is exhibited which
assays 60 ozs. of silver to the ton, but the exact locality is not
known. A dyke, said to be a ? geological feature of the field,?
and traceable for many miles, consists of dolerite, while examples
of cassiterite both as stream tin and lode tin are exhibited from
the Phcenix Mine, Cannibal Creek, The total output of tin from
the Palmer for 1880 was 759 tons 15 cwts., valued at 38,000/. On
Granite Creek stream tin occurs associated with gold, as is occa-
sionally observed in other stream tin districts.
Tinaroo Mining District. ?Comprises the Coolgara, Irvinebank,
Scrubby Creek, Newell Town, Eureka Creek, Tate River, Silver-
field, and Mount Garnet gold fields. The staple product is tin.
The enormous advance made by Queensland in the production of
this valuable metal is shown by the fact that in 1872, 1383 tons
were raised, valued at 96,840/.; whilst in 1881, 106,448 tons were
obtained, worth 2,168,790/.; but since then there has been a
steady diminution in the output, consequent probably on the
working out of the stream tin. The Tinaroo district, of which
Herberton is the commercial centre, has yielded beside tin?
silver, gold, copper, and bismuth. Local enterprise has success-
fully erected machinery for the manipulation of these metals
to the value of 56,000/. From Silverfield, and also from
Newelltown, are exhibited specimens of decomposing argenti-
ferous galena, similar to that found in Derbyshire, and to
which Dr. T. Thomson gave the name of supersulphuret of
lead. The unaltered ore at Silverfield reminds one of some of
the fine grained Spanish and Sardinian ores, though so much
richer in silver. An uncommon association of stibnite and galena
comes from the Victoria claim ; whilst from the Cumnor claim is
an argentiferous galena stated to assay from 800 to 1400 ozs.
silver to the ton, an extraordinarily rich return. A good deal
of this silver is probably distributed through the galena in the
form of free sulphide. Argentiferous-ferruginous earths, and
nodules of horn silver (silver chloride) of fine quality, assaying
from 1000 ozs. per ton, are shown from the Mount Albion
claim. In Pinnacle Lease, Gregory Gully, cassiterite occurs
with pink orthoclase, which appears to belong to a granite rock,
and decomposes into a kaolin. At Return Creek, Coolgara,
cassiterite crystals are found having the usual made form; and
from the Grand Junction Line claim the same mineral occurs in
a compound of mica and quartz, resembling the German greisen,
a frequent associate of tin in all tin-bearing districts. The
North Britain claim has afforded mispickel crystals, accompany-
ing cassiterite in quartz, resembling the same association in
Cornish mines. Asbolane is said to occur at Mount Garnet, and
if in sufficient quantity it might be Utilised for the manufacture
of Smalt. At this locality, which is about 35 miles from Her-
berton, an outcrop of carbonate of copper occurs, estimated at
4000 tons, and stated to assay 20 per cent, copper. Another
frequent associate of tin?viz.. Wolfram?is found in the great
northern prospecting claim, Herberton. The Three Star claim, at
the same place, ? presents the peculiarity?almost without
parallel on the field, although so common in Cornwall and else-
where ?of an elvan dyke, containing payable tin ore.? The
Azurite found in the North Australian claim much resembles
that from the Burra Burra Mines, South Australia, The peculiar


alternate laminfle of cassiterite and quartz of the Christmas Eve closely resembling that from the celebrated Costerfield Mines of
claim strongly resembles its congener in parts of Cornwall,
where it appears to have replaced the killas. Three splendid
and very rich bulk specimens of tin ore are exhibited by Mr.
J, C. Baird, of Cooktown, from the Prospect Gully, Herberton.
The mineral Bismuthite has been found at Coolgara, and would
be valuable if in quantity, as it occurs in bulk at but few
localities. In the Caledonia and Wanderer claims, near Silver-
field, Blairs claim, near Coolgara, Little Wonder and Comet,
near Irvinebank, cassiterite is said to occur in hematite. The
specimens exhibited, however, are probably Turgite, a lower
hydrate of iron than Limonite or brown hematite. The same
association of minerals occurs in the Black Rock claim, Eureka
Creek, and is probably derived from the decomposition of a
chlorite, very rich in iron, as the reddish-brown chloritic
mineral is very distinct on some of the specimens. A very in-
structive ? Report on the Tin Mines of Herberton, Western
Thompson's Creek districts ? (foolscap, Brisbane, 1888), has been
published by the Government Geologist for Queensland, Mr.
R. L. Jack, F.R.G.S. In this Mr. Jack lays great stress on the in-
timate connection of the tin deposits with metamorphosed igne-
ous dykes. He says?? Tin occurs in floors, veins, or pipes,
among the joint planes of the dykes.? He believes that the tin
was carried up either with the dykes in a molton condition, or in
solution along the lines of the dykes. These metamorphosed
dykes are traversed by secondary dykes of el van, two of which are
known to be stanniferous. At the Rose of England claim, Eureka
Creek, however, the lode is traversed by a Diabase dyke. At
more than one claim, such as the Barossa, Cumnor, and Silver-
field, near Silver-field; the country rock resembles an arkose ; but
it is probably only a decomposed granite, as is distinctly the case
in some other specimens.
The special private exhibit of Messrs. John Moffat and Co.,
comprising ordinary and argentiferous-galena, argentiferous
earths, and iron ores, lode tins, and dressed tins far surpass
anything of the kind elsewhere exhibited in the building
in its completeness. From the Victoria claim there is
fibro-larninar galena, assaying from 65 to 114 ozs. per ton;
from the Albion claim, argentiferous each (silver-chloride), yield-
ing 880, 875, 2814,424, 571, 392, and 522 ozs, silver respectively,
whilst the argentiferous iron ore (Limonite) contains 74 ozs. silver
to the ton. The tins (lode, stream, and dressed) from upwards
of 50 claims on the Irvinebank district are most instructive.
Many of these are bulk specimens, and exhibit the character of
the ore remarkably well. Finally, Messrs. Moffat has sent the
materials for a fine tin trophy, containing about 20 tons of me-
tallic tin in ingots, set off with bags of dressed tin, a series of tin
ornaments, and blocks of rough ore and country rock. A similar
exhibit is that of the Herberton Local Committee, who, in addi-
tion to the above ores, show cassiterite asociated with garnet,
and a long series of silver ores from the Kohinoor and North
Queensland Silver 'Co., Newelltown, containing silver varying
from 100 to 209 ozs. per ton. A bulk specimen of cassiterite,
4 cwts., is shown from the North Australian Tin Mining Com-
pany. It is said that tin ore valued at 50,0007 was obtained
from this mine in two years by six men only: 29 samples of
crushed and prepared tin ore are exhibited by the Herberton
Bischoff Tin Crushing Company.
Hodgkinson Gold Field is situated about 60 miles south-west
of Port Douglas, the commercial centre being Thornborough. It
is now chiefly a ?quartz reefing? field. The countr}'- rock of this
field, like that of the Palmer, consists of slate and schist of sedi-
mentary origin. Mr. R. L. Jack, in his ?Report on the Hodg-
kinson Gold Field? (foolscap, Brisbane, 1884), describes the bed-
rock as varying from shales to conglomerates. He divides the
quartz reefs into two groups ?one coinciding with the strike of
the country strata, the second group at right angles to the latter,
and probably belonging to a period subsequent to the first. Ex-
cellent examples of auriferous quartz are shown from the Hodg-
kinson : 1859 tons have been raised at the Black Bali claim since
March, 1877, yielding 1672 ozs. gold, or an average of 1 oz. odd
per ton Again, the total crushings of the Tyrconnel claim have
been 10,875 tons, with a yield of 17,494. ozs. of gold, and some
60,0007 worth has been taken from the mine. Fine examples of
Stibnite are shown from the Emily Antimony Mine, Northcote,
Victoria. The process carried out at the Emily works is illus-
trated by a series of specimens from the crude antimony ore to
the production of the regulus. The association of gold with Stib-
nite is not a frequent one, although the Craig?s Lease and Minnie
Moxham claims appear in this respect to resemble many anti-
mony mines in Victoria, where sulphide and oxide are found with
free gold.
Ravenswood Gold Field. ?The ore raised here is chiefly an
auriferous pyrites, but the gold is also accompanied by galena,
blende, mispickel, and again stibnite. The country rock is
syenitic or hornblende granite. Sphalerite (blende), aby no
means common auriferous mineral, appears to be very cha-
racteristic of the Ravenswood field: and is, in fact, by no means
an uncommon occurrence in several Queensland gold fields. It
is distributed throughout here, and is a very conspicuous feature,
especially when associated with iron pyrites. The Ravenswood
Gold Smelting Company have forwarded samples of the lime-
stone and ironstone used at their works for reductions, and the
mattes resulting from the process. In the Hillsborough claim
specular iron is found. The iron pyrites and Chalcopyrite from
the Black Jack claim are very rich in gold, yielding from 18 to
20 ozs. per ton. The country rock here consists of a mixture of
quartz and altered mica, and is probably granitic. The Ravens-
wood Silver Mining Company exhibit a good and typical series
of dressed ores, their galena assaying 350 and 400 ozs. silver and
28 ozs. gold to the ton. Auriferous lead ore is known only from
a limited number of localities in other countries. The Great
Extended Silver Mining Company have forwarded as probably
Stephanite a 2 cwts. block, which appears to be Argentiferous
Tetrahedrite; this class of ore is said to assay from 500 to
5000 ozs. silver to the ton. A cube representing the 307,5800z5.
of gold obtained from this field since 1877 measures along the
edge 2*53 feet.
Charters Towers Gold Fields has an area of 1700 square miles,
and is the most successful gold field in Queensland since its con-
nection with Townsville by rail. There is a great uniformity in
the country rock and gangue, and very little gold is visible. The
reefs when mapped out are seen to have the form of a horse-
shoe, with the convex or outer side to the south. Veins of only
6 in. wide are worked with profit, and they vary from this to
reefs of 19 ft. wide. The deepest shaft is over 1000 ft. in depth,
and the machinery on the field is valued at 156,0157 The yearly
yield of gold from quartz has been steadily increasing since 1872,
till in 1884 it reached 106,2367 18s. 9d. The following are some of
the more important returns: ?Eastward Ho and North Aus-
tralian, 460 tons, yielded 1535 ozs.; Queen Lease, No. 2, south-
west, 4992 tons, yielded 10,072 ozs.; New Queen Gold Mining
Company, 2396 tons, yielded 7505 ozs. But the Day Dawn Block
and Wyndham Gold Mining Company surpasses the whole of
them, for whilst the field in general yielded 56,791 ozs. in 1884
these two claims together produced 46,087 ozs. As an instance
of the production of one mine it is stated that the Alexandra
Hill Gold Mining Company has alone furnished 50,000 ozs. of
gold. Auriferous galena is also met with at Charters Towers, as
in the Ravenswood field. The so-called auriferous mica slates of
Mount Davenport, Lower Cape River, appear to be micaceous and
hornblendic schists, which is a rather novel and unusual matrix
for gold. The country rock on the Upper Cape River, which
carries nearly 2 dwts. of gold to the ton, appears to be a steatitic
schist. In the Bryan O?Lynn claim the joints on the granite
contain a filmy coating of iron pyrites, assaying If to
2 dwts. This is worthy of notice, as auriferous pyrites is
not often associated with granite. Auriferous blende is again
found on this gold field (Black Jack claim, Broughton) as in the
case of the Ravenswood field. In the Occidental claim, Cape
River auriferous calcite has been found with 2 dwts. gold to the
ton. In the Charters Towers gold field 1,315,221 ozs. have been
raised since 1877, which is illustrated by another gilt cube, the
edge of which measures 4100 ft. Those interested in this impor-
tant field cannot do better than consult Mr. Jack?s ? Report on
the Geology and Mineral Resources of the District between
Charters Towers Gold Field and the Coast ? (foolscap, Brisbane,
1878).
Gladstone Gold Field comprises six smaller auriferous areas ?


has published an elaborate report u On Mount Morgan Gold
Deposits(foolscap, Brisbane, 1884), from which the following
extracts are well worthy of re-publication. He believes the aurifer-
ous rock of Mount Morgan to be the deposit of a thermal spring in
the open air. In one place ? it is a large mass of brown hema-
tite ironstone, generally in great blocks, up to some tons in
weight, with a stalactitic structure The ironstone
contains gold of extraordinary fineness and is more
or less mixed with fine siliceous granules. Gradually to right and
left of the central mass the silica more and more replaces the
ironstone. It is a frothy, spongy, or cellular sinter, sometimes
so light from the enlargement of air in its pores that it floats in
the water like pumice. The gold is disseminated throughout this
siliceous deposit as well as the ironstone In another
viz., Calliope, Norton, Cania, Kroombit, the Tableland, and Long-1 with iridescent colours is well worth inspection. Mr. R. L. Jack
more. In 1884 the alluvial gold obtained was 583 ozs., and from
quartz 1550 ozs., or a gross yield of 2133 ozs., whilst the mining
plant was valued at 2650/. This gold has an average value of
31. 10s. per oz.
Norton Gold Field.?ln the No. 2 South Advance claim we
have another instance of the country rock carrying a few penny-
weights of gold, whilst auriferous galena is again present. In
the Advance P. C. auriferous calcite occurs. According to
Lock, the association of calcite and gold is with few exceptions
a particularly distinctive feature of the metal in Australia ; it is
met with both in New South Wales and Victoria. We have
already noticed its occurence on the Palmer, and it is again so
met with in the Golden Bar claim, at Rosewood, near Rock-
hampton. From Frarapton?s United Mines are some very inte-
resting specimens of auriferous spongy silica of a light-brown
colour. ? The silica has rectangular cavities, not sphoeroidal like
the siliceous sinter of a hot spring.? The average yield of gold
from this, in a crushing of 50 or 60 tons, was nearly 4 ozs. In
Nova Scotia mispickel is an almost constant companion of gold,
but it does not appear to be in the Queensland mines. It is met
with in the Frampton United.
Cania and Kroombit Diggings.?The inaccessibility of these
fields will account for the little work hitherto done on them.
The ore from the former is an auriferous copper oxide.
Calliope Gold Field. ?Auriferous stone from the Kelley's Gully
claim, without visible gold has been found to yield on crushing
2 ozs. per ton. Mr. H. Friend, of Gladstone, has forwarded large
specimens of pyrolusite and psilmelane containing from 57'0 to
74*84 per cent, available peroxide of manganese, but neither gold
nor silver. In connection with this field, see Mr. W. H. Rand?s
? Report on the Gold Fields of Raglan, Calliope, Milton (Norton)
and Cania, in the Port Curtis District, &c.? (foolscap, Brisbane,
1885.)
Rockhampton District Gold Fields.?The Canoona Gold Field,
which was the first discovered in what is now Queensland, in
1858, is situated in this district. From it has been obtained
black gold ? ? i.e., gold coated with manganic oxide of iron.
The gold follows the course of a serpentine dyke. Asbestos and
magnesite are exhibited from the Mount Wheeler Gold Field,
but although the former has been found to be auriferous in New
South Wales, no information is afforded as to its auriferous
nature here. The serpentine of Mount Wheeler, on the other
hand, was found to be gold bearing. The Rosewood Gold Field,
60 miles west of Rockhampton, is well known for its nuggets,
and although the deepest part of the payable ground is only
18 in., nuggets have been found, weighing as much as 18 ozs.
The North Star Reef, New Zealand Gully, exhibits quartz with
cavities containing very finely divided gold, which has been set
free by the decomposition and removal of the iron pyrites, which
originally filled the cavities. Perhaps one of the most interest-
ing specimens in the collection is schorl from the Union Gold
Mining Company containing auriferous iron pyrites, some of
which exists in the form of simple octahedrons. Auriferous schorl
has been found by Mr. Henry Louis in the Akankoo reef, on the
banks of the River Ancobra, Gold Coast, and it is very interest-
ing to observe its occurrence in Queensland. Another example
of an auriferous country rock, consisting of quartz and a decom-
posed felspar, is furnished by the Greenvale Gold Mining Com-
pany, with an average of 9 dwts. of gold per ton; the auriferous
blende is also present from the Niagara Falls claim, Crocodile
Diggings, and the Annie claim, Cawarral.
Peak Downs Gold Field is 227 miles from Rockhampton by rail.
Alluvial gold was discovered here in 1861, and continues to be
so to some extent now. The gold returned in 1884 amounted to
8268 ozs,, valued at 12,336/. 14s. From the Peak Downs Copper
Mine, now abandoned, native copper and iron pyrites are shown;
but the chief exhibit of these ores from this locality is that of
Mr. H. Salmon, which includes black oxide and carbonates of
copper.
Mount Morgan Gold Field is only about 22 miles south-west of
Rockhampton, and is, perhaps, the most wonderful auriferous
discovery yet made in Queensland, if not in all Australia. The
Trophy contains some roughly dressed blocks of Limonite, aver-
aging 7 ozs, gold per ton. One very beautiful stalatitic specimen
place is a band of brown hematite in large bombs, with a
mammilated botryoidal, or sometimes reniform appearance.?
He adds that the frothy siliceous sinter agrees in every respect
with the deposits of the New Zealand and Iceland geysers, and of
the hot springs of the Yellowstone River. The Mount Morgan
geyser probably dates from tertiary times, and is contemporaneous
with many of the basalts covering auriferous drifts in Victoria.
The gold is practically free from silver, 99 7-10 per cent.,
and is worth 4/. 4s. Bd. per ounce. It is the richest native gold
hitherto found. Mr. Jack adds that only about half the gold is
extracted by the ordinary quartz crushing and amalgamating
machinery ; the tailings will, therefore, prove very rich.
Stanthorpe Tin Field. ?In this stanniferous district the ore is
associated with granite or granitic detritus only, and the felspar is
invariably red. The ore is cassiterite in fine grains, together with
the ruby and amber varieties, and in combination with quartz
forms a coarse imperfectly cemented conglomerate. The tin-wash
usually lies directly on the bed rock. The tinstone was originally
in the form of crystals, and has been derived from the denuda-
tion of quartz reefs and igneous dykes, much resembling the
stanniferous greisen of Saxony. The tinstone bears a proportion
iofsto 10 per cent, of the total rock mass, Mr, Jack, who has
again reported on this district ( u Stanthorpe Tin Mining District,
Preliminary Report,? foolscap Brisbane, 1882), believes that the
future of Stanthorpe will depend, after the exhaustion of the
alluvial deposits, on the profitable working of the stanniferous
dykes. The specimens from Stanthorpe are exhibited chiefly by
a Local Committee, and they include a fine crystal of smoky
quartz, graphite, fine cassiterite crystals from Mola taberland,
fine peblDles of tinstone and stream tin. The samples of the
latter from Mountain Station Gulley, at the 6 mile, if in their
original condition and not washed, are very pure and fine. The
china clay exhibited, if it represents an extensive deposit, may
be looked upon as a valuable acquisition to the colony. The
Commissioners exhibit Hyalite, a very pure opal from the Stan-
thorpe Railway extension, accompanied by large crystals of ortho-
clase and smoky quartz.
Etheridge Gold Field. ?The examples of ore from this field
are all bulk specimens, and are exhibited in the trophy. From
the Cumberland reef is a mundic ore assaying as high as 27 ozs.
gold per ton, and a silver galena carrying 84 ozs, silver. Another
from Gilberton reaches as much as 155 ozs, per ton. A still richer
mundic ore from the Titania Reef, No. 2, assays 57 ozs. gold per
ton. According to Mr, E. A. Kayser ( u Geological and Mining
Report on the Etheridge Gold Fields,? foolscap, Brisbane, 1875),
the reefs are entirely formed of quartz, and are very rich in
minerals. A cube similar to those constructed to represent the
gold yields of Palmer and Ravenswood gold field for the com-
bined Etheridge and Woolgar fields measures along the edge
2*48 ft., and represents 290,566 ozs. gold obtained since 1877.
Normanton District.?Exhibits have been forwarded from this
district by Mr. Hann, and include bulk samples of hematite,
copper carbonate, galena, and apparently magnesite.
Kilkivan Gold Field is 44 miles west of Gyrnpie, and is chiefly
represented by Asbolite, containing 22*207 per cent, of cobalt,
and 3*510 per cent, of nickel. This mineral is of importance, as
cobaltiferous ores except lead and pyrites w r ere previously un-
known in Queensland. A serious of cobalt colours have been pre-
pared and exhibited by K. T. Staiger, and appears to be excellent
examples of their kind. Cinnabar is another product of the Kil-


kivan gold field, and appears to be now much used locally in i Messrs. Stafford Brothers. The Darling Downs coal is a hard
place of the imported material. This may be looked upon as
an important find, as cinnabar localities are limited in number.
The country rock of a portion of this district, at least, is a highly
interesting serpentine, apparently accompanied with a variety of
Enstatite.
Gympie Gold Field. ?54 miles south-east of Maryborough.
The bedrock is greenish slate, including a thick bed of calcareous
rock, containing Carboniferous fossils, and connected with an ex-
tensive development of porphyritic rocks. These are interstra-
tified with a hard blue rock ? having the external appearance of
being of igneous origin,*? but it contains an excess of carbonate of
lime ; and, according to the Hon. A. C. Gregory, in his ? Report
on the Geology of Part of the District of Wide Bay and Burnett ?
(foolscap, Brisbane, 1875), has been proved to be a sedimentary
rock, and not a greenstone trap, as originally supposed. It is
only where lime or magnesia are combined in quantity in these
slates, otherwise composed of silica and a little alumina, that the
combined quartz veins are metalliferous to any extent. Some
handsome, specimens of native gold are exhibited by Mr. J.
Pearen from various Gympie claims. Prof. Liversidge exhibits
in the New South Wales Court specimens of gold in calcite
from Gympie, another instance of the co-occurrence of these
minerals. The Gympie gold cube represents 1,129,963 ozs. ob-
tained since 1877, the edge of the' cube measuring 3?786 feet.
Masses of graphite are exhibited by Mr. C. S. A. Drain from the
Mount Bouple Plumbago Mine, near Maryborough, where the
lode is 30 ft. wide. Magnetic iron ore is not extensively repre-
sented from Queensland; but examples have been forwarded
by Mr. W. F. Tucker, from the Happy Valley, Bowen. Ipswich
Chromite is exhibited from pockets in serpentine by Mr. J. Knox,
of Brisbane, and a series of chrome colours prepared by Mr.
K. T. Staiger, In 1884, 62,085 tons of quartz were crushed on
Gympie, yielding 112,051 ozs., or an averageof 1 oz. 15 dwts. 17grs.
per ton.
Nebo Gold Field,?Ores of copper from the Mount Orange
Copper Mine are the chief products exhibited from this field.
Specimens of gold in quartz are shown by Messrs. Reckitt and
Mills from the Edith Mary P.C,
Mackay District.?Wolfram and the scarce mineral Molyb-
denite, are shown by Mr. G, Francas,
Cloncurry Gold Field.?Copper ores predominate in this dis-
trict. Some fine specimens of native copper, with black and red
oxide, malachite, tetrahedite, and again bismuthite containing
gold are exhibited. In the centre of the Court is a large block of
copper carbonate, weighing 14 tons, and assaying 27*5 per cent,
copper. It was obtained at the surface of a 25 ft. lode on the
Leichhardt river, and is exhibited by the Kelvin Grove Museum,
Glasgow. The gold output of the combined gold fields of the
Cloncurry, Calliopi, Rockhampton, Clermont, Norraanby, and
Talgai is represented by a gilt cube, the edge measuring 2?Bo ft.,
equal to 329,565 ozs, since 1877.
Coal and Coal Fields. ?The coal fields of Queensland are large
and valuable, but at present more or less undeveloped. In the
future, however, they will probably be found to be of larger extent
than any other of the Australian colonies. The coal is of both
paleozoic and jurassic age, but so far as explorations have at pre-
sent gone chiefly the latter. Coal of paleozoic age is met with in
the Bowen River Coal Field, whilst the principal mesozoic areas
are those of the Brisbane River Basin, including the Ipswich Coal
Field, the Darling Downs Coal Field, and the northern coal fields,
the chief of which are those of the Burrum and Burnett rivers.
These'all lie at a relatively higher horizon than those of the New-
castle basin in New South Wales. The Ipswich fuel is a bright
bituminous coal, easily ignited, coking well, and burning freely ;
it is largely used both for household and steam purposes.
Samples are on view from the Bundanba Collieries, exhibited by
fuel, capable of standing carriage, but does not generally coke
well. It has a large percentage of gas or oil, and is generally of
the nature of cannel. The Burrum coal is of a rich bright bitu-
minous >iature, and giving a good coke, but it is a tender coal.
A quantity is exhibited from Torbanelea Colliery, Maryborough.
Unfortunatety for the Queensland coals in the present Exhibi-
tion, they are placed in contiguity to the magnificent display of
fuel from New South Wales, and are hardly likely to have justice
done them in consequence. The industry is, however, clearly in
its infancy only, and ere long we may expect to see great strides
made in developing these fields, and the exportation of their
contents to neighbouring but less favoured colonies.
Building Stones and Ornamental Marbles.?An excellent dis-
play of cubes and oblong blocks, polished, rough squared and
tooled-up, is made a corner of the Court. Of the sandstones
perhaps those to be most preferred are the Stanwell building
stone, a rock which becomes very hard on exposure, and stands
well; a pure white sandstone, and a bluish sandstone from Heli-
don, the former of which can be had in blocks up to 8 tons in
weight, whilst the latter is suitable for internal ornamentation
of buildings, and a brown freestone from Grantham, Toowomba.
The Stanwell building stone will compare favourably with the
celebrated Grampian stone of "V ictoria. Some good homogenous
granite well adapted for building purposes, and several cubes of
syenitic granite are also shown. The ornamental marbles are
without doubt the best series of their kind displayed in the Ex-
hibition, although they are hard pressed by one or two examples
from South Australia. The Herberton marble is a very fine
stone of a dark grey brown, whilst from Gladstone there is a hand-
some dark variegated marble; but perhaps the most taking of all
is a delicate pink or salmon-coloured stone from Stanwell, which
is almost pure carbonate of lime.
Precious Stones. ?The only gems exhibited consist of a case
of precious opal, by Mr. H. W. Bond, Torrington, Toowamba.
Specimens are shown in the rough, polished but unmounted,
and others mounted as a very elegant lady?s necklet, containing
representative stones. These opals are undeniably a very fine
series. Other but poorer stones are exhibited by Professor A,
Liversidge in the New South Wales Court, from Bulla, Queens-
o
land.
Quartz-Crushing Battery?This machine is in course of erec-
tion by Mr, J. N. Longden, the Commissioners engineer, on the
South Promenade, and will be shortly in working order. It is a
five head-mill, by Messrs. John Walker and Co. (Limited), of
Maryborough, and has been specially designed for the treatment
of complex refractory ores. It is a full-sized mill, the stamps
weighing 800 lbs., newly shod, with a working duty of 10 to
12 cwts. per hour. The mill is of the latest design for the treat-
ment of difficult ores, and is the outcome of 30 years expe-
rience on behalf of the makers and erector. The whole opera-
tion of winning gold from its matrix to the production of bar
gold will be shown by this exhibit. The greatest credit is due
to Mr. Longden and his assistant, Mr, Bennett, for the manner
in which they have overcome the many difficulties attending the
erection of this fine piece of machinery.
Mr. R. L. Jack, the Government geologist, has forwarded a
collection of Queensland fossils, which are arranged in systematic
order, in continuation of the minerals.
In conclusion, we would offer a word of congratulation to the
Queensland Commissioners for their excellent display of the
mineral products of their colony. Dismissing a comparison witli
superlatively fine specimens of any one particular kind seen in
other Courts, we believe we are justified in saying that the
Queensland display of metalliferous ores will compare most
favourably with any in the Exhibition.
3 1508 00246551 1
V . J
