

AUSTRALIAN TRADE
AS AFFECTED BY THE
FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR, 1870-71.


The following Letters for the most part appeared
in The Times of August, 1870, and February, 1871,
and are republished in order to record exceptional circum-
stances which may be of future importa?ice to trade.


AUSTRALIAN TRADE.
LETTER I.
August U)ih, 1870.
The mail to Australia will be anxiously expected from
England, as well for the details of the war as for the
effects upon English commerce, and in making a few
comments on the subject the opportunity will be availed
of to show that the colonies have an immediate as
well as a prospective interest in war ; that their trade
must be adapted to a new regime, and that their
political relations with Europe may have to be revised,
if not remodelled.
At present, in the short space of four weeks, there
can be distinctly traced a marked effect upon the prices
of all commodities of Australian production. Wool
has not simply declined about 20 to 25 per cent., but
Germany and France have withdrawn from the market
as buyers, at a time, too, when stocks are heavy, and
must throughout the year continue to accumulate.
From being consumers those countries have, in many
cases, closed their manufactories ; men, instead of
making fine cloths, have become soldiers; waste or
annihilation of property has set in, and the industry of
generation is about to be diverted to other, perhaps


less useful, purposes than was originally intended. It
cannot bo prudently calculated that England will, by
an enlarged trade in woollens, apply any salutary
remedy, for the toiling millions in foreign countries
cannot now want the fabrics. Less valuable materials
must suffice, and economy will often dictate the use of
the old instead of the purchase of new materials.
Again, copper as a large product has had another heavy
blow. There was no room for much decline, it having
fallen from ,£ISO to £BO in a few years, yet it has
shown a further reduction of about £5 per ton, while
the tendencies are that contracts will be reluctantly
made, and new efforts for the use of the metal al-
together contracted. It has not been shown in recent
warfare that copper largely enters into consumption,
and it therefore has now to contend with restricted
commerce and the economical spirit engendered in
individuals by the extravagant waste in the aggregate,
and the chaotic elements of international discord.
There are some minor articles of Australian export,
such as tallow, hides, and preserved meats, which may,
under certain circumstances, be favourably affected by
the war; but in the main, prices have declined upon
markets more than ordinarily sensitive, and therefore
little or no recovery can be hoped for under the present
position of affairs.
Evidence is furnished in this retrogression upon the
exports of Australia, that the imports hence should he
cautiously regarded both in value and extent. With
the limited profits of growers and producers, wages


must rapidly attain a normal condition, the consequence
of which will be that manufactured goods will find a
limited market. Those who have engaged in this trade
of late years know that many articles of merchandise
have more often left losses than profits; drapery,
articles of luxury and fashion, the superfluities rather
than the necessities of life, must still further suffer.
Perhaps in most of these respects commerce has been
far too abundantly supplied with capital; credit has
been not only rife, but renewals have been viciously
granted; accommodation has been allowed on a scale
that will now have to be curtailed; and all heavy
stocks, whether in England or Australia, must be
brought to their true level. Hence to the extent that
prices have been maintained by fictitious means, they
must be watched in the buyers’ or consumers’ interests,
which in times like the present are certain to be in the
ascendant.
The influence of the war upon Australian shipping
is not less important than the points already discussed.
The effect on freights may be remote rather than
immediate; but if goods are still carried outwards at
low rates which have long been unremunerative to
shipowners, it cannot be so with homeward cargoes.
At all distant ports like those of Australia, freights
should rise; first, because the carrying trade will be
independent of German or Erench vessels—the latter
not important, but the former decidedly so throughout
the world ; secondly, because there must be a certain
absorption of men and ships in the actual business of


the war. Competition will thus be narrowed, but its
extent can alone be determined by the progress and
duration of the war. There is, however, a point of
immediate interest from the fact that vessels and goods
have to pay an increased rate of insurance to cover
risk of capture and seizure, another proof that the
mere prospect of war exercises a baneful influence on
commerce. To the distant colonies this will be still
more manifest when homeward cargoes are assessed
with a 20s. per cent, premium, which rate is necessary
to protect the underwriter from the contingencies of the
four to six months’ period embraced by open policies.
Even then shippers should carefully avoid sending goods
by foreign vessels; and, of course, for the honour of
the empire, the avoidance of all contraband traffic is as
incumbent on Australians as Englishmen. It is not
beyond the scope of the design to urge that no material
assistance or active sympathy can legally be extended
to either of the belligerents, and with the tendencies of
Australia, especially in the case of the Alabama, the
reiteration of the duty of neutrals is both expedient
and necessary. It is incumbent that the explicit
instructions of the Imperial Government be observed—
for the obligations of colonies in the duties of
Empire are that they shall not weaken, embarrass,
nor imperil the position that arises from an enforced
duty as well to ourselves as to continental neighbours,
and that neither in defeat nor in success the course
of England be altered or disturbed.


LETTER 11.
August 15t/i, 1870.
In none of the wars of this generation has the English
money-market shown more active sympathy than at
present with the complications which actual fighting
may lead to, either financially or politically. The distant
colonies of Australia have especially to watch this
sensitiveness, for, apart from the influence upon trade,
the mere value of money—its scarcity or abundance—
affects every interest in which they are concerned.
There may be repeated and rapid advances of the Bank
rate, meaning little else than protection to the reserves
of coin ; but credit is so disorganized that one or both
of the combatants may suspend cash payments, hoarding
will then set in, a condition that a large portion of
Europe has at present virtually adopted in and about
the seat of operations, where arbitrary values are
established, and all the contrivances of economical
science are abolished or disturbed.
Already have Australian securities fluctuated with
remarkable accuracy to what may be termed the baro-
metrical pressure of war. They have, for a short time,
been positively without a market, except of a nominal
character. Dealings, when they did occur, were at
heavy reductions in value, and now they are all alike
depreciated, which is a lesson and a warning for future
investors. Something may be attributed to an over


facile market for Australian bonds; but the real danger is
in prices upheld by advances to speculators, the loans
being encouraged and actually increased for “ premium
hunting,” and those engaged in the operations having
their highest ambition in a temporary success regardless
of all future danger. Perhaps advantages may now be
obtained in checking an ever-increasing tendency to
borrow; and shaking the belief in the absurdity that
the English money market can never be too frequently
“ tapped.” Colonial statesmen may thus awaken from
the delusion that their securities have no limit, simply
because there are vast possessions or wastes yet to be peo-
pled. In the comparatively short period of ten to twelve
years the bonded debt of Australia and New Zealand
has attained an aggregate of not less than £40,000,000.
It is time, therefore, to inquire if this has been judicious-
ly expended on durable and reproductive works, and
to pause in order to test the effect of this borrowing
policy. The question arises, can the limited popula-
tion of 2,000,000 maintain taxation necessary for the
annual interest and gradual redemption of the principal ?
Even if only partial, the colonies will find that war
is not conducive to any substantial progress. Many of
them have wasted brilliant opportunities for encour-
aging emigration, under the false plea of “ protecting”
labour, or jealousy of helping their neighbours; but now
the labourer who once was “idle all day” in the
market-place, will, for a time, be attracted by the
recruiting-sergeant rather than the emigration agent,
and Government employ of some kind or other will


absorb skilled labour instead of its finding occupation
in new fields, to the advantage both of the Colonies and
England. Those who have advocated a steady and
continuous stream of emigration, not by forced measures
or improper assistance, but attracted by good wages and
illimitable resources, cannot look back upon the past
with satisfaction. Money intended for such schemes
has been in some cases positively misapplied; the great
loans have been for public works, useful but often
premature, and extravagantly costly. Popular govern-
ment has thus frequently been the victim of local
jobbery, rather than a means for insuring wise and
prudent internal improvement. The present, then,
should be regarded as a period of inaction; and, with less
profit from colonial staples, the labouring classes will
find their imaginary “ protection ” a fitful dream, and
the embryo statesmen who have been willing instru-
ments in wasteful and unwise management of the
public lands, may find leisure for forgetting what they
never should have learnt, and learning that which may
be really useful and beneficent.
As these are appropriate times for reviewing position
and progress, the Australian colonies may now fairly
consider the policy of self-defence, which imposes new
obligations upon all distant dependencies possessing
constitutional government. That policy has been
dictated by the irresistible tendencies of facts, purely
local and immediate; but still more by an Imperial
necessity for concentrating land and sea forces, besides
escaping from the folly or wickedness of representatives


scattered over the entii’e globe. The change has,
however, to be watched, if not controlled, and, with
the immense trade and debt obligations, public opinion
may well urge the care and forethought of true
statesmanship. If these be neglected, the commerce
of Australia will decrease, for the obvious reason that
insecurity engenders a want of reliance upon the
future. Some increased expenditure is, therefore,
inevitable for armaments and defences. The beginnings
may be small, but should be effective; a foundation
that will admit of enlargement, as the occupation of
the coast line increases and wealth requires additional
security. As America was once wittily informed that
“ it is not for gin-sling and sherry-cobbler alone that
man is to live, but for those great principles against
which no argument can be listened to,” so Australia
may now be urged to rise superior to parish-like
government; to believe that debt is not prosperity;
that safe external defences are more necessary than
railroads or wires through dreary wildernesses; and
that to justify admission to the great comity of nations
there must be capable men, sound finance, and a
nobility of independence.
One of the results of the great American trouble was
the consolidation of the Canadian Dominion, long con-
tended for, and the postponement of which was the dis-
appointment of many a foremost statesman of our age.
Australian federation, in like manner, has often been
agitated. Its necessity is seen in fiscal legislation, upon
postal reform, in frontier questions, and, last of all, in


systems for dealing with waste lands. There must long
he wide differences of opinion upon all these questions,
only to be settled in periods like the present. The op-
portunity sooner or later will offer for bringing Australia
into homogeneous action, and effecting improvements in
the relations with England, to remove small internal
jealousies, bring all borrowing powers under control,
and effect methods of defence to command the respect
and confidence of nations. As England again finds that
these cannot be neglected in its larger affairs, Australia
will likewise have to follow her example, not be wanting
in preparation, nor allow any measures to weaken or
render insecure a position that must be impregnable if
prosperity is to be continued. When once these principles
are in the ascendant, the distant colonies will be
safe under the new system of government, and they
may rely upon steam and telegraphic communication
always enabling England to provide naval assistance
equal to any emergency.


LETTER 111.
February 11 th, 1871.
A pause in the great war gives another opportunity for
reviewing the position and prospects of the Australian
trade. The review can now be made to embrace the
whole results of the memorable year 1870, the accounts
of all departments, even from the distant colonies,
being nearly complete.
Before entering upon the condition of markets,
it should be observed that there have been significant
movements among merchants and brokers as to their
charge for services on imported commodities. The
rates of “middlemen” have undoubtedly had an
oppressive effect, and it has been apparent that no
Chamber of Commerce, even if established and effective
to impose a tariff, would accomplish the same results
as private competition. The beginning of the end has
long been discerned. Sometimes there has been a
division of commission or a rebate under circumstances
regarded as exceptional; at other times, and this is the
latest movement, there is the principle of a “ con-
solidated commission,” to include merchant, broker,
and even the charge for interest. Among brokers the
battle of rates has been continued even longer and
fiercer. But, after the rates for ordinary metals had


been lowered to half per cent., and on precious
metals had been reduced from one-eighth to one-
sixteenth, and at times a lower percentage, it was
unreasonable to assume that the brokerage for wool
could be continued at one per cent. Yet the “associa-
tion ” has shown a deal of that fighting which means
dying hard. The chivalry has resembled that displayed
by those who declare that “ not an inch of our territory
nor a stone of our fortresses shall be surrendered.” The
cession, however, has been made, and the stronghold
abandoned under circumstances either of expediency or
necessity. It is gratifying, now that prudent counsels
have prevailed, to believe that the bad blood generated
by twelve months’ agitation may be allowed to cool,
and that epistolary correspondence may again show the
usual amenities. To the wool trade it is enough to
state the result is the importer will in future only pay
half per cent, brokerage. Other advantages have been
gained in the warehouse charges, while the reform in
public sales is evidently only deferred, not abandoned.
Indeed, if brokers were emancipated from the patroniz-
ing control of committees, and the dry nursing of
“ associations,” they would find it much to their
advantage, especially as the public instinctively believe
that freedom of action is best for all interests concerned
in trade and commerce.
The unhealthy action of banks has, during the past
twelve months, worked its own remedy. One institu-
tion confesses to a loss of £123,000 in two half-years
following each other, the consequence of which has been


1870 :—
Australian Joint-Stock Bank
4,462 bales.
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney
9,752 „
Bank of Australasia
5,949 „
Bank of New South "Wales
4,172 „
an entire suspension of dividends. Another bank in its
last half-year’s business, cannot have lost less than
£40,000, and reports that “ the bad debts have been
unusually large.” The strongest banks have internally
shown that nothing but former good reserves have
carried them through the protracted and severe de-
pression which has attended pastoral pursuits, and these
being the basis of Australian prosperity, industrial
undertakings generally have suffered more or less in
degree, just as they have been associated nearly or
remotely with the staple productions. It would be
difficult, perhaps, to form any reliable estimate of the
banks’ losses in the aggregate, but £250,000 may
barely suffice to cover the contingencies; the consequence
of which is that in proportion as the accounts show
vigorous handling to preserve none but sound assets, to
that extent alone is the future to be regarded with
confidence and encouragement.
In the interest of the banks, not less than that of the
mercantile community, it is regretted that those institu-
tions still act as importers of wool for the sake of small
profits on realization and accounting for proceeds. This
subject received considerable attention in 1869, when it
is known that about 20,000 bales were brought to
market by such agencies. The following is the list for


There is thus an increase going forward; but the
arguments against the policy or prudence of such
business have, until now, remained unchallenged.
There is an interference with mercantile pursuits ; an
impropriety in hanks being subject to deficiencies and
reclamations, and in these times a natural suspicion
that the wool so imported may be from stations under
heavy advances, or actually maintained and conducted
on banks’ account.


LETTER IV.
13 th February , 1871.
The dependance of Australia upon its pastoral interests
is absolute enough to make the wool trade in its
condition and prospects, a subject of paramount im-
portance. The more the island-continent is known,
the clearer it becomes that following its extensive
sea-board there is a line of country tolerably good and
productive. It runs about 100 to 200 miles into the
interior; but, being mostly without rivers or other means
of irrigation, it is uncertain even for that hardy and
thriving animal, the sheep. The consequence of any
neglect in breeding has been manifested in bad
seasons, particularly after long droughts; but in the
the past year the rallying power of Australia was
again shown by the exports taking another rapid bound.
The quantity from New South Wales and Queensland
greatly increased; that from South Australia to some
slight extent; while from New Zealand there was a
large increase.
In England the price of wool, has been subject to
considerable fluctuations. Early in 1870 there was an
undoubted improvement; it was lost again as the year
advanced; and in the present season the market is very
nearly where the war, at its commencement, placed
prices. It would be unwise not to take a retrospective


view at such a juncture. The imports during the past
four years for the February or March sales have been as
follows:
1868 ... 106,227 bales.
1869 ... 117,385 „
1870 ... 72,554 „
1871 ... 76,142 „
But, as these quantities show the arrivals only, it must
be remembered that a large number of bales were
held over from last November sales, which have now to
be offered for competition. The result, however, can
scarcely be considered satisfactory, either for the past
year or the probable future. There is a chronic
condition of weakness showing itself in declining
markets, traceable to other causes than peace or war, —
to something else than a disturbed home market, or an
“ impulsive foreign demand.” Such causes operate
only in a secondary degree. There is, in fact, a
continuously increasing supply to be carefully watched
in its origin and effects. The Australian supply in
relation to that from the River Plate, shows the
following results for the past six years :
“land.
1865 ... 333,033 ... 131,710
1866 ... 348,855 ... 152,354
1867 ... 413,368 ... 192,989
1868 ... 491,817 ... 235,145
1869 ... 500,381 ... 230,145
1870 ... 549,402 ... 200,000
17


The last figures for the Elver Plate are not quite
exact, hut for all purposes of the argument may be
regarded as reliable. There is an almost similar cause
at work at the Cape of Good Hope; indeed, wherever
there are waste lands suitable for sheep, the enterprise
of the wool grower is strongly manifested. How the
result is not so much shown in over production,—
falsely so called—as in the supply having exceeded the
demand ; or it is nearer the truth to urge that the cause
and effect are not in relation to each other. The sub-
ject may he viewed in parallel directions. Look at the
British laborer, who, by somewhat rapid turns, has
emerged from fustian to coarse woollens, and now
wears an almost superfine cloth, not only on holidays,
but at most seasons when not in actual work. Com-
pare him with the French peasant, in his blouse; or
with the poor field laborer throughout the Continent in
calico garments; still more with the East and West
India native races, to whom woollen clothes are an
unknown luxury. There is, in a word, a vast extension
of consumers yet to be reached, but, until they are, the
improvement in price of the raw material must be kept
at about the present point, or, perhaps, reach a lower
basis.
The sales now going forward exhibit this result
in a remarkable degree. Fine wools, suitable for the
best home cloths, are in better demand than greasy
wool with long staple, suitable for the French dealer.
This, of course, is from the prostration of all enterprise
on the Continent. The great seat of manufactures is in
18


the northern districts of Prance, where the factories
are now either piles of ruins or military hospitals.
The weavers and spinners have become soldiers
fighting in the fields, or “interned ” in German towns.
The owners of mills and factories have been so heavily
“ requisitioned ” that they cannot show confidence
either in employing labor or embarking capital to
restore the waste of property. The only prospect
is in a very gradual improvement, during which
economy in clothing must he observed among all classes.
The Australian wool grower, then, must look more
than ever to the prices being without any permanent
improvement. His advantage will be best secured by
persevering in economy of management; studiously
looking to incidental charges being kept at the
minimum, and improving his flocks by all means
within his power. He should abandon the idea that
heavy speculations in stations will answer, and more
than all look to that frugality of banking which
is far removed from the indulgence of any vanity
about halcyon days such as deceived pioneers in cotton
and indigo plantations, and led to a luxurious system of
absenteeism, completing its career in disappointment
or bankruptcy.


LETTER V.
20 th February, 1871.
The commerce of Australia, in relation to gold, would
be a trite subject for public attention, were it not that
the normal position may now be clearly defined. The
production has been going on for twenty years, the
certain result of which is that upwards of £205,000,000
have been exported from Australia and New Zealand.
The early stages were remarkable for fluctuations; but
taking gold-finding as an industrial occupation, the re-
sults from all sources can be best seen at long in-
tervals :
1855 ... £11,700,000.
1860 ... 10,100,000.
18G5 ... 9,600,000.
1870 ... 9,850,000.
The normal condition may thus be ascertained without
disturbing the conclusion that the diggings are not to
be regarded as a veritable el dorado, of exhaustless
resources; but that the work is hard; the gains
are widespread; and the absolute profit is less than that
obtained from other occupations. To the colonies
concerned, with their limited articles of export, the
great point is that gold must continue to have many


advantages in attracting population ; exciting the love
of labor, and stimulating a spirit of adventure, —the
dominant features in all true colonization.
As to the less valuable metals, copper is almost the
only other important article of export. The changes
anticipated in its price at the outbreak of the war
have been fully realised. During six months the
market has been, perhaps, the worst in dulness, the
least satisfactory to the producer or merchant. That
the price has reached the minimum may be reason-
ably assumed from following the course of the
market during the last ten years. The highest
point was £llO in 1864, for Australian “tough
cake,” and the lowest £7O per ton in September,
1870. Then the stock in hand in England and
France was nearly at its minimum; but during the
war an improvement of about £5 per ton has been
gained, although the stocks gradually accumulating
portend danger to the holder. Copper, indeed,
can no longer he subject to the speculative principle
which regards a “ dock warrant ” as equivalent to a
bank note, and it will be a repetition of the follies of
1866 to carry on operations for a rise in the market
with only a slight improvement. With every rise the
Chilian importations increase, and there are mines in the
northern part of Australia, besides the old and well-
known mines, that would resume working to the discom-
fort of the market and the annihilation of all better
prospects. The problem of Australian mining may
yet have to be solved; but if so, its future will have


to be based on the present, not a prospective, value of
the metal. The cost of labor; the cheapening of the
machinery; the question of smelting locally, or in
England, are points to be settled: and, finally, the
propriety of supplying direct the places where con-
sumption is continuous, as is the case at present with
India. Whether copper has yet to enter more largely
into manufactures, time alone will show. The im-
portations of 1870 were almost five times the quantity
of 1850, while the exports have not been much more
than doubled, which gives ground for believing that
the genius and enterprise of trade will find means of
utilising the metal to old industries, or for use in
new materials.
Only a concluding word or two is needed as to
the general prospects of Australia. A cycle of good
seasons appears to be setting in. The harbinger of better
times will be a favorable harvest, at least for those
districts properly devoted to the growth of cereals.
The agriculturalist will have an abundant crop of the
finest wheat that can anywhere be produced. The sheep
farmer will also rejoice in plenty of feed over the great
breadth of land he occupies. It is absolutely certain
that wheat and flour must come to England. As
flocks and herds improve, tallow and preserved meats
will yield better results. The great need of caution
in the exports will not, however, diminish. Manu-
facturers of soft goods must keep to the moderate ship-
ments lately shown. Not only will the mercantile
community both in England and Australia then better


regard each other’s welfare, but it will not be over-
looked that now, and in the time to come, the population,
showing a mighty increase from natural causes alone,
will enlarge in local manufactures ; and that when the
population is again added to by any renewal of emi-
gration, it will more than ever assert an emancipation
from all external dependence.
Alfred Boot, Printer, 8, Eastcheap, E.C.


