

MR. THOMAS WALKER'S
ORATION
ON
MR. DALLEY'S OFFER OF TROOPS
FOR THE
SOUDAN CAMPAIGN
DELIVERED IN THE
THEATRE ROYAL, SYDNEY,
On Sunday Evening, February 22, 1885.
Sydney:
LEE & ROSS, STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
53 Market Street.
1885.




MR. THOMAS WALKER'S
ON
MR. DALLEY'S OFFER OF TROOPS
FOR THE
SOUDAN CAMPAIGN
DELIVERED IN
THE THEATRE ROYAL, SYDNEY,
On Sunday Evening, February 22, 1885.
TO judge by the editorials, reports, and letters in our
newspapers, by the talk at the Paddington Barracks and in
our crowded thoroughfares, and by the noise of cheering and the
array of the names of those who took part in the large Exhibition
meeting held during the week, I stand to-night on the unpopular
side of a burning question. (Hear, hear.) But I feel confident,
nay, I know Ido not stand entirely alone; and even if I did, I
should not hesitate to proceed. I have stood on the unpopular
side again and again in matters theological, as well as in other
matters before this, and I am not going to desert from duty now.
The fact is, unlike some journalists, I never ask myself the
question whether a thing is popular or unpopular; I ask if it is
right, just and wise, and if I am satisfied after investigation that
it is, I advocate it as a duty as sacred as life to me. (Applause.)
I have learned that popularity is no safeguard against error, that
repeatedly in this world’s history the unpopular has been truth
in the stage of martyrdom; the right obscured by universal
clamour, justice or liberty struggling for life oppressed by a
large but ignorant majority. Within my own brief lifetime I
have seen great peoples rush impetuously into national deeds
with some high-sounding name upon their lips ; deeds which they
have had to repent almost ere commenced. Nations as great as
the British Nation itself, have repeatedly fallen into disastrous


errors during fits of enthusiasm, and I venture to predict that our
younger and less experienced New South Wales will, when this
temporary and abnormal excitement has died away and it has
recovered its wonted sobriety, bitterly repent of its present and
ruinous folly. (Cheers and some dissent.)
I am therefore to-night to give you my candid thoughts upon
this great question, without concern for anything but to be
truthful and just. I will at once ask you if you think that those
who are about to leave our Colony to do military service in the
Soudan have troubled themselves to know what it is all about ?
(Cries of “Yes” and “No”). Have they taken pains to
ascertain whether the quarrel they are to fight in is just or
not ? (Cries of “ Yes” and “ No”). To those who cry out “ Yes,
let me say, that this is not a Town Hall meeting nor an
Exhibition meeting, so there is no fear of anyone who differs
from me being “ gagged,” nor is there fear of his being hustled
off the platform if he essays an amendment. When I have done
he can have a free platform and a fair hearing, to express his
dissensions. But if mv friends will allow one lecturer at a time
to speak, I think T shall be able to show in the course of the
evening,’ that ignorant enthusiasm, roused and fanned by a
title-seeker, has seriously jeopardised the interests of these
Colonies. ’(Cheers and dissent). Mark you, I am not
now concerned with the talk about the ultimate good that
will accrue to these colonies from the advertisement war will give
us for I believe a better road to successful advertising can be
taken than the highways of plunder and bloodshed. I cannot
detain you with the talk of the spirit of war that the present
movement will awaken, though I admit that if we can get so
many men to fight in a quarrel not theirs, in a country far from
their own and against people that have occasioned them no
oppression’ it speaks well for the time, should it ever come, when
warriors will be needed to fight for liberty, and in the defence of
the land of their adoption. (Applause.) But I simply to-night
ask myself one question : Is the quarrel with the Soudan a just
one 1 ( ries of “ Yes” and “ No.”) If the quarrel be not just, I
don’t care who undertakes it, it is a crime. This is the first point
to be settled, and yet I will venture the assertion that there are
not half-a-dozen who are now drilling for the African campaign
who really know what they are going to fight about. (A voice,
“1 >o you 1 ? ”) I have endeavoured to make myselt acquainted
with the facts, and with your permission and silence I will briefly
cite them. , . , ... ,
In that vast tract of country, to this day comparatively
unknown lying within the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer, and
stretch in» nearly from East to West of Northern Africa in
almost its broadest part, the dusky Ethiopians and the black races


figured historically even in the days of Solomon. Some of the
numerous tribes of that immense country, almost ere Europe
could be said to have a history, were known to Syria as possessing
<rreat wealth, and in Southern Europe for their war-like spirit.
One of the kings of Ethiopia is said to have fought with 10,000
men for the defence of Troy. And this king of Ethiopia was a
Soudanese, and his warriors hailed from the Soudan, and we are
shortly to land 750 recruits at Suakim, on the Red Sea, to fight
their descendants !
Though the area implicated in the present unfortunate war is
not so & extensive as to comprise the whole of the enormous
territory known as the Soudan, still we in Sydney reading about it
in the daily papers, can form no conception, from mere
statements and descriptions, of its vastness and diversity. It is
inhabited by people speaking different tongues, and of various
degrees of civilization. It necessarily, therefore, has had
numerous internal conflicts and ruptures, amounting at times to
anarchy. In 1819 Mehemet Ali, having a number of idle
troops, made this internal discord a pretext for sending his son at
the head of an army to invade the country. For this avarice the
Egyptian and all his adherents were burned to death in a drunken
fit 5 by a Soudanese ruler in Khartoum. Of course the Egyptians
did what England is doing now—took revenge ! Having gone
into a country to which they had no right, met with defeat and
disgrace, they resolved to steep their hands in blood. In 1869,
the° late Khedive Ismail, whose luxuries floated on British
capital (the soul and body of all this quarreling), having an
eye on reputed copper mines and the wealth of Darfour
found a pretext for invasion in the person of Zebehr, the
kinc- of the slave traders. Zebehr defeated the Egyptian
army. And to show how genuine the pretext was, no sooner had
Zebehr, this great slave trader (and declared by the late General
Gordon, to be the only man capable of succeeding him as
Governor-General of the Soudan), resolved upon invading
Darfoui himself, than he was taken into the Egyptian service
and with his help the reigning Sultan Ibrahim was cruelly
slaughtered, and his two sons murdered over his corpse. Zebehr
thought he ought to be made Governor-General for these outrages
in the service of Egypt, and went to Cairo with £IOO,OOO for
purposes of bribery, to plead his claims. Ismail made him a
prisoner, after thus having used him ; and he has been kept at
Cairo on <£loo a month, intriguing for rebellions in the Soudan,
ever since.
You will see then that avarice lies at the root of the Soudanese
rebellion. The inhabitants of the country have been conquered to
gratify the selfishness of the Khedives, and they have rebelled
against the conquerors.


But what has this to do with England in the Soudan ? As I
have already hinted, British capital had found its way to Egypt,
and English money-lenders virtually dictated the policy of the
Khedive and governed Egypt. The British Government
invested over four millions of money in Suez Canal shares, and
then followed the transaction of paying over ,£98,000 to the
Messrs. Rothschild for their service to the Beaconsfield Govern-
ment in this matter, and from that day to this there has been a
fever of speculation in the notorious “ Egyptian bonds.” The
government of Egypt thus shorn of independence and deprived of
national spirit, as might be expected, became unscrupulously
corrupt. The people felt themselves impoverished and down-
trodden under the foreign influence that was swaying their
destiny. Even as the Israelites they sighed for a Saviour, they
prayed for deliverance, they aspired to escape from the yoke of
this English cupidity. At last the shameless extravagance of
Ismail resulted in bankruptcy, and a brave patriot answering
to the cry of the people, rose up to free his country from
crushing despotism and corruption, and to claim Egypt for
the Egyptians. Then came the bombardment of the
historically renowned Alexandria, attended with treachery
and unnecessary cruelty, and the war with Arabi Pasha which
drained the blood of many of England’s bravest sons. This
war was undertaken for what ? Remember Arabi had
he been successful would have been the Cromwell, the
Washington, the Garibaldi of Egypt ! This war, then, was
undertaken for what 1 In the name of justice, mercy, liberty ?
No ! In the name of English gold, the gold that had sunk Egypt
to a spiritless dependency and had spread demoralisation through
a great people. (Applause.) On the one hand was Arabi fight-
ing for freedom and for patriotism, a son of the soil fighting for
his fatherland, and on the other hand were English soldiers fight-
ing to protect a few purses in the pockets of money-lenders !
After a series of reprehensible blunders, terrific battles, the battle
of Tel-el-Kebir, and the shedding of precious English and
Egyptian blood, Arabi was captured, exiled, and created a
pensioner. Surely now all is over and there shall be abiding
peace in this corner of our planet! No, for with this war the
English had assumed the responsibilities of the Egyptian rulers
and the management of the Soudan was one of these responsibil-
ities. Just as the British troops were about to withdraw
from Egypt, after having bound its rulers hand and foot, informa-
tion was received in Cairo, of defections among the Soudanese.
The present rebellion had started under the leadership of
Mahomet Achmet, the Mahdi. England’s strange and vacillating
policy in Egypt encouragd the rebellion. Yet it was to crush
that rebellion, and to evacuate the Soudan and to give it back to


those it had been stolen from, that the late General Gordon was
despatched on his fatal expedition. The Soudan was likely to
prove a little too costly to the English, so they and the Egyptians
must clear out peaceably, if Gordon could manage to effect that
end, if not, through the gauntlet of war.
The orators at the Exhibition, the journalists and numerous
correspondents have attempted through the week to justify Mr.
Dailey’s action on the score of humanity. “It is,” say they “ a
war for the suppression of slavery!” I deny it! (Applause.)
It is again a war for the pockets of England. (Hear, hear, and
applause.) When General Gordon was under the pay of the
Khedive I will admit that he issued a proclamation against slave
hunting, at the same time that he bought slaves himself, and
recognised the right of ownership to such property. But when
he went in the service of the English all previous treaties and
proclamations relating in any way to. the suppression of the slave
trade were annulled, and a proclamation was issued restoring all
the rights, or I should say, wrongs of slavery ! (Applause.) It
was to give them their rulers and the slave-trade back, so the
English and the Egyptians might depart in peace, that Gordon
ventured in the Soudan
And it is for this we are to send our men to shed their blood
in Africa ! Could they conscientiously fight if they knew these
facts 1 (No). Against a brave people fighting for their homes
and their liberties we are very shortly to despatch (50 profes-
sional fighters, who do not know why to fight, where they
are to fight, nor whom they are to fight.
For many years the Soudanese Mohammedans have been
expecting another prophet, who like their first, should spread the
glory of the Koran, and carry war into the citadels of the
Infidels. The mighty deeds of the first great prophet of Mecca
and his successors; their victories, not only in Asia and Africa,
but along the Mediterranean in Europe ; their martial spirit and
their fanaticism have been stamped upon Mahommedan thought and
have been treasured in the hearts of every devout Musselman. How
irritating it must have been, then, for the servants of the Koran,
to groan under the double oppression, as it were, of Egypt and
England ! Meditating in his subterranean retreat the present
Mahdi (who started life like Jesus, as a carpenter—a boat builder
ran away, joined several free religious schools, and at last was
ordained a sheikh, and as such extended his fame far and near
for what the Christians would call piety) came to the resolve to
expel the invaders. With surprising genius he drew rival and
conflicting tribes to his standard, and with the maxim of
Mahomet^upon their lips, “ That paradise is found in the shadow
of crossing swords,” he took the Koran and his weapons to head
his followers to battle with the infidels and usurpers. The old


spirit of the old Arabs is in their breasts ; they have fought not
like the demoralized Egyptians, but like warriors by nature and
instinct; they have met their foemen in the open field and have
rushed upon them with all the ferocity of enraged tigers, and
have more than once broken the squares of valiant British
soldiers. It is for their country, the land of their birth, the land
of their sires for which they fight. They are filled with
fanaticism —the strongest kind of cementing enthusiasm; im-
mortality hangs upon their battles ; they defend not only their
native land, but the Paradise of their souls. It would not be
wise to mistake the power of such an influence, for think what
Cromwell accomplished by it. Yet it is to the onslaught of such
a people we are to needlessly expose the lives of 750 citizens of
New South Wales ! (Applause).
Ladies and gentlemen, I should not be surprised shortly to learn
that Lord Wolseley and his men have suffered the melancholy
fate of General Gordon and his defenders. The country, so
unhealthful and uncertain to the Europeans, is the natural home
of the native warriors. They have their strong-holds in the
deserts, which are all but impassible to us. Our forces may
retake Khartoum and theirs may retire in the deserts. Our army
would then have to divide, whilst the Mahdi could concentrate
successively his whole forces upon each division and give us
severe defeats and humiliating disgrace. And this really seems
to be the plan the Mahdi has pursued up to the present. Re-
member the troops now being despatched to the seat of war, have
not only to retake Khartoum but to break up the power of the
Mahdi, and this may mean a protracted and bloody war under the
scorching sun of the equatorial deserts of Northern Africa.
(Hear, hear). I very much question if 10,000, nay if 20,000
troops can succeed in breaking up a force so advantageously
situated and so enormously preponderant.
You ask me then if I would allow the mother country to wage
such a disastrous war without help ? I reply that I would help no
country to be unjust. (Loud applause.) If my own mother
were to do a manifest wrong I should raise up my voice against
it (Hear hear) and surely the affection of a son for his mother is
greater than our ties to the soil ! The day is coming when men
will investigate before they battle, and will see that the cause is
just before they fight. (Applause.)
“ But we must avenge the death of the brave General Gordon.”
Gordon is dead, so you must spill more blood ! (Applause.)
What was Gordon doing there? What right had he and his
soldiers in the Soudan ! Is it then all honour and glory for a
white man to fight even when the battle is unjust, but all
dishonour and inglorious for a brave race to defend their
hearths and homes! Surely the homes, the temples, and


the shrines of the Sondanese are as sacred to them
as ours are to us ! Have you one law of honour
for the white and another law of honour for the black
people of the earth ? Is the same act performed by the white
and the black to be differently estimated 1 Is that treason in the
Arab which is patriotism in the Scotch ? Is it rebellion to offer
your own life 5 s blood to consecrate the land you love whilst
defending it when the skin of the soldier is tanned, whilst we
deem no act more glorious if the skin be white ? Has justice
and patriotism a varying standard, and must we respect no rights
but our own 1 General Gordon was undoubtedly a brave soldier
and a masterly general, and to my mind as heroic as Alexander,
Hannibal, or Napoleon. But no hero should be defended when
he worketh injustice, and it is our duty to be as just to our
enemies as to our friends. (Applause.)
Yes, the city is hoarse with shouting “ Gordon is dead, and our
750 shall avenge him.” (Laughter.) Brave, gallant 750 !
(Laughter.) Courageous Dailey and his contingent !. (Laughter.)
But where were you when Gordon was shut up in Khartoum
surrounded by a hostile country teeming with foes, and crying
vainly to England for help 1 (Applause.) What were you
doing when your mother-country turned a deaf ear to his plaintive
entreaties, until at last awakened by the popular rage they
started bunglingly and slowly to send relief 1 English blood had
saturated the red sands of the deserts and the Nile’s blue waters ;
officers had kissed the earth in death agonies, and Gordon himself
had cried out in his fears, but then you were pitiless ; you heard
not, you moved not, you talked at banquets and feted and
left your greatest English general to die succourless in his prison
at Khartoum ! (Cheers.) Uh ! brave contingent that rushes to
lock the stable when the steed is gone !
But in the name of Humanity I protest against further
slaughter and bloodshed, simply to wreak a revenge. Above all,
I protest against the needless shedding of the blood of my fellow-
colonists. We were not consulted when the war was started, we
have had no voice in the way it has been conducted, and why
should we be called upon to repair its disasters ? If we are to
share the burdens, we must share the counsels, of there is a
violation of the fundamental principles of sound government, and
a precedent established which may prove the parent of a brood of
fatalities.
To send our men to perish from privations, pestilence and war
in Africa is to endorse and encourage England’s blunders. If
England must fight even unjustly she should fight as becomes her
position and reputation. But she never seems to learn by ex-
perience she is always falling into the same pit—underestimating
the strength of her enemies ! When in the South of Africa she


had driven the Boers from settlement to settlement—to the North
of the Republic in the Orange Free State—the discovery of gold
mines provoked the rapacity of her sons just as the diamond
mines had at Kimberley. As she stole the diamond mines from
the Orange Free State, with a bolder design she annexed the
whole of the Transvaal. Prior to this the Zulus had been at
peace with the English, though bordering for more than a
hundred miles, and only separated from it by a stream of water,
on the colony of Natal. But the Boers had appropriated some of
their land, and of course with the annexation the troubles of the
Transvaal became the troubles of the English. The land became
the source of a quarrel. King Cetewayo was called upon to
disband his army, to allow the missionaries to return, and to
receive a British resident. Then came a frightful war, wherein
the Zulu King exhibited all the courage of the Spartans of old.
These nearly naked savages advanced in a body thousands strong
with their guns and assegais pointed upon our red coats, and
annihilated whole regiments of horsemen and infantry. Not till
British blood had deluged the earth was a force sent our
sufficiently strong to terminate the struggle.
In Afghanistan too, after the outrage' perpetrated on Shere Ali,
and Lord Lytton’s shameful dissimulation when war was declared,
the same blunder w T as made. After blood had been needlessly
and uselessly spilled, the British lion roused to roar and carry out
revenge ! (Cheers.)
And was it not even so in the after struggles with the
Transvaal, when the Boers were in rebellion against the English ?
General Colley and a few hundred men were sent to overcome
those intreped colonists of South Africa, with the result of being
nearly all massacred ?
The same mistake has been made in the Soudan. A force
sufficient to haVe held its own should have been at once
despatched, or none at all. But no, a handful of men with
wrong on their side, are sent to subdue a nation of warriors with
right on their side ! And Mr. Dailey shows his approval of such
tactics by offering a handful of our men to die inglorious deaths
as a sort of seal on England’s blunders ! (Applause).
I aver that Mr. Dailey’s offer is purely a political manoeuvre.
(Applause). And viewed calmly, is as striking a piece of tyranny
and assumption as the colonies ever saw. (A voice : “He wants
a title”). Yes, and the taxpayers here will have to pay for it.
(Cheers). There is no more of patriotism in the offer, judged by
all its surroundings, than there is in a dog of small size helping
a mastiff to take a bone from a spaniel ! (Laughter). Our
relations with England were a little strained, owing to
the imported British greed for more land whilst our own
is lying waste. Dailey, for some reason or other, which I


think we can see now, has always stood by the Home
Authorities, even more stoutly in their blunders than in their
acts of wisdom. Precipitately, therefore, at the first chance
he cries out across the seas, “ Never mind poor England,
I am here; you’re not without friends in the world just yet.”
(Laughter.) Whereupon we may imagine the desponding heart
of England revived, and Dailey instantly became better and more
favourably known than any other colonist, however deserving of
fame : for Royalty ever has honoured its toadies. (Applause).
It is the cry of “ loyalty ” that has been used to rouse the
people to this pitch of suicidal folly. The orators at the
Exhibition with the Chief Justice at their head —justice clamouring
for injustice—(who proved how chivalrous they themselves were
by refusing to allow their opponents to come into the field at
were most loud in their pitch upon that note. England now
could see, they said, that the empire was united, and Foreign
nations would stand in awe at o'ur loyalty ! We had risen from
Colonial to Imperial importance by Mr. Dailey’s genius ! Does
loyalty mean then that we must fight in all battles, just or unjust,
that England has the temerity to wage 1 I ask you which is the
better to be loyal and unjust, or to be just and yet illoyal 1 Is it
better to be loyal and wrong, or not loyal and be right ? Call
me disloyal if you will, but I will plead for humanity ! Eight
for England if you like against all justice and all honour, I will
take a higher stand and make mankind my bretheren, and for the
oppressed and tyrannised I will lift up my voice, aud if needs be
will even descend to espouse this cause amid the dangers of
physical warfare. (Cheers.)
But what possible loyalty can there be in all this furor ? The
majority of the men now enlisting would have fought for anything
and for anybody. If they had been told they were going
against the King of Timbuctoo or to capture the asylum at
Kalamazoo, the result would have been just the same. I
happened to be in Africa at the time the Basutos were at war
with the Cape Colonists. The Basutos had been ordered to give
up their arms, to hand over some cattle, accept British residents,
and take care of the missionaries—whom they mightily mistrusted
—and failing this the Cape Government declared war against
them. There was just the same sort of enthusiasm; young men
were enlisting everywhere, just for the sake of the excitement.
Anything for a change ! They went against these poor blacks,
as Caesar would have met the Suevi. That is to say they enlisted
with as much apparent ardour as would have led them to such
bravery ; but a few weeks brought some of them back repentant
fully resolved for the remainder of their lives to cultivate the
arts of peace. (Laughter). Gentlemen, take your minds back
to the time you saw the first circus. Did you not immediately


swell with the proud ambition to be a bare-back rider, or an
acrobat on the bar ? Call to mind the first son of Mars you ever
beheld. Did not his red coat put you into the soldiers mood, and
cause you to dream of the grandeur of a soldier’s life 1
“ The child
Ere he can lisp his mother’s sacred name,
Swells with the unnatural pride of crime, and lifts
His baby-sword even in a hero’s mood.”
You have, perhaps, played yourselves at soldiers—certainly you
have seen your companions at the game. You have observed
with what zest they flash their tinsel swords, and fire their little
pop-guns. They are in earnest though their weapon is only a
pea-shooter. Just so. And we now witness the farce of getting
750 of our citizens to go through the same absurdity whilst we
stand by to cheer and encourage them ! (Laughter and applause.)
They are just playing at soldiers, probably for the most part Jed
to ic by the prospects of a cheap trip across the sea to Suakim.
(Laughter.) They can be of little, if any use to anybody, for
they are not really soldiers. They are simply raw recruits. A
man comes out of the streets into the barracks, gets presented
with a red coat and a helmet, and he is immediately transformed
into one of our soldiers, and we look upon him with pride.
(Laughter.) Of a truth it is an easy method of making _ warriors.
(Laughter.) Yet the British Empire would fall to pieces, and
“ the greatest military power ” in the world perish if we did not
send 750 such gallant warriors to die in the Soudan. (Laughter.)
Really, Mr. Dailey has made us a laughing stock in the eyes of
the civilised nations of our globe ! (Applause.)
The most astonishing feature of all this hubbub is, that even
our Exhibition orators admit that England does not need our
help. Just imagine “Great” Britain needing the help of 750
fresh made soldiers from the colony ! If she does, surely Nemesis
hangs over her, and her ruin is hopelessly beyond recovery ! No,
she does not need our help, and has even refused the help of other
Colonies where the Piemiers are evidently not such favourites
with the Home Cabinet. She has apparently only accepted pur
proffered aid to distract attention from the affairs in the Pacific.
(Hear, hear). Now nobody talks of New Guinea. The
conversation is no longer on Bismarck and annexation, but
on the Mahdi and war. Yesterday we were going to demolish
Europe—to-day we are satisfied to send men to die in the
Nubian deserts !
Then if our men are not needed it is nothing short of
murder to imperil their lives and send them to untimely graves.
(Cheers.) You have all heard of the man who enlisted
the other day, and then quarrelled with his landlord. In that
quarrel the recruit—the hired murderer, sworn in to kill


Arabs —killed his host. He will be tried for manslaughter
Why should he be? Had he not just been licensed to kill?
He had the enlistment ticket m his pocket at the time.
Was not that license enough? What is the difference
between a murder in the Soudan and a murder m W 00l oomooloo ?
This difference : In this case, the man had a quarrel with his
landlord ■ they agreed to fight over it, to settle their own disputes
in that way. was an excuse for the fight however poor
PXCUS e might be. But if that same man had been sent to
Africa he might have killed dozens of people, with whom he had
no quarrel and whose lives might be worth inestimably more than
his ! I repeat unjust wars are nothing but legalised murders.
(C But now mark how all this has been brought about It is the
sheer audacity of one man. (Cheers). I wonder will the
thoughtless populace of Sydney, who destroy our public meetings
by their want of fairness, I wonder will they cheer so loud y
when they have to pay for these fireworks and spangles ! (No).
Husbands and fathers are to betaken away from homes thus
rendered desolate and forlorn, to earn distinction for a politician,
and the Colonists who remain behind are to have their taxes
increased, their poverty deepened their miseries multiplied alone
for that end. (Cheers). I say alone for that end because all the
i in go advocates admit that our 500 infantry are neither asked for
nor wanted. An elephant in the prime of its strength went out
to labour and on its way a mouse—that stood m great dangei
of being crushed under the elephant’s feet—offered to render
its help To flatter the mouse, the elephant accepted and that
mouse was Mr. Dailey with his raw contingent. (Loud laughter).
I hold that Mr. Dailey is culpable in the highest degree to
involve the colony to such an enormous extent at the inspiration
of a sudden caprice. Whatever his ambition for the honours the
fin-o imperialists may have to bestow, to pledge the colony to
the & extent of hundreds of thousands of pounds without any
authority whatever, is nothing short of atrocious tyranny and
impertinence. Before taking such an unprecedented step the
people’s representatives, if not the people themselves should have
been consulted. (Hear hear.) For it is not as though we had
so much wealth in the treasury that it required an expensive
political hobby to give it an outlet. The money for this expedi-
tion of death will have to be borrowed, and the tax-payers will
not only have to pay the debt but the interest upon it No
Furonean Prime Minister would have dared to have gambled with
thTSi oi the people as Mr Dailey has done. He has offered
the blood and the bread of the people for years to come ; he is
sendin- the supporters of families from our land, and has placed
a terrible burden on the shoulders of a rising colony. All this


he has done as though the people were so many cattle waiting for
his word, not only to struggle but to die. He ! the great
Mr. Dailey, offers our troops and resources ! He, alone, seizes
the helm of the nation and deliberately turns her prow to the
rocks ! I hope when Parliament meets he will receive his reward,
and if it should be that our Representatives should be carried
away by the fireworks and fail in their duty, that the country
will rid itself of such dangerous self-seekers at the next General
Election. (Cheers.)
At the very time that the present Government is taking
advantage of the poverty of the people to secure underpaid
labour, whilst they have been using the unemployed with the
apparent aim of reducing the wages of toil, whilst they have
voted over fifty thousand pounds to bring people here from the
old lands, now we are to expend thousands upon thousands to
send them away again! All this, of course, is patriotism !
Splendid patriotism, on Mr. Dailey’s part, is it not 1 A patriotism
that proposes to tax that very labour the Government has helped
to impoverish. (Applause.) But if Mr. Dailey is such a patriot,
and as he is so ready to risk other people’s fortunes and lives,
why does he not go to the front himself ? (Laughter, and pro-
longed cheers.) The country could easily spare him, and he
should be in his element at the head of the New South Wales
contingent. In violation of our Constitution, with supreme
contempt for Parliament and people, and with a total indifference
as to necessities and results he has implicated this colony in an
unjust and shameful war, and I say earnestly he should be the
first man to shoulder arms and offer his bosom to the shots of the
enemy. (Cheers).
In the meantime, let us hope, almost against hope, that our
men will return to the families they have deserted, and to the
country that has sent them on their revengeful mission. Let us
hope that they will have gained wisdom by their experience, and
that they will come back improved in every way. I earnestly
hope this. If they are created soldiers by actual experience—if
they are not kept in the harbour at Suakim or in the garrison at the
Port, or sent to watch the navvies at labour in a part secure and safe
—good and well ! It may be, a time will come when it will be
necessary to protect this land of ours ; when we shall need soldiers,
and when we shall all be called upon to fight. If their experience
can serve us then, so much the better—we will condemn their
present folly so much the less. In the cause of our national life,
for liberty against tyranny, for Australian independence, for the
State of which we are citizens, for our homes under the Southern
skies, there is not a man here but would fight if the need came.
War then, and then only would be just, and only the coward
would shrink from it. But we protest to-night against a war


with the very people who, in their own land, are doing this, who,
as Mr. Gladstone himself officially stated, are “ rightly struggling
for their freedom
For those who remain behind is left the duty of opening up the
country and developing its resources to pay for this trip. If only
that money were spent on water-conservation, irrigation, road-
making, and railway lines to productive districts ; if it were only
spent on improving our streets or reclaiming the wastes, how
much better would it be for us ! But it is for a war of revenge—
not even that; but for a title for Mr. Dailey !
Mr. Walker in his peroration recited the “ Speech of Henry Y.
at Harfleur,” and appealed to the people to protect their country,
not only from political despots in their midst, but from all
despotism that threatened their liberties or their independence.
On resuming his seat he was cheered for some minutes. A
resolution was moved condemning the action of our Government.
It was duly seconded and carried (with only three dissentients)
amid great enthusiasm. The audience then volunteered to
subscribe the amount for the publication of the lecture, and it is
published accordingly by the
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
OF THE
4iiIS&MSMI ilffilMtt ftSSeCMtmi,
Offices—2o OXFORD STREET.
Thomas Walkek, President
• H. Robinson, Hon. Sec.
Members’ Subscription —Ladies, Is. 6d.; Gentlemen, 2s. 6d.; Families, ss.
per Quarter, paid in advance.


