





THE
LIFE AND GENIUS
JAMES LIONEL MICHAEL,
FIFTEEN YEARS’
EXPERIENCE OF LITERARY LIFE IN SYDNEY,
Being the substance of a Discourse delivered at the School of Arts,
Sydney, on Thursday, July 16th, 1868,
By J. SHERIDAN MOORE,
|}rinxipal hi |lanbfcick ChUtgt.
J. FERGUSON, GEORGE STREET.
1868.


PRINTED BY GEORGE LOXTON AND COMPANY
QUEEN’S PLACE.


THIS BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCH AND VINDICATION
OP THE
LIFE AND GENIUS OF A GIFTED MAN,
IS EESPECTFULLY INSCEIBED TO
NICOL DRYSDALE STENHOUSE, Esq., M.A.,
IN EECOGNITION OP HIS UNWEAEIED DEVOTION
TO THE CAUSE OP POLITE LETTEBS IN AUSTKALIA,
BY HIS GEATEPUL PEIEND,
J. SHERIDAN MOORE
SYDNEY, JULY 18tH, 1868.




LIFE AND GENIUS
JAMES LIONEL MICHAEL.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
I know no better or more appropriate way of beginning
my discourse this evening, than by adopting (slightly adapted to
my present purpose) the words of Macpherson’s Ossian in the weird
rune of “ Temora.” “My soul,” sang the warrior-bard, “ feels
a want in our joy. The head of one tree is laid low. The stormy
wind pours in on Selma. Where is the voice of our friend 1
* * * * * Ye are silent in my pi'esence! He is then no
more ! Joy meet thee, departed one, like a stream of light. Swift
be thy course to thy fathers, along the roaring winds ! Ossian,
thy soul is fire : Kindle the memory of the King !”* Ah, my
friends, on an occasion like the present, mingled memories sweep
across the soul. They are at once sad and pleasant; or rather
there is a sad pleasure in dwelling on them : for while they give us
glimpses, and as it were luminous hints, of many bright scenes in
the varied landscapes of the Past, they are equally suggestive of
fears and tremblings in the Present, and open a vista full of mystic
warnings for the Future. The form of a friend fades from our
sight ; the voice of a brother (and of a brother who had a voice
full of deep tone and rich melody) is hushed in death ; a spirit
which keenly felt, while in the bondage of the flesh, its enthral-
ment, has passed to the spirit-land. Although told by an authoia-
tative voice, the echo of whose words shall last through all time,
that “ in the midst of life we are in death,” we do not realise its
stern truth till we find our social circle broken—a link in the life-
chain lost—one who was to some extent a partaker of our joys
* Macpherson’s Ossian, Yol. 11., p. 217, London Ed. of 1809.


and sorrows, and perchance to some extent an occasion of both,
is gone from amongst us. The Roman poet with his stern realism
may tell us “ the night of the death will set upon us all” —omnes
manet una nox —that we shall have to journey along one particular
road without the hope of returning by it— et ccdcanda semel via
lethi ;* and the voice of an English bard may be heard, asking
in significant words, “ Why dance ye, mortals, on the slippery
edge of the grave V’ Yes, why dance, and weave coronals, and be
so full of festive ecstasy, when time for other graver doings and
feelings is so short.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I have not invited you this evening,
to hear me moralise—much less to hear me preach. Nor should I
have ventured on these preliminary reflections did they not arise
spontaneously to my mind when I first began to consider how I
should introduce the subject of my discourse to your kind attention.
I shall presently have to review the life of a man who had no heroic
element in him, save a generous recognition and keen appreciation
of greatness in others; of a writer of Poetry, who although he
possessed the sensibilities, and to some extent the vocal sweetness,
nevertheless lacked the higher powers, of the genuine Poet; of a
prose-essayist, who although full of matured thought and great
subtlety of analysis, was deficient in that fulness of expression,
that native energy of eloquence, or that curiosa felicitas verhorum,
which makes the essayist popular. Being, then, neither hero, great
poet, great essayist ; being neither a philanthropist nor an active
politician, why do I make him or his writings a subject for your
consideration this evening 1 Because there are in his works some
beautiful teachings on the mystery of Life and Death ; because his
poetry is full of suggestiveness to those who study God in Nature—
who find an evangel in the stellar heaven and the flower-starred
earth ; because he worked more earnestly and unselfishly than any
man I have known for the last fifteen years, to promote both Polite
and Scientific Literature in Australia ; and, finally, because he has
been foully maligned, and I conceive it to be my duty to defend
him, and vindicate his intellect, his heart, his whole theory and
practice of Religious Belief, from ungenerous and unmerited
aspersion.
Let me first run through the simple story of his life ; soon told,
for it was the life of a dreamer and a thinker, or should I not say
a thoughtful dreamer, and not that of a man of action.
JAMES LIONEL MICHAEL, the eldest son of James Walter
Michael, Solicitor, and Rose Lemon-Hart, sister of a well-known
Wine and Spirit Merchant, was born in {or in the vicinity of) Red
Lion Square, London, in the year 1824. He was the eldest of six
Horace, Oar. I. 16


or seven children, and from his infancy till he reached his twentieth
year somewhat delicate. Indeed robust health and great physical
energy he never possessed, although his nervous temperament gave
him a certain liveliness and activity which rendered him a good
man of business. As a child, he possessed great sensibility ; and
judging from some notes made by his mother at the time, and
fondly cherished by her son afterwards, he was a general favorite
with all their acquaintances. He was a shy, timid, awkward boy
when he first went to school—so he himself often told me—and
shrunk so much from contact with the more vigorous boyhood
around that he was often alone. I once quoted in his hearing the
saying of Cato, the Censor, in reference to Scipio Africanus: —
-He was never less alone than when alone.”*' “ There’s a bitter
truth in that,” he replied. “ I enjoyed the luxury of such solita-
riness when a boy at school; but it induced the bad habit of liking
it too much.” But he tells the story of his childhood much better
in his verses than I can do in prose, and he often assured me there
was a prse-Raphaelite realism about the picture. Here it is :
My earliest memory is of a seat
On a low footstool, by a winter fire,
Listening, while warm and ruddy with its glow.
To stories of the lambs lost in the snow,
Stories of which I never seem’d to tire,
Although they made my heart so sadly beat:
And, somehow, the impression was profound
Young as I was; for, to this very day,
It stirs my inmost heart to hear a lamb
Lift up a piteous crying for its dam,
And all my soul leaps back upon its way,
And falls upon its childhood at the sound,
And paints her there, my Mother, gentle-ey’d,
And quiet voiced, and with a long thin hand;
Telling the story in the twilight hour,
While I sat rapt and awestruck, till a shower
Of tears reliev’d me—l have paced life’s sand,
The barren sand of life, since then, in pride
That weeps but seldom for another’s woe,
Though freely for its own—l have not shed
Too many tears. None, lam sure, like those
Unselfish, scalding, bitter drops, that rose
Out of my simple childhood. They are dead,
Those child-emotions. Never shall I know
Others so pure ; until, from mortal stain,
Wash’d angel-white in the celestial river,
A purer Lamb, who bled to set me free,
By His own mighty grace, deliver me,
Wipe pride out of my heart again for ever,
And make me like a little child again.
* Nec minus solum, quam cum solus esset. A pud Ciceron. Be Officiis
L. 111., I.


They tell me that I was a lovely child,
Eed-cheek’d and golden-hair’d; as now the hoy
Who plays about my knees, and calls me father.
But from my own first memories, I was rather
A quiet lad, finding a private joy
In hooks, in sunshine ; wayward, but not wild;
Gathering much lore they never taught at school
Of acids and of alkalies, of flowers
Their names and natures ; of old ringing rhymes ;
Stray scraps of knowledge, pick’d up at odd times
Because I lov’d them ; while, in lesson hours,
They found me somewhat hard to teach by rule,
I pick’d up Greek (I loved its sounding line),
But very little Latin, (to this day
I hate the Latin poets); well enough
Liked algebra and Euclid—all the stuff
(No question pretty knowledge in its way,)
Which we are taught in youth is “ very fine,”
And think so, because told so: hut I turn’d
With all my heart of hearts, to flower and tree.
To moss-spots on the beech, to sunny glade,
And dreamy moonlight, and soft woodland shade.
And to all nature’s beauty, where I learn’d
Much more than school could teach me. Then I read,
(Gods ! how I read !) of knight, and dame, and squire
lu brave old songs; read about pictures too ;
Bead nistory, wondering if all were true ;
Read about steam, and the electric wire,
And of galvanic motions in the dead ;
Geology and botany ; and then
Music and Sculpture, and the laws of storms;
Statics, and metaphysics—every day
Devouring all that came into my way
In shape of printed papers in all forms
Picking up scraps of knowledge, which the pen
Of ready writer had set down, in words
More or less clear to me, till I became
Cramm’d with stray facts that I could ill digest;
My mind unsettl’d with a vague unrest,
My brain tormented with an inward flame,
Not satisfied with squares, and cubes, and surds,
And Greek inflexions, I began to mope
Not knowing what I wanted; woke at mom
Only to wish the weary day were done—
Only a little happy in the sun,
Where I bask’d listlessly beside the corn,
For I loved sunshine like the heliotrope.
Circumstances led to his leaving school before he was fifteen, and
then he had private tutors in English, French, Italian, and
Drawing. Ee was, at the legal age, articled to his father, although
he had little love for the law, as may be evidenced from the fact
that in the first two years of his articles, he wrote an Epic Poem
in Six Books, entitled “ Death,” and to some extent an imitation
of one of Southey’s heroic efforts and failures. I have that
juvenile production now under my hand, and I wish I could afford


time to give you some idea of its remarkable contents. I cannot,
however, refrain from mentioning the highly artistic headings-in-
chief he gives to each Book. They run as follows : —Book L,
“ The Plague;” 11., “ Youth-tortures 111,, “ The Lightning
IY., “War;” Y., “Fire;” VI., “The Council Chamber of
Death.” You can from these headline hints form an idea of the
Epic. How strange it is—is it not I—that every boy possessing
the poetic faculty to any considerable extent, or with poetic
sensibilities, begins his poetic labours with an Epic. I began one
myself on Samson (in XXIY Books) before I was fourteen years
of age ; then changed the subject, after three months’ effort, for one
on Solomon, in order to bring in the Building of the Temple, in
due course of time—say half-a-year —I rejected this for something
in which the Heathen Gods and Goddesses flourished ; and finally
gave up heroic poetry altogether, in order to indulge in lyrics
about the crusades and a two-act farce entitled “The One-eyed
Fiddler.” Michael’s Epic is the best boy-effort of the kind I have
read, and portions of it would really interest you. Biit I must
hurry on. He now began that dual life, which to the day of his
death he never abandoned : his law-life of the office, and his
artist-life out of it. He had his holidays too, and keenly he
enjoyed them. Here is a picture of some of them taken from his
curious phychological Essaylets on Dreamland. You will excuse
me if I read the whole passage :
But if capricious, irregular, and uncertain in waking hours, when we exer-
cise a strong volition to endeavour to compel it to regular action ; in sleep,
when volition is at rest, and pure reason lies bound hand and foot, memory,
doing irregular light service to the imagination, becomes the most wandering,
flighty, unreliable, unstable of all the operations of the mind. The imagina-
tion herself is capricious enough, and gives us, sometimes a series of tableaux,
sometimes a connected story, sometimes a mere vivid succession of images;
hut memory, like a true servant exaggerating the peculiarities of her mistress,
carries it still further : one vivid instant recalls the circumstances which you
had fancied forgotten, of some petty occurrence long past by; the next
combines it, queerly enough, with the recollections of yesterday. lam a
child at my mother’s knee, listening to the story of the lamb lost in the
snow, playing with the long, thin, loved fingers, sitting on the little worn,
well-known stool, of which the very pattern is as clear as reality, with the
winter wind, like a besieging army, striving in vain to break through the
ramparts of brick and glass that fence it out, and yet while I sit and listen,
all a child, to the dear calm voice, there sits somehow at my side the Fanny,
the Ada, or the Isabel, the goddess of my early manhood, smiling at me
through violet eyes, quickening every pulse the more that hers is so tranquil.
An instant afterwards the scene is changed, and we stand, all of us, mother
and mistress, and many more, by the well-remembered grave that I have
wept over so often; or gaze in admiration at the painted window of a foreign
cathedral, which I never beheld but once, but which memory repaints for me,
nevertheless, perfect. I ride the little rough pony that I rode twenty years
ago over the Welch hills, but he carries me, not to Gelert’s grave, but
through the valley of the Loire, where I travelled, years after, on foot, with
a sketch-book and colour-box and camp-stool; or sets me down at the green


garden-gate of the little cottage I had, later still, at Hampstead or Richmond.
I am hack in the little parlour where we used to meet and draw, with the
easel moved into the corner, and smoke obscuring the ceiling, and long-
haired, youthful enthusiasts, waxing warm over all kinds of discussion,
uttering such astounding sentiments; but instead of painting sunrises, or
maintaining unlimited early heresies, I am reciting the poem I only wrote a
month ago, to an audience that would fill a hundred little parlours, hut who
all find room somehow in that one; or re-writing that important commu-
nication in which, with dear Ellen’s consent, I made certain definite propo-
sitions to her respectable mama; or re-inditing that early literary attempt
on my part, to which the Quarterly Review (to my then astonishment) did
not award the honour of publication ; or chattering atrocious French to that
Pauline whom I met, taking shelter from the rain under the same portico
with me at Avignon, hut who now seems as comfortable in my hack parlour
as I. I am standing on the rock of Capri, that I never saw since I was a
hoy, but I hear no music of soft air sighing to the sleeping waters, but
Lablache singing “ Madamina,” or the voice of the curlew, that whistles at
night about my Australian home, or the Marseillais Hymn, as I heard an
angry people once sing it; and see, not the gentle bay with the long steady
ripple glowing under the Italian sun, but the Genius, rising in smoke, when
the seal of Solomon was broken ; or the black, wretched little abortion of an
elm tree that grew in the London Square where I lived my early years.
The years sped on and Michael not only came to man’s estate, hut
to a higher inheritance—man’s fruition of a rich and chastened
Fancy (I will not call it Imagination), and to a singular and
singularly subtile appreciation of Art. He had barely become a
man de facto, and a gentleman by statute—an attorney, solicitor,
and proctor, and all the rest of it—when he became a gentleman
de jure by joining a Literary Club, and a Knight-errant of Art by
becoming a sort of literary Quixote to a number of Artists who
were Hying to emancipate themselves from what they were pleased
to call the thraldom and traditions of Old Schools—men who
wished to found a new school on the basis of a rigid interpretation
of Nature. Millais was amongst them, and Turner was their
Magnus Apollo. Michael, with his toned though deeply-felt love
of Nature, became the first literary exponent of this school ; and,
in a pamphlet which made a sensation at the time, he vindicated
the position of the Prse-Raphaelite Brotherhood (as they some-
what infelicitously called themselves, forgetting for a moment that
the queer limnings of the Mediaeval monks, without fore-shorten-
ing and knowledge of anatomy were Prae-Eaphaelite), and waged a
crusade of eloquent words against the hypocricies and meretricious
characteristics of existing Art; abusing the impossible gipsy
children with the sweet wild eyes ; the itinerant mendicant’s
offspring, with “ cream and strawberry complexions the country
lasses with dresses fit for a duchess ; and the hundred other
traditional modes of producing “ strong effects” in painting, which
were little better than pictorial lies, or a mode of idealsing subjects
to suit the ideal standard of the Minerva Press. Against
these convential shams and painted falsehoods, Michael fought a


good fight; and great was the gratitude of those on whose side he
battled. He was admired by both Millais and Ruskin—the former,
indeed, looked upon him as an Art critic of much promise. Now,
although Michael was getting on fairly at law, was respectably
associated with artists, was in a good set of men of letters, and
got into the company of doctors and other scientific savans, who
were always glad to see him, he had not learned the practical
philosophy of the XIX Century, which is fully expressed in the
mystic letters £s. d. Although always temperate and abstemious
in his habits, he had a strange talent for frittering away his money.
Although his Hebrew blood had been tempered by two generations
of men with Christian ideas of generosity or prodigality—indeed
I am not sure if his great-grandfather was a Jew—he certainly
had little of the tact for living within his income, which is said to
be a trait in the character of the children of Israel wherever they
exist at the present day. I think pecuniary pressure, or else the
hope of making a fortune suddenly to spend it in the great world
of London afterwards, first induced him to leave England, and
seek a home in Australia. The news of the gold discovery
attracted him as it did thousands of others ; but he came out with
no intention of remaining long. You know the English notion
sixteen years ago was that gold could be got by making a little
excursion across some mountains, and stooping down in a creek to
pick up the nuggets. Michael was soon disenchanted after his
arrival on our shores. A long and disagreeable voyage from
Gravesend first toned the colouring of his golden dreams, and a
few weeks’ residence in Sydney showed him the organic defects of
the gold mania. He settled down quietly as an Attorney, still
living the dual life alluded to, the life of a pleader to earn his
daily bread, and the life of a poet and artist (out of business hours)
to gratify the longings and aspirations of his susceptible soul.
From this time (1853), his life belongs to Australia alone.
Before I became acquainted with Mr. Michael, I was on intimate
terms, or actually asssociated with, the leading literary men of
Sydney—with Edward Kennedy Silvester, who, besides being a
graceful versifier, was no bad judge of poetic merit; with Edward
Reeve, full of mediaeval memories, and as gay a troubadour as the
most romantic young lady could desire; with Charles St. Julian,
full of sound judgment and sterling common sense; with Richard
Rowe who wove curious literary tissues—undoubted panni
purpurei —for the Sydney Morning Herald , under the
signature of “ Peter Possum;” with Frank Fowler, ever
vivid in word delineation, a brilliant talker, a sparkling wit, and
the most genial companion that ever drank your wine,
or borrowed half-a-sovereign; with William Wilkes, facile princeps
as a rough sketcher of Australian Bush Life. There were
besides, amongst my literary and learned acquaintances, John


Connery, Author of the “ New Speaker,” Joseph Dyer, editing
a Scientific Magazine, and many others besides —to say nothing of
the Mecsenas of Literature in Sydney, the scholarly, sweet-voiced,
large-hearted Stenhouse, whom we all reverenced as a father.
Then there was Deniehy, fresh from Goulburn, and the works of
DeQuincey, who wielded a pen with the readiness and deadly
precision with which an accomplished French petit maitre plays
with a small sword. It was my good fortune to have introduced
Michael to nearly all these gentlemen, as I did subsequently to
Chambers Williams ; and later still, to Henry Kendall, whom he
received as an affectionate elder brother would a younger one
from whom he had been long separated. But let me mention how
I first became acquainted with Mr. Michael. In springing into a
railway carriage at the Newtown station, (during the time of the
Great Devine Ejectment Case) while the train was in motion,
some portion of my dress caught in the door, and only for the
timely assistance of the guard, I should probably have fallen back
and been killed, or much hurt. During the flurry this occasioned,
a middle-aged woman asked, with kindly severity, “Do you want
to kill yourself 1” “No, madam,” I answered, perhaps too
flippantly ; “ I do not want to discover the Grand Secret in that
rough way.” “ Particularly,” said a lively gentleman opposite,
“as a drop of concentrated Prussic acid would do that for you
much neater.” “ Thanks for the information,” I replied ; “ but
we don't destroy what we like, or you would not take such cam of
those flowers ” —he had an artistically arranged boquet in hand.
We continued in this vein for a few minutes ; and before we
had reached the Sydney terminus, we were known to each other.
That gentleman was James Lionel Michael.
Time will not permit me to do more than hint at the literary
vicissitudes of the next three years, during which Michael and
myself were all but inseperable. It was during that period that I
became acquainted with his peculiar cast of mind, and induced him
to devote himself to more vigorous efforts in letters. It was then,
too, he talked to me as to a trusty friend about his family and his
private affairs. He read to me, from time to time, some hundreds
of letters from his mother (whom he loved with a love that
bordered on superstitious reverence), from his sisters and brothers,
and home artist friends. Wonderful correspondents were all the
Michaels. His brother Lemon, an artist by profession, wrote on
matters of Art, with a fulness of knowledge and a warmth of
appreciation which were absolutely invigorating. His brother
Walter, who was engaged in the service of some great Company,
and had opportunities of travel, gave sketches of men and things—-
of scenery in particular—which deserved to be stereotyped by
Kentledge, for cheap editions. His youngest brother, Albert, now
an Attorney, was equally felicitous, but more in the serio-


satirical or Thackeray mood. I remember one of his letters on the
Irish Peat Company, in whose office he had for a time a chair,
which deserved to be inserted in London Punch. Never did I
read an epistle fuller of quaint sayings neatly modernised, of
humour, at once racy and easy of mental digestion, and of happy
hits at character-sketching. Nor were the ladies of the family
behind their brothers in this useful and graceful accomplishment—
that of writing really readable chit-chat letters. But I must
hurry on. During the twenty months I conducted the Month
Magazine—the first eight of them in conjunction with Mr. Frank
Fowler—Michael was my chief collaborates. He wrote whenever,
and on whatever subject I asked him. He gave me carte hlanche
invitation to bring my literary friends to his house; and many,
very many delightful reunions we had—not only at his house at
Burwood, but at Fowler’s—at the French Cafe —in Cox’s drawing-
room-—at Clarke’s book-shop—out in the bush—on Garden Island
(pic-nicking)—in this Institution [Sydney School of Arts] and
elsewhere. Pray, pardon these somewhat egotestic reminiscences ;
but I cannot pass them by. Bemember what the world’s poets
tell us about the Pleasures of Memory from Yirgilius Maro’s
hcec olim meminisse juvabit to Samuel Rogers’ exquisite Poem
on the subject through which there shines such chastened ‘ light
of other days,’ that it reminds one of those luminous apparitions
which played in the northern heavens during the long summer
evenings of our youth. To me these conversaziones were rare
treats, for I had not lived much in the great world of London.
What a medley of anecdotes it was—the Temples of Art, the
Inns of Court, the Colleges of Universities supplying the material.
Sometimes Farquharson was amongst us, and then (provided
Fowler were present) we had a whole world of gossip about the
Lyrical Stage. There were stories of the Catalani ;of the Yocal
and the Dancing Grisi ; of Lablache, ‘ the colossal basso ’ (colossal
in a double sense); of Rubini, the Sympathetic tenor; of Sontag,
after her 4 resurrection’ from private life, and her second appearance
on the stage after twenty years’ retirement; of the Fairy Dancers
of Vienna; of the Sweedish Nightingale (Jenny Lind); of the
Swan of Erin (Kate Hayes); of Staudigl the Russian Euroclydon ;
and of many other notable celebrities. Then there were epigrams
on Bar and Pulpit by the late Mr. C. K. Murray, who seemed to
renew his youth in our society; and there were graphic sketches
of Cambridge and Oxford, by ’Possum and Chambers Williams;
and graphic mimicries of the oratory and oratorical manner of
great English statesmen and warriors, by one who now holds a
high place amongst the dispensers of justice in this country. Nor
were the Schools of Painting and Design forgotten ; nor the much-
abused Prse-Raphaelites (for this was a topic on which we could


always make Michael blaze into eloquence); nor the old or new
School of Water Colorists ; nor the English Sculptors; nor the
English Landscape and Animal Painters. And occasionally, a
benign face of peculiar beauty and sweetness appeared amongst
us ; and whenever it passed from us, we felt that an Angelic
Presence (in that bodily form) had gone forth, leaving an aroma
of loving kindness behind, after we had been richly regaled with
the most delicate philosophy of a Christian Plato, in the purest
English that Englishman ever spoke ! Need I say, ladies and
gentlemen, that I allude to the late, and loved, and ever-to-be-
lamented Dr. John Woolley ! How well my Ossianic text tells
now ! Do not, at the mention of many of these names, memories
sweet and bitter, joyous and sad, sweep across the soul!
But I am neglecting Michael’s writings while gossiping about
Michael’s social life amongst his friends. A word, then, on his
Poetry first; on his Prose-writings secondly; on his Lectures
lastly—for, I am sure, you will excuse my saying anything about
him as a lawyer—not that he was an incompetent one, but because
reference to lawyers is not as a rule pleasantly suggestive ; and
Michael, although he had sound legal knowledge, and was I dare
say fairly up in practice, had little love for his profession, and
thought far more of his peers in the Upper Bohemia of Letters
and Art, than he did of his Brethern in either branch of the
profession. This, I willingly admit, was (as a matter of business)
the great mistake of his life. But is it not vain to rail at
temperament and try to unteach acquired habits? You may pity
the man that has an uncommercial organization, but you cannot
give him one.
I have been accused by a country journal, of saying that
Michael was “ the most original and the sweetest song-writer in
Australia.” This is not correct. What I did say—to use a
parliamentary style of explanation—was this : Michael, as a lyrical
writer, not only reveals the structure of a strangely-constituted
and original mind, but is besides the most musical of all our poets.
I think this is sound criticism. Michael was not only a fair
scholar, a good modern linguist (he spoke French and Italian, and
understood Herman and Spanish), but a sound Art-Critic,
embracing Painting, Sculpture, Music, and the Drama, a good
Naturalist, well read in History, a pleasing public Lecturer, a
skilled amateur Analytical Chemist, and finally a high-toned Meta-
physician and Theologian. Now a man whose intellectual range
was so extensive, must surely be said to have had a mind singularly
constituted —one of an original cast. None of you will deny that
he sang in musical numbers, even if you do not attach the
highest value to the thoughts he wedded to his words. Here is
an example of his mellifluous word-music.


Gh, the gentle moonlight shining on the branches intertwining !
Oh, the lovely moonlight sleeping in the hollows of the hill;
On the river silver-crested, on the mountain purple-breasted,
With the midnight stillness echoing the murmur of the rill!
And the sedge-bird in the marshes, and the rustling in the larches,
And the dark tips looking frosted on the edges of the pine,
And the ripple on the rivers, where the moonlight shakes and shivers,
To the nightingale’s clear music, and the house-dog’s distant whine.
Oh ! the soft night-breezes creeping, and the dreamy moonbeams
sleeping,
And the stars like jewels glitt’ring in the water’s quiet breast,
And the distant echo dying, and the distant hills replying;
Ah, how the heart grows placid with the sentiment of rest!
God impos’d it as a duty, when He bath’d the world in beauty,
That we should learn to love Him through the glory of His works ;
Made the moonbeam calm and tender, roll’d the sun in light and
splendor,
That we might read the lesson in all loveliness that lurks ;
That mankind might know the story of His goodness and His glory,
Set before them, plainly written, in ail places, in all time ;
In the spirit and the letter telling this world of a better,
Free from death and from temptation, free from wretchedness
and crime;
Peace beyond all earthly measure, riches past all earthly treasure!
If God hath made this world so fair for Adam’s fallen race,
What shall be the joy up-springing, where the Seraph hosts bow singing,
And the suns are sickly tapers to the glory of His face ?
There are tones the heart will hush to; there are sounds the cheek
will flush to;
There are little lovely glimpses that speak strangely to the soul;
When the arching boughs meet o’er us and the landscape breaks
before us.
Revelation speaks in flashes and a part declares the whole.
Underneath the lightning flashing, underneath the thunder crashing,
Or the cataract that tumbles white with wild and streaming hair,
In the strong wind’s day of battle, in the tempest’s scream and rattle,
Goaded thought leaps up in flashes that we seek in vain elsewhere.
To all ages hath He spoken, lest the burden’d back be broken,
So that sight and sound may take away the pressure of the years :
And Almighty to deliver, hath set free our souls for ever,
When the darkness set on Calvary, and veil’d immortal tears.
Shall He not of right be jealous, as He bade His prophets tell us,
Lest His creatures offer otherwhere the praise that is His own ?
When He wrote on all creation His great mandate —Adoration;
That all peoples and all languages might bow before His throne ;
In bereavement and in sorrow tells the heart of a to-morrow,
That we walk together comforted through trouble and through pain ;
Gave His word to priest and poet, that the listening world might know it
And purge itself of folly, and return to Him again.
Such the thoughts that we four ponder’d, in the moonlight as we
wander’d;
And peace rose out of loveliness and slept upon my breast;
And love sprang from the heather, as we wended home together,
And bound us four in unity—and all my heart had rest.


Surely these thoughts are beautiful and their word-embroidery is
beautiful too. Michael, although too fond in his earlier poems of
catching the tone and manner of much greater masters, now and
then strikes out an original conception with great felicity. Here
is an instance—an exquisite cabinet picture—in which a refreshing
Prse-Raphelite simplicity is combined with artistic skill in indivi-
dualising the central figure.
THE GOOD KING.
The day was done and lost
And we gather’d round the King,
And one said, “Sire, the foe come fast,”
(We could hear their galloping;)
But the good King only sigh’d, and said,
“ I will wait and die with my brave men dead.”
A trusty knot of spears
We gather’d, stout and few,
Two or three bold and stalwart peers,
And a knightly little crew.
So the foe came on, and the good King said,
“ I will venge me yet of my brave men dead.”
They came in disarray,
For they thought it was a chase,
And they reckon’d not again that day,
To have met us face to face.
And the King’s lip curl’d, and he smiled and said,
“ I will smite them yet for my good men dead.”
We charged them fast and hot,
And we rode them down like wheat,
And the vultures gather’d to the spot,
Good Lord ! revenge is sweet!
So we saved the fight, and the old King said,
“I will plague them yet for my good men dead.’
Some of our men that ran
When they witness’d what had past,
Came gathering to us, man by man,
So we kept the field at last.
But the good King only sigh’d and said,
“Ah me ! I grieve for my brave men dead.”
Of a higher order of thought is the following :
‘DEATH IS TO US CHANGE NOT CONSUMMATION.’
Heabt op Midlothian.
A change ! no, surely, not a change,
The change must be before we die ;
Death may confer a wider range.
From pole to pole, from sea to sky ;
It cannot make me new or strange
To mine own personality!


For what am I ? —this mortal flesh,
These shrinking nerves, this feeble frame,
For ever racked with ailments fresh,
Scarcely from day to day the same—
A fly within the spider’s mesh,
A moth that plays around the flame—
This is not I—within this coil
The eternal spirit rests awhile :
When this shall lie beneath the soil,
Which its mere portal parts defile.
That shall for ever live and foil
Motality, and pain, and guile.
Whatever Time may make of me,
Eternity must see me still
Clear from the dross of earth, and free
From every stain of every ill;
Yet still, whate’er—where’er I he,
Time’s work Eternity must fill.
When all the worlds have ceased to roll,
When the long light has ceased to quiver,
When we have reached our final goal,
And stand beside the Living River,
This little spark—this living soul,
Must last for ever and for ever.
To choose what I must be is mine,
Mine in these few and fleeting days.
I may he, if I will, divine,
Standing before God’s throne in praise,—
Through all eternity to shine
In yonder Heaven’s sapphire blaze.
Father, the soul that counts it gain
To love Thee and Thy law on earth ;
Unchang’d, but free from mortal stain,
Increased in knowledge and in worth,
And purified Rom this world’s pain,
Shall find thee through a second birth.
A change ! no surely not a change,
The change must be before we die ;
Death may confer a wider range,
From world to world, from sky to sky,
It cannot make me new or strange
To mine own personality !
still grander is the conception in these stanzas
What is the likeness we bear to Divinity ?
What is the image of God that we bear ?
Stamp’d in our nature to last through infinity,
The impress of Deity born with us, —where ?
Father ! the children who claim thy Paternity,
Teach them wherein they bear semblance of
So that they strive, in their road to Eternity,
Daily and yearly more like Thee to be.
Thee;


This world, Thou teachest, is folly and vanity;
Vain are the humblest; the wisest are weak.
Where, in the frailty and dearth of humanity,
Where is the image of God that we seek?
Saviour ! Thy glory the glory of meekness is,
Meekness in suffering, meekness in might;
Where shall we seek, in the load of our weaknesse s.
Something that seems like the image of light ?
Likeness we claim, to Thine own speciality :
Not in the body, that shrinks from the gale,
Falters and faints ’neath the weight of mortality.
Trembling and helpless, and weary and frail;
Yet an assurance Thy groat mercy gives in us,
Certain, though darkly, that we are Thine own ;
Secretly sure, that the Spirit that lives in us
One day shall stand on the steps of Thy throne.
The past cannot teach us. We look to its history:
All mortal history stops with the life.
Futurity, shrouded in darkness and mystery,
Indicates nowhere the road through the strife.
Prophet and poet are sent to declare to us,
Dimly and doubtingly, something of Thee—
Father ! make clearer the word that they bear to us ;
Draw the great curtain ! reveal the to-be !
Something of light from thy written word borrowing,
Something of knowledge, though dim and obscure.
Something of wisdom to soothe us in sorrowing ;
Slowly v, r e learn the great art—to endure ;
Slowly we find out the secret of severing
All the poor pomp of the world from our hearts;
Too often failure awaits our endeavouring;
Till, in the struggle, occasion departs.
Yet ’tis for something the yearning that swells in us,
Somewhat of Thee and Thy secret to read :
Therefore a strong Ideality dwells in us,
Almost creative ; thine image indeed.
Teach us to use it in fearing and lowliness,
So that it lifts us from earth audits sod ;
Painting for mortals the glory of holiness—
Imagination, the image of God.
The reading of this poem suggests one of the most painful,
although one of the easiest duties I have to perform this evening.
Tins sounds like a paradox, but it is literally true. I said in the
beginning that I should have to defend Michael’s life and Michael’s
memory from foul calumnies, and I now come to the principal one
of them. He is said to have had no Religion—to have been a
Pantheist, a Deist, or a Materialist. Never did malice deal in
more ungenerous mendacity. The poems just read convey a
sufficient refutation of it. But I, who knew him so well, can add
fuller evidence and bring my own clear testimony to bear on the


fact that he was a true Christian believer. Oh, my friends, to me
this charge against him is, indeed, painful; for I knew him well!
Many and many a time together did we discuss the rationalism of
the age, and found it—to our intellect’s fullest conviction and
tranquillity—a flourish of brazen trumpets. Delamenais, Comte,
Carlyle, and many other thinkers of the age, as they are euphem-
istically called, did we review in turn, and found them all organi-
cally defective. We recognised, indeed, their power of undoing, but
equally their incapability to build up again. Could we who held as
demonstrated truth that nothing which God created in the material
order could be annihilated, fall into the materialistic error that
MIND, with its godlike creative faculty, Imagination, and God-
created as well as inert matter, would come to nought 1 Could we
who held, as little less than demonstrated, that no form of instinct,
no form of life, would utterly perish, but run on in vivifying
cycles, either joining the great magnetic currents which pervade
the universe, or entering into and informing new material combi-
nations, believe that our feelings, our emotions, our temperament
(that wonderful product of innumerable known and unknown
influences), would fade like the beauty, and die out like fragrance,
of the most precious flowers 1 Could we who held that the very
conception of personality—the capability of each realising his
individual ego —without at all attaching undue importance to the
fact of our longing spirit ever soaring for something beyond the
animal life—could we, I ask again, with this complete comprehen-
sion of that personality, believe it was nothing more than a nervous
fiction, a phantasmagoric result produced by the grey matter of the
brain 1 Could we who had accepted, through the irresistible force
of reason, the utterances on Sinai as the words of Supernal
Wisdom, be false to our most infelt conviction, and believe them
the creation of a mere man 1 We knew no Moses, of himself and
by himself, could possibly have produced such a canon of Faith,
Duty, and (by implication) of Future Responsibility, as that
Decalogue. No, though he were backed by all the learning
esoteric and exoteric, mystic and vulgar, of all the Egyptian
hierarchy, and had besides the very perfection of human genius.
He could never have invented that which transcended the
knowledge of his time—which did not naturally suggest itself
from the state of society around him—which was, taken apart
from Divine aid, sure to be resisted by those to whom he
communicated it —which must have been as hard for himself (the
teacher and legislator) to bear as it was for those whom
he taught—as it is for you and me. And when we
found by the irrefragable testimony of history that the Second
Moses, the Divine Emanuel, had accepted and endorsed this grand
canon, with its tripartite conditions of Adoration, Moral Respon-
sibility, and (by implication) Future Reward and Punishment, we


could only bow down our beads in submission and receive it too.
For what had it not achieved 1 It had changed the face of human
society as the first Creative Word had changed the face of Nature
when all was “ void and without form.” The world, which had
idolised its own passions, gave up its idols under the influence of
these ten little simple rules; and equally irrefragable was the evidence
of history to convince us, that some dozen poor fishermen, who lived
and laboured round an iidand sea, and were therefore certainly not
among the great thinkers of their day, propagated those doctrines as
the supreme moral code of Him who came on earth to give them
Divine Sanction, and to associate them with the whole mystery of
His Love and loving Self-sacrifice. Michael was at once thorough
and simple in accepting Christ Jesus as his Redeemer, and the
Redeemer of the whole World, intellectually, morally, and in
relation to the Creator. I remember one night—now nine years ago
or more—how we discussed a position of the late Auguste Comte's,
hostile to Christian Revelation. Michael for a time wavered,
although I repeatedly pointed out that the condition of man
would be far worse than that of the brute beast, if with
the power of conceiving and of aspiring to a Divine Future, he
could not obtain it. He hesitated in admitting that the French
philosopher was hollow in his argument, although the whole force
of that argument in particular, and of his entire Positive Philosophy,
go far to prove the oneness and completeness of Mind as
distinct from matter; he hesitated, although I insisted that as
there was Design plainly manifested throughout all Nature—‘-and
this design harmonised at all points with man’s material necessities
—there must also be a moral economy as well. Indeed it arose a
fortiori , for our moral requirements are of a higher, though not
of a more urgent, order than our physical ones. I remember we
debated in this way—over yonder in the domain—till nearly three
o’clock in the morning, and then we parted. Thinking I had not
p\it my views of the question strongly enough before him, I posted
to him, before I retired to rest, an excerpt from a Common-place
Book in which those views were more eloquently and forcibly
expressed. Curiously enough the extract had been previously sent
to myself in consequence, it would seem, of some sceptical remarks
I had (unwittingly) allowed a writer in The Month to give
expression to. At all events, I sent it to Michael with a few
annotations and emphasised marginalia of my own, and under the
title of “ Cljrpsologos ; nr, % Argument §hlter Jlut.” You must
allow me to read this extract, or you will not fully understand
Michael’s remarks on it :
The conceit of infallibility [it states] seems to be a besetting danger of
scientific culture. In the study of pure science the mind acquires the habit
of absolute confidence in its own conclusions. There is no room for modesty
in mathematics. There is no presumption in affirming of the result of a


carefully conducted calculation that it is true for all minds and for all time
and that if any one cannot perceive its truth, this proves only his ignorance,
not the uncertainty of the conclusion. The stars in their courses record in
characters of light, in the depths of unmeasured space, the equations wrought
out by the lonely student in his cell. The returning comet, the new planet,
answer from the remote verge of the solar system to his summons,
and demonstrate the laws of the human intellect to be the laws of the
universe. With respect to the subjects of pure science, the man of science
stands on a platform of infallible certainty, from which he looks down with
conscious superiority on the mass of mankind, who must remain ignorant,
for the most part, of the processes of science, and be content to take its
results as matter of faith, which to him are matter of demonstration. No
wonder that he is tempted to attribute to the superior strength of his own
intellect that infallible certainty which, in reality, results from the supe-
riority of the intellectual instruments he employs. He forgets that his
intimate familiarity with the reasoning process by which those great results
are demonstrated, which the majority accept on trust, is merely one instance
of the advantage which every artist has in his own art over other men ; for
science becomes art when it is employed to extend its own boundaries. He
grows impatient of doubt, of humility, and of difference of opinion. He
desires the certainty of mathematics in all other branches of knowledge ;
and as he can no longer find that certainty in the processes by which his
conclusions are reached, he finds it in the fact that he has reached them.
Science has taught him that the solitary reasoner may be right, and the
whole world wrong. He simply generalises the lesson, and infers that when-
ever he differs from other people, they must needs be wrong, because he is
infallibly right. His own opinions become, in his eyes, the high-water mark
of the intellectual progress of the age, and any opposition to them the sure
token of ignorance, narrow prejudice, or dishonesty. The most splendid
warning of these dangers of scientific culture is furnished by the late
Auguste Comte, the man of science, par excellence, of the present age. As
incapable beyond his proper province as he was powerful and unrivalled
within it, he mistook the narrow pale of accurate science for the wide horizon
of human knowledge. Confounding science, sometimes with philosophy, and
sometimes with art, he imagined that, in classifying the sciences, he was
mapping out the whole domain of the human intellect, and was unable to see
that our largest and most precious treasures of knowledge lie beyond, or
above, where the foot of science has not trodden, nor her wings soared ; in
the world of consciousness and of emotion, which defies science; in the world
of actual individual experience, where science is the disciple, not the teacher;
and in the world of faith, where the demonstrations of science are superseded
by a sublimer certainty.
The loftiest, broadest, surest inductions of modern science cannot soar
beyond the atmosphere of observed facts. No induction from nature can
include God. It can but point to Him, and bid us seek elsewhere the light
which it cannot furnish, yet in which alone its deepest lessons can be read.
So far from furnishing a “ basis ” for theology, physical science cannot add
one single fundamental proposition to those primary biblical truths, which
form the grammar of religion, and on which theology rests. It is only
by being united with moral and metaphysical considerations that the induc-
tions of physical science can even supply evidence of the great fundamental
truth of theology—the existence of God. The intelligent theologian, indeed,
will be far from underrating the light which modern science can shed upon
this majestic and profound theme. It cannot show the depths, but it can
illuminate the surface. It cannot solve the mysteries, or answer the solemn
doubts and awful questions of theology, but it can pour upon some of its
plainest and yet sublimest doctrines the rich glow of profuse and glorious


illustration. It can tell us nothing new of the Divine character, will, or
nature. On the most urgent problems of theology—the theory and conse-
quences of the Divine conduct towards men, as the Father-Creator towards
His offspring, and as the Supreme Euler towards His disobedient subjects—
inductive science can shed no ray of light. It possesses no data. In the
perpetual flux of human affairfe, the same individuals, the same circum-
stances, never recur. In the wide expanse of this world’s history, induction
finds no rest for the sole of its foot; from the shoreless waste of the desolate
past it cannot bring a single olive-leaf of promise and hope. What science
can do to illustrate theology, should be acknowledged, not only thankfully,
but devoutly; for Creation also is the Word of God, and it is a noble task
to decipher, though slowly and imperfectly, its divine lessons. It can illus-
trate truths which it never could have revealed. It can attest the unity of
creation, by showing that the sunbeam in which the tiny gnat dances and
the violet expands is identical with the rays that have been millions of
years on their passage from those vast hives of suns and systems which are
but nebulous points in our heaven, and that beyond those inconceivable
wildernesses of boundless space the same law reigns by which the thistle-
down floats and the rain-drop falls. It can exemplify, with the most daz-
zling variety, magnificence, and minuteness of evidence, the wisdom, power,
and goodness of the Divine Maker; showing how, not a bundle of single
threads, but an infinitely complicated web of design, like the fine-woven
sympathetic network of nerves in the human body, pervades every atom and
point of creation, binding each to all; how primeval forests grew and decayed
in order that coal might be dug, and steam might be the slave of commerce
and civilisation; how multitudes beyond all arithmetic of living creatures
were born and perished, and earthquakes throbbed, and oceans were dried
up, that the chalky downs might pasture the flock or repay the ploughshare,
and that the rifted marble crags might be the quarry of the mason, the
school of the painter and the poet, or the fortress of the oppressed; how the
cloud that cools the fainting wayfarer, and clostes the pimpernel, is carrying
food for a thousand tables; or how the wind that speeds the Mayflower , or
wrecks the Armada, that buries an army beneath the sand, or frolics with
the child’s kite and gently bears the odour of the clematis to the sick girl’s
bedside, is but obeying the laws given to it by the heat of the sun’s rays and
the twofold motion of our globe. Above all, physical science furnishes the
most impressive and unanswerable evidence that the All-wise and Almighty
Creator works by law, i.e., by settled and permanent principles, and that
V/l cUour \v Ul xxo Uj Id TV v• w • ee iirv. VI Cvirei jj vr i imutvir u inr w o Uj irvi uxr ui u
while the inflexible maintenance of His laws often involves a tremendous
cost of suffering, yet the laws themselves are stamped with the manifest
image and superscription of pure and infinite benevolence. These are the
sublimest lessons of science. They are a part of God’s revelation of
Himself to man. But they only illustrate and confirm the teaching of His
written word. They add no single new truth to theology, much less furnish
a new basis for it. They do but re-set, with the rich choral harmony of
innumerable voices “ of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth,” the ancient melody chanted from the beginning in the
pages of Scripture. “ All thy works shall praise Thee, 0 Lord.” “ For
ever, 0 Lord, thy word is settled in Heaven They continue
this day according to thine ordinances; for all are thy servants.”
Michael’s reply to this paper was to the following effect
-—“ I am satisfied. The writer is right—we do set human
limits to the dealings of the Father-Creator with his children.
I will never part with the paper you have sent me, and
I will add a few stanzas to the second part of “ John Cumberland,”
in which I will embody my own doubts, and get Dr. Grant and


Master Cumberland’s mother to answer them. How quickly the
full sunshine of Truth dissipates the fog of error.”
Here are the stanzas he added to “ John Cumberland,”
ready for press ;
Youth is heretical. About this time
I vex’d myself with doubtful points of creed;
Not that I question’d those great truths sublime
That serve the Christian in his hour of need;
But, mingling metaphysics and theology,
I strove, as young men will, to argue out
God’s ways ; and strove to find apology
For all that inexperience dar’d to doubt.
Why was not revelation made so clear,
I ask’d, that all might read and understand?
Could He leave room for doubtfulness or fear,
Writing His secrets with His proper hand ?
I saw the sects divided; saw that each
Profess’d to the same rule of faith to look ;
And each propos’d its special faith to teach,
Upon the warrant of the Holy Book ;
And marvell’d greatly, how it came about.
That God should speak, and yet the world should doubt
Yes ! there is darkness underneath Thy feet;
(I groan’d)—none can by searching find out The*.
I knew it; yet I trusted I should meet
A guide to lead me up to the to-be.
Wherefore the veil of mystery that shrouds
Thy deeper secrets from our closest gaze ?
Wilt Thou for ever hide Thy face in clouds.
So that we walk uncertain all our days ?
Is there no light to guide us through the maze.
That so we may attain Thy very will?
No light to penetrate the misty haze,
Or must we wander in the darkness still ?
Once more, as erst I pray’d, I pray for light.
To guide my doubting footsteps to the right.
I stand alone upon the shore of truth,
Gazing upon The Infinite ; and yearn
To make Thy word a guide unto my youth,
That something of Thy hidden will I learn.
Alas ! how little can my eyes discern !
My vision fails. The boundless ocean rolls
Beyond the chart, whichever way I turn ;
Yet hast though promised guidance to our souls.
I know that one day Thou shalt raise Thine own,
Where they shall know even as they are known;
Meanwhile, oh 1 strengthen Thou the heart that faints,
That I may read and comprehend, and be
Counted amongst the number of Thy saints,
And find the road through darkness up to Thee.
Forgive the doubt, the weakness, the distress !
I cry for guidance. Father ! guide and bless !


And he redeems his promise of making Dr. Grant and his hero's
mother refute his inchoate errors in the following simple hut
subtly-logical and musical manner :
So, in the frequent letters that I sent
To the old Doctor, some such douhts appeared;
He guessed the struggle that I underwent,
And wrote me, that my spirit might be cheer’d,
A kind long letter, where he pointed out
The want of reason in mere reason’s doubt.
He said “ My friend, if doubt he in the word.
Doubt not at least, the goodness of the Lord.
Learn this; two set of rules are clearly given.
Our duties to our neighbour and to heaven—
‘ Thou shalt not worship other Gods but me.
Thou shalt not steal nor lie nor envious he.’
Here at the least, His law is fix’d and clear.
He leaves no room for doubt or cavil here.
Obey these first, love God with all thy heart;
Do all thou cans’t to ease thy neighbour’s smart;
So far thou need’st not douhts. Behind there lie
The undiscovered fields of mystery.
That, at his peril, which man must obey.
Is bright and plain and certain as the day :
If theologic questious, in His view,
Had been thus vital for the spirit’s rest,
Believe that he had made them certain too,
That never doubt might try his servant’s reast;
Duty imperative is pointed out,
Only the non-essential left in doubt:
There’s truth enough in all the Christian creeds—
Only love well enough the Christ that bleeds.”
So wrote my venerated friend. And then
My mother answer’d me—l quote again.
“ .Remember, my dear boy, how you and I,
In every care that came about our hearts,
Join’d hands in pray’r, and look’d up to the sky.
And earn’d the comfort that His grace imparts.
When douhts or cares assail you, think of me
Fancy me once more kneeling at your side,
And grow a child again, and pray to he
Strengthened in love, guarded from reason’s pride.
Prayer is the armor of the soul, that turns
The arrow of distrust another way :
Prayer is the light that in the darkness burns—
Child of my love ! if thou art troubl’d, pray.
W e are not hound to solve all doubts, nor read
That plainly, which His word has not made clear;
We are to seek him in our time of need,
Knowing that He who bids us ask will hear.
Who says the age of miracles is past ?
There never was a miracle so great
As this, that he who set the world so fast,
Upholds the suns and holds the keys of fate.


Will hear and answer every humble prayer,
And ease the contrite spirit of its care.
Prayer is the refuge of the sad ; the balm
Of weary hearts that faint upon the way :
Prayer will restore thy spirit to its calm —
Child of my love! if thou art troubl’d, pray.”
With these extracts from his longest poem—far better than many
sermons I have heard or read—l will quit the question of his
Religious Belief. I am aware he was not ordinarily a church-
goer, and for this he gave “ the reason that was in him,” which
although it did not satisfy me, appeared quite satisfactory to
himself. “ They [the clergy] are not teaching up to the time,” he
used to say. “ They are shirking the real issues of the Age, and
disputating with one another about mere polemics of no real
importance. All bodies corporate—all professions that have legal
privileges—think more of their order than they do of the ordinance
which first incorporated them. Divines, doctors, lawyers—they
are all alike V’ This was his reason. You may disagree with
him, and I trust you do; but it is a reason still. He was no
regular Church-goer on principle, but he was nevertheless, in his
profoundest convictions, a thorough Christian believer. Let no
one, then, be guilty of such gross slander of the dead, or of
falsehood so insulting to me the living witness of his religious
convictions, as to brand him infidel. Let no one dare to say that
his intellect was not irradiated with the red light of Faith that
beams from Horeb—the Mountain of the Lord ; let no one weakly
believe that he did not recognise the moral beauty of Christianity,
of stainless effulgence like the white light of Thabor; let no one
uncharitably think that he died without hoping—having passed
through the shadows of death—to rise in the fulness of the glory
of the heavenly Zion, where “ the Lamb is the light thereof.”*
Let me, as a finishing touch to this topic, read you a few simple
hymns he wrote after his ephemeral doubts on religious matters
had vanished. In these he brackets the 6th, 7th, and Bth verses
of the Bth chapter of St. John.
“ But Jesus stooped down , and with his finger wrote on the ground.
And again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.’’
The following is the hymn suggested by this text ;
When they brought sin before the Lord,
He stoop’d and wrote upon the dust:
What wrote he, the Incarnate Word ?
’Twas Mercy—written by The Just.
* Revelations, xxi. 23.


So, long before, so, long ago,
God set His mark on all He fram’d ;
Wrote Love upon Creation’s brow,
The name whereby He would be nam’d.
One perfect law from Matter’s birth,
Till the long years shall cease to roll;
Love to the Universal earth,
And Mebcy to the single soul.
In the second hymn he brackets Matt. XXXVIII, 2, with
John V., 24.
“ And, behold, there was a great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone, and sat upon it
“ Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and believeth
in Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemna-
tion ; but is passed from death unto life."
And he gives us these two beautiful stanzas :
When Christ the man passed into Christ the God,
Some certain of the saints which slept arose ;
Yea, the great grave was conquered, and the sod
Gave up its sleepers from their long repose :
So Death, by death for ever vanquish’d, gave
The Lord of Life His triumph o’er the grave.
He hath put death and hell beneath his feet,
So that we study to achieve the same;
And learn to make the victory complete,
Not of ourselves, but through His mighty name,
And vanquished Death in His own death to save
Us for eternal life beyond the grave.
After a confession of faith so thorough and so charmingly rendered
as this, who will dare to throw a stone of calumny at his memory 1
Now I will say a word about his prose-writings. He wrote prose
with ease, grace, and some vigour. There are technical —and I
might almost say mechanical faults in his style. His sentences
are too long, although exquisitely rhythmical. There is also a
debilitating tendency to niceness in his descriptive passages ; but
the matter is always good. I wish I could detain you to hear the
fourth of his Essaylets on Dreamland. It would mar the effect to
give you merely a sample—a sentence or two. I will, instead,
read you a short extract from “ The Isle of Vines, a Fairy Tale
for Old and Young,” from which you can form an opinion of his
descriptive manner :
Far away—long ago—slept in the sunny sea the Isle of Vines ; there be
none such in this age of iron; but then, if old tales tell true, the world held
many spots fairer than any that are ours,
The coast of the Island was bold and bare, the long sands glittered in the
light of an almost eternal summer, and the high cliffs, black, bold, and
rugged, rose perpendicularly to a great height—sometimes clothed with the


wild heath, and green with long-armed ivy, that stole down over the face of
the rock, hut generally barren and frowning, black at the base, and with
great black masses peeping out of the water at low tides, all round the
Island. Above them would often appear the green grass, or the yellow furze,
or the purple heath, with the rock butterflies dancing for ever in the merry
gales, blue and grey, and spotted with eyes ; or the fisherman’s solitary hut,
or the thin bramble straggling down over the cliff. Sometimes little valleys
ran down to the sea, rich with golden corn, or ruddy fruits, and smiling with
a sweet smile that betrayed the fertility of the interior, which was so
wonderfully rich and fertile, that it was called the Isle of Vines. And the
coast formed itself into a hundred little bays, where day by day might be
heard the merry laugh of the fisherman’s daughters dancing on the golden
sands, or chasing each other in caves of the rocks.
And now the path grew easier and more beautiful, banks there were, sweet
with violets and wild pansies, and the way was more open; the harebell
smiled from the soft grass, and the pink heath ; the sun shone through the
net-work of the boughs, and the mosses beautiful whh a thousand colors,
clothed the stems of the trees ; the ivy ran up the twisted trunks and hung
in dark festoons from the ends of the boughs, and the voices of the wild
beasts sounded faint and distant, so that they could hardly be heard for the
merry rustling of the leaves, and the soft hum of the bees. Beautiful
butterflies—black and gold, scarlet and crimson and white, brown and
spotted, blue and orange and rich green—sported along the path, and merry
voices of little birds made sweet music for the Princess as she went: yet still
she went warily, for she knew not what dangers might be yet in the path she
had to go.
And the path grew more beautiful yet; the red anemones clustered thickly
round the roots of the chestnuts, whose broad fans waved in the sweet air;
the noble leaves of the acanthus rolled with beautiful curves, and long
purples rose out of the thick mossy grass under her feet; by the side of the
way, too, ran a sweet stream, clear and gentle, over whose smooth surface
the willow bent washing her long hair, and the tall purple flowers rose up
upon the bank, the moths flitted among the rushes, the marsh-mallow and
the marigold studded its banks, and white starry flowers, small and great,
peeped through the swordgrass; above, the honeysuckle and the jasmine,
and beautiful creepers, azure and white, hung from birch and elm, from
firtree and ilex, making the air fragrant with the breath of summer
blossoms. Everywhere the wild vine clung to the boughs, and the blue
forget-me-not ran like electric light along the very edges of the rivulet—
shadowed with deep dark bells of beautiful flowers, that waved over the
water, and as the Princess stept, lo! fire-hearted kingcups and red dragon-
flowers, and white-bells started up under her feet, so that the bird Poesy
when he saw all this, sang a song so sweet and so happy, that the Princess
thought she had never heard the like before.
His lectures, too, were remarkable in their way ; he had such a
supremely quiet and self-possessed manner. Sometimes he spoke
to his subject from notes, as in his exquisitely-tinted discourse on
“ The Analysis of the Sunbeam,” over at Balmain ; and he some-
times wrote and read an elaborated paper, as in his “ Thought,
Feeling, and Imagination,” delivered in this Hall. The following
remarks, which I wrote for the Month, on his “ Currer Bell,”
delivered at the Temperance Hall, will give my views more
vigorously, because more freshly, than I can now after the lapse


of some ten years : —“ Mr. Michael,” I wrote, “is not a bad
orator. Although this is negative, it is no mean praise. When
we consider, or rather remember, how, and how often, our
popular public speakers make, and have made, savage onslaughts
on rhetorical and grammatical proprieties, it is quite refreshing to
hear a gentleman speak good English, in a rich musical voice,
and with the use of generally appropriate gesture. Mr Michael
has, however, one radical defect: he does not know the science,
or the trick, of using his natural gifts. He speaks in too low a
tone of voice, pauses too long between his periods, and keeps you
waiting sometimes six seconds for a word ; when the word comes,
it is sure to be the right one. He took a high, and from his
point of examination, a just view of the life and writings of Currer
Bell. She was a great and a singular woman—singularly great
(for a woman), and greatly singular (for anybody). Yes, she stands
out alone among the lady writers of the age; she is, in fact,
a she-Carlyle fto coin a rough word), writing the philosophy of
actual life in books of story. Mr. Michael understands her works
well, and appreciates them thoroughly. Some criticlings have
found fault with Mr. Michael for his enthusiastic admiration of
Currer Bell’s genius. Now this enthusiastic admiration is the
very secret of the success of Mr. Michael’s lecture. He was
earnest because he was discoursing on a woman who was a miracle
of earnestness among men and women, and he was warm because
he was describing the history of a heart, the healthy development
of whose affections had been stopped by hard circumstances. That
this is the truth of the matter, the whole reading world must
admit. Therefore, Mr. Michael’s high conception of her genius
and character was justifiable, if not positively just. The lecturer
said a great many true and a great many beautiful things in the
progress of his discourse. He told us the cardinal qualities of the
poet were Faith, Love, and Energy. He told us that Power com-
pressed alone could move the soul of the world—drawing a very
happy image from gunpowder ignited on a pan, and within a
metal tube an inch in diameter. He spoke to the heart about a
mother’s love, and every one present thought of a fond mother.
The lecture, or rather oration, was, in a word, one of the best we
have heard since last our own Frank spoke musical words
and strung bright ideas—a “ rosary of brilliants ” —in the School
of Arts.”
[The Lecturer here rapidly sketched Mr. Michael’s life during
his residence in Grafton, Clarence River ; alluded to his friendship
with Mr. Wilcox, the eminent Naturalist, his Honor Mr. Judge
Francis, Mr. Stevenson, Proprietor of the Examiner, and other
esteemed gentlemen. He then dwelt forcibly on the circumstances
attending Michael’s premature death, asserting his belief that it


had been brought about by violence. He could not understand,
he said, a man with such a sense of responsibility to his Creator as
Michael had, rushing blindly into the presence of his Creator,
unless his reason had been suddenly blasted. Besides, his great love
for his son and his comfortable position in life were circumstances
which argued against such a supposition. There were, moreover, his
morbid terror, amounting almost to a preternatural horror, of
water—the fact of his putting on goloshes to save his feet from
damp on the last evening of his life—and the deeply incised
wound, laying the temple-bone bare, and cutting through one of
his eyes—all facts, taken from the evidence at the Coroner’s
Inquest, which went directly to prove violence from others, and
to disprove the possibility of his making away with himself as
some have uncharitably supposed. There was also the significant
circumstance, that many hours had elapsed before his absence from
home was made public. The matter demanded further iiwesti-
gation; and no importance could be attached to the verses,
written by him some three months before, during his illness,
when he had a presentiment that he would be soon called away
from the earth through natural causes. The Lecturer was deeply
moved during his analysis of the evidence (of which only the
merest abstract is here given), more especially in reference to the
fact that Michael had (unintentionally) made enemies in the town
or district of Grafton. * After a few minutes’ pause, Mr. Moore
thus resumed.]
But I must not trespass much further on your kind attention.
If I have done something to defend the memory of my departed
friend from undeserved aspersion ; if I have succeeded in pointing
out some of his brightest intellectual and moral specialities (and
bear in mind, I have not quoted from his most ambitious poems,
such as his “ Retrospection ” and “ Introspection,” nor from his
singularly felicitous translations of Beranger, Dante, and Alfieri);
if I have inspired you with any kindly feeling towards his little
son, a native-born Australian—l shall have accomplished all I
proposed to myself this evening. There is one other thing I am
anxious about—your cooperation in raising a simple stone to mark
Michael’s grave. But, perhaps, a more immediate memorial, and a
more appropriate one, would be to bring out an editio princeps of his
best works ; for most of his writings are, unfortunately, very
badly printed and defectively edited. May I solicit your best
assistance in this matter 1 As soon as I have subscribers’ names
for two hundred copies, I will begin their re-publication.
Michael, with a young poet’s yearning for the Beautiful even
in Death, sketched, in a pathetic ode, before he was twenty years
of age, the kind of last resting-place on earth he would like his
mortal remains to repose in. Here are the stanzas :


MY GRAVE.
When I am dead, my bones be laid
Where green trees w ve !
Where green leaves make a pleasant shade
Above my grave ;
Where dappled sunshine spots the grass,
Pleasant to view;
And to the tomb the last rdys pass
The green leaves through ;
And song-birds clustered overhead
Make music sweet about my bed,
Year after year.
Let him that has not loved his kind
When he was here,
Rot where he loads the sultry wind
With death and fear ;
Where from the clammy, crowded soil
Foul vapours creep,
Angels of Death that spread and spoil
Where poor men sleep.
Foul misty vapours make a gloom,
A nameless shade about his tomb,
Year after year.
Let a sweet stream that murmurs nigh
Gentle and fair,
Invite the traveller passing by
To rest him there ;
Where little waves sweet music make
Under the trees,
And sharp lights on the surface break
In the light breeze ;
And wild-flowers blossom, blue and red,
And tempt the children round my bed,
Year after year.
But thou wilt sit beside the spot
So sweet and fair,
When others have my name forgot;
Not to .weep there,
But to remember how I loved
The trees and flowers, —
But to remember how we loved
In by-gone hours,
And pluck the blossoms, blue and red,
And plant fresh seeds beside my bed,
Year after year.
And when at length the mighty voice
Shall summon thee,
Thou shalt not tremble, but rejoice
To sleep by me ;
To lay once more thy faithful breast
Down by my side.
Waiting together for our rest,
Our time to bide ;
The while sweet blossoms, blue and red,
Scent the long grasses of our bed,
Year after year.


Before I say good-bye, let me reverently turn to this kind
garland, which a loyal and a loving hand has laid on his grave—to
Henry Kendall’s tender
IN MEMO El AM.*
Be his rest the rest he sought:
Calm and deep.
Let no wayward word or thought
Yex his sleep.
[knows —
Peace—the peace that no man
Now remains
Where the wasted woodwind blows,
Wakes, and wanes.
Latter leaves, in Autumn’s breath,
White and sere.
Sanctify the scholar’s death,
Lying here.
Soft surprises of the sun—
Swift, serene, —
O’er the mute grave-grasses run :
Cold and green.
Wet and cold the hillwinds moan:
Let them rave!
Love that takes a tender tone
Lights his grave.
He who knew the friendless face
Sorrows shew,
Often sought this quiet place
Years ago.
One, too apt to faint and fail.
Loved to stray
Here where water-shallows wail
Day by day.
Care that lays her heavy hand
On the best,
Bound him with an iron hand :
Let him rest!
Life, that flieth like a tune.
Left his eyes,
As an April afternoon
Leaves the skies.
Peace is best! if Life was hard
Peace came next.
Thus the scholar—thus the bard—
Lies unvext.
Safely housed at last from rack—
Far from pain ;
Who would wish to have him hack ?
Back again ?
Let the forms he loved so well
Hover near;
Shine of hill and shade of dell,
Year by year.
All the wilful waifs that make
Beauty’s face,
Let them sojourn for his sake
Round this place.
Flying splendours, singing streams,
Lutes and lights,
May they be as happy dreams :
Sounds and sights.
So that Time to Love may say,
“ Wherefore weep ?
“ Sweet is sleep at close of day ?”
Death is sleep.
* Michael is buried in a lovely spot on the north bank of the Clarence River. This place
which was a favorite haunt of the poet, is referred to in the annexed verses. —Note by Mr
Kendall.


616 UO
F1214~2~
\ C&kHj
Note to Poem on “ Immoetality of the Soul.” —Dom. Michael
nuper me sic interrogavit: “ Quid sit Persona ?” “ Est rationalis natures
individua substantia," cum Boetio et Divo Thoma, Doctore Angelico
respondi. “Et Personalitas, quid sit?” ursit. “ Est possessio talis
substantiae simulque cognitio talis possessionis," erat definitiomea. “ Bene
respondisti,” inquit; “ sed est altera questio : An vir unquam foeminam
aut feemina virum genitum fuisse reverva yellet ?” Negative post aliquid
morse respondi. “ Estne hoc argumentum maxime validum,” turn arguit,
“ ut quisque individualiter suam personalitatem agnoscat atque in ea ex
naturse vi gaudeat; et non solum propriam speciem sed etiam propriam
talis speciei possessionem (nempe suam personam—suum EGQ) tenere ac
servare desideret?” “ Utique, amice, tua conclusio est socratica et logica.’’
I n paucis diehus postea, dialogum ex Platonis Alcibiade Primo excerptum
D. Michael exhibui, in quo Socrates, cum Alcibiade colloquens, discrimen
inter animam et corpus solide ae nitide constituit. Hoc est hujus dialogi
conclusio. S. Nonne toto corpore homo utitur? A. Penitus. S. Aliud
utique utens, et quo utitur? A. Yidetur. S. Quid est igitur homo? A.
Ignore. S. Scis esse quod corpore utitur. A. Scio. Post lectionem
Michael dixit, “ Carmen de animse immortalitate scriham, rationes ex
colloquio nostro deducens.” —Notulce Philososophicsz (MS.) VIII. Id.
Maii, 1859.
%* Cf. pp. 7—14. The first statement refers to Michael’s aptitude to do
business for others; the second to his carelessness in respect of his
personal affairs.
Printed by Geok&e Loxton k Company, “Journal of Commerce,” 3 Queen’s Place, Sydney.




