

A LESSON FROM A PRINCE’S DEATH
FUNERAL SERMON,
PREACHED IN ALBERT STREET BAPTIST CHURCH,
MAEGH ie, 18G2,
E.ec»c.iouf> p*MPHujrr
ON THE
&o* Y
DEATH OF PRINCE ALBERT,
THE REV. ISAAC NEW.
(Reprinted from the “Christian Times, ,: )
PRICE SIXPENCE.
_• MELBOURNE;
<1
ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET; BLUNDELL, COLLINS STREET ; STEPHENS, COLLINS
STREET ; MULLEN, COLLINS STREET.
1862,


PREFACE.
The following Discourse was delivered without the least thought of its ever
appearing in print; and the Author had to encounter no small amount of
reluctance before he could comply with the request of friends to submit it
to the public eye; and though he has yielded his consent, it has not been
without considerable misgiving.
I. N.


P 1 'Sl5l>
A LESSON
FROM A PRINCE’S DEATH.
“ There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit j neither hath he power in the day
of death; and there is no discharge in that war."—Ecclesiastes vili.—B.
The death of no public man for many years has
made so deep an impression, created so profound
a sensation, or awakened a feeling of such uni-
versal commiseration and sorrow throughout Great
Britain and her dependencies, as the death of
Prince Albert. His elevated station, his princely
rank, his nearness to the throne, and the endeared
relationship he sustained to our Queen, who is
the object of so much ingenuous affection to all
her subjects, have imparted to this event a power
of disturbing our emotions scarcely expected.
But in addition to these adventitious circum-
stances, he had, by his personal virtues, won for
himself a more than ordinary share of respect
and esteem. His position was a difficult and
delicate one, which required a large amount
of judgment and prudence so to act as to
prevent him from coming into collision with
the prejudices of the people, and involving
him in the loss of their good opinion. The
husband of the Queen, but yet her subject;
prevented by - the constitution of the country
from adding the title of king to his name and
wielding a sceptre ; fenced in on every side by
laws and precedents which deprived him of all
political action in the state in which he occupied
so conspicuous a position; holding all that he
enjoyed as privileges, and not as rights on
sufferance, and not on the ground of legitimate
claim; —had he been a man of restless, in-
triguing ambition—had he gathered around him
a party to put into action an under current of
influence to serve his own ends—or had he
shown any disposition to import into his adopted
country any of the elements of continental des-
potism, so jealous are the British people of their
constitutional freedom, and so tenaciously do
they cling to the political rights which their
forefathers acquired at so immense a cost, and
bequeathed them as a most sacred inheritance to
their offspring, that such conduct would have
involved himself, and the Queen as well, in the
bitterest odium and the most perilous indigua-
tion. But he had too much wisdom to be guilty
of such folly, and too much good sense to
expose himself to such threatening danger. He
had an apprehension so clear of the position he
occupied as ever to demean himself in it with
undeviating consistency ; and so distinct a per-
ception of his duty as to do it without awaken-
ing any suspicion, or sacrificing his dignity.
Educated in one of the German universities, he
devoted himself with diligence to his studies, and
by his persevering application, and his severe
self-discipline, he acquired more than usual
repute. He came into the country which was
to be his future home, an amiable young man,
but of considerable promise, modest but yet
evincing more than ordinary self-possession and
self-respect. Having gained the affections of
the Queen, he won her hand and became her
husband. Both were young and were con-
sequently liable to the indiscretions of youth,
but none such are on record. Lifted to notice
before the eye of a nation, and invested with
most solemn responsibilities, he was watched
with keenest vigilance, but he came out of the
scrutiny with a character unblemished and
above surmise. In one or two instances the
public press endeavoured to fasten on him the
charge of a meddling interference in the affairs
of State, which were beyond his province, but it
melted into nothing; and along a course of
twenty-two years, notwithstanding its difficulties
he went on gradually gaining the confidence
and affection of the English people, till at length
he has passed away without a stain on his
escutcheon, or a blot upon his name.
Could the history of courts be written with
faithful accuracy, it is to be feared it would be a
very doleful one. If the veil were uplifted,?which
has hidden from public view, and in a great
measure concealed from public knowledge the
deeds of iniquity which have been perpetrated
there, it might raise a blush on the face of
humanity. But there have been illustrious


exceptions, and one of the most distinguished of tation, and impatient of control, her sceptre
those exceptions has been the court of our Queen, in many instances was a rod of iron. Perhaps,
Vioe was frowned bevond its precincts, and when we look at the times in which she lived, it
Vice was frowned beyond its precincts, and
virtue reigned predominant; the domestic affec-
tions greatly prevailed, and were impressively
revealed; a high degree of conjugal felicity was
enjoyed. The Prince was an affectionate hus-
band, a fond but judicious father. The strictest
order and decorum were exhibited in all the pro-
ceedings of the palace. It has been said to have
had all the arrangement of a beautiful, happy
English home. In addition to the daily worship
conducted in the royal family, I was informed
from a credible source, when in England, that
the Queen and her husband were accustomed to
spend frequently a portion of each day in a devo-
tional reading of the scriptures. At the time to
which I refer, there were servants in the house-
hold of various denominations of Christians, but
the utmost toleration was allowed. Two of them
were members of the Baptist Church in Windsor,
and one I believe was a deacon, but not the
slightest restriction was imposed on the enjoy-
ment of their religious privileges. Recently we
have been informed that the governess of one of
the young princesses is also a Dissenter, which,
when we remember that the Queen is the legal
head of the Church of England, and that the
Prince was a member of the Lutheran Church,
neither of which churches has ever been distin-
guished by their kindly feeling to the dissidents
of another faith, are facts eminently to their
honour, revealing the enlightened principles by
which they were governed. Notwithstanding the
heavy expenses involved in maintaining what have
been called “ the decent splendours of royalty,”
yet the most rigid economy was observed in
conducting the affairs of the royal household,
combined, however, with an affluent and a
wisely-regulated generosity; and that this was
attributable very much to the personal super-
vision and the judicious management of the
Prince is well known. Hence along the twenty-
five years, or nearly, during which the Queen has
sat on the British throne, I do not remember a
single instance of an appeal being made to the
House of Commons for a grant to liquidate debts
which extravagance had caused ; and when we
consider how shamelessly this was often done
during the reigns of the two Georges, the third
and the fourth, frequently irritating their sub-
jects almost to rebellion, it proclaims in language
too distinct to be mistaken the prudential
domestic government which has been carried on
in the royal house. And besides this, I am per-
suaded you will agree with me that no monarch
ever reigned in England who kept himself or
herself more completely within the limits of con-
stitutional law, or came less into collision with
the feelings of the subject from any supposed
invasion of his political rights than Queen Victoria.
Her name will therefore go down to subsequent
ages, consecrated in the hearts of posterity, and
surrounded with a lustre, more chastened, ’tis
true, but not less enduring, than that of Elizabeth
herself. That Queen, we know, was called to
reign at a difficult period in the history of our
country; and taking all circumstances into
account, she ruled weff, and lifted England to an
elevation among the nations which it had never
previously attained. But then she was a
Tudor, and consequently a tyrant. Proud,
haughty, arrogant, self-willed, resenting die-
was necessary that it should be so ; but notwith-
standing her imperious sway, she managed by
her dazzling qualities to fascinate the hearts of
her subjects, and to lead them captive to her
will, and that was enough. But if our present
Queen has less energy of character, she has more
of moral beauty; if she has less of self-assertion,
she has far more of those excellencies which
inspire confidence and love; so that, perhaps,
never at any period did the feeling of loyalty, so
congenial to English hearts, palpitate with so
strong an affection as at this moment. And I
advert to these things because it is impossible
not to believe that much of this is owing to her
amiable Consort, whose unexpected death we
all, with her, so deeply deplore.
As to the personal qualities of the Prince, they
were such as tended to conciliate and not to
repel; to win esteem and not to excite aversion.
There was dignity with condescension, manliness
with grace, firmness tempered with-suavity. To
all who sustained the relation of dependents, he
was courteous and affable, and he secured their
willing services by not exacting them with stern-
ness ; while he rewarded them with expressions
of his approbation. Hence it has been said, that
he never lost a faithful and honest servant, but
he retained them by the force of attachment,
and by his considerate regard. And it is but in
harmony with the amiable spirit of Her Majesty,
to find that she has intimated her wish that not
one of his retinue shall be discharged, but that
all shall be retained in her service. His
bearing in public was princely, but without any
arrogance and hauteur. He was fond of rural
sports, and was attached to rural pursuits; but
it is not in evidence that he had any inclination
to those more questionable sports which demoralise
and do not improve, which tend to degrade
the minds of those who love them, rather than to
elevate and refine. When he appeared before
the public eye, it was never in connection with
anything inconsistent with morality or religion
(two or three debateable instances perhaps
excepted), so that he has never made an impres-
sion which has awakened the least suspicion of
any thing unfavourable to the one or the other.
He was a liberal patron of science and the fine
arts. He took a deep interest in everything
pertaining to agriculture and to the improvement
of estates. Whatever contributed to the eleva-
tion of the labouring classes found in him a firin
and devoted friend. He was intimately identi-
fied with the British Association, and frequently
attended its meetings ; the year before last he
was its president. The merit of originating the
Exhibition of 1851 which exerted so beneficial
an influence throughout the whole civilised
world, was all his own ; and to the one antici-
pated this year he was looking forward with
eager satisfaction and pleasure. In fact, there
was nothing which was in any way favourable to
the intellectual, the social and the material well-
being of the people, in which he did not take a
most solicitous interest. Kind and generous was
he to the poor and distressed, while whatever
tended to promote the success of charitable objects,
his name, with that of the Queen frequently
appeared as most munificent contributors.
And so grateful was the impression he had sue-


Ceeded in universally producing on the English in all the events of this lower world, whose
mind, that I am not aware of any one thing activity is determined by unerring wisdom, and
which was calculated to disturb it. We cannot
wonder, therefore, that his decease at a period
so unlooked for, should have created a feeling of
such general mourning and regret, and have
awakened so deep and lively a sympathy with
our beloved Queen. Cut of at a time of life
when a great portion of his family was rising
around him ; when they most needed his counsel
and guidance, his judicious training and dis-
cipline ; and w r hen the gradual unfoldings of the
mind, revealing amiable excellencies, or incipient
tendencies to evil, call into exercise those varied
emotions which exert so chastening and mellowing
an influence on the parental character, his loss
must be severely felt; and must leave in the
heart of our widowed Sovereign, especially after
the comparatively recent death of her excellent
mother, a sense of desolation and distress difficult
to conceive. When, therefore, we think of the
commanding position he occupied, and the force
of his example on the higher classes, and on the
interests of public virtue, his decease is a national
loss, giving birth to an intensity of regret,
aggravated by its suddenness, and rendered
pungent by the fact that the arrow of the great
archer pierced him in the meridian of his powers
and in the vigour of his days.
Look, then, at this spectacle of fallen great-
ness. Lifted to the loftiest eminence, seated on
the highest step of the throne, surrounded with
the pomp and glory of earth, in the possession
of all the materials of terrestrial felicity, having
at his command all the appliances and means
which the first medical skill could afford, sharing
largely in the sympathies of friends who were
ready, if required, to hazard immense resources
to perpetuate his life, but all to no purpose.
The fiat had gone forth, —thehour of his mortality
had come,- and he had to experience, with the
meanest subject of the realm, “that there is no
man that hath power over the spirit to retain
the spirit, neither hath he power in the day of
death, and that there is no discharge in that
war.” The great enemy, when permission is
given him, knows no relenting. The tears of
royalty cannot melt him ! the cries of agonised
children, however dignified their rank, stay not
his hand; he strikes the fatal blow Avith unerring
aim, and his victim dies, his Avork on earth is
done, there is no reappearing, and the “place
Avhich knew him will knoAV him no more.” The
precise position of Prince Albert can be re-occu-
pied by no other. Were Providence to design
for Her Majesty another husband, he could not
be the husband of her first love. His children
can have no second father; a Amid has been
created in their young hearts which can never
be filled up. Their lacerated affections time
may heal, but the remembrance Avill never pass
away. Who would not desire, therefore, that
the painful stroke may prompt the cry from
each one of his surviving family to Him who
sits on the throne of the universe, “Wilt Thou
not from this time be my Father and the guide
of my youth ?”
By the irreligious mind, nothing will be recog-
nised in this event but a mere casual occurrence.
Disease attacked him —it baffled the wit and the
wisdom of physicians—and he died, that is all.
But we know it is not all. There is a power
superior to death. There is an agency in action
regulated by previous plan and arrangement.
“ A sparrow cannot fall without your Father,”
much less a prince. The Providential govern-
ment of theworldisa doctrine taught us through-
out the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation; and
it is a mark of impiety “ not to regard the Avork
of the Lord, nor to consider the operation of his
hands. 1 ” therefore, says the Psalmist, “The Lord
shall destroy them and not build them up.” God
is represented as acting in all, diffusing an influ-
ence through all, as putting forth a poAver which
determines all. Even the wickedness of men he
turns to account. He makes their wrath to praise
him. Jacob deceives his brother, and obtains
the birthright; but that is Avorked into the Divine
arrangement, and in its results it harmonised with
the Divine will. Joseph is sold by his brethren
into Egypt, and he is supposed to be dead,
but it was God that conducted him there.
Pharaoh, the Egyptian tyrant, oppresses Israel,
and their life is rendered wretched by cruel
wrongs; “but,” says God, “for this cause
I have raised thee up, to show forth my power in
thee. ” Moses appears as the deliverer and legis-
lator of the chosen seed; but ‘ ‘ Have not I
ordained thee ?” says God. The rains descend,
but he sends them; the sun shines, but he causes
it to know the time of its rising; the seasons
return, but he gives summer and winter, seed
time and harvest. He binds the sweet influences
of Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the
chambers of the south. He makes the grass to
grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man. The hearts of all men are in his hands,
and he turns them as the rivers of water. He
fixes the bounds of our habitation ; he arranges
our lot. There is no event but it is of God,
directly or indirectly. Men live and men die ;
they act their part in their several stations,
whether of insignificance or of distinction; they
pervade the spheres they occupy, whether of
quietude or of activity; they exert an influence
on their generation— it may be limited or it may
be extensive, it may be for good or it may be for
evil, it may be to bless or it may be to curse.
But, in the midst of all, there is no accident;
nothing is fortuitous. God rules in the midst of
the earth ; he determines the course of events as
it pleaseth him ; he controls the actions of men,
and subserves them to his purposes ; by him
kings reign, and princes decree justice. Thoughts,
motives, feelings, designs are materials of his
government. Nothing occurs, as time flows on,
but is woven by a Divine hand into the web of
that vast historical drama which, Avhen it is
completed, will be a wondrous manifestation of
the manifold Avisdom of God, All things are of
God. Of him, through him, and to him, are all
things.
Apply this, then, to the case before us. About
five or six-and-twenty years ago a young man of
attractive manners enters the University of
Bonn as a law student. He is a descendant
from an illustrious house, Avhich included in it
the celebrated Elector of Saxony - the great
friend and patron of Luther. He is accustomed
to rise early in the morning, and to pursue his
studies through the day with energetic diligence,
as if his subsistence depended upon it. He
acquires the character of an assiduous and suc-
cessful scholar. In 1838 he visits England with


his father, to be present at the coronation of the could be surrounded. On all public occasions,
Queen. He had not seen her before. In the
interviews at the royal palace he fixes her
attention—he wins her affections—he gains her
hand—he becomes her husband, and in becoming
her husband he becomes the father of a numerous
family, and, in all probability, the ancestor of a
long line of sovereigns to sit on the English
throne, with collateral branches of princely
dignity and royal relationship. But in the’midst
of his days, in the maturity of his powers, when
his cup seemed to be filled with the wine of
earthly felicity, with his bones full of marrow and
his soul yet exuberant with life, he sickens
and dies, filling the palace with tears, and
covering an empire with mourning. And is
this all chance, nothing but chance? What,
when a sparrow cannot fall without God ?
My friends, we have no faith in such an atheistic
creed. God has done this deed. His own
hand struck the fatal blow. “ Even so, Father,
for so it seemed good in thy sight.” And it is
for us to bow in resignation and submissive
acknowledgment, not losing the lesson which by
this event he has sought to teach.
I. We learn, then, from this event the vanity
and instability of all human distinctions. These
are the objects of a restless ambition. We are
the victims of illusion; we are governed very
much through the medium of the imagination.
The dazzle and the pomp of elevated station
fascinate the gaze; the glitter of factitious de-
coration charms while it deceives, attracts while
it ensnares. Men are but full-grown children.
They are enchanted by splendour, and are rapt
to exhilaration by gaudy allurements, which have
no power to satisfy the soul. Reason is many
a time lead captive by poetic visions never to be
realised. The exhibitions of a puppet show,
and the dramatic representations of a theatre
will kindle admiration and swell the spirit with
delight, which will often remain unmoved by the
radiant magnificence of a setting sun, or the more
beautiful scenes of nature. Hence, as men lift
their eyes towards the summit of society, and
behold there the moving pageants, sparkling with
meteoric coruscation and visionary lustre, they
are apt to get intoxicated with the sight. They
begin to struggle, they try to rise, they commence
the ascent, they climb the rugged way with weary
steps, and many a time with bleeding feet and
aching hearts, forgetful that what they see is
but vapour, gay it may be with radiant
hues, which as substance they can never
grasp, and which may vanish to-morrow into the
darkness of night. Oh ! the infatuation which
confounds and bewilders the intellect of men,
ever turning away from realities to be cheated
and deluded by fantastic forms. Look at the
Prince Consort. He had reached the highest
position which, as a foreigner, he could attain in
a country perhaps the greatest on the earth.
He took his station on all occasions by the side
of the Queen to which he was intimately bound ;
he had his residence in a palace which had been
the home of a long line of kings ; his eye rested
on all the ensigns of grandeur, dignity, and
royalty; his feet trod and moved on the most
illustrious theatre of human greatness ; honours
had been heaped upon him ; titles had been con-
ferred in abundance ; numerous offices he filled
which had been encircled with all the insignia of
renown; all the glory invested him with which he
next to the Sovereign, he was the observed of
all observers. But look at him there, in that
chamber hung with drapery of richest colours;
but what was it all to him any more than the
humblest cottage of the poorest peasant ?
Disease is upon him; it has fastened on his
vitals. The perfection of the medical art is
there, but it cannot cure him. He declines, he
languishes, he dies, and there is an end of all the
glory. They may erect a mausoleum over his
ashes, inscribed with the proudest eulogies
which the fondest affection can dictate; but the
vision is gone, the curtain has dropped, the
scenic attraction has vanished from the view
of the spectators to re appear no more. And if,
in the unspeakable mercy of Heaven, it is per-
mitted the departed prince to look down from a
higher and a purer realm on the scene he has left,
and on the distinctions he had won, viewed in
the light of God and eternity, what gewgaws
do they all appear! what gilded -toys ! what
unsubstantial bubbles dancing on the stream of
time ! “Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher,
vanity of vanities, all is vanity.”
Solomon, the author of the book from which
I have taken my text, had wealth, possessions,
distinctions, honour, fame, influence, respect,
beyond that of the prince whose death we
lament; but his estimate of them amid the
sated feelings and penitential emotions of his con-
cluding life I have given you. But yet, these
vanities are the very things for which multitudes
pant, toil, labour, with patient, unfaltering and
ceaseless assiduity. They are the morning’s
first thought —they are the night’s last consider-
ation—they fill up the moments of each day.
They task the intellect, the soul, the powers of
thought—all the appliances and energies of the
life. They string the nerves, they brace the
sinews, they concentrate the mighty power of
the human will. Invention, skill, effort, are
exhausted for them. Nobler enjoyments, loftier
pursuits, and purer pleasures are all sacrificed
for them ; and yet, what are these very tilings
for which so immense a price is paid ? There
are sorrows they will not assuage, griefs
they will not extinguish, pangs they will
not alleviate. There are tears they will not
wipe away, broken hearts they will not heal, and
blighted hopes they will not revivify. There
may be remorse in the conscience they cannot
subdue, agitating fears they cannot quell, dreary
forebodings they cannot dissipate. Despair may
crush down the soul until it is tortured with the
agonising consciousness that it is lost, which
they cannot by any charm or illusion expel,
while death, grim death, revolting death is in-
vincible to their power. Why, my friends, these
vanities and allurements, deriving their exclusive
meaning from their relation to the present exist-
ence, are often distinguished for their utter
worthlessness in reference to this life. ’Tis true,
viewed under one aspect, they have a value
which is not to be despised. Begarded in their
bearing on the development of humanity as at
present constituted, and on the administration
of human affairs, they may be considered as the
blessings of a beneficent Providence, which dis-
tributes them at pleasure. But the fatal spell
from which I wish to disenchant you is that
which leads multitudes to attach to them a ficti-
tious importance, beneath the influence of which


they offer for them so costly a sacrifice. You will go into such
must die. “ There is no man who has power
over the spirit to retain the spirit, ” when that
hour comes, and there is no discharge in that
war. Oh ! do not then trust to these fleeting
vanities, these perishable treasures, to avail you
anything amid the dread solemnities of such a
scene. They will then appear lighter than dust,
valueless as a withered gourd.
2. But the death of the Prince Consort reads
us a solemn and instructive lesson on the pre-
cariousness of life. Not long before his brief
illness he was in the full enjoyment of health.
The springs of life in him seemed strong, and
apparently promised a protracted duration of
active usefulness for many years. He was busily
engaged in those duties of his position to which
he was accustomed to give most assiduous atten-
tion. Perhaps he was looking forward with
animated interest to that Exhibition this year
which was to add a new gem to his coronet, and
a new lustre to his fame. He may have been
intent on carrying out many plans having a
reference to the welfare of his children, and was
possibly anticipating, as within the limits of a
high probability, a green old age, in connection
with his illustrious spouse, in the midst of an
honoured and honouring family. But a huge,
portentous shadow gathers over his hopes.
Providence, in its inscrutable counsels, had other-
wise determined. The great spoiler was per-
mitted to come and mark him out as his victim,
proclaiming as he did so, * ‘ All flesh is grass, and
all the glory of man is as the flower of grass
and when death thus acquires its commission to
enter the arena of conflict with the life of man,
“there is none hath power over the spirit to
retain the spirit, and there is no discharge in that
war.” What may seem casualty to us is fixed
and arranged by heaven. Man is born at the
time, under the circumstances, and in the con-
dition in which God sees fit. He passes along
the course which an invisible hand has pre-
scribed ; and he dies at the time, in the
manner, and by the instrumentality which
the All-wise ordains. But the book of his ordi-
nation is closed to us—its leaves are sealed
its contents are hidden —we know not
what shall be futurity is dark to us
mysteriously dark. Some disease may have
begun its insidious operation upon our system, of
which we may be unconscious, which ere long
may have a fatal issue. Some virulent influence,
unseen by us, may be streaming towards us at
this moment, under the direction of that eye
which cannot be deceived, and which, by touch-
ing the principle of life, may speedily bring us
to the grave. Some event may be on the eve of
occurring, of which we little dream, and in a few
days eternity may open its gates and let us in.
We may be rejoicing in the fulness of our
strength, and in the hilarity of our feelings
—we may be meditating our pleasant plans
—be anticipating successful results—be look-
ing forward, in delightful hope, to the at-
tainment of some object on which the heart
is fixed but that object we may never
attain—those results we may never realise—our
plans we may never live to accomplish. The
great reaper, Death, may come at a time when
we are not looking for him, and may gather the
harvest of all our thoughts and labours. “Go
to, now, ye that say to-day and to-morrow we
city, and continue there
a year, and buy and sell, and get gain.
Whereas ye know not what will be on the
morrow. For what is your life, it is even
a vapour, which appeareth for a little while,
and then vanisheth away. For that ye
ought to say —if the Lord will we shall
live, and do this and that. ” My friends, it is
folly, it is an absurdity, it is gross impiety to
leave out of our calculations the possibility of
a Divine agency intruding upon us, and, virtually
saying, ‘ ‘ Thy calculations are nothing, thy
imaginations are vain, the Lord hath, rejected
thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in
them.” So long as the issues of things are not
in our hands, so long as there is an all-governing
power independent of our control, we ought to
acknowledge that power, we ought to take it
into account. Both wisdom, religion, and per-
sonal interests combine to dictate the propriety
of endeavouring to bring our hearts into harmony
with the rule of Him by whom that power is
wielded. But when we remember that that
power is wielded in mercy, and that as a general
law in the present constitution of things, it is
regulated by infinite benevolence, there is some-
thing cheering in the thought, something cal-
culated to compose the mind amid the uncertain-
ties of life, the death of friends, and in the
prospect of that period when we too must
surrender ourselves to the dominion of that law,
which, in its operations, is conducting the entire
race to the oblivions of the tomb.
3. But we are reminded by this event of the
unutterable value of true religion. It is the
Pearl of Great Price. With respect to the
piety of the deceased Prince, we are, of course,
not in possession of such information as to enable
us to form a sure judgment, or to utter an
undoubted conviction; but we have very strong
reasons for concluding that he was not a stranger to
its principles in life, nor destitute of its supports
in death. It was’stated by an eminent minister
in London, on very good authority, in a funeral
sermon which he preached on the occasion, that
when the Prince’s illness commenced, one of the
physicians said, “Your Boy al Highness will be
better in a few daysto which he replied, “ I
am sure this illness will be fatal, but I am not
afraid.” The physician then retired, but shortly
after returning he said, “I most sincerely hope
your Eoyal Highness will not realise the fulfil-
ment of your own prediction.” The Prince
answered, “I have no fear of the result. I* am
surrounded with wealth and rank, but if 1
trusted only to them, I should be a miserable
man. I have made my peace with heaven.” The
Bev. Baptist Noel stated, in a speech, “ that the
clergyman on whose ministrations the royal
family were accustomed to attend when at
Osborne, was a very good and excellent man,
and that the more faithful his sermons were, the
more was he thanked for them by the Prince. ”
and Mr. Noel stated at the same time that, in a
letter from a nobleman who attended the Prince
in his illness to the last, it was said that he was
frequently repeating on his death-bed that cele-
brated hymn of Toplady’s
“ Rock of ages, cleft for me 1
Let me hide myself in thee.”
and to a distinguished lady at court he said, not
long before his last illness, “ that a simple trust


in the Saviour was the pivot of his religion, public life of the Prince at variance, but
These, of course, are pleasing and most gratifying very much in harmony with them. How
11 i a j *l* • i j x. * : A oi /I 1 xr iia flm -fnnlinnr onvrnw
statements. A very striking incident is said to
have occurred in connection with the last sermon
before the court at Balmoral, last autumn. The
preacher was the Rev. Mr. Stewart of Edin-
burgh, who discovered after he had entered
the pulpit, that he had forgotten his manuscript
which he was going to read. It occurred to him
however, that he had recently composed a sermon
on the text “Prepare to meet thy God.” He
therefore preached that sermon, and with great
fluency and power. Her Majesty and the Prince
were so much struck with the discourse that they
sent a message to the preacher, expressing the
pleasure with which they had listened to it, and
requesting a sight of the manuscript. It was, of
course, at once forwarded to the court. Shortly
after, it was returned with a request that it be
published. It was so, and is now in extensive
circulation in Scotland. Now, when we think of
the circumstances under which it was delivered,
it may have been kindly intended by God as an
especial message to the Prince. It is stated on
the authority of the Rev. J. Stoughton, who long
resided in Windsor, that a beautifully executed
statue stands at the top of the Queen’s staircase
in the palace, which represents the boy-king,
Edward the sixth, pointing with his sceptre to
a passage in the Bible which he holds in his left
hand and on which he is intently looking. The
passage is this, “Josiah was eight years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned thirty-eight
years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all
the ways of David his father, turning neither to
the right nor the left.” This statue the late
Prince had executed, with the design of its being
a constant memento to his son, the heir presump-
tive to the throne, of that significant Divine rule
by which the future sovereign of England should
fashion his heart and life. And we are told, on
the same authority, that the Queen had so exalted
a conception of the excellencies of her husband
that she was accustomed to hold up his example
to her children as a model for their imitation in
all things. In closing these references I cannot
forbear reading two beautiful stanzas of a hymn
which is said to have been a great favourite with
the Prince:—
I shall not in the grave [remain,
Since Thou death’s bonds hast severed;
By hope with Thee to rise again,
* Prom fear of death delivered.
I’ll come to Thee where’er Thou art,
Live with Thee, from Thee never part,
Therefore to die is rapture.
And so to Jesus Christ I’ll go,
My longing arm extending;
So fall asleep in slumber deep—
Slumber that knows no ending —
Till Jesus Christ, God’s only Son,
Open the gates of bliss —leads on
To heaven, to life eternal.
Now, what inference can we draw respecting any
individual to whom such a hymn is a favourite,
but that there must be feelings in the heart in
delightful sympathy with its spirit. But the
probability as to the truth of the statements
that have been adduced is greatly strengthed
by the fact that there was nothing in the
considerably then is the feeling of sorrow
chastened and sanctified by the consolatory hope
that though he has disappeared from earth, yet
that he has past away to a higher, a nobler, a
more princely condition than that which he occu-
pied here. But were it permitted us to indulge
in such a supposition, that he had no such hope,
would there not be something truly appalling in
the thought of the spirit of such a man without
any religion passing away from amid wealth and
pomp, splendour and influence, and entering the
dark unseen—dark to us, but an awful reality to
him—and to find himself stripped of all his artificial
distinctions, and left naked, destitute, without a
righteousness, and without a plea, speechless and
confounded in the presence of his Judge,—a
Judge whom no gifts can bribe, no veil elude,
and no apology conciliate, and to feel himself
condemned, —then driven away as if in a whirl-
wind of terror from the glory and majesty of the
Divine Presence to that abyss which is bottom-
less, uncheered by hope, and lost in despair.
“ Where,” says the Rev. Robert Hall, “ shall we
find the tears fit to be wept at such a spectacle ?
Or could we realize the calamity in all its extent,
what tokens of commiseration and concern
would be deemed equal to the occasion? Would
it suffice for the sun to veil his light, and the
moon her brightness; to cover the ocean with
mourning, and the heavens with sackcloth, or
were the whole fabric of nature to become ani-
mated and vocal, would it be possible for her to
utter a groan too deep, or a cry too piercing, to
express the magnitude and extent of such a
catastrophe?” And yet, awful as is the thought,
it is possible for each one of you in another
world to realise that catastrophe in all its extent
and magnitude in your own experience.
My friends, remember, in reference to your
highest and best interests, riches are of no avail,
distinctions are of no avail—fame is of no avail—
the comforts, and decencies, and respectabilities
of life, can be of no avail. Nothing can avail you in
the hour of death or at the day of judgment, but an
interest in the precious blood of Christ, and a heart
renewed and made pure by the Spirit of his grace.
How is it, then, with you ? Do not let your
thoughts be so absorbed by the death of the late
Prince as to forget yourselves. He died unex-
pectedly, when, to all human appearance, he had
years before him. But he is gone, and you have
no more guarantee than he had that your death
will not be equally unexpected as his. Only let
the great enemy come with his leaden sceptre,
and sweeping scythe, “and there is no discharge
in that war.” Are you, then, prepared ? Are you
ready? Are your houses in order? Are your
lamps trimmed, and your lights burning ? Have
you, as the departed prince said he had, made
your peace with heaven ? Can you look forward
into futurity with confidence ? And could you
meet death with composure, and your God in
peace? If so, well. But if not, “what shall it
profit a man, if he gain the whole woi'ld and lose
his own soul ?—or w'hat shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?” “Now, then, is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation.’’ “ To
day, tvhile ye hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.” Amen.
William Goodhugh and Co., Printers, 48 Flinders I.ane East, Melbourne.
