

THE
FIRST
REPORT
OF
The Committee
OF THE
BRITISH SOCIETY,
FOR PROMOTING
THE REFORMATION
O F
FEMALE PRISONERS.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM BELCH, 1, STAVERTON ROW,
NEWINGTON BUTTS.
1822.


A T the first Annual Meeting of the
“ British Society for promoting the Rejormation of
Female Prisoners,” held, at the Friends’ Sleeting Mouse,
Bishopsgate Street, London, the Hist of 5 mo. (Slag) 1822,
It was agreed, that the Report which had been read,
be printed and circulated under the direction
of the Committee, and that the following be
the Officers for the ensuing Year.
Uatroneus,
THE DUCHESS QF GLOUCESTER.
Creasiureru,
FRANCES WILLIAMS, ELIZABETH JOSEPH FRY.
s?eerctartco.
ANN STEINKOPFF, ELIZABETH DUDLEY.
Committee.
LADY MACKINTOSH
SOPHIA VANSITTART,
EMILY JERNINGHAM,
SUSAN PITCHFORD,
LOUISA HOARE,
MARY SHAW,
SARAH FOSTER,
DORCAS COVENTRY,
ANN CHRISTY,
MARY HAGEN,
(lAN.NAH CHAPMAN,
HANNAH MESSER,
ELIZABETH FRY,
ANN DALE,
MARTHA SAVORY,
LVDIA NEWMAN,
RACHEL FOSTER,
SOPHIA J)K CHIEVRE,
ELIZABETH N. PRYOR,
ELIZABETH SANDERSON,
ELIZABETH BOUZER FRY
KATHARINE FRY,
MARY HAN BURY,


REPORT.
presenting their First Report to the subscribers
and friends of the British Society, the Committee
feel fully authorized to state their increasing con-
viction of the value and importance of the object
for which they have been associated : a conviction
which is strengthened by the gradual increase of
efficient auxiliaries in this country, the interest and
persevering labours excited in foreign parts, and the
encouraging accounts transmitted, respecting those
female culprits who have had the advantage of in-
struction, and a course of salutary prison discipline,
previously to being sent abroad.
The situation of female convicts, having been made
prominent in the address circulated last year, the
Committee deem it right early to notice the improved
condition of those exiles ; and have much pleasure
in bringing forward extracts of two letters from the
worthy Chaplain of the colony in New South Wales,
which have been received within the year.
Parametta, Feb. 21st, 1821.
“ A house of accommodation is at length provided
“for the female convicts, and is opened this day.
“ I hope now it will be in my power to give you a
“ more regular and more favorable account of the
“ female convicts in future, than what I have done
“ yet. I believe the Commissioner is convinced that
“ my statement of the situation of the female convicts
“at Parametta, addressed to Governor Macquaire,
“ wasnot coloured too deep; their morals were full


“as bad as I had represented them, and their
“ miseries as great, lam happy to say that they
“ arc at this very moment walking, for the first time,
“ to their new habitation in my sight, while I am
" writing this hasty line. I consider the foundation
“ stone laid this morning, for honor, happiness, and
“ religion, to build upon. The females will not now
“ be compelled to live in such scenes of human misery
“ and vice as they have hitherto done. I have now
“ the satisfaction to see this object attained; I have
“ sown in hope, and the early and latter rain will
“ descend upon the seed, and the dew of heaven will
“ distil upon it, and bring it to maturity. Wc can
“ only contribute our mite while we live, to counter-
“ act the evil that sin has .introduced into the world ;
“ and the great Head of the Church, the ever blessed
“ God, will not be unmindful of our labours of
“ love, if they extend no further than a cup of cold
“ water.”
August the. itti, 1821.
“ I wrote you on the very day the female convicts
“ were admitted into the New Penitentiary: this
“ building is so far completed, as to afford lodgings
“ for the women, yet every step is to be taken for their
“ moral improvement. There have been generally
“ from eighty to one hundred women in the Peniten-
“ tiary. besides children, up to the present time;
“ and in the day, from seventy to eighty men at work;
“ tho’ the men and women ate separated at night,
“ as the men lodge in the town where they can, yet
“ they have access to each other during the day;
“ this evil is very great, but will be remedied in
“ time. A very great object is gained in having a
“ building for their accommodation, so far as con-
“ cerns their comfort, and their connection with the


“ public, as they arc now prevented from living in
“ such scenes of drunkenness, vice, and misery,
“as formerly. I have been exceedingly gratified
■“ with reading the report of the Committee of pri-
“ son discipline, and am encouraged from that
“ report, to look for better times, and have no doubt
“ but the period will arrive when we shall be able
“to class the prisoners, and find them suitable
“ employment; till this is done they will not make
“ any great advances in the improvement of their
“ morals; if wc can improve the moral habits of the
“ women, they will aid in improving the men; and I
“ hope, at some future period, we shall be able to
“ give you a better account of those who have come
“ from under your instructions, by being able to
“ second your exertions after their arrival; tho’ we
“ are situated on opposite sides |of the Globe,
“ yet Our labours may unite, and be productive of
“ much happiness to our fellow creatures, both here
“ and hereafter. A foundation of morality and re-
“ ligion, may be laid in the minds of the convicts
“ who are transported to this colony, upon which
“ their children may build their happiness; and
“generations yet unborn, may by this means be
“ conducted into the paths of virtue, and render
“ this rising empire a blessing to all the heathen
“ natives within its influence. I know numbers here
“ who have become good wives and mothers, that
“ were once lost to society and to themselves.”
Another document, in reference to this part of
the subject, is also thought worthy of insertion,
which has been taken from a work lately published
by Thomas Reid, Surgeon in the R. N. who acted
a very useful part as Surgeon Superintendent of a
convict ship, a few years ago, viz:


“ Dr. Bromley, who was Surgeon Superintendant
“ in the Lord Wellington, assured me, that he had
“ less trouble with the women who came from New-
“ gate, than all the rest; three of these very women,
“ on their arrival, were received into the service of
“ Mrs. Governor Macquairo, where their conduct
“ was so uniformly correct, as to merit that Lady’s
“ approbation, a circumstance so uncommon, that
“ she felt it a duty to acquaint Mrs, Fry of the
“ happy change. Mrs. Macquaire was prevented
“ from writing by ill health, at the time I left the
“colony, but desired me to communicate the fact,
“ as she had herself intended.”
While accounts of this kind respecting such as
are enduring the penalty of banishment, cannot fail
to cheer and encourage those who have laboured
for their benefit, the Committee feel peculiar pleasure
in being able to state instances of reformation with-
in the sphere of their own knowledge, and some
reported to them by local associations in the country.
One young woman, who was a prisoner in one of the
remote counties, has been living nine months in the
family of a clergyman in the metropolis, where she
is deemed an honest and well-disposed servant,;
another, who had been under sentence of transpor-
tatiota in Newgate, but owing to her good conduct
while there was sent to the Penitentiary at Milbank,
has been recently discharged, before the expiration of
the term allotted her in that prison, and is now in a
respectable situation, likely to regain the character
of an industrious servant, and so sensible of the
advantage she derived from the instruction bestowed
upon her in Newgate, and, through the kindness of
the Chaplain at the Penitentiary, that she expresses
herself truly thankful that, by having been convicted


for a first offence, her progress in wickedness was
so soon checked. While iii prison, this young woman
learned to read, and appears very grateful for being
able to peruse her bible. Four others are also in
service, and sCem likely to do well; and one young
woman maintains herself by knitting, and the work
is disposed of at the "Newgate sales.
A woman, who Was under sentence of death when
the Newgate Association was first formed, and who
had been a notorious dealer in forged notes, and
otherwise very immoral in her conduct ; has for
above three years past, with some parochial assis-
tance and occasional help from the prison fund,
maintained herself and a numerous family in a
respectable manner, and there is reason to believe
has entirely forsaken her vicious practices and
associates ; a circumstance which is the more re-
markable, from her having been greatly addicted to
drunkenness. A correspondent, who is zealously
engaged in visiting the prisons of a distant county,
has lately transmitted the following pleasing facts.
“ has taken a woman from the female Peniten-
“ tiary as a laundry maid ; another has been in
“ service two years, and gives* great satisfaction ;
“ another woman preferred a bible to any article of
“ clothing for herself or child, as her reward for
“ good conduct on leaving the prison; she saved
“ £l.ss. during the time she was confined, and leaves
“ it as a deposit in the savings bank, to insure the
“ return of the w ork we continue to supply her
“ with at a distance, for she has an bid sick father to
“ nurse. Orie'now in goal entreated me to receive a
“ penny each w eek; for the missionary society, as
“ a small proof of hfcr gratitude* for the blessing of


" instruction; and tho’ their pay is very small, many
“ lay by a trifle, and their greatest punishment is to
“ be unemployed.”
A poor woman whp has now been more than four
years in New South Wales, and was, while in New-
gate, considered an improving character, has lately
written the following to a member of the Committee,
“ Believe me, my dear Madam, that it was inside
“ Newgate walls the rays of divine truth shone
“ into my dark mind, and may the Holy Spirit shine
“ more and more into my dark understanding, thaj;
“ I maybe enabled so to walk, as one whose heart
<c is set to seek a city whose builder and maker is
“ God; believe me, my dear Madam, altlio’ I am a
“ poor captive in a distant land, I would not give
“up having communion with God one single day
“ for my liberty,, for what is the liberty of the body
“ compared with the liberty of the soul, and soon
“ will that time come, when death will release me
“ from all the earthly fetters which hold me now,
“ and I trust to be with Christ, that bought me with
" his precious blood; and now, my dear Madam,
“ these few sincere sentiments of mine, I wish you
“ to make known, that the world may see that your
“ labour in Newgate has not been in vain in the
“ Lord.” She adds in a postscript, “ I have lived
“ at the native school ever since I arrived in New
“ South Wales, and the Governor has shown me
“ every kindness that my unfortunate situation could
expect, and I hope by my good conduct to obtain
“ a mitigation of sentence. If you have any cor-
“ respondent in this part of the world to make any
“ enquiry respecting me, I wish you to do it; if you
“ have no friend in the colony, Mrs. Marsden will
t( answer any enquiry respecting me.”


Other letters from female convicts bear similar
testimony to the impressions received while in con-
finement here; but the Committee wish to be brief
in their statements, and also feel cautious in
speaking of those who are yet liable to temptation,
sensible that the fairest hopes may be frustrated
for want of that watchfulness and prayer, jvhich are
essential during the whole life.
It will no doubt be interesting to the friends and
supporters of this cause, to hear some particulars of
the care extended by the society to the last female
convicts ; these amounted to one hundred and nine,
and were repeatedly visited by some members of the
pommittee, while the transport Ship remained in the
river; their cases and characters were minutely en-
quired into, and spoken of to the Surgeon Superinten-
dent; such articles of clothing as they required w ere
provided, and arrangements made for their occupation
and instruction during the voyage. The rules for their
conduct w T ere read to the women in their separate
classes, and such advice was added, as seemed likely
to promote their orderly demeanour, cleanliness, and
attention to whatever the Surgeon Superintendent
might think proper to require. Materials for needle-
work, to be bestowed upon the deserving as rewards,
were alsoleftin charge with this Officer, together with
a choice collection of books, which had been gene-
rously sent by a benevolent gentleman for the pur-
pose. A grant of bibles from an auxiliary society,
was the means of furnishing each convict with a copy
of the holy scriptures, and the schools, both for
children and adults, were amply supplied with les-
sons, spelling hooks, hymns, &c. The visitors had
the satisfaction of witnessing, in addition to the other
liberal supplies of government, an increased allow


ance of soap and towels from the Navy Board;
and were truly pleased with the management and
conduct of the Surgeon Superintendent, who appears
to possess those qualifications of seriousness, firm
perseverance, and interest respecting the welfare of
those under his care, which are so valuable and
important in one to whom the charge of female
convicts is committed.
It was gratifying to observe, that the country
prisoners were generally better clothed than has
been heretofore the case ; but the visitors were pain-
fully affected at seeing some, who came a considera-
ble distance, much injured by being sent in irons,
The Committee have great pleasure in again
acknowledging the kind attention with which they arc
treated by the local authorities, whose liberality and
willingness to meet their views, may be said really
to increase ; for the longer female associations are
engaged in visiting prisons, the more openness they
find on the part of those, whose countenance and
support are essential to the execution of their plans;
this friendly co-operation and assistance is not only
afforded in the metropolis, but gratefully noticed
by country correspondents; and those foreign Ladies
who are pursuing similar means for rendering places
of confinement, schools of industry and reforma-
tion, acknowledge the same kindness from their
respective governments.
The Committee deem it worthy of peculiar notice,
that in Liverpool, where some important regulations
have lately taken place, a female turnkey has been
provided; an example they would rejoice to sec
followed by the governors of every prison, where
women arc confined.


It is equally proper and gratifying, to mention the
increasing care of magistrates, to provide work for
female prisoners, as well as to state the beneficial
effects ot this judicious measure, in those places
which have fallen under our observation. Where con-
stant employment is made a regulation of the prison;
it not only produces quietude, good order, and that
subdued appearance which furnishes hope of
gradual amendment; but tends to lessen the number
of committals, by operating as a terror to the most
idle and profligate offenders : this is strongly proved
in the Borough Compter, where a machine for cutting
flax has been recently introduced. The inmates of
this prison, have usually varied from ten to twenty,
and the re-committals were very frequent; but these
have gradually become fewer; and at the time this
report was written, only one female misdemeanant
was confined there. Such a circumstance is well
calculated to encourage the friends of prison disci-
pline, to persevere in their efforts, and to use every
means afforded them, for procuring this salutary
arrangement; convinced that by giving prisoners
full occupation, teaching them their duty, and with
kindness enforcing the benefit and importance
of a virtuous life, all within the sphere of human
agency is attempted, tho’ not more than is attached
to the due exercise of that Christian philanthropy
and care, which are enjoined upon the followers
of Him who went about doing good, and was
pleased graciously to recognize, among the terms of
final acceptance, a willingness to visit even the
lowest when “ sick or in prison.”
Before closing this report, the Commitee have the
painful duty to announce the loss they have recently
sustained, by the decease of their valuable colleague
and joint secretary, Ann Newman, whom, in the


prime'of life, and surrounded with temporal bless-
ings, it has pleased the allwisc Disposer of events,
suddenly to remove from those scenes of active
benevolence, for which she possessed extensive and
peculiar qualifications, and wherein she was h di-
ligent and conscientious labourer. May an example
so worthy of imitation prove > a renewed incitement
to others, that the vacuum which is now mourned
over in this and other charitable institutions, may
become filled by such as are alike favored with
leisure and ability.
Having, in the commencement of this address,
given some extracts from the letters of Samuel
Marsden, the Committee are inclined to conclude it
with quotations from two other foreign correspond-
ents, whose accounts are of an interesting and in-
structive nature.
From the Princess Mestchersty, dated
St. Petersburgh, 15th of November, 1821.
<c We are happy to be able, at last, to give you
“ some more satisfactory accounts of the progress
“ of our efforts, to better the condition of our poor
" female prisoners. God seems to bless the exertions
" which we make to imitate the good examples which
4 ‘ you have set before us; order, cleanliness; sub-
“ mission and labour, arc introduced into all the
“ four prisons which arc under our inspection.
“ Every morning on rising, the w omen are obliged to
“ wash their hands and face and comb their hair; they
« are all dressed in the same manner, and wear white
« caps similar to what are worn by chamber-maids,
« the matron reads prayers to them every morning,
“ and afterwards each one prays apart for herself;
« they then betake themselves to their respective


“ occupations, and the most perfect tranquillity
“ reigns tliroughout the rooms; they are not per-
“ mittcd to speak in a high tone of voice, nor in ail
“ unbecoming manner; nor are they permitted to
“ sing improper songs, or speak about unbecoming
“ things. Every day one of the Ladies visits the
“ prison, examines all the rooms, hears the prisoners
“ say their questions, which we teach them by heart,*
“ (as not one of the prisoners can read); they also
“ instruct them in the same way, in passages out of
“ the holy scriptures, and read them the new testa-
“ mentor religious tracts, and someotherpiousbooks.
" Between twelve and one o’clock they go to dinner,
" preceded by the matron or by her assistant, who
“ says a grace before they sit down to table; silence
“ and order prevail during their frugal repasts.'
“ Every day presents the same scene of labour and
" instruction, and a degree of subordination and
“ order prevails, which we had little idea of ever
“ seeing realized.”
Prom the Marchioness Colbert de Baroll, dated
“ Turin, 3rd of May, 1821.
“ I have long desired to have the honor of writing
“ to you, and of offering to you the expression of my
“ gratitude for the good advice and assistance you
“ have kindly given me; but I delayed expressing it
“ to you until it should be in my power to speak of
“ something that may interest you more. I have
“ not left Turin for six months, and excepting
“ when I ■ was ill, I have never failed to visit the
“ prisons every day, and even twice a day; I think
“ it is necessary to expect little, to expect it always,
“ and never renounce a cause that is certainly good,
“ I have raised a subscription which has been suffici


“ ent to procure shifts, sheets, and handkerchiefs for
“ the head and neck; I am trying to augment my
“ funds, in order to procure complete sets of
“ clothing for the poorest of the prisoners. I have
“begun to teach them to read in both prisons,
“ and employ a method of mutual instruction; they
“ learn with pleasure; I did not begin this lesson
“ until I was relieved of their religious instruction
“ by an Ecclesiastic : waiting for it has given it a
“ high value in their eyes, and makes them look upon
“ it as a reward; no one is obliged to learn; but
“ I foresaw that when once begun they would not
“ leave off until they could read; I explain to
“ them as well as I am able, that perseverance
“only is useful and meritorious. I hope I have
“ gained a little ground; they express affection and
“ confidence towards me, and I settle their disputes.
“ Some who have left the prison, lead a regular
“ life, and of their own accord have requested me to
“ direct them; these I have placed with very respect-
“ able people, who teach them a trade, and watch
“ over their conduct. I have heard that in other
“ countries there are establishments on purpose to
“ receive such persons; but it appears to me, that
“ there is great advantage in scattering them, itis
“ then much easier to hide their former conduct,
“ which is important, as men do not look upon
“ repentance with the same eye as Divine Mercy;
“ sighs and tears have not the power here below
“ to wipe away all sins; still there may be ad van--
“ tages in uniting them under the same rules. What is
“ your opinion on this subject 1 it may be useful
“to me to know it. Have the kindness to con-
“ tinue to aid me with your advice and ex-
“ perience; you will do a good action; I can say •
“ nothing more likely to induce you to it.”


LIST OF ASSOCIATIONS.
Newgate, Borough Compter.
Bedford, Bristol.
Carlisle, Chester, Colchester,
Derby, Devon County Jail.
~ Do. Do. Bridewell.
Durham, Dumfries, Dublin.
Glasgow, Liverpool.
Lancaster, Nottingham,
Plymouth, York.
TOGETHER WITH
St. Petersburg!!, Turin, Geneva, and Berne.


Dr.
Cr.
£■
S.
d.
</,
To Donations and Subscriptions from Derby, per
By the Mary Ann Convict Ship
9
Henrietta Newton 8
6
0
Ditto,... from Hertford, per Mary Gopiell, 55
10
0
,, Cold Bath Fields Prison
0
Ditto,... „ Hitelien, ,, PkeWAUetl... 12
to
0
„ Printing Circulars, &c
0
Ditto,... „ Lancaster,,,, El in. Foster... 9
12
Ditto,... Leicester, Ann Heaford, 26
0
0
Ditto,... „ London and its Neighbour-
hood 2S0
6
0
Ditto, Woodbtidge, MarthaJcsup, 5
JO
o u
Balance in hand
9
£397
14
7
£3 97 14
6
a r - , a
It is requested that the Names of Contributors to the Funds of this Society may be. sent , for want of which
the Committee cannot , this year, publish a correct List, '
Donations and Annual Subscriptions to be remitted to any Member of the Committee ;—who beg leave again
to solicit the continuance of that liberality which can alone enable them to prosecute the benevolent designs of this
Institution. -
Statement of &cce{ptg gnu U(js6ui*scmcntg,
Up to 21st of 5 Mo. (May) 1822.
