

t\ oct C ; - ;
f y\ n n o, ?
TO THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
WE resign into your hands the high trust committed to us as your representatives in the
Federal Convention of Australia.
In doing so we thank you for your great confidence. We have been deeply sensible of our
responsibility.
The Convention was charged with the duty of framing a Constitution under which the
colonies of Australia may become united in one Federal Commonwealth.
That duty was accomplished after four months of patient labor, happily aided by a prevailing •
desire to be just and a patriotic spirit of conciliation.
In submitting to you the Constitution so framed, we earnestly recommend you to adopt it as
a form of union under which—without necessarily adding to their taxation—the Australian
Colonies may live in harmony, each retaining the power of self-government in local matters, yet
enjoying, in all national concerns, the unity of a great nation.
Federal Union has long been the aspiration of every true Australian. It will remove the
evils and weaknesses of disunion, it will create a nation powerful and prosperous—an Australian
Nation owning allegiance to the Queen, forming an integral part of the British F' b able to
speak with one clear voice, and ready with one united strength to resist foreign a De vision.
Such a union will contain possibilities of industrial and commercial development width will,
we believe, result in general and permanent prosperity.
To you it will open up an unrestricted market of nearly four millions of consumers instead
of a restricted market dependent upon the goodwill or caprice of your neighbors; and it will
secure to you for ever the immense commercial advantages to which the unrivalled geographical
position of South Australia entitles her.
The question now is—does the Commonwealth Bill offer union upon conditions which a
free people can with honor accept! We unhesitatingly say it does. We believe it is so framed
as to secure the freedom, the welfare, and the happiness of all, with a justice and efficiency to
which no other Constitution known to history can lay claim.
We bespeak for it your gravest consideration. It is for you, the people, to mould your own
destiny.
Is it to be Union or Disunion! That is the great issue.
On the 4th of June you will be asked to vote “ Yes ” or “ No.”
To vote “No ” would be a national misfortune. It would mean continued disunion, or,
almost certainly, worse terms if union should come hereafter. To vote “ Yes ” will mean union
now and for ever, and the commencement of a new era full of hope and full of promise !
