

St, i<winttr’s Ipetcixre (^mumittee
ON THE
MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
FIRST SESSIOH
OF THE
OF THE
BISHOP, CLERGY, WO LAITY
- OF THE
DIOCESE OF aOULBTTEJSr,
HELD IN 'THE CITY OF GOULBIJRN,
PRINTED BY THOMAS DANIEL, MACHINE PRINTER, ATJBTJRN - STREET.




|>t t |Wi(|ial Fiefcitcc
ON THE
MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
HWIR-ST SHjSSIOTsT
OF THE
OF THE
BISHOP, CLERGY, AND LAITY
OF THE
DIOCESE OE GOULBUEE,
held in the city of goulburn,
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6th, 1884,
WITH .A.IPIFIEIfTIDICESS.
GOULBURN:
PRINTED BY THOMAS DANIEL, MACHINE PRINTER, AUBURN - STREET,




INTRODUCTORY.
It had always been the intention of the authorities of the Church
to obtain an Act of Parliament (the terms of which would neces-
sarily have to command the approval of all parties concerned) to
invest the new Church of St. Saviour, Goulburn, with the
additional character of a Cathedral, so that, in the words used at
the laying of the corner-stone, it might bear the double character
of “ the Parochial Church of the city and the Cathedral Church
of the Diocese of Goulburn.” This intention the Bishop had thus
expressed in his address to 4th Synod of the Diocese at its 3rd
session, held in June, 1882: —“ In the Diocese of Newcastle I
observe that, under professional advice, steps are being taken to
obtain an Act of Parliament which will have the effect of removing
the site of the cathedral from the operation of the Church
Temporalities Act (8 William IV, No. 5), and of placing the
building upon its proper basis as a Cathedral for the whole Diocese,
and not merely a parochial church for a particular district. 1 his
design of the Newcastle Diocese I approve, and trust that we may
be allowed to unite with them for a similar purpose.”
The first intimation received by the members in general of
the Church of England in the Parish of St. Saviour that there was
any serious intention of carrying on their new Church as a
Cathedral, without any Act of Parliament authorizing and regulat-
ing such a change of constitution, was on the Bth day of .May,
1884, when a very small number of the subscribers to the Building
Fund, convened by an unsigned advertisement (appearing for the
first time in that morning’s Herald), met in the
Diocesan Depot (the Bishop being in the chair) “ for the purpose
of making arrangements for the management of the finances of
the new Church,” thus ignoring altogether the function of the
Churchwardens and the provisions of the Act of Parliament to
which the new Church was subject in law. Against these pro-
ceedings the Incumbent (who was at that time laid up with a
broken thigh) protested by letter, pointing out that until the
suggested Act of Parliament was obtained the building was merely
a Parish Church, and must be governed as such, and the
Incumbent’s Churchwarden, Mr. Conolly (who accidentally
observed the notice in time to be present for the purpose), also
strongly protested against the whole proceedings as an illegal and
unjust usurpation of the functions of the properly constituted
authorities—the Trustees and Churchwardens. The meeting


however, proceeded to elect a committee for the illegal purpose
named, and the Trustees have since permitted this committee to
take the form of a Cathedral Council, who are now managing the
affairs of the new Church as a Cathedral only, without any legal
authority. [See Appendix A.]
Great Dissatisfaction.
Lest it should be supposed that the Bishop and those acting
with him were unaware of the wide-spread dissatisfaction caused
by these and other unjust proceedings, it may be mentioned that
the local papers were about this time filled with letters from Mr.
Conolly and other parishioners expressive of the strongest disap-
probation, and that a letter dated May iCth was written to his
Lordship, from which the following is an extract“ Well, can I
believe, my Lord, that in the midst of the present most unhappy
state of affairs your Lordship’s mind is indeed troubled, but I
cannot help reflecting with sorrow that if (instead of ignoring
those who are as much concerned in the welfare of the Church as
your Lordship, and endeavouring to explain away everything
which favors the Parochial element in the question) your
Lordship had boldly faced the facts, and convening a Synod,
or anything like a representative body, had fairly and fufly dis-
cussed the matter with all parties an adjustment might readily
have been arrived at, whereby Parochial rights could have been
equitably satisfied without any interference with the Cathedral
scheme, and we should have been spared this present most unseemly
division, which threatens to result in a permanent disruption of
our congregation, or an appeal to the law. Ido trust, my Lord,
that these remarks will be received in the spirit of earnest desire
for the peace and prosperity of our Church, which has dictated
them, and that some wise step will be taken to bring about an
understanding, and prevent even now the disastrous consequences
which must otherwise ensue.” This letter, like previous com-
munications, was entirely disregarded, and throughout this whole
period the representations of those who advocated the dual
character of the new Church were treated with complete in-
difference.
The Synod and the Cathedral Ordinance.
At last, in the month of August, 1884, the Synod was con-
vened “ to consider important questions relating to the welfare of
the Diocese and to the constitu'ion of the Cathedral Church f
and hopes were now entertained that affairs might be settled upon a
just and satisfactory basis. A petition was presented to the Synod
from upwards of 500 adult members of the Church of England
resident within the Parochial District of St. Saviour, praying that


no Cathedral Ordinance might be passed which did not recognise
the new Church as the Parish Church of St. Saviour’s Parish as
well as the Cathedral Church of the Diocese, and a Draft Cathedral
Ordinance was presented for the acceptance of the Synod, con-
taining, in precise accordance with an arrangement previously made
with the Incumbent of the Parish [see Appendix B], the following
clause :—“ The Incumbent of St. Saviour’s Parish shall have the
right to occupy the pulpit of the said Cathedral once every Sun-
day, and also to perform in the said Cathedral such surplice duties
as he may be requested. to perform by any Parishioner of St.
Saviour’s Parish.”
This clause recognising, so far as the Incumbent was con-
cerned, the Parochial character of the Church, it was stipulated
in another clause of the Ordinance that “ all income derived from
the rents and profits of the Glebe (subject to the payment of
per annum to the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s for the time
being)” should, with other moneys, “form one sum known as the
Cathedral Revenue,” which should be chargeable with the annual
stipend of the Dean, Precentor, Organist, &c., &c. This stipula-
tion regarding the Glebe Revenue of St. Saviour was retained in
the Ordinance; but, through the influence of the Chancellor of
the Diocese, aided by the Bishop, the clause relating to ihe Incum-
bent's rights was expunged, the Bishop offering to make “ a private
arrangement ” with him instead. This private arrangement the
Incumbent was obliged to decline as useless, because it would
neither bind the Bishop’s successor nor secure the rights of future
Incumbents, and that what he desired was not a personal favor,
but the recognition of a right in himself and his successors.
[The Bishop and the Chancellor greatly influenced the Synod
by maintaining that the new St. Saviour’s Schoolroom should be
regarded as the Parish Church, and that the Incumbent of St.
Saviour’s had no more right to minister in the new Church than
any other clergyman in the Diocese.]
Appointment cf Parochial Defence Committee.
The Synod having thus altered the Ordinance so as to appro-
priate the Parochial revenue while ignoring the Patochial rights , and
the Trustees proposing to incorporate this Ordinance in their
Private Bill or Act of Parliament, two large meetings of the
parishioners were held to protest against the whole proceedings,
and at the second of these, on the 4th of September, 1884, the
Parochial Defence Committee was appointed “to take all neces-
sary steps to oppose the said Bill it a satisfactory settlement of
the question be not arrived at before the introduction of the said
Bill.”


Minutes of Proceedings of Synod.
The Parochial Committee having had frequent occasion to
refer to the misleading statements made before the Synod and to
the incorrect impression given by the so-called “ Minutes,” desire
to draw attention to the most irregular manner in wdiich these
Minutes were compiled and published.
By vote No. 67 of the Synod it was resolved “That the
Standing Committee of the last Synod be the Standing Committee
of present Synod.” Of this Committee the Incumbent of St.
Saviour’s, the Ven. Archdeacon Puddicombe, was Secretary,
having held this office in successive Synods for more than 13
years.
By vote 71 it was resolved “That the Minutes be written up
by the Secretary (of Synod—the Incumbent of Yass) as scon as
possible and confirmed, by the Standing Committee.” The oppor-
tunity for doing this was particularly favorable, seeing that several
members of the Standing Committee usually resident at a distance
remained in Goulburn for some days after the close of the session.
Seven weeks were, however, allowed to elapse before anything
was heard of the Minutes, when it was understood that the Bishop
was preparing than for the press , the Standing Committee having
had no opportunity to inspect than !
Upon this the Secretary of the Standing Committee wrote to
his Lordship saying “ I shall be ready to summon the Standing
Committee whenever your Lordship desires.”
The Bishop took no notice of this intimation, and the
Incumbent, waiting four weeks longer, wrote again to the Bishop,
asking him to fix a day for a meeting, and adding the request —
“ Will your Lordship kindly leave the Minute Books of the
Synod at the Depot ? ” To this his Lordship replied, “As soon
as I can arrange for the time I will see that the Standing
Committee is summoned, and that a Secretary or Secretaries be
duly appointed at the first meeting.”
More than two months later—on the 7th January, 1885 —
five months after the close of the Session —the Standing Committee
was at last convened by the Bishop and invited to confirm the
Minutes, which had been put into print more than three months
previously ! This meeting was peculiarly constituted—Canons
Pownall (Wagga), Druitt (Cooma), Soares (Goulburn West),
Evans-Jones (Bega), Faunce (Yass), and D’Arcy-Irvine (Goulburn
North) —gentlemen, many of them coming from long distances,
and all particularly interested in confirming the. Minutes—being
present, and the Incumbent’s Churchwarden, Mr. Conolly, a
resident of the city, being obliged to complain that he had not
been summoned to the meeting ! !
At this meeting the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s claimed his
right to be regarded as Secretary until the Committee should


hiake other arrangements; but the Bishop, who occupied the
chaiq refused to acknowledge his claim. The Incumbent also
asked permission to read the correspondence which had taken
place between himself and the Bishop relative to calling the
Committee. This also was refused !!
The Bishop—a most singular proceeding—called for the
production of a certificate signed by three clergymen to the effect
that they had examined the printed and MS. Minutes and found
them alike, with the exception of certain words introduced for the
purpose of “ completing the sense.” The words so introduced
amount (besides minor interpolations) to no less than twelve
lines on page 16.
Phe Incumbent of St. Saviour’s objected to the interpolation of
these words as being no part of the Minutes, and as putting an
unfair construction upon matters in which he and his parishioners
were particularly interested.
Phe Chancellor of the Diocese maintained that the words
objected to had no right in the body of the Minutes ; but, if inserted
at all, should have been in a foot-note.
The Incumbent’s Churchwarden, Mr. Conolly, inquired the
reason of the unnecessary delay in calling the Committee
together, and of the extraordinary proceeding of printing the
Minutes before they were brought up for confirmation. The reply
given was evasive.
Notwithstanding these objections and questions, the Minutes
(as might be anticipated under the circumstances) were confirmed,
and have since been widely circulated, giving an erroneous
impression of our Church affairs to the whole diocese.
It must here be particularly mentioned that during the interval
which was allowed to elapse between the closing of the Session of
Synod and the production of the Minutes for confirmation by the
Standing Committee several alterations -were allowed to be made
Bishops opening addtess, notably the introduction of the
following words in reference to St. Saviour’s New School-room
(which the Bishop desired should be regarded as the Parish
Church): —“ And all the money derived from the sale of the old
materials ” (i.e., of St. Saviour’s Old Parish Church) “was
expended entirely upon that building.” The erroneous nature of
this interpolation has been already exposed by the Defence
Committee in their published correspondence with the Bishop
his Lordship having (four months previous to the Synod) signed
the following receipt on behalf of the Cathedral Building Fund :
“ Received from the Churchwardens, on behalf of the
Committee, the sum of One Hundred Pounds, being refund of
money received from sale of old St. Saviour’s Church,”


Unfairness of Proceedings in Synod.
The great unfairness which characterised the whole proceed-
ings of the Synod may be further illustrated by the following
circumstances i ——— .
The Bishop in his opening address, when referring to a certain
agreement made by the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s to withdraw
his application to be made Dean of the Cathedral if the privi ege
were reserved to him of preaching once a Sunday in the Cat e ra
and using the building for ordinary surplice duties (Appendix V),
spoke of this agreement as embodying an arrangement for the
payment to the Incumbent of “ a y ear the P arsol J a g e
and eight acres of the Glebe.” To this the Incumbent respectfully
objected, pointing out that there was no allusion whatever to
money in the agreement and asking one of the gentlemen in whose
presence he had signed it to hand it to his Lordship for inspection.
This was done and the Bishop (as recorded in the press reports of
the proceedings) promised in Synod to correct this inaccurac), u
has since caused his address to be published in the Minutes
without so doing! [See p. 12 of Minutes of Synod ]
There was appended to this agreement when handed to the
Bishop in Synod an explanatory letter written a few hours after
the agreement had been signed. (See Appendix C.) His Lord-
ship read the agreement to the Synod, putting his own construction
upon it as though it were a private agreement between himself
and the Incumbent; but when asked to read the explanatory
letter he refused to do so ! . . ,
Further remark is needless to show to all right judging minds
that the proceedings of the first session of the fifth Synod of the
Diocese of Goulburn were conducted in a one-sided and unfair
spirit, and that the manner in which the Minutes were allowed to
be handled is totally inconsistent with the first principles of
impartial legislation.


APPENDIX A.
EXTRACT FROM LETTER REFERRED TO.
To the Gentlemen attending the Meeting convened to make arrangements
for the management of the finances of St. Saviour’s Cathedral,
Goulbum.
Ottiwell, May Bth, 1884.
My Dear Sirs, —It is with considerable surprise I notice in this morning’s
“Herald” an advertisement (unsigned) calling the meeting at which you
are now assembled. Being unable to attend the meeting, permit me to point
out that the question of the control of the finances of St. Saviour’s Church
scarcely needs discussion. Until the passing of the proposed private Act of
Parliament which is intended to withdraw St. Saviour’s from the influence
of the Church Act (Bth William 4th, No. 5) it is purely and simply (what-
ever we may call it or desire it to be) our Parish Church, and its finances
must be controlled, as the Act directs, by the Churchwardens subject to the
rubric.
* * * * *
It may possibly be advisable to appoint from amongst the subscribers to
the new Cathedral a Committee of Advice to act with the Churchwardens
during our present transition stage, but the legal control of the finances still
rests with the Churchwardens and must so rest until the new Act is obtained.
With deep interest in this matter and an earnest desire for unity of action
on the basis of the original intention of our new building,
Believe me to be,
Yours faithfully,
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.
Agreement made with the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s to secure his
SUPPORT TO THE PROPOSED CATHEDRAL BILL, SIGNED ON THE 2ND
April, 1884.
Ist April, 1884.
The Incumbent of St. Saviour’s Parish withdraws his application and
claim to be made Dean of St. Saviour’s Cathedral, Goulbum, on the under-
standing that the said Incumbent may have the privilege reserved to him
of preaching once a Sunday in the Cathedral, and be allowed to perform
such surplice duties within the Cathedral as he may be 1 equested so to. pei -
form by any parishioner or parishioners. If this is conceded by the Bishop
q Incumbent will not oppose the passing of the Cathedral Bill thiough
Parliament. __ _ TITTnT . Tr , AI ,T Br ,
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.
Signed in the presence of
A. Macxellar, I. Shepherd, W« C. Harris.


APPENDIX C.
Goulbum, April 2nd, 1884.
To Messes. Mackellae, Shepheed, and Habeis.
My Dear Sirs, —I hasten to secure myself from a possible misconstruc-
tion of my action in signing, a few hours ago, at your request, a peculiarly
worded document dated April Ist and drawn up by Mr. Betts.
By that signature I have undertaken, if certain rights in the new
Cathedral Church are accorded to the Incumbent, to withdraw all claim to
the position of Dean and not to oppose the passage of the Bill through Par-
liament on that score , i.e., on the score of any claims as Incumbent.
It must be understood however that I have not undertaken to accept
without opposition all the possible provisions of a Bill which as yet is not
even drafted. lof course reserve to myself the right to oppose, in Conference
or in Synod, any clause which I may deem inequitable (if such there should
be), and, should any such clause be retained in the Bill, after my protestations,
to oppose the passage of the Bill on that account, if it seem advisable.
Fully hoping however that all Parochial claims may be satisfactorily
adjusted, and again thanking you very much for the warm interest you are
taking in the proceedings,
I am, my dear sirs), faithfully yours,
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.


THE REPLT
ST. SAVIOUR’S PAROCHIAL DEFENCE COMMITTEE
AN ANONYMOUS PAMPHLET,
HEADED
“ST. SAVIOUR’S CATHEDRAL, GOULBURN,”
RECENTLY CIRCULATED BY
THE LORD BISHOP OF GOULBURN.
The corner stone of St, Saviour’s new Church in Goulburn was
solemnly declared to be “ The corner stone of a Church to
be the Parochial Chinch of the City and the Cathedral Church
of the Diocese of Goulburn.”
The chief object of the anonymous pamphlet recently cir-
culated by the Bishop is to persuade its readers that this expression,
“ the Parochial Church of the City ” (reiterated on many occasions),
implied that the new Church, besides being the Cathedral of the
Diocese was to be the Parochial Church of some Parish undefined
(except by the Municipal boundaries) and now embracing portion
of St. Nicholas’, Goulburn North, and Christ Church, Goulburn
West, not the Parish Church of Goulburn proper, i.e., of St.
Saviour’s Parish. “ The city of Goulburn,” says the writer, “ can*
not possibly be held to mean St. Saviour’s Parish only.”
The absurdity of this specious quibble may easily be exposed,
seeing that it implies the existence of a Parish which has never
been defined ! A Parish embracing parts of two other Parishes !
A Parish with three Incumbents, two of whom have Parish
Churches of their own besides a share in St. Saviour’s Church,
while the third (the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s) is left with only a
one-third share in his own Church —a share which it is stated does
not even give him the right to officiate therein !


This is what the Chancellor of the Diocese gravely informed
the Synod was a Parish Church “in a metapho) ical sense T And
as the writer of the pamphlet truly states that a motion proposed
by VV. Conolly, Esq., “that the words Parish Church in the city
of Goulburn in the first clause of the Cathedral Ordinance, and
the words Parochial Church of the city of Goulburn in the pre-
amble, shall be held to mean the Parish Church of St. Saviour’s
Parish,” was rejected by 31 to 7 ; he should also have stated that
a motion proposed by the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s that the same
words “ shall be taken in a metaphorical sense ” had previously been
rejected, as the mover intended it should be, with derisive laughter!
So that while seven members of the Synod voted for the plain
meaning of the words “ the Parish Church of the city of Goul-
burn,” the whole Synod rejected the “ metaphorical ” interpretation
with ridicule !!!
But there is no need foi argument. The following letter
addressed to the present Incumbent of St. Saviour’s before he was
appointed to Goulburn —not (as the pamplet states) as “ curate to”
the then Incumbent, but (in the words of his license) as “ addi-
tional minister in our Cathedral Church of St. Saviour”—will
conclusively show that the expressions “St. Saviour’s Parish,”
“ Goulburn,” “ The City,” were all synonymous terms, or in other
words that “ the Parochial Church of the city of Goulburn ” does
and always did mean the Parochial Church of St. Saviour’s Parish
and nothing else ;
Goulburn, October 20th, 1870.
My Deae Me. Puddicombe, —
Yesterday we had a meeting for a private conference ; and it
was agreed by the people that an additional clergyman should be provided
for Goulburn city and that the North Goulburn clergyman should look after the
hamlets and inhabitants in the surrounding district. Thus there will be
one for the city and another for the northern portion of the city and for the
hamlets. But in order to give effect to the above lam first to inquire and
to be satisfied that an income can be provided for the North Goulburn clergy-
man. The Dean, the additional clergyman, and I would of course aid the
North Goulburn clergyman in Sunday 'duties in the nearest hamlets. On
Saturday, the 2‘2nd, I am to meet the North Goulburn people on the subject,
and on Tuesday, the 2oth, to hold another meeting in Goulburn for final
arrangements.
As soon as matters are more mature I will draw up a scheme setting
forth the whole of the plans for both divisions of work, and have it dulv
signed by the parties concerned to prevent future misunderstanding. I need
not say that my wish is to have you in Goulburn city. * * *
I think that probably the arrangements here need not take effect until
the beginning of the new year. But respecting these things I will write
again. Meanwhile I will merely add that the North Goulburn clergyman
will of course retain the N. Goulburn parsonage. As soon as we remove to
the new house the clergyman for Goulburn city might have the use of our


present cottage, which in most respects is comfortable. May God graciously
aid us in these designs to do that which is best for the glory of Ilis name.
I am, very faithfully yours,
M, GOFLBITRN.
The Rev. A. T. Puddicombe, Moruya.
It is manifest from the above that the Bishop expressly and
advisedly uses the term “ the city ” not to embrace but to exclude
North Goulburn Parish, and to define St. Saviour’s Parish in
particular as distinguished from any portions of it which might
have been cut off!
In conformity with this indisputable fact the inscription placed
in the cavity underneath the corner stone of “ the Parochial
Church of the city of Goulburn” (erected upon the site of the old
Parish Church of the city) makes no mention whatever of the
Incumbent or other officials of the Parish of Goulburn North
(West Goulburn did not then exist), but commemorates the names
of the incumbent, the additional minister, the churchwardens, the
sidesmen, and the representatives in the Synod of St. Saviour’s
parish alone !
Surely it cannot be, as generally believed, that the Bishop
compiled as well as circulated the pamphlet which denies, in the
face of such facts as these, that “ the city of Goulburn” and “ St.
Saviour’s Parish ” are identical terms ?
The effect of the numerous quotations from “ letters, appeals,
speeches, and resolutions ” which form the main bulk of the
pamphlet is simply to confirm —what no one has ever denied—that
the new Church of St. Saviour was always designed to be a
Cathedral for the Diocese as well as a Parochial Church for St.
Saviour’s Parish, and was acknowledged so to be by the Incumbent
and everybody else. No one has ever attempted “to divest” the
new Church “of its Diocesan character,” “to curtail and circum-
scribe its use,” or “ to reduce it to the limitations applied in the
idea of a Parish Church for a single parochial district,” and the
continued repetition of this baseless insinuation, which has been so
repeatedly and indignantly repelled by the members of the
Parochial Defence Committee, is as insulting as it is dishonest.
The departure from the original design of the building has been
wholly on the other side, the defenders of the Parochial rights having
simply demanded the full and just recognition of the dual
character of the new Church as “ the Parochial Church of the
city of Goulburn ” as well as “ the Cathedral Church of the
Diocese,”










