







JOHNSONIANA.
SEVERAL OF THESE ITEMS BEING UNKNOWN.
22
E. JOSEPH, Bookseller
397 A POETICAL EPISTLE from the Ghost of Dr. Johnson, to his Four Friends : The Rev.
Mr. Strahan, James Boswell, Esq., Mrs. Piozzi, J. Courtney, Esq., M.P., from the Original
Copy in the Possession of the Editor, with Notes, Critical, Biographical, Historical, and
Explanatory. 4t0., old half calf, £l2. 10s.
> London-. Printed for Harrison & Co., No. 18, Paternoster Row, 1786
”Collation : —Half-title, title-pagt, A-O2 in twos (pp. i.-viii. and 1-52).
The advertiser has been unable to trace any other copy of this very interesting item.


A
POETICAL EPISTLE
FROM THE
Ghost of Dr. Johnson,
TO HIS
FOUR FRIENDS:
THE REV. MR. STRAHAN.
JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.
MRS. PIOZZI.
J. COURTENAY, ESQ. M.P.
FROM THE
ORIGINAL COPY
IN THE POSSESSION OF THE EDITOR.
WITH
NOTES
CRITICAL, BIOGRAPHICAL, HISTORICAL, AND EXPLANATORY.
MY LITTLE FAME MAY HEAV’N DEFEND,
FROM EV'RY FEIGN’D OR FOOLISH FRIEND!
Editor’s MS.
LONDON:
Printed for HARRISON and Co. No 18, Paternoster Row.
M DCC LXXXVI.




EDITOR’S preface.
THOUGH the fecrets of trade ought not to be divulged, the
Editor thinks it neceffary, for his own juftification, to give
the Publick a circumftantial account of the manner in which he be-
came poffefled of this laft and mod invaluable production of the ce-
lebrated Dr. Johnson.
Know, then, gentle Reader, that his principal Publifher, had no
fooner obtained copies of the refpeCtive works of Mr. Str ah an,
Mr. Boswell, Mrs. Piozzi, and Mr. Courtenay, than he inltant-
ly difpatched his Printer's Devil to the Elysian Fields, in
fearch of Dr. Johnson’s Ghost; and, having been cunning enough
to accompany his prefent by a long and very curious Epidle*, in or-
der to obtain, if poffible, an Anfwer of equal length from the Doc-
tor, which might enable him to give a more compleat Edition of the
Doctor’s Works thtrrrany of BW-Rrethren, heffiraiLThe happlnefs to
receive, not only a mod grateful Letter, in return, diffidently copious
to make a moderate pamphlet, with which the Publick may be fome
time or other favoured f, but alfo to have his Special Mejfenger charg-
ed with an unfealed Packet , containing the Original “ Poetical
Epistle of Dr. Johnson’s Ghost to his Four Friends.”
The
* My Bookfeller, who is in reality a man of confiderable candour, notwithftanding a
few tricks of trade , acknowdedges himfelf indebted to Mr. Bos well for this hint. He had
remarked, in that Gentleman’s Journal, many Letters w 7 hich confiderably increafed the
bulk of the volume; and he plainly perceived they would never have been there , if Mr.
Bofwell had not fent Copies of Dr. Johnfon’s Tour, &c. to the refpe&ive Gentlemen
whole politenefs furnilhed him with fuch excellent materials.
+ The Editor confiders himfelf obliged to Mr. Bofwell, and Mrs. Piozzi, for this
happy method of announcing his embrio edition of Dr. Johnfon’s lajl Letter. Their fupe-
rior addrefs, however, on fuch occalion, will appear in the following extracts.
“ Dr. Johnfon had the fatisfa&ion of being told that his name had been gratefully
celebrated in one of the parochial congregations in the Highlands, as the perfon to whofe
A influence


The Book feller no fooner laid hands on this choice production—«
which the Dodtor himfelf has declared, in his Letter to the Publifher,
nowin the Editor’s poff'efion, contains th q laf fyliable he ever will
write —than that Gentleman, not having quite fo much virtue as Mr.
Boswell’s wife, or even as Mr. Boswell himfelf*, far from be-
ing contented with merely copying what had been thus confided to
his care, actually made free enough to keep the Original Epiftle ; com-
plimenting thofe for whom it was intended with a copy apiece only,
foon after the whole of this performance had been prepared for prefs,
accompanied by much fuch another view of the Original as an Attoi-
ney’s Clerk ufually gives a Defendant or Witnefs on ferving copies of
Writs or Subpoenas.
With
influence it was chiefly owing, that the New Teftament was allowed to be tranflated
into the Erfe language. It feems, fome political members of the Society in Scotland for
propagating Chriftian Knowledge, had oppofed this pious undertaking, as tending to pre-
serve the diftindtion between the Highlanders and Lowlanders. Dr. Johnfon wrote a LONG
letter upon the fubjedi to a friend, which being (hewn to them, made them alhamed,
and afraid of being publickly expofed; fo they were forced to a compliance. It is now
IN TOT- possttssTON, and is, perhaps, one of the best productions of his majlerly pen.”
Boswell’s Journal , p. 466.
“ When the firft paralytic ftroke took his fpeech from him, he inftantly let about
compofing a Prayer in Latin, at once to deprecate God’s mercy , to fatisfy himfelf that
his mental powers remained unimpaired, and to keep them in exercife, that they might
not perifti by permitted ftagnation. This was after we parted j > but he wrote ME an
account of it-, and I intend to publijh that Letter, with many more”
Airs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 277.
* “ From an erroneous apprehenfion of violence, [There being no thieves in Scot-
land!] Dr. Johnfon had provided a pair of piftols, fome gunpowder, and a quantity of
bullets: but upon being allured we Ihould run no rifle of meeting any robbers, he left
his arms and ammunition in an open drawer, of which he gave my wife the charge. He
alfo left in that drawer one volume of a pretty full and curious Diary of his Life, of
which I have [God knows how !] a few fragments ; but the book has been deftroyed. /
wijk female curiosity had been Jlrong enough to have had it all transcribed, which
might eafily have been done ; and I Jhould think the theft, being pro bono publico, might
have been forgiven. But I MAY BE wrong! My WIFE told me Jhe never once looked
into it.” Boswell’s Journalp. 48


With refpe<£t to the Editor’s fhare in the bufinefs, he honeftly
confefies, that he experts very little praife and will think himfelf well
enough off, ifheefcapes the cenfure of thofe learned Cri ticks, who
write, like himfelf, more for pudding than for fame . Indeed, as mo ft of
thefe Gentlemen have no apprehenfions of rivalry, from his fuperior
talents, he willingly does them the juftice to own, that they have often
highly praifed his anonymous works, when he has himfelf been
heartily ajhamed of them: for the appetites of men will fometimes
make the belt do what they would otherwife blufh to think on.
In the prefent cafe, however, he expe&s the ufual advantages of
fuccefsful Commentators and Illuftrators of celebrated Authors. He
has taken a great deal of pains to make the meaning of his Author
univerfally known, and has laboured to imprefs the Reader with an.
idea that he is not defective in any branch of human learning : and
he hopes none will have the hardinefs to difpute the fuperior faga-
city of their Commentator, by oppofmg any of his well-founded con-
jectures, much lefs his pofitive offertions ; for is it allow-
ed, that no one but a regular~lfSff\ mentaror thoroughly comprehend, s
the works of a great Author after his deceafe , though in his life-time
they are fufficiently underjiood? This is a myftery in Authorihip,
which it is not the Editor’s bufinefs to develope.
And now, having taken great care to prepare the way for a favour-
able reception of his own part of this tranfcendent work, the Editor
begs leave, in conformity with the eftablifhed ufage, to fay a very few
words for his principal.
This Poem, then, the critical world are defired every where to re-
port, is the moft perfeftproduction of Dr.Johnfon’s pen. It has all his
colloquial beauties, and is entirely free from that ch arafter iftical
fefquipedaliaifm which fo potently affe&s the nerves of all Readers of
tafe


tajie and delicacy > throughout his other printed works*. Indeed,
there appears, at the firfi readings and without regarding the Notes,
fo much difference between the didiion of this piece, and all the Doc-
tor had written while his great mind was cooped up in it s “ walls of
fiejhfi capacious as they are known to have been, that rezdonMz doubts
might hill be entertained of it’s authenticity , were it not quite certain,
that no perfion living can write nearly fo well as he could even in his mor-
tal fate —that this is unqueftionably infinitely fiuperior \ being, as the
Author has himfelf deferibed it,
an immortal lay l"
and that, therefore, according to the exclamation oi a prodigious
great Critick , on perilling the Manuficript , c If it is not the deceafed
‘ Doctor’s, by G—d, it mull have been written by the very Devil
himfelf!’
On this, and a variety of other important quefiions , naturally aiif-
ing out of the fubjedt, the Editor chufes to referve his remarks foi
the Work itfelf, from the dele Stability of which he will no longer de-
tain his very obliging and he hopes innumerable Readers,
A POETI-
* “ Near the end of his “ Journey,” Dr. Johnfon has given liberal praife to Mr,
Braidwood’s academy for the deaf and dumb. When he vifited it, a circumftance oc-
curred which was truly charadleriftical of our great Lexicographer. “ Pray, (faid he)
can they pronounce any long words?” Mr. Braidwood informed him they could. Upon
which Dr. Johnfon wrote one of his fefquipedalia verba , which was pronounced by the
feholars, and he was fatisfied. My readers may perhaps with to know what the word
was; but I cannot gratify their curiofity. Mr. Braidwood told me it remained long in
his fchool, but had been loft before I made my inquiry.” Boswell’s Journal, p. 903.
Mr. Bofwell obferves, in a Note which follows the above extra#—“ that one of the
beft Criticks of our age “ does not wifh to prevent the admirers of the incorrect and
nervelefs ftyle, which generally prevailed for a century before Dr. Johnfon’s energetick
Writings were known, from enjoying the laugh that this story may produce, in which
he is very ready to join them.” It would have been kind in Mr. Bofwell to have
mentioned who this great Critick Is; and to have informed his readers, at the fame time,
in what part of the above very witty story, as Mr. Bofwell chufes to call it, they might
begin to enjoy the laugh with two fuch celebrated and facetious gentlemen.


A
POETICAL EPISTLE
FROM THE
Ghost of Dr. Johnson.
1% /f ID S T happy bowers of Amaranthine bloom,
Where playful Zephyrs, loaded with perfume,
Their tiny pinions as they dutt’ring fpread,
\
Scatter the grateful odours round my head,
Incenfe ftill fweeter to th’ uncumber’d mind 5
Wafts in the breath of gen’rous Friends behind!
Court’nay, Piozzi, Boswell, and Young Strah’n,
Had I a Place, a Lover, Coif, and Lawn,
Lines 1 to 6.] The extreme beauty of this apoftrophe, with which the
fublime bard opens his divine poem, muft not efcape my reader: it is, indeed,
highly poetical, and raoft happily introduces his fubjetft, where the plain or
familiar ftile is properly adopted.
Lines 7, B.] There are, perhaps, few readers whom it will be neceflary to
inform, that Mr. Courtenay is a patriot, and of courfe out of power; Mr.
Boswell, a candidate for judicial authority; Mrs. Piozzi, a—woman; and
Mr. Strahan, who has juft got a third living, much too good a prieft to
defpife lawn-fleeves,
B Things


Things which no merit always can acqum.,
Gladly I’d give what ye fo much defire: 3 °
But tho’, in thefe calm regions of the blefs’d,
I feel my fpirit by your praife opprefs d,
No means have I the kindnefs to repay,
Save kindred praife, in an immortal lay !
Who firft fhall figure in this attick feaft ; 1 -5
The wit, the fair, the lawyer, or the prieft ?
How hard the talk, where all have equal claim,
To make a choice which three fuch friends may blame ?
My fame, I own, owes juft alike to each :
Tf this contents not—you may kifs my br—ch 1 20
With
Une ao. 1 I regret exceedingly that I cannot expunge part of this line,
which muft of n Zell “
'" J 2s comes in fome Mufeum not likely to be fold piece-
f
hlpmifh in a work otherwife perfect. Indeed, lamme m
biemiin in d v r rhoao-ht to have been fometnnes
ginai poem ; and eannot aval my wr i tten Commentaries on ancient
b ’ Til",IX to M in the »- ./
Ztllriinds of my own black letter Colleflion: nor is it my province to deliver
i tZeits of another, as Hamlet fays, “ after whatflourifh my nature would;
the j ntmem j fuC o e f s f u Uy have adopted the refined phrafeology of
That fady, indeed, whofe M l,cacv I cannot fufficiently admtre, has got through
a frill coarfer expreffion, of precifely th .fame import, ,n a manner winch I fhall
for her honour tranferibe. - « when


With one I mu ft commence, fpite of the three;
Then hey for him who firft; begun with me !
THE REVEREND MR. STR AH AN.
O Youthful Strah’n, whofe prime effay in fheets,
Thy father’s friend, and thine, fo kindly greets!
tc When he [Dr. Johnfon] turned his back on Lord Bolingbroke in the
rooms at Brighthelmftone, he made this excufe: tc lam not obliged, Sir, (faid
he to Mr. Thrale, who flood fretting), to find reafons for refpefting the rank
of him who will not condefcend to declare it by his drefs, or fome other vifi-
ble mark: what are flars and other figns of fuperiority made for?” The next
evening however he made us comical amends, by fitting by the fame noble-
man, and haranguing very loudly about the nature and ufe and abufe of di-
vorces. Many people gathered round them to hear what was faid, and when my
hufband called him away, and tol dhi m \owTodin KeThad been talking, received
an answer — which I will not write down.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. no.
Line 22.] This line gives us the image of a mere earthly bard, juft mounted
on Pegafus, and fetting out on what is called a rattling gallop : from which it
fliould feem, that poets in the Elyfian Fields retain all their original enthufiafm.
Line 23.] The reader muft by no means imagine that the epithets youthful
andj young, which precede Mr. Strahan’s name, mean to reprefenthim as green
in years: that learned gentleman is, lam informed, near forty, though the four-
teen pages of Preface to what are called “ Dr. Johnfon’s Prayers and Medi-
tations,” are fuppofedto comprehend the whole of his literature. But the fad:
appears to be, that Dr. Johnfon (whofe valuable friendfhip for Mr. Strahan’s
fuccefsful father, late Printer to his Majefty and commonly foie Printer of the
Dodor’s works, probably paved the way to preferment for the whole family)
had accuftomed himfelf to diftinguifh the fons of his old friend from himfelf,
as is very commonly done, till he loft the idea of it’s impropriety when applied
to what may be called middle-aged men. This is thought neceftary to be ex-
plained, that thofe who are given to joking, particularly at the expence of the
clergy, may not exercife their wit, by remarking that Mr. Strahan is more of
the chicken, or green-go ofe, than Dr. Johnfon’s odier Friends.
With


With zeal fo ardent! and with ikill fo great! 2 5
That in eight months the 11017 work’s compleat;
Where, heal’d from guilt by thy abfolving hands,
The weak, miftaken, aged finner, lianas !
In thee, fo wife ! fo good ! fo foon mature!
’Twas kind, thy father’s friend, and thine, to cure 1 30
Lines 2 5 26.] Dr. Johnfon died on the 13th of December 1784, and Mr.
Strahan completed his celebrated Preface, which the Defter himfelf io.highly
extols, the 6th of Auguft 1785- The Doftor's partiality for the Strahan
family, makes him confider this as very extraordinary difpatch in the young
ma „s forgetting what he had told Mr. Bofwell long before “ that he had.him-
felf written forty-eight of the printed oftavo pages of his famous Lie o
Savage at a fitting.” Boswell’s Journal, f. 65.
Lines 27 to 30°] What a fine k-ffon of humility does the Doctor here in-
culcate to his generous afoiogift < How candidly and pathetically does he ac-
knowledge his errors! and how nobly does he thank the good and fagacious Jon
of his old friend for the conviXion which that pious gentleman’s powerful rea-
toning conveyed to his mind! . . . . r ", . , clt
The excellent logick above referred to, is doubtlefs confined in the follow-
ing extraX c< Our Author [Dr. Johnfon] informs us, that his Prayers for
deceafed friends were offered up, onfeveral occafions , as far as might be lawful
for him\ and once with Preface ofPermiffion : whence it fhould feem that tie had
fome doubt concerning the lawfulnefs of Juch prayers , though it does not ap-
pear that he ever difeontinued the ufe of them. It is alfo obfervable, that in
his reflexions on the death of his Wife, and again of Mr. 1 hrale, he willies
that the Almighty not may have , but may have had , meicv on them.- evidently
Juppoftng their fentence to have already paft in the Divine Mind. This fup-
pofition, indeed, may feem not very confiftent with his recommending them
to the Divine Mercy afterwards. It proves, however, that he had no belief in a
(late of Purgatory, and confequently no reafon for praying for the dead, that
could impeach the lincerity of his prof effort as a 1 ro test an t !
Mr. Strahan’s Preface, p . ix. x.
When


When my expiring reafon bade thee take
My facred fcraps, and keep them for my fake,
Lines 31, &c.] ft During marly years of his life, [fays Mr. Strahan,
fpeaking of Dr. Johnfon] he Itatedly obferved certain days with a religious
folemnity; (viz. New Year’s Day; March 28, the day on which his wife,
Mrs. Elizabeth Johnfon, died; Good Friday; Falter Day; and September the
18th, his own birth-day): on which, and other occafions, it was his cultom to
compofe fuitable Prayers and Meditations; committing them to writing for
his own uje , and, as he allured me, without any view to their 'publication. But
being lalt fummer on a vifit at Oxford, to the Reverend Dr. Adams, (Mailer
of Pembroke College, at which Dr. Johnfon received part of his education),
and that Gentleman urging him repeatedly to engage in fome work of this
kind, [Dr. Adams, who appears to be one of the worldly wife , has unpo-
litely infinuated, in a Letter publifhed in the Gentleman’s Magazine, that the
work he wilhed to fee from Dr. Johnfon’s pen was of a very different kind ]
he then firlt conceived a delign to revife thefe pious effufions, and bequeath
them, with enlargements [ls Mr. Strahan fure the Doctor did not lay, with re-
trenchments too?] to thef use and benefit of others. [The above queltion
becomes the more necefiary, when it is confidered that, to others, the Me-
ditations in general now printed could not pofiibly be made of the fmallelt fer-
vice by any revijal whatever.] Infirmities , however, now growing fait upon
him, he at length changed this defign, and determined to give the Manufcripts,
without revijion , in charge to me, as I had long fhared his intimacy, and was at
this time his daily attendant.” Mr. Strahan’s Preface , p. iii. iv.
It is curious to obferve how mildly the Dodtor reminds Mr. Strahan
that he never intended fuch loofe memorandums for the prefs. Jult as one
good Chriltian fays to another, who has cc done what he ought not to have
done” for his own benefit, without appearing to have confidered in what degree
it muft neceffarily a fell the intereft of his friend — cc It is done, and cannot now
be helped; but thou mighteft as well have let it alone , and peradventure
thine own confcience now telleth thee as much !”
Mr. Strahan wifely printed the whole ; and, I dare fay, both he and his father
as heartily wilhed that the enlargements had been made, as fome nice readers
may regret that the retrenchments did not take place, and that the whole efcaped
a thorough revifion,
C I never


I never meant —or may I never fquint
The world fhould fee the precious (lore in print:
But thou, good, duteous lad, difdain’d to rob, 3 3
Me of my fame —thy father of a job !
Elfe might’ll: thou, from the lecret fouice, hav~ giv n
Thy flock alone my private path to heav n.
Might*ft every Sabbath made thy hearers ftare,
By introducing fome new-modell d pray r ; 4°
Line 33.] I muft honeftly confefs that I was myfelf at a lofs how to apolo-
gize for the Doctor’s adopting that vile old phrafe, tc I wijh I may never
/quint!” the vulgarity of which cannot but difguft every polite reader; and there -
fore had recourfe, as before, [See the Notes, Line 20.] to that elegant, accom-
plifhed, and chafle writer, Mrs. Piozzi, for the molt relined mode of expref-
fion on the occaflon. Very luckily, I foon met with the following appofite
anecdote in that Lady’s book; which will abundantly difplay the nicenefs of
her tafte in fuch cafes, and at the fame time convince every impartial reader,
that all Dr. Johnfon’s friends, in fuppreffing, as they have done, his little defedts,
have juftly entitled themfelves to the praife bellowed upon them in this im-
mortal poem.
“ When Sir Jofhua Reynolds had painted his [Dr. Johnfon’s] Portrait
looking into the flit of his pen, and holding it almolt clofe to his eye, as was
his general cuftom, he felt difpleafed, and told me <f he would not be known
by pojlerity for his defects only , let Sir Jofhua do his worfl.” I faid in reply,
that Reynolds had no fuch difficulties about himfelf, and that he might ob-
ferve the pidlure which hung up in the room where we were talking, repre-
fented Sir Jofhua holding his ear in his hand to catch the found. “ He may
paint himfelf as deaf if he chufes (replied Johnfon) ; but I will not be blink-
ing Sam!” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,/. 248.
Line 40.] It is remarkable, that moft of what are called Dr. Johnfon’s
prayers, in Mr. Strahan’s book, are in reality only flight alterations from die
liturgy of the church of England, adapted to his own particular fituation at
the time of penning them,
And


And while my thoughts, giv’n with Stentorian, pow’r,
Lengthen’d thy fermon out to half an hour,
Retiring Cits had ceas’d for once to fnore,
And fleepy children wak’d to hear thee roar!
Thus great had been in Iflington thy name, 45
Could’ft thou have (loop’d to filch a bit of fame.
But thou haft fuffer’d, noble, gen’rous youth ;
And faint-like fuffer’d—in the caufe of truth !
Take, in return, a piece of my advice:
Be, in thy future conduct, not o’er nice. 50
Nor let refentment in thy bofom rife,
At fneers unhallow’d from the worldly wife
But at their mirth with equal mirth rejoice;
Whom men deem weak, are oft’neft Heav’n’s choice.
So fhalt thou reach, at laft, this blefs’d abode— 55
Spite of each rub that’s met with on the road!
Line 54.] Here,, it Teems moft probable, the following text is referred to
by the pious Doctor.
“ God hath chofen the foolifj things of the world to confound the wife: and
God hath chofen the weak things of the world to confound the things which
are mighty ; —and hafe things of the world, and things which are defpfed t
hath God chofen, yea, and things which are not , to bring to nought things
that are*\ 1 Corinthians,, i. 27,28.
JAMES


JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ^
O Bozzy ! Bozzy ! how (hall I begin
To fpeak of thee—whofe all-approving grin,
As on we journey’d thro’ thy native illc,
Oft made me lofe remembrance of tue toil ! bo
But foft—thy honeft pride why fhould I check ?
“All hail, Dalblair ! hail, Laird of Auchinleck !”
Line 0.l It is curious to trace how fuddenly the Doftor’s ftile changes from
gravity to gaiety, when he begins to fpeak of his old fellow-traveller. We
almoft fee the Ghoft chuckling over ideas which arife from the remembrance
of paft fport with his friend Bozzy! for fo, it feems, he commonly called that
ftupendous gentleman, the renowned James Bofwell, Efq.
“ When Dr. Johnfon awaked this morning, he called, 11 Lanky l hav-
ing I fuppofe, been thinking of Langton; but corrected himfelf inftanily,
and cried “ Bozzy!” Boswell’s Journal, p. 3 8 4-
Line 62.] This is quite chara&eriftick. The Doftor was fond of fami-
liarly fportingwith Parody; and, I am afraid, in this and fome other places,
indulged what the incomparable Fielding calls an internal laugh , at the ex-
pence of his all-unconfcious Friend Bozzy. Something exactly like this
happened during their tour to the Hebrides. .
<f We drove over the very heath where Macbeth met the witches, ac-
cording to tradition. He [Dr. Johnfon] then parodied the All-hail of the
witches to Macbeth, addreffing him/elf to me. I had purchafed fome land
called DdlMair ; and, as in Scotland it is cuftomary to Giftinguilh landed
wen by the name of their ejlates , I had thus two titles , Dalblair, and
Young Auchinleck. So my friend, in imitation of
All hail Macbeth! hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
condefcended to amufe himjelf with uttering
All hail Dalblair ! hail to thee, Laird of Auchinleck !”
Boswell’s Journal, p. 122, 123.
Who


Who boafts, from princes, even fince the Flood,
The mighty honour of defcending blood
Who,
. Lin [ S 6 3^ 6 4'-] "Nihil eft, nifihocfciat alter T fays Mr. Bofwell, and it
is with pleaiure I affift in promulging the illuftrious genealogy of a Gentleman
to whom the world is fo highly indebted for much exquiftte entertainment.
" My great grandmother Veronica, Countefs of Kincardine, [was] a Dutch
lady of the noble houfe of Somme Ifdyck! The family had once a princely
Right in Surinam ! The governour of that ifland was appointed by the States
general, the town of Amfterdam, and Sommelfdyck. The States General
have acquired Sommelfdyck’s right, but the family has ftill great dignity and
by Intermarria S es is conneEled with many other noble families !
hen I was at the Hague, I was received with all the affettionoh kindred!
The prefent Sommelfdyck has an important charge in the Republick, and is
as worthy a man as lives! He has honoured with his correfpondence io r
taele twenty years! My great grandfather, the hulband of Countefs Veronica,
was. Alexander, Earl of Kincardine, that eminent Royalist, whofe character
is given by Burnet! From him the blood of Bruce flows'in my veins ! !/—Of
luch anceftry who would not be proud? And, as Nihil eft, nifi hoc fciat alter, is
peculiarly true of genealogy, who would not be glad to feize a fair opportunity
to let it be known r . . Boswell’s Journal, p. 2 6.
\v hat a fine proof uoes this furmlli of Mr..Bofwell’s great descent, as well
as of his extreme diffidence and mcdefty! His boaft of blood, he fays, 'is highly
commendable , and the Dodor pronounces it honeft —in which fenfe of that
word the reader mull decide. Here, then, Mr. Bofwell is exhibited, as
nobly born, diffident, modeft, and honeft , reader, I will give thee a proof of
his candour, when judging of another, who felt precifely the fame ruling
paffton. But he was an illiterate blockhead, and had never written books t
<c We furveyed the remains of antiquity, at this place [lcolmkill] ac-
companied by an illiterate fellow, as Cicerone — who called himfelf a defen-
dant of a coujin of Saint Columba, the founder of the religious eftabliftj-
menthere!” . Boswell’s Journal, p. 41 9.
O what an impudent dog !
Lines 63 to 86.] The whole of this curious padage, we are forry to
obferve, feems little lefs than what is vulgarly called rob thief: Dr. Johnfon
having made free enough to fteal Mr. Bofwejl’s excellent character of him-
self, the manner of which—though not the matter— that being doubtlefs as
original


Who, tho’ a foldier from his own fir ft choice,
Urg’d by the mufick of a father s voice,
The road of honour duteoufiy declin d,
And humbly ftoop’d, with him, to retail wind—
Who had in many foreign countries been,
And many things a many times had feen ; 7°
But, unlike mifers hoarding up their pelf,
He made the weakeft cunning as himfelf,
While they perus’d th’ originals he wrote,
And large quotations he knew how to qucte —
° Whofe
original as it is curious—Ur. Bofwell has evidently made free enough to tranfplant
into his true work from Sir William Thornhill’s account of himfelf under the
name of Burchell, in Dr. Goldfmith’s fictitious flory of the Vicar of Wake-
field. It muft be owned, however, in jufiice to Mr. Bofwell, that he has given
his own character much the highejl colouring. As for Dr. Johnfon, he has merely
verfified th Sentiments of his friend Bozzy, preferving all thcfpirit of the ori-
zinal- and is, at moft, only an accomplice after the faft. But let the reader
have ’an opportunity of judging for himfelf on this important point. The
charo-e is ferious, and the accufed party Ihould be allowed to fpeak for himfelf.
° [Cryer. “ James Boswell, Efq. come into court!”}
Mr. Bofwell fpeaks
< f I have given a (ketch of Dr. Johnfon; my readers may wilh to know
a little of his fellow traveller: [myself!] ’Think, then, [O think!] of
a gentleman of ancient blood , the pride of which was his predominant pajfion !
He was then in his thirty-third year, [ cc So young, and yet Jo witty l Shakesp.J
and had been about four years happily married ! [Happy, happy man!] His
inclination was to be a foldier! [“ He would be a Soldier, wouldJweet Jemmy-0 /”
Bravo!] but his father, a refpedtable Judge, had preffed him [What a pity!]
into the profejfion of the law f Fie had thought more than any body fuppofed!
[Won-


Whofe full-fluff’d bofom, like a parifli chert, y ;
All my old flock of principles poflefs’d ;
But from the duft and mould divinely free,
Which ftill clung to them while they flood with me-
Who had of learning a fufficient ftore ;
And fo much wifdom, he could gain no more— 80
Who thought much more, one fays, and he beft knows,
Than any one befldes could e’er fuppofe—
Who yet, midft fallies of his pregnant brain,
Oft popp d out words, but let the fenle remain ;
And was, like jockies mounted for the courfe, 85
Willing to ride, on an unwilling horfe!
[Wonderful!] and had a pretty good flock of general learning and knowledge .
[Charming!] He had all Dr. Johnfon’s principles, [What a ftockf] with Jome
degree of relaxation l [Better, and better!] He had rather too little, than
too much prudence j [That’s a pity!] and, his imagination being lively , [Who
would have thought it ?] he often faid things of which the effedl was very diffe-
rent from the intention. [Strange!] He refembled fometimes
“ The befi good man , with the worjl natured muse !”
[O the wicked jade! the cruel, ungrateful jilt!]
Boswell’s Journal , p. 46, 47,
Reader ! thou art of the Jury j thou haft no doubt peruled the novel al-
luded to ; and to thee, and thy fellow-jurors I commit the decifion of this
folemn fadt: only reminding you all, in tendernejs to the culprit —that the of-
fence with which he is charged is CAPITAL, though he will not be quite Jhut
cut, by your verdidt, from th zpoffibility of availing himfelf of the benefit of
CLERGY.
Oft


Oft had I prais’d thee, Bozzy, long before,
But thy deferts now afk a little more:
Nor (hall the juft demand be made in vam ;
Friends ffiould give pleafure, which withheld were pam. 9 °
E’en the untutor’d Highlander ftiU knows,
What one kind office to another owes;
And, tho’ their minds itch not with lull of praife,
When like contagion on their bodies preys,
The poor, good fouls, plagu’d by the fame difeafe, 95
Scratch for each other, for their mutual eafe..
O ffiould I, Bozzy, in my Bow-wow way,.
Now fay of thee all I ought now to fay;
Lines or to 96.] If the Doftor had never written a fyllable more than the
fimiie contained in thefe few lines, his fame as a poet mult have been im-
mortal The companion of two Writers, Scratching for one another, wait
a couple of Highlanders infefted by their naltomljijeaje, has a beauty an
propriety which I have never been able to meet with in Homer or Virgil. This
poem therefore, muft be placed, by all judicious Cnticks at the head of a
new chfs of literature, above even the beft produdhonsof the Eptck or Tra-
gick Mufes: fo that, as in the well known fable of iEfop, while two are
fighting for pre-eminence, a third Heps in, and fairly carries away the prize for
■which they have been fo long contending* . j •
Line 07.] This may feem an odd phrafe, to perfons unacquainted with
ou r Author s manner, as deferibed by his celebrated Friends, irrom them,
however, it appears to be truly charafteriftick.
.< Dr Tohnfon’s fayings would not appear fo extraordinary, were it
« not for his bow-wow wa h " Boswell’s Journal,


All I could fay of thee, bold, fteady youth,
Say in thy praife, and fay it too with truth; 100
Thy love of which—let no one dare to mock it!—
Is as capacious as my great-coat pocket:
“ He is a fcholar undoubtedly Sir [faid Dr. Johnfon to God knows who ,
ipeaking of Jeremiah Markland], but remember that he would run from the
world, and that it is not the world’s bufinefs to run after him. I hate a fellow
whom pride, or cowardice, or lazinefs drives into a corner, and does nothing
when he is there but fit and growl ; let him come out as I do, and bark ”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 252.
The copious and polite Mrs. Piozzi alfo furnidies, among other appofite
indances, the following.
<c Mr. Johnfon did not like any one who faid they were happy, or who faid
any one elle was fo. “It is all cant (he would cry), the dog knows he is
miserable all the time.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,p. 284.
Lines 102, 103.] The Dodor in this place feems to have (t /natch’d a
grace beyond the. reach of art /” led away, pofiibly, by extreme zeal for the eda-
blifhment of his friend Bozzy's charader for veracity. Perhaps the fird len-
tence of Mr. 80l well's Book, on this very Jubjefi, is one of the mofi elegant and
leaf ob/cure periods ever penned, by any re/pefiable Author, ancient or mo-
dern. How different is the ftik of Mr. BofwelTs former Dedication to Paoli
moft of which Dr. Johnfon is fuppofed to have /polled!
In every narrative, whether hidorical or biographical, authenticity is
cf the utmoff con/equence. Of this I have ever been fo firmly perfuaded, that I
infcribed a former work to that perfon who was the bell judge of it’s truth.”
Boswell’s Journal, Dedication, p.v^
Binding Mr. Bofwell had thus greatly at heart the defire of being remark-
able for his attachment, to truth, the Dodor thought he could not poffiblv li ve
a larger idea of his Friend’s veracity, than by dating it to be equal in magni-
tude to his own great-coat pocket ; the fize of which is particularly mentioned
very fortunately, in our Journalift’s mod exaft and authentick account of thl
Dodor’s travelling drefs.
“ He wore a full lint of plain brown clothes, with twided hair buttons of the
fame colour, a large bufhy greyifh wig, a plain fhirt, black worded dockings
and filver buckles. Upon this tour, when journeying, he wore boots, anc? a
very wide brown cloth great coat , with pockets which might have almod held
the two volumes of his folio dictionary !” Boswell’s Journal, p. 10.
The


The glorious theme alone might form a tome,
Big as thy promis’d labours yet to come! r r\\ S
Lines rot 104-1 It is fuppofed that a few of thefe promifed labours may
be cS fromthe following paffages in Mr. Bofwell'sJoßrnal, where more
proofs of that gentleman’s great modefty will occur, parucil. y,
SL to keep company with fuch an infignificant charaßer as Mr. Hume,
{he J'-Omgbt famous Hifiorian ; and in the polite compar Jon which ha,
1 "“.r*
old bio, I ... »« dor MU -- ”>" '• l ;S
« But (h\dl) how much better are you than your books! P‘i*‘ u PP 0 ““
this obfervation might be extended even to Mr.Bofwell him e •]
cheerful, obliging, and inftruftive; he was charitable to the poor; and many
an agreeable hour have I paffed with him. I have prejerved fome entertain-
ing and interejling memoirs of him, particularly when he knew himself
to BE DYING, which 1 may fome time or other communicate to the wot Id. I
not however, extol him fo very highly as Dr. Adam Smith does who fays,
“ Upon the whole, I have always confidered him [fpeaking of Mr. Hunne}
both in his life-time, and flnee his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea
h fz {erfeaiy wife aJid virtuous man as perhaps the nature of human frailty
•■H De rmit.” When I read this fentence, delivered by my old PicfejjOr Oj
Moral Philofophy , I could not help exclaiming with the PJalmijl, “ Surely 1
have now more understanding than my teachers!
baV Boswell’s Journal, p. 11, 11, 13.
c much for Mr. Bofwell’s diffidence-, and for his undemanding, too! It is
booed 'however, that gentleman does not mean, by the ‘.hint he has given
Sging Mr. Hume, to fulfil any part of the following Prophecy, delivered
loner ap-o ly one who is no Conjuror. ,
«‘ D Some enthufiaftick and abfurd bigot will ante, withm a century; who,
« t 0 ga i n the reputation of being himfelf a good Cbrijhan, lhall deliberately
“ COIN A LYE and publifh it to the world— charging Hume, as many other
« philofophical Writers have been falfely charged, with defertmg his fuUtJbed
« principles, on his death-bed, where he is now umverfally known to have
« expired in avowing them. And, notwithftanding the growth of Jcience
« this previous caution, and the notorious ftufidity of the promulger, there wil
“ be many found to believe 1” Editor’s MS. Prophecies, cap^u


The pleafing tafk I therefore fhall decline; XO5
To fate the publick tafte be folely thine:
Who, while weak Authours, ftudious of connexion,
Lofe many an hour in profitlefs refledion,
But it is time to proceed with Mr. Bofwell’s promifed labours, as an-
nounced in his famous Journal.
Dr. Johnfon gave us part of a converfation held between a Great
Personage and him, in the library at the Queen’s Palace. I have been at great
pains to get that converfation as perfectly preferred as poffible. It may perhaps
at fome future time be given to the Publick:' Boswell’s Journal , p. 134.
" Now for the Epitaphs !” [This gives a fine edge to Curiofity.
Mark how well Mr. Bofwell gratifies it.]
[Theje, together with the verfes on George the Second , and Colley Cibber,
as his Poet Laureat, of which imperfect copies are gone about, will ap-
pear in my life of Dr. Johnson.]” Boswell’s Journal , p. 4 ,g
" Baxter was the keen antagonifl of Barnes. His life is in the Biographia
Britannic a. My father has written many notes on this book , and Dr. Johnson
and I talked of having it reprinted.’’ Boswell’s Journal , p. 47 r
“.He [Lord Elibank] publifhed feveral fmall pieces of diflinguiffied
merit; and has left fome in manuscript, in particular an account of the expe-
dition againft Carthagena, in which he fcrved as an officer in the army. His
writings deferve to be collected.’* Boswell’s Journal, p. 4 g6
Lines 106 to 112.] This abundantly confirms the account Mr Bofwell
has given of Dr. Johnfon’s opinion how books fhould be made ; though it feems
rather odd that he never made them Jo himfelf. It certainly is the mod exte
daunts mode ; and, as Dr. Johnfon advifes it to be purfued, who can blame
his friend Bozzy!
" I love anecdotes. [Dr. Johnfon is fuppofed to be fpeaking.] I fancy
mankind may come, in time, to write all aphorijlically , except in narrative-
grow weary of preparation, and connexion, and illujlration, and all thofe arts
with which a big book is made. If a [ftupid] man is to wait till he weaves
anecdotes into a fyfiem, we may be long in getting them, and get but few, in com-
panfon of what we might get.” Boswell’s Journal, p. ™
Rejoice, my dud brethren! We authors have the fanttion of Dr. Johnfon
for writing any how ; it is recorded by the great Mr. Bofwell, and he has
glorioufly/*/ us the example!
Before


Before they venture to take quill in hand,
Thy belt ideas always can command; 110
And, knowing books are made with pen and ink,
Keep ever writing on, but never think.
Thus, ere a work’s begun by fome poor brother,
Thy firft is fold, and thou haft made another.
O had fly Edmund, that true Fox’s cub, 11 5
Kept thee, my Bozzy, from our pleafant club;
Elis hand profufe, which yet no art can bribe,
Had “ loft a pearl richer than all his tribe!
Long ftnce, this truth he freely has confefs d,
They gain more mirth from thee than all the reft: tso
Tines lie to 12Q.1 "As we travelled on, he [Dr.Johnfon] told me, cc Sir,
you got into our Club [meaning the l.terary club] hy dang waat a man
can do ” (I fuppofe, fays Mr. Bofwell, Dr. Johnfon meant, mat I affiduoufly
“n& earneftly recommended myfelfto fome of the members, as m a canvafs for
Zmi n into parliament.) « Several of the members [continued Dr John-
Zn\Z2d to keep you out. Burke told me, he doubted ,f you were fit for re-
but nolyou are in, none of them at tjony. Burke fays, that you have fo
much GOOD humour naturally , it is Jcarce a virtue! Beauclerk was v.ry
earne/l for you.” Bofwell. “ Beauclerk has a keennejs of mind which ts
tarnejt lory j Boswell’s Journal, 76.
Mr. Beauclerk had probably more keemejs than Mr. Bofwell tmagm. ;
but Ihough he may have been a little mfiaken in this particular, he feems to
underftand perfe&ly well—
“ What one kind office to another owes”
Proceed,


Proceed, then, Bozzy, doggedly go on,
“ And curs’d be he, who firft cries—“ Hold! have done!”
What joy have I, that one who knows fa well
How to make books, and how to make them fell,
Thro’ all his labours fpreads my honour’d name, 12^
And makes me, tho’ relu&ant, fhare his fame!
Thus may I, when my too erroneous Tour,
For want of thee, has liv’d it’s lateft hour,
See without anguifh my poor babe decline,
Secure of immortality in thine. 130
Lines 121, 122.] The word doggedly, however harffi, feems to have
been a favourite of the Doctor’s, when living. [ <c Somebody talked of happy
moments for composition ; and how a man can write at one time, and not at
another. “ Nay, (faid Dr. Johnfon) a man may write at any time, if he
will fet himfelf doggedly to it.” This word, [Mr. Bofwell obferves] is
commonly ufedto fignify fullenly, gloomily ; and in that fenfe alone it appears
in Dr. Johnfon’s Diftionary. I fuppofe he meant by it, in the above injlance ,
with an obstinate resolution !” Boswell’s, Journal , p. j 3) n 6.
Lines 127 to 130.] “ /regret that he [Dr. Johnfon] did not allow me
to read over his Book before it was printed, I Ihould have changed very little ;
but /ffiould have fuggefted an alteration in a few places — where he has
laid himfelf open to be attacked.” Boswell’s Journal, p. 116.
What a pity it is that Dr. Johnfon did not fuffer Mr. Bofwell, who fo no-
torioufy poffefTes the art of making invulnerable Books, to exercife his great
talents! But on fome other occafions, it feems, the Dodtor had the weaknefs
to rejedt the good offices of his fugacious fellow-traveller.
fC Johnfon. “ I ffiall do what is fa.”—Bofwell. « Ay, Sir, but all I
defire is, that you will let me tell you when it is fit.” — Johnfon. “ Sir, I ffiall
not confult you!” Boswell’s Journal , p. 335.
F So,


So, when the burs, on my knit {lockings borne,
Stuck to the hofe by them and thirties torn,
While I was wont thy native wilds to tread,
In fearch of knowledge, by thy footlteps led;
Lines into 136.] Here Is another fimiie, fuperior to all the fimiles in all
the works of all the ancients, and confequendy of all the moderns!. Ihe vile
burs (like Dr. Johnfon) are reluctantly dragged out of into publick
notice by the very Jlockings they had tcrnl What reader can fail to feel the
charming propriety of this moft fublime metaphor, and to make the ex-
quifite application! Who fees not, in the idea which this elevated language
infpires, our immortal bard, to borrow a figure from Mr., Bofwell, (p. 5 W
“ Jl diking like a giant among the luxuriant thijlles and nettles r • An hiftoi ica
fa£t of ajlonijhing importance comes out in this paffage, which we recommend
to Mr. Bofwell, for the improvement of his third edition: this gentleman
has defcribed the Dodtor as wearing worfted Jlockings , but has ftrangely, foi
a gentleman of his minute obfervation and precifion , negle&ed to particularize
whether they were woven or knitted —a queftion of the nrft concein to the
woollen manufactures! Dr. Johnfon has, however, pronounced them to
have been knit fockings , from which it may be inferred that his philanthrophy
made him entertain a partiality for that manufacture which employs moji
hands to produce the fame work . Mr. Bofwell may eafily defcant on this iub-
jet, fo as to add confiderably to the bulk of his ftupendous performance; ef-
pecially if he could conveniently, during the long vacation , make another
journey to the Highlands, in order to procure intelligence whether they were
obferved to be Scotch hofe. The inveftigation of this national concern , for fo it
certainly is, as well as many other curious particulars congenial with Mr.,
Bofwell’s patriotifm and tajle, may perhaps be more effectually promoted by
applying to feme old woman , than by troubling any of his learned friends : and,
as a Barber is undoubtedly the properefl perfon to afk what kind of wig was
worn by any gentleman on whom his eye ever once glanced, or a Shoeblack
whether his boots were clean or dirty— Vrofejfors of all forts inflantly and mofb
minutely directing their attention to what has been the foie purfuit of their
own lives —he is advifed to feek out, for this purpofe, fome Highland goody ,
vifited during his former tour, whofe occupation it is to knit hofe.
The


The wretched things far more admirers gain’d, 13-
Than, but for this, they ever had obtain’d !
O ne’er fhall I our curious jaunt forget;
When, hungry, cold, fleepy, fatigu’d, and wet,
On mufty hay we vainly fought repofe,
Till glutted vermin let our eyelids clofe! 140
How
Lines 137 to 140.] fc It was a very heavy rain, and I was wet to the Jkin.
Captain M c Lean had but a poor temporary houfe , or rather hut-, however, it
was a very good haven to us.” Boswell’s Journal, p. 352.
“ We had much hefitation, whether to undrejs , or lie down with our
clothes on. I laid at laft, <c I'll plunge in ! Lhere will he lejs harbour for ver-
min about me when lam JlrippedI ’ — After we had offered up our private de-
votions, and had chatted a little from our beds, Dr. Johnfon faid, “ God blefs
us both, for Jefus Chrifl’s fake! Good night!”—l pronounced <c Amen.”
He fell afleep immediately. [As Mr. Bofwell thought, but it appears from
the Poem that he was miftaken.] I was not fo fortunate for a long time. I
fancied myfelf bit by innumerable vermin under the clothes 3 [O the blood of
Bruce!] and that a fpider was travelling from the wainfcot towards my mouth.
At laft I fell into infenfibiUty .” Boswell’s Journal , p. 152, 15 3.
“ We were accommodated this night in a large barn , the illand affording
no lodging that we fhould have liked Jo well. Some good hay was ftrewed at
one end of it, to form a bed for us.” Boswell’s Journal , p. 419.
fc We had each an elegant bed in the fame room. From his defcription
of his chamber, [Dr. Johnfon’s in his ridiculous Tour] it has erroneoujly been
fuppofed, that, his bed being too Jhort for him , his feet, during the night , were
in the mire: whereas he has only faid, that, when he undrejfed, he felt his feet in
the mire: that is, the clay-floor of the room, on which he ftood before he went
into bed, was wet , in confequence of the windows being broken , which let in the
rain!” Boswell’s Journal, p. 403.
This was indifputably a very fine apartment , according to Mr. Bofwell’s own
defcription , for elegant beds ! But what a Highlander , or even a Lowlander,
thinks


How oft we laugh’d, alone and in the crowd,
At diff’rent things, but both with laughter loud;
Flow
thinks may not be efteemed exactly fo by one who has been a ecu homed to
enjoy the accommodations of London. Indeed, there is zjmall variation between
the accounts of Dr. johnfon and Mr. Boiwell, in the preceding extract ; where
the hay , which the latter calls good, is by the former deferibed as mufty. Who,
then, are we to believe ? "Why, the veracity of both parties being unimpeach-
able,'it has been fuggefted, by Jeveral great criticks, that, after all, Dr. John-
fon’s account was probably right: fince the fmell of Mr. Bofwell, long refident
in a city where “ the odour [as he calls what I fhould think would make my pa-
perftink but to mention] fall continues f might be fomewhat lefs exquifite than
that of his fellow-traveller ; who, when aflailed by '■‘■the evening effluvia of Edin-
burgh” grumbled in his ear— cc ßozzy! I fmell you in the dark!” While many
others, of equal repute in the learned world, and all perfons oft he firft fajhion
and confequence , my particular and very good friends , have taken it for granted
that Mr. Bofwell might have loft even the ufual fagacity of his nose, by a very
common accident; that gentleman being particularly liable to — catch cold.
Lines 141, 14a.] “ I have often thought, [Dr. Johnfon is fuppofed to be
fpeaking] that, if I kept a feraglio, the ladies fhould all wear linen gowns y —
or cotton ; —I mean fluffs made of vegetable fubftances. I would haven oftlk-, you
cannot tell when it is clean: it will be very nafty before it is perceived to be fo.
Linen detefts it’s own dirtinefs”— To hear [fays Mr. Bofwell] the grave Dr.
Samuel Johnfon, <c that majeftick teacher of moral and religious wifdom,”
while fitting folemn in an arm-chair in the lfle of Sky, talk, ex cathedya 3 of his
keeping a feraglio, and acknowledge that the fuppofition had often been in his
thoughts, ftruck me fo forcibly with ludicrous contrafi, that I could not but
laugh immoderately! He was too proud to fubmit , even for a moment, to be
the objett of ridicule) and inftantly retaliated with ftich keen farcaftick wit , and
fuch a variety of degrading images) of every one of which I was the object) tnat,
though I can [from ufe, no doubt!] bear fuch attacks as well as mojl men , I yet
found myfelf fo much the fport of all the company , that I would gladly expunge
from my mind every trace of this fevere retort .” Boswell’s Journal) p. 261.
Mr. Bofwell barely poffeffes more candour than to keep thefe intereftingpar-
ticulars from the world, merely becaufe they were direfted againft himfelf;
and it is yet hoped he means to give them in a new edition with additions , or in
feme of his other multifarious undertakings!
" He


How oft I urg’d thee gravely to recite,
Confcious thy manner amply would requite;
How oft I faw thee dance with force and glee, 145
Pleas’d at thyfelf, more pleafimg (till to me;
How
tc He [Dr. Johnfon] laughed with uncommon glee, and could hardly leave
off. I have feen him do fo at a jmall matter that (truck him, and was a J 'port
to no one elje .” Boswell’s Journal, p. 304.
My readers, I believe, will make a better guefs than Mr. Bolwell appears
to have done, at the object of Dr. Johnfon' s laughter on fuch occafions.
Lines 143,144.] “ When we had got into our boat again, he [Dr. Johnfon]
called to me, {C Come, now, pay a claffical compliment to the ifland [lnch
Keith] on quitting it.” I happened luckily, in allufion to the beautiful
Queen Mary, whofe name is upon the fort, to think of what Virgil makes
iEneas lay, on having left the country of his charming Dido: [Very appoftte,
indeed!]
tc Invitus, regina , tuo de littore cejfil ”
cc Very well hit off l .” faidhe.” [Turning his head, and laughing. ]
Boswell’s Journal,. p. 52.
tc Juft as we came out of it,. [Macbeth’s caftle] a raven perched on one of
the chimney-tops, and croaked- Then I, [with congenial harmony'} repeated,
f< —The raven himfelf is hoarfe,
That croaks the fatal enteranc of Duncan
Under my battlements.” Boswell’s Journal, p. 19.
What a feaft mull this curious difplay of his friend Bozzy’s oratorical pow-
ers have afforded Dr. Johnfon !
Lines 145, 146.] “ It entertained me to obferve him [Dr.Johnfon] fitting by,
while we danced , fometimes [ apparently ] in deep meditation, —fometimes
fmiling complacently,: —fometimes looking upon Hooke’s Roman Hiftory,
—and fometimes talking a little, amidft the noife of the ball, to Mi*. Donald
M‘Queen.’ r Boswell’s Journal , p. 189.
“ We danced to-night to the mufick of the bagpipe, which made us beat
the ground with prodigious force.” Boswells Journal, p. 3
G “ The


How oft I bade thee Ting with all thy might,
While birds and beafts the Muflck put to flight,
How
« The found of a bagpipe will ftir my blood, and fill me with a mixture of
melancholy and refped for courage 5 in fhort, with a crowd of fenfatiom with
which fiber rationality has nothing to do.'’ Boswell s Journal, p. 155.
The latter part of this fentence will probably bring to the minds of moil
readers, the account which Shakefpeare has given of many perfons being af-
fe<sted in a fimilar manner, by the mufick of that famous inffrument, the
Scotch bagpipe , in his days.
“ And others, when the bagpipe Jings V th * nofe,
Cannot contain their urine for affe Elion."
Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice , Adt IV. Scene I.
Line 147.] Cf They [the Highlanders] talked in their own ancient lan-
guage, with fluent vivacity, and fung many Erfe fongs.—For myfelf, though
but a Howlander, having picked up a few words of the language , I prefumed to
mingle in their mirth , and joined in the chorujfes with as much glee as any of the
company ßoswell’s Journal, p. 176,
Line 148.] It is imagined, that the allufion in this line refers to fome un-
particularized Jpuimen of Mr. Bofwell’s imitative art, given to his fellow-
traveller while on their tour in the Highlands, rather than of his vocal pow-
ers, ilridUy fo called. Indeed, Mr. Bofwell has in this refpedt once favoured
the publick ; and a fecond exhibition would, I doubt not, be very numeroufly
attended. His fuccefsful practice in that art he has himfelf defcribed with
great diffidence and humility,
«« When Dr. Hugh Blair and I were fitting together in the pit of Drury-
lane play-houfe, I entertained the audience prodigioujly by imitating the lowing of
cow!” —I W as fo fuccefsful in this boyijh frolick, that the univerfal cry of the
galleries was, “ Encore the cow ! Encore the cow!” In the pride of my heart, I
attempted imitations of fome other animals, but with very inferior effedt. My
reverend friend, anxious for my fame, with an air of the utmoft gravity and ear-
neftnefs, addrefifed me thus: <f My dear Sir, I would confine myfelf to the cowl ”
—A little while after I had told this ftory, I differed from Dr. Johnfon, I fup-
pofe too confidently, upon fome point, which I now forget. He did not fpare me.
“ Nay, Sir, (faid he,) if you cannot talk better as a man, I’d .have you bellow
like a cow!” Boswell’s Journal, p, 499.
INTELLIGENCE


How oft I heard thee pray, and faw thee drunk,
Thy fpirits now full high, and now quite funk ; 150
How
INTELLIGENCE EXTRAORDINARY.
(to whom it may concern.)
A New Opera, founded on the following Fable, is faid to be preparing
for one of the celebrated Horse-Theatres; when a good aClor in the art of
'imitating animals would probably meet with great encouragement, particu-
larly if he fhould be thoroughly qualified to fill the ■principal character.
THE FABLE.
te The Old Lion once dead, a Young pert and vain,
cc Cloth’d himfelf in the Jkin, and appear’d on the plain:
<f Where long he had met with refpeCl from the herd,
f< Who beneath a fine coat fufped nothing abfurdj
<c But, afpiring to roar , in the pilfer’d array,
“ His long ears flood ered, and they heard the fool bray.
fC All his pride in an inflant now turn’d to dijgrace ,
cf And they hooted and kick’d the dull beaft from the place.”
Editor’s MS. Fables of FEJop Modernized.
Fine 149.] The Dodor has in this place made a ludicrous affociation of
devotion and drunkennefs ; but he had, no doubt, good reafons for what he has
done : at lead, I fhall fuppofe Jo as every wife Commentator ought, on fuch
occafions,who is indebted to a great Author for handing him down to poflerity.
But let us examine the minute Mr. Bofwell himfelf, who has fomethino- to
fay on every fubjed. It muft be owned, that this gentleman, however, has not,
amidft all his profufion of anecdotes, adduced much that, flridly fpeaking, is
greatly in favour of himfelf ■, or, as fome might exprefs themfelves, highly to
his own honour: the inflances of his devotion , therefore, we are forry to remark,
are very few 3 compared with thofe where his difpofition to ebriety is abundantly
manifejl.
“ On one of the rocks juft where we landed, which are not high, there is
rudely carved a fquare, with a crucifix in the middle. Here, it is faid, the
Lairds of Rafay, in old times, ufed to offer up their devotions. I could not
approach the fpot, without a grateful recollection of the event commemorated by
this symbol.” Boswell’s Journal, p. 193.
So much for Mr. BofwelFs devotion now, Reader, for the contrajl.
Xl After fupper, Dr. Johnfon told us, that Ifaac Hawkins Browne drank
freely for thirty years, and that he wrote his poem, Be Animi Immortalitate f
in


How oft tlion teaz’d me, at our {lender dinners,
To fpeak of princes, poets, faints, and finneis;
How
in fome of the lafi of theft years. I liftened to this with the eagernefs of one,
who, confcious of being himfelf fond of wine, is glad m hear t iat a man
wuc h genius and good thinking as Browne, had the fame propenfity.
Boswell’s Journal, p. i74j *7S-
« He [Dr. Johnfon] was rather quiefcent tonight, and went early to bed.
I was in a cordial humour l and promoted a chearful glafs. The punch was ex-
cellent l Honed Mr. M c Queen obferved that I was in high glee, £< my cover-
nour being gone to bed!” Boswell’s Journal , p. 214.
«« Dr. Johnfon went to bed foon. When one bowl of punch was fimjhed ,
I rofe, and was near the door, in my way up Hairs to bed, but Comchatachm
faid, it was the ftrft time Col had been in his houfe, and he fhould have his
bowl; —and would not I join in drinking it? The heartmefs of my honelt
landlord, and the defire of doing social honour to our very obliging conductor,
induced me to fit down again. Col’s bowl was finifhed ; and by that time we
were well warmed. A third bowl was foon made, and that too was finished.
We were cordial land merry to a high degree; but of what pa [fed I have nore-
colleWdn, with any accuracy .—lt was hear five in the morning when I got to
bed. lazvaked at noon with a fevere head-ach. I was much vexed that I fhould
have been wihyoffucb a riot, and afraid of a reproof from Dr.Johnfon.—About
one he came into my room, and accofted me, “ What, , drunk Sir,
faid I, they kept me up?— He anfwered, “ No,jy*« kept them up , you drunken
dog'” This he faid with good-humoured Englifh pleafantry. Soon after-
wards, Corrichatachin, Col, and other friends, affembled round my bed. Corn
had a brandy-bottle and glafs with him,, and infilled I fliould take a dram.—
“ Ay, faid Dr. Johnfon, fill him drunk again. Do it in the morning, that wc
may laugh at him all day. It is a poor thing for a fellow to get drunk at night,
and fculk to bed , and let his friends have no fport?—l took my hoft’s advice, and
drank fome brandy, which I found an effectual cure for my head-achl When I
arofe, I went into Dr. Johnfon’s room, and taking Mrs. M‘Kinnon’s Prayer-
book, I opened it at the twentieth Sunday after Trinity, in the epiftle for which
I read, “ And be not drunk with wine, wherein there is excefs.” Some would
have taken this as a divine interpofitionT 80-swell s Journal, p. 316 to 318.
Mrs. Piozzi has alio kindly favoured the world with an anecdote, in which
Mr. Bofwell’s cordial propenfity is hinted at: nor has that ingenuous Lady
Jupprcffed Dr. johnfon’s <c keen farcajliek wit> on the occafion.


Ho w oft I mark’d thee, like a watchful cat,
Lift’ning to catch up all my filly chat;
ff It was unlucky for thofe who delighted to echo Johnfon* s fentiments ; that
he would not endure from them to-day , what perhaps he had yeferday, by
his own manner of treating the fubjett , made them fond of repeating ; and I
fancy Mr. B has not forgotten, that though his friend one evening in a gay
humour talked in praife of wine as one of the bleffings permitted by heaven,
when ufed with moderation , to lighten the load of life , and give men strength
to endure it; yet, when in confequence of fuch talk he thought fit to make a
Bacchanalian difcourfe in its favour, Mr. Johnfon contradicted him fomewhat
roughly as I remember; and when to ajfure himjelf of conqueft , he added thefe
words: You muft allow me, Sir, at lead that produces truth ; in vino veri-
tas,you know Sir. —“ That (replied Mr. Johnfon) would be ufelefs to a man who
knew he was not a liar when he was sober.” Mrs. Piozzi's Anecdotes, p. 261.
Mr. Bofwell, however, has been even with the Doctor: for, having luckily
outlived him, he has taken care to have the last word on his favourite topick.-
“ One of his [Dr. Johnfon’s] arguments againfi drinking, appears to me
not convincing . He urged that, tc in proportion as drinking makes a man
different from what he is before he has drunk , it is bad ; becaufe it has fo far
ajfefted his reafonA But may it not be anfwered, that a man may be altered
by it for the better ! Boswell's Journal, p. 407.
It may be obferved, by way of illujlrating Mr. Bofwell’s argument — neither
of us having any thing now to fear from the reply of an antagonijl —that if one of
the verieft ideots who ever lived was to fit down when quite sober, and write a
book —Reader! fuch things have been done by fuch perfons, more than once,
ftrange as it may feem !—there is a moral certainty that the fame dull ideot,
let him be as drunk as he likes, provided he only holds and guides his pen ,
cannot pofiibly write worse ; and, therefore the prefumption is, that his drun-
kenness may , as Mr. Bofwell has Joberly advanced, be all for the better !
The cafe is, perhaps, dill dronger, as Dr. Johnfon had himfelf dated it on a
former occafion — (forgot by Mr. Bofwell, though remembered by Mrs. Pi-
ozzi) —where one who is a liar when sober, feels the force of that maxim,
« in vino veritas,” and tells the truth when he is drunk.
Line 150.] The examples of Mr. Bofwell’s high fpirits are innumerable,
but I find only one acknowledgment of his fears .
« I was very ill, and very defirous to get to Jhore . When I was told that
we could not land that night , as the dorm had now increafed, I looked miferably ,
as Col afterwards informed me.” Boswell’s Journal, 351.
II How


How oft that chat I fall more filly made, 155
To fee it in thy common-place convey’d ;
How
Line 155*] tf It was not very eafy for people not quite intimate with Dr.
Johnfon, to get exactly his opinion, as he would now and then divert himself
by confounding those who thought themfelves obliged to fay to-morrow what he
had faid yesterday ; and even Garrick, who ought to have been better ac-
quainted with his tricks, profeffed himfelf mortified, that one time when he
was extolling Dryden in a rapture that I fuppofe difgufied his friend, Mr.
Johnfon fuddenly challenged him to produce twenty lines in a feries that would
not difgrace the poet and his admirer. Garrick produced a paffage that he had
once heard the Doctor commend, in which he now found, if I remembei
rightly, fixteen faults, and made Garrick look filly at his own table. When I
told Mr. Johnfon the ftory, “ Why what a monkey was David now (fays he),
to tell of his own difgrace /” And in the courfe of that hour’s chat he told me,
how he ufed to teize Garrick by commendations of the tombfcene in Con-
greve’s Mourning Bride, protefting that Shakespeare had in the fame
line of excellence nothing as good: cc All which is ftriftly true (laid he) •, but
that is no reafon for fuppcfng Congreve is to Jland in competition with
Shakespeare : thefe fellows know not how to blame, nor how to commend.
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,p. 275, 276.
But though fuch a filly monkey of a fellow as Garrick might often fail
properly to difcriminate, in the gaiety of converfation ; it muft appear won-
derful if a Gentleman of Mr. Boswell’s fagacity , and a Lady of Mrs.
Piozzi’s great learning and intimate knowledge of the Doctor, fhould ever
have made fnnilar miftakes, and gravely and deliberately have regiftered them in
their immortal performances • Surely no Reader, whatever may be his dii-
cernment, can exclaim, on this occafion, in the language of Shakespeare
“ There needs no Ghost come from the grave to tell us this /*’ Plamlet.
It feems to have been now and then forgotten, by one or two of Dr. Johnlon’s
friends, that he was like the Apoflle Paul, tc all things to all men.”
Line 156.] <c Pie [Dr. Johnfon] came to my room this morning before
breakfaft, to read my Journal, which he has done all along. He often before
faid, <c I take great delight in reading it l” Today he faid, Cf You improve !
it grows better and better!” I obferved, there was a danger of my getting
a habit


How oft I faw thy ftiil unvanquifti’d face.
Proof againft all th’ artill’ry of difgrace ;
How
a habit of writing in aflovenly manner. ff Sir,” faid he, [with great gravity l
it is not written in a flovenly manner. It might be printed, were the subject
fit FOR printing !” Boswell’s Journal, p. 276.
A plain, blunt Englijhman , fuch as the inimitable Sterne has defcribed our
national character, might have weakly Jufpetted an infult, where the policed
and dijcerning Mr. Bolwell has difcovered a compliment: for that well-bred
gentleman, with his ufual adroitnejs, obferves, in a Note , at the foot of the
fame page, u I hope IJloall be pardoned for infertingfo flattering an en-
comium on what is now offered to the Publick /”—As one of that Publick,
then, I not only pardon, but praife, the all-accomplifhed Mr. Bofwell, for
this new proof of his candour and difnterejlednefs. Indeed, that learned gen-
tleman has, in this and many other inftances, been even better than he intended .
Lines 157, 158.] The reader muft not here miftake my author’s mean-
ing: this being, in fadt, one of the highefi compliments paid to his friend Bozzy
throughout the whole of this encomiaftick Epiftle. What, indeed, can be
more pleafing to any of us, than a fenfible Friend’s recognition of our poffef-
fing thofe good qualities for which it feems to be the grand purfuit of our lives
to appear remarkable? What the French very emphatically call the mauvaife
honte , is a bale plebeian vice, and the noble blood of Truce difdains it!
<f I am, I flatter myfelf, completely a citizen of the world.—ln my travels
through Holland, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Corfica, France, [He might
probably have added, ff or any where elfe.”] I never felt myself from
home.” Boswell’s Journal,.p. ir.
<c My fellow-traveller and I talked of going to Sweden; and, while wc
were fettling our plan, I expreffed a pleafure in the profpedt of feeing the
king.— Johnfon. “ I doubt, fir, if he would fpeak to us.”—Colonel MdLeod
faid, <c I am Jure Mr. Boswell would fpeak to him.” —Here let me offer a fhort
defence of that propensity in my difpofition , to which this gentleman alluded.
It has procured me much happiness. I hope it does not deferve fo hard a name
as either forwardness or impudence!” Boswell’s Journal, p. 260.
<f The Duke [of Hamilton] placed Dr. Johnfon next himfelf at table. J
was in fine fpirits-, and though fenfible that I had the misfortune of not being in
favour with the duchefs, I was not in the leafl difconcerted, and offered her grace
lome of the difh that was before me. It muft be owned that I was in the right
to be quite unconcerned , if I could. —l knew it was the rule of modern high life
not


How oft I fmil’d this well-known fact to find,
Thou thought’ll thyfelf the wittieft of mankind ! 160
How oft do I, e’en midll thefe fcenes deplore,
That I can fhare the dear delights no more !
Happy the land, that gave fuch genius birth ;
And happier Hill, that which contains fiich worth !
ml to drink to any body ; but, tbat I might have the satisfaction for once to
look the ducbefi in the face , [I may venture to prophecy Mr. Bofwell "'ill never
have a feconi such opportunity] with a glafs in my hand, I with a refpeSful
air addreflfed her, — cf My Lady Duchefs, I have the honour to drink your
grace’s good health!” I repeated the words audibly, and with a steady coun-
tenance. This was, perhaps, rather too much!”
Boswell’s Journal, p. 446, 447.
ff Her grace made Dr. Johnfon come and fit by her, and afked him why
he made his journey fo late in the year. “ Why, madam, (faid he,) you know
Mr. Boswell muft attend the Court of Sefiion, and it does not rife till the
twelfth of Auguft.” She faid, with home Jharpnefs , cc I know nothing of
Mr. Bofwell ” Boswell’s Journal, p. 45 1..
Upon the whole, it mull be owned, that Mr. Bofwell was not properly
treated j and the Duke and Dutchefs now probably lament their want of atten-
tion to that well-bred gentleman on this occafion. There was an obvious me-
thod of returning their gueft’s polite manner of contemplating the dutchefs's vifage ,
which it feems aftonilhing to me ihould have been/* grofsly neglected by the
Wh ll'Lj o1 1 Happy Scotland! happy England! now, indeed, is
your union compleat. “ What boots it,” may enraptured England exclaim,
“ that Scotland has partaken largely of my good things ! She has given me a
Boswell, and lam fill her debtor!”—O for the promptitude of my hero, that
I inftantly promulge, in a warm, Clafiical phrafe, feelings which the
frigidity oftheEnglifh language can never exprefs. 1 have it! -Take it
then, my Reader! and, if you are a Briton, repeat it in the morning when
you rife, and in the evening when you lie down !
o fortunatos nimium, si bona sua norint ! VIRG#
Thy


Thy juft purfuits may no ill chance retard \ 165
And may thy merits meet with due reward!
So prays, dear Bozzy, thy departed friend;
Who, by the Devil, does his bleffing fend !
MRS. PIOZZI.
Once-deareft friend, at whom I dar’d to rail,
When firft Piozzi took the place of fhrale , 1 7°
Madam, Signora, Thrale-Piozzi, how
Shall I, unblam’d, dare to addrefs thee now !
, , rci In thefe good wifhes for Mr. Bofwell, I moft heartily
join the Doftor; whofc fUafant Mufion ®
e 9 n th ; r jJus and
publick, is judmoujly y . k muft be owned, by Something like a
might ferve to gratify Cunofity P > which the Doftor was a
promife of “ all the Anecdotes that knew of ten .
P - y » and though, it muft 1 in deliver-
dernejs has not on ever} occaf y [ familiarly laid at the expence of
ing what the Dottor fometimes joco e y hiould act fo very
Jer Friends; no reafonable perfon ought to ex
unnaturally as not to preferve <W eg, « 4 any
i J vhohM thM wh,ch


How can I ior pad: rudenefs e’er atone ;
For what I did, and what I left undone !
The aged fail, too oft, in due refpect, 17 5
And wifeft women cannot bear negled.
ceived from her prefent hulband at full length in her title-page. But perhaps
-ne ajfoctation of ideas , brought to his remembrance another literary lady ;
w o, under circumftances extremely Jimilar, retained the name of her former
rulband, in the manner Dr. Johnfon has written Thrale-Piozzi. This
* [Zay C ' tmay fe , em , h , ardly neceffiu 7 add, is the famous Mrs. Ma-
IZdL T AMi ’ hke MrS - PIOZZI ' prudentl y op an old man’s
(aj%£\r a * ° n rA l ° Ve: Bath bemS ’ in both cafes > Aefceneof
foaiv fatisfie?r? S C °K nfldered ’ the CntlCal reader will > Uis ho P ed * be per-
uly latisficd, that it is by no means out of nature.
MrT P\c!JJ’ r 74 ' ] ' cf* 7 tKiS and fome other Pa«s °f the addrefs to
cbunUUb ’tor r /a 3 fT mtUrSi and ’ Perhaps ’ are 'hat ac-
nnt liable to be mifunderftood. lam therefore greatly concerned that I feel
myfeli conftramed to acknowledge my total inability always to the
nous reader, on fuch occafions, who muft confequently be left o m ke h s
own reflections on what the Dodtor has himfelf advanced in fuch paffige. of
his delightful poem, without my hazarding wUd conjeftures, the uncertainly
7 1C •fV 0 t ; e *^ Wand °s end thofe > w hom it is my duty to dmtl
and my mterefi to oblige. 1 J ■>
„mT 77 , IdS a trke remark) that P erfons advanced in life are re-
gard.efs 01 thofe little attentions which the fair-fex naturally expeft from men
and which young ones are by no means backward in practifing, even with la-
thes fomewhat “ declined into the vale of years.” Indeed, it muft be owned
uch perlons have often other objeSls in view; and inftances have occurred’
where maiden aunts, and even widowed mothers, have been abfolutely courted
1 Wh ° mea " C to M»»»ze with the daughters or nieces. Be [his as it
may no matron, whatever portion ofphilofophy ihe may poffefs—if Ihe has not
ftWftf r W, -m °r r T‘ her W ~ can bear witb fortitude the idea of difre-
fpea.ul remiffn ? fs from any part of that fex which has formerly been ftudious
of Peeking opportunities to do her continual homage. All Dr TohnfonW
otT, and MY Hunt consverfation, I will venture to affect, could n'ever compel*’
in the eftimation of any well-bred woman of this defcription, for the abfence
of thofe mnutt* which are fo eflential to female happinefs.
Could


Could I with reafon—no, ’twas idle dream—
Hope e er to glide with thee on life’s rough ftream,
Unfit to ply the never-ceafing oar,
Whofe aid alone could keep thee from the fhore, 180
Where I was haft’ning, with a crouded fail,
To follow after hofpitable Thrale.
Methinks I ftill behold thy angry pout,
And fcornful fneer, as once I dar’d pull out,
In
Lines 177 to 182.] This charming allegory prefents to the “mind’s eye’*
of my reader the moil luxurious imagery. Here he beholds the Sea of life, on
which all mankind are placed, as it were, in large boats with fails and oars.
Thofe of the young and robuft, excurfe from fide to fide, and row backwards
and forwards, in purfuit of Pleafure, whom they generally at lafd overtake;
while the aged and infirm, unable to make fufficient ufc of their oars, vainly
attempt to catch the addive goddefs, and are hurried away by the force of the
current, till they find themfelves precipitated, breathlefs, on the cliffs of Death,
which bound the unfathomable ocean. As if the Doddor had faid, in plain
language —nothing but gaiety and pleafure could keep you alive, after the
death of a beloved hufband; and, as I was too old to accompany you in thofe
fcenes of delight neceffary to preferve your exiftence, and you felt no great in-
clination to hurry after our deceafed friend, you no doubt added very wifely in
procuring a more eligible companion for the voyage !
Lines 183 to 194, &c.] Mrs. Piozzi has omitted this particular anecdote*
but it is not difficult to trace many of the circumflances it comprehends in dif-
ferent parts of her ineftimable performance.
“ He [Dr. Johnfon] had fometimes fits ofireading very violent; and when
he was in earned: about getting through fome particular pages, he would be
quite loft to company, and withdraw all his attention to what he was reading,
without the Jmallefi knowledge or care about the noije made round him. His
deafnefs made fuch condudd lefs odd and lefs difficult to him than it would
have been to another man ; but his advifing others to take the fame method, and
full


In thy foie prefence, an nnfocial book, 185
Heedlefs of queftions not to be miftook.
Thy anger rofe; thy colour came, and went;
Nothing thou faid’ft, but this I k;iew thou meant —
c Uncivil, rude, ill-manner’d, horrid brute !
c Ah, what to me can fuch a friendfhip boot! 190
‘ Now my poor lord is gone, the Lord knows where,
c Shall I put up with fuch a fhocking bear ?
c Who, when a Widow confolation needs,
c Takes out his filthy book, and idly reads !
< How
pull a little book out when they were not entertained with what was going for-
ward in fociety , Teemed more likely to advance the growth of fcience than oipo-
ll jhed manners ” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 259, 260.
“ Mr. Johnfon’s health had been always extremely bad fince I firft knew
him, and his over-anxious care to retain without blemifh the perfect ferenity
of his mind, contributed much to difturb it. He had ftudied medicine dili-
gently in all it’s branches; but had given particular attention to the difeafes of
the imagination, which he watched in himfelf with a folicitude deftruftive of
his own peace, and intolerable to thofe he trufted. Dr. Lawrence told him
one day, that if he would come and beat him once a week he would bear it;
but to hear his complaints was more than man could fupport. ’Twas there-
fore that he tried, I Tuppofe, and in eighteen years contrived to weary the pa-
tience of a woman.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 77.
As I never had any afcendency at all over Mr. Johnfonj except iuft in the
things that concerned his health, it grew extremely perplexing and difficult to
live in the houfe with him, when the mafter was no more; the worfe indeed,
becaufe his diflikes grew capricious; he could fcarce bear to have any body
come to the houfe whom it was abfolutely necejfary for me to fee.
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 138.
“ I was


4 How muft I manage!—Shall I tell a lye? 195
4 O naughty word ! what, Mrs. Thrale ? O fye !
c But then how can I be again a rib :
4 A lucky thought!—l’ll only tell a fib!
4 I’ll fay to Johnfon — 44 Sammy, things go crofs;
4 And tho’ I grieve more than for Thraly’s lofs, 200
4 It muft be fo—O bur ft, my fwelling heart!
4 How fhall I fay it, we at laft muft part.
4 My law-fuit loft, my health on the decline,
4 No Peace, I fear, can ever here be mine ;
4 Where ftill I fret, till I grow thin as lath : 205
4 ’Tis fix’d, I’ll try what can be done at Bath f
tf I was forced to take advantage of my loft law-fuit, and plead inability of
purfe to remain longer in London or its vicinage. I had been crojfed in my
intentions of going abroad, and found it convenient , for every reafon of health,
peace, and pecuniary circumftances, to retire to Bath , where I knew Mr.
Johnfon would not follow me, and where I could for that reafon command
fome little portion of time for my own ufeMrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 292.
C£ The original reafon of our connection, his particularly dfordered health
andfpirits , had been long at an end , and he had no other ailments than old
age and general infirmity . Veneration for his virtue, reverence for his talents,
delight in his converfation, and habitual endurance of a yoke my hufband firft
put upon me, and of which he contentedly bore his fhare for fixteen or feventeen
years, made me go on fo long with Mr. Johnfon ; but the perpetual confine-
ment I will own to have been terrifying in the firft years of our friendfhip, and
irkfome in the laft; nor could I pretend to fupport it without help , when my
coadjutor was no more.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 293.
K Thus


Thus was the plot contriv d by thee and fate,
Againft thy now-deferted, old inmate !
Nor think I blandd thee for what fate deciCv-d,
To blame a woman would be weak indeed; 2 io
Long had I known that female flefli was frail,
Before my eye firft glanced on Mrs. Thrale :
And tho’ I dar’d to raife my angry voice,
? Twas not at chufng Man, but at the Choice ;
Indeed, I always thought it weak to roam 215
Abroad for things much better found at home.
Line aoB.] " Exa&neffes in a man [Dr. Johnfon] who was nothing lefs than
exa<st himfelf, made him extremely impracticable as axx inmate.”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 290.
Lines 215, 216.] f£ Walking in a wood when it rained, was, I think, the
only rural image he [Dr. Johnfon] pleafed his fancy with, " for (fays he) after
one has gathered the apples in an orchard, one wifhes them well baked, and
removed to a London cating-houfe for enjoyment.” With fuch notions, who
can wonder he palled his time uncomfortably enough with us, who he often
complained of for living fo much in the country j “feeding the chickens (as he
faid I did) till I farmed my own undemanding.. Get however (faid he) a book
about gardening , and ftudy it hard, fince you will pafs your life with birds-
and flowers, and learn to raife the largest turnips , and to breed the biggest
fowls A It was vain to allure him that the goodnefs of fuch dilhes did not
depend upon their fize j he laughed at the people who covered their canals with
foreign fowls, ‘ c when (fays he) our own geese and ganders are twice as-
large : if we fetched better animals from- diftant nations, there might be fome
fenfe in the preference ; but to get cows from Alderney, or water-fowl from.
China, only to fee nature degenerating round one , is a poor ambition indeed!”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 266.
This


This was the fource of our laft fatal jars,
Our written quarrels, and our wordy wars :
Thofe wars and quarrels which our friends divide,
While fome blame me, and others thee deride. 220
Forme, now landed on the happy fhore,
Where females can, as females, acl no more ;
Where man and woman form one lingle kind,
' Unknown all biifs but the chafte blifs of mind ;
My too large debt of human frailties paid, 225
Of man now truly but the verieft fhade !
How can I give thee adequate return,
For offerings kind which muft for ever burn ;
Which burn with fury deftin’d ne’er to ceafe,
Sacred to thy kind efforts for a Peace : 230
Lines 218 to 212.] From this it fhould feem that fome furviving Friends
are acquainted with the particulars of this unhappy breach r the Publick may
therefore yet expedt them, efpecially if Mr. Bofwell happens to be in the Jecret r
or can procure copies of certain letters much talked of fome time ago* which:
will probably not be publifhed by the party to whom they were fent.
Lines 222 to 233.] The Dodtor feems to confider Mrs. Piozzi’s publication
of her Anecdotes, as <c heaping coals of fire on his head,” (Romans xii. 20.);.
and his ardent wifhes for her enjoyment of the peace fhe has laboured to bring
about, in return for her great condefcenfion, is in the higheft degree generous
and noble.
That


That Peace O may’ll thou undiilurb’d enjoy;
Which, unlike other fweets, can never cloy!
Thy maiden book has met my ravilh’d fight,
And ev’ry page conveys iincerc delight;
Thy chaile expreffions, and thy flowing line, 235
Not to be reach’d without excefs of toil;
Thy
Line 233.] “ I mud conclude my Preface, and begin my book, th tfirjl
I ever prefented before the Public.”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes ; Preface, p. vm.
Line 235.] The exquifite delicacy celebrated in the beginning of this line
abundantly prevails in the following extra&s, as well as in fome already quoted:
cc There is in this world no real delight ( excepting those offenfuality ),
but exchange of ideas in converfation.” Mrs. Piozzi s Anecdotes, p. 267.
<c Johnfon encouraged parents to carry their daughters early and much into
company : for what harm can he done beforefo many witneffes ? Solitude is the
fureft nurfe of all prurient paffonsA Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 10 6.
cc Being married to fteepy-fouled women, is juft like playing at cards for
nothing: \o paffion is excited , and the time is filled up. Ido not however
envy a°fellow one of thofe honeysuckle wives for my part, as they are but
creepers at beft, and commonly deftroy the tree they fo tenderly cling about A
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 170.
« Of the various ftates and conditions of humanity, he defpifed none more
I think than the man who marries for a maintenance: and of a friend who
made his alliance on no higher principles, he faid once, “Now has that fellow—
(it was a nobleman ofwhom we were fpeaking)—[Not the perfon whom the
reader might have imagined, if Mrs. Piozzi had omitted her parenthefis]—at
length obtained a certainty of three meals a day, and for that certainty, like
his brother dog in the fable, he will get his neck galled for life with a collar A
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,p. 254.
One day when my fon was going to fchool, and dear Dr. Johnfon followed
as far as the garden gate, praying for his falvation, in a voice which thofe
wbo liftened attentively, could hear plain enough, he faid to me fuddenly,
£( Make your boy tell you his dreams: the firft corruption that entered into my
heart


Thy learning great, thy unaffected grace,
Thy fcientihck knowledge, as I trace,
With
heart was communicated in a dream." What was it, Sir a faid I. cc Do not
afk me,” replied he with much violence, and walked away in apparent agita-
tion. I never durjl [though I longed to know!] make any further enquiries .”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,p. 20.
tc One cannot love lumps of fiefh, and little infants are nothing more.
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 273.
c< Many were indeed the le&ures I ufed to have in my very early days from
Mr. Hogarth, whofe regard for my father induced him perhaps to take nonce
of his little girl, and give her fome odd particular directions about drefs, dancing,
and many other matters , intereding now only becaufe they were his. As he
made all his talents, however, fubfervient to the great purpofes of morality,
and the earned defire he had to mend mankind, his difcourfe commonly ended
in an ethical dijfertation , and a ferious charge to me never to forget his picture of
the Lady’s last Stake !” Mrs. Piozzi s Anecdotes , p. 137*
“ In bed we laugh, in bed we cry,
And born in bed, in bed we die ;
The near approach a bed may fhew
Of human blifs to human woe.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 70.
What a pity it is that this choice defcription of the valuable properties of a
bed, cannot be compleated by an account of the fird dedicate dream Dr.
Johnfon ever had in one!
There is another poetical extract, to which Mrs. Piozzi acknowledges her-
feif-partial. ;
“ O’er the ice, as o’er pleafure, you lightly fltould glide,
Both have gulphs which their flattering fur faces hide.”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 144.
After thefe incontedible proofs of Mrs. Piozzi’s extraordinary delicacy of
fentiment, the reader will not be furprized at the fucceeding eulogium on
propriety pronounced by that lady> in favour of Cervantes, at the expence
of thofe pitifulJcribblers, Voltaire and Sterne.
« May his celebrity [that of the author of Don Quixote] procure my par-
don for a digrefiion in praife of a writer, who, through four volumes of the
mod exquifite pleafantry and genuine humour, has never been feduced to
overdep the limits of propriety, has never called in the wretched auxiliaries of
L OBSCENITY


'With fieriing metaphors from Genius’ mine,
All aptly aiding the one great defign * 240
Thus
obscenity or profanenefs ; who trulls to nature and fentiment alone, and never
mifles of that applaufe which Voltaire and Sterne labour to produce !”
Mrs. Piczzi’s Anecdotes, p. 283.
Poor Voltaire, and Sterne ! after this terrible anathema pronounced by
the Goddess of Delicacy, how fhall ye ever again hold up your heads! What
fair reader will in future dare to pollute her hands with your unhallowed leaves!
You are now configned to oblivion; the dreadful fentence is palled ; and the
Temple of Immortality is for ever clofed again!! you!—l pity, but I cannot
excufe you!—for, as that other famous advocate for Delicacy, the celebrated au-
thor of the Rape of the Lock, has truly obferved—
The tc want of decency is want of fenfe !” Pope.
Lines 237, 238.] The extenfive learning of Mrs. Piozzi will be manifeft in
tne following pafiages; where fhe appears converfant in the Welsh, Spanifh,
French, Italian, and Latin languages. The Welfh, however, being Mrs. Pi-
ozzi s native tongue, can hardly be confidered as an acquirement: but then her
perfect knowledge of Englijh may be added to the above lilt.
Welsh Learning.
" It was impoffible not to laugh at the patience he [Dr. Johnfon] fhewed,
when a Welch parjon of mean abilities , though a good heart, Itruck with reve-
rence at the fight of Dr. Johnfon, whom he had heard of as the greatejl man
living, could not find any words to anfwer his inquiries concerning a motto
round homebody’s arms which adorned a tomb-fione in Ruabon church-yard..
If I remember right the words were,
Heb Dw, Heb Dym y
Dw o' diggon.
And though of no very difficult confirudiion [to Mrs. Piozzi, who Ihould there-
fore have given a tranfiation ] the gentleman feemed wholly confounded, and
unable to explain them; till Mr. Johnfon having picked out the meaning by
little and little, faid to the man, <c Heb is a prepofition, I believe Sir, is it not?”
My countryman recovering fome fpirits upon the fudden queftion, cried out,
So I humbly prefume Sir, very comically A Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 239/
Mrs. Piozzi adds, very unneceffiarily molt readers will probably think, that
Stories u/ humour do not tell well in books; and what made impreffion on
the friends who heard a jest, will feldom much delight the difiant acquaint-
ance, or fallen critic who reads it."
There,


Thus to myfelf, e’en here, I fadly figh—
-6 How could I e’er make fuch a woman cry!’
O long
There, reader! I have given you an excellent jlory \ and, if you refufe to laugh ,
remember that you are a “fallen cntick .”
Now for more learning.— Ha! ha! ha! —But I cannot— Ha l ha! ha! ha! —
proceed— Ha! ha! —for laughing. I am, therefore, be it known to all men,
and women too, no sullen critic.
Spanish Learning.
<f Some of the old legendary (lories put in verfe by a modern writer pro-
voked him to caricature them thus one day at Streatham.
The tender infant, meek and mild,
Fell down upon the done;
The nurfe took up the fquealing child,.
But dill the child fqueal’d on.
tc A famous \SpaniJh] ballad alfo, beginning Rio verde , Rio verde y when
I commended the tranflation of it } he faid he could do it better himfelf—as
thus:
Glaffy water, glafly water,
Down whole current clear and drong,
Chiefs confus’d in mutual (laughter,.
Moor and Chridian roll along.
“ But Sir, faid I, this is not ridiculous at all. (< Why no (replied he), why
(hould I always write ridiculoufly ?—perhaps becaufe I made thefe verfes to
imitatefach a one , naming him :
Hermit hoar, in folemn cell
Wearing out life’s evening gray;
Strike thy bofom fage! and tell,
What is blifs, and which the way ?.
Thus I fpoke, and fpeaking figh’d,
Scarce reprefs’d the darting tear,
When the hoary Sage reply’d,
Come,, my lad, and drink fome beer!”
[This, the Editor cannot refrain from obferving, is in his opinion one of the
mod admirable pieces of burlefque he ever met with.]
<f I could •


O long remain to range Italia’s fields,
And riot long in blifs her climate yields:
Fertile
<c I could give, [proceeds Mrs. Piozzi] another comical inilance of carica-
tura imitation. Recollecting fome day, when praifing thefe verfes of Lopez
dc Vega, [Now for more Spanijh learning.]
Se acquien los leones vence
Vence una muger hermofa
O el de flaco averguenpe
O ella di Jer mas furiofa 3
more than he thought they deferved, Mr, Johnfon inftantly obferved, <c that
they were founded on a trival conceit-; and that conceit ill-explained, and ill-
exprefied befide. The lady, we all knew, does not conquer in the fame
manner as the lion does : ’Tis a mere play of words (added he) and you might
as well fay, that
If the man who turnips cries,
Cry not when his father dies,
’Tis a proof that he had rather
Have a turnip than his father,”
Mrs. Piozzfs Anecdotes , p. 65, 66, 67
French Learning.
fc We had got a little French print among us at Brighthelmftone, in No-
vember 1782, of feme people fkaiting, with thefe lines written under:
Sur un mince chryftal Vhyver conduit leurs pas ,
Le precipice eft Jous la glace \
elle eft de nos plaiftrs la legere Jurface ,
Gliftez mortels ; »’ appayez pas.
And I begged tranflations from every body.”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 142, 143.
[There are feveral tranflations fubjoined, but the reader has feen that which
Mrs. Piozzi preferred, in Page 37. “ O’er the ice," &c.]
Italian Learning.
It happens rather oddly , that the following extract to introduce an Italian
phraje , feems a little unfavourable to Mrs. Piozzi’s publication of Dr. John-
fon’s extemporaneous ejfuftons.
tc Mr. Johnfon did indeed poflefs an almoft Tuscan power of improvifation:
when he called to my daughter, who was confulting with a friend about a new
gown


Fertile and rich, her fruitage and her flowers, 245
Rival almoft, in fweetnefs, even ours - 9
And
gown and drefled hat Ihe thought of wearing to an aflembly, thus fuddenly,
while Ihe hoped he was not liftening to their convention,
Wear the gown, and wear the hat,
Snatch thy pleafures while they laft;
Hadft thou nine lives like a cat,
Soon thofe nine lives would be pad.
" It is impoflible to deny to fuch little fallies the power of the Florentines,
who do not permit their verfes to be ever written down though they often de-
ferveit, becaule, as they exprefs it, cofi Je perderebbe la poca gloria .”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 165.
As Dr. Johnfon had only almoft the power of an Italian improvifatorey there
feems to have been the ftronger reafon for not publishing all his fayings. What
would difgrace a Florentine, is not likely to produce Dr. Johnson any ad-
ditional honour !
Latin Learning.
<c When he [Dr. Johnfon] would try to repeat the celebrated Profa Ecclefi-
aftica pro Mortuis, as it is called, beginning Dies irDies ilia , he could never
pafs the ftanza ending thus, Tantus labor non fit caffus , without burfting into a
flood of tears; which fenfibility lufed to quote againft him when he would in-
veigh againft devotional poetry.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 200.
" When Mr. Thrale once alked him [Dr. Johnfon] which had been the
happieft period of his paft life? he replied, “ it was that year in which he fpent
one whole evening with M yAf n. That indeed (faid he) was not hap-
piness, it was rapture; but the thoughts of it fweetened the whole year!”—l
muft add [fays Mrs. Piozzi, with her ufual regard for delicacy /] that the evening
alluded to was not palled tete-a-tete —but in a Jeledl company , of which the
prefent Lord Killmorey was one. “ Molly (fays Dr Johnfon) was a beauty
and a Scholar, and a wit and'a whig-, and Ihe talked all in praife of liberty: and
fo I made this epigram upon her.—She was the lovelieft creature I ever faw!! !*
* How heartily would poor Sterne have laughed could he have taken a peep at Mrs.
Piozzi’s triple mark of admiration !!! And what a charming jeu d’efprit might then
have been expe&ed from the pen of him who wrote the following on viewing a fugle onel
EXTEMPORE.
ON SEEING A LADY THROW A SOMERSET.
I faw—l faw—l know not what !
I faw a dash above a dot;
Prefenting to my contemplation,
A perfect mark, of admiration(!)
M «Liber


And tho’ her fens, degen’rate deem’d by feme,
Prove lefs robuft than thofe of ancient Rome ;
Their
“ Liber ut effe velim, fuafifti pulchra Maria,
Ut maneam liber—pulchra Maria, vale /”
Will it do this way in Englijh , Sir (faid I)?
Perfuafions to freedom fall oddly from you;
If freedom we feek —fair Maria, adieu!
“ It will do well enough (replied he); but it is mandated by a lady, and the
ladies never loved M yAf n.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Ajiecdotes, p. i
{t Whoever once heard him [Dr. Johnfon] repeat an Ode of Horace,
would be long before they could endure to hear it repeated by another.”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 302.
Now, Reader, I hope you are fully fatisfied with Mrs. Piozzi’s {C Learning
great,” and with her <c unaffected grace,” too!
Line 238.] Mrs. Piozzi has given an aftonilhing proof of her Jkill in Ar-
chitecture ! when, fpesking of Dr. Johnfon, {he fays—
tc Like a cube in Architecture, you beheld him on each fide, and his
fize ftill appeared undiminifhed.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 301.
I will venture to fay, that there are many Gentlemen who, to their eternal
difgrace, are fo grofsly ignorant, that they have almoft conftantly cubes in their
hands, without knowing them by that name, or being at all {killed in Archi-
tecture; except, perhaps, in building card-houses, and pulling down or
dejlroying family-mansions.
Line 240.] “ The one great defign” that of praifingDx . Johnfon, in return
for th egood advice he had on certain occafions given Mrs. Piozzi, is confirmed
by the following inftances of partiality in his favour ; which might eafily be
much increafed, fo zealous has this lady been to convince the world of her un-
feigned gratitude.
“ My mother [faid Dr. Johnfon] was always telling me that I did not be-
have myfelf properly; that I lhould endeavour to learn behaviour, and fuch
cant; but when I replied, that fhe ought to tell me what to do, and what to avoid,
her admonitions were commonly, for that time at leaft, at an end.”—This,
I fear, [adds Mrs. Piozzi] was however at bell a momentary refuge, found out
by perverfenefs. No man knew better than Johnfon in how many namelefs and
numberlejs actions behaviour confifts: actions which can fcarcely be reduced
to


Their genuine warmth abundantly fupplies,
The want of fairer features, larger fize : 250
While
to rule, and which come under no defcription. Of thefe [Mrs. Piozzi wittily
obferves] he retained fo many very ftrange ones , that Ifuppofe no one who faw
his odd manner of gefticulating much blamed or wondered at the good lady’s
folicitude concerning her fon’s behaviour .” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 25.
To thofe who knew the <£ particularly dijordered flats" of Dr. Johnfon, the
obfervation of Mrs. Piozzi muff appear not only prodigtoufly witty , but polite
and humane in a very high degree!
fC I have often thought Dr. Johnfon vsxortfree than prudent in profeffing fo
loudly his little Jkill in the Greek language: for though he [not Mrs. Piozzi]
confidered it as a proof of a narrow mind to be too careful of literary reputa-
tion, yet no man could be more enraged than he, if an enemy, taking advan-
tage of this confeffion, twitted him with his ignorance !”
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 54.
<c Johnfon’s notions about eating were nothing lefs than delicate ; [Mrs.
Piozzi fometimes writes only plain u Johnfon ,” fometimes <c Mr. Johnfon ,” and
occafionally ff Dr. Johnfon ,” for all which fhe has no doubt her own reafons] a leg
of pork boiled till it dropped from the bone, a veal-pye, with plums and fugar, or
the outfide cut of a fait [not frefs'] buttock of beef, were his favourite dainties l
With regard to drinjc, his liking was for the strongest ! as it was not the fla-
vour but the effett he fought for, and profeffed to defire; and when I firft knew
him, he ufed to pour capillaire into his Port wine. [lt happens rather unluckily ,
that few readers will think with Mrs. Piozzi, that capillaire is either defti-
tute of flavour, or that it increafes the ftrength of wine. ] For the laft twelve
years , however, he left off all fermented liquors! To make himfelf fame amends ,
indeed, [for if I can’t make him out a drunkard, he fhall at leaft appear as
a grofs glutton] he took his chocolate liberally , pouring in large quantities
of cream , or even melted butter! and was fo fond of fruit, that though he
ufually EAT seven or eight large peaches of a moaning before breakfaft began ,
and treated them with proportionate attention after dinner again, yeti have heard
him proteft that he never had quite as much as he wifhed of wall-fruit , except
once in his life!” [When he muff, doubtlefs, have eaten at leaft a bufhel /]
Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 10a, 103.
I cannot conclude without one more proof of Mrs. Piozzi’s candour\ in
which fhe has probably, like Mr. Bofwell, tc been even better than fhe intended .”
<c I was


While each fond hufband, far from being rude,
Is kindnefs all, and all folicitude ;
Not with vain fears, productive of diitrefs,
But merely anxious how he moft may blefs !
Well-pleas’d to feek for the delighted fair, 255
With what might be efteem’d fuperfluous care,
ff /was faying to a friend one day, that /did not like goose ; one fmells it fo
whileit is roafting,y?// I; (C But you, Madam (replies theDocftor), have been
at all times a fortunate woman , having always had your hunger Jo foreftalled by
indulgence y that you never experienced the delight of fmellingyour dinner be-
forehand Which pleafure , anfwered I pertly, is to be enjoyed in perfection
by fuch as have the happinefs to pafs through Porridge Ijland of a morning.
<f Come , come (faid he gravely),— [it might be added and nobly , for the fpeech
does honour to human nature] let’s have no Jneering at what is ferious to fo many:
hundreds of your fellow-creatures, dear Lady, turn another way , that they
may not be tempted by the luxuries of Porridge Island to wifh for gratifica-
tions they are not able to obtain : you are certainly not better than all of
them .give God thanks that you are happier !” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 104.
Line 242.] "It was extremely difficult to find any body with whom he
[Dr. Johnfon] could converfe , without living always on the verge of a quarrel ,
or of fomething too like a quarrel to be pleafing. I came into the room for
example, one evening, where he and a gentleman, whofe abilities we all refpeCt
exceedingly , were fitting; a lady who walked in \exadly] two minutes before
me, had blown 'em both into a flame, by 'wh.ifptnng fomething to Mr. S d
which he endeavoured to explain away, fo as not to affront the Do&or, whofe
fufpicions were all alive. “ And have a care, Sir (faid he), juft as I came in
[with a proper degree of manlinefs ] the Old Lion will not bear to be tickled!"
The other was pale with rage, the Lady wept at the confufion ffie had caufed,
and I [weeping, too, as it fhould feem—if the Docftor does not refer to fame
other more private occasion] could only fay with Lady Macbeth ,
Soh ! you’ve difplac’d the mirth , broke th t good meeting
With moft admir’d diforder.
Such accidents however occurred too often.” Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes,p. 291.
Some


Some gay Cicefbeo, kindly to afford,
His friendly aid, in abfence of her lord !
Thefe are the joys which Italy can give,
Where all wife women well may wifh to live! 260
There may (\ thou long hill-varied blifs derive;
And Ihll, in health, in love, and goodnels, thrive !
Till thou, at lah, canh quietly lay down
The earthly fceptre—for a heav’nly crown!
. 262 d Goodnefs appears to have been the Dodor’s favourite charaderif-
tick of my fair author.
He [Dr. Johnfon] really was oftentimes afraid of going home, becaufe he
was fo fare to be met at the door with numberlefs complaints [of his fer-
vants and poor dependants] ; and he ufed to lament pathetically to me, that
they made his life miTerable from the impoffibility he found of making theirs
happy, when every favour he bellowed on one was wormwood to the reft. If
however, i ventured to blame their ingratitude, and condemn their conduct, he
would inftantly fet about foftening the one and jufiifying the ether ; and finifhed
commonly by telling me, that I knew not how to make allowances for fixations
I never experienced.
To thee no reafon who know’ll only good,
But evil haft not try d. Milton.” Mrs . Piozzi’s Anecdotes, p. 214,
The following is not quite fo pofttive on this fubjed. It will, however, in-
Hru<sl my Reader, to reflect, with Dr. Johnfon, on the motives which may pof~
libly influence any aglion they are called on to praife or condemn .
When I have laid fomething as if the wickedness of the world gave
me concern, he would cry out aloud againft canting, and proteft that he
thought there was very little grofs wickednefs in the world, and fiill lefs of ex-
traordinary virtue !” With regard to my own notions of moral virtue (con-
tinued he) I hope I have not loft myfenfibility of wrong; but I hope like-
wife that I have lived long enough in the world, to prevent me from expecting
to find any action of which both the original motive and all the parts were
eOOD • * Mrs, Piozzi’s Anecdotes , p. 89, 90, 91.
N
J OH N


JOHN COURTENAY, ESQ^
Court’nay, thy work, cc tho’ laftnot leaflinfame, ” 265
Begins with wit and fenfe, and ends the fame !
Thy praifes give my ravifh’d foul delight ;
Zealous thou art, and often in the right:
And e’en where thy vaft flock of Reafon fails,
Who mourns her abfence, while he hears thy tales? 270
Thy
L ; nes 1 69 to 27 a.] Every great Orator in full pradlice, be his flock of Rea-
fon what it may, would foon exhauft the whole, were he to make ufe of that
unneceffary ingredient on every oceafion. Convinced of this fail, the wifefl
generally fubftitute joke and laughter , of which they have a more plentiful
(lore, with now and then a flight dafh of the Jiarcer commodity. This, it mufl be
owned, is a mofl delightful expedient, fince it never fails to plea/e even in the
mofl exalted affemblies: where Wifdom relaxes for a while the rigidity of her
mufclesj and thofe of Folly contradl fo loofe a habit, that they never recover
their tone, but often exprefs fenfations of mirth at the very inflant when Reafon
prompts the figh or the tear! Indeed, it is not a little remarkable, that the
mofl renowned Orators in the world, who rife with a face of woe to pronounce
the certain ruin of their “ dear, dear country !” feldom fail to crack fome joke ,
before they fit down again, and very heartily to join in the laugh which their
gaiety infpires; apparently forgetful of that concern for the impending fate of
the unhappy nation, with which their patriotick effufions commenced. The
tmiverfality of thefe practices, and the good-humour with which they are con-
flantly received, furnifh abundant proof that they are quite right. Who, then,
can wonder, that the Ghost of fo wife a man as Dr. Johnson jfhould approve
of Mr. Courtenay’s very laudable and fuccefsful attempt to give Books
thofe advantages which Authors of repute have, generally fpeaking, hitherto
ridiculoufly fuffered to be confined to oral discourses ?
But let the oratorical Poet, who always fpeaks fo well, even where he is
not at all concerned , now fpeak for himfelf .
“ Religious Johnfon, future life to gain,
Would ev’n fubmit to everlafling pain!
O, had


Thy merry tales r which, fill’d with wit and glee,
In fpite of party, make both fides agree !
~ ~ .. ~. A noble
had he liv d in more enlighten’d times,
.When figns from heaven proclaim’d vile mortals’ crimes,
How had he groan’d, with facred horrors pale,
When Noah’s comet Ihook her angry tail;
That wicked comet, which Will Whifton fwore
Would burn the earth that Ihe had drown’d before!
Or when Moll Tofts, by throes parturient vex’d,
Saw her young rabbits peep from Efdras’ text!”
Courtenay’s Poetical Review of Dr. John/on's Literary
and Moral Character, p. 8, 9.
The above ten verfes, Mr. Courtenay obferves in a Note, are founded on
the following faff.
Dr. Johnfon, in his laft illnefs, is /aid to have declared (in the prefence of
Dodtors H. and B.)—[Why are their initials only given?]—that he would
prefer a ftate of existence in eternal pain to annihilation.”
Courtenay’s Poetical Review , p. 8.
Now, allowing the fact as ftated, which none but a profeffed modern Orator
could expert, I will venture to afiert, that any reputable Author, not an oratorical
one, would weakly have blotted out the whole ten lines, if he had ever written
them, on the very firft perufal. He would have thought himfelf unfounded,
and indeed liable to be confounded, when he afterted, in the beginning cou-
plet, that a man who " wouldfubmit to everlasting pain,” did it, <f to gain
future life!” efpecially after he had faid that the party himfelf declared
it was fC rather than fubmit to annihilation.” Nor would a writer poffefled of
fillyfcruples, have proceeded to infer that, becaufe the Dodtor would rather, as
lie thought, bear eternal pain, than be annihilated, he was therefore to be more
terrified than perfons in general, “ when figns from heaven proclaim'd vile mor-
tals crimes .” For, unqueftionably, to thofe who regard dull Reason only, it;
mu ft appear, that the more guilty a man feels himfelf, the lefs reludtance can
he have in fubmitting to annihilation.
Here, then, with an ordinary Author, full of ridiculous appreheufion, the world
muft have loft two excellent stories given by the oratorical Writer; unlefs, in-
deed, they had by accident perufed the famous works of W H isTON:Vrom which
both, it muft be acknowledged, are fairly extradted. But the praife is generally
exadllv


A noble champion in thy country s caufe,
It glads me much to meet with thy applaufe!
° But
exa&ly the fame to a man of wit , whether he invents a joke himfelf, or alters
or literally relates the jeft of another.
For the fatisfadUon of my Readers, I cannot refrain from taking the lame
liberty with Mr. Courtenay, as he has taken with Whiston. Here, then,
are the merry stories which the lines in queftion were written to introduce }
let, therefore, Fun and Laughter fing The Deum , and a fig for Reason .
TALE THE FIRST.
« This lafl comet (which appeared in the year 1680) I may well call the
moft remarkable one that ever appeared; fince, befides the former con fidera-
tion, I (hall prefently fhew, that it is no other than that very comet which
came by the earth at the time of Noah’s deluge, and which was the caufe of the
fame ” Whiston’s Theory of the Earthy p. 188.
“ Since C 7 5 years appear to be the period of the comet that caufed the de-
luge, what a learned friend who was the occafion of my examination of this
matter fueeefts, will deferve to be confidered; viz. Whether the (lory of
the phrenix, that celebrated emblem of the refurreftion in Chnftian antiquity>
(that it returns once after five centuries, and goes to the altar and city 01 uie
fun and is there burnt; and another arifes out of its afhes, and carries away
the remains of the former; &c.) be not an allegorical reprefentation of this
comet which returns once after five centuries, and goes down to the fun, and
is there vehemently heated, and its outward regions diflblvcd ; yet that it flies
off amfin, and carries away what remains after that terrible burning; &c.
and whether the conflagration and renovation of things, which fome uci
comet may bring on the earth, be not hereby prefigured I will not here be
nofitive: but I own, that I do not know of any foltmon of this famous piece
of mythology and hieroglyphics, as this feems to be, that can be compared with
. V Courtenay’s Poetical Review, p. 9.
it. Itnd.p- 190.
TALE THE SECOND.
(in which lies the cream of the jest.)
“ Tis here foretold [by Efdras] that there fhould be figns in the woman ;
and before all others this prediaion has been verified in the famous rabht-
woman of Surrey, in the days of King George I—This ftory has been fo tm-


But how cam’ft thou fo humbly to defcend ? 275
I knew thee not, as author, or as friend :
Yet kind it was, my honour’d name to chufe,
For the fir ft offspring of thy virgin mufe.
Thrives
juftly laughed out of countenance, that I mu ft diftinftly give my reafons for
believing it to be true, and alledging it here as the fulfilling of this ancient
prophecy before us. ift. The man-midwife, Mr. Howard of Godalmin in
Surrey, a perfon of very great honefty, fkill and reputation in his profeftion, at-
tefted it.—lt was believed by King George to be real; and it was alfo believed
by my old friends the Speaker and Mr. Samuel Collet, as they told me them-
felves, and was generally by fober perfons in the neighbourhood. Nay Mr.
Molyneux, the Prince’s Secretary, a very inquifitive perfon, and my very
worthy friend, allured me he had at firft fo great a diffidence in the truth of
the fa£t, and was fo little biafted by the other believers, even by the King him-
felf, that he would not be fatisfied till he was permitted both to fee and feel
the rabbet, in that very paffage , whence we all come into this world. Whifton’s
Memoirs, vol. ii. p. i io.” Courtenay’s Poetical Review , p. io.
Even the faftidious Mrs. Piozzi, it is hoped, will not refufe her thanks to
Mr. Courtenay, for his excellent Tale.
Line 27 6.] It is furprizing that Dr. Johnfon ffiould carry his bluntnefs
beyond the grave, and, while he fees his feveral Friends boafting their acquaint-
ance with perfons of rank whom they never Jaw twice in their lives, boldly dis-
claim any intimacy with a Gentleman who has a feat in what ought to be con-
fidered as the moft auguft aflembly on earth.
Line 278.] It is fome comfort to reflect, that though the world has
loft one great Author by the death of Dr. Johnfon, it has at leaft got three new
ones of fuperior ability by the fame event; Mr. Strahan, Mrs. Piozzi, and
Mr. Courtenay: which laft gentleman is not only an author , but a poet.
Nor muft we omit to obferve, that even the fuperlatively fuperior Mr. Boswell
himfelf\ hacknied as he is in the art of book-making, would probably have de-
clined favouring the publick with any new production, had his fellow-traveller
been living: at leaft, it is certain that his prefent exquifite performance, which
had remained peaceably on the Ihelf fo many years, would never have made it’s
O appearance


Thrives not thy trade, in fam’d St. Stephen’s Hall,
Where thou fo long haft kept a trinket-ftall; 280
Dealing out glitt ring toys, to many a youth,
Who took thy copper-gilt for gold in truth :
That thou art enter’d on the fcare-crow lift,
Of thofe who write, for love of fame, or grift ?
Why, what the devil haft thou been about ? 285
It cannot be, that they have found thee out!
Too great the difprence wanted in each fkull;
Thine far lefs bright, and theirs by far lefs dull!
It cannot be, that in that merry fhop,
Where I was fometimes wont my head to pop, 290
appearance while the Do&or had retained fufficient ftrength to have wielded
either a pen or a cudgel. If, after all I have faid, the reader fhould (till be hete-
rodox, and incline to doubt the fuperiority of thefe renowned Authors, let him
examine their refpe&ive works at large, and he will find that each could dijcover ,
and of courfe avoid , all the Do6tor’s blunders and abfurdities.
Lines 279 to 288.] The language here is finely allegorical-, and yet it is,
at the fame time, lndeed, many parts of this divine poem
have, exactly like the fpeeches of all modern Orators, an agreeable mixture of
jejl and earneji ; fo that when the Readers of the former, or the hearers of the
latter, fail to pick out what belt fuits their own tafte, and to negleft the reft,
they will be pleafed to remember that the fault is entirely their own.
Lines 289 to 294.] It is extremely fatisfaftory, to find that Dr. Johnfon fo
highly approved of the manner in which bufinefs is carried on in the fhop al-
laded to, notwithftanding the ill-natured fuggeftions of morofc cynicks.
When


When too much gloom my penfive mind opprefs’d,
To hear the lively tale, and frequent jeft,
Laughter, in fome long fit, has quite expir’d,
Or love of fun, from folks lo wile retir’d !
How dull were ancient Britons! ftupid things, 295
They feldom jok d with minilters or kings;
But, harlh and rugged as their native rocks,
Rudely difcours’d of gibbets and of blocks:
W hde polilh’d nations nam’d them aptly Bears,
Yet ventur’d not to take them by the ears! 3 0Q
But why Ihould ancient follies be made known,
Moderns have quite fufficient of their own !
My bell, my lateft thanks, O Court’nay, take,
They form the foie return I now can make,
For the large debt of thy fo wondrou s pains, 3 0 5
To prove me not quite deftitute of brains 1
From thee my praife fhall fpread around the court,
Where thou halt oft before made glorious fport!
Lines 299 to JOO.] It is remarkable, that Bears, and Tome other rtmm»r
they grow more folijhed or civilized aet more a nH L r m , as
ears or nose anH leH more and more liable to b etahenhytbe
owe their recent, and who d^ed
And,


And, as. all part As read with equal glee
The fprightly fpeeches fo well (poke by thee, 3 1 °
And ma'ke-their children get them ofi by rote;
So mud they all with equal'transport note
My too-great praife, in thy too-gen rous verie,
And bid their youngfters ev’ry line rehearfe :
Thus down Fame’s dream dial! we both make our way,
In the gilt barge of thy fweet pretty lay!
Adieu, my Friends, l ean no longer write;
The Devil waits, and mud get back to-night!
Spite of mate rials bad, and hnle time, yV:
To form thefe flow’ry wreaths r eful rhime; 32a
Who c< runs and reads, may this plain meaning lev
“ I praife my Friends juft as my Friends praife Me!”
Une 116 ] This line is finely characteriflicll of Mr. Courtenay s poem,
which, on the whole, richly deferves all the praife which the Doflor has
thought proper to bellow,
F INIS. , ,








