

THE BALLAARAT DISTRICT
t ♦ ♦
Jpwptf ||#p
fresideut :
Yen. Archdeacon Potter, B.A.
t?ice- presidents ;
Wm. H. Gaunt, Esq., P.M. Hon. Henry Cuthbert, M.L.C
Treasurer :
James Oddie, Esq., J.P.
3Jon. sec.:
William Little, Esq
Committee :
John Lombard, Esq.
J. Whitehead, Esq.
C. Dyte, Esq., J. P.
A, Hunter, Esq.
W. H. Barnard, Esq., F.G.S.
Robert Lewis, Esq., J.P.
I Chas Salter, Esq.
j James Russell, EsJj., J.P.
’ James Campbell, Esq.
A. H. King, Esq.
Peter Cazaly, Esq.
\ J, SOMMEBSCALES, ESQ.
Ex-officio. —Revs. H. W. H. Adeney, J. E. Herring, Joseph
Walker, W. Clark, J. M. Goldreich, George Minns, E. I. Watkin,
R. T. Walker, H. C. E. Morris, Ralph Brown, James Lowe, John
Orchard, William Thomas, William Hunt, John Green, J. W.
Inglis, and R. J. Mercer.


“ SINCE CUSTOM IS THE PRINCIPAL MAGISTRATE OF M AN’S LIFE, LET MEN BY ALL
MEANS ENDEAVOUR TO OBTAIN GOOD CUBTOMS.”--Bacon.
Ji Public to consider the question of Funeral
Reform, was called on the requisition. of several citizens,
by their Worships the Mayor of the City of Ballaarat,
and the Mayor of Ballaarat East, for Thursday evening,
12th July, 1877. The meeting was numerously attended,
and it was unanimously resolved to establish a Funeral Reform
Association. A committee was thereupon appointed, and rules were
adopted, the acceptance of which constitutes membership.
The committee in bringing the subject before the public and
inviting co-operation, would point out that the Association desires
only to pledge its members to such alterations in funeral arrange-
ments and mourning as will free them from objectionable features,
make them more economical, and better suited to show genuine
respect to the dead, and reasonable consideration for the interests
and feelings of the living.
The Association proposes to do this by avoiding unseemly
display, by simplifying the emblems of mourning, by discoun-
tenancing the practice of providing refreshments, and by discouraging
Sunday funerals.
The expenses attending funerals and mourning are often so
great as to plunge bereaved families into difficulties, and, at times,
into absolute want. The heavy black mourning generally worn is
unsuited to this warm climate. In many cases the health of the
living is injured by mistaken ideas as to the kind of clothing
necessary to show respect for the dead. The present custom of
inviting large numbers of people to attend funerals is believed to
be injurious, as it encourages ostentation, wastes valuable time,
and sometimes spreads disease.


7
39 / ■ -7 c
The Association will also direct its attention to kindred
subjects, such as the reduction of cemetery charges, &c., and invites
useful suggestions and information.
appeal is confidently made to all classes to support a
movement which is designed to lessen the anxieties of the poor,
and to promote the welfare of all in those seasons of bereavement
which are common to our race.
The active co-operation of Ladies, Friendly Societies, and
others, is earnestly invited.
RULES.
I. That the funeral of a member, or of any of his family, shall he
conducted in harmony with the following conditions :—
(1) The coffin to be free from, unnecessary ornament.
(2) The hearse (if used) to be drawn by not more than two
horses; hearses with'glass sides, plumes, horsecloths, and
hat streamers, to be strictly prohibited.
(3) No refreshment to be supplied at the house of mourning.
11. That if mourning be worn, a plain band around the hat or arm,
or both, shall be deemed sufficient.
111. That, as far as possible, mourning coaches shall be dispensed
with, and ordinary conveyances used.
Information may be obtained, and the members’ roll signed at
the office of Messrs. James Oddie and Co., 45 Dana street, to which
address, all communications for the Secretary should be sent. No
fee for enrolment.
F. Wigney, Printer, 6 Sturt Street, Ballarat.


o Biduo
r fcs7b«- jftt
■
