

ye th rum
WHICH IS THE OLD AND WHICH THE
NEW CHURCH “CATHOLIC”?
Extracts and Notes by a Layman.
PAMS
Bo* to
“ The Apostles and about one hundred and twenty disciples, men and
women, met in an upper room at Jerusalem, and Peter stood up in the
midst and preached to them.”—(Acts i. 13-15.)
“ Barnabas and Saul assembled with the Church and taught much
people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.”
(Acts xi. 26.) This shows the first named Christians as a Church,
was at Antioch. No less than ten Councils were held there between
A. i), 252 and a.d. 480, and the Church acknowledged no ecclesiastical sub-
mission to any other see in the world. “ Barnabas and Saul assembled
themselves with the Church for a whole year and taught much people.”
“The Emperor Justinian repaired the city in a.d. 529 and called it
Theopolis—that is ‘ The City of God.’”—(Calmet’s Dictionary of the
Bible.) Tertullian, a.d. 190, states, “ Places inaccessible to the Romans
are subdued to Christ; ” and Origen,' a.d. 240, states that “ The Church
in the British Isles holds the religion of Christ.” British bishops were
present at the Church Councils held at Arminium, a.d. 359. The
Saxon conquest was complete and pagan darkness reigned in great
part of Britain. Two young men from Britain, of fair complexion,
were offered for sale in the slave market at Rome. Pope Gregory the
Great saw them, and being interested in their appearance and nation
he organised a Roman Catholic Mission with Augustine to proceed to
Britain, a.d. 596. About seven years after the landing of Augustine
the ancient Welsh' British Church, with their bishops and clergy, met
Augustine in conference.
L (*)!>’]


When Augustine landed in Britain, a.d. 597, he found no less than
seven Bishops and one Archbishop in existence, and that “the British
Church had customs wliich the Roman Church had followed until a.d.
458 ; and that it knew nothing of Romanism previous to that date.
Subsequent to that date, the Church of Rome had introduced changes
with which the British Church refused to conform, or to submit to its
supremacy. On the contrary, the foreign bishops became Anglicised ;
but neither priest nor people became subservient to Rome although
for some years it was in communion with—but never under the control
of—Rome.* (G. H. F. Nye, “Church and Her History,” 1892.)
“An ancient church has been discovered at Cilchester in a.d. 1890,
which has its apse to the west, but otherwise resembles, in places, the
numerous chapels of the 4th and sth centuries in Syria. The British
examples can hardly be later than 410 a.d. and therefore two centuries
before the mission of Augustine.” ( Edinburgh Review, Jan., 1895.)
During more than six hundred years from the time of Tacitus the
historian in the Ist century, who mentioned the strange way in wliich
they (the liish) affected even the organization of the early Christian
Church, which to a very large extent was shaped in Ireland after the
habits and ideas of the tribes and septs. Its great monastic institu-
tions were “essential clans,” and abbots were rulers in virtue of their
birth after the manner of succession which prevailed among their
chiefs and kings.” ( Edinburgh Review, April, 1885.)
In fact it is highly probable that the Christian Churches in early
Ireland were founded upon a model of which the New Testament
affords several examples. Fur instance: “Greet Priscilla and Aquila,
my helpers in Christ Jesus. Likewise greet the Church that is in
their house.”'—Romans xvi. 1-5.
“ And all the brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia.” —(Gal. i. 2.) (And be it remembered the Galatians, like the
Irish, were of Celtic origin.)
“Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church which is in his house.”- (Colossians iv. 15.)
Ireland, since abandoning the old Irish Church, forms an almost soli-
tary example of a nation in which national interest and national pride
are sacrificed to Romanism.f
The grant of Ireland by Pope Adrian was but the seal of approbation
to the conquest by the Normans. Celtic Ireland was neither Papal
nor inclined to submit itself to the Papacy until Henry 11. riveted the
Romish yoke upon it.
* “Communion” does not necessarily imply either union or submission, e.g. the
Episcopal Church in America was in communion with the Church of England,
yet was in no way controlled or ruled by it.
flrishmen in ordinary business will not buy before search as to facts and value
of the goods ; how much more is it necessary to search the Bible to see that his
religious belief is in accordance with the Holy Book? *(>See Acts xviii. 11)
“If the blind lead the blind they both fall into the ditch.” (Matt. xv. 14)
“ Eyes have they and will not see j ears have they and will not hear.”


The definition of the term “ Catholic ” (or Universal) cannot be ex-
clusively applied to any local church (or assembly of believers). The
Greek Church, the English Church, the Roman Church, the Churches
in Asia, Alexandria and Antioch have definite meaning and location,
but the “ Church Catholic” embraces the professing members of Christ
throughout the world of every kindred and every tribe. (See Acts ix.
31, xi. 26 ; Gal. i. 2 ; Mark ix. 38-40 ; Rom. xi. 13 ; Matt. viii. 14.)
Creeds are essential to the various churches, being a definition and a
declaration as to what an adherent must accept, and subscribe to, as the
basis of his belief.
THE CREED OF THE ANCIENT CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
As Composed at
The Council of Nice, A.D, 325,
Recapitulated by
The Council of Constantinople, A.D. 381
The Council of Ephesus, A.D. 431
The Com cil of Chalcedon, A.D, 451
Proved to have continued unchanged by
The Council of Trent, Feb. 4, A.D. 1546.
This was the Creed of the Christian Church up to December 9th, 1564.
This was the Creed of St. Patrick and is now the Creed of the Protestant
Church of the United Kingdom.
THE CREED OF THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible.
And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of His
Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God,
Begotten, not made, being of one substance with the H’ather, by whom all things
were made ; Who for us men, and for our salvation came down from heaven, and
was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man, and
was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and
the third day He rose again according to the Scriptures; He ascended into heaven,
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father. And He shall come again with glory
to judge both the quick and the dead : Whose kingdom shall have no end.
And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceedeth
from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic
and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins, and
I look for the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen
XII. NOVEL ARTICLES
Addkd to this Ancient Creed by Pope Pius IV.
And Published as the New Creed of the Modern Church of Rome, December 9th,
A.D. 1564.
This Creed was not known in the Christian Church until December
9th, 1564. It was never heard of by St. Patrick, and yet it is now
the Creed of the Church of Rome.


Header, which is the New Creed , and which is the Old One I —which
is the New Church, and which is the Old One 1
Surely you must see and acknowledge from the above, that the Creed
of the Church of Rome, composed a.d. 1564, is the New Creed, and that
the Creed received by Catholic Protestants, and composed A.D. 325, is
the Old Creed.'
I.—l most steadfastly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions
and all other observances and constitutions of the same Church.
lI.—I also admit the Holy Scripture, according to that sense which our Holy
mother the Church has held and does hold, to which it belongs to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of the Scriptures ; neither will I ever take and
interpret them otherwise than according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.
lII.—I also profess, that there are truly and properly seven Sacraments of the
new law, instituted by Jesus Christ, our Lord, and necessary for the salvation of
mankind, though not all for every one ; to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony, and that they confer grace;
and that of these, Baptism, Confirmation and Orders cannot be reiterated without
sacrilege ; and 1 also receive and admit the received and approved ceremonies of
the Catholic Church, used in the solemn administration of all the aforesaid
Sacraments.
IV.—I embrace and receive all and every one of the things which have been
defined and declared in the Holy Council of Trent, concerning original sin and
justification.
V.—l profess, likewise, that in the mass there is offered to God a true, proper
and propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead ; and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist there are truly, really and substantially the body and
blood, together with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that
there is made a conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the body,
and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood ; which conversion the
Catholic Church calls transubstantiation. I also confess, that under either kind
alone, Christ is received whole and entire, and a true sacrament.
VI.—I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the souls therein
detained are helped by the suffrages of the faithful.
Vll.—Likewise, that the saints, reigning together with Christ, are to b e
honored and invocated ; and that they offer prayers to God for us and that their
relics are to be held in veneration.
VIII.—I most firmly assert that the images of Christ of the Mother of God,
ever virgin, and also of other saints, may be had and retained ; and that due
honour and veneration are to be given them.
IX.—I also affirm that the power of indulgences was left by Christ in the
Church, and that the use of them is most wholesome to Christian people.
X.—l acknowledge the Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church for the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches ; and I promise and swear true obedience to
the Bishop of Rome, Successor to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ.
XI. —I likewise undoubtedly receive and profess all other tnings delivered,
defined and declared by the Sacred Canons and General Councils, and particularly
by the Holy Council of Trent; and I condemn, reject and anathematize all
things contrary thereto, and all Heresies which the Church has condemned,
rejected and anathematized.


Xll.—i, N. N. , do at this present freely profess and sincerely hold this true
Catholic faith, without which no one can be saved ; and I promise most con-
stantly to retain and confess the same entire and inviolate, with God’s assistance
(o the end of my life. And I will take care , a* far an in me lies, that it shall he
held, taiujht and preached hy my subjects, or by those the care of whom shall apper-
tain to me in my office, ; this I vow, promise and swear—so help me God and these
holy Gospels.*
LET ALL WHO READ THIS PAPER ATTEND TO THE FACTS IT
CONTAINS, AND THEY WILL AT ONCE UNDERSTAND THE TRUE
AND OLDEST CHURCH—CATHOLIC.
“ How is the true and ancient Church known ?
holding the true and ancient faith.
How is the new Church known ?
holding the new faith.
Then it follows that whatever Church holds the true and ancient
faith, which can to be proved to be so by Councils, and can stand the
test of the Scriptures, this is the true and ancient Church.
And whatever Church holds the new faith, that can neither stand
the test of proof by Councils, nor by the Scriptures, this is the new
Church.
What then is the true and ancient faith ?
Let us now ask was this whole Creed composed or known at the
first General Council ? No. The Church of England Creed, that is the
first part, was composed at the Council of Nice, establishing and ex-
panding the Apostles’ Creed, and thence called the Nicene Creed, A.D.
325.
The latter Creed, that of Pope Pius IY., A.D. 1564, was never heard
of in the Church at that time.
Then—Was it composed at the second General Council, the Council of
Constantinople? No. This Council, held a.d. 381, recited and
improved again the Nicene Creed, but never heard of this new Creed.
Let us go to the third General Council, the Council of Ephesus, held
a.d. 431, and let us ask which of these Creeds was held by that
Council? Hear the very words of the Council itself. The Nicene
Creed, that is the first Creed, is read aloud ; circumstances are related
of some who attempted to alter it; then the Council decrees as follows.
DECREE OF THE COUNCIL OF EPHESUS.
“ These things having been read, the Holy Synod decreed, that it
should be lawful for no one to profess, to write or to compose, any
other form of faith than that defined by the Holy Fathers, who, with
the Holy Ghost, had been assembled at Nice.
*The words in Italic constitute this Greed the oath of all Roman Catholic Priests, Professors
and Bishops—who must take it, and these are usea when it is administered to them.


“ But those who shall have dared to compose, or to profess, or to
offer, any other form of Faith to those wishing to be converted to the
acknowledgment cf the truth, whether from Paganism or from Judaism,
or from any sort of heresy, that these, if they were Bishops or Clergy-
men, that the Bishops should be deposed from their Episcopacy, and
the Clergy from their clerical office ; but that if they were laymen they
should be subjected to an ‘anathema.’ ” Mansi., vol. iii., p. 1362.
We see this Creed, then, established up to the year 431.
Now we shall see the Decree of the next General Council, that of
Chalcedon, in the year 451, and see which of these Creeds was set forth
there:—
EXTRACT FROM THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON.
“ The Catholic faith delivered by the Holy 318 Fathers (viz., at
Nice), and by the Holy 150 Fathers (viz., at Constantinople), also by
the other most Holy and glorious Father (viz., at Ephesus), we guard,
and according to that we believe. The most Rev. Bishops exclaimed,
‘No person makes any other exposition of faith. We neither attempt
nor dare to do so. For the Fathers have taught, and writings preserved
those things which have been set forth by them ; and other than these
we cannot speak.
“ Those principles which have been set forth are sufficient ; it is not
lawful to make any other exposition.”
We learn then from the Council of Chalcedon, that this was the
faith of the Church for four hundred and fifty-one years after our
Lord,
Now, we have another infallible witness, to prove that it had never
been changed up to the year 1546. This witness the Church of Rome
must admit, for it is no less than her own Council of Trent. This
Council, in the Session held February 4th, 1546, declares as follows:
EXTRACT FROM THE THIRD SESSION OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT,
FEBRUARY 4, 1546.
“ In the name of the Holy and undivided Trinity of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
“This holy, oecumenical, and general synod of Trent, lawfully assem-
bled in the Holy Ghost, the same three Legates of the Apostolical See
presiding in it, considering the magnitude of the subjects to be treated,
especially of those contained under these two heads, the extirpation of
Heresies, and the reformation of morals, on account of which chiefly it
has been assembled ; but acknowledging with the Apostle that it has
not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with Spiritual wickedness in
Heavenly places. With the same Apostle it exhorts all and every one,
in the first place, that they should be strong in the Lord and in the
power of His might; in all things taking the shield of faith by which
they can quench all the fiery darts of the most wicked; and that they
should take the helmet of the hope of salvation, with the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God.


“ Therefore, that this its pious solicitude may have its beginning and
continuance by the Grace of God, it determines and decrees that before
all things the Confession of Faith is to be premised, following in this
the examples of the Fathers, who in their Sacred Councils were accus-
tomed to oppose this shield against all Heresies, in the beginning of
their actions, by which alone they both sometimes drew Infidels to the
faith, vanquished Heretics and confirmed the Faithful.
“ Wherefore it (the Council) commands that this Creed, which the
Holy Roman Church uses as that summary in which all who projess
the Faith of Christ necessarily agree , and that firm and only foundation
against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail , shall be read in those
words in which it is read in all the Churches, which is as follows
Then it recites the Nicene Creed, and not one Article of the New
Creed.
Now, mark these witnesses for the truth of the Creed.
We have first the Council of Nice, establishing and expanding the
Creed from the days of the Apostles, a.d. 325.
Then, this confirmed by the Council of Constantinople, a.d. 381.
Then, again, both by the Council of Ephesus, a.d. 431.
Then, again, these three by the Council of Chalcedon, a.d. 451.
We have the Council of Ephesus denouncing those with an anathema
who shall dare to alter it, add to, or take from it.
Then we have the Council of Trent proving them all, asserting not
only that this was the true faith of the whole Christian Church, but
that it was “ the firm and only foundation of faith against which the
gates of hell shall never prevailf and this to the year of our Lord 1546.
Now which of these Creeds do these five Councils prove to be the
true Creed of the ancient Holy Catholic Church to the year 1546 ?
What Church holds it, and throws open the Bible to prove its truth to
the people ?
The first Creed only, the Apostolic Nicene Creed, is proved that of
the Holy Catholic Church.
This is the Greed of the Church of England , she throws open the
Bible to prove its truth to the people.
Whence came this New Creed then with its twelve Novel Articles?
What Council set it up ? What Council published it ? What ancient
Church professed it? In what records of the Catholic Church is it to
be found ? Where did it originate ? What Church maintains it now 1
and does she throw open the Bible to prove it to the people ?
No Council ever set it up. No Council ever published it. It was
never seen in any book of the ancient Catholic Church. The Council
of Ephesus pronounced a curse on any who should ever publish any
such. The Council of Trent disowns it in the Creed she recites, and
declares the Old Creed to be the “ firm and only foundation of faith,


against which the gates of hell shall never prevail ; ” and this in a.d.
1546, the very year that Luther died. This was the faith of the
Christian Church before Luther, and it is the fa’th of every true
Christian this dav.
these twelve articles of this New Creed were first pub ishod in the
year 1564, by the Pope at Rome, who calls himself the vicar of Christ
on earth.
This is the Creed of the Church of Rome : she has turned from the
ancient faith to this novel Creed and she fears that the people should
read the Bible , or their children be taught it , because these principles of
their new Creed are not to he found in the Word of Cod ”
“ Prove all things. Hold fast that which is good/’—(l Thessalonians
v. 21.)
In order that we Protestants for all time may truly worship in the
Church Universal, in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, our fore-
fathers sacrificed their lives and their all, thereby protesting against the
very erorrs and corruptions which in these days hordes of priests, and
laymen too, are striving to perpetuate.
The latest illustration is supplied in the Argus of the 12th of
August, 1895, where Archbishop Carr is reported as saying in a lecture
on “the Catholic (Romish ?) Church and the Bible,” that the Roman
Catholic Church, from the earliest times “had made enactments
enforcing the fullest education in scriptural knowledge for aspirants to
her priesthood.”
Infinitely wiser and more scriptural is the Protestant teaching, that
this priceless knowledge should be shared by all mankind, and not
remain the exclusive possession of a professional class.
“Search the Scriptures,”—John v. 39.
“They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched
the Scriptures daily.”—Acts xvii. 11,
The books of the Old and New Testament were first written in
Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee, Syriac, the language then spoken in Judea.
If written in any other language it should agree with the before-
mentioned if correct as to the part written.
“ There is the same conviction that, taken with all its difficulties,
the Bible is still the Book of books to all mankind, the fountain and
the bulwark of truth and’holiness, the guide both of LEARNED and
UNLEARNED into communion of thought and feeling. There is
the same quiet confidence that, standing high above the human specula-
tion which have gathered round it, it contains treasures of wisdom,
justice, toleration, freedom and love, which have never yet been exhaus-
ted.”—(Dean Stanley.)
Victorian Standard Print, 28 Market Street, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
