

PAHS
Box IO
PRIESTS AND THEIR VICTIMS
BEING A SEQUEL TO THE CIRCULAR LETTER (WITH A PREFACE, AN
INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND COMMENTS) ADDRESSED
TO THE LATE ARCHBISHOP GOOLD.
PARTICULARS OF THE WRITER’S CLAIM AGAINST ARCHBISHOP
GOOLD’S ESTATE AND ARCHBISHOP CARR—THE INJUSTICE AND
INGRATITUDE OF DRS. GOOLD AND CARR, AND OF THE PRIESTLY
EXECUTORS OF DR. GOOLD’S WILL—THE PART PLAYED BY DEAN
DONAGHY, &c.
THE MORALS OF THE MELBOURNE PRIESTS.
P. A. C. O’FABRELL.
FITZROY :
WILLIAM SINCLAIR, PRINTER,
Moor Street.




PREFACE.
The almost unprecedented success of my pamphlet entitled “ Third Edition of
Circular Letter Addressed by P. A. C. O'Farrell to Archbishop Ooold ; with a
Preface, an Introduction, and other Matter Relating to the Priests of Victoiia, &c.”,
emboldens me to ask the indulgence of the public for the following fitting sequel to
the production mentioned. But for the favor with which it has been received, and
the enormous circulation which it has reached in this and some of the neighboring
colonies, 1 should scarcely feel justified in launching the present venture. I believe
it is one which will let in light to some dark places in the devious avenues pursued
by priests, and drag into the glare of the sunlight many facts which those priests
would fain have concealed in obscurity. It surely cannot be a mistake for a Catholic
(as I am) a Protestant, a Jew’ or a gentile to speak or write the truth. If it is wrong
to do so, all I can say is that I have wholly mistaken the beginning, middle and end
of my existence, and that my life is consequently an utter failure, i love the truth,
and abhor falsehood and duplicity ; and all the menacing, persuasion and cajoling of
Dr. Goold and his ministers have never been able to tongue-tie or pen-tie me. lam
a firm believer in the power of the pen, even so far as to agree with what Earl Lytton
makes Cardinal de Richelieu exclaim :
“ Beneath the rule of men entirely great
The pen is mightier than the sword.”
But priests would like to be the only wielders of the pen themselves, so that, as in
the early and middle ages, they could “fool men to the top of their bent.”
1 take leave to deny the reports which those priests and their satellites have
industriously and lyiugly circulated to the effect that my pamphlet was an attack on
the Catholic religion. Nothing of the kind. If Ino longer believed in the dogmas
of that faith, I would within an hour cease to belong to it, and those who know me
will indorse me when 1 say that I possess the moral courage to do what I think is
right. I have assailed only the morals, the drunkenness, the libertinism, the broken
vows of celibacy, the avarice, the cupidity, the duplicity, the mendacity of the
priests, and their betrayal and corruption of pure women, married and single, at the
confessional. lam not a follower of Martin Luther, who would have conferred an.
inestimable benefit on mankind if he had confined himself to exposing and
endeavoring to reform the scandalously couupt lives of the priests of his day. But
he assailed the dogmas of the church, and “at one fell swoop” sivept away five of
the seven sacraments, thus striking at tiie very root of the faith. There is only one
of its teachings in which I do not believe in its literal interpretation, and that is in the
endless torments of hell, although the biblical texts in support of this doctrine are
numerous and explicit.”* (Vide Isaias, c. 33, v. 14 ; Matthew, c. 3, v. 12 ; Matthew, e.
25, v. 41, 4fi ; Mark. c. 9, v. 43 to 48 ; Luke, c. 3, v. 17 ; 2 Thes., c. 1, v. 7,8, 9 ; Jude,
v. 6,7; Apoc., c. 14, v. 10, 11; c. 20, v. 10.) There doubtless must Ire a separation of
the good from the bad, but I never could believe that a beneficent and merciful God
would torture souls with fire for ever. Such a belief would seek to change a mild,
kind, forgiving Creator into a pitiless, cruel, relentless, merciless fiend. Better that
there never were a God, a creation, but everlasting nothingness and chaos, than that
a single soul should be tormented in flames for eternity, and the souls of all the r est
of mankind be in endless bliss. If a person were to live to be a hundred years old, and
were to commit ten brutal murders on an average for every day of his life, his soul
would not merit eternal torment. Few individuals reflect sufficiently on those two little


words FOB ever. Some idea may be formed of them by a perusal of the following
extract from a poem, the name of the author of which 1 have been unable to discover:
Infinite years in torments shall I spend,
And never, never, never have an end ?
Ah ! must I live in torturing despair
As many years as atoms in the air?
When these are spent as many thousands more
As "rains of sand that crowd the shelving shore
A million years for every drop ot rain
That ever fell, and drop in ocean’s main ?
When these are done as many yet behind
As leaves of forest shaken by the wind ?
When these are gone as many to ensue
As blades of grass and drops of falling dew ?
When these run out, as many on the march
As starry lamps that light the spangled arch?
When these expire, as many millions more
As moments in the millions passed before?
When all these doleful years arc spent in vain.
And multiplied by myriads yet again
Till numbers drown the thought—could I suppose
That then my wretched years would have a close,
This would afford some ease. But, oh ! I shiver
To think upon the dreadful sound FOR EVER.”
I will not pursue the argument by educing the corollary that, if the teaching of tli3-
Catholic Church concerning the tormenting of souls by fire for eternity is erroneous,
it may be argued that “ falsc.s in uno falsus in omnibus,” and the claim to
infallibility is exploded. But, as I remarked in my former pamphlet, we now do not
hear preached the old fire and brimstone hell, and therefore I may consolingly
conclude that the church puts a milder construction than founerly on the texts
quoted, as the Church of England has done in the Kevised Version of the hew
Testament.
The great and active hostility which the priests and their sa'el’ites have
exhibited towards my last published pamphlet concern ng Dr. Goold has earned me to
smile at their impotent, unreasoning rage. It was all blow and bluster.” all vox et
pr.eterea NifiiL. They have not dared to institute proceedings against me for libel,
as they well knew that the law would allow me to justify," that is, to piove the
truth of all that the pamphlet contained, about which there would be no difficulty.
It is also a ludicrous, as well as a historical fact, that in all countries wherever
Catholic bishops or priests have had irrefutable charges made against them, they
have invariably circulated-the report that their accusers were insane ! Of course the
imputation was hurled at me. Pitiful, shallow, subteifuge! adopted as a ‘make
believe ” to avoid the necessity of defending in court their rickety characters, rotten
reputations. Even the enemies of that greatest of living statesmen, William Ewart
Gladstone, have taken their cue from the priests, and circulated the lying report that
he is mad, simply because his facts and arguments in favor of autonomy for Ireland
were unanswerable. But the grand reply to all those mendacious, unscrupulous
priests and foes to Mr. Gladstone is, that they have never yet been able to procure
to be immured in a lunatic asylum a single one of the many individuals whom they
lyingly, brazenly and unblushingly declared to be non compos mentis, as they would
gladly have done if they could so have rid themselves of their honest and unanswer-
able accusers. The whole thing proves to what shifts priests are driven when their
moral deformity is unveiled. Let only an archbishop or bishop lyingly say of an
accuser, whose facts and arguments are indisputable, that he is insane, and the whole
priesthood will join in a chorus of mendacity, and procure all the tagrag, bobtail and
rabble of their deluded followers to take part in the cry. But, as tire Yankees say,


this is “toothin’’ to deceive the most unsophisticated person in possession of his
senses. But perhaps it should be considered au act of insanity for any layman to
expect to be paid a debt by a Catholic archbishop, bishop, or priest.
Mr. Edmund Finn, alias “Garryowen,” having done me the honor (for he
belongs to that class “whose praise is censure, and whose censure’s praise”) to vilify
me in a small daily paper, I have a few words to say about this man. Although his
attack was professedly made, as I believe, and at the instigation of the priests,
against my announced book to be entitled “Victoria and Victorians,” (of which he
is envious in advance) yet his real motive was doubtless to prejudice the sale of my
pamphlet regarding Archbishop Goold and this sequel to it; therefore these remarks
are appropriate in this Preface. I have known Finn by sight for considerably more
than foity years, and few persons, I should suppose, have ever cared to know him
except by sight. In the humble positions which he has always held he has, so far as
I am aware, always been treated with that charitable consideration which is due to
small natures. Such is the man who has undertaken to vilify me and to write ‘‘The
Chronicles of Early Melbourne,” a task which could be satisfactorily performed only
by a gentleman of education, research, impartiality, discrimination, modesty and
ability. Tho e “Chronicles” have yet to be written by some such gifted person. As for
“Garryowen’s ” “ Chronicles ” they are a travesty on the subject, and really amount
to an impertinence on the public. I have read only a few of the chapters, and I was
too disgusted with their incoaectuess, the sickening conceit of the writer, and the
poverty of the style, to read any more. Many old colonists have complained to me
of the trashiness of the “ Chionich s,” in which only one little egotist is glorified
throughout; it is “ Finn, Finn, Finn ” “ first, last and all the time,” and his self-
complacency would be ludicrous but for the damage which ho does to a fine subject.
I have no desire to be the critic of “Garryowen” or his “Chronicles,” and would
never have condescended to notice either if he had not improperly obtruded himself
on mj r attention by making a newspaper attack on me. If he has a grain of sense he
will not further interfere with me, my pamphlets or my doings, else he may find himself
trespassing on dangerous premise<. 1 prooably accord him too much importance by
noticing him at such length ; but I thought I might as well give a sample of the petty
instruments that are employed against me and the cause of truth.


PRIESTS AND THEIR VICTIMS
Men who aspire to the priesthood of the Catholic Church must be content to
have their lives judged of by the rules laid down by the Saviour Himself in the
matter. A prominent feature in His selection of apostles, and His admonitions to
them, was His detaching them from this world, and His instructing them to devote
themselves entirely to God and things spiritual. The whole life of Christ (He who
could by the fiat of His will have changed pebbles into diamonds and rocks into
fold) was one of self-abnegation and poverty, and on one occasion He declared that
le “ had not whereon to lay His head.” “Do not,” He exclaimed (Matthew, c. 10,
v. 9, 10) “ possess gold or silver, or money in your purse, or scrip for your journey,
or two coats, or shoes or a staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat.” That
advice is confirmed in the Gospel of St. Luke, c 9, v. 3. The apostles, for the most
part, were admirably chosen from among fishermen, for this is a hardy and enduring
class, ever on the alert in watching wind and tide, toiling night and day in
tempestuous weather, and constantly risking their lives in or der to obtain bread for
their families. The Saviour therefore doubtless considered that men so trained and
•disciplined would labor with a heart and will in the apnstlcship. They led a life of
poverty, self-denial a fid purity, and with one exception (St. John) ended it with
martyrdom. They adopted no empty, high-sounding titles, lived in no fine “ palaces,”
or ground money out of the poor. St. Peter, who is considered the first Pope of the
church, was not designated “ your Holiness he mo t likely would have repudiated
the title. Imagine persons addressing Saints Paul, James. Matthew. Luke, &c., as
“ your Eminence,” “ your Grace,” “your Lordsh p!” The idea is preposterous, and
even ludicrous (if it were not akin to blasphemy) for “Lord ” is one if the titles of
the Almighty. I am aware that in Catholic Spy in, and among the descendants of
Spaniards, as in some of the South American Republics—in the Argentine Republic,
for example—it is common for parents to give their sons the Christian name of
“Jesus,” which is, I think, blasphemous, and is scarcely surpassed in blasphemy by
those shocking “Passion Plays” which, so far as I know, have never been allowed
to be performed outside of Catholic countries. The au'horities of the United States,
first in New York, refused to permit them to be acted there. Imagine representing
the Saviour, His apostles, &c,, on the stage of a theatre ! Think how it would sound
to hear the stage-manager calling out: “The curtain is about to be rung up. Is
Christ ready to appear ? Has St. John left his dressing-room ? Why does the Virgin
Mary delay ? Tell St. Peter I will fine him if he keeps the stage waiting as he did
last night !” &c. Yet this kind of thing is not objected to by Pope, bishops or priests
in Catholic countries ; but it would not be tolerated by Protestant Governments.
I ask in all seriousness, is it possible to recognise in the proud popes, prelates
and priests of medieval and modern times the slightest trace of the self denial,
simplicity, and teaching of the Saviour ? A negative answer must be given. Not
long since it was announced that the Jubilee "fferings made to Leo the Thirteenth
amounted in value to three millions of pounds sterling ; and those behind the scenes
know that most of these “offedngs” were gotten up by priests who desire to
become bishops, bishops who wish to be made archb shops, and archbishops who are


ambitious to be raised to the cardinalate. In every instance sedulous care was taken
to impress on the Pope the name of the archbishop, bishop or priest who got up and
forwarded each munificent “ offering and that scapegoat, Monsignor Kirby, residing
in Koine, of all the archbishops, bishops and priests of Australia, will, for sundry
bribes to himself, make the offerings from this part of the world “ tell ” as opportunity
shall occur. The poor victims who subscribed the three million pounds were merely
tools in the hands of ambitious ecclesiastics. The Catholic Church of today is
unidentifiable with that established by Christ. If He were to revisit the earth in
human form He would be unable to recognise in the church a vestige of the sublime
simplicity of its foundation. He never was carried about on men’s shoulders ; His
greatest earthly pomp was when He made His entry, on the humblest of quadrupeds,
on His palm-strewn way into Jerusalem. Now the Pope (his triple crown a blaze of
diamonds, who claims to he Christ’s Vicar on earth) is carried on the shoulders of
lacqueys caparisoned in robes of silk embroidered with gold. In place of the humble,
simply-clad fishermen, the Saviour would nowadays find cardinals enveloped in fine
scarlet cloth ; archbishops and bishops with mitres on their heads studded with
precious stones, vestments similarly decorated, living in palaces, rolling in carriages,
and the men surrounded by all this splendour, and wallowing in luxury, endeavoring
to trample on the rest of mankind as if they were beings of an inferior creation.
What religion is there in all this? What is there but earthly pride, vanity, pomp
and meretricious display, combined with much bad taste and a smack of vulgarity ?
From the days of my youth it has always been painful to my feelings to be present at
what is termed a “High Mass.” The dawdling, long and meaningless pauses,
ceremonies and operatic music are anything but edifying or inspirational of devotion ;
and, to get through them all successfully and with eclat, Archbishop Goold has more
than once informed me that it was necessary for him and his priests to have several
rehearsals as in the production of a play at a theatre. Truly nice religion ! which is
grand only on account of its simplicity. The Almighty does not require intricate,
complicated worship, or a lot of bejewelled mitres and vestments.' Any little devotion
of which I am capable is felt at what is known as a “ Low Mass,” where there ai’e
only the absolutely necessary ceremonies gone through, and there is something
approaching the simplicity of Christ’s worship. As far back as St. Augustin’s time
(fifth century) he complained of the excessive number of the ceremonies which had
crept into the church, and they have since been multiplied, until they amount to
an intricate theatrical performance.
Having thus briefly endeavored to draw a parallel between the simplicity of
the church established by Christ and the complicated, ostentatious institution into
which outwardly it has degenerated, it will be well to take a peep behind the scenes
at the lives of the priests and how they bleed their victims. Do they, the priests,
even endeavor to follow in the footsteps of the Divine Four.dc” of Christianity, and of
His apostles ? They do not. The career of the Saviour and of His chosen twelve
(except Judas, the dishonest pursebearer) was one of privation, suffering and danger.
The path of a modern priest is strewn with flowers. His life is one of indolence,
laziness, ease, luxury, arrogance, impertinence to the poor, sycophancy to the rich, and
self-indulgence. He knows no want, he has no care. He is not biuth- n d with a
wife, although the average priest has a substitute for one, or does worse If he is the
father of children they are of a kind that do not give him much anxiety or cause him
any molestation. The Council of Trent passed a decree declaring the children of
priests illegitimate ; but the law of our land says different if the priest chooses to go
through the marriage ceremony, as Father Barry did in Melbourne, and as is common
in the United States, The priest is a little king in his parish, which is a sort of
IMPERIUM in imperio. He taxes his subjects, his parishioners, more ruthlessly than
the Government does the people. His power to compel them to “pay up” is
irresistible ; his means to do so more terrible to the Catholic than the machinery of
the law for delinquent taxpayers. The priest holds the sword of Damocles over his
victims. The Government can only imprison a man or deprive him of his property,
or both. King Priest shakes in the face of his subjects the teirors of h-11 and
purgatory, the deprivation of heaven, “denouncing” and “cursing” from the


altar, anti moral boycotting. A short time before his death Archbishop Goold sent
me word that (because 1 had endeavored to recover the money which he owed my
father’s estate) he had “cursed” or would “curse ” me (I forget which but it is not
of the slightest consequence) from the altar. Such impotent rage and puerility
caused me only a-smile and created a joke among my friends. Dr. • oold forgot, or
never knew, the Spanish proverb which says that “ cui'es like chickens, co nc home
to roost.” Even excommunication (that terror of medieval times to kings and
subjects) is nowadays looked upon as harmless as babies’ prattle ; and if a Pope of
this century were to invest in an interdict he would be laughed at. Modern
enlightenment, even among Catholics, has dii-en him off those premises. When
Victor Emmanuel drove Pius the Ninth from his thr ne, the latter did n it dare to
place that King's dominion under an int rd ct, abhou h the cause of offence was a
thousandfold greater than when the Pope, in the reign of King John, placed England
under an interdict, or when France was similarly tr. ated during the reign of Philip
Augustus. The tecent ac'ioa taken by Leo the Thirteenth, in ordeii gth s clergy to
“ refuse absolution ”t > certain class-s of Irish Nationalists, has had no her effect
than to bring his middling Holiness and the Papacy into contempt and n anile ; and
he will soon discover that Irishmen, in every pare of the world, will not urook such
uncalled for, officious and arrogant interference.
In order to enable priests to live in their luxurious style, and to acquire the
large or small fortunes which nearly all of them possess, they have to “ bic d ” pretty
freely their numerous victims. The young newly-ordained priest is frequently given
charge of a new parish, or. to sp*ak more co rectly, area which has h tnerto lain
ecclesiastically fallow, where a paash is to be formed. As a rule (to wh ci, however,
I have known honorable exceptions) he sets out to collect money to build a
comfortable dwelling f r himself, and to furnish it elegantly. While this is in
progress he probably celebrates Mass, but only on Sundays and great festivals, in a
large room of a hotel or a public hall. He pushes his “collections ” vigorously, and
the walls of a little church soon emerge from the ground. The machinery for the
confessional and all the rest of it is speedily on hand, and then the young priest is in
his glory. He collects money from a variety of sources, and his victims are as docile
as dove's. If a person visits a theatre he pays at the door once and fo all on that
occasion. But not so in the little church. At each Mass on Sunday three payments
are expected, one compulsory, two optional. An individual can no more enter a
Catholic Church of a Sunday or a great festival without payment than he can enter a
theatre. Once inside he takes his seat, and generally immediately after the Gospel,
but sometimes later on in the Mass, a lull in the service takes place in order to enable
the collectors (“ told off’ specially each Sunday for the purpose, but the priest takes
care that they get nothing for their trouble) to shak- a collection plate under the nose
of every person present, and for a few minutes the jingle of silver is very lively, and
no doubt “most harmonious music” to the priestly ear. Mass over and the
congregation dismissed (ita missa est) there are generally two ominous-looking
sentinels stationed outside every door, each with a tin plate in his hand, endeavoring
to glean what more money they can after the double argentiferous harvest already
reaped. After that triple attack the victim is permitted to depart in peace, with
perhaps more religion in his heart but less money in his pocket, and feeling
very dubious as to the justice of the whole proceeding. So much for the morning
M ass. In the evening, if the devout Catholic then visits the church, he cannot enter
without paying a fee. During the service the tin collection plates are again put in
lively circulation, and again are thrust under the people’s noses as they leave the
church. Thus a Catholic, who attends two services of a Sunday, has to run the
gantlet of no less than six collection plates, two payments being compulsory and
four optional. But these quasi “optional” contributions are really obligatory, as,
when a plate is shaken under a man’s nostrils, he does not like to appear “mean ” by
not dropping a coin into it in order to be on a par with his right and left hand
neighbours. No wonder that priests strut about in the best broadcloth w Inch money
can purchase, and live like the proverbial “fighting cocks,” while mo?t of their
victims have to be content with humble apparel and plain fare.


As an illustration of priests’ mercenary conduct I may relate a case in point,
and ex uno disce omnes. A great many years ago Dr. Goo'd appointed Father
Madden, whom he had ordained, to found a parish in Richmond, which, for the
benefit of European and other foreign readers, I may mention is about two miles from
the Melbmrne Postoffice. In those days th> re were two Fathers Madden; but,
although personally acquainted with them, 1 do not remember the Christian name of
either of them. They were both well known to all Victorian Catholics of the time.
One Father Madden was tall, the other (low-sized. Dr. Goold, in a fit of pretended
virtuous indignation, first suspended and thendism ssed the tail Father Madden, who
was stationed at Geelong for being the father of a child the mother of which he had
led astray in the confessional It is of the short Father Madden that I desire to say
a few words. As mentioned, he was deputed to foim a parish in Richmond. He
went among the Catholics of that suburb, and soon had a plethoric purse, although he
had not the price of a baret a when he under 10 »k the mission. First, he built a fine
two-storey house (for those days) for himself and furnished it well, as he thought it
belter to attend to No. 1 befoie bestowing any attention on his parishioners. The
fact that Christ had not “ win reon to lay His head,” and that Bt. Paul (the greatest
missionary that ever Jived) suffered tenible privations for the benefit of those whom
he sou,lit to convert to the faith, never entered the cranium of little Father Madden,
He wanted a snuggery, and he spe-di y obtained one, and there entertained his friends
in right royal fashion ; for 1 must confess that the average Catholic priest is lavish in
his hospitality. He gets hi-t money easily, and he spends it freely, like “the boys of
Kilkenny, 1 ' as an old song informs us. Father Madden hatl cast his lines in pleasant
p aces, and r aped a rich harvest after the usual method of a priest performing that
op. ration, before he had been a year in charge of the parish of Richmond he applieel
to a wel known moneylender of that and the present day (T. 8.P.) to invest eour
thousand pounds for him on mortgage securities—not badfor one year’s victimizing.
He probdily did not apply to me because he knew that I was Dr. Goold's solicitor,
ami expert d that I might divulge his rapid money making, and then Dr. Goold would
probably have insisted on going “ whacks,” as I have known him to do in other
ca-es . nau is merely my surmise, for Father Madden and I weie always on friendly
terms ; and if he is still living, and this should meet his eye, he will scarcely find
fault with me for having, related this episode in his life. iVly na rative would be
valueless without names and other facts; and if I did not choose Father Madden’s
Richmond career by way of example, I would have had to select for the purpose the
case of some other Victorian priest, for I was acquainted with them all. Father
Madden s is no isolated case ; it is a fair illustration of the course pursued by nearly
all the piiests of the colony, and, for that mat er, of nineteen-twentieths of all the
priests of the world. It is for this reason that some of the greatest men in Europe
have recently declared that “clericalism is one of the greatest evils which afflict
humanity, for it is the main cause of human beggary, want and misery. Victor
Hugo was strong in his denunciations of “clericalism.” He has been termed an
atheist; but not so. Shortly before his death he penned the beautiful sentiment;
“ Our d p ce iscd relatives and friends are not absent, only invisib e.” Those are not
the words of an atheist. Of course I believe in the necessity of the priesthood ;it is
only of its abuses that I complain, and that it in no respect resembles that of
the early days of the church. Father Madden having made his “pile” (as the
Yankees say) obtained his exeat from Dr. Goold, and proceeded to Europe, wheiehe
lived sumptuously, and laughed in his sleeve at his victims.
but perhaps I had best come to my own particular case. With all the loathing
with which I would touch a toad or an asp I proceeil to narrate the details of my own
victimizing by. Dr. Goold, the executors of his will (Dr. Corbett, Archpriest O’Meara,
and John Fitzpatrick), and his successor, Dr. Thomas J. Carr, who, like Goold and
Fitzpatrick, has not a heart the size of a cherrystone. I must condense the facts as
much as possible, for, to give them in full, would require a quarto volume. My claim,
as is well known, is in connection with my father s estate It would be an almost
endless task to detail all the negotiations between Dr. Goold and me for a settlement,
but sufficient of them will appear in the epitome of the letters (which I am about to


give) that were written by me to his .priestly executors, To Dean Donaghy, ami toDr.
Carr, and the truth ok the statements thekein not one ok those persons has
e\ t ek dared to deny. With s iglit and unimportant variations the following was"
written by me to Dr. Carr, Dean Donaghy, and the executors of Dr. Gould s will;
“I wish you to take for granted (the tact is incontostibly proved, and has been admitted inf
Dr. Goold and all other interested part tea) that the debts owed by my father exceeded by many
thousands of pounds the a-sets left by him, and th at therefore there was not a farthing for any legatee
under his will. Not one of his family received a shilling. So far from my getting any of my legacy 1
was personally between two and three, thousand pounds out of pocket in payiny my father's debts
after his decease. The only reason 1 ask you to take these facts for granted is, firstly, because they
are admitted by f riends and foes; and, secondly, because it would require many sheets of paper to
explain all the details. 1 would have to enter into all the particulars of the debts and assets left by my
father. This is unnecessary as the facts arc not in controversy. Now for my claim against Dr. Goold s
estate.
“ Within a few weeks after my father’s death Dr. Goold became importunate for the payment
of the legacies left him in my father’s will. I even then saw that the assets would fall short of the debts,
and so 1 told him, and that none of the legatees would receive a penny. lie contended that the estate
would turn out differently, and still pressed for payment, as he declared he was in want of the money.
On my continuing to refuse to pay him, he asked me if 1 thought that he was good tor the amount. On
my replying in the affirmative, Dr. Goold said that, if 1 would pay him, and the assets should prone
insufficient to pay leyacies, he would return or repay me the amount of his leyaci.es with Jive per cpit.
per annum interest for all the time he held the money. I agreed to this, and he was handed the amount
of his legacies by cheques on the Hank of Victoria , where those cheques are now lying. When it was
conclusively known that the debts exceeded the assets I called uuon Dr. Goold to fulfil his promise or
contract with me, and to return the legacies with interest. He postponed doing so from time to time,
making many excuses, until at length I left for America without his having returned a shilling. After
1 had written him from that country two civil letters requesting repayment, to which he sent no reply,
1 became angry «ith him, and wrote him in terms more emphatic than polite. He then sent me two
hundred pounds on account, and paid my sister, Mrs. Allan of Sale, Gipps Land, one hundred pounds
on my aceou.it On my return to Melbourne, Dr. Goold paid me live hundred pounds more on
account. The receipt and letter which I gave him at the time require explanation, and I must therefore,
in order to make it intelligible, go hack a little. I was concerned as solicitor for Dr. Goold in the
St Patriot’s College swindle, by which he did h ! s creditors out of £B.OOO or £9,000. He told me
that if I cjuld induce the creditors to sign a document exonerating him from liability, he would
see that were paid from some source. I told this to the creditors, and they (poor victims !>
gladly signed such a document, depending on Dr. Goold’s promise to get them paid. He then,
armed with the document, laughei at them. All he did was to order a collection to be made to pay
them, to which he did not contribute sixpence, and the unfortunate creditors only got a small dividend
on their debts. I fell into a similar trap; but I did so only because I got £SOO on account. George
Rnllen, then Dr. Goold’s solicitor, who handed me the money, said that if I would sign a general release,
and (in order to show that there was no ill-feeling between Dr Goold and me) would write him (Dr.
Goold) a note stating that money matters had been settled between us, he, Dr. Goold, would soon
pay me, or get me paid, the balance of the money due. As 1 got £SOO as an earnest of the
genuineness of such promise, 1 signed the release and wrote Dr. Goold such a letter, but did
so under nror.est that the documents should he void unless I was paid the balance due. He
then laughed at me as he had done at the college creditors under similar circumstances, and
triumphantly exhibited the documents which I had signed, but studiously suppressed the promise
under white I had been induced to sign them. I lost little time before applying for payment
of the balance due, and as Dr. Goold shuffled, told lies, and refused to pay (a familiar practice
with him) 1 fi eJ a hill in equity against him. In his answer, made, on oath to that bill, he
virtually admitted that he owed me the balance claimed, for he set up the defence of the-
Statute of Limitations, which was absurd and meaningless if there was no debt to plead it
to. The Statute of Limitations is always considered a dishonest defence, and finds little favor
In courts of law $ It is needless for me to comment on the turpitude of an archbishop settin"
up that defence! What wood he thought of his telling a congregation , from The pulpit, not to


pay a dd’bt If U vraa owinj for more than six years? I venture to say that the cn'y honest
method to pet rid ol a de‘>t is to pay twenty shillings in the pound and interest, even if it
were due for fifty years. la consequence of the Brighton imbroglio the suit never came to
trial. 1 subsequently often applied to Dr. Goold for payment, and all he offered mo was one
hundred pounds a year for ray life, whi;h I promptly refused, as I did not want payment in that
shape. I offered to accept the compromise sum of fifteen hundred pounds in full for the
balance due, which he was willing to pay; but he (jot bad advice from Dr. Fitzpatrick and
others on the subject. Dr. G fold's own solicitor, Dullen, advised him to pay ins the £1,500.
Whether or no Bullen would tell the truth as to wlut transpired, when ho paid me tho £SOO
on account, Ido not know. He probab y would not do so, as he is well known not to be
•veracious. But I am in a position to prove by unimpeachable evidence that he advised Dr.
Goold ts pay me the £1,50), which he would never have done if he had not informed me,
when he handed me the £SOO, that the balance would he paid soon after 1 had signed the
documents mentioned. [I have a threat deal to say about Bullen-s conduct when he was
my articled clerk, how I spared him because his family was connected with mine by marriage,
to.; but I must defer all this until the next edition of this pamphlet.) So the matter
stands at present, Tho balance actually due from Dr. Goold’s estate to my father’s estate
(I am the sole surviving trustee and executor of my father’s will) it about four thousand
pounds, for which, as stated, 1 have offered to accept the compromise sum of fifteen hundred
pounds."
Many gentlemen of standing, some of them Protestant clergymen, have
exerted their influence with the executors of Dr. Goold’s will, wi’h Dean Douaghy, and
with Dr. Carr to obtain me a settlement. Dr. Cakr is responsible to me because
HE IS A LARGE DEVISEE AND LEGATEE UNDER Dk. GooLU’s WILL. Debts must be paid
before devises and bequests, on the familiar principle that a testator must ha just
before he is generous. This is both sound law and common sense. The amount for
which I am willing to sett'e is only a tiifle compared with the assets lift by Dr.
Goold, and a large portion of which has passed into the bauds of Dr. Carr, Under
THE CIRCUMSTANCES DETAILED A COURT OF EQUITY WOULD FOLLOW ASSETS INTO THE
HANDS OF ANY PERSON POSSESSING THEM, IN ORDER TO COMPEL PAYMENT OF A DEBT.
Therefore, I repeat, that Dk. Carr, as well as the executors, is liable for
my claim. This doctrine is familiar to every member of the legal profession. Dean
Douaghy (who came very near b ing Dr. Goold's suoesor, and who therefore ought
to have great influence with Dr. Carr) is favorable to my being paid the £1,500. He
and I have repeatedly debated the nut'er, and he several times promised to do his
best to get me paid. Moreover, he has never denied to me or others, to whom he has
spoken on the subject, that the money is due. He professed to take a lively interest
in the matter, and asked me for full particulars of my claim, which I gave him both
in wilting and verbally. He likewise lequested me to write the paiticulars to Dr.
Corbett, now bishop of Sale, one of the executors of Dr. Goold’s will, and I did so.
Corbett and Fitzpatrick are, I am informed, the main obstacles to a settlement of
my claim. I fixed the compromise sum of £1,500 that low because I was and am
anxious to shake the dust of Victoria off my feet and to return to America. Here
I cannot practice my faith, as the Catholic religion, as administered in this
archdiocese, is a mere sham and travesty on the name, there being nothing but a
“ game of grab ” and scramble among the priests for money, and the Catholic Church
in this colony is nothing but a huge money-making institution.
Dean Douaghy trifled w ith me for a long time, and I found that I w'as as far
off as ever from obtaining payment. During my negotiations with him many persons
informed me that he w r as acting towards me with deceit and duplicity, and at length
I could no longer close my eyes to that fact. I think it was Lafitte who declared
that he had never been deceived in any man unless he allowed him to “explain
himself away.” That was my feeling regarding Dean Douaghy. If I had acted on
my limited knowdedge of physiognomy (as acquired from Lavater) I would never
have had anything to say to that person, as he possesses a most artful, insincere and


sinister cast of countenance. When I could no longer doubt his ambidextrous
dealing with ,me I wrote him a letter, from which the following are extracts :
“If I condescend to write to you again it is mainly to tell you that, although I was
for some time unaware of your duplicity, I am no longer deceived in you. lam fully informed
of your doubledealing with me, I pass over your discourtesy in connection with my letters to
you, one or two of which were written at your own request, as was likewise one which I
sent to Dr. Corbett. 1 find that I was quite mistaken in offering you thanks in a recent note
for your ”, (supposed) “ efforts to obtain me payment of my legal and equitable claim against
D r . Goold’s estate, for which debt the executors are responsible to me, as is also Dr. Carr, as he holds
assets belonging to the estate. All persons to whom I have spoken on the subject ridicule the idea
that you could not, if so inclined, get me paid. They say (and very reasonably) that as you came
very near being Dr, Goold’s successor, and that as Dr. Carr won the position by a fluke, he
would not think of refusing your request, if sincerely and earnestly made, to pay me the
compromise sum which I am willing to accept, and which is only a little more than a third
of what is due. You have only to tell Dr. Carr what you virtually told me, namely, that if
you occupied his position, which by right should be the case (as your appointment to this
archdiocese was made by the Pope and cabled to Melbourne) you would unhesitatingly liquidate
my claim. If Dr. Goold had lived a few weeks longer you would now be archbishop of
Melbourne, and I should long ago have been paid, that is, if you were sincere in what you told
me. If you have any respect for your word I call upon you to fulfil your solemn promise,
made to me more than once, to do your best to get me paid, and let me embark for America.”
* ■ * * “I will not at present do you the wrong to suppose that you have such a convenient
memory as that which Dr. Goold possessed. In my money dealings with him he could always
remember what enured to his own interest; but he was delightfully and charmingly oblivious
to facts which adva staged me and others. As bearing more or less on my claim against his
estate it is only proper to unfold a little of his true character. He swindled the creditors of
St. Patrick’s College out of £S,OJO or £l,OOO. He swindled me. He swindled Father Edward O’Dwyer
out of two and a half years’ salary. He tried to swindle Father Stack, but the latter compelled
him to pay by legal process, and was silenced and suspended from the performance of his
priestly functions for having dared to insist on payment of what was due him. He, Dr, Goold,
swindled the Very Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, who told me so in San Francisco. He, Dr. Goold
swindle! Father Niall. Poor Father Niall! There was not a better little priest in Victoria until
Dr. Goold made him a drunkard. The two of them, as Father Niall informed me, were in the
habit of inducing in drunken orgies together. Father Niall sunk deeper and deeper until he
became thoroughly demoralized; and (oh, infamy of infamies) he, a Catholic priest, was at
length tried, convicted and sentenced in the Supreme Court, Melbourne, for an unnatural crime
with a negro! This stupendous misfortune he attributed to Dr. Goold. He, Dr. Goold, swindled
Mr. Randall, who exposed the swindle, over his signature, in The Melbourne Argus. The Very
Rev. Dr. Barry, once President of St. Patrick’s Coilege, exposed some of Dr. Goold’s swindles
in The Melbourne Herald, then a morning paper. But enough on that score. I therefore am
not a solitary victim I may remind you that the Catholics of Melbourne petitioned Pope Pius
the Ninth for the removal of Dr. Goold from this diocese (it was not then an archdiocese,
and the pallium had not yet been trailed in the mire here as it was subsequently) on several
grounds, among them being dishonesty. Although I was not at the time on speaking terms with
Dr. Goold, on account of his bad conduct towards me in a certain matter, I refused to sign
the petition, on hearing which he sought to mike up with me (to which I assented) his
medium being his factotum John Fitzpatrick. Would that I had refused to renew Dr. Goold’s
acquaintance, for then I should not have incurred odium and financial ruin by having my
name associated with his in connection with the college swindle. By the way, when 1 informed
von of my losses in connection with that odious affair, you coolly remarked that I might have
refused to act as Dr. Goold’s solicitor in the matter. What a wretched remark for you to
make; a Protestant .would term it ‘Jesuitical.’ I cannot trust myself to comment on that
observation or opinion of yours. Was I to desert my own client? All I could do was to
give him good advice, which I did, nemely, to pay the college debts, for which I informed


him he was legally and morally liable. He declined to pay those debts, and I wrongfully got
the credit, or discredit, of having advised him to shirk’his pecuniary responsibilities—an atrocious
falsehood.” * * * “It is folly for Hr. Carr to seek to avoid his liability to pay me out of
the assets which he holds under Dr. Goold’s will, or to seek to shelter himself, so to speak,
behind the testator, somewhat
‘As a chess king, ensconsed within his nook,
Throws out his pawns, and skulks behind a rook.’
For the life of me I cannot see why Dr. Carr withholds my money from me, or why you do
not insist on payment being made. Has the moral code been abrogated? If you have done
your best to get me paid, according to your promise, let you drop me a line to that effect, and
I will believe you. If you refuse that very reasonable request, you cannot blame me for
crediting what I have recently heard to the contrary. All I want is to get at the truth of
the matter, in order that there may be no misstatement about D in my forthcoming pamphlet,
if I shall bo driven to expose the vile treatment with which I have met in this black
transaction.”
No reply was vouchsafed by Dean Donaghy to that letter, or to any other
-communication which I addressed on the subject to him, Carr, Corbett, O’Meara or
Fitzpatrick, although, as will present y be seen, Dr. Carr did send a sidy answer to
■a certain gentleman, a clergyman of the Church of England, who had written to him
telling him that he ought t > pay me I miy remark that that policy of “silence ”
(regarding letters w Inch cannot, without damage to the recipients, be logically and
truthfully answered, and tbe statements in which are indisputable) is almost
universal among the hierarchy of the Catholic Church. They, perhaps with the
wisdom of the serpent, profess to treat with contempt that which they cannot truth-
fully answer except to their own detriment, l .have known this course to be pursued
•on numerous occasions by Dr. Go Li and many of Ins priests ; and the cowardly
policy of “silence” is even recommended in Catholic theological works. “ What
you cannot answer to your own benefit, don’t try to answer ”is the poltroonery advice
.given, ihe “ silence ”of Dr. Carr and of the executors of Dr. Goold s will, properly
interpreted, means, as passing in the minds of those pe sons : “ We know that we owe
O’Farrell this money, but we will say noth ng about it; nor will we, if he writes us
a thousand letters, reply to one of them. Let him go to law with us if he likes ; but
we know that he has not funds for the purpose, and, if he had, our larger means and
influence would defeat him.” Such is virtually the bravado of theina.i from Galway
and his local backers. After Dr. Carr had jeft Galway some poor priest commenced
legal proceedings against him for an act of alleged injustice. Cf course the poor
priest lost the case, as lie could not successfully contend against the heavy metal
brought to bear against him. So it is with me. It would be vain and futile for me
to pit poverty and right against mi. lit, influence and money bags. Goold and Co. have
•acted in my case, and- doubtless in scores of o'hers, on the new “rule of three,”
“ addition, division and silence,” which forms the code of morals c f the Government
.and other “lings ” in the United States. Whatever may be said to the contrary,
there is one law for the rich and another for the poor ; and the Lirsc NapAeous
•apophthegm, that God is alwayson the sideof tin t army which pos esses the luavicst
artillery, ii equally applicable to legal contests.
As s'ated, Dr. Carr sent a reply to a Church of England clergyman, the Rev.
H.S., who had urged the former to pay my just claim. A lamer, more illogic.l or
more puerile reply has never been penned. It sets out by saying that if my claim
were a just one he, Dr. Carr, would pay me without the interference of any third
person. In the second paiagiaph he declares that he received only a small amount
of property (specially mentioning household furniture, carriages &c ) under Dr.
Goold’s will, and, to quote from the letter, “hence even if Mr. O’Farrell lias any
claim against the estate, I am not in a position either to consider or to satisfy that
•claim.” See the sophistry of that argument. Dr. Carr admLs having received
some PKOi’EBTY from Dr. Goold s estate. Why did he not oiler to apply it pro
tanto tow’ards payment of what is due me ? Half a loaf is better than no bread.


But, forsooth, because the articles he mentions, “furniture, carriages,” &c., are
insufficient to realise enough to pay me, he .declares : “ I am not in a position
either to consider or satisfy that claim I” In point of fact, I should he very glad to
accept in payment of my debt half the value of what Dr. Carr received from Dr.
Could s estate. The one word “ consider,” used by Dr. Carr, tells the whole story.
Be my claim just or unjust he refuses even to “consider” it, and that, too, after
having said in the fiist paragraph of the same letter that if my claim were a just one
lie would pay it without the interference of any third person ! Dr. Carr then goes,
on to say that if 1 please I may go to law' with him—the defiance of might against
right, llow can he question the justice of my claim when he refuses even to
“ consider ” it ?
To that unique letter (which is in my posse-sion open to the inspection of any
person) although not adtlressed to me, I sent Dr. Carr a reply on the loth of last
December. I make the following extracts from that reply :
“The Rev. H.S. has just favored me with a perusal of your note to him of the 9th instant anen^
my affairs. I lose not a moment to say that if your Grace had taken the trouble to inquire into the
nature of my claim against the estate of the late Archbishop Goold and your Grace, you would never
have penned such a self-stultifying answer to Mr. S.’s communication. You haye manifestly been
badly advised in the whole business.” * * * “I have neither time to write, nor has your Grace
time to read, the oft-repeated particulars of my claim qua executor. They have been written and
rewritten to Monrignor Fitzpatrick, to Dr. Corbett, and to Dean Oonaghy usque ad nauseam, and you
can avail yourself of all those sources of information without my shedding any more ink or wasting
another quire of paper over the matter. Moreover, a few days after your arrival in Melbourne I gave
you notice of my claim and some particulars of it, to which you made no reply. It is idle and
nonsensical for your Grace to contend that you are not responsible for the debt.” * * * “ Von well
know that I do not possess the means of entering on what might he very protracted litigation with your
firacf and t v ‘'n-eforp the little falsely triumphant (I am tempted to say cowardly) flourish which you
make on the suoject snould have been omitted from your note. If I had the requisite means to sue-
you I would soon compel you to pay me.”
In one of my letters to Dr. Carr, and in s veral of my communications to Dean
Donavhy and the executors of Dr. Goold’s will, I offered to submit my claim to
arbitration ; but that pi ©position did not suit those men ;it w r as too fair and liberal
a suggestion for them to agree to ; it would deprive them of the unfair advantage
which their money gives them over my impecuuiosity, The men would do nothing
that was just, equitable or honorable. 'J he extracts given from my letters, and
explanations, furnish the reader with a sufficient knowledge and insight into the
mcri s of my claim without my burdening these pages with copies in extenso of all
my communications addressed to Dr. Goold, L)v Carr, Dean Ponaghv and the
executors on the subject, in which there "was necessarily much repetition of facts and
arguments. In all, Dr. Goold made me three payments, aggregating eight hnndied
pounds, on account. Before he made one of those payments he unscrupulously,
vigoiously and unblnshingly denied that he owed me a penny. But all persons who
knew Ur. Goold will bear witness to his intense love of mon y his miserly, covetous,
avaricious disposition, and that he was about the last m m in the world to part with a
shilling unless he owed it. I ask the candid reader, won d Dr. Goold ha* e made me
those i hree payments on account unless he was in my debt? V\ onld lie. in pa\ inent of
the balance which I claimed, have offered me £!00 a year for my life uni ss lie was in
my debt ? Would lie, after he had paid me the £BOO on account, and when 1 sued him
for the balance (hut as mentioned, the case was never tried) have pleaded as a defence
the Statute of Limitations unless he was in my debt? Would his then s< lieitor.
Bullen, have advised him to pay me the compromise sum of £i,ooo fur th balance due
unless he was in my debt? All these facts are indisputable Tluee solicitors-
(Grcs=on, Gillott and Motile) were witnesses to Dr. Goold’s offer to pay me £IOO a
year for my life by way of compromise for the balance due. If I had accepted tl at
offer, but I spurned it, there would now Le nearly four years of the annuiiv in art ear g


but I have not received a penny since payment of the £SOO on account, although Dr.
Goold would have paid ine the £1,500, in satisfaction of the balance due, if he had not
been prevented from doing so by the crafty priests, pettifoggers and toadies who had
his ear, and who knew that he liked to be advised not to part with a farthing.
(Several priests have sent me word that they know the money is due to me ; and
probably the most respected priest in Victoria, the Very Rev, Dean O’H., who has
known me for between thirty and forty years, told Mr. R. C. Gresson, solicitor, 48
Queen street (whom he knew was acting for me) to tell me not to accept £1,500, or
less than £2,000, as a compromise for the balance due me. Throughout my negotiations
with Dr. Goold he had wretched legal advice. He dismissed his solicitor, Bullen, as
not meriting his salt. Then he. Dr. Goold, consecutively applied to two solicitors of
standing to attend to the business, but they both refused (no doubt having the fear of
my fate before their eyes) to have anything to do with him. 'i hey knew that there
was neither honor nor profit in such a connection. He then had to fall back
on the “ services” of a Police Court practitioner, who of course felt proud at having
an archbishop for his client. It perhaps was an improvement—but a very slight one
—on having the usual run of rogues and vagabonds to defend.
As has been stated, a great many gentlemen, Catholics and Protestants, who
believe in the righteousness of my claim, have exerted their influence with Dr. Carr,
Dean Donaghy, and the executors of Dr. Goold’s will to procure me payment. Several
of the gentlemen referred to have shown me copies of the letters which they had
addressed to those callous individuals. As a sample of those letters I insert the
following. It was addressed to Dr. Carr on the 17th of January last by Mr. W. J.D.,
one of the oldest and most respected residents of Melbourne :
“ I trust that your Grace will excuse me for briefly addressing you, under the following
circumstances, without the formality of an introduction.
“ I am not a Roman Catholic, but a liberal Protestant. I have sufficient respect for our
common Christianity to abhor such disclosures as, to the scandal of religion, I hear will be made in Mr.
P. O’Farrell’s announced pamphlet entitled ‘ Priests and Their Victims.’ I have known him for nearly
orty years, and, whatever his misfortunes may have been, I think him quite incapable of making an
unjust pecuniary demand against any human being, much less against his own archbishop. Moreover,
I am told by many persons, who are well informed upon the subject, that Mr. O’Parrell’s claim against
the late Archbishop Goold’s estate is eminently legal and equitable, as it is now against j our Grace as
the possessor of large assets from the estate of your predecessor. I would have supposed that Mr.
O’Farrell’s ruinous losses in connection with his church, especially in relation to the affairs of St.
Patrick’s College, would have caused j'our Grace not to be too critical regarding his claim, although I
hear that he courts the fullest investigation into it, and has even offered j’our Grace to submit it to
arbitration, as you know that he does not possess the means of establishing his rights in a court of law.
Is it fair for you to refuse to submit the matter to arbitration ? Is it just to take advantage of his
poverty, and that, too, after the many thousands of pounds which, in his prosperous days, he donated
to his church ?
“ If the pamphlet mentioned shall be published I think that it will create not only a great
sensation but a widespread sympathy for Mr. O’Farrell, and will probably gain him a public
subscription, at the same time that it will cause a bitter feeling against those who have treated him so
badlj'.
“ I hear that he is anxious to return to America. Would it not be well for j’our Grace to pay
him, and let him depart in peace V”
Mr. D. informed me that he had received no reply to that letter ; the old
policy of “ silence,” That simple act of civility or courtesy is not within the range
of the Carr philosophy. He lived too long and ruled too long in cold Galway to
appreciate or act up to the amenities of our “ sunny south.” It is not long since
Galway was the most lawless and distracted of all the counties of “ the island of
■saints,” So difficult was it to arrest malefactors or to execute civil process in that
county, it became a proverb there that “the king’s or queen's writ does not run in
Galway.” It is a pity that that mercurial spot of “God’s green earth” was ever


deprived of the services of the holy and righteous Thomas J. Carr, and that he was
ever pitchforked into this colony. The truth is that the Australian colonies have of
late been overrun with clericals from Ireland, who use interest to be allowed to come
hither to make what must appear to them “ miraculous draughts of fishes,”
Victoria is really worth in a year to Dr. Carr as much as Galway would be worth to
him in all his life, and he brings in his train a lot of priestly adventurers who, like
himself, know nothing of the antecedents, the present wants, or the future require-
ments of this colony. There are at least twenty-five priests in Victoria, any one of
whom, having been educated in and grown up witli the place, and knows its Catholic
history, would make a vastly superior archbishop for the colony than Dr. Carr.
These facts are unknown to the Pope, who allows himself to be cajoled into appointing
ambitious and money-making Irish clericals to high positions in these colonies, for
which those ecclesiastics are totally unfitted. What is the remedy? I know of
none, unless I were to express myself too radically for the present age. 0 that some
enlightened despot could govern the earth for five years ! He would make the
world better worth living in. As regards Catholic clerical rule in Victoria I can
only lament with Shakspere (Macbeth):
,r Can such things be,
And overcome us like a summer cloud,
Without our special wonder
Ireland, or Irishmen in any part of the world, have little reason to be grateful
to any-of the Popes. One of them made a present of the island to England ; but,
thank Heaven, the temporal wings of the Pope have been clipped. While money
flows in a steady stream from Ireland to Rome, the Italians retain for themselves
nearly all the grand prizes of the church. Of the two hundred and fifty odd
Popes, since Christ’s visible appearance on earth, there never has been an Irish
Pope, and only one Englishman (Adrian the Fourth) has sat in the Papal chair.
Nearly all the Popes have been Italians or Frenchmen ; and until the present
century was about half over there was never even an Irish Cardinal. When, in
the early days of the church, the Popes were elected by popular suffrage, like our
members of Parliament, a better choice was made than is done nowadays by the
College of Cardinals. As for the priests, who arrogantly term themselves the
“hereditary advisers of the Irish,” they equally, merit the designation of
“hereditary robbers” of that nationality; and, as a body, they have always
baulked and frustrated the national aspirations of Irishmen, as also the present
Pope, who is'a tool of England, is now doing. He is persecuting Irish
patriots, refusing them absolution, &c. A Pope the puppet of the Protestant
Government of England ! What a miserable, humiliating spectacle ! The Irish
bishops have given his Holiness a good healthy snub. 1 here are of course many
honorable, patriotic exceptions among the Irish hierarchy. For instance, there
has never lived a purer patriot than Dr. Walsh, the present Archbishop of
Dublin, who, although rather small of stature, is gigantic in intellect, and who, in
the words of a poet, is a
“ Man of large mind but more expansive heart.”
In him are combined all those virtues and attributes which “give the world
assurance of a man.” (Shakspere). Vvhat a providential escape Dublin had from
having Moran as its archbishop ! Compared with Archbishop Walsh how dwarfed
and utterly insignificant appear Moran, Goold and Carr ! And what is to be said
of such small fry as Corbett of Sale, Fitzpatrick, Hegarty. England, O’Callaghan of
Coburg, &c ? It is scarcely belittling them to term them ecclesiastical microbes.
Cardinal Moran has moreover made himself additionally obnoxious by advocating
Chinese immigration. He does so mainly on the ground that the Celestial Empirites
are thrifty, and that but for them we should be short of vegetables ! Does the
Cardinal’s historic research extend to the time when western Europe was threatened
with invasion and devastation by vast hordes of Goths and Huns ; and has he the
acumen to discern that Australia might easily be sw r amped by millions of Chinese


without their being missed from the four hundred millions of the Flowery Laud ’
This EN PASSANT.
When that great and good man, Andrew Johnson, succeeded Abraham Lincoln
as President of the United States, his admirers presented him with a magnificent
carriage and span of fine horses, but he refused the gift, remarking that, if his
salary as President was insufficient to enable him to purchase a carriage and pair,
he would travel on foot. Tims Mr. Johnson pursued a noble, manly, independent
course; how different from that of Dr, Carr concerning a carriage &c., after his
arrival in Melbourne ! The latter is supposed to be familiar with the Bible.
Does he bear in mind that St. Paul (who had no private means to fall back on)
during his herculean labors refused to accept a penny for his support, much less
would he have accepted carriages, horses, harness and bags of gold ? Notwith-
standing his arduous and exhausting work, the stripes and imprisonment he
received, and suffering as he was from a wasting disease, he found time to earn
his own living at his trade, that of a tentmaker. Alas, for the degeneracy and
selfishness of Catholic ecclesiastics ! “ Grab, grab, grab ”is the only game played.
I now come to a portion of my narrative which it is most distasteful for
me to write, because it may subject me to the pharisaical charge of boasting of
one’s meritorious works. But those who know me will judge of this part of my
little pamphlet in a different spirit, and will give me credit for making the
following references only for the genuine motive intended, namely, to show the
ingratitude towards me of Drs. Goold and Carr and the executors of the former’s
will, and Dean Donaghy. The mysterious ways of Providence have never been
more strikingly illustrated than in the fact that such men are permitted to occupy
places of authority. But, indeed, we have only to bear in mind that the
Almighty permits all sorts of evils and wrongs to be perpetrated. His ways
are truly inscrutable. From the time that I was admitted to practice as an
attorney (1851) I acted as Dr. Goold’s solicitor, and for a long series of years
transacted his business (principally conveyancing) “free, gratis and for nothing”
except “costs out of pocket.” He consulted me in all his schemes for raising
money for church and kindred purposes, schools, clergymen’s dwellings, convents,
&c. From the time that I was admitted to practice my business, was large,
partly on account of the popularity of my father, and partly because I had purchased
the good-will of the extensive conveyancing business of Mr. T. B. Payne, who then had
his fortune made, and who is now one of Melbourne’s millionaires. My practice soon
netted me £6,000 a year, and I made about £4,000 more per annum by speculations
in land, principally in purchases from the Government, and I believe that few
names appear oftener than mine on the Government maps of the period. 1 perhaps
got credit for making more money than I was really earning. At all events 1 had to
keep open house for the priests, and scarcely a day passed that they did not get
from me one or more cheques, not one of which was for less than five guineas,
and they ranged up to a hundred pounds. In a comparatively short period I
found by my bank books that such cheques aggregated more than £6,000. They
are now lying in the Bank of Victoria, Melbourne, open to the inspection of any
person. A lot more of such paid cheques ‘(the collective amount of which Ido
not know) are now tying in the Colonial Bank of Australasia, Melbourne, where
I also banked.
Dr. Goold and his priests made considerable drafts on my time and attention,
when time literally meant money to me, and had no consideration for me (what
priest has ever had consideration for a man under similar circumstances ?) but
only for their own selfish purposes. Of this I need give only one illustration.
When Dr. Goold imported his first batch of nuns into the colony, he located
them in one of Ins two-storey houses on Nicholson street, but he informed me
that means must be obtained to enable them to purchase premises for themselves.


, ,
As that was the period when the gold fever was at its height in Victoria, and
money was as plentiful as pavingstones, I suggested the holding of a “ monster
bazaar ” on behalf of the nuns, to which he assented, and saddled me with the
onus of making all the arrangements for the undertaking. This, off and on,
occupied weeks of my time to the neglect of my practice and my clients’ affairs.
Two or three times a week I had to preside at meetings of the ladies who had consented
to hold stalls at the bazaar. I engaged from the Government the immense Exhibition
Building on William street, and had to comply with the Government’s requirements,
such as insuring the structure from destruction or damage by fire, laying on water,
&c. I likewise had to superintend the erection of the stalls, and of a stage, to
attend to the engagement of vocal and instrumental performers, and a host of
other matters, “too numerous to mention,” as the auctioneers say. I found,
moreover, that 1 had to contribute nearly two hundred pounds towards the purchase
of fancy articles. The enterprise was eminently successful, and netted nearly five
thousand pounds. This enabled the nuns to purchase that tine property known as
Abbotsford, on the left bank of the Yarra, which is now probably worth twenty
thousand pounds. The title was a troublesome and expensive one, and, as
usual, I made it out for nothing, except “costs out of pocket,” and never
received a word of thanks from either Dr. Goold or his nuns. He certainly
showed me considerable hospitality, and invited me to dine with him two or
three times a week on an average, and generally placed me next himself at
table. But I would gladly have dispensed with much of his hospitality, as,
-his dinner hour being three o’clock, most of my afternoon office work was sadly
intei'fered with every week day that I dined at “ the palace.” *
Dr. Goold was very unscrupulous as to how he enriched himself. On the plea
that he required it as a suburban residence for the students of St, Patrick’s College
■during the long summer vacation, he persuaded me to let him have at c-st price'
(about £120) a valuable tract of land in the Parish of Prahran, which I desired
to hold as an investment, and which is now woith many thousands of pounds. Ho
obtained the property from me under false pretences, as he never devoted it to the
purpose mentioned, but retained it as an investment for himself. One or two more
instances and I have done with this branch of the subject.
A client of mine, Mr. John Carfrae, a Protestant, desired to make provision
for two poor orphan boys. He consulted me in the matter, and I suggested that he
should place them in Dr. Goold’s Catholic Orphan Asylum, 1 spoke to Dr. Goold on
the subject, and he informed me that his usual charge, when persons were in a
position to pay, for receiving a boy into the asylum was £l5O. Mr. Carfrae
authorised me to accept those terms, and I handed Dr. Goold my own”cheque
for £3OO for the two boys, which cheque is now lying in the Bank of Victoria,
and can be proved to have been paid in to Dr. Goold’s private account. I
subsequently discovered that the asylum was A free institution, partly supported
by the Government and partly by public subscriptions, that no charge had ever
been made or was authorised or justified for the reception of a boy, and that, in
plain language, the £3OO had been obtained by Dr. Goold from Mr. Carfrae, through
me, under false pretences, and pocketed by himself ! On Mr. Carfrae ascertaining


this state of facts he called on me to return him the £3OO, and I did so. I requested
Dr. Goold to refund the money to me, but he only laughed at me. It would not
have paid me to go to law with him, so that I lost the £3OO, which form no portion
of my present claim against his estate. Is it any wonder that such a man would
swindle me out of the money which he owed, and his successor and executors now
owe, my father’s estate ?
One day, while dining with him, Dr. Goold informed me that the building
fund of St. Patrick’s Cathedral was very low, and he asked me if I could devise any
means of “ raising the wind” over and above the ordinary monthly collection in the
churches for the purpose. I immediately suggested that he should sell “ life seats,”
(not pews, but sitting room for one person) for twenty pounds each, which I told him
would probably not lessen the ordinary collection at the doors. He agreed to the
proposition, as lie almost invariably coincided with my financial suggestions, and the
idea was at once acted on. In order to give the enterprise a start I there and then
subscribed for five life seats, and handed in my cheque for £lOO. In a few days two
thousand pounds were collected in this manner, without lessening the door receipts-
by a sixpence. A small brass plate with the donor’s name was affixed on the ledge
in front of every seat. Nearly all the brass plates have since been removed on
account of ths death of the donors, while those fronting mj five seats were removed
at my own request, made to Dr. Goold, w'hen I found that he had determined to
swindle me out of the money which he owed my father’s estate. I disassociated my
tame from his as much as possible.
It is no part of the design of this little publication to explain how 1 fell from
comparative wealth to poverty. But I must mention the principal cause as it forms
an important factor of this pamphlet. I acted, as mentioned, as the solicitor of Dr.
Goold in what is generally known in this colony as “the St. Patrick’s College
swindle.” The college is built on the same Government land grant as the
archbishop's palace, only a few feet of ground separating the structures. Dr. Goold
made himself responsible for all the supplies furnished the college, and was so
debited in all the tradesmen’s books. If the college had been prosperous, that is,
making money, he, Dr. Goold, would have claimed every farthing of profit for his
own pocket. But the college was a losing concern and ran behind, and got into
financial difficulties. Then Dr. Goold repudiated the whole business ; declared that
the head teacher (who was penniless) was responsible for the debts ; and compelled
him to commit perjury by fathering the debts and getting a whitewash of all the
liabilities in the Court of Insolvency! What wretched, detestable dishonesty and
trickery. The unfortunate tradesmen, butchers, bakers, grocers, clothiers, &c.,
lost between £B,OOO and £9,000. It may be asked, why did they not sue Dr. Goold
for their debts ? Simply because, with one exception, they were all Catholics, and :
they were afraid to sue the bishop (he was not then archbishop) lest they should lose
all their customers and be boycotted. As mentioned in a previous page, I advised
Dr, Goold to pay those debts ; but when, pn his own responsibility, he refused to do
so, I got the credit of having advised him to repudiate his liability in the matter.
The result was (not to weary the reader witli minute particulars) that nearly all my
Catholic clients, including some priests, withdrew their business from me, and my


practice fell'O'fF from about £O,OOO a year net to less than £I,OOO per annum, a loss of
£5,000 a year. At what should I gross that loss:? Ido not know as 1 am not an
actuary. But say, for the sake of argument, that my practice w r as worth four years’
purchase, the loss of £5,000 a year totaled £20,000. I informed Dr. Goold that he
owed me that amount as a moral debt, but of course I made no legal claim for it,
and it is no part of my present contention. Unfortunately, Dr. Goold refused to pay
his legal indebtedness, much less would he satisfy his moral obligations, I seek only
for.my legal claim as executor against his estate, or of such smaller sum as lam
willing to accept by way of compromise.
After having sustained that serious loss, and after all I had done fur the
church as narrated, what will be said of the ingratitude of Dr. Goold, who refused to
pay me the comparatively small compromise sum which I was agreeable to take in
full satisfaction of the £l,OOO or so which he owed my father’s estate ? And what
will be said of the ingratitude of Dr. Goold’s personal representatives, and of his
successor, who in defiance of law, of the noble sentiment of gratitude, of public
opinion, and respect for ths honor of the church and the gospel they preach, refuse
to pay me? Catholic colonists well know how Dr. Goold hugged the golden calf to
his heart, and the love of mammon exhibited by his executors, and indeed by nearly
all priests. But before his arrival something better was expected from Dr,
Carr. Many of my friends declared that he would be certain to pay me. He is,
however, according to the opinion of all Catholics with whom I have conversed on the
subject, a miserable failure as the head of this archdiocese. He lacks administrative
ability and other essentials for the position, and commenced his career in Melbourne
in a fashion which his own priests had to check. He is not a mm of ideas or
progress. If in my last pamphlet, and in this present one, I have expressed myself
fearlessly and boldly it is only because I keenly feel the illegal, ungrat ful, I may add
barbarous treatment which I have experienced from Dr. Goold, his successor, and the
executors of the former's will. Although but one man, and a poor man at that,
opposed to several men, and they wealthy, I feel that the integrity of my mind and
heart rende:s me, in one sense, a match for them ; and that each of my debtors and
persecutors (considering the quality of mind and heart which he has exhibited in the
matter) cuts but a bald and sorry figure before the public ken. As Shaksperc says :
“ What broader breastplate than a heart untaint ?
Thrice is he armed who hath hi* quarrel just,
And he but naked, though encased in steel,
Whose conscience by injustice is corrupt.”
I have never envied the conscience of Dr. Goold, and I do not envy the conscience of
Dr. Carr, Corbett or Fitzpatrick, who have treated me so shamefully. I close, for
the present, the narrative of my victimising by the two archbishops and the executors
of the will of one of them. Dr. Carr declared in a public speech, soon after his
arrival in Melbourne, that he would endeavor to walk in the footsteps of his
predecessor, Goold. So far he, Dr, Carr, has faithfully kept his word in that respect,
as I and others have reason to regret. When Dr. Goold refused to pay me
and others, the populace, as he walked the streets, shouted to him “ pray your debts !


pay your debts!” Several gentlemen have recently ex pressed their opinion to me
that Dr. Carr would probably be gieeted in public in a similar manner unless lie pays
me what he owes me. “ Archpriest ” O’Meara (whom several Catholics to his face
called “archfiend” for his refusing, as one of the executors of Dr. Goold’s will, to
advocate payment of my claim) who is in his dishonored grave, and who left money,
(five shillings per Mass) to pay for the celebration of three hundred Masses for the
repose of his soul, will probably require three thousand more Masses to get his soul
out of purgatory, if it is not in the grip of the devil, for his share in my victimizing.
But enough for the present about these men and my own wrongs.
A numerous class of priests’ victims are those who are on their deathbed, and
this unfortunate condition of our lot is ceaseless. What are known as “ sick calls ”
come in at all hours of the day and night, and the priests take their turns in
attending to them. Archbishop Goold did so when he was a priest in Sydney ; but
since his consecration (1848) he has never been known to attend a poor person on his
or her deathbed, or to be absent, within the sphere of his operations, from the death
chamber of a wealthy individual. My father was thought to be rich (and he would
have died well off but for the ruinous speculations into which he had been led by
T. B. Payne and others when his mind was weakened from illness during the last year
of his life) and Dr. Goold was assiduous in his attentions to him in his last sickness.
He, Goold, was so importunate to be bequeathed money that his importunity
was supposed to have hastened my father’s death ; and his body was scarcely
cold before Dr. Goold insisted on hearing the will read. God knows that I would
not publish a word of untruth concerning a man during his life or after his demise.
If 1 mention these occurrences it is not by way of slur on Dr. Goold’s memory, but
merely as matters of fact and as illustrative of the conduct of archbishops, bishops
and priests under similar circumstances. Priests reap an enormous and almost daily
harvest from dying Catholics. A familiar p. overb sav s that a drowning man clutches
atastiaw. A person, during a fatal illness, may be placed in the same category.
He knows that the world is s ipping from beneath his feet, that he is about to pass
from the shadow of the sick chamber into the darkness of death, and he grasps at the
hope of after-death life. The inevitable priest is on hand and offers all the religious
consolation in his power ; but while he does so he rarely neglects to attend to his
own interests. He reminds the dying man of the claims of the church, of the
necessity of making it bequests. The priest asks to be left money for himself, money
for Masses, money to save the dying person's soul from hell or to’ get it out of
purgatory. Such appeals to the fast-ebbing life are irresistible. Aso icitor is called
in; a will or codicil is prepared and executed; the priest administers the last
sacrament, Extreme Unction ; the man dies ; the priest departs in a happy frame of
mind ; the lawyer gets his fees ; and let irs charitably hope that the soul of the
victim has given hell and purgatory the go by, and has been fairly and safe'y landed
in the bosom of Abraham. In my younger days, when Iwas in full law practice, I
have taken my part in such scenes, and have sometimes been requested to invest on
mortgage securities the priests’ money gained under such circumstances.
If Parliament were fully cognizant of such daily practised frauds I believe it


would enact a law to prevent the priestly Jeremy Diddlers from so fleecing their
victims. I take leave to say, in the interests of our common humanity, that there
is no difference in turpitude between a priest taking money on the false pretence that
he can apply it towards getting a soul out of purgatory, aud the common swindler
who is prosecuted for obtaining money or goods under false pretences; and there
should be a like fate for both classes of malefactors—that is, the gaol.
A very old and esteemed friend, to whom 1 showed the manuscript of the
previous portion of this pamphlet, and who declared that he kuew the statements
therein to be correct, nevertheless expressed the opinion that I ought to
describe how it happened that the assets left by my father were insufficient to cover
his debts. The reader will remember that, near the commencement of this narrative,
I stated that that fact was not in controversy; that Dr. Goold and all other
interested persons were satisfied on that point; in short, that Dr. Goold was fully
convinced that such was the case before he made me the first of the three payments
on account already mentioned. However, although it cannot be of much public
interest, I may as well briefly state a few facts in this connection. During his long
residence in Melbourne my father was prospering, that is, saving money, for only
three years before his decease. Whether or no from failing health I will not under-
take to say, but certain it is that the purchases or speculations in real estate made by
him during the last year of his life were of such a character as to entail heavy losses
to his estate. Mr, T. B. Payne, who had “got the better” of my father in many
transactions, observed to me, shortly after his death, that if he had lived another
year he would have financially ruined himself by investments in land. Payne spoke
intelligently and by the book when he expressed that opinion, as he had perpetrated
what the Yankees would designate “a very smart trick ” on my father a few months
before he died, and when his mind was weakened by a wasting disease. By
misrepresentations as to distance from Melbourne, locality and character of soil of
fifty acres of Prahran scrub (which had cost Payne only three or four pounds an acre)
he induced my father to give him fifty pounds per acre for the “property”—
£2,500! The trustees of my father’s will were very glad to realise £l3 an acre for it
—£6so, a loss of £1,850. I may observe that in making his will, and in calculating
what legacies he might bequeath, my father estimated that that and other properties
would realise fifty per cent, profit on the cost price. Hence, he thought that those
fifty acres would sell for £3,750, a wide difference from what they brought—£6so !
Again, a few months before his death, my father purchased 925 acres of land at the
Plenty ranges for four pounds per acre—£3,7oo. To pay the cash deposit he was
£4OO short. I lent him that sum, which I have never been paid to the present day,
nor were there assets to pay me. He gave his acceptances for the balance of the
purchase money, which bills did not mature until after his death, and they had to be
met out of the comparatively small amount of good assets. Those 925 acres of land,
which my father thought would realise fifty per cent, profit, that is, six pounds per
acre—£s,ss0 —have not yielded a penny to the estate. Certainly, one of the
creditors took 400 and odd acres, at cost price, in payment of his debt, and he has
not been able to realise on a foot of the ground. About the most valuable of my


father's properties—that fronting Swanston-street, Melbourne—my father devised to
my brother William ; but he, poor fellow! had to part with it to satisfy a debt due
by my fathex - , as debts take precedence of devises and bequests, so that my brother
William, like myself and all the rest of my father’s children, did not benefit to the
extent of a farthiixg under his will. It is needless, and would be tedious, to
particularise other losses, or to detail other reasons why the assets left by my father
were less than his debts. I repeat that, so far from my having received any of my
legacy, I was personally more than two thousand pounds out of pocket in paying
debts left by my father. The accuracy of what I have stated, regarding the cost and
selling prices of properties connected with my father’s estate, can be tested by any
person who takes the tx’ouble to search the records in the Melbourne Land Registry
Office. After this explanatory episode, suggested here by my friend referred to at
the beginning of this paragraph, 1 shall resume the thread of my narrative.
Not a few of the priest’s victims are his “penitents,” as those of both sexes
are called who attend his confessional. As a rule he gives them the best advice in
his power, and concludes by absolving them from their siirs. He never, as far as I
know, asks for money in the confessional, except to hand to the lawful owner money
which a “penitent” has stolen. But outside the confessional he “ puts the screw
oxx ”in a variety of ways, and reaps a golden harvest. His well-to do “ penitents ”
are “ bled ”to a frightful extent, the poorer ones in proportion to their means. The
priest is a leech whose phlebotomising propensities are as endless as a circle. These
remarks do not apply to all pries s, only to a vast majority of them. When I was
well off, priests crowded to my house and to my office like flies to a sugar barrel. I
was never done writing them cheques. But when I was financially ruined, mainly
by Dr. Goold, the priests, knowing that I had no mire for them to pounce on, that
the orange had been squeezed dry, avoided me as they wou’d a leper, and dropped
my acquaintance. How true are the following lines of Shakspere :
“ Everyone will be thy friend
Whilst thou hast wherewith to spend ;
But if store of crowns be scant
No one will supply thy want.”
“ But if fortune once do frown,
Then farewell thy fair renown.
They that fawned on thee before
Use thy company no more.”
“ As we do turn our backs
From our companion, thrown into the "rave,
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
Slink all away.”
Such treatment from the canting, hypocritical, Mammon-worshipping Melbourne
priests went far towards making me a misanthrope, and in the bitterness of my heart
I felt tempted to exclaim with Shakspere :
“ Hate all, curse all ; show charity to none,
But let the famished fiesh slide from the bone
Ere thou relieve the beggar. Give to dogs
What thou deniest to men ; let prisons swallow ’em,
Debts wither ’em to nothing. Be men like blasted woods,
And may diseases lick of their false bloods.”


But to return from this digression to the confessional. Money is not always
the greatest loss which the victims experience. Many a young woman owes her
moral ruin to her attendance at the tribunal in question, She tells her “confessor”
the innermost secrets of her heart, and he sometimes takes advantage of them, by
hellish devices, and effects the victim’s downfall, sometimes under the pretence of
an allowable “spiritual marriage.” I have before me a copy of a Sydney paper,
from which I make the fo lowing extract :
“ A priest in New York named Sherman is in trouble on account of being much married.
Priests are presumed to be confirmed bachelors. A wife is something they have no business with.
But this particular priest having seduced a stupid, superstitious young woman, who says she was led
away by her implicit trust in the priest’s office, imagining he could do no sin, persuaded her to stand
up beside him while he mumbled some Latin. Then he turned to her and said : ‘ Before the Almighty
God you arc now as much my wife as any ceremony can make you.’ Now she lias sworn out a warrant
charging him with being the father of her new-born child. The priest also married (?) another girl,
named McCoy. St ill another woman claims him as her husband. The gay Lothario lias skipped, it is
supposed, to Canada, but the world wags still, and priests debauch silly women as usual.”
I believe, however, that such occurrences are comparatively rare.
Doubtless most of such immorality is due to the clergy being a bachelor
priesthood. It sixrely cannot be right to fly in the face of the natural law laid down
by the Almighty for all His creatures. It is substantially a conflict between the law
of God and the law of man, and can any one hesitate as to whicli he should obey ?
It is not contended by the Catholic Church that the rule of celibacy is of divine
origin, or that its necessity is a matter of faith for priest or layman. I have
conversed with numbers of priests on this subject, and, with few exceptions, they
have advocated the allowance of matrimony for their cloth, just as the priests of that
portion of the Greek Church, which is in connection with the Catholic Church,
are permitted to enter into wedlock. A very pious priest once said to me:
“Nature will have her way,” and it requires but small powers of observation to
discern that, whenever Nature is thwarted in the animal or vegetable world, she
takes a signal revenge. The Saviour, in making selections for the apostleship, did
not confine himself to bachelors; some of the apos’les, including St. Peter, were
married men. In neither the Old nor the New Testament has the Almighty
forbidden marriage to the clergy. Indeed, under the Jewish dispensation, which
Avas the prototype of Christianity, God, through Moses (Leviticus, c, XXI) directs
how and from among whom the priests shall select their wives, and forbids them to
marry widows, divorced women, or women of immoral character. Verse 13 commands
the High Priest to marry a virgin. In the New Testament bishops and deacons are
directed to marry. 'So long as the natural law is set at defiance by the church, so
long will the filth of the confessional and the immorality of most of the priests be
rampant, and nauseating to all good Christians. Soon after the publication of my
former pamphlet concerning Dr. Goohl, the following letter appeared in the Sydney
Protestant Standard :
“Sm:—ln looking again into Mr. O’FaVrell’s Pamphlet, I 3nd that he condemns the
unscriptural doctrine of enforced celibacy. He says that so long as priests are forbidden to marry, the
confessional is not a sate place for any woman. I think that Mr. O’Farrell should have shown
scriptural grounds for his belief on that point. I will try to prove from scripture that enforced-


•celibacy is antiscriptural, unreasonable and unnatural. In the first place when God create! nun He
also created woman, as a helpmeet for him.
“ And Christ said that a man should leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife.
“ The Apostle Paul says that a Bishop must be the husband of one wife. Aaron, the Jewish
priest, was a married man, for we read in scripture that he had sous. Eli the priest was a married
man, for we also read in scripture that he had sons, and that the Lord slew them because they defiled
the house of the Lord. Indeed, the Priesthood in the Jewish dispensation was hereditary and
descended from father to son, and from the High Priest down the wh e priestly tribe of Levi married
and gave in marriage. Mr. O’Farrell also charges the priests of Melbourne, on the authority of no less
a person than the late R.C. Archbishop Goold, with making St. Francis Church little better than a
brothel.
“ Then, St. Paul in the Ist Epistle to Timothy, 4th Chapter, st verse says—* Now the Spirit
speaketh expressly; that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies and hypocrisy, having their conscience seared
with a hot iron, forbidding to mani/, and commanding to abstain from meats which God hath created
to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.’
“ Now, sir, you see, according to St. Paul, enforced celibacy is the doctrine of devils. St. Peter
was a married man, though not a priest. St. Patrick’s father was a deacon, and of course a married
man. And until the Norman conquest of England all the clergy had wives who chose to marry. They
were not forced to remain in the unnatural state of enforced celibacy. Again, St. Paul says in Ist
Timothy, 3rd chapter, 2nd verse— 1 A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, v igilant,
sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach. Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy
of filthy lucre ; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous ; one that ruleth well his own house, having
his children in subjection with ail gravity. For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how
shall he take care of the Church of God?’ Again, verse 11th — 1 Let the deacons be the husbands of one
wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.’ Again, in Hebrews, 13th chapter, 4th verse -
1 Marriage is honourable in all,’ &c.
11 1 think, sir, there is no need to quote more from scripture to prove that enforced celibacy
is antiscriptural ; and it is also unnatural. It would have been better if Mr. O’Farrell had exposed all
this infamy and seduction at the confessional before he quarrelled with Bishop Goold. Perhaps the
outside world would not have heard anything about it but for the quarrel. At any rate it is better
•exposed than cloaked over. There are many who would expose such conduct of the clergy only that
they are afraid to tell the truth for fear of persecution. Devout Romanists would rather hide any
•corruption than expose it, for they are taught to believe that the greatest of ail sins, from which there
is hardly any hope of pardon, is to bring in any way scandal on 1 holy 1 hurch.’ Therefore they believe
it wiser to hold their tongues and cloak the corruption they know of in this world rather than burn in
everlasting torment in hcllfire hereafter. That is where the great power of an evil priesthood lies.
Fear to divulge their corruption. Therefore it is that such priests as Mr. O’Farrell tells us oFIn
Melbourne, and Pastor Chiniquy tells of in America, can year after year continue a life of immorality and
corruption with impunity, for seldom have any of those who know of their evil lives the courage to
reveal and denounce them. Faithfully yours, Joseph Dunbar.”
I thank Mr. Dunbar for having fortified my position by the texts quoted. I
was well aware of them, but lacked space to insert a quarter of what I had to say.
Concerning the immorality which I mentioned as having taken place in St. Francis
■Church, Melbourne, it was a matter of public notoriety, and was several times a
subject of conveisation between Dr. Gould and myself. To do him justice ho
deplored it, but he either could not or would not (at all events he did not)
immediately suppress it. On one occasion I reminded him, by way of illustration,
•of the well-known adventure of Mundus in the Temple of Isis, particulars of which
may be read in Roman history, but I have not space to insert them here. On that
■ occasion the Emperor Tiberias very properly ordered the two offending priests and a.


procuress to be crucified for their immorality in and desecration of the temple
Mundus to be banished for life; and the temple to be i-azed to the ground, which
sentence was fully carried out.
Celibacy and drunkenness cause the blackest of crimes all the world over
among the Catholic priesthood. One would suppose, however, that they would be
on their good behavior during Passion or Holy Week. Yet let ns see how
matters stood during a recent Holy Week in Madrid, the capital of Catholic Spain.
The following is a translation from La Luz, a newspaper published at Madrid :
“ Palm Sunday, April 18.—Assassination of the Bishop of Madrid by Padre Galleote, a Catholic
priest.
“ Monday.—A lady was brutally beaten in a Church by Senor Lacasas, the parish priest of
Vendrjll.
“ Tuesday.—A cation, who had been once in prison, attempted to assassinate the Bishop of
Menorea.
“ Wednesday.—The schoolmaster of Esquez was today murdered by his parish priest.
“ Thursday.—Today a bomb was exploded in the Church of San Luis, Madrid, seriously
wounding a number of persons. Another bomb was exploded in the Church Hospital, Granada ; many
fainted and suffered contusions, etc.
“Good Friday.—To prevent any disturbance, the parish priest of San Jose, Madrid, gave notice
that admission to the special services of the day would be by ticket only. Notwithstanding this
precaution a row took place among the worshippers, and one man mortally stabbed another before the
altar, almost slashing his victim in twain. The usual procession ‘ for the burial of our Lord ’ was
consequently stopped. It is also reporte I that one reverend gentleman has stabbed another in a dispute.
“ Saturday.—The orthodox, after yesterday’s drunken debauch in honour of La Veronica, are
preparing for the great bull fight, to be held tomorrow, Ascension Day. Great lamentation among the
people on account of the celebrated image of the Virgin de la Cabcza having been found upon
the floor of the Church well-nigh burnt to ashes.
Those arc enough of horrors for one week—anti that Passion week—in an almost
exclusively Catholic city. A bull fight on Easter Sunday was a fitting finale of all
the week’s priest fights and murders.
A liberal minded layman finds it difficult to account for the intense love of
money exhibited by nearly all Catholic ecclesiastics, and which leads to the greatest
injustice, dishonesty and scandal. Those people, as a class, (of course the exceptions
are numerous) grudgingly pay even their tradesmen’s bills. Witness, too, the awful
scandal caused by Cardinal Moran of Sydney, who, after having received from his
predecessor, Archbishop Vaughan, a considerable fortune by will, actually refused
to pay the freight of transporting the deceased prelate's remains from England to
Sydney ! I select the following from among several cablegrams on the subject :
“ The Right Rev. Dr. Herbert Vaughan, Bishop of Salford, is indignant at the careless attitude
of Cardinal Moran, the head of the Roman Catholic Church in Sydney, in reference to the defrayal of
the cost of the proposed interment in Sydney of his predecessor, the late Archbishop Vaughan. It is
probable that in consequence of the difficulty which has arisen the body of Archbishop Vaughan will
be buried in England, unless the Roman Catholics of New South Wales speedily arrange for its transfer
to Sydney.”
Such an occurrence appears almost incredible, but it is only too well attested, and is
an extreme illustration of the tenacity, mingled with gross ingratitude, with which a
Catholic cardinal hugs the golden calf. Archbishop Vaughan bequeathed to his


■successor, Moran, about seven thousand pounds, yet this wretched, miserly cardinal
refused to pay a few pounds to have the body of his generous testator brought from
England to Sydney !!! Is it surprising that I was victimised by Goold & Co? We
are advised “not to put our trust in princes.” But a fortiori it might be said,
“ put not your trust in Catholic archbishops, bishops and priests.” Indeed, Christ
Himself practically says as much. Referring to the canting hypocritical Pharisees
of His day He remarks, (Matt. c. XXIII, v. 2 and 3) “ The scribes and the Pharisees
sit in the chair of Moses. All things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you,
•observe and do ; but according to their works do ye not; for they say and do not.
And verse 28 of the same chapter : “So you (Pharisees) also outwardly appear to
MEN TO BE JUST; BUT INWARDLY YOU ARE FULL OF HYPOCRISY AND INIQUITY.” HoW
very applicable are those two quotations to most of the Catholic ecclesiastics of this
unfortunate archdiocese !
Among the daily victims of priests are poor widows, orphans, servant girls,
and laboring men. The heartlessness of wi inging from such persons the last penny
possible is only equalled by the luxury and iniquity in which the money is spent. 1
have known a priest to preach a sermon on charity, chastity, celibacy and good
towards one’s neighbour, and in an hour after having descended from the pulpit to
visit a house of gilt frame in Spring or Lonsdale street. Landlords of such places
have informed me that some of their best customers were priests. Nor is this all.
Priests, like most old bachelors, become sour, crusty, morose, intensely selfish, and
unsympathetic. Most middle-aged persons will remember the burning of the Church
of the Holy Family many years ago in Santiago, and the awful loss of life which
occurred. Not long ago a cori’espondent of a Melbourne paper alluded as follows to
the catastrophe. I make the extract in order to show the demoniacal heartlessncss
and unfeeling conduct of the priests on the occasion :
“ Hard by this old cathedral is a pleasant garden and monument, where twenty years or more
-ago stood another church almost as large; a church whose fate I remember as a boy sent a thrill of
horror throughout the civilised world. It was the Iglesia de la Compania, or Church of the Holy
Company. On the eve of a certain grand feast day this church was thronged by more than 2,000 of the
people of .Santiago, composed principally of women and girls, representing nearly every family in the
-city. During High Mass the building caught fire, and as only a small pastern in the groat eastern
doors had been left open, this quickly became blocked, and 2,000 human beings were left imprisoned in
ithe blazing church to he burnt to death. I was shown a spot, now railed off, where the human matter
and blood of these martyrs literally flowed from beneath the burning doors. II hat made the calamity
worse was that the priests made no attempt at rescuing the people, but occupied themselves in saving
the church plate, and escaped therewith by a back passage leading from behind the altar and known
.only to themselves. I afterwards visited the grave of these victims in ‘EI Panton,’ and found wreaths
and immortelles on the tablets erected to their memory, for the/ were all buried together, showing
that the occurrence is still fresh in the minds of the inhabitants. The monument erected on the actual
site of the church bears an inscription containing a scathing irony respecting the conduct of the
priests, who, contrary to the Words of Holy Writ, * saved themselves, hut others they would not save. ”
1 he Catholic archbishops and bishops of Australia make trips to Europe, some
of them repeatedly, merely for the purpose of having a jolly good time. Ihe
most paltry excuses have been put forth for such trips ; and before they are under-


taken those archbishops and bishops have invariably set their secret agents at work
to inaugurate subscriptions for the episcopal pleasure-seekers. Money “ first, last,
and all the time.” Cardinal Moran recently left for the purpose of paying a
“ friendly visit to the Pope,” a ridiculous and puerile excuse for deserting his charge.
He obtained a pot of money before he skipped. In a year or two, perhaps sooner,
it will be Dr. Carr’s turn, although there is not the slightest necessity for the
excursions mentioned. The Yankees call such flightiness “ swinging round the
circle.”
I deem it unnecessary to pro’ong this pamphlet, more especially as I intend
soon to publish a larger edition of it, or an independent pamphlet, containing much
additional matter for which I have not room here. I shall have a good deal to say
about George Bullen, Dr. Goold’s cast-off solicitor, who, to my great detriment and loss,
was one of my articled clerks, until I had to give him up as unteachable, by reason
of his meagre education, lack of mental training, and utter uselessness in my office.
Bullen is now in partnership with a man named Godfrey, who understands a little
about his profession, and to whom he, Bullen, has to appeal on every small point
of law which comes before him. I intend likewise to detail, in my next
pamphlet, the particulars of the conduct of “Father” Hegarty, now or late
of Sale, Gippsland, towards a very near relative of mine. A short time ago I
was furnished with a li=t containing the names and addresses of twenty-three
of the mistresses of priests residing in Melbourne and its suburbs, which list I will
publish in my next pamphlet. In my last pamphlet I gave the names of two of Dr.
Goold's mistresses, Anne Healey and Mrs. Pokorney, whose husband he “ bought
off” with very liberal “hush money.” Pokorney was too good (i.e. slavish) a
Holy Homan to institute a suit for a divorce from his wife with Archbishop James
Alipius Goold as corespondent, although he, Pokorney, was advised by more than
one proctor to do so. And yet the present archbishop declares that he will walk in
the footsteps of his predecessor! Truly, if he does, he will march in the “broad
way,” and we all know whither that leads. In the early days of the colony, and up
to about thirty years ago, nearly all the Victorian priests were good moral men.
Now we have, for the most part, the imported ordained scum and refuse of Ireland
—caricatures in the church, Goths, boors and vulgarians in society—officiating here
(with scarcely cleaner local production) from whom have emanated more ills and
evils than were alleged to have issued from the box of Pandora. Dr. Goold and his
successor, and most of their priests, were or are pigmies, Liliputians, in preaching,
teaching, lecturing, zeal, theology, &c., compared with the Right Rev. Dr. Geoghegan
and his priests of the old time in this colony. Money, money, money, is the central,
the pivotal idea of a majority of the priests of today. It is their breath, their soul,
their life ; and the changes which are rung on the subject in the Catholic churches
do credit to the priests’ ingenuity, and are as interminable as they are disgusting
and unedifying to the lay mind. The Catholic returns home from a “ Low Mass ”of a
Sunday under the impression that he has been to a bank, a countiughouse, or a Stock
Exchange. But although there is so much urging and importuning to “ subscribe,
subscribe, subscribe” for all manner of purposes, and “charity sermons’* without end,
there is not a word of information vouchsafed as to what becomes of the money ; no


financial statements or balance-sheets, as in all Protestant churches. Every parish
priest sends to his archbishop or bishop, as the case may be, ten percent, of what he may
choose to report as his collections for his, the archbishop’s or bishop’s own use. But
what becomes of the balance of ninety per cent ? Echo answers what ? The priest
holds that in petto. He does not condescend to tell his dupes or victims a word about
it. The ninety per cent, is supposed to be divided up in various ways, but no account
or information is given to the congregations ; there is no secretary, no treasurer, no
auditor. The outcome is obvious ; for the average parish priest has plenty of money
to invest on mortgage securities for the benefit of his own pocket; he is irresponsible,
amenable to nobody. Parliament should provide against such rascality. Unfortu-
nately, in nearly every era of the Catholic Church, religion has been a cloak for
money-making among the bishops and priests. For example, at the time of the quasi
“Reformation,” all the Catholic archbishops and bishops of England (with only tw 0
honorable exceptions) apostatized from their faith, renounced their allegiance to th e
Pope, became Protestants, and acknowledged Henry the Eighth as the head of the
church, rather than resign their fat sees, their “ palaces,” their loaves and fishes, their
means of money making. Not only did those archiepiscopal and episcopal black
sheep deny and desert their faith, but they did so with the full knowledge as to how
the “ Reformation ” had been accomplished in England. According to the Protestant
historian Macaulay, it was brought about by the Duke of Somerset, who murdered
his brother (Somerset’s own head subsequently rolled from the block) ; Henry the
Eighth, who murdered his own wives ; and Elizabeth who assassinated her innocent
royal kinswoman and guest. But what did those archbishops or bishops care for
those facts, or for the faith to which they had pledged their vows, when weighed
against their determination to stroke the golden calf on the back ?
In writing and publishing my last pamphlet concerning Dr. Goold, the present
one, and any future pamphlets in this connection, I sincerely trust that my motives
may not be misunderstood. If any individual supposes that I am instigated bv
feelings of revenge or animosity he is egregiously mistaken. I am not naturally
vindictive ; I love not vengeance for vengeance’ sake. To check my tongue and pen
in this direction, I have only to remember the text: “Revenge is mine, saith the
Lord. ” If I had only to consider the wrongs and injustice inflicted on myself personally
by Dr. Goold, the executors of his will, and Dr. Carr, I could have borne my losses and
all the injustice in dignified silence, and have treated those despicable men with lofty,
unspeakable contempt and loathing. But (there is a “but” in most matters) by
pointing out some of the swindles perpetrated on the Catholic community as well as on
myself, I believe I am taking a step towards getting those wrongs and abuses righted.
The physician must first discover the disease before he can effect a cure. With my
knowledge of the dishonest and infamous operations of Dr, Goold and other clericals
exposure was the only praiseworthy course open to me; silence on my part would have
been cowardly and criminal. Throughout the whole affair I have possessed a mens
CONSCIA recti, and my principal consolation in this connection is that I have done,
am doing, and, please God, will do my duty fearlessly, no matter how unpleasant
that duty may be.


I am glad to have reached the end of my painful pamphlet, for tfie whole
subject is loathful, nauseating, sickening, to any fair and honorable mind ; for,
whatever my misfortunes may have been, I have never done, been concerned in, or
countenanced any “crooked” action in my life. One word more: While I believe
that I am the greatest of the victims (I mean the heaviest loser) of the Catholic
Church in Victoria, I extend my cordial sympathy to my fellow victims.


N.B.—The publication of my book, “’Victoria and Victorians,’* is delayed for lack of funds. It was-
and is my desire to publish it in the United States, because the population of Australia is not large
enough to make a cheap work pay, and the public, except to a limited extent, will not purchase a high-
priced one. For example, the volumes of the Franklin Square Library, New York, published
by the Harper Brothers, are issued for ten cents (five pence) each. For that low price the
novels of Scott, Ouida, Reade, Braddon, &c,, are sold retail, because the sale is immense among
the sixty or so millions of population of the United States, not to speak of Canada and the other
British North American colonies ; while here in Australia, the population being only between three
and four millions, it would not pay to sell a long work at the figure mentioned. Of course if I publish
the book in America I would supply Australia with abundance of copies; but it would not pay me to
act vice versa, on account of the duty on literature between the two countries.
My last pamphlet concerning Dr. Goold gained me much sympathy, and induced a considerable
number of persons to send me sums of money in order to mark their sense of the injustice with
which he had treated me. lam experiencing no better treatment from his successor or the priestly
executors of Dr. Goold’s will. I take this method to thank those persons who forwarded me money
anonymously; if I had known their names I would have sent a note of thanks in each instance. To
those gentlemen who made themselves known to me, when they sent me cheques or notes, I believe I
have made acknowledgments to them all in due course through the post. I treat the moneys as loans
to be repaid when I am in a position to do so.
Persons who may desire to communicate with the writer of this
pamphlet (for the purpose of ordering' copies or otherwise) can addresss
him at his office No. 16 Little Collins Street "West, Melbourne.
William Sinclair, Printer, Moor-street, Fitzroy,


