

NEW GUINEA.
FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE
RESPECTING
NEW GUINEA.
(In continuation of [C.—1566.], July 1876.)
Presented to both of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty,
May 1883.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY GEORGE E. B. EYRE AND WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE.
To be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from any of the following Agents, viz.,
Messrs. HANSARD, 13, Great Queen Street, W.C., and 32, Abingdon Street, Westminster ;
Messrs. EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, and
Sale Office, House of Lords;
Messrs. ADAM and CHARLES Black, of Edinburgh;
Messrs. ALEXANDER THOM and Co., or Messrs. HODGES, FIGGIS, and Co., of Dublin,
1883.
[C. —3617.] Price 1s. 7d.




Serial
No.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page
1
Gov. Sir Hercules
Robinson (New-
South Wales).
March 3, 1876
(Rec. May 1, 1876.)
Transmitting copies of papers laid before Par-
liament, and extracts from newspapers, re-
specting the proposed annexation of New
Guinea and contribution by Colonies in-
terested.
1
2
New South Wales
Parliamentary Paper,
Legislative Assem-
bly. *110-A.
Jan. 30, 1877
Account by Signor L. M. D’Albertis of his
voyage of exploration to New Guinea in the
steam-launch “ Neva.”
7
3
Gov. Sir A. E. Ken-
nedy (Queensland).
Jan. 14, 1878
(Rec.March 20,1878.)
Forwarding copies of papers relating to the
enlargement of the maritime boundary of
Queensland.
27
4
Admiralty
April 17, 1878
Forwarding copy report by the Hydrographer
to the Navy respecting certain islands situated
in Torres Straits, and stating that their Lord-
ships are not aware of any objection to these
islands being annexed to Queensland.
28
5
London Missionary
Society,
June 3, 1878
Calling attention to the recent influx of gold
seekers into New Guinea, and suggesting
that the Governor of Fiji should be instructed
to put in force in New Guinea the powers
which he possesses in order to ensure pro-
tection to native rights and native life.
29
6
High Commissioner
the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
March 4, 1878
(Rec. June 8, 1878.)
Transmitting copy letter from the Governor of
Queensland respecting the extension of the
jurisdiction of the magistrate of Thursday
Island to certain islands in the Torres Straits,
and of High Commissioner’s reply comply-
ing with the request preferred.
32
7
To Admiralty
June 28, 1878
Transmitting copy of a letter from the London
Missionary Society, and suggesting that a
ship of war should for the present be sta-
tioned at New Guinea until it has been
decided as to the appointment of a resident
Deputy Commissioner.
33
8
Admiralty
July 4, 1878
Stating that Commodore Hoskins has reported
that H.M.S. “ Sappho ” is now between Port
Moresby and Thursday Island, and that
H.M.S. “Conflict” will proceed to the south-
east and south coasts of New Guinea.
34
9
Admiralty
July 5, 1878
Stating that telegraphic instructions have been
sent to the Commodore on the Australian
station to despatch a vessel to Port Moresby
to assist in preserving order.
34
10
To Gov. Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
July 6, 1878
(Telegraphic.)
“ Vessel ordered to Port Moresby. Commander
to communicate with Chester.”
35
11
Royal Colonial Insti-
tute.
July 9, 1878
Submitting for consideration various circum-
stances in support of conclusions previously
arrived at in favour of the annexation of the
eastern part of New Guinea.
35
12
To the London Mis-
sionary Society.
July 13, 1878
Stating the steps which have been taken with
reference to the Society’s letter of the 3rd
June relative to the difficulties anticipated by
the influx of gold diggers into New Guinea.
36
K 6853. Wt. 3429.
a 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS.


1
Serial
No.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page.
13
To the Royal Colonial
Institute.
July 26, 1878
Stating that Her Majesty’s Government are not
prepared at present to entertain the question
of the annexation of New Guinea; but that
instructions have been issued by the Admi-
ralty for the despatch of a war vessel to the
coast to assist in preserving order.
37
14
Admiralty
Sept. 6, 1878
Transmitting copy of a letter from Commodore
Hoskins reporting that he had, previous to
the receipt of the telegraphic instructions
from the Admiralty, despatched H.M.S.
“ Sappho ” to Port Moresby, and that her
Commander had been furnished by Sir A.
Gordon with authority to act as Deputy
Commissioner for New Guinea.
38
15
Admiralty
Sept. 13, 1878
Transmitting copy of a telegram from Com-
modore Hoskins reporting the return of the
“ Sappho ” from New Guinea, and the failure
of the expedition.
42
16
F. P. Labilliere, Esq.
Sept. IS, 1878
Again urging the expediency of the annexation
of New Guinea by Great Britain.
42
17
Gov. Sir G. P. Bowen
(Victoria).
Aug. 1, 1878
(Rec. Sept. 20,1878.)
Forwarding copy of a letter from Sir A.
Gordon, covering a correspondence with the
u Australasian Colonisation Company ” on the
subject of a projected settlement in New
Guinea.
45
18
Admiralty -
Oct. 3, 1878
Transmitting copy letter from Commodore
Hoskins enclosing a report by Captain Digby,
R.N., of the visit of H.M.S. “Sappho” to
New Guinea, and reporting the visit of a
French vessel of war to the Chesterfield and
Bampton reefs for the purpose of proclaiming
those islands French territory.
47
19
To Gov. Sir G. F.
Bowen (Victoria).
Oct. 3, 1878
Stating that the correspondence with the “ Aus-
tralasian Colonisation Company ” forwarded
in Governor’s despatch of 1st August has
been received direct from Sir A. Gordon,
whose answer to the Company has been
approved.
51
20
To F. P. Labilliere,
Esq.
Oct. 5, 1878
Stating that Her Majesty’s Government are not
at present prepared to take any stops towards
the annexation, but that the Secretary of
State Avill shortly consult the High Com-
missioner as to the necessary means for pro-
tecting expeditions of gold miners and con-
trolling British subjects.
51
21
To the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Oct. 5, 1878
Transmitting copy of a conlidentia! printed
paper on the New Guinea question, and
requesting that the Secretary of State may
be favoured with Governor’s observations
thereon.
52
22
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Aug. 19, 1878
(Rec. Oct. 29, 1878.)
Commenting on the prospectus and proceedings
of the “ Australasian Colonisation Company,”
and announcing his intention of visiting New
Guinea.
53
23
To the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Nov. 5, 1878
Transmitting copy of a despatch from Mr.
Gorrie announcing his intention to visit New
Guinea, and stating that he has been instructed
by telegraph through the Governor of New
South Wales not to do so until authorised.
57
24
Sir A. H. Gordon -
Nov. 22, 1878
Submitting his views on the question of the
annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain.
57


Serial
Xo.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page.
25
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Sept. 16, 1878
(Rec. Nov. 25,1878.)
Transmitting, in the absence of any official-in-
telligence, newspaper cuttings respecting New
Guinea.
60
26
Admiralty
Dec. 7, 1878
Transmitting copy despatch from Commodore
Hoskins on the subject of the rush to New
Guinea by gold diggers from the Australian
Colonies; and enclosing a report from Com-
mander Digby of H.M.S. “ Sappho ” on the
state of affairs at Port Moresby.
66
27
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Oct. 14, 1878
(Rec. Dec. 23,1878.)
Transmitting copy of a report by Commander
Digby of his proceedings in New Guinea, and
of a newspaper extract reporting the pro- 1
ceedings of Mr. Chalmers, and commenting j
on the present state of the island. i
87
28
To the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon,
Dec. 31, 1878
Acknowledging his letter of 22nd November,
and stating reasons for which it is considered
unnecessary at present to entertain the
question of annexation.
93
29
To the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Jan. 3, 1879
Transmitting copies of further despatches for
his observations thereon.
94
30
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Nov. 11, 1878
(Rec. Jan. 20, 1879.)
Transmitting copy letter from Commodore
Hoskins embodying a report by Lieutenant
Musters, of H.M.S. “Conflict,” relative to
the exploring party in New Guinea, and
calling attention to the inefficiency of the
present Order in Council for want of more
naval assistance.
95
31
Admiralty
Jan. 24, 1879
Transmitting copy letter and inclosure from
Commodore Hoskins, reporting that the
anticipated failure of the expedition to New
Guinea is being realised.
98
32
The Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Jan. 31, 1879
Forwarding copy letter from the Rev. W. G.
Lawes on prospects of settlers in New Guinea,
its future government, &c.
99
33
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Dec. 10, 1878
(Rec. Feb. 18, 1879.)
Forwarding copy letter from Commodore Hos-
kins respecting affairs at New Guinea ; and
confirming the reported killing of a native by
a white man.
102
34
To the Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Feb. 26, 1879
Pointing out that the extract from the “ Sydney
Morning Herald,” forwarded in Colonial Office
letter of 8th inst., seems to show that there is
now less necessity for such an appointment
as that urged in the document enclosed in the
letter from the Rev. Mr. Lawes.
103
35
Gov. Sir A. E. Ken-
nedy (Queensland).
Jan. 23, 1879
(Rec. Mar. 31, 1879.)
Transmitting copies of three reports on New
Guinea by Mr. Chester, the magistrate of
Thursday Island.
104
36
Gov. Sir Hercules
Robinson (New
South Wales).
Feb. 22, 1879
(Rec. Apr. 14, 1879.)
Transmitting copy of a letter from Baron Mik-
louho-Maclay to Sir A. Gordon, urging that
that the British Government should take
steps to protect native rights and interests in
New Guinea.
108
37
To Gov. Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
Apr. 21, 1879
Acknowledging receipt of copies of Mr. Chester’s
reports, which have been read with much
interest, and pointing out that copies of such
reports should be sent to the High Commis-
sioner and to Secretary of State as soon as
they are received.
109
38
To the Officer Ad-
ministering the
Government (New
South Wales).
Apr. 25, 1879
Acknowledging despatch of 22nd February,
and stating that Sir A. Gordon has been
authorised to reply direct to Baron Maclay’s
letter.
no
a 3


Serial
from or to whom.
Date.
Subject. ,
Page.
39
Acting High Com-
missioner Gorrie.
Apr. 28, 1879
(Rec. July 5, 1879.)
Transmitting newspaper extracts on the subject
of outrages by white men on the natives of
New Guinea.
110
40
Gov. Sir A. E. Ken-
nedy (Queensland).
June 30, 1879
(Rec. Aug. 27, 1879.)
Forwarding copy of a- further report from
Mr. Chester with reference to his recent visit
to New Guinea, and his omission to report to
the High Commissioner.
114
41
To High Commr. the
Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
Sept. 6, 1879
Transmitting copy of a despatch from the Go-
vernor of Queensland, enclosing Mr. Ches-
ter’s explanation of his omission to communi-
cate with the High Commissioner on the
affairs of New Guinea.
115
115
42
High Commr. the
Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
April 22, 1881
(Rec. June 6,1881.)
Enclosing extracts from the “ Lyttleton Times ”
and copy of a letter from Baron Maclay
respecting the proposed colonization of New
Guinea.
43
To High Commr. the
Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
June, 29, 1881
Approving the reply which High Commissioner
proposes to address to the promoters of the
projected expedition to New Guinea.
117
44
F. P. Labi 1 here, Esq.
Dee. 11, 1882
Urging the occupation by Great Britain of
certain points on the coast of New Guinea,
with a view to the exclusion of other
nations.
118
45
Foreign Office
Dec. 18, 1882
Forwarding copy of a letter from the Colonial
Institute pointing out the detriment which
would accrue to British interests if the eastern
portion of New Guinea were annexed by any
foreign power.
119
46
To F. P. Labilliere,
Esq.
Dec. 28, 1882
Stating that Her Majesty’s Government are not
prepared at present to reopen the question of
the extension of British authority in New
Guinea.
119
47
To the Hoynl Colonial
Institute.
Jan. 4, 1853
Stating that the annexation of a portion of New
Guinea is a question which Her Majesty’s
Government are not prepared to entertain.
120
48
The Agent General
for Queensland.
Feb. 28, 1883
Transmitting with observations copy of a tele-
gram from the Premier of Queensland re-
questing Agent General to urge upon Her
Majesty’s Government the desirability of
annexing New Guinea to Queensland.
120
49
To Gov. Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
March 8, 1883
Transmitting for Governor’s observations
thereon copy of a letter and enclosure received
from the Agent General for Queensland, and
stating the substance of a conversation with
that gentleman on the proposed annexation
of New Guinea.
121
50
To the Agent General
for Queensland.
March 13, 1883
Transmitting copy of a despatch addressed to
Sir A. E. Kennedy with reference to Agent
General’s letter of 28th ultimo.
122
51
The Officer Adminis-
tering the Govern-
ment (W. Australia).
Feb. 15, 1883
(Rec. Mar. 27, 1883.)
Transmitting copy of a letter from the Colonial
Institute, with reply thereto, respecting the
policy of annexing New Guinea.
122
52
Gov. the Right Hon.
Lord A.> Loftus
(New South Wales).
Feb. 19, 1883
(Rec. April 6,1883.)
Transmitting copy of a memoir by Dr. Robert-
son on the subject of New Guinea, and point-
ing out the desirability of preventing the
annexation of the island by any foreign
power, as the question has much increased in
importance since 1874.
123
63
Foreign Office -
April 6, 1883
Enclosing copies of despatches from Her Ma-
jesty’s ministers at Berlin and Brussels,
bearing upon the movement in Germany for
the foundation of German colonies.
130


Serial
No.
From or to ■whom.
1 Jiltt 1 .
Subject.
Page.
54
To Gov. Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
April 14, 1883
Telegraphic.
“ Reuter’s telegram states Queensland Govern-
ment taken formal possession New Guinea;
please telegraph explanation.”
131
00
Gov. Sir A. E. Ken-
nedy.
April 16, 1883
(Rec. April 16, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
Reporting that the Queensland Government
took formal possession of New Guinea in Her
Majesty’s name on the 14th inst., pending
the decision of Her Majesty’s Government.
131
56
The Agent General
for Queensland.
April 17, 1883
Transmitting copies of various documents
bearing on the annexation of New Guinea,
and pointing out the expediency of placing
the island under the immediate control of the
Queensland Government.
131
57
The Agent General
for Queensland.
April 19, 1883
Enclosing copy of a report by Dr. Robertson
(extracted from the “ Glasgow Herald,” of
17th inst.), giving his reasons for advocating
the annexation of Now Guinea by Great
Britain.
137
58
Colonial Secretary
(N. S. Wales), to
Agent General,
London.
April 19, 1883
Telegraphic.
“ This Government views favourably annexation
of New Guinea to British Crown.”
138
59
The Agent General
for Victoria.
April 20, 1883
Transmitting copy of a telegram from the Pre-
mier of Victoria, authorising support of the
action of Queensland in annexing New
Guinea.
138
60
Governor Lord A.
Loftus (N.S. Wales).
April 21, 1883
Telegraphic.
“The New Guinea annexation is favourably
viewed by this Government.”
138
61
Governor Sir W. F.
C. Robinson (S.
.Australia).
April 21, 1883
(Eec. April 21,1883.)
Telegraphic.
Conveying the opinion of S. Australian Govern-
ment that New Guinea should be under
British rule.
138
62
The Agent General
for Queensland.
April 24, 1883
Transmitting copy telegram from the Premier
of Queensland stating that the annexation of
New Guinea has met with the approval of all
the other Australian Colonies.
| 139
63
Governor Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
Mar. 14, 1883
(Rec. May 2, 1883.)
Transmitting copy of a letter from the Premier
of the Colony, urging the annexation of New
Guinea to Queensland.
139
i
64
Aborigines Protection
Society.
!
May 14, 1883
j
i
Expressing the earnest hope of the Society that
if New Guinea is annexed to Great Britain,
its affairs may be administered under the
direct authority of the Imperial Government.
] 40
1
i
VII


NEW GUINEA.
FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE.
No. 1.
GOVERNOR SIR HERCULES ROBINSON, G.C.M.G. (NEW SOUTH WALES), to the
RIGHT Hon. THE EARL OF CARNARVON. (Received May 1, 1876.)
Government House, Sydney,
My Lord, March 3, 1876.
I have the honour to enclose, for facility of reference in your Lordship’s office,
copies of papers* which have been laid before Parliament here relating to the annexation
of New Guinea, and the proposal for contribution by the Colonies interested in any
scheme undertaken for their benefit by the Imperial Government.
2, I also enclose some leading articles which I have extracted from the local press,
which show that your Lordship’s views on the subject are considered by the leading
journals here and in Victoria reasonable and just.
I h&vc
(Signed) HERCULES ROBINSON.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Carnarvon,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 1.
Leading Articles
Extracted from the “ Sydney Morning Herald,” “ Sydney Mail,” and “ Melbourne
Argus,” relative to the proposal for contributions by Colonies interested in any
scheme undertaken for their benefit by the Imperial Government.
“ The Sydney Morning Herald.”
Wednesday, March 1, 1876.
Some important correspondence with reference to the proposed annexation of New
Guinea has been laid before Parliament. Some of it our readers have already seen,
but the most interesting portion of it is new. It begins with a letter from Mr. Francis
P. Labilliere to the Secretary of State, urging the importance of the annexation of New
Guinea, which letter was forwarded for the comments of Sir Hercules Robinson, who
replied in a tone adverse to Mr. Labilliere’s views. In his reply Sir Hercules enclosed
Mr. Parkes’ Minute, which is also in favour of the annexation ; but he himself points
out that the island cannot be colonised in the same sense as Australia can, that foreign
Powers are not very likely to annex the island, as a military or naval station could be
obtained with far less responsibility, and that with so many islands as there are in the
Pacific it is impossible for Great Britain to prevent foreign Powers from getting a footing
if they wish it. Then follow Mr. Robertson’s minute, which has already been published,
and the report of the interview between Mr. Robertson and the deputation that waited
on him.
After that comes the most interesting portion of this publication. The Earl of
Carnarvon, writing in July last, refers to the request that each of the three principal
colonies of Australia should contribute not more than 4,000/. a year towards the probable
deficiency in the Fijian revenue. His Lordship thinks it necessary to take some notice
of the replies which were made to that proposal, because the principles on which he
proceeded seem not to have been sufficiently explained or understood. Ho points out
* For these papers see [C. 1566] July 1876.
R 6853. A


that Fiji was annexed at the strong and repeated instance of the Australian colonies;
that it was not expedient to subject the island to the Government of any one of them;
that it was necessary to provide an effective government; and that it was probable
that the local revenue would be insufficient to pay its expenses. Two Colonies, viz.,
New South Wales and New Zealand, had volunteered to give assistance through the
medium of their official staff, but it seemed to him that it would be more convenient,
and especially so to Victoria and to Queensland, if the contribution should come in a
money form; and, for reasons he explained, it was obviously impossible that the con-
tributing Colonies should undertake any share of the government of Fiji. Each Colony
refused in a different mode, but the substance was that not a single Colony would give
the money required. That being the case, the Earl of Carnarvon, who very properly
remarks that the grace of the action depended upon it being voluntary, intimates that
he could not put the slightest pressure upon any one of them to make the contribution.
The amount asked for was small, but it was asked for, he says, not so much for the
sake of the money as “principally to give trial and effect to the principle of joint action
among the different members of the Empire in such cases.” If that was the case, then
the effect of the appeal was equivalent to saying that the Colonies were not prepared to
co-operate with the British Empire in any Colonio-Imperial matter. If this was the first
experiment in such a policy it was certainly a most discouraging failure. The Earl of
Carnarvon, however, professes not to be wholly discouraged, but “ still inclined to believe
“ that the Colonial Governments are alive to the expediency of bearing, in certain cases,
“ a share of those burdens which cannot fairly be thrown entirely upon the revenue of
“ Great Britain.” In this faith he takes the opportunity of again explaining the part
which, in his opinion, it would be reasonable for the Colonists to bear. The future of
the South Pacific Islands, he points out, is of the most direct and material importance
to the colonies of Australasia. It will be impossible for the English taxpayers to under-
stand why they should bear taxation, and the Colonies should be exempted, in order to
carry out an object to which the Colonies are most immediately concerned. He goes
on to say that if it were a Crown Colony there would be no question at all about it.
The Crown Colony would have to bear its fair share of any undertaking in which the
said Colony was interested. This principle has been adopted recently in some matters
connected with the Malay territories adjacent to the Straits Settlement. His Lordship
might have added that the principle is universally adopted with regard to the Indian
Empire. The Indian exchequer has always been made responsible for expenses which,
though outside the Indian territory, are considered as incident to the possession of
India. Thus, for instance, the fortifications of Aden were, we believe, constructed
entirely at Indian charges. This principle, which is thus definite!}' one of Imperial
policy, will not apply with less justice to the case of dependencies that are entrusted
with self-government. But in this case, of course, the Colonies have to be asked to
exercise the powers that have been committed to them. Hitherto they have declined
to do so, and the question that now presses is, has this been from a mistake, from want
of a sufficiently comprehensive view of the situation, or is it the deliberate view of the
Australasian Colonists ? Earl Carnarvon’s Despatch can only be considered in the light
of a request for reconsideration. He says that he has been told that our united
revenues amount to fourteen millions per annum, and the table which Mr. Robertson
sent to England, showing the progress of the Australian Colonies, very nearly justifies
these figures. Earl Carnarvon does not allow himself to doubt that Colonies possessing
such magnificent resources, which have shown an enlightened liberality in their internal
government, and which, on occasions of emergency, have exhibited a remarkable eager-
ness to contribute to Imperial needs, will be desirous to join in establishing some system
under which they may share in the cost of any policy which they may hereafter propose
as essential to their interests and those of the Empire generally; and he asks the
Governments to consider whether the time has not arrived for the adoption of some
general principle under which each Colony more immediately concerned shall bear
its reasonable proportion of the expense attending any policy it may advocate or
approve.
We concur with Earl Carnarvon in thinking that the good sense and the liberality of
the Australasian Colonists will ultimately lead them to a right decision. We think the
course hitherto taken has been a mistake, and has been taken under an incomplete con-
sideration of the whole question involved; but on this point, and on the remaining
Despatches of Sir Hercules Robinson and his Lordship, we must reserve our remarks for
a future article.


“ The Sydney Morning Herald.”
Thursdajq March 2, 1876.
The points submitted for consideration by Earl Carnarvon, with reference to annexa-
tion, deserve all the more consideration by the people at large, because up to the present
time they have never pronounced any decision thereupon. Whatever may be the case in
the other Colonies, in New South Wales neither Parliament nor people bas as yet given
any definite opinion as to the practicability and propriety of co-operation between the
Colony and the Crown in undertakings of common interest to both. All that has
happened with us is, that two Premiers, with their Cabinets, have each undertaken to
speak for themselves, and to a certain extent for the Colony too. But they have done
so without any authority, and they have done so without any subsequent approval or
disapproval. So far forth the question is an open one, as two different Governments
have given to some extent two different opinions; and, as the people at large
have not at all pronounced on the matter, the Colony may be considered uncommitted.
In the matter of Fiji, Mr. Parkes gave a qualified and cautious promise of Colonial
assistance up to a certain point. In the matter of New Guinea, Mr. Robertson used
language which is tantamount to a refusal of any assistance. Probably both Ministers,
if required to restate their views now in the light of all subsequent events, would do so
with more care and fulness; but, so far as the matter has gone at present, we prefer the
tendency of Mr. Parkes’s policy to that of Mr. Robertson in this matter. We do so on
the simple ground that it behoves the Colonists of New South Wales in all their dealings
to be straightforward and equitable, reasonable and honourable; and it seems to us that
it would be neither to ask the mother-country to be perpetually undertaking difficult and
expensive tasks on behalf of the Colonies, and yet refusing to bear a share of the expense.
We do not believe that the people of the Colony, if appealed to, w r ould in any respect
he unwilling to assume their fair and legitimate responsibility. They have asked for and
they have received self-government to the full. So far as all their internal administration
is concerned, they are carrying out the government of the counrry with spirit and
enterprise, entering into large responsibilities, and fulfilling to the letter all the obliga-
tions those responsibilities involve; nor is there the slightest justification for supposing
that they would seek to shirk any kind of duty which devolves upon them as a
dependency of the Empire, or as a young nation in the germ. It seems to us, therefore,
that Mr. Robertson has made a mistake in rejecting on behalf of the Colony all pecuniary
responsibility with respect to the colonisation of New Guinea, should it be undertaken.
Even if we were to admit that it was exclusively an Imperial question, still we are a part
of the Empire ; and if we set the Imperial authorities in motion we ought even on that
ground to stand our fair share of any expense.
Mr. Robertson presses the argument that there cannot be co-operation in expenditure
without co-operation in government. But this argument may be pushed too far.
Admitting the general soundness of the principle that taxation and representation go
together, still there are in practice certain limitations of this rule. It is a constant thing
in common life, and not an uncommon thing in political life, to part with money to certain
trusted persons and powers, and to leave them the executive control. If it were
just as easy for the mother-country and the Colonies to co-operate in governing
Fiji or New Guinea as it is for them to co-operate in finding the funds, then there would
be no objection at all to push the principle we have referred to; but if in practice it is
found that a divided government would simply mean a divided responsibility and
endless complications, with the prospect of ultimate failure, then practical common
sense suggests that the executive duty should be left in the hands of those most
competent to discharge it. If on account of proximity the Colonial Government
w T ere the better of the two to undertake the task, then we should be fairly entitled to
ask that it should be left in our hands. But if, on the other hand, the Imperial
Government is the better fitted for the discharge of the duty, then the Colonial Govern-
ment may be content to leave the responsibility there, and to watch or suggest as
circumstances may dictate. To push a principle to extremes without regard to
expediency would often destroy the very purpose for which the principle exists. Means
are for the sake of the ends, not the ends for the sake of the means; and if we want
New Guinea annexed and colonised, we are simply standing in our own light by
asserting stiffly a theoretical principle which stands in the way of the practical realisation
of our wish.
A 2


It ought not to be overl joked that this principle of co-operation in payment without
co-operation in administrative control is already recognised to some extent. Thus, for
instance, the Mint, although situated within our own territory, is paid for by a fixed
Colonial contribution of 15,000/. a year, yet it is managed exclusively by the Imperial
Government, which is represented here by the Governor. This Imperial establishment
is in no respect under the control of the local Cabinet, although any suggestions from
Ministers are always carefully considered. The settlement at Somerset, Cape York, is
in the territory of Queensland, and it is managed exclusively by that Colony. But being
established mainly in the interest of the mercantile marine, and especially for the behoof
of shipwrecked sailors, the mother-country contributes towards the cost of maintenance;
so do the other Australasian Colonies in the proportion in which it is supposed that the
shipping of each is interested. The contributions come from various Governments,
the administration rests with one. When we had Imperial troops in the Colony we
contributed to their maintenance, but had no control over them, and the same remark
applies to our naval contributions. Our mail services are at present exclusively in
Colonial hands, yet the Government of England virtually contributes to each of the
three Colonial lines, by carrying the mails free to and from the points at which the
Colonial lines commence. In all these cases, and in similar cases, it is obviously the
common-sense arrangement to have the authority where, all things considered, the
authority can best be vested, and to let contributions be shared on some equitable basis.
Co-operation is impossible on any other principle.
At any rate, in view of the present unwillingness of the Australian Colonies to spend
a farthing towards the colonisation of New Guinea, that project stands in indefinite
abeyance. Earl Carnarvon does not see it to be an Imperial duty, and he is not
distressed at the idea of its falling into the hands of any great foreign Power. The
assurances received are adverse to any such supposition, and there does not seem
anything to justify an appeal to the British taxpayer.
Mr. Robertson says that if the Australian Colonies were a separate nationality they
would annex Polynesia as a matter of course; in which case they would have to pay
for it. The question then arises, Why should they lose by it because they want it done
in their interest while they are still dependencies ? If the Colonists press a particular
policy on the mother-countrv, and if they do so mainly with a view to their own advan-
tages, they do not stand well before the eyes of their fellow-countrymen in England, nor
well before the world at large, in declining to contribute anything towards the cost of
such undertakings on the ground that they cannot co-operate in the act of government
with the mother-country, and that therefore they will contribute nothing in money.
The probabilities are that, in the long run, as these Colonies increase in power and
population, and especially if they become a federation nation, the government of these
dependencies will fall into Australian hands; none the less, however, it is reasonable
that while these Colonies are small, weak, isolated, and even mutually jealous, the
executive government of these dependencies should rest in Imperial hands. The
Colonies are not strong enough to act single-handed at present in the matter of these
outlying administrations. They are too suspicious of each other to act in conjunction,
and yet they all want that Australia should get its footing on the Polynesian islands.
Obviously, therefore, the simple policy is for them all to solicit the aid of the Imperial
Government, and to back up that aid by the most substantial support. How that is
to be carried out is of course a matter to be considered, but at present the only question
submitted to the different Colonies is whether they will recognise the principle that, if
the Imperial Government does what the Australian Colonies ask for, it should be
proportionately assisted in the task.
“ The Sydney Mail. ”
March 4, 1876.
Colonial Contributions towards Imperial Expenditure.
Some correspondence between the Earl of Carnarvon and Sir Hercules Robinson
on the New Guinea question, and matters connected therewith, has been laid before
Parliament. It is well known that although urgent representations in favour of the
annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain have been sent from these Colonies to the
Imperial Government, and that although it has been obvious throughout that the step
was recommended chiefly on the ground of Australian interest, it has been made


perfectly plain that the charge was to fall upon the British taxpayer. It Will be
remembered that when the acquisition of Fiji was resolved upon by Great Britain,
also greatly in the interest of Australia, the Secretary of State suggested that each of
these Colonies should contribute a certain proportion (insignificant in amount) towards
the cost of governing the new dependency. The suggestion found no favour with those
Colonial legislatures to which it was submitted (for it was not brought before them all).
The most interesting part of the correspondence before us is that in which the Secretary
of State, assuming that this cold reception was due to a mistake as to the nature of the
proposal, explains its true .character, in order that the Colonies may reconsider the
principle involved, and be prepared for future contingencies in which its application
might seem desirable. The object of the Home Government was not to obtain the
small sum of money required in the case of Fiji, but to introduce a system under which
the distant Colonies would co-operate as parts of the Empire in carrying out measures
of Imperial policy in which they were primarily, if not chiefly, interested. Such co-
operation would justify, or at least promote, the favourable consideration of such
measures by the British taxpayers, who, of course, cannot always see the equity of
their bearing all the cost and securing only a share of the benefit of distant enterprises.
The chief objection here seems to be that the Colonies would not be able to control
the expenditure of money contributed. But, in the nature of the case, Imperial under-
takings must be under Imperial control; and there is not only inconsistency, but
meanness, in the conduct of those who complain that England is relaxing her Imperial
policy, and not showing a due interest in the welfare of her dependencies, and then
claim that the dependencies shall be exempt from bearing any share in the cost of
Imperial action that would promote their welfare, because, as Imperial action, it would
be beyond their control. If the matter were rightly understood, the Colonies would
embrace with eagerness such a proposal as that made by Lord Carnarvon.
“ The Argus.”
Wednesday, March 1, 1876.
The Despatches which have passed between the Earl of Carnarvon and the Governor
of New South Wales on the subject of the actual annexation of Fiji and the suggested
annexation of New Guinea, which are published elsewhere, will repay a careful perusal.
Studiously courteous in tone, and calmly dignified in language, those of the Colonial
Secretary seem to have been framed with a scrupulous desire not to give umbrage to
communities which are in the habit of setting their backs up on the slightest provocation
—communities in which Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies is occa-
sionally spoken of as a “foreign nobleman,” and credited with all sorts of nefarious
designs upon the independence of their public men, and upon the integrity of their
political institutions.
In the first of these Despatches Lord Carnarvon recapitulates the narrative of events
preceding the annexation of Fiji, which was effected by the Imperial Government at
the “ strong and repeated instance ” of these Colonies, and then relates the kind of
reception which his overtures to the Governments of four of them, with reference to a
contribution towards the cost of administration, met with. On the whole it was any-
thing but satisfactory; but, as Lord Carnarvon observes, the circumstances of the case
being such as to make the grace of the action depend upon its being voluntary, while
the contribution “ would be mainly valuable as proving the readiness of the great
Colonies to accept their membership in the common duties of the Empire,” Her Majesty’s
advisers did not feel that the occasion was one which would justify the slightest pressure
being put upon the unwilling co-operators. The result, Lord Carnarvon evidently
wishes to insinuate, is that Great Britain is saddled with an island she does not want,
entailing upon her losses which she did not anticipate; and her experience in connection
wfith this transaction inclines her to be extremely cautious with regard to any overtures
which may be addressed to her from these Colonies for the incorporation of other
islands with her dominions. “It must be obvious,” significantly remarks Lord Car-
narvon, speaking with reference to both Fiji and New Guinea, “that the future ot
“ these islands is of the most direct and material importance to the Colonies of
“ Australasia, while it would be impossible for a very large proportion of taxpayers
“ of this country to understand on what principle they should bear, whilst the Colonies
“ immediately concerned should be exempted from, the burden of any expenditure
A 3


“ that may be incurred in connection with such places.” Therefore, Sir Hercules
Robinson is invited to ask his Ministers whether the time has not arrived in which the
various Governments of Australasia might combine to bear a reasonable proportion of
the expense attending any policy of annexation advocated or approved by them. The
reply, however, of the Governor of New South Wales, conveying the sentiments of his
Ministers, was unfavourable; and in another Despatch from Downing Street, dealing
with the question of annexing New Guinea exclusively. Lord Carnarvon enters into
the whole subject very fully. Summarising the reasons which have been advanced for
placing that island under the British flag, he comments upon them seriatim. He
considers that these Colonies are chiefly, if not solely, interested in the acquisition of so
great an area of country, and would principally benefit by any trade which might be
opened up with the Papuans. He states that the provisions of the Pacific Islanders
Protection Act, passed by the Imperial Parliament last year, will apply to New Guinea
as well as to Fiji, and will bring that island within the control of the High Commis-
sioner, so that “it will thus be possible to punish crime, to supervise the local trade, and,
“ it may perhaps be added, to learn by experience how far there are other places which
“it may be expedient or necessary to bring absolutely under British rule.” There
remains then, Lord Carnarvon observes, the possibility or probability of New Guinea
being annexed by a foreign Power to be considered and disposed of. Of this, he savs, he
fails to perceive any indication. The United States, he alleges, adheres to its traditional
policy of not acquiring remote dependencies. Germany has formally declared, with
special reference to New Guinea, that she has no intention of acquiring Colonies; and
Lord Carnarvon is of opinion that if any other European power should contemplate
laying hold of any of the Pacific Islands, they would have the politeness to communi-
cate with the British Government before assuming “jurisdiction over a place the
“ expediency of annexing which to the British Empire is well known to have been
“ formally recommended and to be under the consideration of Her Majesty’s Govern-
“ ment.” But if Russia should take it into her head to establish a settlement in New
Guinea, we scarcely think she would trouble herself to make her intentions known to
the Cabinet at St. James’s, any more than Lord Derby thought it necessary to apprise
the Foreign Office at St. Petersburg of his purpose to purchase the Khedive of Egypt’s
shares in the Suez Canal.
Finally, Lord Carnarvon signifies that, having weighed the arguments pro and con.,
he regards the present extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea or any other
of the Pacific Islands as inexpedient, but does not wish us to understand that he
considers the question to be closed. To quote his own words, —he “ sees no reason
for hastening a decision on so important a question.” In the meantime, it is satis-
factory to know that the Secretary of State for the Colonies has caused a very
impressive warning to be addressed to Lieutenant Armit and the other members of
the “ New Guinea Colonising Association,” who will receive neither moral support nor
legal recognition at the hands of the Imperial Government, which refuses to sanction,
even tacitly, the acquisition of land within the island by British subjects.
The question stands in this position, then: —Great Britain does not preclude herself
from annexing New Guinea at some future day; but, as she holds that the advantages
of such a step would be almost wholly reaped by the Australian Colonies, she is of
opinion that, whenever the subject is re-opened, these Colonies should be prepared to
sustain at least a considerable proportion of the cost of occupying and administering
this additional territory. Whatever view may be entertained on this question of
annexation, it must be admitted by all dispassionate readers that Lord Carnarvon’s
Despatch is a well-considered and statesmanlike document.


No. 2.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY. *l10 —A.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION.
(Extract from the Log-book of the steam-launch “ Neva.”)
Ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be printed, 30 January 1877-
Signor L. M. D’Albertis to The Colonial Secretary.
I left Sydney on the 20th of April 1876, in the mail steamer “ Brisbane ” for
Somerset with Mr. Hargrave, the engineer, Moreraan, a sailor, and Mr. Wilcox. I
expected to get some native troopers from the Government at Brisbane (Queensland),
but felt much disappointed that from the great demand for the police at Cooktown none
could be spared, but on my arrival at the last-mentioned town I succeeded in engaging
six coloured men.
May Ist. Arrived at Somerset, and disembarked the “ Neva ” safely.
2nd to sth. We were employed in fitting out the “ Neva.”
6th. Left Somerset at 2 p.m. on a trial trip, under a steam pressure of 30 lbs.,
proposing to visit Mount Adolphus Island, but the wood we used
being wet we stopped at Muddy Bay until we had attained a power
of 40 lbs. steam pressure, when we started for Cape York Island,
and anchored at 4.15 p.m. west of Cape York ; cut wood, and remained
for the night.
7th. Passed the day on shore ; the bilge water was very offensive on board
the “ Neva,” and discoloured the paint.
Bth. Left Cape York at 11 a.m., under a steam pressure of 40 lbs; passed
east of Albany Island and anchored at Somerset at 1.30 p.m. For
five miles we had a current in our favour, and for three miles the
current was against us, but the sea was calm.
9th to 11th. Engaged in completing the arrangements and stowage of the “ Neva.”
12th. Purchased two tons of coal from the steamer “ Bowen,” and was annoyed
by some of the men getting drunk.
13th and 14th. Engaged in loading the “ Neva.”
15th. Was informed that Moreman was unwilling to go with the expedition,
as higher wages had been offered to him. I therefore proposed to
Moreman to discharge him on condition that he repaid the money I
had advanced to his wife, and his passage money from Sydney, but
he replied that it was his intention to go with the expedition.
l6th. Moreraan left last night. I was told he left with Captain Hovell on
board his vessel.
17th. Moreman has not been seen in Somerset.
18th. Called on the Police Magistrate for a warrant to be issued against
Moreraan. The weather being fine and calm, I left Somerset at 1 p.m.
and anchored at Harvey Rocks. Some of the bars of the furnace
melted,,so that we had to lessen our steam and help with the sail.
Mr. Hargrave had an attack of fever,
19th. We left our anchorage at 7 a.m., and anchored at 10.15 at Long Island,
where we remained all day and night—the engineer still continuing
ill. The weather was very fine.
20th. Started at 7 a.m. and steamed until noon, and then sailed until 5 p.m.,
for we could not get fresh water at Long Island.
21st. We left at 7 a.m. under steam ; at 9 a.m. saw the schooner “Pacific ”
at anchor on the Warrior Reef; we steered towards her, as she had
some coal, rice, and biscuits on board for us; at 10 a.m. we went on
board the schooner and received our supplies, and then left for Katow
at 10.30 a.m.; being over the coral reef and having no chart we had
some difficulty in keeping ourselves clear of accidents. Following
A 4


one of the pearl fishing boats we sighted the coast of New Guinea,
and landed at Katow at 3.30 p.m.; being desirous of procuring a pilot
to Kiwai. Maino, his sun, and another young native promised to go
with me to-morrow to Kiwai.
May 22nd. Early this morning I landed again at the village Moatta, and found that
Maino, his son Waruki and Dawan were ready and willing to accom-
pany me as pilot to Kiwai. We left at 9 a.m. for Bristow Island,
about miles from the main land, found a good channel from 3to
7 fathoms deep. About I p.m. we were abreast of a coral reef east
of Bristow Island, passed about a mile from the reef at low-water and
found from 4to 5 fathoms; after clearing the reef steered for
Bampton Island, named by the natives Parama. At 4.30 p.m. we
sighted Breakfast Island, named by the natives Mibu; at 7.15 p.m.
anchored 3 miles south of this island in two fathoms water.
23rd. At dead low-water, during the night the “ Neva ” struck the
bottom, which being rocky occasioned some alarm, but fortunately
the steamer received no injury, it being very calm at the time. At
7.30 a.m. we left for a small village at Kiwai Island, south-east of
Mibu, named by the natives Tzamari, and anchored in front of the
village about a mile from the shore on account of a mud flat. At 3 p.m.
went on shore with the Moatta people; we were well received, as the
natives are on good terms with the above people ; they were ready to
sell provisions in any quantity, consisting of pigs, bananas, yams, and
cocoa-nuts, the medium of exchange being tobacco ; so having loaded
the dingy with a large stock of provisions we had to refuse to purchase
any more. Remained at our anchorage all night.
24tb. We had a strong breeze during the nignt with heavy rain in the morning,
but it cleared up and became very fine during the remainder of the
day. A few miles above Tzamari we found the water fresh. We
passed close to some islands opposite to Kiwai Island and found a
good channel 5 fathoms deep and shoaling to 1 or 2 fathoms, but it is
very probable that we had got out sometimes from the proper channel.
Anchored at 11.30 a.m. opposite a village at Kiwai named Para by the
natives ; this village can be readily recognised by some lofty trees
which are very remarkable by being flat on the top. We found the
current here ran from 4 to 5 knots an hour. The natives of this
village did not come to us, and we saw only a small canoe in which
were two men far away. Landed on an island opposite the village to
cut wood, which we named Hixson Island.
25th Left Hixson Island at 7-30 a.m., but the wood being wet we made but
slow progress, but derived some assistance from our sail. After
clearing Kiwai we had a fresh south-east breeze and made good speed.
Passed Attack and Long Island without seeing any natives, and I
made at this part some alterations in the chart planned in the former
voyage of the “ Ellangowan.” We were in a good channel of from
sto 7 fathoms deep. Passed on the left close to an island, which
judging from its vegetation is of recent formation; this was named
Bennett Island. We now got into shallow water, but close to Canoe
Island there is a channel of 7 or 8 fathoms ; anchored at the same place
as when in the “ Ellangowan.” We have not yet seen any natives.
26th This morning about 7 a.m. two canoes were seen about a quarter of a
mile from the “ Neva ” ; a short time after three more appeared behind
but kept at a distance ; we made signs and held out baits to them by
waving red calico and called to them, but it was of no use. At
8.30 a.m. we raised the anchor, and the noise of our whistle and steam
caused them to take flight, and to enable them to pull faster they left
some of the canoe fittings behind ; they were not armed or attired in
their war dresses. I regretted we could not communicate with them,
as they seemed to me to be the same people by whom we were well
received in the “ Ellangowan.” We tried to pass close to the village
on the main land west of Canoa Island, but we were obliged to stop
at noon as we found we had got into shallow water and had but
little steam from the wood being green. About this place are many
sand-banks, dry at low water and difficult to cross. It was at this


place the “ Ellangowan ” struck. I believe that when the river is
properly surveyed, a safe and deeper channel will be found nearer to
the eastern bank. At 5.30 p.m. we reached Howling Point, where,
in the voyage of the “ Ellangowan,” we had seen natives ; we, however,
did not see any to-day, but heard the dogs barking and saw some
smoke. At dark we sent up.some rockets and made some experiments
with a combination of the dynamite with the rocket, which consisted
of inserting the fuse of a cartridge of dynamite into the bod}' of the
rocket. The first trial was unsatisfactory, as probably the rocket
exploded before the fire had communicated with the fuse. The second
time was a success, proving the possibility of sending a cartridge of
dynamite to a great distance and which will explode after the rocket
is spent. The time for the explosion of the dynamite may be
regulated by the length of fuse. It is wonderful the effect it produces
at night, hearing the heavy report of the dynamite after the explosion
of the rocket and its shower of fire. We did not expect that the
natives would venture to attack, us this night. The day had been
very fine.
May 27th. We did not see any fires on the land last night, nor did any natives
make their appearance this day. We left at 11 a.m., but the strength
of the current obliged us to stop and wait the rising of the tide. The
second time we stopped at an island, which I named Walker Island.
We then explored in the dingy a small creek for about half a mile and
killed some fish with dynamite. We left again at 4.15 p.m., and
anchored at dark.
28th. With the small supply of wood we had yesterday we left this morning
at 5.30 a.m. having the flood tide with us. We went 6or 7 miles and
then anchored in seven fathoms water. It rained in the morning, but
the remainder of the day was fine.
29th. Left at 6 a.m. with the rising tide, and the wood we used as fuel being
dry we made a run of about 26 miles. At 11 a.m. we had to stop,
having exhausted all our fuel. We did not meet any natives.
Passed so many islands that it made this part of the river very narrow,
but we had always from sto 7 fathoms. The banks at this part were
low and flat, but covered with beautiful dense and luxuriant forest.
30th. We left at 7 a.m. and anchored at 4 p.m., at the distance of one or two
miles from the last place we reached in the “ Ellangowan.” We
passed a large island north-east of it and saw a small village on the
main-land, composed of four or live new houses. Some few miles
further we observed* a few natives, some of whom were armed with
bows and arrows. They were laughing and chattering at us, but did
not appear to have any bad intentions. Near them, fastened to the
bank, were some canoes. I waved some red calico towards them,
but they did not or would not notice it, but soon after disappeared into
the bush.
31st. We started early in the morning and reached Ellangowan Island, passing
on the north side. The bank on the right was covered with dense
and luxuriant forest trees, but on the left vegetation was very scanty,
there being only a few lofty trees about the bank, and behind these,
as far as we could see, was only an open country of coarse grassy
vegetation, and appeared to be swampy and flooded at some seasons
of the year. The banks of the river had at this place a very different
appearance from what we had previously seen for it was covered by
that graminaceous plant the Coix lacryma. At 3 p.m. we discovered
some huts in an abandoned village. We landed and found eight or
ten old houses close to the bank, which was at this part 7 or 8 feet
above the level of the water. Following a path through the forest
behind the houses we found a new canoe which had been constructed
on the spot. The ground around was cleared of trees and shrubs,
and small trunks of trees were lying across of about two yards one
from the other, on which the canoe had to be launched into the river.
A similar plan is adopted on the north-west coast of New Guinea. In
the houses I found a stone, some fresh water shells, fish bones, and
, pig s> skulls. The houses looked very rudely constructed, and it is
R 6853. B


very probable they were only used as places for shelter. Close by I
observed some small platforms on which the natives preserve their
provisions against the hungry dogs and pigs ; such platforms are also
used by the natives of Yule Island and Hall Sound. A short distance
further on I saw a few more houses protected by a side wall made of
leaves ; they were probably used by the women. We left the village
at 3.15 p.m., and anchored at 6 p.ra., but we did not proceed any
distance from the village, the wood procured there being wet. We
had a fine and calm day.
June Ist. Left at 8.10 a.m. and anchored at 2 p.rn.; the engineer reported that
from the quality and state of the wood we could not go any further
to-day. The banks at this part were very low 7 and covered with long
coarse grass, of which the Coix was very prominent, and some
straggling trees which appeared to be a species of Acacia. We saw
a small channel, and considered it probable that we had anchored on
the north side of an island formed by this creek. At this place the
river assumes a much more broad appearance, and the presence of a
number of aquatic birds suggests to me that we are not far from a
lagoon.
2nd. We left at 7 a.m. and steamed until 5.30 p.m. when we anchored, during
which time we ran thirty to thirty-two miles, advancing somewhat in a
northern latitude, but the direction of the river seems to tend to the west.
The banks of the river are still low and now are only covered by Coix
and other coarse grasses, or a very poor vegetation, still here and there
some dumps of beautiful trees would appear. The Acacia was also
seen occasionally, but was not plentiful; the bread-fruit tree (Arto-
carpus) w r as more common on the banks, and also a species of taro.
We also saw a few cocoa-nut trees, and I observed that those bearing
fruit had their leaves hanging over the river cut down in the middle ;
this, I suppose was done by the natives, so that they could perceive at
a distance which trees are bearing fruit. Also passed some huts,
and saw some traps for catching fish at several places on the banks,
especially on the left side ; a short distance inland we also discovered
a plantation of cocoa-nut trees, and observed some smoke ; no doubt
there is a village, but we saw nothing of the natives.
3rd. Left at 10 a.m. and anchored at 5 p.m. On three different points a
quantity of smoke was seen, and about 2 p.m. we came upon a small
grove of cocoa-nut trees ; on the right hand, a little behind it the
ground is a little more elevated and covered with grass, and a little
beyond a dense forest was seen. We landed here and got some
cocoa-nuts; about half-a-mile from the cocoa-nut grove we met a
canoe with a boy, and apparently also a w'oman ; they did not appear
to be frightened, but pulling away entered a lagoon on the right, and
disappeared among the long reeds ; some houses were seen in that
direction. A little further on another lagoon w 7 as seen about three
miles in extent as far as we could see; it may be larger, but a portion
was not visible for the trees. We met also another canoe with two
men, but they soon disappeared among the reeds. I endeavoured to
make them understand that we were friends, but they avoided' all
intercourse with us, without evincing any great fear. The country
we passed to-day looks much better, the banks were here and there
more elevated, consisting of red clay, and the vegetation was much
more luxuriant.
4th. We steamed from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., except stopping at 11 a.m. to get
more wood; the banks again became low, some of the land being
covered with shrubs, and sometimes by coarse grass, among which
the Coix predominated. A species of bamboo appeared very abun-
dant at this place, A little before dark, about one or two miles inland
on the left bank some cocoa-nut palms were seen, and probably there
is a village, but we only saw a. canoe with one native, who took no
notice of us.
sth. Very early this morning I observed a canoe about 300 yards with
natives behind us, and all our attention was directed to gain their
confidence, but all our presents of red calico and bottles, sent down


by the current, were unavailing; they did not notice or seem to care
for them, but crossed the river and disappeared among the reeds.
A short time after, two other canoes, manned by natives, passed the
same way, without communicating with us. At 6.30 a.m. five large
canoes came out from the place where the others had disappeared,
with about twelve or fifteen men in each. After looking at us for
some time they passed on, making a great noise and at times appeared
as if they would approach nearer. They were in fighting order, as
they were attired in their war dresses, and were armed with bows and
arrows. I endeavoured to pacify them by sending some red calico,
knives, and bottles, fastened to a piece of wood, but they did not
take any notice of my presents or pick them up. When we raised up
the anchor the flags were hoisted ; this seemed to alarm them, for they
almost immediately ceased shouting and talking, and pulled away;
two chiefs apparently tried to place the other canoes ahead, so as to
protect them from any danger. As soon as the “ Neva ” moved they
began to retreat, but when we turned the bow of the steamer towards
them they rapidly fled, still more terrified at the noise from the steam
whistle and the report of a few shots from a revolver fired in the air,
and they speedily got out of sight, vanishing among the reeds. We
continued our course until 4 p.m., when we landed among some old
houses on the left bank, which at this place was about twenty feet
high from the water, and for the purpose of obtaining some more
wood as fuel. To get into the house we had to climb up an old
rotten ladder which was not very safe. The houses were situated
along the bank, and were similar to those used by the natives of Yule
Island. In the middle of the village was a square place kept cleared
of plants and other vegetation, and judging from a painted post, the
carving of animals and other devices on the bark of some of the trees,
and the remains of animal bones, it was evident that this place was
used as a place of meeting for the people, for dancing or any pubiic
assemblies. The animals carved on the trees were principally reptiles,
as alligators and iguanas, which are used as food by the natives, and
may be also objects of veneration ; some of the designs were very well
executed, and I cut out one of these carvings from the tree, repre-
senting a human face, very odd and grotesque; the colours used
were red, white, and yellow. The bones of pigs and fresh-water
turtles were found in the houses, with net bags filled with fresh-water
shells, in the latter stored for the purpose of being converted into
lime, which the natives use to mix with their betel leaf and areka-nut.
The ground about this locality was somewhat undulating and tolerably
dry. Bread-fruit trees were abundant and of large size, and taro was
also growing on the bank. Our provisions being rather scanty, we
had a good supply of fish from the river by aid of the dynamite.
June 6th. We left about 7 a.m. and found the river bending very much till we got
some miles west by north, when the banks again had only a little
elevation, but the forest was very rich and luxuriant. We stopped
a short time at some cocoa-nut palms to get a supply of nuts for the
crew, who were very fond of them. At 3.30 p.m. we saw an opening
on the left from the north-west, and came upon some places with not
of a greater depth than one fathom of water, but we soon got again
into the proper channel, when we then had from five to seven fathoms
of water. Opposite the opening just mentioned there was a muddy
bank on the right. At 4.30 p.m. we had to anchor, having no fuel,
close to a bank of red clay, as we had exhausted all our wood. The
weather was windy with a little rain, and we got some large fish by
aid of the dynamite.
7th. We did not leave before 10 a.m., and, our supply of wood being bad,
were obliged to go very slow, and to drop anchor at a small plantation,
to procure more wood. Left; and stopped, after a short time, for
the purpose of visiting another old village, and found some implements
and other articles in one of the houses, which, in its form, resembles
the reception-houses of the south-east coast of New Guinea—that is,
like to an overturned boat, with a projecting spur in front, —the only
B 2


difference being, that it was not built on piles. Part of the bank on
which the village is situated has been washed away by the water, and
consequently some of the houses have fallen down. Some fine banana-
trees and tobacco plants were under cultivation by the natives ; but,
judging from the grass about the houses, I should consider they had
been abandoned, from some cause or other, several months since.
Steamed again for a few miles, and then anchored near a tall dead
tree in the water, bearing the marks of fire—the first seen of any indica-
tion of fire since we entered the river.
June Bth. Left at 8 a.m., and anchored at 5 p.m., remaining half-an-hour at another
old village. We found that tobacco was cultivated at this place, and
appeared to be of excellent quality ; some bags, with fresh-water
shells and the remains of alligators and fresh-water turtles, were found
in the houses. From stellar observations taken by Mr. Hargrave, we
were now in 6° 28' south latitude; by my calculation, we are only
four miles above. The health of all on board this day was very
good. / _
9th. Left at 8 a.m.; and, the wood being good, we were able to steam until
4 p.m. without any delay. We spent the night near the left bank,
mooring the “ Neva ” to a tree, and using the dingy as a bridge to
go on shore from the steamer. The bank was high, and covered
with a very rich vegetation, of more luxuriant growth than any we
had yet seen, and of a deep green colour. During our excur-
sions we met with no natives, but fell in with a young plantation of
eleven cocoa-nut palms, a few huts, and some old landing-places.
The bank was from 6 to 8 feet high above the level of the water;
and, judging from the discolouration of the water, and the large
amount of snags and debris brought down by the current, it is
probable that there was very heavy rain about the higher lands of the
interior far away from us. It was proposed to give the men a day’s
rest to-morrow (the first since we left), and also to go on a shooting
excursion, as our provision was getting short.
10th Went on shore at 8 a.m. with some of the men, and was very fortunate
in killing, among many other birds, a noble full-grown Cassowary
( Cassuarius sp.), as well as a new species of goura-crowned pigeon.
We soon returned to the “ Neva ” with a fine specimen of cassowary
and a good supply of fresh meat.
11th. We left at 6.30 a.m., and anchored again at 5 p.m. By stellar observa-
tion Mr. Hargrave made our position 6° 20' south latitude, by my
reckoning we were four miles more north. The bank was low, but
covered with the most luxuriant vegetation and magnificent forest
trees. Ido not think this place is inhabited, as all traces of natives
have disappeared. The men were dissatisfied that the cook did not
give them a larger supply of meat, and also asked for an extra supply
of biscuits ; but I refused, as we had only about 40 or 50 lbs. of
biscuit left.
12th. Left at 8.30 a.m. ; but, our wood being bad, we could only proceed
slowly. We passed an island, and found ourselves in front of some
openings, one of which may very probably be another large branch
of the river. We landed on the western point, to give time to get up
sufficient steam to enable us to proceed; found an old arrow, and
captured a living snake, so I named the point “ Snake Point.” I did
not see any natives, but observed a cutting on a tree by some sharp
instrument. We finished, this day, the flesh of the cassowary.
13th. Our wood being bad we did not proceed far this day. The banks were
covered with a thick luxuriant forest. We passed two hills about
200 feet high, covered with a dense forest vegetation ; the trees were
of a rich deep green colour, and amongst the trees I observed some
species of tree fern. We anchored at 5 p.m.
14th. Left at 11 a.m., and anchored at 5 p.m. We were not able to make
much progress this day from our fuel being bad. It is now 7 three days
since we have had a glimpse of any natives, but this day we had signs
of some being in the vicinity, for we saw 7 three or four canoes fastened
to the muddy bank, but could not discover any tracks or signs of the


owners, so I suppose the canoes must have been there for spine time.
The banks at this place were seven or eight feet high. I took a long
walk and found that the forest was very rich, the lesser vegetation
beautiful, and the soil very fertile, but in many parts it was exceed-
ingly damp and muddy, and in other places covered with water. I
found the sago palm very abundant.
June 15th. We were late in taking our departure this morning, not leaving until
10 a.m. We had cut a large quantity of wood, but being green we
steamed this day very slowly, and were often obliged to stop. The
banks as we passed along became of greater elevation, and once we
stopped at the foot of a hill. At the edge of the water 1 observed some
yellow sandstone with oxide of iron in it; this supported a conglomerate
of flint-stone, basalt and quartz in abundance. Above the conglomerate
was red clay and a strata of hard decayed vegetation. I collected
several mineral specimens, with one or two fossils. The men washed
some dirt for gold, but I did not think that they found any. From the
washing I obtained a sample of iron-sand. The sight of a hill, rock,
or stone seemed to animate my people, who no doubt engaged in the
expedition in expectation of finding gold. We met this day canoes
in different places, some lying on the banks and one in a creek. On ex-
amination of this one I found only some leaves in it and two wretched
paddles, being formed of long sticks with three bits of bark inserted
in a cleft at the end, and tied with rattan; on the mud I recognised
the foot-print of a boy or woman. I placed a bottle in the canoe,
which J think will astonish the owner, who I suppose, was not far
away. We anchored about 4 p.m., near a small creek, in which I
procured some excellent fish by aid of the dynamite. Observed
several paths in the forest, so I think we are in the vicinity of natives.
Palmer had an attack of fever to-day.
l6th. Left at 10.30 a.m., as we could not get up our steam before ; we obtained
more fish by dynamite. Visited the shore and shot a specimen of Para-
disea apoda, if it should be that bird, which it closely resembles ; if
so it is the first time it has been met with in New Guinea. Not far
from our starting point we saw a large rock above the water in the
middle of the river, and trying to avoid it by nearing the right bank
(it is about 25 feet high) came upon a large house, and a few natives
were seen to run away armed with bows and arrows. We stopped in
front of the house, and then landed to visit the house and the planta-
tion, in order to procure food and ethnological specimens, so as to be
able to form an opinion of the natives of this part of New Guinea, as
so far we have not as yet been able to have any communication with
them from their constantly running away on our approach. I found
the house was constructed upon piles, fifteen feet high, very neatly
built, but of a different style to any I have seen in other parts of New
Guinea. The interior was very clean and arranged in good order.
We inspected everything, and took away r with us some weapons, stone
implements, and several ornaments, which will serve to show by 7
comparison and examination the race of people inhabiting this part of
New Guinea. We procured also some bananas of a very bad quality,
but did not see any pigs. In exchange for what we took, I left three
axes, three knives, six bottles, some red cloth, and some handkerchiefs.
We returned on board without seeing any natives, and steamed away.
Soon after we passed a small island, got into shallow water and struck
the ground three times, but fortunately received no injury, but on
steel ing for the left bank we got into the proper channel, with a depth
of water of two and three fathoms. About 4 p.m. we were obliged
to stop, our supply of wood being exhausted. We saw three men and
two canoes, but found it impossible to induce them to approach us,
for they abandoned their canoes and disappeared into the forest.
17th. About 10 a.m. we left; after steaming a few miles the water became
so shallow—only half a fathom: —that w T e had to stop near to the right
bank, where we found 1-| fathom; the engineer went in the dingy to
sound, and found the channel at cme and one and a half fathoms on
the right-hand side, bat there was a large snag lying across it. He
B 3


returned on board at 4 p.m., but too late to proceed any further. We
proposed to clear the passage, but at the same time hoped we should
have some rain by to-morrow, and have a greater depth of water.
I went on shore, and ascended the summit of the hill, 250 feet high.
On the: top I found a good path along the ridge of the hill, and also
visited a small house, which appeared to have been only recently
vacated by the natives, judging from the remains of food, and fresh
leaves used by them to sit upon. There were some net bags in which
I found Dammar resin, and there were also some bamboos for carrying
water. The paths at the summit of the hill were very numerous ;
from the top in a north to north-east direction I observed some very
high mountains at a great distance, and the land rose gradually in
that direction ; it was so misty at the time that I found it impossible
to determine the distance. In the afternoon I again visited the hills
with some of the men; we then obtained a much better view, but
not enough to enable us to form an opinion of the true distance,
but I calculated they may be fifty or sixty miles distant from us.*
The hills were covered with dense vegetation, and a yellow and red
clay were to be seen here and there covering a hard sandstone. In
the creeks quartz was seen in abundance. John, one of the men, is
ill with fever; Palmer improving.
June 18th. After the rain of last night we found the water deeper and left at about
7.30, but found the current very strong against us at the rate of five
miles an hour; had to stop at 1 p.m. for want of fuel, having pro-
gressed only four or five miles the water shallowed. I passed nearly
four hours in rambling on shore, and found the country formed of
small rounded hills from 50 to 100 feet high. Observed as usual in
the creeks and gullies an abundance of quartz pebbles, and the dirt
when washed gave a large quantity of iron. The forest is very
luxuriant and of semi-tropical vegetation, and the ground was
generally covered by a species of Begonia. Mr. Wilcox had an attack
of illness.
19th. Left at 7-30 a.m., but the wood being bad, we did not progress more
than six or seven miles, and about noon had to delay for the purpose
of cutting more wood ; steamed again about 3 p.m., and stopped a
short time after at some bread-fruit trees we saw in a small plantation.
We proceeded again, and as the water was shallow, having only three
feet of water, I gave orders to the engineer to go slowly, and to stop
when we had only half a fathom of water, to give us time to sound ;
but he must have mistaken my instructions, for he went at full speed,
the result was that we struck the ground three times and had to
stop. The men landed to cut wood, and I occupied myself by
rambling about, and found the country undulating and hilly to the
height of from 40 to 50 feet. The trees were here growing widely
apart, but taller than any I had previously seen; the soil was of
yellow clay, covered by a strata of decayed vegetation, mosses, an
apparently new species of Pitcher-plant (Nepenthes) covered the
ground in great abundance, quartz and sandstone were found in the
creeks.
20th. It was raining all last night and this morning to 9 a.m. Left at noon,
but the wood being wet and a strong current against us we did not
go very far. About 4 p.m. we arrived at a plantation on the left
bank where we saw some poor sugar-cane and plenty of taro.
Anchored to collect some provisions, as ours are all consumed, but I
keep in reserve four or five pounds of flour, and biscuit, to be used
only in case of necessity. We thought we perceived some movement
on the bank, but could not distinguish if any natives were there, or
only dogs or pigs. We landed and found a small house two or three
hundred yards from the river, in the middle of a taro plantation ;
entered the house and got some sago and fish, which we found ready
for cooking by the natives, and some ornaments and stone implements.
Dawan captured a young pig, at which we were all delighted, as we
* Probably it is the Charles Louis range.


all began to feel the want of meat. We determined to remain here
for the night, to cut wood to-morrow, there being a great number of
fallen trees, and to lay in a stock of taro for future occasions.
June 21st. We had a good deal of rain during the night and this morning, so that
the men did not land to cut wood until 9 a.m. Captured another
pig, and obtained ten bags of taro. I found two human skeletons
exposed on a platform, and I secured them for scientific purposes ; I
left in exchange for what we took tomahawks, knives, handkerchiefs,
beads, bottles, tins, and looking-glasses. Left at 12.30 p.m., but our
progress was slow—the current being strong against us. From pass-
sing too close to the bank we were struck by the branches of an
overhanging tree, occasioned by the want of care of the man at the
wheel. I saw in the middle of the river a very singular plant which
only grows on gravel banks in the rivers, serving as a natural
warning to voyagers in an unexplored river. I was aware of this, and
gave orders to proceed at half-speed, and told the man to steer to the
left; but my directions most have been again misunderstood, as we
went at full speed and received a severe shock upon the gravel bank ;
fortunately we sustained no damages, but we had to drop anchor for
the night.
22nd. All night and morning we had heavy rains, and although we had our
steam up till noon the current was so strong against us that we
resolved to wait until the flood had subsided. Passed the day on
shore, which teemed with a most luxuriant vegetation. I observed
yellow clay and quartz in the creeks. Mr. Hargrave and the
Chinaman ill with fever.
23rd. Left early this morning, and after steaming a few miles came upon two
branches of the river ; took the right branch, being the largest but
not of a greater width than fifty or sixty yards, the depth of water
being almost constant from two to three fathoms ; but we had not
proceeded very far when we came upon a gravel bank in the middle
of the river, and found that we had shoaled to half a fathom of water;
the “ Neva ” got aground, and the force of the current sent her on
her beam ends, and we fully expected she would capsize. Sounded
in the dingy from bank to bank, and found only half a fathom with a
gravel bottom, at last found one fathom close to the right bank where
we anchored, expecting, by waiting, the river would rise with the rain.
24th. We had no rain, so the shallow water still continued, and we were
obliged to remain. I spent the day in shooting, and traversed some
miles of country, which I found hill}”, and the hills became more
elevated as we passed inland from the river, still I did not see any
mountains ; the average height of the hills seen and ascended averaged
for three to four hundred feet. Observed yellow clay, green sandy
stone, and the usual quartz pebble in the creeks. This place afforded
the greatest interest to the naturalist. On the top of one of the
hills I found a small house, in which I discovered some arrows, stones
used for cooking food, some flint implements, and some cassowary
bones. Although the house was small, there was a division in the
middle for a separation of the sexes. We had some rain during the
day. Mr. Hargrave bad a slight attack of fever.
25th. Abundance of rain last night, and the river rose this morning with a
strong current. We left at 9 a.m., but in two hours did not make
progress more than one or one and a half miles ; notwithstanding we
took every precaution, we got twice aground, but did not sustain
any damage. At 11 a.m. started for the third time, but the current
drove the “ Neva ” against a snag, and we sustained two or three
severe shocks and were nearly capsized, and lost from the roof a
valuable collection of living plants, together with some shells and
skulls and skeletons of animals which were stored on the roof for want
of room inside the steamer, and also some yards of canvas, which got
entangled in the screw 7 and rudder, so that we could not move ; the
anchor was quickly dropped, so that we should not be carried by the
current, but it placed the “Neva” on a gravel-bank, lying over on
ber side, and much water got into her. We made every effort to get.
B 4


her afloat again, but were unsuccessful; as the flood subsided the
“Neva” remained on the now dry gravel-bank all the day. At
8.30 p.m. the clouds were heavy with rain, and every appearance of a
thunder-storm, so we remained in hopes that a flood would relieve us
from our unpleasant position.
June 26th. Heavy rains last night; the river was rising, but at 6.30 a.m. our position
had not improved. It appears to me, and to all, especially Mr. Har-
grave, that we cannot proceed any further in the “ Neva,” and
advised me when we floated again to return. I requested him to
write his opinion in my log-book, which he did as follows:
“ Mr. D’Albertis asked my opinion about the possibility of the
“ ‘ Neva ’ proceeding up the Fly River. I said, ‘ She cannot; the
“ ‘ current is 6 or 7 knots, the channel narrow; the eddies make
“ ‘ the rudder useless.’ — Law. Hargrave.” From 6 to 8 a.m. the
flood rose a little more, and we again tried to float the “ Neva,” but
with no success, and she remained this day on the gravel-bank. Two
men on the sick list.
27th. Last night, about 1 a.m. the water again rose until 6 a.m., when I sent
two men in the dingy to put an anchor astern, in order to try to get
her off the gravel-bank, on which she had been fixed for the last two
days. By the carelessness of one of the men the points of the
anchor struck the dingy, and damaged it so much that we had to
defer any attempt to relieve the “ Neva,” as the dingy had to be put
on shore to be repaired. The flood having subsided, the “ Neva ”
remained dry on the bank, still on her beam-ends. I went up the
country with the men about six miles, and crossed some swampy
flats, and some very stiff hills, and followed the course of the river,
in some places only 25 or 30 yards wide, and very shallow, with
here and there gravel-banks similar to those on which the “ Neva ”
is grounded, and which is composed of pebbles of quartz, basalt, lime-
stone ; and I also found some fossil plants, coral, and a fossil scapular
bone of a turtle. The fossils appear to me to be the representant of
a still living species.
28th. There was a very heavy flood last night, and this morning we were de-
lighted to find the “ Neva ”in her normal position and afloat; the current
of course ran very strong, so much so that it would have been imprudent
to venture further up the river ; it was therefore with much regret that
I came to the conclusion to return, as I found it would be impossible to
take the “Neva” further, as at low water she was too deep, and at
flood she had not sufficient power to stem the current; to abandon her,
and to go on the land journey, it did not appear to me that it would be
wise to attempt it, nor would it be possible. We reckoned that we
were now in latitude 5° 30'south, and longitude 141° 30' east; so
that, if the men could be induced to accompany me, from this the
distance to be traversed in a straight line to Hall Sound would be
about 400 miles, and I never at any time entertained the idea of
crossing the land at a greater distance than 200 miles; the crew
are also much exhausted by work, sickness, and a want of a constant
supply of nourishing food, so that I think nothing would induce them
to volunteer to follow me overland; not only this, but we have not
yet reached the mountain range, and the only mountains we saw were
in a northerly direction, and had we landed our course would have
to be east by south-east, which, with the prospect of having to travel
over flat, swampy country for such a distance, seemed to me an
impossibility, particularly in a country like New Guinea, and with-
out any means of carrying even our ammunition. So I gave orders
to return, and the current took us in a few hours to the plantation
from which we got our taro on the 20th instant. This course was
also required, for we had finished all our provisions, and could find
but little game, and no fish. We landed here again, and got as much
taro as I considered will be sufficient to last six or eight days, so that
I hope to be able to go and examine the large branch of the river
we have seen at Snake Point. We were surprised to find that the
natives had not returned to the house, for I found all the articles I


left were untouched. The soil is very rich at this part, and covered
with a luxuriant vegetation. A nutmeg ( Myristica) tree was very
abundant, bearing large and eatable fruit. The land was flat on the
left bank, and hilly on the right. We remained here for this night
to cut some wood to-morrow.
June 29th. At 9-30 a.m. we left the place, and passed down rapidly, aided by steam
and the current, to the house we visited on the 16th instant. Some
natives appeared in front of the house ; they sent three arrows at us,
but they did not reach their destination. Mr. Hargrave and myself
fired three or four shots, and made them go away, but one came down
to the bank, and under the shelter of some shrubs, thought to send
us some of his arrows, but a discharge of a gun at him with game shot
soon made him retire. We also fired three or four shots at some
distant canoes to prevent them from approaching us. We then landed
with the hopes of finding some pigs, but could not see any; we then
visited -the house, and a shocking sight there met ray eyes: in the
back room there was lying an old blind woman, only a thin diseased
skin covered her bones; she was still alive, but evidently dying fast;
the fore-part of the skull was broken, and the brain protruded,
covering her grey hairs; on a careful examination I found that the
wound had been made by a cutting instrument, and we afterwards
saw some marks of blood near the door and on the ground in the
direction in which we had seen the natives running away ; probably’
the natives thought it better to kill her than to allow her to fall into
our hands, or probably because she was helpless and diseased. Some
few miles below the village we saw a canoe with two or three in it;
when they saw’ us they hurried on shore, leaving the canoe. On
examining it we found it was full of sago; we took it with us, and
considered we were fortunate enough in securing food for about a
fortnight, by far superior to the taro we had been using to live upon
so many days, and left in exchange some trade as calico, axes,
beads, &c.
30th. Left at 9-30 a.m., and although the current was in our favour, we -lid
not go very far, as the wood was too green. When we arrived at
Snake Point I gave directions to enter the western branch of the
river, which I named Alice Hargrave River. Many on board were
disappointed at this new arrangement, as they expected we were
returning homeward ; the natives Katow, Maino, Waruki, and Dawan,
grieved ami cried out at this change, and I at last pacified them by
a promise of an increase to their wages, so they became consoled.
We anchored at 5 p.m, four or five miles from the entrance. At
first we found shallow water, and had some difficulty in finding the
channel, which is from three to five fathoms deep. On my return
from the Fly I made another chart in order to correct any errors
that might have occurred when going up, and I was pleased to find
that one agreed perfectly with the other, but great accuracy could
not be expected with my appliances. From the great rising of the
water to-day we could recognise only with difficulty many of the
places we had marked as prominent points, and some noted in my
chart as muddy or red banks had entirely disappeared.
July Ist. We steamed this day from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., and then had to stop from
our wood being exhausted; w T e got up about 14 miles. We had a
constant depth of water of from 4 to 5 fathoms, and only got out of
the channel a short time after w’e started; the soundings gave us
I|, fathom, but near to the right bank we again found 5 fathoms of
waiter. We saw some old native houses, and a raft rudely constructed
of two trunks of trees. F'or the first 7or 8 miles the land w T e passed
was very low, and covered with scanty vegetation; reeds were
abundant, and the general appearance, more especially on the left
bank, was swampy. We then passed a point where the bank is about
25 feet high, but it soon decreased as we passed along to 5 or 6 feet,
and the vegetation became very rich and luxuriant. It appeared to
be raining not far from us.
B 6853. C


July 2nd. There was nothing worth noting this day; we steamed to-day from 9 a.m.
to 5 p.m., and had a depth of water varying from 3 to 5 fathoms.
3rd. Gave rest to the men, some of them not feeling well, and not being
well myself remained on board ; others went on a shooting excursion,
and returned on board with some interesting birds. They informed
me' that during their excursion they found several native paths and
a trap for catching pigs.
4th. Although I felt ill to-day from an attack of rheumatic fever, I proceeded
to avoid loss of time. So we left at 8 a.m., passed some old houses,
some creeks, and two small islands on the right and a smaller one
on the left. At 3 p.m. had to stop on account of shallow water.
Palmer and the Chinaman are both very sick, and I feel so exhausted
that I can hardly stand.
sth. Remained the whole day at anchor, the water being too low. Some of
the men landed and went on a shooting excursion. In the morning
five or six natives made their appearance on the left bank, but not far
from us; they did not evince any surprise but merely curiosity, and
after laughing very much one of them turned his back and gave a
slap to his hip as an insult (such an act is considered an insult in
other parts of New Guinea) ; we replied by sending a rocket close to
them, which made them disappear into the bush. I feel much worse,
and three of the men are lying down with fever.
6th. Rain last night, deep water this morning with a very strong current
against us. Left, but could not proceed further than a mile or per-
haps less, and anchored at the foot of the left bank, which at this part
was about 30 feet high. Here was situated a small village of three
or four houses ; being too ill I could not go myself, but it was re-
ported by some of the men who visited them that they were built very
high on piles, and one of them which was supported by a tree was
about 50 feet from the ground. All round the houses the ground has
been cleared from trees and cultivated by the natives. My men
found the houses deserted and carefully shut up; they went inside
and found everything had been removed. A short distance beyond
they found another large but old house and some banana trees from
which they gathered some fruit; they also brought on board some
two or three stone implements they found which had apparently been
forgotten by the natives. I was fortunate in obtaining the skeleton
of a boy, which was brought on board by Mr. Hargrave. After
replenishing our stock of wood we again tried to stem the strong
current and twice we failed, being driven back by the current to the
point from whence we started. The engineer considered it impossible
to proceed further; I requested him to give a written statement to
that effect, which he did as follows :—“ On the 6th of July I tried
“ twice to steam up the second rapids of the north-west branch of the
“ Fly river and failed ; Mr. D’Albertis asked me if I could steam
“ further and I said no. Law. Hargrave.” After experience on the
other branch of the river I considered it would be useless to make any
further attempt, so I determined to return to-morrow and anchored
below the village for the night.
7th. Early this morning the men went to cut wood and succeeded in killing
two fine pigs. I was thinking of making another attempt this
morning, but found John, Palmer, and Jackson very ill with fever,
and although a little better myself unfit for work, so gave directions
for our return, so in a few hours we were carried down by the current
and again anchored in the Fly River at about 10 miles from Snake
Point.
Bth. Many being sick, we rested all day and cooked our pigs.
9th. From 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. we steamed down about 60 miles, and had to
stop to cut wood. Sickness still on board.
10th. Steamed 50 miles down to our anchorage of the sth of June
11th. Left at 10 a.m., but the anchor got hold of a log, and so, not to lose it,
we had to work to extricate it; we succeeded after three hours of hard
work. We then proceeded to some new huts or shelters we saw on


the left bank: there were also some canoes. Visited the huts, and found
some bows and arrows and a fine large paddle. Did not see any
natives, as they were probably engaged in collecting sago in the bush,
or may be occupied in a hunting expedition. lam much better, but
Jackson, John, and Palmer are still down with the fever.
July 12th. Left this morning, after getting our supply of wood, and about I p.m.
arrived at the cocoa-nut grove we had previously visited, and dis-
covered a village about a quarter of a mile distant, with many natives,
who did not appear to be aware of our presence. I was desirous of
paying them a visit, and returned with the “ Neva ” a short distance
back to the channel, where in our ascending passage we observed a
canoe pass through the reeds. Some of us went in the dingy, and
with difficulty found the channel, which was obstructed with reeds
and aquatic plants for about three-quarters of a mile. We then
landed and found we were not nearer the village than when we were
at the cocoa-nut grove, but still saw the natives in the village. We
returned to the “ Neva ” with the hope of finding another passage to
the village. A canoe appeared with two natives, and soon disappeared
in the cocoa-nut grove; we followed them in the “ Neva,” found the
channel they had taken, and went into the dingy. We soon found
ourselves in a small lagoon, and saw a few men escaping from the
village, where we landed soon after. The houses are on a small dry
spot at the end of the lagoon, and in the middle was a plain covered
with coarse grass, behind was a dense scrub. We succeeded in
killing one pig and capturing another alive. When engaged in
examining the houses, three canoes with native women only
approached the village at a distance of about 200 yards. We went to
see the new arrivals. For a little time they did not notice us, but
soon they stopped pulling, and looked as if our appearance was some-
thing beyond comprehension, and then finding we were strangers, and
of a novel kind, they pulled away in great terror before we had an
opportunity of conciliating them, and disappeared behind a low hill.
We got in the village some.bows and arrows, human skulls preserved
and painted by the natives, and some other articles. My men got a
quantity of tobacco and sago. From the large quantity of tobacco
and sago we saw, and the large marine shell used by the natives for
ornament, I believe that these people grow tobacco, and trade with
the southern tribes bartering it for shells.
13th. This morning revisited the village with the hope of securing some more
pigs; found a stuffed human head, the skull having been previously
removed. I brought it away, and in return for what I had taken
yesterday I left handkerchiefs, tomahawks, knives, hooks, beads, and
calico. Observed a number of ducks in the lagoon, and succeeded in
killing some of them. Left about 8 a.m., and soon after we saw nine
canoes, four of them containing a number of men well armed, and
wearing the usual war ornaments. In each canoe there seemed to be
from fifteen to twenty warriors. The other five canoes contained
but few men, who appeared to be unarmed, and remained some dis-
tance from the others. It was sufficiently apparent that their object
was to attack us, but their ardour diminished very much as we
approached them. I made every endeavour to assure them that our
intentions were friendly, waving calico, but without success; so I
gave the order to run the steamer at full speed to divide the war
party in the middle, so as to leave the unarmed party up the current
on our right, and the armed canoes below the current. As soon as
they saw this, the unarmed canoes stopped, and seeing the others
retreating as fast as they could paddle, went on laughing heartily.
As soon as the canoes with the warriors reached the shore they
deserted the canoes, with their arms and provisions, and disappeared
in the forest. We boarded the canoes and found and appropriated
plenty of sago, some fish, a living turtle, and some thousands of
arrows, for which, this time, I did not pay anything. On going down
the river we observed some more canoes, but they did not wait for us
but went into some of the creeks.
C 2


July 14th. Passed Ellangowan Island, and at 5 p.m. anchored 37 miles from it.
15th. We steamed from 8.30 a.m. to 5 p.m., but we got on shore at 1 p.m.,
and it was some time before we got afloat again. At Howling Point
we saw many natives on the opposite bank as well as canoes, and we
slackened our speed, thinking they would come to us, but they
appeared to be alarmed and pulled away.
l6th. Rested the men this day ; some went on a shooting excursion, but wdth
very poor success.
17th. We left early, and at 3 p.m. anchored at Kiwai Island at a village,
named by Maine, Auti. The inhabitants of Kawai are on very
friendly terms with the people of Moatta (Katow). At this place
Maino passed some years when a boy; one of his wives lives here.
We bought a quantity of 3 7 ams, taro, and cocoa-nuts, and a pig. I
also bought twelve human skulls from a heap 1 saw in the verandah
of a large house. We visited one of the large houses, but the natives
did not like to go inside. The women and children had left the
village. The house was very large and kept very clean, and could
accommodate 300 people; the dim light of the interior and the
peculiar form of the building conveys the idea of an old Gothic
church. I saw a fine tame Horn-bill in the village, a female of
Buceros ruficollis , or the red-necked Horn-bill. I wished to purchase
it, but the natives said that they could not catch it, but would
procure it for me to-morrow.
18th. Sent the men on shore to cut wood, and also a large knife and a red
blanket to purchase the Horn-bill. On the return of the men
thev r said that the natives were willing to sell the bird, but could not
catch it. I did not believe this statement, so I sent three rockets in
the direction of the village ; and then Maino went for the promised
bird, and he returned with it on his arm.* Some canoes came with
natives to wish us good-bye and to shake hands : we had met them
before; some canoes also came off from the village where I had stopped
when in the “ Ellangowan,” bringing cocoa-nuts and yams, but
demanded too high a. price for them. Left at 10.30 a.m. to go to
Mibu Island to shorten the distance, so that we might in one day go
from that place to the Katow River and land our pilots at their
village, Moatta; anchored east of Mibu Island at 1 p.m.; strong
south-east breeze and the healtli of all on board very much improved,
no doubt from having a good supply of meat.
I,9th. Strong wind all night; the steamer rolled very much and shipped some
water. 1 shall not go to sea yet, as it is too rough for a boat like the
“ Neva.”
20th. Passed a terrible night from the heavy rolling of the “ Neva ” and
powerful wind and sea, with the danger of the dingy getting destroyed
against the stern of the “ Neva ” ; took the advice of Palmer, the
only sailor on board, who advised me not to venture the passage with
such rough sea and strong head winds. Gave orders to get up steam
and to go and find a safe anchorage and wait for more favorable
weather. Maino suggested a channel which divides Mibu Island into
two parts, forming two islands. We entered this channel, and fount!
from five to seven fathoms depth of water; went out on the other
side, west of the island, into the passage formed by Mibu Island and
the mainland of New Guinea, considering that it may be possible by
this way to get to Bampton Island or Parama of the natives. Steamed
south lor this island, but soon arrived abreast of the south end of
Mibu Island, and found the sea too rough to proceed, so we anchored
at the south end of Mibu Island ; the steamer rolled very much, and
we did not anticipate an agreeable night.
21st. We had a miserable night with very bad weather, and the rolling of the
steamer was very heavy, and the dingy struck several times on the
stern of the “ Neva ” and caused a little damage. The rough
weather continuing this morning, I got up steam and went, directed
by Maino, to find a more sheltered place in one of the channels
* This lird is now in Sydney alive and in good health. It is the celebrated big bird of Mr. Stone.


dividing Mibu Island. The one we are now in is 20 or 30 yards
wide, and with 2 or 3 fathoms depth of water in the middle of the
passage ; the banks are low, muddy, and swampy, covered by man-
groves and the Nipa palm, as well as an abundance of cocoa-nut
palms. Waruki and Dawan crossed the island, and returned with
some natives of Kiwai, who were on a visit to this island, and bought
from them cocoa-nuts, yams, &c.
July 22nd. We had a much worse night than the preceding one, for on the tide
changing we found ourselves across the channel, with the bow in the
middle of the water and the stern on a dry bank. We set to work
to get her out of this dangerous position, but when we suc-
ceeded we got into a worse state, for the strong current carried her
on the opposite bank, on which we remained so fixed in the mud, in a
very inclined position, that she could not be moved. The tide was
falling all the time, so at last the “ Neva ” was lodged on a slippery
mud-bank and was nearly capsized, and indeed was only prevented
from overturning and ending her career in this place by the old roots
of Nipa palms. At daylight it was dead low tide, and I sent on
shore everything I could get out of the “ Neva.” As the tide rose
the water entered the vessel and four men were employed in bailing
the water out of it. We succeeded at last by great exertion to get
her afloat again. None of us are expert seamen, but every precaution
is taken to prevent accidents. Our provisions are getting short and
water also, and if the wind does not subside we shall have to depend
upon the natives for our supplies.
23rd. No change in the weather. The natives and some of the men crossed
the island and saw the sea on the Kiwai side, and found it very rough.
Last night we dragged the anchor, and this morning found we were
some hundred yards from our original position, and at low water had
only half a fathom. Returned to our former anchorage, and took
every precaution to prevent a recurrence.
24th. The night has been nearly calm, so we steamed out, thinking to reach
Parama ; but in the morning the wind freshened and we had to stop
again. I directed the steam to be ready by 4 a.m., so that if the
night should be calm we might start and reach Parama before the
strong breezes set in.
25th. The night had been calm, but were not ready to start before 6.30 a.m.
The strong winds came on when the sun rose. We made an attempt
to go but failed, for out of Mibu it was too strong for an open boat
like the “ Neva.” As it was we shipped three seas, one after the
other, with some damage to the stores and collections, and likely to
be followed by worse consequences, so we returned to the channel
first pointed out to us by Maine, in sight of Kiwai, and anchored.
I sent Dawan and some men in the boat to buy a pig and some yams
at Kiwai. The natives were unwilling to sell, but Dawan pointed
out to Bob (one of the men) a fine pig and told him to kill it. This
being done he afterwards paid for it with a large knife, a blanket, a
Crimean shirt, and a pair of trousers.
26th. A fine day and calm, but a heavy swell on the sea from the gales of the
previous days. When the men were on shore to-day with the pig
some natives arrived, and seeing the dead pig began crying out; but
when Dawan told them it had been well paid for they were satisfied
and went away in their canoes to the village at Kiwai, to secure the price,
which was left in the hands of another for the proprietor.
27th. Rain during the night. Left at 5 a.m., but had to return to our
anchorage. Maino got so alarmed at the sailing qualities of the
“ Neva ” in a rough sea, that when we arrived at our anchorage, he
requested to be put ashore, telling us that he would never again
expose himself to so dangerous a position. So I had to promise that,
I would not again leave except the day was calm. It rained to-day,
so we filled our casks with fresh water.
28th July to Ist August. Detained by the weather. Living on game and some yams
purchased from the natives.
C 3


August 3rd. Calm night. Left at 5.30 a.m. Dawan did not come on board, so I
left him behind with his friends. We arrived at Parama Island,
passed in the channel between it and New Guinea, attempted to go
as far as Jarro, but out of the channel we found shallow water and
the wind too strong and the sea too rough to proceed, so we steamed
back and anchored in the channel between Bampton or Parama island
and the mainland of New Guinea. Sent to buy provisions at Wighi,
a village on the mainland opposite, where they obtained yams, bananas,
and cocoa-nuts. We have now ascertained that there is a passage
from Bampton Island to Kiwai, or the mouth of the Fly River, west
of Mibu, and it is probable that a future survey may discover a channel
for larger ships. Two men attacked by fever this day. Dawan
ioined us to-day, coming in a native canoe.
4th. Left at 9 a.m. for Jarro, and Maino proved to be an excellent pilot;
except in one or two occasions we had always 2 or 3 fathoms of
w T ater, the nearer we approached to Jarro, so here also a channel
might be found for vessels larger than the “ Neva.” We had no
accidents this day; but lam certain that we cannot go to sea with a
head wind and rough sea, in safety, so I do not intend to attempt it
any more.
sth. Remained at anchor all day, and visited the little island, where we
found it had been used as a station for beche-de-mer. The island
is well covered with shrubs and grass, and an ample supply of fresh
water. The island seems formed of yellow and green sandstone with
oxide of iron lying in strata, and forming a base to the yellow, reddish,
and blue clay. The western part of it is swampy and muddy, and
covered with mangrove. I found, in a creek, a good supply of fish;
birds were also plentiful; so we had a good supply of fish and game.
6th. Remained at anchor, and got a good supply of birds and fish.
7th. Left at 7 a.m. for Katow, passed between the mainland and Jarro, arrived
at Katow, entered and anchored in the river at 10.30 a.m. So this
day we had completed our passage from Mibu to Katow, passing
inside all the islands close to the mainland, saving many miles than
by the passage south of Bristow Island, Bampton Island, and
Mibu. If a deeper channel could be found, no doubt this will be
found the best course to be adopted for the Fly River. I asked
Maino before he landed to sell or to get some one to sell me a pig,
and not caring to trust that he will give the pig after he got on shore,
I requested him to send on shore for the pig ; he held a long conver-
sation with his wife from the steamer; at last Maino spoke very
decidedly, when the pig was brought, payed for, and killed, and
Maino landed with his luggage and suite to his great satisfaction.
Bth. This morning Maino sent us a present of taro, and we purchased from
the natives some bananas and cocoa-nuts. I asked Maino to send some
more provisions on board, so that we might have at least five days’
rations on board, so that if we on leaving should be detained by the
weather at some uninhabited island we should have sufficient supplies, but
the natives did not bring any ; so when it was dark I let off some rockets
with the hope that to-morrow the natives would be better disposed.
3th. The rockets had the desired effect, for early this morning the natives
came with yams, taro, and bananas, which we purchased with tobacco,
which we found the best article for barter at this place. Two men ill
with fever.
10th. More natives came to-day to sell provisions, but one demanded an axe
for a cocoa-nut, which I refused. I was told by Dawan that the
women and children left the village when they saw the rockets; I told
him that they had nothing to fear, but at the same time they must
understand that they must sell some provisions to feed my crew.
After he left, women and children were seen returning to the village.
11th to l6th. Strong gales and heavy sea prevailing; could not leave, and had some
difficulty in procuring food for all the crew, but what with pigeons,
megapodius, cockatoos, parrots, fish, a few bananas, and taro from the
natives, we were not exactly in a starving state.


August 17th, The weather more moderate; if we had provision on board we might
have left this afternoon. Waima, another chief of Moatta, came on
board and asked for a blanket, shirt, trowsers, and a large American
axe, for a pig; I considered and sent the men to the village to get the
pig, when Dawan suggested to the chief to ask for a gun instead of
the other articles he had proposed, so the men returned without the
pig, and I was angry with Dawan for his interference.
18th. I went on shore early this morning to the village, to inquire about the
pig; Dawan appeared, and after much altercation a fight appeared
imminent, but by threatening to fire rockets I kept the natives at a
distance. Maino came and said I had to send a man to kill the pig,
as it could not be held, but fearing for my man I asked to see the
pig first, which after a little delay was driven to us, killed and paid
for, amidst great shouts of laughter among the natives. Dawan had
fled into the bush frightened. We all parted as friends as before, and
Maino told me not to take any notice of Dawan, who was one of
those who talked much but thought little. The pig was afterwards
carried to the dingy, followed by about 100 natives; I threw some
tobacco among them, and the struggle amongst the crowd to get a
piece of this to them precious commodity caused a good deal of
laughing, and good humour prevailed among them. I bought from a
native two human skulls, taken by him from a bundle hanging in
the front of the house of the young men. The natives have promised
to supply me with all the food I may require, but I do not place
much dependence upon them.
IQth. At 3.30 a.m. we were ready to leave, but having been told it "would be
dangerous to leave in the dark I waited for daylight, but the wind
increasing very much was obliged to put off our departure.
20th. The weather still very bad. As the natives brought no provision for
sale, I sent the men to get some bananas from a plantation. Some
natives from the interior are soon expected at Moatta with sago.
One of the men sick.
21st. About 200 men and women from the interior passed this morning in
sight of the “ Neva,” going to Moatta with sago, exchanging it for
cocoa-nuts. They left again soon after, but none could be induced
to sell any to us or to come near. I observed the women wore the
small grass petticoat as at Yule Island. Mr. Wilcox ill.
22nd to 23rd. Still detained by the state of the weather.
24th. The weather being sufficiently calm I left at 5.30 p.m., but we soon
struck on the left bank at the mouth of the river, and did not get
afloat again until past 10 a.m., when we had to go back.
25th. As we could not start early I deferred it to the next day.
26th. Early this morning we had only a steam pressure of 22 lbs.; I would
not leave until we had a pressure of 40 lbs., which occasioned some
loss of time, and with a receding tide I directed the course and
considered we were almost out of danger, when we found we were only
in half a fathom of water; I gave orders to stop, but by some accident
the rope of the boat got entangled in the propeller, which caused some
delay in cutting it; in the meantime the wfind and the current sent
us on a sand-bank, on which we struck so hard as to be unable to
move, and ran a great risk of filling with water from the heavy
breakers. On the tide flowing we again floated, but being too late to
leave we had to return.
27th to 31st. The weather too tempestuous to leave and some difficulty to procure
food. The men were however very successful in purchasing a supply
of game.
Sept. Ist. Nothing particular to mention from this day, the sth, except the difficulty
of purchasing a sufficient supply of food from the natives, but this
day two pearl shelling boats called here, and we w 7 ere glad to get
some biscuit and rice from them.
6th. The pearl shell boats left this morning; we followed them, but as soon
as we were out of the river we found that what was fine weather for
the decked boats was bad for an open heavy steam launch, and Palmer
advised me to return, notwithstanding he complained of our long
detention at this place.
C 4


Sept. 7th. Finding that every day I was exposed to new difficulties respecting
getting a supply of food for the crew, I considered it advisable to send
the boat to Brothers Island, to ask for some supply of provisions
from Captain Redlich, who had a beche-de-mer station on that island.
I expressed this proposal to the men and they agreed to it, so that
four of them will start at 1 p.m. to-morrow.
Bth. As arranged last night the four men left about 1 p.m., and we were not a
little surprised to find Capt. Redlich calling at Katowin the afternoon.
He will sail again to-morrow. I requested him to take six of my
crew to Somerset, who it is my intention to discharge, from the diffi-
culty of procuring food for them, and they also expressed a wish to
leave ; Capt. Redlich consented to take them, and he left at 2 p.m.
on the 9th of September for Somerset, with the engineer and Jackson,
and the other four he will take from his island, where he will find
them. Wrote to the Rev. Mr. M‘Farlane to pay the men and dis-
charge them before the Police Magistrate at Somerset; Mr. Wilcox,
Bob (South Sea islander), and the cook (a Chinese), remained with me.
10th. I felt relief to-day, as lam now quite independent of the natives for
food, having hut few persons on board. Eight native canoes, Waruki
informed me, are fitting out for a fishing party to leave to-morrow.
11th. About 6 p.m. 1 saw a sail; it was our dingy returning from the Brothers
Island ; they reported that they got no provisions, as Capt. Redlich
was absent. I told them what had happened in their absence, and
they accepted my advice to return, and that Capt. Redlich would
take them to Somerset. At this they were very delighted, and would
not stay the night, but left again immediately. They gave me the
news of the murder of Hr. James at Yule Island.
13th to 17th. Nothing of particular interest, except that this day, for the first time, a
canoe with women came near the “ Neva ” to sell cocoa-nuts.
18th. Canoes returned from their fishing expedition.
22nd. Some canoes that arrived from Kiwai some days ago with sago are return-
ing, taking with them me banana and other plants.
23rd. In the morning Moatta village was in a state of alarm, ami all the men had
left the village to repel an attack from some inland tribe; I observed,
however, that the women passed near the “ Neva ” going to their
usual work. About 4 p.m. I saw the natives returning, and seemed
to be carrying a wounded or dead man. They would not permit
Mr. Wilcox to enter the village, but told him they did not fight, as
the bushmen ran away as soon as they appeared.
24th. Capt. Redlich arrived, bringing me provisions and letters, and returned
on the following day.
Sept. 25 to Oct. 4. Nothing has occurred worth mentioning, except that the Moatta
people being now friends with the inland tribes, enabled me, with the
assistance of the toßicco I received from Somerset, to purchase
specimens of natural history.
sth. On the sth a large canoe arrived from Wighi.
6th to 15th. Nothing of importance.
16th. Some natives from the interior visited Moatta to purchase fbh, giving
in exchange sago and bananas. Five canoes also arrived from Wighi.
There was a man with them who had a gun and spoke English very
well, and two others armed with clubs; they -wished to come on
board. I would not allow them to come armed on board, as it is not
the usual custom among natives ; so I told them to go away, which
they refused to do for some time until I took my rifle. Bob at
Tureture met the same man ; it seems that he has been to Sydney on
board of one of the pearl fishery vessels.
17th. Finding that the weather was breaking and likely to be fine and cairn,
we put the “ Neva” in order for leaving.
18th to 29th. Nothing worth mentioning, except that two pearl shell boats came for
provisions and water. A white man was in charge, but they had to
go 4 miles distant for fresh water, and the natives and ourselves
could only obtain it from the same distance. The Moatta people are
much annoyed at seeing the inland natives receiving so much tobacco
for animals, and they have tried to prevent their coming, and even
threatening to fight them.


Oct. 30th. The natives say the weather will now moderate and be fair, so I shall
make every preparation for taking ray departure for Somerset.
Nov. 1. A boat arrived to-day with two native teachers, Lochat and Elia, from
Cornwallis Island, sent by the kindness of Mr. MTarlane, with a
letter. They told me the weather was fine and calm, and would
continue so for a few days. They left again in the afternoon. I
shall leave to-morrow if the weather continues fine.
2nd. One of the inland natives brought me a beautiful snake of a species I
had never seen before. Left at 10 a.m., and on arriving at the entrance
of the river found the weather fine, and steered for Cornwallis island
with a gentle breeze, and aided by our jib-sail went at the rate of six
miles an hour, passed north of Saibai, and anchored at Cornwallis
Island at 4 p.m. The two following days we occupied ourselves in
getting a supply of wood and water on board, in which the teachers
aided me by lending their boat with two boys.
sth. I attended the service conducted by the native teachers in their little
church ; about 100 natives were present, men, women and children,
almost the whole of them neatly dressed; they seemed very attentive
to the service. A great number were from Saibai. lam not capable
of judging of the influence of the teachers in a religious point of view,
but from the benefit derived from their moral influence the result is
very satisfactory; the advance of the natives of Saibai in civilization is
progressing very fast, and the London Missionary Society may be proud
of two such teachers as Elia and Lochat, who are eminently qualified to
reform the wild tribes and to prepare the ground for future settlements.
6th. The wind being fresh and our anchorage not safe, I left for the Brothers
Island, and arrived after a run of six hours. The passage was not
pleasant, for the wind was fresh and the sea rough, but I knew there
was no danger of rocks or shallow water; during the passage the men
had to bail the water out, and it was with some difficulty it was kept
from rising to the furnace and putting out the fire. On the following
day, November 7th, Bob, the South Sea Islander, made a raft to go on
shore to look for the dingy, but he found that Capt. Redlich had
removed to Pumpkin Island ; as Bob did not see the dingy it was
probably taken to that island. It is blowing very hard, but our
anchorage is safe.
Bth. Bob went on shore and made such arrangements as would enable us to get
on shore to cut wood and obtain a supply of fresh water. There are no
natives on the island. The wind still continues to blow very strong.
9th. Landed again to cut more wood, and obtained some birds. The Chinese
cook was bitten by a snake of a poisonous species, and the symptoms
in less than ten minutes were something very alarming; I incised the
wound, allowing it to bleed freely, applied ammonia, and gave brandy
and ammonia internally.
10th. The cook was much better, but he was very ill in the night, but on
the following day (11th) he was so ranch improved that I considered
him out of danger.
12th. The weather being fine and calm, left the Brothers Island at 10 a.m.,
and anchored at Mount Ernest Island, where Mr. Jardine has a station.
The next day was windy. 1 started for Somerset, but was obliged to
return after going a few miles, from the stormy state of the weather.
14th. I left the “ Neva,” and went on board a boat going to Somerset.
20th. Returned to the “Neva.” The wind during my absence had changed
to the north, and the anchorage on the north side being unsafe the
men had shifted anchorage to the south of Mount Ernest Island.
21st. Was calm last night, and we left early in the morning for Somerset.
An accident happened to the engine by the bursting of one of the
tubes, so I was obliged to cease steaming, but it very fortunately
happened when we were only three miles from Somerset, when
by aid of our sails and the current being in our favour, we soon
anchored at Somerset. I left the “ Neva ”at Somerset, when I
departed for Sydney, in charge of Bob, under the control of Mr.
Powell, the postmaster, who kindly promised to see that the “Neva”
was put in good order, cleaned, and painted.
R 6853. D


After my long narrative I shall conclude with a few words expressing my regret at not
having been able to do more ; but it is not the pioneer who shows the way that attains
the most glory, but often the one who follows him, and it is easy to hear of a road but
very difficult to find it out. I wish every success to any explorer of this part of New
Guinea, should I not be able to return and complete my work; and I hope that the
little I have done will be some guide to, and enable him to find his way more readily
than I did mine, and correct any errors I may have made. By this exploration we are
now aware of a road to the interior of New Guinea, which is of more importance, as it
is so near to Somerset, where a line of large steamers call twice a month. We also
found a new passage from Moatta to the Fly River, shorter and safer than the one
previously known, and when properly surveyed may be found navigable for larger ships.
The richness of the land we visited, its vegetable and probably mineral productions, the
soil suitable for the cultivation of many of the most valuable plants, as coffee, sugar,
india-rubber, sago, tobacco, nutmeg, ought to attract the capital of the Colony to open
up the country. The Dutch in their part of New Guinea, although on a small scale,
derive some trade, and the part of New Guinea into which we penetrated was in latitude
50° 30' south, and ran about 500 miles on the winding river, the course of which may be
seen on the chart appended, and it almost forms a line of- demarcation between that part
of New Guinea claimed by the Dutch and that remaining as yet unclaimed by any
nation. About the Fly River, as far as I. could judge, the natives appear less numerous
than I have seen in other parts of New Guinea, and the land is cultivated in a
smaller quantity, so that, in this part of New Guinea, the settler will not find the same
difficulties I pointed out on former occasions when speaking of the south-eastern part
of New Guinea, where the natives are more numerous and possess and cultivate all
the best land. I have appended Baron von Mueller’s report on my collection of
dried plants, arid on the return of Professor Liversidge to Sydney he will report on the
small collection of minerals I submitted to him for examination; and I hope on a day
not far distant to give the ethnological report on the natives, their weapons, also on the
mammals and birds collected, the latter consisting of about fifty species, many of which
are new or only recently described from specimens obtained during my first visit to the
Fly River; there is also a rich collection of reptiles, fish, both of salt and fresh water,
some beetles, fresh water and land shells. I expect that the voyage of the “ Neva ”
will be remembered by those who in future will take an interest in New Guinea, and by
the scientific world.
I have now to give my grateful thanks to the Government for the aid they have
afforded to me in this expedition by the loan of the steam-launch “ Neva,” without
which it would have been impossible for me to have undertaken the expedition.
I remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Sydney, 15 January 1877. L. M. D’ALBERTIS.
APPENDIX.
Baron von Mueller's Report.
The collection of plants brought together by Signor D’Albertis, during his last expe-
dition to New Guinea, is of particular interest, inasmuch as thus, for the first time, an
insight into the vegetation of the more central portions of New G uinea is obtained. But
since the distinguished Italian traveller, with the means at his command, could not extend
his explorations beyond the country along the Fly River, only plants of strictly intra-
tropical type, and mainly indicative of a jungle vegetation, came within his reach. It
seems that no highland forms of plants descend to that river, as far as it was followed by
Signor D’Albertis; nor shows the material kindly submitted to me any repetition of the
Australian types, which some other portions of South-eastern Papua have brought to
light, except two species of phyllodinous Acacias, both distinct from A. Simoii. This
almost entire absence of Australian forms on these newly-traversed lines may perhaps be
accounted for by geologic circumstances. But now, for the first time, are added to the
hitherto recorded genera of New Guinean plants : Gompharena, Grewia, Melhania,
Muhlenbergia, Connarus, Terminalia, Pipturus, Codieeum Cynometra, Ceratophyllum,
Jussiaea, Alstonia, Coleus, Vandellia, Limnanthemum, Calanthe, Eurycles, Costus,
Schelhammeria, Dracaena, Hypaelytum Phragmites, Paspalum, Lycopodium, Helmin-
thostachys, Gleichenia. The collection contains also species representing the following


genera : —Myristica (nutmeg), Wormia, Fittosporum, Elaeocarpus, Hibiscus, Dysoxylon,
Harpullia, Vitis, Semecarpus, Maenga, Phyllanthus, Piper, Albizza, Mucua, Ficus,
Eugenia, Barringtonia, Gardenia, Psychotria, Ixora, Plectronia, Myrmecodia, Ipomoea,
Maba, Dischidia, Alstonia, Tabernaemontaua, Maesa, Coleus, Clerodendron, Solarium,
Tournefortia, Cycas, Freycinetia, Flagellaria, Calamus, Pothos, Cordyline, Seleria,
Kyllingia, Hypaelytum, Panicura, Coix, Leptaspis. Besides, there are also representa-
tives of other genera belonging to Anonaceae, Menispermaceae, Rutacese, Laurineacae,
Melastomaceae, Myrtaceae, Araliacese, Urticaceac, Euphorbiaceae, Acanthaceae,
Gesneriaceae, Orchidaceae, and palms; but to define the species of these, and to contrast
them with allied forms of other tropical regions, especially of the Sunda Islands, the
Philippines, and Polynesia, will require careful investigation, the results of which will be
promulgated in the succeeding pages of the publication on “ Papuan Plants.” A s specially
noteworthy on this occasion, may' be mentioned a sapotaceous tree with edible fruit,
two Begonias (one with spotted leaves), a grand Hibiscus, and several amaranthaceous
and scitamineous plants of horticultural importance; further, a Nepenthes (Pitcher-
:plant), distinct from N. Kennedii.
Melbourne, December 1876.
No. 3
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, K.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT HON.
THE EARL OF CARNARVON. (Received March 20, 1878.)
Government House, Brisbane,
.My Lord, 14th January 1878.
I have the honour to transmit copies of papers on the subject of enlarging the
present maritime boundaries of this Colony.
Having given the proposal ray careful consideration, I see no reason to dissent from
the views expressed by my Ministers.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Carnarvon, (Signed) A. E. KENNEDY.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 3.
Extract from the Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Council of Queensland.
At the Government House, Brisbane, 2nd January 1878.
Present:
His Excellency the Governor in Council.
His Excellency the Governor, at the instance of the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, lays
before the Council a copy of a letter from the Port-master, Brisbane, addressed to the
Hon. the Colonial Treasurer, covering a tracing* showing the present boundary line of
the Queensland coast and the islands proposed to be brought within the Queensland
jurisdiction.
The Council advise that the Memorandum of the Hon. the Vice-President of the
Executive Council to His Excellency the Governor in reference thereto be approved.
(Signed) A. V. Denny,
Clerk of the Council.
* Not printed.
1) 2


Enclosure 2 in No. 3.
Memorandum for Hrs Excellency the Governor.
Executive Council Office,
27th December 1877-
Referring to previous correspondence in connection with the proposed rectification of
the maritime boundary of Queensland, I beg now to submit to your Excellency a sketch
plan,* prepared by Commander Heath, showing approximately the present 60 mile
boundary and the amended boundary if the suggested alterations are carried into
effect.
I see no objection to the acceptance on the part of this Government of the responsi-
bilities which this territorial rectification may involve. I can speak with some slight
knowledge of the subject, as your Excellency is aware that 1 have lately returned from
the pearl-shell fisheries in Torres Straits, and have visited some of the islands referred to.
A sort of police surveillance is even now exercised over some of the islands outside our
limits, but it is certainly desirable that we should possess a real authority to deal with
the somewhat doubtful characters who are occasionally found to act in a very inde-
pendent way. It does not at all follow that we should form settlements. They will be
frequented by pearl-shellers, and probably eventually by more permanent settlers.
They ought to be visited occasionally by the Resident Magistrate at Thursday Island,
but it would not be necessary to do more than this at present, and I don’t think that we
should have to increase our expenditure on that account. If, therefore, Her Majesty’s
Government should see fit to rectify and amend the present maritime boundary of the
Colony I see no reason why this should not be done in the manner suggested by
Commander Heath.
JOHN DOUGLAS,
Vice President.
Enclosure 3 in No. 3.
Department of Ports and Harbours, Brisbane,
Sir, December 11, 1877-
In order to show more clearly the proposed change of the boundary of Queens-
land, 1 have the honour to forward herewith a tracing,* showing in blue the present
boundary line, and in red the islands now proposed to he brought within Queensland
jurisdiction.
As to the question of practically taking charge of these additional islands, it would
seem to be simpler that such should be the case than that the existing state of affairs in
the Straits should continue. Where any lodgment of islanders or others for questionable
purposes had been made on the islands beyond our jurisdiction, and yet not within the
limits of Polynesia, the police have been obliged to act as those though islands did belong
to Queensland ; the Police Magistrate wisely considering it a lesser evil to exceed his
authority in this matter than to allow any attempt at settlement on these islands for
improper purposes.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) G. P. Heath,
The Hon. The Colonial Treasurer, Commander, R.N.
& c * &c. Portmaster.
No. 4.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, _ Admiralty, 17th April 1878.
With reference to previous correspondence, and to your letter of the sth instant,*
forwarding correspondence with the Government of Queensland upon the subject of the
proposed annexation to that Colony of certain islands situated in Torres Straits, and
commanding the principal channels of navigation between Australia and New Guinea,
and asking for information as to whether any of these islands or reefs are known to their
Lordships to be claimed by any foreign power, I am commanded by my Lords Commis-
* Not printed,


sioners of the Admiralty to transmit, for the information of Sir Michael Hicks Beach, a
copy of a Report from the Hydrographer of the Navy on the subject, with a chart*
showing the line of boundary, and lam to observe that their Lordships are not aware of
any objection to these islands being annexed.
I am also to return to you the tracing furnished by the Government of Queensland.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 4.
Remarks by the Hydrographer of the Navy on the proposed Annexation of certain
Islands to the Government of Queensland.
In reference to former correspondence which has passed between the Admiralty
and the Colonial Office on the subject of taking possession of certain islands in Torres
Straits, contiguous to the shores of New Guinea, the Secretary for the Colonies, after
communication with the Queensland Government, asks the following questions :
1. Whether any of the islands and reefs which the Colonial Government (now) wish
to annex are known to their Lordships to be claimed by any Foreign Power ?
2. Whether their Lordships see any objection to any of these islands and reefs being:
included within the boundaries of the Colony of Queensland ?
3. And whether it would be possible to define such boundaries in words ?
On these questions I would offer the following remarks ;
1. For the most part these islands and their adjacent reefs have been discovered and
taken possession of at various times by British navigators. They have further been
thoroughly surveyed in H.M. ships, and, so far as is known at the Admiralty, no Foreign
Power has made any claim to them.
2. There can be no objection, so far as the Admiralty is concerned, to these islands
and reefs being included within the boundaries of the Colony of Queensland; indeed
these islands are geographically a part of the outer sea-board of Australia, and would
appear to come fitly within the jurisdiction of Queensland.
3. There would appear to be no difficulty in describing in words the proposed new
seaward boundary (East and North) of the Colony of Queensland, adopting with
modifications the proposal of Commander Heath in the enclosed papers.
The boundary thus defined would comprehend all islands included within a line drawn
from Sandy Cape northward to the S.E. limit of Great Barrier reefs, thence following
the line of the Great Barrier reefs to their N.E. extremity near the latitude of 9° S.,
thence in a N.W. direction, embracing East, Anchor, and Bramble Cays. From Bramble
Cays in a line W. by S. (S. 79° W.) true, embracing Warrior Reef, Saibai, Juan, and
Deliverance Islands, and onwards in the same W. by S. (true) direction to the meridian
of 138° East longitude.
A chart, on which the proposed amended boundary is marked, is attached.
(Signed) Fredk. Jno. Evans,
11th April 1878. Hydrographer.
No. 5.
THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Blomfield Street, London, E.C.,
Sir, / June 3, 1878.
1. On various occasions the Directors of the London Missionary Society have had
the honour of representing to Lord Carnarvon the perils to which the natives of New
Guinea have recently been exposed by the schemes of adventurers, who desire either to
search for gold or to establish permanent settlements at various points of that great
island; and they had the satisfaction of being assured by Lord Carnarvon that provision
had been duly made in the Pacific Islanders Protection Act for the protection of (the
natives from wrong. They understood also from His Lordship that by placing the coasts
# Not printed.
D 3


of New Guinea under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Fiji, who had cruisers at his
command, the necessary executive action had been effectually secured.
2. During the past five years the Directors of this Society have been steadily prose-
cuting their mission on the coasts of New Guinea. They have formed three settlements,
which are the residence of English missionaries, and around which, at various points,
some six and twenty teachers are instructing the natives as missionaries. A few months
ago, an English gentleman, Mr. Goldie, who had been visiting the central station in
this group, that, namely, of Port Moresby, and made an excursion of some 50 miles into
the interior, discovered gold ; and though the metal proved to be in small quantities, the
mere fact of the discovery, when made known in Sydney, produced great excitement
amongst the old gold diggers of that Colony. One or two vessels were at once announced
as proceeding to Port Moresby, their berths were speedily filled up, and the vessels
sailed for their destination.
3. A brief notice in one of the public telegrams a few r days ago stated that those
vessels had arrived at Port Moresby and had landed their passengers among the natives.
The English missionaries in New T Guinea entertained grave doubts respecting the proba-
bilities of intercourse being kept up between the two parties on healthy conditions. The
Directors cannot but think that for these doubts very solid reasons may be adduced.
On the one hand, the diggers themselves, entering a throughly tropical country which has
proved to be exceedingly unhealthy, are exposed to the most terrible rFks of health
and even life. On the other, in entire ignorance of the language, of which only a
single gentleman has obtained any acquaintance, they are likely to come into most
serious collision with the native tribes around that settlement. The Directors, therefore,
invite your kindest attention to the danger which has arisen; and they venture to
suggest that the Governor of Fiji should be requested at once to put in force the powers
with which he is invested, in order that everything may be done both to secure pro-
tection to native rights and native life, and also help to our people in the sickness and
privation to which they are exposing themselves. Except under proper control the
greatest evils will probably arise from the lawlessness of the classes by which gold
digging has been usually undertaken.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) JOSEPH MULLENS,
Foreign Secretary of the
To the Right Hon. Sir M. Hicks Beach, Bart. M.P. London Missionary Society.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 5.
Australia.—New Guinea.
“ Morning Post,” 22nd May 1878.
Comparatively little has been heard about New Guinea’s annexation since Lord
Carnarvon notified to the Australian Governments that it was a question that almost
exclusively concerned their interests, and that the Home Government was not inclined to
take any action in the matter until it knew w hat pecuniary assistance would be received
from Australia towards the expenditure that would have to be incurred in forming an
establishment on the coast. It is only quite recently, in consequence of the statements
made by Mr. Goldie, a botanist, who is exploring in the island, and the Rev. Mr, Lawes,
of the London Missionary Society, respecting the discovery of gold, that the subject has
again come to the front in a manner that must at once claim the attention of the Secre-
tary for the Colonies, On several occasions, when adverting to the annexation or even
exploration of New Guinea, we pointed out that authentic news of the finding of gold,
even in a very small quantity, would be sure to occasion a large influx of miners from the
Australian Colonies, where the pursuit of the precious metal is by no means so prosperous
as it was a few years back, and where the mode of procuring it now —by steady labour
in quartz mining—is not nearly so attractive as the old method to the adventurous
spirits who were the most successful prospectors in the early days of the diggings. Such
an influx, unless checked and controlled by authority, would inevitably lead to collisions
with the natives, to much bloodshed, probably, on both sides, and to scenes that would
have a lasting impression upon the native mind, and render hostile in the future even
those who are now amicably disposed to the white man, and have shown it in numerous
ways during the three years that the Rev. Mr. Lawes has resided upon the coast.


Although the announcement of the finding of gold made by Mr. Lawes and Mr. Goldie
was coupled with many cautions to the public against a hasty “ rush,” we learnt by the
mail that arrived from Australia last week that on the 27th March the schooner “Colonist ”
sailed from Sydney for Port Moresby with 25 diggers on board, who w T ere to be joined by
a similar number at Cooktown, in Northern Queensland, where the vessel was to touch
on the voyage, and upon their arrival at their destination they were to disperse about the
country in parties of five or ten to prospect for gold. By the same mail we are told
that another expedition was about leaving New Zealand for New Guinea, and we are
further informed by a telegram received in London from Sydney on Saturday last that,
in addition to the two expeditions we have just referred to, three other vessels laden
with passengers and live stock have sailed from Port Jackson for the island. The
event that we anticipated has therefore come to pass, and unless immediate steps are
taken to establish some form of British authority in the island the most deplorable
results are likely to occur. Without any knowledge of the language, even those of the
new comers who may be the most anxious to refrain from acts calculated to pro-
voke a collision may inadvertently give some slight cause of offence, which will
at once precipitate it. It is more than probable, however, that some of the
members of the expedition may not be particularly careful, and with a number
of parties of five and ten scattered about the country it will be almost impossible
to avoid an encounter, the news of which will spread over the island and render
all the natives hostile to 'white men. The miners, who are by this time in New
Guinea, are well armed, and are not likely to hesitate about making use of their weapons
in case they think themselves in danger. They are sure not to move about without
having their firearms at hand, and as the Papuans are almost always provided with
their bows and arrows for the purpose of killing game, a very slight misunderstanding
may at once lead to an exchange of shots. Uncontrolled by any Government, the
presence of a number of diggers is almost certain to be followed by bloodshed, and it
can only be prevented by the immediate action of the Home Government in appointing
one or more officials, who will be upon the spot, and exercise some degree of sway over
the diggers. None of the Australian Governments can interfere; the island is beyond
their jurisdiction, and action rests with the Home authorities. Sir Arthur Gordon,
Governor of Fiji, in his capacity of High Commissioner of Polynesia, has lately visited
Samoa and held a court there. It may be unnecessary to instruct him to proceed to
New Guinea, but certainly someone ought to be appointed at once with full magisterial
powers to regulate the doings of the diggers and prevent them interfering either with the
natives or their property. In January last year we commented upon the conduct of
Signor D’Albertis s expedition in September 1876 up the Fly River, which portion of
the country fortunately for the present does not come within the scope of the prospecting
parties now in or on their way to New Guinea, and we remarked, “ Although no actual
“ collision occurred with the natives, some circumstances unfortunately happened which
“it is feared may produce hostility on the occasion of any future expedition.” These
fears have been amply verified. In a diary which is now before us of a fresh expedition
up the Fly River which Signor D’Albertis undertook in the steam launch “ Neva,” between
May and November of last year, we find an almost daily record of encounters with the
natives, to such an extent that at the annual meeting of the New South Wales Auxiliary
of the London Missionary Society, held at Sydney on March 26, the President deemed
it necessary, as an Englishman and a Christian, to protest against the doings of Signor
D’Albertis, which he felt sure would invite terrible retribution. He added that the
narrative was more like an old buccaneering American story than anything that had ever
occurred in connection with an English exploring expedition. In his voyage up and
down the Fly in 1877 the Italian explorer was accompanied by an engineer, three South
Sea Islanders, and five Chinamen. In one fight alone Signor D’Albertis fired
110 cartridges, the engineer reloading his arms as fast as possible, and his shots
were not always harmless. The “Neva” bore the Italian and New South Wales
colours, which will be long remembered on the Fly. It is only in consequence of the
non-existence of any civilised authority that such proceedings as those of Signor
D’Albertis, in the nominal pursuit of science, can be possible. He has made the
inhabitants on the banks of the Fly thoroughly hostile to white men, and we are very
much afraid that unless the Secretary for the Colonies takes immediate action the
population in the eastern portion of the island, now friendly disposed to the Europeans
who have visited them, may have ample cause, from the probably lawless doings of some
of the diggers, to regard all white men with the same aversion that Signor D’Albertis
has engendered on the Fly. The question is one that can only be dealt with at Home,
and it requires the promptest attention.
D 4


Enclosure 2 in No, 5.
“Times,” June 1, 1878.
Queensland.
Brisbane, May 30.—Owing to the influence of the Queensland Government Agent
at Port Moresby, very friendly relations have been established between the natives of
New Guinea and the mining and exploring expedition now in that island.
No. 6.
HIGH COMMISSIONER THE HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to the RIGHT HON.
THE EARL OF CARNARVON. (Received June 8, 1878.)
Nasova, Fiji,
My Lord, March 4, 1878.
I have the honour to enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from the
Governor of Queensland, respecting the extension of the jurisdiction of the police
magistrate of Thursday Island to certain islands in Torres Straits but without the limits
of the Colony.
2. The adoption of Sir A. Kennedy’s suggestion was so manifestly likely to be
attended with advantage that I felt no hesitation in complying with his request, a course
of which I hope your Lordship will approve.
3. I enclose a copy of my reply to Sir A. Kennedy’s letter.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Carnarvon, (Signed) ARTHUR H. GORDON.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 6.
The Governor of Queensland to H.M. High Commisstonf.r for the Western Pacific.
Government House, Brisbane,
Sir, December 19, 1877.
I have been requested by my Ministers to ask you whether, under the powers
conferred by your commission, you have any jurisdiction over the islands of Torres
Straits.
This question has arisen from a letter, a copy of which I enclose herewith, addressed
to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland by the police magistrate at Thursday Island,
in which Mr. Chester suggests that “he may be appointed a Deputy Commissioner
under the Amended Imperial Kidnapping Act,” which would empower him to deal with
outrages on natives of islands beyond the Queensland limits.
My Ministers anxiously hope that, should your Excellency have such jurisdiction over
the said islands, it will be in your power to give the necessary authority with a view of
remedying the evils so clearly set forth in Mr. Chester’s letter.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) A. Kennedy,
Governor.
Mr. Chester, Police Magistrate at Thursday Island, to Colonial Secretary.
Thursday Island,
Sir? November 23, 1877.
I have the honour to bring to your notice that there is a constantly increasing
colony of Europeans, South Sea Islanders, and a West Indian black settled'on Darnley
and Murray Islands, outside the Queensland boundary, who are practically beyond
control, except in the very improbable event of the visit of a man-of-war to those
islands.


The men are mostly runaway seamen and discharged Polynesians, and are by no
means a desirable addition to the population of the Straits.
The missionaries and others have made repeated complaints to me of outrages
committed by these men, but hitherto the impossibility of obtaining reliable evidence
against them has prevented any steps being taken. A remedy for this state of things
might lie found in the appointment of the police magistrate at Thursday Island as a
Deputy Commissioner under the Amended Imperial Kidnapping Act, which would
empower him to deal with outrages on natives of islands beyond the Queensland limits,
I have, &c.,
(Signed) Henry M. Chester,
Police Magistrate.
Enclosure 2 in No. 6.
H.M. High Commissioner to the Governor of Queensland.
Nasova, Fiji,
Sir, February 1, 1878.
I have had the honour to receive your Excellency’s letter of the 19th December,
suggesting the expediency of the appointment of the police magistrate at Thursday
Island as a Deputy Commissioner under Her Majesty’s Order in Council of the
13th August 1877, with authority to act in Murray and Darnley Islands.
As the islands in question are beyond the limits of Queensland, and not within the
jurisdiction of any civilised power, they clearly come within the limits of my commission,
and I agree with your advisers in thinking it would be advantageous that the police
magistrate of Thursday Island should, with respect to them, have the powers of a
Judicial Commissioner under the Order in Council.
I accordingly enclose an acting commission for Mr. Chester pending reference to the
Secretary of State, as also a copy of the Order in Council itself. No additional salary
will, of course, be required.
In the enclosed letter sent under flying seal to your Excellency I have requested
Mr. Chester, in making reports of his proceedings as a Deputy Commissioner, to transmit
them under flying seal to your Excellency, in order that your Government may be fully
aware of all that is done by Mr. Chester.
I should be obliged if your Excellency would draw the attention of your advisers to
the 46th clause of the Order in Council, and ascertain whether they are disposed to give
the requisite permission. It might in the case of the Torres Straits Islands be of decided
advantage to the efficient and speedy administration of justice.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) Arthur Gordon,
No. 7.
COLONIAL OFFICE to ADMIRALTY.
Sir, Downing Street, June 28, 1878.
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to transmit to you, to
be laid before the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, a copy of a letter* from the
London Missionary Society drawing attention to the difficulties which are likely to
ensue from the discovery of gold in the south-east part of New Guinea, and from the
influx of gold diggers, who would seem, from telegrams which have appeared in the
public papers, to be proceeding in large numbers from the Australian Colonies to
Port Moresby.
2. Sir M. Hicks Beach has been informed by the High Commissioner of the Western
Pacific that, in compliance with an application from the Government of Queensland, he
has appointed the police magistrate, at Thursday Island, in Torres Straits, to be a
Deputy Commissioner under the Order in Council of 13th August 1877, with authority
to act in Murray and Darnley Islands ; and Sir M. Hicks Beach was at first inclined to
think that the danger apprehended by the London Missionary Society might be met by
* JSTo. 5.
K 6853.
E


the extension of the jurisdiction of the police magistrate at Thursday Island to Port
Moresby and the neighbouring coast of New Guinea.
3. On further consideration, however, of all the circumstances of the case, and having
regard to the distance between Thursday Island and Port Moresby, and to the fact that,
even if the police magistrate at Thursday Island could be spared from his duties there
to attend to any difficulties which may arise in New Guinea, he would have no force at
his command to enforce his orders, Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to suggest for the
consideration of their Lordships that it would seem very desirable that a ship of war (even
if only a sailing schooner) should be stationed in the neighbourhood of the principal
assemblage of diggers until it can be seen whether the rush to New Guinea is of more
than temporary duration, and until the Secretary of State can form an opinion, after
consultation with the High Commissioner of the Western Pacific, who is expected to
arrive in this country in August or September next, as to the necessity 7 of appointing a
Deputy Commissioner to reside in New Guinea under the provisions of the Order in
Council of 13th August 1877-
4. I am to request that an early answer may be returned to this letter, and that, in
the event of their Lordships agreeing in the course proposed, that they will cause
instructions on the subject to be sent by telegraph to the Commodore commanding on
the Australian Stations,
I am, &c..
The Secretary of the Admiralty. (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
No. 8.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, 4th July 1878.
1. With reference to your letter of 28th June* relative to the apprehended
disturbances on the part of the gold diggers in the south-east part of New Guinea, and
to my reply of sth instant,f lam commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty to request that you will inform the Secretary of State for the Colonies that in
acknowledging the telegraphic orders sent to him on the latter date for the despatch
of a vessel to Port Moresby, Commodore Hoskins reports that H.M.S. “ Sappho” is
now between Port Moresby and Thursday Island, and that he will communicate any
intelligence from her as soon as received.
2. The Commodore also reports in a letter dated Auckland, 20th May (received on
Bth hist.) that H.M.S. ‘ Conflict ’ left Auckland for Levuka, Fiji, to give His Excellency
“ the Governor such assistance as he may desire in carrying out his duties as High
“ Commissioner for Western Polynesia, and, having afterwards visited the New
“ Hebrides and Solnum Groups, was to proceed to the south-east and south coasts
“ of New Guinea, and observe the proceedings of the various prospecting expeditions
“ which have started for that locality from New South Wales and Queensland.”
I am, &c.,
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) THOS. WOLLEY.
Colonial Office.
No. 9.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, July 5, 1878.
In reply to your letter of 28th ultimo,* relative to the apprehended disturbances
in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby in consequence of the discovery of gold in the
south-east part of New Guinea, I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty to request that you wdll inform the Secretary of State for the Colonies that,
in compliance with his wushes, telegraphic orders have been sent to the Commodore on
* No. 7.
t No. 9,


the Australian Station to despatch a vessel of war to Port Moresby with directions to
the commanding officer to communicate with the magistrate on Thursday Island, and to
assist in maintaining order so far as he may be able to do so consistently with the
safety of the vessel and crew.
I have, &c.,
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) THOS. WOLLEY.
Colonial Office.
No. 10.
THE RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART., to GOVERNOR
SIR A. E. KENNEDY, K.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLABD).
Telegraphic.
6th July.—Your telegram of 4th* received. Vessel ordered to Port Moresby. Com-
mander to communicate with Chester.
No. 11.
THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, 15, Strand, W.C., July 9> 1878.
The Council of the Royal Colonial Institute have the honour to invite your
consideration to circumstances which, they submit, strengthen the conclusion at which
they have for sometime arrived in favour of the annexation of the eastern portion of the
island of Papua to the British Empire.
You are doubtless aware that on April 29th 1875 f a deputation from the Council
and Fellows of the Institute had the honour of bringing before your predecessor, the
Earl of Carnarvon, the importance of immediate steps being taken to annex the territory
in question, and again on 30th June 1876 they addressed a letter* to His Lordship to
the same effect.
Although two years have elapsed since the Council last had the honour of urging
upon Her Majesty’s Government the expediency of this step, they have not been
inattentive observers of all that has taken place in connection with the island of Papua,
but have noted the various circumstances which have occurred, and which have all
tended strongly to support the conclusion they ventured to express in the memorial
presented by the deputation of 29th April 1875 f and the letter of 30th June 18/6.*
The rights asserted on behalf of the British Crown when formal possession of Eastern
Papua was taken by the discoverers of its coast cannot but be impaired by the lapse of
time, during which no occupation of any part of the territory has been effected with a
view to make good by actual possession such formal claim.
The Council would, therefore, submit that Great Britain would now have less right of
complaint were any other Power to annex the territory than at the period referred to.
During the two years since the Council last had the honour of submitting the question
of annexation to Her Majesty’s Government, their anticipations that the Papuans would
be brought more and more into contact with white men have been realised; several
exploring expeditions have visited the island, mission stations have been established in
different localities, and the probability which the Council suggested, of the existence of
gold in the island, has become an ascertained fact; so much so that a vessel with a
number of miners has recently gone from Sydney to New Guinea, and a telegram
published within the last few days announces that they have discovered “ gold in
payable quantities.”
Such a report might at any time lead to a large and sudden influx of people from
Australia to Papua, producing all those consequent complications with the natives which
the Council in their previous communications with Her Majesty’s Government have
f See No. 12 in [C. 1566] July 1876.
E 2
* Not printed.


pointed out as of serious moment, in the event of the authority of the Imperial Govern-
ment not being extended to the territory prior to white men, even in small numbers,
resorting to its shores.
The Council may refer to an account of an expedition in New Guinea, which
appeared in the numbers of the “ Colonies and India” published on the 11th and 18th
oi last May, as illustrating the conflicts which have already taken place, and may be
expected to become still more frequent in future, between Europeans and the natives of
New Guinea, owing to the absence of any civilised government in the eastern part of
that island.
The Council do not presume to suggest in what manner that authority should be
extended, but they do submit that it cannot effectually be done by any means short of
the territory being declared annexed to the Empire. It would at least be essential that
a magistrate should be appointed, and that his headquarters should be established in
some part of Eastern Papua, and thus also by actual possession would the claim of the
British Crown to the territory be completely secured.
It appears to the Council from the “ Correspondence respecting New Guinea,”
presented to both Houses of Parliament in July 1876, that the question whether Eastern
Papua should be annexed turned upon a small contribution to the expense of such
annexation being refused by the Governments of the Australian Colonies. Now the
Council would venture to observe that, whilst it may be a matter of regret that these
Governments did not favourably respond to the invitation to take part in the expense of
annexing the territory, it would be a matter much to be deplored if a great Imperial
object should not be attained, or a favourable opportunity of carrying it out be lost,
because the adjustment of the share of the expenses consequent on annexation could not
be satisfactorily settled.
The Council would, in conclusion, venture to submit that the annexation of Eastern
Papua, unless our possession of it be forestalled by some other nation, seems inevitable,
and that therefore it can now be effected with less difficulty and cost than must
ultimately attend such a measure if, as in the case of Fiji, the presence of Europeans in
the island give rise to complications with the natives, and claims of compensation for
rights actually acquired, or attempted to be set up, which can only have existence in
consequence of delay on the part of the Imperial Government in putting off the
inevitable annexation.
The Council would, therefore, most respectfully urge upon Her Majesty’s Government
that the annexation of Eastern Papua should be speedily effected, the reasons they have
on previous occasions submitted being all in full force, and some of the weightiest of
them considerably strengthened, as they must continue to be, by lapse of time.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) FREDERICK YOUNG,
The Right Hon. Sir Michael Hicks Beach, Bart., M.P., Honorary Secretary.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 12.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Sir, Downing Street, July 13, 1878.
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 3rd June* drawing attention to the difficulties which
were to be apprehended from the discovery of gold in the south-east part of New
Guinea, and from the influx of gold diggers, who you anticipated would be proceeding in
large numbers from the Australian Colonies to Port Moresby, and you suggest on behalf
of the Directors of the London Missionary Society that the Governor of Fiji should
be instructed to put in force the powers with which he is invested in respect of that part
of New Guinea by the Pacific Islanders Protection Act, 1875.
2. Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to inform you in reply that he has given his careful
consideration to this subject, and that he had at first been inclined to think that the
requirements of the case might be met by the extension to Port Moresby and the
neighbouring coast of New Guinea of the jurisdiction of the police magistrate at
Thursday Island, who has recently been appointed a Deputy Commissioner, under the
* No. 5.


provisions of the Order in Council passed on the 13th of August 1877, to carry into
effect the Pacific Islanders Protection Act, 1875, and who already possesses jurisdiction
over certain neighbouring islands in Torres Straits.
3. On further consideration, however, of all the circumstances of the case, and having
regard to the distance between Thursday Island and Port Moresby, and to the fact that,
even if the police magistrate at Thursday Island could be spared from his duties there
to attend to any difficulties which may arise in New Guinea, he would have no force at
his command to enforce his authority, Sir M. Hicks Beach has thought it preferable
that a ship of war should, if possible, be stationed in the neighbourhood of the principal
assemblage of diggers until it can be seen whether the rush to New Guinea is of more
than temporary duration.
4. Sir M. Hicks Beach has, therefore, been in communication with the Lords Com-
missioners of the Admiralty upon the subject, and I am to inform you that orders have
been sent by telegraph to the Commodore on the Australian Station to despatch a vessel
of war to Port Moresby, with directions to the commanding officer to communicate
with the magistrate at Thursday Island and to assist in maintaining order so far as he
may be able.
5. I am to add that the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific (the Governor
of Fiji) is expected to arrive in this country in August or September next, and that
Sir M. Hicks Beach proposes to take the opportunity of consulting with him as to the
necessity of appointing a Deputy Commissioner to reside in New Guinea, and generally
as to the measures which may be necessary for the government of British subjects who
may proceed to New Guinea.
I have, &c.,
The Secretary of (Signed) R. H, MEADE
The London Missionary Society.
No. 13.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
Sir, Downing Street, July 26, 1378.
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 9th of July,* stating the grounds upon which the Council
of the Royal Colonial Institute considers that the annexation by this country of the
eastern portion of New Guinea is at the present time of even greater importance than
when urged by the Institute upon the Earl of Carnarvon in 1875 and 1876.
2. Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to inform you in reply that he has for some time
past had under his consideration the proposals which have been made for the annexation
of the eastern part of New Guinea by this country, and that the difficulties which are
to be apprehended from the recent discovery of gold, and from the influx of gold diggers,
have already engaged his attention. Her Majesty’s Government are not, however,
at present prepared to entertain the question of the annexation of the country.
3. The High Commissioner for the Western Pacific is expected to arrive in this
country in August or September next, and Sir M. Hicks Beach proposes to take the
opportunity of consulting with him as to the necessity of appointing a Deputy Com-
missioner to reside in New Guinea, and generally as to the measures which may be
necessary for the government of British subjects who may proceed to that Island.
4. Meanwhile, with the view of preserving order amongst the gold miners who have
already gone thither, instructions have been sent by telegraph to the Commodore on the
Australian station to despatch a vessel of war to Port Moresby, with directions to the
Commanding Officer to communicate with the Police Magistrate at Thursday Island, in
Torres Straits, and to assist in maintaining order so far as he may be able.
I am, &c.,
The Honorary Secretary, (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
Royal Colonial Institute.
* No. 11.
E 3


No. 14.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, 6th September 1878.
With reference to my letter of the sth July last,* containing a telegram which
had been sent that day to the Commodore in Australia, desiring him to send a ship of
war to communicate with the magistrate at Thursday Island, and to assist in keeping
order amongst the gold diggers near Port Moresby, I am commanded by my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit herewith, for the information of the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, a letter, dated the 16th July, from Commodore Hoskins,
reporting that he had already sent Commander Digby in H.M.S. “Sappho” to Port
Moresby on the 22nd of May, foreseeing that difficulties were likely to arise there; and
that as it subsequently appeared that the magistrate at Thursday Island was not a
Deputy Commissioner for New Guinea, Commander Digby had been furnished with the
necessary authority from Sir Arthur Gordon to act at Port Moresby in that capacity.
2. I am to request that the original enclosures may be returned.
I am. See.,
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 14.
Commodore Hoskins to the Admiralty.
Sir, “ Wolverene ” at Sydney, 16th July 1878.
With reference to your telegram of the sth instant, desiring me to send a ship
of war to communicate with the magistrate at Thursday Island, and to assist in
keeping order amongst the gold diggers near Port Moresby, I have the honour to report
that, foreseeing difficulties were likely to arise there, I had sent Her Majesty’s ship
“ Sappho ” on the 22nd May last to Port Moresby and Torres Straits, with orders to
inquire into the state of affairs at the former place, and to do what might prove to be
necessary in the event of disturbances having arisen; while, at the latter, Commander
Digby was to inquire into the state of the Pearl Shell Fisheries, &c., as directed by your
letter of the Ist October 1877.
2. When your telegram arrived His Excellency the Honourable Sir Arthur Gordon
was in Sydney on his way to England ; and, having conferred with him on the subject,
he informed me that Mr. Chester, the magistrate at Thursday Island, is not a Deputy
Commissioner for New Guinea, and could not therefore act at Port Moresby, and that,
all things considered, he thought it would be better to send Commander Digby the
power to act in that capacity if I had no objection.
3. To this I assented, and the authority from Sir Arthur Gordon was forwarded by
me to Commander Digby, with orders to return to Port Moresby and remain there as
long as his provisions, &c. would last; and the Netherland Company’s SS. “ Atjeh,”
which took my letter, would also supply him with coal under arrangements made with
the Agent at this place.
4. Since the orders were sent, telegraphic intelligence by the Torres Straits steamer,
via Townsville, gives a short summary of the “Sappho’s” proceedings, of which I
enclose a cutting taken from the Sydney Morning Herald of the i6th instant.
5. Commander Digby’s report will be shortly received, and anything of interest will
be forwarded to you by the next mail.
I have, &c.,
The Secretary of the Admiralty, (Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Whitehall. Commodore.
|* No. 9.


The Sydney Morning Herald, Tuesday, July 16, 1878.
New Guinea.
The Cooktown correspondent of the Brisbane Courier on the 10th instant telegraphs
that H.M.S. “ Sappho ” reached Tursday Island on June 22, after a cruise in Louisiade
and Port Moresby, which she left on June 18, offering to take any of the men wishing to
return. Two of the party of the “ Colonist ” and two others returned suffering from fever.
Advices state that the Laloki River was falling, and the weather clearing up. Strong
colours of gold had been found on the river banks, and gold is expected to be obtained
when the waters subside. Generally speaking, the prospects are reported hopeful. The
“ Sappho ”is now engaged surveying Proudfoot Shoal. Mr. Chester has left Thursday
Island for Port Moresby.
The Courier of Friday says : —From the news to hand per the “ Sappho ” it would
appear that the position of affairs with regard to the exploring party has not been
altered since the news received from them by the “ Prospect,” cutter, last montn. We
then learned that they had been stopped by the set-in of the rainy season at the Laloki
River, and had been unable to penetrate through the scrub, that fine colours of gold
onlj r had been found, and that all (or nearly all) were suffering from fever. A month’s
forced inactivity amid the miseries incidental to their being compelled to camp through
a tropical wet season, and their sufferings from fever, would necessarily impart a very
desponding tone to their correspondence; but as soon as the rain is over, and they
resume active operations, a new spirit will be infused, which will enable them to over-
come all difficulties, and if gold exists in Mount Owen or Stanley peninsula, there is
every probability that these men will yet discover it. It is to be deeply regretted that
they set out on their quest too early in the season. Some months must necessarily
elapse before the result of their exploration, if favourable, will be made known, as in
their case there is neither reward nor inducement in any shape or form to make them
report their discoveries. It is, however, pretty certain that up to the present the party
has not discovered payable gold.
The Sydney Morning Herald, Thursday, July 18, 1878.
Colonization op New Guinea.
Mr. Ingham, who represents the Government of Queensland at Port Moresby, has
just supplied the following information concerning New Guinea.
Port Moresby is situated about latitude 9'20 S. and longitude 147'30 E., and access to
the port is obtained through the basilisk opening in the New Guinea Barrier Reef. The
distance from the reef to the entrance of the harbour is about five miles, and good
anchorage is obtainable under the south head in about six fathoms of water, at a distance
of a mile and a quarter from the shore. Deep water is found close up to the eastern
head, and this is the place lately occupied by the “ Saucy Jack,” cutter, as a beche-de-
mer station. The entrance itself is about a mile and a half wide. From the eastern head a
native track runs round the harbour to the village of Anuapata, and the Colonist party
in landing their horses availed themselves of this portion of the harbour, the vessel being
warped to within 100 yards of the beach, whence they were able to swim the horses
ashore, and drive them round to the village. A range of high mountains forms the
backbone of the peninsula, and between these and the Port Moresby coast is first a stretch
of level country, and then a series of low hills, which at some places run down steeply to
the sea, and at others are succeeded by a considerable stretch of comparatively level
ground. These hills skirt the harbour from the eastern head to Anuapata, where they
lie back from the beach sufficiently far to give abundant room for a township. Opposite
to Anuapata a range of hills, dividing the harbour from the sea, forms an effectual
barrier against the north-west, monsoons, and renders Port Moresby abso.utely land-
locked.
Port Moresby will form an admirable position for a European settlement so far as
regards its healthiness, but until a proper road is made the range will be an insurmount-
able barrier to dray traffic with the interior. It was at one time supposed that Booties Inlet
would be a more suitable place for a township, as the land does not rise more than
60 feet at the head of that harbour, besides which it has a fine running stream of fresh
water; but, unfortunately, a coral reef extends right across the opening of the bay, and
no available passage has yet been discovered. The distance from this, place to the
crossing of the Laloki would be about two miles less than from Port Moresby. Another
objection to Port Moresby as a settlement is the great scarcity of water, which can only
be obtained from two springs immediately at the foot of the hill, and about a mile distant
E 4


from the village, so that any European settlement would have to depend upon storage
for its water supply. So far as can be ascertained the rainfall here is slightly less than
at Cooktown.
The natives of Anuapata and the adjacent villages closely resemble the Polynesians
of the New Hebrides group, especially those from the island of Motu ; and, strange to
say, these people call themselves Motu. This gives colour to the supposition that the
Port Moresby natives pwere originally drifted from this island, and there can be little
doubt that they are interlopers at New Guinea; they even retain a tradition regarding
the circumstance of their ancestors having come from the east, fighting the Koitappo
tribes for the possession which they obtained and handed down to their children.
Their colour is a light bronze, and their hair varies in different individuals, from curly
and bushy to light wavy. The total number of Motu natives in Port Moresby is
about 1,000.
The hills immediately surrounding Port Moresby are dotted here and there with
plantations of bananas, yams, sugar-cane, and the native women bestow great care upon
the cultivation of these patches. Besides the products of their gardens, the natives have
the cocoa-nut, the native mango or vivi, the bread fruit, and two or three species of large
chestnuts. Mango, bread fruit, and cocoa-nut trees are real property among the natives;
that is to say, they are not parted with merely by selling the ground on which they
stand. This is a matter that should be specially impressed upon persons having dealings
with the natives in landed property, as it is necessary either to buy the trees as well as
the land, or to allow the owner of the fruit trees a right-of-way through your property.
The available products of the country for commercial purposes are the sago palm, the
sugar-cane, small quantities of cocoa-nuts, native flax, and cedar. Cocoa-nuts would not
form a staple article of export, as the dense population of the country is sufficient to
consume almost the whole of the present crops. There are several distinct varieties of
sugar-cane, all of them perfectly free from disease. Mr. Ingham states that some canes
were shown him as the product of a village east of Port Moresby, which were very much
superior to anything he has seen in Queensland, although he has had three years’
experience here as a planter. He believes that with care and perseverance the natives
might be got to work on sugar plantations, and an unlimited supply of labour could be
opened up as soon as friendly communications were established between the white men
and the natives.
Among the natural productions of the country may be mentioned tobacco, which is
grown by the mountaineers, but their practice of drying it in the sun effectually destroys
all flavour; and, although content to use this when they could get nothing better, the
coast natives have now learned to appreciate the qualities of the American article, and
stigmatise Coiairi tobacco as “no good, and all same as grass.” In smoking the natives
use a large bamboo stopped up at one end, and pierced with a hole in the side ; into the
hole is inserted a leaf rolled up in the shape of a funnel, and in this funnel is placed the
tobacco, which is then lighted; as soon as the tube is filled with smoke they apply their
mouth to the other end, and inhale it. They employ the old injurious plan of sucking
the smoke right down into the lungs, and this undoubtedly has a powerful influence in
shortening their lives.
Timber is very scarce at Port Moresby, as the gum trees there are very small and
stunted, and none of the scrub woods are available for building purposes. The natives
bring the poles for their houses from a river about twenty miles distant; canoes in a
rough state are brought from various distances along the coast, and are afterwards
finished according to the requirements and tastes of the owner. The big trading canoes
from Erremma often sell one or two of the smaller canoes of which they are composed
after disposing of their sago. Occasionally the natives make an expedition to the west
for the purpose of obtaining canoes, and it was during the last trip of this kind that an
epidemic broke out and carried off more than half the full-grown men of Anuapata ; this
probably resulted from fevers contracted in the low-lying country where the timber is
obtained.
Of course, at present, all business between the whites and natives is carried on by a
system of barter, and for this purpose Barrett’s twist is found to be a most convenient
article of exchange, the native consumption being such as to prevent anything like a
glut in the market for some time to come, —a commercial disaster which has already
put a stop to the use of beads as current coin. Of course, as stocks get larger the price
of tobacco will also fall, and this has already begun to operate. At present a “ hodu ”
full of water, about a bucket and a half, is brought a distance of about a mile by the
women for an inch and a half of twist, whereas the charge for the same service at the
time of Mr. Ingham’s first arrival was but half an inch. A cocoa-nut costs about
an inch of tobacco; yams vary in price according to the season ; a stick of sugar-cane


(12 feet long) is worth about an inch and a half. All these prices, however, vary
according to the distance from white men.
The road from Port Moresby inland is over the low range of hills at the back of the
town, through a gap, at a level of 560 feet above the sea ; thence by a gentle descent
into a large black-soil plain, which extends for about 12 miles to the bank of the Laloki
river. A large portion of this plain is covered with good kangaroo grass, and is admirably
adapted for grazing cattle ; on the other side of the river there is about four miles of
level country, after which a dense scrub is reached, and then the lower spurs of the main
dividing range. The Laloki river takes a course almost parallel to the coast, running
between the main range and the east hills, and empties itself into Redscar Bay, about
40 miles from Port Moresby. The natives say that about 40 miles inland from Port
Moresby, at a height of 2,000 feet above the sea, it is only five sleeps to the big water
on the other side, so that, should it ever be required, there is little doubt that com-
munication could be obtained with the north-west coast, through the great gap between
Owen Stanley on the west and Mount Obree on the east. The absence of ports on the
north-west coast renders it not unlikely that a large portion of it may have to depend
upon Port Moresby for supplies.
A third and distinct race, called Coiairies, inhabit the large mountain ranges further
inland. These men are very superior to either the Koitappos or the coast natives, both
in physique and in intelligence.
Westward from Port Moresby are numerous little villages of from 200 to 400 inhabi-
tants, and these extend along the coast as far as Cape Suckling. After passing this
point a different race of people is approached; these are the true jet-black Papuans.
Eastward from Port Moresby also are numerous small villages, until Hood Lagoon is
reached, where there is a village of 1,000 inhabitants or more. These natives are in a
higher state of civilization than those of Port Moresby, though undoubtedly of the same
race; they are exceedingly light-coloured, and have quite long wavy hair of a light
brown colour, probably kept so by the use of lime.
Beyond Hood Lagoon the villages are more populous, and in Keppel bay there is a
village of about 4,000 inhabitants. Still further eastward the region of cannibalism is
reached. One of the principal occupations of the cannibals is that of patrolling the coast
in large war canoes in search of smaller craft; and w y oe to the canoe overhauled by them ;
for whether its occupants be a crew of fishermen blown out of their reckoning, or a
company of traders who have ventured beyond prudent limits, their lives are forfeit to
the enemy, their bodies are eaten and their skulls taken to adorn the canoes or houses
of the captors ; the jawbone of the prisoner is used as an arm ornament. The cannibals
are nearly black, thereby affording additional proof that the Motu men are merely
immigrants who have settled upon a small portion of the coast.
A few words illustrating the nature of the language may be interesting, and at the
same time prove useful to parties visiting the country. These are used by the Motu
natives:—
English. Motu.
Water ... Ranou.
Wood - - - - Anou.
Fire - Lahi.
Food - - Aniani.
Pannikin ... Kapperri.
Water jar - - - Hodu.
Canoe - - - Laktoie.
Dog - - - Cissea.
The sea - - - Tavarra.
Fish - - - Quaroumi.
To-day - Harriharri.
To-morrow - - - Keroukerou.
Day after to-morrow - - Yaneka.
Yam - - Maho.
Rope ... - Quanou.
You (or ye) go [imperative] - Oi lou.
Let us go - - - Ita lou.
Bring me some water - - Ranou mila.
Bring me some food - - Aniani mila.
You go and show me the road - Oi lou tala itaia.
E 6853. F


No. 15.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, September 13, 1878,
I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit,
for the information of the Secretary of State for Colonial Affairs, a copy of a telegram
which has this day been received from Commodore Hoskins reporting the return of the,
“ Sappho ” from New Guinea, and the state of affairs at that place.
I am, &c.,
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 15.
From Commodore Hoskins, C. 8., Australia.
Sydney,l2 Sept.,lB7B. “ Sappho ” returned from New Guinea, reports expedition failed,
many deaths, 60 remain, many foreigners, no disturbances, relations with natives friendly.
No. 16.
F. P. LABILLIERE, ESQ., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
5, Pump Court, Temple, E.C.,
Sir, 18th September 1878.
On March 26th, 1874,1 had the honour of addressing* your predecessor, the Earl
of Carnarvon, on the important question of the annexation of Eastern Papua to the
British empire, and his Lordship was so much impressed with the facts which I was able
to lay before him as to transmit a copy of my letter with a covering despatch, dated
April 17th, 1874, to the Governors of all the Australian colonies.
These letters, and the correspondence to which they gave rise, appear in the papers
presented to Parliament in July 1876. f
I think I am fully justified in saying that the observations of the Governors upon my
letter confirmed the views I ventured to submit. Even Sir Hercules Robinson and
Sir George Bowen, in opposing annexation, took exception to only a few of the arguments
advanced in its favour; whilst I am clearly entitled to claim the replies of Sir James
Eergusson, Governor Weld, and Governor Cairns in support of the conclusion at which I
had arrived. The opinions of Colonial Ministers, Cabinets, and Parliaments were still
more favourable.
The principal argument of Sir George Bowen and Sir Hercules Robinson was that the
climate of Papua is never likely to admit of the island possessing a European population,
the latter Governor intimating that it was improbable that even a few white men would
venture there. But he admitted that “if British subjects do settle in New Guinea,
“ effectual provision should at once be made for controlling them.”
The contingency thus contemplated by Sir H. Robinson as so very improbable has
already arisen. The Governor stated that “not even a missionary ” was in the Island,
and that it was desirable “ that the existing isolation of New Guinea should be main-
“ tained as long as possible.” But now several missionaries have been for some time
permanently established there; explorers and other visitors have soon followed them;
and the last few mails from Australia have brought accounts of the proceedings of a
number of miners who have been for some time in the Island, and who have succeeded in
discovering gold in sufficient quantities to induce them to continue working for it.
Recent intelligence of them, published in “ The Colonies ” newspaper of September 7th,
states that one of the party has bought 45 acres of land. Thus has commenced the
embarrassing question of purchases of land from aboriginal inhabitants, which has been a
source of so much difficulty in Fiji and other colonies when inevitable annexation has
been too long delayed.
* See No. 2 in [C. 1566] July 1876.
t [C, 1566] July 1876,


But even if it were unlikely that a permanent settlement should be formed in Papua
by this expedition, it is certain to be followed by a succession of others to the same or
different parts of the Island, until some of them at length succeed in establishing
Europeans in New Guinea in numbers sufficiently large to require that control referred
to by Sir Hercules Robinson.
Sir George Bowen seems to consider that Eastern Papua should not be annexed,
because he is of opinion that it is not capable of sustaining a large British population
like New Zealand. How far its climate will admit of its doing so is a question which
experience of the territory alone can determine. In the meantime, we know how elevated
a considerable portion of the Island is, and must remember how all past colonizing
experience teaches that no new territories should be at once pronounced unfit for
European inhabitants. At all events, Papua has already attracted sufficient white men
probably to satisfy Sir Hercules Robinson that some supervision is required, and most
likely before many months elapse a much larger number will have resorted to the
Island.
It seems impossible that the Imperial Government or any of the Colonial governments,
can exercise efficient control over British subjects who, like these miners, may go inland
some distance from the coast, unless a magistrate and a few police be stationed in some
convenient position. The miners themselves would be only too glad to be under such
control, as they have expressed a wish for the establishment of a regular government.
Then also the purchase of land from the natives cannot be regulated, and satisfactory
relations maintained between them and white people, without the intervention of British
authority, or, in other words, the exercise of British sovereignty within the territory ; and
that would practically amount to annexation. There is also no other way of preventing
undesirable colonizing enterprises being from time to time projected, such as that which
is the subject of a considerable portion of the correspondence laid before Parliament.
One of the chief features of such projects is the acquisition of land from the natives ;
and there are people who will not cease to embark in them until they are aware that the
territory forms part of the Empire, and that the Crown has proclaimed that it reserves to
itself the regulation of the conditions on which land can be acquired from the natives,
and will recognise no titles to it unless in conformity with such conditions.
But if the Imperial Government leaves it uncertain for some years whether it intends
to accede to the wishes of its subjects that it should annex a territory, and then takes
that step, it can, I submit, be scarcely equitable to refuse to recognise titles to land
previously acquired from the natives. The refusal of the Government to sanction the
extensive purchase made by the Port Phillip Association, the particulars of which are
given in my “ Early History of the Colony of Victoria,” was based upon the fact that
the territory had already been declared part of the British dominions ; and the Government
had even twice attempted to colonize it. But with regard to New Guinea the Imperial
Government has never even announced its approval of the formal possession of the
coast taken by Captain Yule thirty-one years ago, and more recently by Captain
Moresby.
I venture, therefore, to submit that no further delay should take place in proclaiming
the eastern half of Papua, up to the 141° longitude, the Dutch boundary, part of the
British empire, and that it would be expedient to occupy Port Moresby or some other
point on the coast, in order that the claim to the territory should be followed up by an act
of possession, and that a centre should be established for the effective control of Europeans
£oiu<r to the Island.
o o
Sir George Bowen assumes “ that the British Crown would not annex the eastern
“ moiety of New Guinea without some formal invitation or expression of consent on the
“ part of the native chiefs.” Now, if we are to wait till the numerous tribes in the
interior of Papua, as well as on the coast, understand what annexation means, and give
their formal consent to it, I admit that it must be indefinitely postponed. But surely,
without such consent, the Imperial Government may in all good conscience take posses-
sion of the territory, knowing that it will be the very best thing for the Papuans ; for
only under British tule can they be assured the highest justice and humanity of treatment,
and the most solicitous regard fur all their rights and interests.
In my letter of March 26th, 1874,* I assumed that the cost of the acquisition of New
Guinea might reach the improbable sum of three or four millions, in order to demonstrate
that it would even be better to incur such an outlay, than that a foreign Power should
occupy the Island, or that such a state of things as arose in Fiji should be repeated there
on a larger scale. Sir George Bowen, in commenting upon this, contends that the expendi-
* No. 2 in [C. 1566] July 1876.
F 2


ture upon Maori wars having exceeded 12,000,000/., the acquisition of Papua might cost
as much. But, with our experience of New Zealand, it is not unreasonable to expect
that native wars might be altogether avoided, or be of a much less severe and costly
character. Should any military force be required native troops from India would be
well adapted to the country. New Zealand has, however, proved itself worth a great
deal more to this country and to the empire generally than 12,000,000/., and so would
Eastern Papua, even if Sir George Bowen and Sir Hercules Robinson are correct in
predicting that a large British population can never be acclimatised in the Island; for
when it is considered how limited is the extent of the high lands in the tropics available
for the culture of certain products, Papua would be of great value even if it could only
be made a dependency like Ceylon.
I have never thought that any expenditure should be incurred at first beyond what
would be necessary for the establishment of one or two settlements to secure the
territory. The opening up of the Island could well be left to private enterprise controlled
by the authority of a regular government, which would only need to be extended as the
trade with the natives and the desire to obtain land from them increased; so that the
machinery of government would come into existence with the prosperity of our new
possession and the growth of revenue to support it. Thus, beginning with a magistrate
under one of the Australian governors, Papua would doubtless in a few years be able to
maintain a complete government of its own.
If I am not greatly mistaken, from the tenor of the correspondence laid before Parlia-
ment, possession would have been taken of Eastern Papua if some of the leading
Australian colonies had undertaken to bear a portion of the annual expenditure until the
revenue of the Island should cover it. It is to be regretted that they did not accede to
the suggestion ; but I venture to think it is too readily assumed that they would be the
chief gainers by the annexation; and it is not sufficiently borne in mind what a demand
the work of developing the new territories committed to them still makes upon their
resources and population.
The question is undoubtedly an Imperial one; and when this is so, it is not desirable
that the carrying out of any wise policy should be hindered by calculations as to which
portion of the empire is likely to derive the greatest advantage. This country would
undoubtedly gain much : a rich Island would be opened up to the depressed trade of
English producers, who ought to be able to keep the supply of the wants of the new
Colony in their own hands; and its valuable raw materials, both indigenous and
cultivated, would for the most part find their way to the factories and warehouses of the
British Isles.
Danger of foreign occupation must, I submit, always exist as long as Her Majesty’s
Government does not declare the territory annexed ; and the longer it is in deciding to
do so, the more must that danger increase. There seems at present no obstacle to any
other nation forming a settlement on the north or north-east coast of Papua, even if
such Power should wish to appear at first not to interfere, with our interests in the south.
Having more than four years ago had the honour of bringing the facts relating to this
important question before Her Majesty’s Government, I have refrained from troubling
your Department any further upon the subject, although 1 have felt that many of the
objections to my suggestions might have been answered at the time they were made.
I was content, however, to leave them to be refuted by time and experience, which,
I submit, have already completely removed many' of them.
I, therefore, venture to think that the policy of annexation, strong as the reasons in
its favour were at the date of my previous letter, has been greatly strengthened by
the circumstances which have since arisen, that the lapse of time must only continue to
add to the weight of these, and that annexation by Great Britain being more than
ever desirable, and ultimately inevitable unless a Foreign Power step in, delay in
carrying it out can only increase the cost and difficulties attending it.
1 have, &c.,
The Right Hon. (Signed) FRANCIS P. LABILLIERE.
Sir Michael Hicks Beach, Bart., M.P.,
Secretary of State for the Colonies.


No. 17.
GOVERNOR SIR G. F. BOWEN, G.C.M.G., (VICTORIA,) to the RIGHR HON.
SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART. (Received September 20, 1878.)
Sib, Government House, Melbourne, Ist August 1878.
I have the honour to transmit herewith, for your information, a copy of a letter
addressed to me by Sir Arthur Gordon, the Governor of Fiji, and Her Majesty’s High
Commissioner for the Western Pacific, covering copy of a correspondence between him
and the “ Australasian Colonization Company ” of Melbourne.
2. This Company is an association formed with the object of effecting a settlement in
New Guinea. As Sir Arthur Gordon remarks, its prospectus shows that its schemes
are open to grave objection ; and I entirely concur with the salutary warnings conveyed
by him in the letter which he addressed to the chairman of the Company on the
17th July ultimo.
3. It has been projected that a petition should be addressed to the Queen, praying
that a charter might be granted to this Company. If any such petition should be
placed in my hands for transmission, I shall send with it a full report containing all the
information on the subject that I may be able to procure in Victoria.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. (Signed) G, F. BOWEN.
Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, Bart.,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 1 7.
His Excellency the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific to the Governor
of Victoria.
Sir, Melbourne, 17th July 1878.
I have the honour to inform your Excellency that since my arrival in this city I
have received a visit from a deputation of the “ Australasian Colonization Company ” of
Melbourne, an association formed for the purpose of effecting a settlement in the
Island of New Guinea. A glance at the prospectus of the Company will at once show
your Excellency that its schemes are open to grave objection.
I have the honour to enclose copies of a letter which I have received from the chair-
man of the Association, and also one of my reply.
I trust that your Excellency may concur in the views which I have expressed, and
that, should the petition of the Company be forwarded to your Excellency for trans-
mission, it may be accompanied by an intimation of your own opinion upon the proposed
action of the Company.
I have, &c.,
To His Excellency the Governor of Victoria. (Signed) Arthur Gordon.
The Australasian Colonization Company to His Excellency the High Commissioner
for the Western Pacific.
To His Excellency Sir Arthur Gordon, Governor of Fiji, &c.
May it please your Excellency,
We have the honour most respectfully to inform your Excellency that it is our
intention to form a joint stock company, to be incorporated by royal charter, for the
purpose of colonising the north-eastern coast of Papua or New Guinea, there to carry on
trading, mining, fishing, pearling, timber-getting, stock-rearing, spice and fruit growing,
or other suitable industry as might appear to our directors or their employes profitable or
expedient legitimately to engage in. We will apply for a royal charter immediately on
the incorporation of the company. It is not our intention to land on these shores with
any other than the most peaceful intentions towards the aborigines, or any well-disposed
F 3


people of any other country whatever; but it is our intention to take with the expedition
we may see fit to equip a sufficiency of stores, arms, and ammunition to preserve our
people from hardships, starvation, piratical or warlike raids on their property, or attempts
at massacre on their persons or those in their employment. Such royal charters have
already been granted to a New Zealand company, and others of a like kind, with a similar
object. The result of such companies has been to confer the blessings of civilisation on
heretofore barbarous regions, and to confer lustre on the empire of Great Britain, adding
at the same time to her power and possessions without entailing expense and responsi-
bility. We also most respectfully submit that in the event of our not being able to
secure a suitable situation for such settlement on that part of the island of New Guinea
east of the 140 deg. meridian, we shall as a company be at liberty to make application
to His Majesty of the Netherlands for permission to form a settlement within his dominion,
provided always that a favourable position for such location be obtained therein. In the
event of these territories being placed under the jurisdiction of Victoria or any other
colonial government, our company would be prepared to comply with all restrictions that
could reasonably be imposed, and would expect to have all reasonable rights, liberties,
and privileges recognised in favour of the Australasian Colonisation Company, to be
incorporated under royal charter. We take this opportunity of thanking your Excellency
for your kind reception of our deputation this morning, and the clear and forcible view s
we had so considerately placed before us of our grave responsibility in this matter.
Trusting that our intentions as herein expressed may appear reasonable and satisfactory
to your Excellency, and that wherever our lot may be cast, it will be our study and duty
so to conduct ourselves as to reflect credit and honour on the empire of which we, as
subjects of tier Most Gracious Majesty, owe fealty and allegiance,
We have, &c.,
Melbourne, (Signed) B. H. Dons,
16th July 1878. (On behalf of the company).
His Excellency the High Commissioner to the Chairman of the Australasian
Colonisation Company.
Sir, Melbourne, July 17, 1878.
I am directed by His Excellency, Her Majesty’s High Commissioner for Western
Pacific, to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday’s date.
It is of course perfectly open to you and the gentlemen on whose behalf you write
to apply to the Imperial Government for the grant of a royal charter for the purposes
you specify, or to solicit from the Government of the King of the Netherlands a similar
charter with regard to any part of the Dutch colonial dominions, although His Excellency
must decline to offer any advice as to the measures to be taken by you with a view to
effect the objects you propose, or to express any opinion as to the success .with which
such applications may be attended.
His Excellency need scarcely add that no objection can be made by him to the trans-
mission, in the ordinary course, through the Governor of the Colony, of the petition to
the Queen, a draft of which was furnished to him yesterday by the deputation.
It was with much satisfaction that His Excellency learned from you that it was not
the intention of the association to take any active steps towards the establishment of the
proposed Colony until a royal charter had been obtained by' it; but he thinks it right to
repeat the warning which he yesterday gave as to the position in which parties who,
without such charter or authority, undertake to carry out any such scheme of settlement
as appears to be contemplated by the prospectus of the association are likely to find
themselves placed.
It is his duty 7 formally and emphatically to declare that the British Government disclaim
all obligation to protect or interfere on behalf of persons voluntarily placing themselves
in positions of danger in a savage country without the approval or consent of Imperial
authority, and that those who enter on such enterprises do so at their own risk and
peril.
Her Majesty has been pleased, by Her royal Order in Council of the 13th August
■ 1877, to make provision for the maintenance of law and order among British subjects in
those islands of the Pacific Ocean where no settled form of government exists, and to
confer authority and jurisdiction under the provisions of various Acts of the Imperial
Parliament upon Her Majesty’s High Commissioner and his deputies over all British
subjects within those limits.


It would be impossible for His Excellency to permit the establishment of any
co-ordinate or rival jurisdiction in the Western Pacific (within which that portion of the
Island of New Guinea not claimed by His Netherlands Majesty is, for the purposes of the
Order in Council, included), and it would be his duty to make use of the powers entrusted
to him to oppose any attempt of such a nature, or any enterprise calculated to compro-
mise the Imperial Government or likely to produce collisions with the native inhabitants
of New Guinea, which might seriously embarrass the future relations of British subjects in
that region.
His Excellency has no pretension and no wish to interfere with the perfect liberty of
action of the members of the association ; but it must be distinctly understood that the
plans of the association, as set forth in the prospectus, have not received, and cannot
receive, his encouragement or sanction, and are of a nature certain to be disapproved by
Her Majesty’s Government.
I have, &c.,
B. H. Dods, Esq., &c. L. F. Knollys, Captain A.D.C.
No. 18.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, 3rd October 1878.
I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit, for
the information of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, a letter from Commodore
Hoskins, dated at Sydney on 31st July last, forwarding a report of the visit of
H.M.S. “ Sappho ” to New Guinea, and the state of affairs at that Island.
2, The Commodore also reports the visit of a French ship of war to the Chesterfield and
Hampton Reefs for the purpose of proclaiming those Islands to be French territory; and
he encloses a statement by Charles Dudfield, master of the mission vessel “ Mayri,” (and
other papers,) respecting the attack made on that vessel by the natives at Stacey Island
in December 1877.
My Lords request that the enclosures may be returned, in order that they may be sent
to the Foreign Office.
I am, &c.,
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) THOS. WOLLEY.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 18.
Commodore Hoskins to the Admiralty,
Visit of “ Sappho ” to New Guinea, &c.
Sir, “Wolverine,” at Sydney, 31st July 1878.
With reference to their Lordships’ orders by telegram of the sth July 1878,
I have the honor to forward herewith Commander Digby’s report of his cruise (so far)
to the south-east coast of New Guinea and Thursday Island, from which latter place he
has, in pursuance of orders sent him by mail steamer on the 91h July 1878, returned to
Port Moresby.
2. With reference to his mention of his visit to the Chesterfield and Bampton Reefs,
and the enclosure No. 1, which he found on Avon Island, I have to report that after the
“ Renard,” “ Beagle,” and “ Sappho ” had visited that locality in April and May last,
a French ship of war was sent there by the French Government of New Caledonia to
proclaim those Islands, and probably some others, French territory, and this was done on
the 15th June with the usual formalities, the object being to secure the valuable deposits
of guano now known to exist upon them.
3. The signer of the notice, Joshua H. North, master of the “Effie Muckle,” appears
to have given the information in Noumea wdiich led to this being done, and a French
company has been formed to remove the guano.
F 4


4. Feeling, however, somewhat doubtful of their position, they have sent an agent to
Sydney to make a compromise with Messrs. Scott and Henderson, to whom the
Governor of this Colony had just before granted a lease of the islets for the same
purpose, under the power possessed by him; and I understand the guano will be worked
by these two companies jointly, until the question of title is decided by the Home
Government, to whom it was made the subject of a telegram by His Excellency
Sir Hercules Robinson immediately on his receiving a notice of the annexation from the
French Governor.
5. In consequence of this, I have directed the “ Renard,” which was under orders to
resume the examination of the shoals in question, to proceed to the Solomon Islands and
survey the Indispensable Reef during her stay.
6. With reference to the representation made to Commander Digby (enclosures
2,3, and 4 of his- letter) when at Brisbane, respecting the attack made by the
natives at Stacey Island on the mission vessel “ Mayri ” in December lust, and the
statement of Charles Dudfield, the master, it would appear from the report that no further
molestation is apprehended by Mr. Chalmers, and under the circumstances narrated I
consider Commander Digby quite right in leaving matters as he found them.
7. The “ Sappho ” will remain at Port Moresby until her provisions are becoming
exhausted, when she will return to Sydney.
8. It would appear that for the present there is no cause to apprehend disturbances
taking place between the natives and the gold diggers in New Guinea, but attention is
being more and more directed in these Colonies to that country, and unless the sickness
and privations the pioneers now there have undergone deter others from following
them, it will probably be necessary to keep a ship of war almost continually there in
future.
9. My attention has been drawn by His Excellency the High Commissioner to the
formation of a company in Victoria, whose object is to establish a settlement on a large
scale on the N.E. coast of New Guinea, probably at Astrolabe Bay; but as it will be
seen by their prospectus,* which I enclose, that they do not contemplate commencing
operations till a charter has been obtained from the Imperial Government, I do not at
present apprehend any difficulty from that quarter.
10. Thinking the reportf of Mr. Ingham might prove of interest, I have added it to
the other enclosures.
I have, &c.,
The Secretary of the Admiralty. ( Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Commodore.
Commander Digby to Commodore Hoskins.
Report of Proceedings.
H.M.S. “ Sappho,” Thursday Island,
Sir, 7th July 1878.
In compliance with your orders of the Ist March, 10th May, and telegram of
2lst May 1878, I left Sydney on the 22nd, and arrived at Brisbane on the 26th, filled
up with coal on the 27th, and sailed on the 28th May.
2. On the 3rd June, Chesterfield Reef was entered by the Long Island passage, and
anchorage obtained for the night, off Anchorage Islet, on which the figure head of a
vessel was found with a board attached, having “Found by H.M.S. Beagle, 1878,”
painted on it.
3. On the following morning I crossed the Lagoon to Avon Island, where the enclosed
notice was found. I left a paper here, stating that I had visited the place, and went on
to the Islet marked P.D. on the chart.
4. Not having found the “ Renard,” I assumed that Lieutenant Richards had finished
his survey, and gone on; I therefore shaped course for New Guinea, and arrived at
Teste Island on the 13th June.
5. There are two Loyalty Island teachers here connected with the London Missionary
Society. The natives are friendly.
6. On the following day I anchored off the mission station at “ Stacey Island,” so
called by the missionaries.
* Not printed.
| Enclosure 2 in No. 22.


7. Between this island (which is represented on the chart as forming part of South
Cape) and the main land there is an excellent, anchorage.
8. In connection with the enclosed letter which I received from the Colonial Secretary
at Brisbane, I ascertained from one of the two Rarotongan teachers stationed here, that
the ringleader, in the attempt to capture the mission vessel, was shot by Dudfield, and
another had died from the effects of wounds received. Peace has been re-established,
and the lives of the missionaries are in no danger. I took no action in this matter
beyond warning the natives of the probable result had they succeeded in murdering the
master and capturing the vessel.
9. On the 17th June I arrived at Port Moresby, and was visited by some of the persons
who came from Sydney anti Cooktown in search of gold. The main party was about
30 miles inland, those at Port Moresby having come down for the restoration of their
health. The expedition had suffered greatly from fever. The relations with the natives
had been friendly.
10. Having embarked three sufferers from fever for passage, I left Port Moresby on
the 18th, and arrived at Thursday island on the 21st June.
11. I left in search of the Lucius and Aurora reefs on the 26th, and returned on the
4th July, having failed in finding them. A separate Report will be forwarded when
completed.
12. My Report on the Pearl shell fishery will be forwarded by the next opportunity,
(and also any information I can obtain in regard to the fate of the schooner “ Kingston ”).
I have, &c.,
Commodore A. H. Hoskins, C. 8., A.D.C., (Signed) Noel S. F. Digby,
Senior Officer, &c. &c. Commander.
H.M.S. “ Wolverine.”
Avon Isles, 4th May 1878.
The schooner “ Effie Muckle ” sailed from Noumea, New Caledonia, March 28th,
1878, on a cruise in search of wreckage, guano, or any other article payable. Found
nothing up to the present time. Leave to-morrow for the north end of Bampton shoals,
and in search of the Island marked P.D., at the north-east end. We have seen traces of
H.M.S. “ Beagle,” also a figure-head of a large ship on the Anchor Isles. Found two
lower yards on a sandbank close to Passage Island.
(Signed) Joshua W. North,
Master.
Telegram from the Police Magistrate, Thursday Island, to the Under Colonial
Secretary, Brisbane.
“ Mayri,” lugger, of New Guinea Mission, arrived 3rd instant. Dudfield, master,
reports attacked by natives on 28th December, had narrow escape, was speared in four
places, and foot nearly chopped through. Beat natives off, killing one and wounding
several. Dudfield considers Rev. Chalmers, his wife, and native teachers, in great
danger. Chalmers refused to leave, would -have organised relief party, but “ Ellan-
gowan ” hourly expected at South Cape, scene of the attack.
(Signed) Henry M. Chester,
Thursday Island, 13th. Police Magistrate.
Mr. Chester to the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.
Sir, Thursday Island, 13th February 18/8.
Referring to my telegram of this date, I have now the honour to forward a state-
ment made by Charles Dudfield, master of the mission lugger “ Mayri,” relative to the
attack on him by the natives of South Cape, New Guinea, on 28th December last.
The “ Ellangowan ” steamer was then overdue at South Cape 14 days, but was hourly
expected, otherwise I would have organised a relief party to return to the spot in the
“ Mayri.”
R 6853. G


It is very probable that the natives are exasperated with the result of their attack on
the “ Mayri,” and I certainly share; Mr. Dudfield’s apprehensions for the safety of
Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers and party. It appears they have fire-arms, but Mr. Chalmers
will not allow them to be loaded.
I have, &c.,
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, (Signed) Henry M. Chester,
Brisbane. Police Magistrate.
The Statement of Charles Dudfield, Master of the Missionary Schooner “ Mayri,”
made at Thursday Island this 4th day of February 1878.
My name is Charles Dudfield. lam master of the “ Mayri,” a lugger in the employ
of and belonging to the London Missionary Societj*. On the 28th December I was at
South Cape, on the coast of New Guinea, in the “ Mayri ”; my crew consisted of
four men besides myself. About 2 p.m. I sent three of the men on shore to cut firewood.
Myself and one man, a Darnley Island native, stayed on board. When the boat landed,
I saw a canoe with four men in it put off from the shore. The canoe came alongside,
and one man came on board ; he asked for something to eat, and it was given him. I
then went below to lie down on the cabin floor. I had not been there more than
10 minutes when I heard footsteps on the deck coming aft, and looking up to see who it
was I received a spear in my left side that pinned me to the deck, and also a chop on my
left foot with a cleaver, and another spear in my left shoulder. I had to break off the
spear that fastened me to the deck before I could rise, and then got my revolver and fired
up the hatchway, at the same time getting another spear in the right thigh. I tried to
get on deck, but natives shoved the scuttle on, leaving a few inches open to heave spears
down. I tried to raise the scuttle, but the natives got on top of it to keep it down. I
fired three shots through the wood, and heard a great scramble on deck. I tried again to
get on deck, and received a blow on the head from a cleaver. Hearing a row in the
forepart of the boat below, I looked through a sliding port in the bulkhead, and saw a
native standing over the Darnley Island native, about to kill him with a cleaver. I fired
through the port, and shot him dead. I then got a Snider rifle, and fired through the
scuttle at a native passing aft. I got down a double-barrelled gun, and while doing so
received a spear in the right hand. I fired again through the deck, and shot a man in
the legs. I again tried to get on deck, and my revolver was knocked out of my hand
with a cleaver.
After a little, hearing no noise on deck, 1 ventured up, and found that they had all
gone. The deck and mainsail was covered with blood. I found the Darnley Islander
had been slightly wounded in two places ; I saw the rest of the crew coming off in the
dingy. It appeared they had heard the firing, and borrowed guns from the native
teachers to come to my assistance. It turned out that while I was below a second canoe
came alongside. About 10 minutes after the affray was over, the Rev. J. Chalmers came
on board ; he left almost immediately, telling me to send the dead body on shore.
South Cape, marked on the Admiralty chart, is actually an island, there being a
passage about 400 yards wide in the narrowest part between it and the mainland. A
Mission Station is established on this island, looking towards the mainland. The party
consists of Rev. J. Chalmers, his wife, four Roratonga teachers and their wives.
There are three villages on the Island, each with about 200 inhabitants, and the mainland
swarms with natives.
The men who attacked me came from a village in the interior of the Island. I heard from
some of my crew that the friendly natives at Mr. Chalmers’ village had warned him that
he had better leave, as the other villagers intended to attack them. The natives collected
in large numbers, coming over from the mainland and from the other two villages on the
Island, armed Avith spears and clubs. They attempted to launch a war canoe belonging
to the friendly natives, but the latter would not allow it to be done. About 6 p.m.,
everything being quiet, 1 sent a boat on shore to Mr. Chalmers for orders. I received
instructions to proceed to Murray Island, as I was badly wounded. From all 1 know of
the natives I consider Mr. Chalmers’ life in great danger. He refused to leave with me,
as the “ Ellangowan” was expected daily. In fact she was then a fortnight overdue. 1
got under weigh at 8 p.m., and off Cape Rodney met Mr. Goldie’s party in the lugger
“ Explorer,” bound for East Cape. Mr. Goldie returned to Port Moresby, where we
arrived on sth January. I was laid up at Port Moresby unable to walk for five days,


and left on 10th January for Murray Island, and arrived at Thursday Island on the
3rd February.
(Signed) Charles Dudfield,
Thursday Island, 4th February 1878. Master, Lugger “ Mayri.”
Taken before me at Thursday Island this fourth day of February 1878.
j (Signed) Henry M. Chester,
Police Magistrate.
No. 19.
The RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS-BEACH, BART., to GOVERNOR SIR G. F. BOWEN,
G.C.M.G. (VICTORIA).
Sib, Downing Street, 3rd October 1878.
. I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch, of the Ist
of August,* enclosing a copy of a letter which Sir A. Gordon had addressed to you
in his capacity of High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, in regard to the project
of the “Australasian Colonization Company” of Melbourne of forming a Settlement in
the Island of New Guinea.
In reply, I have to inform you that I have received the correspondence which passed
between the Company and the High Commissioner direct from Sir A. Gordon, and that
I entirely approve the answer which he caused to be returned to the Company. lam
glad to learn that you are of the same opinion.
I have to add that I am about to consult Sir A. Gordon as to the necessity of
appointing a Deputy Commissioner to reside in New Guinea, and generally as to the
measures which may be necessary for the control of British subjects who may proceed
there.
I have, &c.,
Sir G. F. Bowen.
M. E. HICKS BEACH.
No. 20.
COLONIAL OFFICE to F. P. LABILLIERE, ESQ.
Sir, Downing Street, sth October 1878.
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 18th of September,f urging that the annexation by this country
of the eastern portion of New Guinea is of even greater importance at the present time
than when you previously called the attention of Her Majesty’s Government to the
subject.
Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to thank you for your letter, but I am to say that
Her Majesty’s Government are not at present prepared to take any steps towards the
annexation of New Guinea.
The difficulties, however, which may be caused by expeditions of gold miners to the
Island have already engaged Sir M. Hicks Beach’s attention, and he is about to consult
the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, who has recently arrived in this country,
as to the necessity of appointing a Deputy Commissioner to reside in New Guinea, and
generally as to the measures which may be necessary for the control of British subjects
who may proceed there.
I am, &c.,
Francis P. Labilliere, Esq. (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
* No. 17.
t No. 16.


No. 21.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, sth October 1878.
In the letter from this Department of the 25th of September* you were
informed that the Secretary of State for the Colonies would cause a communication to be
made to you on the subject of New Guinea.
2. I am now to transmit for your information a copy of a Despatch addressed by the
Earl of Carnarvon to the Governor of New South Wales on the Bth of December 1875,f
stating the reasons which, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, rendered it at
that time undesirable that any steps should be taken for carrying out the wish expressed
by some of the Australasian Colonies that the sovereignty of this country should be
extended over the eastern portion of New Guinea.
3. Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to say that he is of opinion that the principle laid
down in that Despatch, that the Australasian Colonies must bear the cost of an enter-
prise in which this country is not directly concerned, except in so far as it is of interest
and importance to those Colonies, should be upheld as long and completely as possible.
4. The recent discovery, however, of gold in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby, and
the consequent influx of miners and other white persons into New Guinea, renders it
necessary that Her Majesty’s Government should consider what steps should be taken
for the control of British subjects proceeding thither, and whether it will be necessary
that a Deputy Commissioner, under the Western Pacific Order in Council of August
1877, should be appointed to reside in the Island. As bearing on the question, lam to
enclose for your information all the correspondence on the subject on record in this
Department since the news of the discovery of gold in New Guinea has reached this
country.
5. You are aware that the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, as shown in this
correspondence, at the request of the Secretary of State, instructed the Commodore
commanding on the Australian station, at the beginning of July last, to send a vessel
of war to Port Moresby, with a view of maintaining order among the miners who bad
proceeded thither; and a report from the commanding officer of the vessel which has
gone there may, therefore, shortly be expected to arrive in this country. You will also
observe that, in expectation of your arrival in this country, the Secretary of State has
deferred taking any more decided action in the matter, with the view of consulting you
upon the whole subject.
6. Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me, therefore, to request that you will take these papers
into consideration, and favour him with any suggestions that you may be prepared to
make with regard to the maintenance of order in New Guinea. If a Deputy Commis-
sioner is appointed, to have his head-quarters on the Island, it will be necessary to con-
sider what force of constables, or what other protection against the attacks of natives or
the insolence of white men, should be provided for him. If the Admiralty could be
induced to station one of the small cruizers for a definite time at New Guinea, with
instructions to visit the Solomon Islands, New Hebrides, and others of the less distant
groups, at convenient intervals, the immediate requirements of the case might, perhaps,
be met in the most effective and economical manner.
7. There is a much larger question, as to which Sir M. Hicks Beach will be glad to
have your opinion, namely, what course it would be desirable to follow in the event of
such arrangements being come to with one or more of the Australasian Colonies as
would justify Her Majesty’s Government in consenting to advise the extension of
British sovereignty over the eastern portion of the Island ?
8. In the event of a colony or colonies undertaking to share the expense and respon-
sibility c. maintaining a settlement in New Guinea, it would probably be convenient
that the Governor or Governors should be associated with the High Commissioner as a
Board or Committee to settle and direct all details.
■ i I am, &c.,
- Sir-A~-H-.- Gordon. (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
f No. 34 in [C. 1566] July 1876.
* Not printed.


No. 22.
ACTING HIGH COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS
BEACH, BART. (Received October 29, 1878.)
Sir, Levuka, Fiji, 19th August 1878.
I have the honour to report that, when leaving Fiji on his leave of absence, his
Excellency the High Commissioner, acting on the instructions conveyed in your
Despatch of I9th November 1877,* instructed me to discharge all functions of the office of
High Commissioner which he should himself perform if personally present.
2. The schemes on foot in at least three of the Australian colonies to send expeditions
to New Guinea to prospect for gold, and even to colonise the country, seem most to
demand attention at present.
3. I have received by the last mail a letter from his Excellency the High Commis-
sioner, dated Melbourne, 17th July, in which he informs me that he had received a visit
from a deputation of the provisional direction of the “ Australian Colonisation Company,”
and enclosing a prospectus of the proposed Company.
4. His Excellency very justly states that a perusal of these documents would at once
show the objectionable nature of the schemes contemplated.
5. I retain the printed prospectus in case it should be necessary to refer to it hereafter,
but it may be sufficient to state the following among the contemplated objects of this
high-soaring association ;
(1.) To form a settlement on the north-eastern coast of New Guinea, under the laws,
regulations, and political institutions of Victoria, until such time as federation
or erection of New Guinea into an independent colony should render it impos-
sible to do so.
(2.) To found a town in such a position as would command the trade of China,
Japan, California, &c. &c.
(3.) That the land should be taken possession of, after formal annexation to Great
Britain, by planting the Victorian Ensign.
(4.) That 60,000 acres are to be claimed (from whom is not very clearly set forth)
for plantation purposes, and 50,000 acres more if gold is discovered.
(5.) It is intended —with a touch of the grotesque —to reserve 500 fully paid-up shares
for the native Chiefs of the territory.
(6.) Among the furnishings of the expedition are mentioned five swivel cannon, small
arms, and ammunition, also a circular fort of boiler plate, j-inch, pierced for
rifles.
6. At an interview with some of the leaders of this proposed expedition, his Excel-
lency the High Commissioner informed them, in a manner which they could not
misunderstand, of the position in which they would place themselves towards the
Imperial Government by any enterprise of the sort.
7. He adds, in his letter of 17th July, “ I am myself of opinion that no serious results
“ will attend the exertions of this Company, but, should the aspect of matters in New
“ Guinea become more serious and complicated, you may probably consider it desirable
“ to visit the locality yourself; and I have written to the Commodore to request that
“ in the event of his receiving an application from you to that effect, he will furnish
“ you with the means of conveyance to the places to which you may desire to
“ repair.”
8. While completely agreeing with the opinion of his Excellency that no serious
results will arise from this Melbourne scheme, it is my duty further to report that I
have received by this mail, through his Honour the Administrator of the Government of
Fiji, a letter, dated 3rd July, from his Excellency the Governor of Queensland, enclosing
a report from Mr. Ingham, the confidential agent of the Queensland Government at
Port Moresby, New Guinea.
* Not printed.
G 3


9. Mr. Ingham reports, that in addition to the original party by the “ Colonist ” from
Sydney of 53 men, the “ Pride of Logan ” had arrived on sth Majy (I presume from
Queensland) with six men and four horses. On the same day the “ Economist ” arrived
and landed 15 passengers and one horse.
10. I regret to see that some trifling acts of theft had been committed, and I certainly
regret not less the parade of force wdiich was resorted to, to obtain restitution of the
goods—a shirt and a bag.
11. “ I called for volunteers,” says Mr. Ingham, “and at daylight 1 paraded eight
“ men, armed with rifles, through the village. I then formed them in line, and demanded
“ the thief. The natives were much frightened, and one of them whispered the name
“ of the suspected man. I immediately went to his house, and ordered him to come
“ down. As he refused to give a satisfactory account of himself I handcuffed him to
“ one of the posts of his house,” &c. &c.
12. This action was taken when the men of the expedition, as Mr. Ingham subsequently
reports, feel a perfect sense of security from harm as regards the natives. “ Single
“ unarmed men are at present able to travel freely over the country, and if they lose
“ their way are brought back and fed by the natives.”
13. Mr. Ingham had posted a notice that persons purchasing land from the natives
were desired to register the same before him within three days after the sale. Two
blocks of land had afterwards been purchased, and Mr. Ingham had issued a certificate,
although he had informed the purchasers that such a document did not necessarily
constitute a title.
14. With regard to the finding of gold, the same gentleman reports, “ Under a promise
“ that I would not make it public, I have obtained the following information : —A party
“ of prospectors, working under Owen Stanley, have obtained several grains in every
“ dish, and the evening before my informant came in here they obtained five shotty
“ pieces of gold about the size of a pea. * * * Within six
“ weeks from date (13 May 1878) I'expect that I shall have to make a formal report of
“ payable gold.”
15. In view of this contingency, Mr. Ingham suggested to the Government of
Queensland to take steps for annexing that portion of New Guinea lying south of the
seventh parallel of sooth latitude, his letter having, no doubt, crossed a communication
from the Queensland Government to him, of which the Governor of Queensland was
good enough to send a copy, in which most just and proper views as to such schemes
were expressed.
16. In face of these facts, the continuance of the expeditions, and the probability of
payable gold being soon found causing a rush as in other cases of a similar kind, the
purchasing of land from the natives, and the resort by those on the spot to injudicious
measures with the natives, I think it my duty to act upon the suggestion contained in
the letter of his Excellency the High Commissioner, and to visit the locality myself.
17. I have accordingly w’ritten to the Commodore, requesting him to place one of the
steamships of the squadron at my disposal for the purpose.
18. My main object would be to take such measures as may be found practically
available to maintain law and order among the whites, and also, by making use of the
powers conferred on the High Commissioner under section 24 of the Order in Council,
to frame such regulations as shall appear requisite and judicious to ensure peaceful
relations with the natives of the Island.
19. I trust that this step will meet with approval, and I have respectfully to bespeak
an indulgent consideration for my attempt to perform what, I well perceive, will be a
most difficult and responsible duty.
I have, &c.,
The Right Honourable
The Secretary of State for the Colonies,
&c. &c. &c.
JOHN GORRIE.


Enclosure 1 in No. 22.
Sir, Nasova, 25th June 1878.
I have the honour to enclose for your information the copy of a Despatch* which
I some time since received from Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the
Colonies, in the concluding paragraph of which you will find expressed the views of Her
Majesty’s Government as to the exercise of my powers as High Commissioner during
my absence from Polynesia.
2. In accordance with these views I have now the honour to instruct you during my
absence to discharge all functions of the office of High Commissioner which I should
myself perform if personally present.
I have, &c.
(Signed) A. Gordon, H.C.
Enclosure 2 in No. 22.
Mr. Ingham’s Report.
Port Moresby, New Guinea,
Sir, 13th May 1878.
I have the honour to report as follows : —“ Colonist” schooner left here for Port
Douglas on Ist May. Per “Colonist” I despatched sealed bag, containing mails,
addressed to Officer of Customs at first Queensland port.” On sth May the “ Pride
of Logan” arrived, and has landed six men and four horses. On the sth May the
“ Economist ” arrived, and has landed 15 passengers and one horse. On the 6th several
complaints of theft by the natives were brought to me, and in the evening I demanded
restitution of the stolen property ; some articles were returned, but a shirt and bag were
not forthcoming. As these articles were stolen from the tent of a man camping by
himself, I thought it advisable to take steps to stop a repetition of such occurrences.
I called for volunteers, and at daylight I paraded eight men, armed with rifles,
through the village. I then formed them in line, and demanded the thief. The natives
were much frightened, and one of them whispered the name of the suspected man. I
immediately went to his house, and ordered him to come down. As he refused to give
a satisfactory account of himself, I handcuffed him to one of the posts of his house, and
told him he should remain there till the stolen articles were returned. I then dismissed
the men for breakfast; in about ten minutes the Chief came to my house with the stolen
articles. I immediately released the prisoner, who w r as very much frightened. As every
act of theft has baen committed by a small tribe living among the Motu men on sufferance,
I threatened to destroy their houses and send them back to their mountains if they
continued to steal. This decision met with the approval of all the Motu chieftains,
and I am pleased to report that no case of theft has been brought before me since this
occurrence. Several articles found on the road from Kere to the Lalokie have since
been returned to me by the natives who picked them up. On the 9th May the “ Annie ”
and two boats arrived en route for “ Beche-de-mer ” station to the west.
(Here follows long report of quarrel between one of the owners and the captain and
crew.)
I was informed that Pitt had left the “ Straits ” with some islanders, who were to
have been paid off at Murray Island, and that he has not paid them; hence his desire
to run away with the vessel. I could not find any information on the ship’s papers'
relating to this, but I have no doubt that Mr. Chester can satisfy your Government on
this point.
I have posted a notice “ O.H.M.S ” —“ Persons purchasing land from the natives are
desired to register the same before me within three days after sale.”
I have also informed residents that it was my intention to ask your Government to
reject all claims upon native land unless so registered. This will prevent frauds upon the
natives. Two blocks of land have since been purchased, and I enclose herewith copy
of certificate issued by me for your inspection. I have, however, informed the pur-
chasers that such a document does not necessarily constitute a title to the land, but
that all such claims will be dealt with as soon as a recognised form of Government is
established.
I hope your Government will approve of my action in the various matters mentioned
above, but, having as yet received no instructions, I have acted as seemed best to me
for the welfare of all parties concerned.
* Not printed.
G 4


1 wish now to place before your Government for consideration my ideas as to the
future of this country, and the course of action which seems most desirable for its
welfare.
I enclose herewith a chart* of this portion of New Guinea, and have marked upon it,
in yellow paint, positions which have been reported to me, on reliable information, as
“ very likely ” country, and in which colours have been found. I know for certain that
good colours have been obtained in the country near “ Hall Sound.” I have traced
in the position of the crossing on the Lalokie River, also the present road, and I have
dotted a line of road which I am about to survey together with the inlet, as T am of
opinion that Port Moresby is not suitable for the formation of a European settlement
as a port for the interior. The country around this district is suitable for cattle and
horses. lam of opinion that the country in the immediate neighbourhood of Port
Moresby is subject to periodical droughts, which would render agricultural pursuits very
precarious. The country to the East along the coast is full of good harbours, and is
admirably adapted for sugar or coffee plantations. From the East 1 have received several
specimens of splendid sugar cane, quite unknown to me whilst engaged as a sugar planter
in Queensland. I measured particularly one bundle of light green cane, the stalks of
which were 12 feet in length, and the average length of the joints inches, diameter
If ", density about 6°, cane was not ripe. This cane was brought to me from a village
near Cloudy Bay, and is, without doubt, the finest specimen of cane I have ever seen.
Bread fruit, maize, omata, sago, palms, and cocoa-nuts are plentiful.
To the West, after passing the 145° of E. longitude, the country is described to me
as low and unfit for Europeans. The natives also bear a bad reputation. I forward
one bag of sago obtained by me from traders, who live at the point marked upon the
chart. This sago is exactly in the condition in which it is brought by the natives.
With the sanction of your Government I should have great pleasure in sending a
collection of canes for the benefit of planters in Queensland. I have seen no traces of
disease among the canes brought to me.
With regard to the immediate prospects of the gold field in this district I have to
report as follows :
The prospectors have split up into small parties, each party working independently
of the others; the laws, therefore, which I sent to you in former report are already null
and void. This has been caused in a great measure by the perfect sense of security
from harm which the men feel as regards the natives. Single unarmed men are at
present able to travel freely over the country, and if they lose their way are brought
back and fed by the natives. Under a promise that I would not make it public, I have
obtained the following information :—A party of prospectors, working under Owen
Stanley, have obtained several grains in every dish, and the evening before my informant
came in here they obtained five shotty pieces of gold, about the size of a small pea.
Several old diggers from the Palmer have informed me that the country looks “ very
likely,” and “ better than even the Palmer did.” These men have now obtained a fresh
supply of rations, and I have heard nothing of them since. Within six weeks from
date I expect that I shall have to make a formal report of payable gold. Meanwhile,
your Government will recognize the necessity of not publishing this information. As
soon as payable gold is reported, I will proceed with the utmost despatch to Cooktown, and
communicate with you by telegraph. I beg to suggest the following plan of action for
the consideration of your Government. Presuming that six weeks elapsed before any
payable field is reported, it would be advisable meanwhile to take steps for annexing
that portion of New Guinea lying soutii of the (7) seventh parallel of south latitude,
and for getting the same placed upon the Commission of His Excellency .Sir Arthur
Edward Kennedy as a dependency of Queensland. That portion of New Guinea lying
to the eastward of the (145°) hundred and forty-fifth degree of east longitude might
be left to the supervision of the police magistrate at Thursday Island, as no permanent
European settlement is likely 7 to be formed there for some time. That portion of New
Guinea lying to the west of the 145th degree of east longitude might be placed under
the supervision of a police magistrate stationed at Port Moresby or adjacent inlet, with
instructions to visit periodical!v the various “ Beche de Mer” stations on the coast.
It would be advisable to pass an Act relating to purchase of land from natives as soon
as possible, and to send surveyors to determine the positions of land already bought.
I would suggest that all land be bought from natives by a Government Commissioner
only, who should be empowered to pay the natives only a certain proportion of the
* Chart not sent to Fiji.


value of such land, according to the Queensland Land Act, and that all colonists
purchase from Government according to the Land Act in force in Queensland.
Should your Government propose to honour me with any permanent appointment in
New Guinea, I think a reference to my uncle. Sir James Ingham, Chief Magistrate of
London, will be sufficient to satisfy the Home Secretary.
I beg to suggest to your Government that I should be supplied with suitable books
for registering my actions here until such time as a suitable form of Government is
established.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) W. B. Ingham, J.P.,
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary Agent, Queensland Government.
(Queensland).
No. 23.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, November 5, 1878.
With reference to the letter from this Department of the sth of October*
respecting New Guinea, I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to
transmit to you for your observations a Despatch which he has received from Mr. Gome
intimating his intention of visiting Port Moresby, and stating that he has applied to the
Commodore Commanding on the Australian Station to place a vessel-of-war at his dis-
posal for tiie purpose of conveying him thither; and lam to acquaint you that
Sir M. Hicks Beach has instructed the Governor of New South Wales by telegraphy to
inform Mr. Gorrie that he is not to visit New Guinea until so directed.
I am, &c, 5
Sir A. H. Gordon. (Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
No. 24.
The HONOURABLE SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Haddo House, 22nd November 1878.
I have attentively perused the various papers relating to the present state of
affairs in New Guinea, transmitted to me with your letter of the sth ultimo,* and have
given much anxious thought to the subject of which they treat.
2. I regret to say that, after the most deliberate reflection, I am irresistibly compelled
to adopt a conclusion which I should have wished to avoid, and which I was at first
inclined to think might be avoided, viz., that the annexation by Great Britain of at
least certain portions of New Guinea will speedily become inevitable, even if the
necessity for such a step has not ahead}' arisen.
3. The Order in Council of the 13th August 1877, known as the “Western Pacific
Order in Council,” already provides, (or, with a few comparatively slight modifications,
will provide,) the machinery requisite for dealing with any difficulties which, so far as
the great majority of the islands of the Western Pacific are concerned, are at all likely
to arise from the action of British subjects dwelling therein.
4. But, adequate as arc its provisions for the administration of justice in the case of
isolated British subjects, or that of any small number of British subjects not engaged in.
partnership with foreigners in a common enterprise, the Order in Council in question
would, I fear, altogether fail to meet the circumstances of so very different a state of
things as that which exists, or very shortly will exist, in New Guinea.
It may be safely assumed that settlement there will not be undertaken by independent
individuals, but by bodies of men bound together in the ties of a more or less dose
organization, and among these men there are certain to be many who are not of British
nationality.
5. The jurisdiction of the High Commissioner would extend to such onl y of
these associations as were British subjects; but it is not to be the
* No. 21.
H
R 6853.


settlers, whatever their nation, would allow murders, thefts, and assaults to be committed
(as against themselves) with impunity, solely because their perpetrators did not happen
to be Englishmen.
In the absence, therefore, of any legal tribunal, which all would alike recognise, a sort
of rough Court would undoubtedly be set up among the settlers themselves for the trial
of such cases; and I doubt whether the public opinion of such a community as the gold-
diggers and other pioneers of settlement in New Guinea are likely to form would permit
the operation of a Court thus constituted to be confined to persons not of British
extraction.
If an English digger were murdered by an American or German, the High Commis-
sioner’s Court would be unable to take cognizance of the offence, but the murderer
would undoubtedly be hanged by the remainder of the diggers. If the converse case
of the murder of a foreigner by an Englishman subsequently occurred, the friends of the
man killed would claim that the accused British subject should be tried by a similar
tribunal, in which they would have a place among the judges. So again; if a theft w r ere
committed by a foreigner, be would be brought before this self-constituted Court, and on
its being found, (as it would be found,) that its proceedings were more summary, and its
punishments more severe, than those of the Deputy Commissioner’s Court, I am much
mistaken if British subjects, accused of similar offences by foreigners, would not be
brought before it, and if it would not he called on to act even in those cases where both
parties were British subjects.
6. There would therefore be an utterly illegal Court acting alongside that of the High
Commissioner, and probably in greater request among the settlers than that possessing
legitimate authority. Under such circumstances the Court established by Her Majesty’s
Order in Council could hardly, with decency, continue to discharge its functions.
7. Nor is this all. The intermixture of the foreign element among the settlers would
paralyse the action of the High Commissioner’s Court, even where British subjects alone
were concerned, and had been properly brought before it. It would be often found that
important witnesses for the prosecution were not under the jurisdiction of the Court, and
could not be compelled to give evidence; while, even when this was not the case, it
would always be easy to allege that essential witnesses for the defence had refused or
neglected to appear, and could not be forced to do so. In every case, the assertion that
he was an American subject, —(an assertion exceedingly hard of disproof)—would be the
natural refuge of an Englishman charged with any offence, and the mere allegation
would be sufficient, if not to prevent a trial, at all events to render its conduct a matter
of great difficulty and embarrassment.
8. The sort of extemporized Courts of which I have spoken would take little or no
cognizance of offences against the natives, and when it was found that any wrong to
them might be done by a foreigner with impunity, the lawless wishes of any ill-disposed
combination of British subjects would simply be carried into execution by a foreign hand.
9. Even if, (contrary to all probability,) British subjects w r ere kept under proper
restraint, in this respect, by the Deputy Commissioner’s Court, it would be impossible to
persuade natives to distinguish between the different Europeans engaged in a common
pursuit, and banded together in one society; and it is but too probable that the
unchecked misdeeds of adventurers of other nations would lead to the perpetration of
acts of vengeance on the part of the natives, which would involve British subjects, (and
perhaps the Deputy Commissioner himself,) in the retribution inflicted for offences of
which they were personally guiltless.
10. Nor should it be forgotten that where a large mixed population of white men and
natives is assembled, offences requiring punishment are certain to be committed by the
natives themselves. Over these, the Court of the Deputy Commissioner has no
authority, but it is not to be supposed that the white settlers will on that account refrain
from inflicting chastisement on those who have offended.
11. Could I see any other way of dealing satisfactorily with such a state of things,
I w 7 ouid recommend a resort to it; but I must, with regret, admit that after the most
careful consideration I am unable to perceive any mode of meeting these difficulties
except by annexation; for it appears to me necessary that territorial jurisdiction should
he assumed by Great Britain to enable us to deal with offences committed by foreigners
associated with the British settlers or with those committed by natives. But, unless such
jurisdiction over them be assumed, I question the practicability of exercising it with the
smallest degree of efficiency over British subjects themselves, and I must confess that
I therefore see no middle course between annexation and the abandonment of all control
over the acts of British subjects in New Guinea, involving a practical acquiescence in the
establishment there of a reign of lawless violence and anarchy. This latter is a course


we cannot creditably adopt, and which indeed, were we disposed to take it, we should
after a time be forced to abandon. A greater or less degree of annexation, consequently,
appears to me inevitable.
Should there be any other method, unknown to me, but known to Her Majesty’s
Government, by which such cases could be met, I need not say that I should prefer its
adoption.
12. With a view, however, to confine such annexations as may be found necessary
within the narrowest possible limits, I would propose that, instead of now declaring an'v
fixed portion of New Guinea to be British territory, the High Commissioner should be
authorised from time to time to proclaim, as such, any place where a bona fide settlement
had been established, together with the land within the radius of a certain number of
miles from it. I would further suggest that, if this plan be adopted, the settlements
should, in the first instance, be placed under the control of a Resident Commissioner, who
should also act as a Deputy Commissioner under the Order in Council, for those parts
of New Guinea not taken possession of by Great Britain.
13. The Resident Commissioner should, I think, have under his orders a force of
native Fijian drilled and armed police. The aptitude of Fijians for this species of service
has been already shown. Their maintenance costs far less than that of Europeans, and
their ability to resist the influence of the climate is of course far greater.
Under a chief who understood them, and whom they respected, such a force would
render invaluable service to the Resident.
14. It will be asked how the expenses consequent on such annexations are to be
defrayed, and whether it is intended to suggest that pecuniary assistance should be
obtained from the Australian Colonies P
15. I entirely concur in the justice of the principle laid down both by Lord Carnarvon
and the present Secretary of State as to the obligation of those Colonies to contribute to
the expenses incurred on account of a work of interest to them. lam not, however,
particularly anxious to see that theoretical obligation practically enforced. The grant
of money by a Colony could not possibly be dissociated from the exercise of some
control over its expenditure on the part of the Colony granting it, and that Colony must
acquire a potential voice as to the objects to which it is to be devoted.
It is not, I think, at all desirable to place the control of relations between settlers and
natives in the hands of local Colonial Ministers, responsible to a Parliament in which one
of the interests concerned is exclusively represented.
16. Ido not myself think that such aid would be needed. I should propose that the
first very moderate expenditure required should be defrayed from four sources
1. A licence tax, to be paid by the settlers themselves.
2. A light tribute from the natives of the districts annexed.
3. A payment from the annual vote of the Imperial Parliament for the expenses of the
High Commission.
4. A small annual vote from the Legislature of Fiji : —a contribution from a Crown
Colony not being open to the same objection as one from a Colony under
Parliamentary Government.
17- Commencing without any original debt, and rigidly confining its expenditure
within the limits of its financial resources, I think the new settlement might succeed,
without being, even at the outset, a burden on the taxpayers of Great Britain.
18. I should, myself, take a great pride in superintending such an experiment, and in
proving, in fact, what I have maintained in theory, that it is practicable to found a
dependency without heavy initial cost, if the construction of cumbrous establishments on
the usual colonial model be avoided.
19. It is clear from Mr. Ingham’s reports, herewith returned, that a practical, though
informal, assumption of control over the country is already rapidly going on. He holds
courts; he punishes natives ; he parades an armed force; he registers land titles; &c.
These proceedings can have but one issue ; and the sooner all these matters are taken
in hand in a regular manner, the less will be the ultimate embarrassment and expense.
20. The establishment I should in the first instance propose would be as follows :
The High Commissioner without salary.
A Resident Commissioner at a salary of 500/., to be paid from the vote for the High
Commission.
A Police Force of Fijians, under an European Officer, to be borne on the strength of
the Fijian Police, and their pay taken as the contribution of that Colony to the expen-
diture incurred.
The Resident Commissioner would, in the first instance, act also as Magistrate and
Treasurer, but he would require two clerks at a salary of say 200/. per annum.
H 2


21. Should Her Majesty’s Government be disposed to consider favourably the scheme
now suggested, I shall be prepared to enter into the discussion of further practical
details, with which it would appear unnecessary to burden the present letter, the length
of which is already greater than I could have wished it to be.
I have, &c..
To the Under Secretary of State (Signed) ARTHUR GORDON,
for the Colonies,
&c. See. &c.
No. 25.
ACTING HIGHT COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS
BEACH, BART. (Received November 25, 1878.)
Sir, Levuka, September if), 1878.
I have the honor to state that I have no official reports from or in relation to New
Guinea to send by this mail.
I find from the public papers that the “ Sappho,” which had visited New Guinea in
accordance with instructions from home, and whose Captain (Digby) had been nominated
a Deputy Commissioner by Sir Arthur Gordon for the purposes of the voyage, had
arrived at Sydney on August 27-
Any report which Captain Digby may have to make will, no doubt, have been
addressed to the Commodore, who left here on or about the 27th August for the
Solomon group. In the extracts from the newspapers which I append there is a state-
ment that two crimes had been committed, but that nothing effectual had been done to
punish them.
In another of those extracts it is stated that Mr. Chester had visited New Guinea.
This is a gentleman to whom the High Commissioner, on the suggestion of the Governor
of Queensland, sent a commission, as Deputy Commmissioner for Thursday Island in
Torres Straits, and the neighbourhood. He has apparently gone to New Guinea, but
not at the request of the High Commissioner. 1 have no letter or report either from
Mr. Chester or the Queensland Government.
In another extract an account is given of an affray with the natives in Torres Straits.
It is said that 52 natives were killed; this is, no doubt, a great exaggeration ; but I feel
disappointed that I am not able to report more definitely in regard to these occurrences,
and to state wdiat steps have been adopted to prevent them in future. I have written to
Mr. Chester for full details.
In lieu of official reports I have the honour to forward the printed statements of one of
the expeditionary party to New Guinea, which is full of interest, both as showing the
difficulties the men have met with, and the friendly disposition of the natives, which
appears to he so different from the accounts usually published of the New Guinea
natives.
I should have been glad also to have forwarded information as to the insurrection in
New Caledonia from more authentic sources than the newspaper reports, but Mr. Layard,
the Consul, has, no doubt, supplied full information to the Foreign Office. So far as my
information goes, partly derived from the newspaper accounts, and partly from residents
here who have been inhabitants of New Caledonia, I gather that the occasion of the
rising has been the old difficulty about the land; —certainly beyond all comparison the
most explosive question with which the rulers of young countries have to deal. One
gentleman with whom I conversed, who has resided about 10 years in New Caledonia,
said very naively in answer to my questions, “ I know of nothing of wdiich the natives
“ had to complain,”—then, after a pause, —“ except it may have been the land, which
“ is being taken from them.” I annex a newspaper* from Noumea which wall show that
at its date murders of settlers were still being committed.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. Sir M. E. Hicks-Beach, Bart., (Signed) JOHN GORRIE.
&c. &c. &c.
* Not printed.


Enclosure 1 in No. 25.
From “Town and Country Journal,” Sydney, August 17-
Latest from New Guinea.
[By Electric Telegraph.]
Cooktown, Tuesday.—The latest news has been received from New Guinea by
H.M.S. “ Sappho.” Mr. Hanran, one of the expedition party, gives an interesting
account.
He says the rain of the last fortnight in New Guinea was heavier than ever. The day
we left the Laloki came down a banker. We only saw Owen Stanley Mount on one
occasion, and that was a very clear day. The whole country is a dense scrub. The
River Goldie was supposed to run from Owen Stanley Range, but it does not. Astrolobe
Range starts from Hood's Point, runs west, —the Laloki on one side of the range, and the
Goldie on the other side; while between the Goldie and the Stanley Range there is
another range. The party tried all the gullies and ravines on the side of that range, but
could not find anything except floating colours. lam convinced that gold found, if any,
was from the other side of the range, on which nobody of the party has yet been. It is
the intention of the party, if possible, to get to that range, as there is a large river on
the other side of it, running under Stanley Range, apparently emptying itself into
the sea further up from Red-scar Bay. Mr. Hanran says the natives are the finest lot
of intelligent men he ever met, —the further inland the better and kinder they are. They
are awfully jealous of their women ; and if they are not interfered with no trouble what-
ever need be apprehended. Three of the party penetrated the bush a long way in, and
came across a village of one thousand. Some of the party were sick, but the natives
were most kind, fed them, and compelled them to sleep in the village. They afterwards
took them out for a pig hunt, and were quite delighted. They brought three young
women out at first, evidently as a decoy ; but when by refusal they 7 found the whites
did not come for their women, they were doubly kind. Mr. Hanran says the cause of
himself and four men having left the party at New’ Guinea was that they were prostrate
with fever. They are now 7 in the Cooktown Hospital. They had succeeded in reaching
the head of the Goldie River by following its right track, on which there is no auriferous
country, not even the colour of gold in the last 12 miles of the river. The party wmre
out 32 days ; and this w T as the third attempt to go to the head of the Goldie River.
They w’ent through several villages, where the natives were friendly and hospitable.
They camped with the natives of a large village of 800 people, and went with them on
an excursion at pig hunting. Here natives were of great assistance, carrying swags
through scrubs, and they showed the tracks. The party treated them kindly, and paid
them in tomahawks, salt, &c., and always did their utmost to encourage friendly relations
with the natives. The letter goes on to say, “ Only as friends will w T e and those who
“ come after us ever be able to go through the country against so powerful and intel-
“ ligent a race of aboriginals as those of New Guinea.” Mr. Hanran regets having to
leave the party 7 he was so long associated with, and who assisted him to organise the
party, they always having the credit of being the pioneers through that dense and sickly
scrub. They 7 were fortunate in being successful in initiating friendship with the natives,
it being now clean and safe for any party 7, by kindness, to go through any part of the
country. The country from Port Moresby is clear for 27 miles. The timber is stunted
bastard gum ; after that the vegetation is very rank, and the grasses very high and
difficult of penetration. Kangaroo, wallaby, and pigeons are plentiful, the latter being of
every description ; there are gowrie pigeons weighing 16 pounds, beautiful eating, to
be shot all up Laloki. There is a good track the whole distance, and well watered. The
next eight miles is scrub and open country. The scrub w r as cut through to make a road
for the horses, but, finding no more grass, found it impracticable to proceed with the
horses. The party decided then to start with swags, and went 15 miles through a dense
scrub to a very high range. There was no indication of gold in the gullies leading to
the river, but the colours of gold could always be found in the river and not in the
creeks or watercourses. Heavy rains set in, and the party got the fever, and were com-
pelled to return to camp, where they had left the horses. They sent the horses hack
to the port. Replenished stores with the intention of proceeding up the other bank of
the Goldie River. After resting nine days went out to look for clear country around,
bnt could not find any. Found, however, that another party went up the right bank
H 3


of the river 50 miles; very rough country, with no Indications of geld, only in the river
bed. The river was turning to the south-east towards the coast. Provisions being-
exhausted, the party returned, and made the return journey to camp in 30 miles. All
the party returned to the Laloki, to make up another party to go to the head of the
Goldie, which they did, without finding any indications of gold, not even in the Goldie
River for the last 12 miles. The party then returned to camp, and loaded one horse
with yams, and arrived at the main camp on the Loloki, after being away 32 day?,
where they still remain, awaiting the rivers to go down. They are preparing for a good
prospecting trip between the Goldie River and the Stanley River, intending fully to
test the river, hitherto unknown. The native name for the Goldie River is Tabara.
It is impossible for any party to be able to prospect without horses. At present there
are about 52 men awaiting at the main camp for the river to go down. Some are sick ;
but those who are well, and have got horses, start as soon as the river goes down. It is
very likely they may strike something this time, as they now know that no gold comes
from the head of the Goldie River, and may be able to trace gold from the falls of
Stanley Range. A description of the country shows it to he very fertile ; indeed, it will
grow anything. The rains are always falling, and the natives consider this an unusually
wet season, and very late. The native plantations are all in the scrubs and along
the river; they cultivate nothing in the open country. At the head of the Goldie
found one small village, built on the top of trees for the sake of health. The country
is so sickly they never build the houses of any village less than 6 feet from the ground,
let it be ever so dry. Wherever the party went they found sugar-cane, yams, and taroo
in plenty. The natives were very intelligent and hospitable. One old chief, about
70 miles up, went through the form of introducing his wife “ Sela ” to Messrs. Jones,
Murphy, and Dick of the party. All the country passed over beyond the scrub was
only suitable for sugar and tropical produce, showing splendid chocolate loam covered
with dense scrub even to the tops of ranges. There is a great depth of rich soil and
dense vines and scrub between Port Moresby and the Laloki, and 15 miles beyond
that the country is richly grassed, with open forests, admirably adapted for any pastoral
or agricultural purposes. The soil is very rich. The party, although not through it,
saw splendid level country 7 richly grassed and watered from Mount Lawes, 20 miles from
Port Moresby, stretching to the coast in the direction of Redscar Bay. Mr. Hanran
concludes by saying, “ It is a great mistake of men going to New Guinea who are not
“ practical miners, and who have not well provided for receiving continual fresh supplies
“ at Moresby, and who are not accustomed to hardships. No game or meat to be
“ depended on up the country beyond the Laloki, though there are plenty of ducks,
“ scrub hens, and pigeons, on the Laloki dray road leading to the main camp, 35 miles
“ from Moresby. The person who died on the way from Laloki to Port Moresby was
“ not named Neville, but Hast, who has a brother in one of the Sydney banks.
“ Mr. Chester and Mr. Chalmers went on horseback to the Laloki, and explained
“ the instructions to the men from Sir Arthur Gordon, of Fiji, saying he was glad
“ to report a good feeling between the whites and natives, and complimented the
“ colonist party on their behaviour to natives, as the pioneers of New Guinea.
“ Mr. Chester gave wine to the sick men, also medicine, and brought back
“ two to the port. The Rev. Messrs. Macfarlane and Chalmers held a service at Port
“ Moresby, and all the miners attended, without distinction of creed. Mr. Chalmers
A lectured at the Laloki, and advised the men to have no religious discussion, as such a
“ thing was likely to create a division between them. He was very glad to see the miners
“ so orderly and behaving so well, as he was under the impression they were a very
“ rough lot.” On the whole, the party of pioneers were in good spirits, and ultimately
hopeful of success. They do not intend giving in until compelled to leave by fever or
want of provisions. They strongly advise no one to come unless well provided with
the necessaries of life, and luxuries and medicine for fever, and thoroughly used to hard-
ship. They also advise prospectors to bring mules instead of horses, as they live much
longer in the scrubs without grass than horses. Mr. Hanran and mates, as soon as
recruited and re-provisioned, will return to Port Moresby, being fully determined to see
if gold is there or not. New Guinea is an immense territory, and will require years of
prospecting. Up to the present time very little prospecting has been done; only
looking for open country, to get horses through. Mr. Hanran’s concluding remarks are,
“ It may take time, but I am sure gold will be discovered, for I never saw such a large
“ quantity of black sand. I think, also, will find gold along the beaches.” The latest
reports say that Mr. Jones, the leader, found good indications at a certain place, and
that he and a few others intend to try it well.


The Captain of the “ Sappho ” on New Guinea.
The captain of the “Sappho” held an inquiry, by requisition of the miners, into a
charge of alleged capital offence on a native woman, by one of the party; but he could
not find who the assailant was, otherwise he would have dealt severely with him. He
cautioned the party against such crimes, and said, if found out, they would be visited
with heavy punishment. There was another inquiry into the conduct of another of the
party, but in consequence of the absence of the tribe from Port Moresby it fell through.
The captain says if payable gold is found in New Guinea it will be the greatest mystery
ever known, and he says New Guinea will be a perfect charnel-house ; five out of every
six men will die, as the climate is quite unfitted for white men.
Loss of a New Guinea Expeditionarv Yesseu.
Cooktown, Wednesday.—A thrilling account has been received here of a mishap to a
small vessel bound for New Guinea, and the hardships which her crew were forced to
endure on the coast till rescued. On the 29th July the “ Platypus,” an open boat partly
decked, left this port for New Guinea. She had a crew of three adventuresome men,—
Percy Charles Fuller, R. A. Purdie, and a seaman, —all belonging to Port Douglas. The
little craft was well stocked with provisions and water, but it was a matter of great
surprise that the authorities allowed the men to jeopardise their lives by crossing the
straits to New Guinea in such a frail bark. Nothing was heard of the party till yesterday.
The regular trader left for Port Moresby full of cargo and passengers and horses, and
she had in tow the yacht “ Cornstalk,” and yesterday evening Captain Duncomb, of the''
“Prospect,” returned to port in the “ Cornstalk ’’ with news about the “ Platypus.” He
said that on Sunday morning, on reaching Lizard Island, they cast anchor, the weather
being heavy. Shortly after anchoring they heard a cooey. Soon after a man was seen
on the rocks. A boat was put off, when it was found that it was Fuller and the seaman
of the “ Platypus ” who had cooeyed. They reported to Captain Duncomb that they
reached Lizard Island on the 31st, and anchored there previous to a final start for New
Guinea. They were engaged some time getting wood and water, and, in order to
preserve their provisions from the water, they took some ashore, together with ropes,
sails, &c. During the night, the blacks on the island came down and took all away. In
the morning Fuller and the seaman started off to recover the stolen goods, leaving Purdie
iu the boat. When they returned in the evening, to their horror they saw the boat a
mile at sea. After great difficulty Purdie managed to work the boat ashore, and he then
explained that while he was lying in the boat he felt something strike her. Thinking
she had grazed a rock, he took up anchor, but on again looking round observed two
spears which had been thrown from the shore. Next day Fuller and the man went again
in search of the blacks to regain the goods. They returned, and again, to their astonish-
ment on returning, they found the boat a long distance at sea, with the wind strong from
the south-east. They noticed the boom and the sails flapping about. They found all
the remaining sheets had been brought ashore. The boat drifted right out of sight soon
after. Fuller and the man subsisted only on crayfish for six days until the “ Prospect ”
came, when they were taken on hoard and treated kindly. Captain Duncomb, on learning
their story, at once manned the yacht “ Cornstalk,” and started in search of the boat and
the missing man Purdie. The yacht made a splendid run of 120 miles in 24 hours,
beating all the time against a strong head wind. Search was made at every island,
mainland, inlets, and at every probable spot, without the discovery of any signs of the
boat or of a wreck. No trace being found, Capt. Duncomb made with all speed for
Cooktown with P. Fuller and the man, leaving the “ Prospect ”at Lizard Island. Great
praise is due to Duncomb, and a testimonial is being got up for him. Purdie lately
assigned his estate at Port Douglas, and it is rumoured he was evading investigation. He
is said to have had 500 sovereigns with him. An inquiry is to be held.
H 4


Enclosure 2 in No. 25.
From “ Town and Country Journal,” Sydney, 24th August.
Latest from New Guinea.
[By Electric Telegraph.]
Cooktown, Saturday. —The Cooktown Herald publishes the following statement re-
ceived from Messrs. Hanran and Nandin, two of the New Guinea prospecting
party, since their arrival.
They say that they have received newspapers in which are published some letters
altogether untrue, and written probably by unprincipled men, with the intention of
exciting the public mind, regardless of the mischief their nefarious designs would cause
in the event of a rush to such a country as New Guinea, without a Government to
enforce law and order, without beef or stores, and without a hospital for the sick.
Therefore I deem it, says Mr. Hanran, a duty I owe to the public, and especially to
those following gold digging, to state what I know to be facts. I hope to be excused
for not writing a report in detail at this time, as I feel unwell, and my memorandum
book having been destroyed while going through a thick scrub in the rain. Consequently,
I have to write from memory. On the Bth May the colonist party, 15 men, whh pack
horses and five black men carrying provisions, crossed Laloki River, 12 miles from Port
Moresby and two miles from the junction of the Goldie River. There is a good track
from Port Moresby to Laloki River. After crossing the Laloki we travelled on a good
track through level country along the left bank of the Goldie far nine miles. Then the
sw T agmen crossed Goldie River twice, we at the same time continuing with the horses on
the left-hand bank, the track still being good, although the country here was getting rough.
We got along easy enough until we came to Mount Laws, which is 30 miles from Port
Moresby. This is a second Hellsgate. At the foot of this mountain there are several
villages, the natives of -which are friendly and well-disposed, but would not come near us
as they were in terror of our horses. This was one-third day’s tramp from Port Moresby,
and on the Goldie. Here all crossed the Goldie, and went up the right bank for
about four miles, then crossed the river again, camping on the beach for dinner. We
here prospected the river in different places, but found nothing but colour. After dinner
we continued our journey up the left bank of the river, but after travelling about two
miles were stopped by the scrub, and for the next six miles had to cut a road through
the scrub for the horses. Continued cutting and getting the horses through as long as
we could find any patches of grass; then Jones, the leader of the party, went out to see
what the country was like, and, returning, reported nothing but scrub and the country
very rough as far as he could see. After resting a few days we decided to go
out of the scrub and look for clear country. Seven men volunteered to go with eight
days’ rations, the weather being at the time fine, and the river low when we started;
but, after three days, when we had travelled about 15 miles, it commenced to rain. We
had to come out of the scrub and came on the river. We did not find the colour of gold
in the creek or ravines. Here four men were taken sick, and the other three returned to
camp, where they found all the men, excepting two, sick with fever. These two then
■went up the river, taking with them quinine for the sick men. All returned in a miserable
condition. After two weeks’ rest the sick men went down to the Laloki, and the
others re-crossed the Goldie and prospected up the right bank, a distance of 50 miles,
finding nothing but colours in the rivers. Provisions being only sufficient to bring
them back to the camp, they returned. The Goldie River runs into the form of a half
circle, heading to the south-east. In this journey the natives were found to be friendly,
carrried our swags, and showed us the tracks. After a week’s rest we returned to the
main camp at Laloki, with the intention of trying another track between Laloki and
Momelia rivers. Frank Jones, the leader, J. W. Murphy, A. M‘Coll, D. Connell, and
R. Ferguson, were the last party that went out. They succeeded in getting to the head
of the Goldie River, and prospected it for miles, also the branches at the head of the
river, but did not find even the colour of gold for 12 miles at the head of Goldie River,
nor did they come on any country worth prospecting. They returned after being
out 32 days. Two were very sick, and hardly able to return. The natives carried
the party’s swags, and showed them to any point that they wished to go to. As yet
no gold has been discovered, but at the same time I think there is a chance remaining
for them in the next trip. They are going into more likely country. The other
parties were preparing to go out when I left New Guinea. Captain Digby, of the
Sappho, the second lieutenant, and the doctor, visited us at the camp at Laloki. Mr.
Chester and the missionaries also visited us. All were kind to the sick. Six were
landed at Cooktown, on Sunday morning, three of whom went to the hospital suffering


from Guinea fever. We were brought over by H.M.S. “ Sappho,” the officers and men
of which were kind to us. The party have been in New Guinea three months, and had,
when I left, provisions for at least three months more. As for the “ Economist ” party,
I believe they are well provided, at least by all appearances. I don’t know where
Chalmers got his information from, but at any rate he has been greatly misinformed.
I have seen other letters published in several papers, in which the writers say that the
Cooktown men were entirely dependent on the natives for food. lam not aware that
a single man belonging to any of the different expeditions was ever in want of anything
from the natives beyond bartering for fish and yams occasionally. [ can safely say
that there is not a white man in New Guinea but has provisions for some months to
come, at least to the best of my knowledge. Through my travels up and down from
Port Moresby to the upper camp on the Goldie River, I never heard of any man being
in want. There were reports of payable gold having been found by our" first party.
The prospectors returned from a prospecting tour through running out of provisions,
and had to return for more. They will go up again shortly and give another trial.
There are other new arrivals who start shortly, but they intend going in a different
direction, which will be all the better, as the country will be well prospected. At
Laloki every one is in good spirits; the health of the men, with the exception of a few,
is improving. A good few went down south to recruit their health, but most of them
are coming back. There are some amongst them new chums, or men that are as well
out of the country. We had heavy rain for three days, which retarded departure for up
country, owing to the river rising considerably, but it is falling again. There were
signs of the weather being fine, so success is partly ensured to future prospects.
Enclosure 3 in No. 25.
From “ Town and Country Journal,” Sydney, August 10.
Cooktown, Monday.—The “ Emily,” from New Guinea, has arrived at Cooktown
A correspondent writes :
“I am very reluctant at sending any news from here. Matters are certainly critical,
and diggers look with great suspicion on any person suspected of corresponding with
papers. Mr. Chester found most of the party sick on his arrival. He distributed
medicine and medical comforts where necessary'. He and Mr. Chalmers went to Loloki
camp, where they found many sick and too ill to walk back to port. Horses were sent
and all brought in, and their health is now greatly improved. The ‘ Ellangowan ’ left
on the 16th for the south with Mr. Chester on- board. The ‘ Emily ’ arrived on the
26th ult. with 9 horses and 23 men. She lost 9 horses in the passage. Five men
who had gone further inland came in for provisions. They will tell nothing, and have
returned again. The ‘ Sappho ’ arrived on the 27th, and left next morning for South
Cape and for the ‘Chester.’ The ‘ Emily'’ party arrived exactly at the proper time,
and being good men, hopes are entertained of success. I have seen other letters, all
state that no gold has been found.”
Great Fight with Torres Straits Natives.
Fifty Men supposed to be killed.
Cooktown, August 13. —A letter from Captain Webb, of the “Pride,of Logan,”
fishing party, states that in consequence of the misconduct of Pitt and Blakesley’s fishing
party towards the natives, they (Captain Webb’s party) have been compelled to leave
Kepple Point, where they were doing splendidly, and seek other fishing grounds more
to the westward. When the natives are quiet Captain Webb purposes returning. He
obtained five tons tit-fish in a short time. The natives destroyed all Blakesley’s party’s
fish. Nelson Horatio Sproule, a coloured man, attached to Pitt’s and Blakesley’s station,
has arrived by H.M.S. “ Sappho.” He has a spear wound in the stomach. He reports
that when Webb and party were fishing at Kepple Point, 300 natives attempted to seize
the trader. A fight occurred in which Sproule was wounded. Pitt fired 20 rounds
It is supposed that 52 natives have been killed. The “ Spitfire” expedition, in search
of the white woman seen with the natives, comprising Mr. St. George, the magistrate,
Sykes, the pilot, two Kanakas, and three sailors, have left. The expedition is not likely
to be successful, as no black troops or officers are with it.
K 6853. I


No. 26.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Admiralty, 7th December 1878,
With reference to previous correspondence I am commanded by my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit, for the information of the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, a Despatch from Commodore Hoskins, dated 24th September
last, on the subject of the rush made by gold diggers to New Guinea from the
Australian Colonies, and also a report from Commander Digby of H.M.S. “ Sappho,” on
the state of affairs at Port Moresby and of his proceedings there.
I am to request that these papers may be returned when done with, observing that
they have been sent to the Foreign Office for perusal.
I have, &c.,
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
ROBERT HALL.
Enclosure in No, 26.
New Guinea, and Expeditions made by Gold Diggers from Australian Colonies.
Sir, _ “ Wolverine,” at Sydney, 24th September 1878.
With reference to previous correspondence on the subject of New Guinea and
the rush being made to it by gold diggers from the Australian Colonies, I have the
honour to report that Commander Digby, in pursuance of instructions sent him, as
mentioned in my letter of 16th July 1878, returned to Port Moresby in H.M.S. “ Sappho,”
on the 27th July, with authority from Plis Excellency the High Commissioner to act as
Deputy Commissioner in New Guinea.
2. On my return to this place from Noumea on the 12th instant I found the
“ Sappho” had already arrived, and I telegraphed to their Lordships a brief account of
the position of affairs at Port Moresby, as given me by Commander Digby.
3. I have the honour to enclose the full report of his proceedings, dated the 20th
August 1878, by which, as well as by the cuttings from local journals appended,*
it will be seen that the original expedition which sailed in the brig “ Colonist ” from
Sydney had almost disappeared, but that successive arrivals had kept the number at the
camp at Laloki up to about 60.
4. All information tends to show that the “ rush ” as a gold speculation is hitherto
a failure, and that the encouraging accounts received from time to time have emanated
from storekeepers and other interested individuals.
5. Up to the time of the “ Sappho” leaving, the relations of the expedition with the
natives had been quite friendly, though it is probably too much to expect that so satis-
factory a state of affairs will be maintained without interruption if fresh parties continue
to arrive from the various Colonies.
6. In view of the lateness of the season, however, and the approaching change of the
monsoon in November, there is room to hope that the expedition may be withdrawn
before any serious disturbance takes place.
7. In the meantime there is constant communication between Port Moresby and
Cooktown, and I am sending the “Sappho,” which has been re-fitted and provisioned,
to Brisbane, where she will be available for despatch again to New Guinea should
circumstances appear to render it necessary.
8. The “ Conflict ” was directed by me on the 18th May last to visit the south-east
and south coast of New Guinea during the latter part of her cruise, and was ordered to
ascertain, watch, and report on the doings of the expeditions sent there from Australia.
She is probably in those parts at this time, and reports from her may be expected within
the next month.
1 have, &c.,
(Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Commodore.
P.S.—A copy of Commander Digby’s report has been furnished by me to the Acting
High Commissioner.
The Secretary of the Admiralty.
* Extracts from “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of 24tli September 1878.


Report of Proceedings.
H.M.S. “ Sappho,” Moretou Bay,
Sir, 20th August 1878.
I left Thursday Island on the 23rd July, and arrived at Port Moresby on the
27th.
2. Nothing of importance had taken place since my last visit. Mr. Chester, the
magistrate from Thursday Island, had been here, but had left for Hood Bay and Eastern
New Guinea in the mission steamer “ Ellengowan.” Fever had been very prevalent in
the diggers’ camp; only five were fit for work. A schooner with a party from Cooktown
arrived the day before I did.
3. As the missionaries were to be some days at Hood Bay, I decided on proceeding
thither, and left for that purpose on the 28th, steaming inside the reefs to avoid the strong
trade wind and heavy sea outside, against which I could not have made headway; arrived
at Kerepunu, at the entrance of Hood Bay Lagoon, where there is a good and safe
anchorage, on the 30th July.
4. Two beche-de-mer vessels, the “ Pride of the Logan,” Webbe master, and the
“ Annie,” Blakesley master, were here. They were boarded and their papers found
correct. They reported having been compelled to leave Keppel Point owing to the
hostility of the natives, who had attacked them with spears. Mr. Chalmers, one of the
missionaries, had already sent for the Chief of the village concerned, and on his arrival on
the 31st I held an inquiry.
5. The Chief declared that the disturbance originated by a dispute about trading.
Webbe, who was first in the field at Keppel Point, had established a fixed price in hoop-iron
for beche-de-mer, which the “ Annie’s ” crew endeavoured to procure for less, and on the
natives objecting the traders seized the beche-de-mer, leaving what they considered
equivalent in trade. On this the natives began throwing stones, which was replied to by
the boats crew r with rifles. •’
6. Some days after this the natives attacked the beche-de-mer station on shore, using
spears, and wounded one man. The crews of the vessels fired on them. Webbe stated
his belief that the natives had attacked them without provocation with the intention of
taking the trade. The native teacher at Kerepunu had warned him that such was their
intention. He had never had any dispute with the natives before.
7. The “Annie” having disappeared somewhat hurriedly on the morning of the
inquiry, I was disposed to regard the Chief’s statement as the most probable one,
especially as he did not deny the main points. He was very much frightened, and
declared that he had no quarrel with the white man. Mr. Chalmers and Mr. Chester
propose visiting the village to ensure peace being established.
8. On my return to Port Moresby on the Ist August I found the “ Annie” there, and
caused Blakesley the master, and a West Indian negro called Pitt, who is part owner, to
come on board and make tbeir statement. They denied having endeavoured to fore-
reach the natives in trading, or having in any way molested them. I pointed out to
them the suspicious circumstances of their having left Kerepunu on the arrival of the
Chief, and called their attention to the Pacific Islanders Protection Act, and informed
them that the proceedings of the “Annie” and her owners would be watched. Both
these men bear doubtful characters.
9. One of my principal objects in communicating with the missionaries was to obtain
the services of the Port Moresby teacher who was with them, and wdio is the only man
that can interpret the language, and from whom I wished to find out the feeling of the
natives towards the diggers. In this I succeeded, and on his return the natives
complained that a man named Trotter had tampered with the native women, and in a
state of intoxication had paraded the village with a loaded rifle threatening their lives.
10. I apprehended the man and tried the case at the Mission House on the 6th August.
He pleaded “Not Guilty,” and the natives, many of whom attended would not give
evidence; so I dismissed tbe case, and recommended the prisoner to leave as soon as he
could, which he probably will do.
11. A case of criminal assault on a native woman was reported. 1 took the depositions
of Kedlick, a German, and Minnis, a British subject, who surprised the man in the act,
but unfortunately the culprit had made his escape in one of the trading schooners before
my arrival. I could not ascertain his name, and the natives made no complaint, but I
hdve directed the teacher to make inquiries.
12. On the 3rd August 1 visited the diggers’ camp, on the Laloke River about 15 miles
1 2


from Port Moresby, taking Staff-surgeon Keelan with me to see the sick, of whom there
were many.
13. Although the statement of the diggers cannot be implicitly relied on, I am
convinced the expedition is a failure. Gold, if it has been found at all, which I much
doubt, has not been found in payable quantities, the difficulty of' procuring supplies and
transporting them is very great, the river is too frequently flooded even in the dry season
to admit of its being worked, the labour of cutting through the bush is immense, and the
climate is so unhealthy that they must ere long leave or die.
14. Three deaths have occurred, several men have left in beche-de-mer vessels, others
have returned to Cooktown in small vessels, and about 00 remain, one-half of whom are
new arrivals. There are many foreigners among them.
15. Five men having applied to me for passage, I complied with their request, hoping
that their report will deter others from coming. Three of the five were influential
members of the first expedition. Besides those men I embarked another to save Ins life,
and also the man wounded in the affray at Keppel Point. They were all landed at
Cooktown,
16. Taken altogether, both old and new arrivals appear to be respectable law-abiding
people; and although it is very desirable that someone in authority should be on the
spot to keep order, I see no fear of any serious irregularities occurring at present.
17. Mr. Andrew Goldie, botanist, assisted me very materially in obtaining infor-
mation, &c.
18. The native teacher Ruakoka has behaved in a very praiseworthy manner to the
sick and destitute adventurers, nursing them and feeding them out of his own supplies,
which are very scanty. In consideration of this and for his services as interpreter, I
ordered the paymaster to supply him with a cask of salt beef.
10. The diggers spoke very highly cf the way the natives had behaved to them.
20. Happening to have a copy of a letter* (enclosed) from the Colonial Office to the
promoters of a “ Colonisation Association ” in 18/5, and thinking it equally applicable
to the present state of affairs in New Guinea, I left a copy with Mr. Goldie for the
information of those concerned.
21, As my presence was no longer necessary, and my provisions running short, I left
Port Moresby on the 7th August, and reached Cooktown on the 11th, having passed
through the barrier opposite Cape Melville. Coal not being procurable here 1 went to
Townsville, took in 35 tons, proceeded to Moreton Bay, where 1 anchored this day, and
go on to Sydney on receipt of my mails.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) Noel S. F. Uigby,
Commander.
P.S. —Since writing the above I have found the enclosed report of Mr. Chester in the
newspaper.f I was not aware of the doings at Murray Island of the West Indian referred
to, who is the man “ Pitt ” mentioned in ray letter.
Commodore A. H. Hoskins, C. 8., A.D.C., (Signed) Noel S. F. Digby,
Senior Officer, &c., &c., Commander.
H.M.S “Wolverine.”
The “ Sydney Morning Herald,” 15th August 1878.
New Guinea.
The following very interesting report is from Mr. H. M. Chester, P.M., to the
Hon. the Colonial Secretary of Queensland. Mr. Chester is Government Resident on
Thursday Island, to whom was granted two months’ leave of absence in order that he
might visit New Guinea and send down an official report of the doings of the prospectors,
and the condition and prospects of the settlement. The report is taken from the
“ Brisbane Courier ” of Monday last.
“ Sir, Poit Moresby, July 20, 1878.
“ I have the honour to report that, in accordance with your instructions, I left
Thursday Island in the ‘ Ellengowan,’ on July 1, for the purpose of visiting Port
Moresby and other settlements on the coast of New Guinea.
* Colonial Office to Edward Schubert, Esq., dated 30th October 1875. See No. 24 of [C. 1566], July 1876.
■f Dated Port Moresby, 20th July 1878,


“We were detained two days at Somerset by stress of weather, and proceeded to
Murray Island, where we remained until the weather moderated. During our stay we
called a meeting of the people. They complained bitterly of the oppression they had
suffered at the hands of a West Indian black, who has been living there since 1871,
carrying on the beche-de-rner fishery. It appears lie induced a number of their young
men to work for him, and took women by force as wives for them, as a means of keeping
them in his employ. I inquired how it happened that they did not defend themselves.
They replied that they dreaded reprisals, and related the following story ;—About 1866,
a fishing vessel was anchored off their island, and one of the crew, a New Zealander,
having seized one of their women, a fight ensued, in which, after shooting a native, the
Maori was killed. The next day two armed boats’ crews landed and laid waste their
villages, shooting men, women, and children indiscriminately. Fifteen were killed out-
right, and many wounded. A few days after, a canoe coming from another island was
attacked, and 12 men killed, the women being taken to work on the reef. They further
stated that this West Indian had severely beaten a Chief, whom he accused of bewitching
a man in his employ, and burnt his house. They would have killed him long since, but
feared a man-of-war would be sent to punish them. I explained that I had been
appointed by the British Government as their protector from miscreants of this sort,
and advised them to elect a Chief and submit to his authority, which, if properly
exercised, would be supported. Nine men were pointed out as Chiefs, and these
unanimously agreed to recognise one named Buziri as their head. The West Indian
referred to left the island a few weeks before, owing upwards of two years’ wages to a
number of people who had been working for him, eight of whom were signed on his
boats’ articles. I recommended, if he returned, they should refuse him permission to
land until he paid all arrears of wages, and if he committed any further outrage to
secure him until they could communicate with the authorities at Thursday Island.
After presenting Buziri with suitable gifts, the people dispersed to talk the matter
over.
“ A native teacher, employed by the London Missionary Society, has been stationed
on Murray Island since 1872, and appears to have acquired considerable influence over
the people. They have built a neat church, which was filled on the Sunday we spent
there. The people, however, are too prone to sit round and sing hymns, instead of
working and improving their surroundings, which are in much the same state as when
I visited them in 1870. The teacher, Josiah, has a school for the boys, while his wife
attends to the girls. They have a primer printed in their language, and some of the
young folks read fluently. The women especially seem to take kindly to the new faith,
as it improves their social position, and ensures them better treatment. The island,
though small, is extremely fertile, and food is so plentiful that it is allowed to rot on the
ground, the people being too indolent to bring it in lor sale. The natives arc com-
paratively wealthy, from having worked for the pearl-shellers, and all wear some kind of
garment, if only a waistcloth.
“ Murray Island is probably destined to play an important part in the evangelisation
of New Guinea, it being proposed to form an institution for training natives from all
parts, wdio will subsequently return to their homes, and impart to their countrymen the
knowledge they have acquired. It is to be hoped that an industrial school, conducted
by a good English mechanic, will form a prominent feature in such an institution, as
hitherto the introduction of the Gospel seems to have been attended with an increased
disposition to indolence in a people not at any time given to exert themselves.
“ Before leaving we learnt that the Chiefs had talked over the advice given to them,
and had resolved to build a house to serve the double purpose of a court-house and
council chamber. The most serious evil the missionaries have had to contend with is
the practice of the women to procure abortion, which in a population of less than
400 souls threatens the speedy extinction of the race. There are three kinds of plants
growing on the island which arc used for this purpose, the end being obtained by
chewing and swallowing the leaves. A young married woman was detected in the act,
and, after trial by the chiefs, was sentenced to three weeks’ labour on tiie roads.
“ Left Murray Island on 13th July, the little steamer being crammed in every
available space with supplies for the teachers in New Guinea. The weather being
squally, with rain, considerable care was necessary in threading our way through the
opening of the Barrier Reef. Passed to leeward of the Portlock Reefs, under steam and
sail, and made the coast of New Guinea about 11 p.rn. of July 14, half-way between
Yule Island and Cape Suckling, from whence we beat up to Boera, a village of about
370 people, some 12 miles from Port Moresby.
I 3


“ Mr. Chalmers and I went on shore and took up our quarters in the house of Peri,
a Rarotongan teacher stationed here. In the evening we had an interesting interview
with the Chiefs. We asked what was their idea of the foreigners who had come to live
among them. They replied ‘At first we were afraid they would take our lands and
‘ drive us into the interior, but we are now satisfied they are peaceable. All our
‘ experience of the white man has been good. Our fathers knew nothing of them, and
‘of the wonderful things they bring us.’ We gave them some advice as to their
dealings with white men, and after the usual presents they took their leave. We
gleaned the following information from them. Their annual trading voyage commences
in August, and extends about 100 miles to the westward. They call at all the villages
to exchange their potteryware for sago, and return to Boera with the first north-west
wind in December. There are 12 villages to pass before arriving in the cannibal
districts. Yaimuro is the last place of call, nine villages further on, and to them come
people from three villages still further to the westward, Kerepo being the last village
with 'which they have intercourse. The best means of communicating with the tribes
to the west would be to accompany the trading canoes. They seem eager to obtain
European wares, and inquired of the Boera people whence they procured them. ‘ Peri
gave them to us.’ ‘ Then bring Peri with you,’ was the reply. We asked, ‘ Would
they receive us kindly if we went with you ? ’ The answer, given with emphasis, was,
‘ They w r ould nurse you ’ —literally, ‘seat you on their thighs’; ‘ when w r e visit them
‘ each house claims a portion of us as guests, and they do not let us want for anything
‘ while staying with them.’
“ They relate a curious circumstance in connection with the people of Kerepo. The
male children have a hole pierced through the left hand in infancy, which is kept
distended like those in the lobes of the ear until they arrive at manhood, and is then put
to this extraordinary use : In fighting, their arrows are balanced through the hole in the
left hand, from whence they are propelled with great force by a smart blow from the
right hand. The bow is not used by them. We classed this story with the account of
the men with tails, but the Chiefs were quite amused at our incredulity, and assured us
they themselves had seen these things,
“ The Boera people are friendly with the lioro tribe on the mainland, opposite Yule
Island, who murdered Dr. James and Thorngrcn in 1876. They gave us a minute
circumstantial account of the affair, which agrees in every particular with the evidence
given me by the survivors on that occasion. We asked what led to the attack, and they
told us the Chief wished to test whether all white men were invulnerable, as a short time
before a white man had allowed them to hurl spears at him, which rebounded without
doing him any injury. ‘ Was he a spirit ? Had he come from the clouds ? ’ they
asked. But no, he came from the sea, and their weapons were powerless against him.
We set this down as some ancient tradition, but Captain Dudfield afterwards told us he
had seen a coat of mail in Signor D’Albertis’ possession, and as that gentleman visited
the Iloro tribe, there may, after all, be some foundation for their story.
“ The village of Boera consists of a number of thatched huts, each accommodating a
single family. They are built on slender piles a short distance from high-water mark,
without any regard to regularity. They bury their dead in shallow graves in the very
street, close to their houses, winch must seriously affect their water supply. The
women of the tribe were busily engaged in the manufacture of pottery for their
approaching voyage. The process is as follows : —Each woman has a shallow trough
alongside her, filled with black clay in small lumps. After softening this to the proper
consistency, she takes a flat piece of wood and beats it out on a round flat stone, adding
fresh clay on the outside, and gradually fashioning the pot to the required shape. They
are then dried in the sun, afterwards piled in rows between brushwood and small sticks,
baked of a dull-red colour, and allowed to cool gradually. They make two kinds, one
circular, with a short narrow neck and turned lip, resembling the Indian ‘ lota,’ the other
about half the size, and bowl-shaped. They hold from one to five gallons of water, and
serve also as cooking-pots.
“ The people are of a light-copper colour, below the middle stature, with straight
hair, frizzed out like a mop, in which a bamboo comb is stuck; they are well made,
with rounded limbs and respectable calves, and both in appearance and softness of
disposition reminded me of the Pelcw Islanders. Many of the women are pleasing-
looking, and some of the younger girls are even pretty. The men are naked, with the
exception of a cord round their waists, which is put to much the same use as that worn
by the Tannese; yet even this small concession to decency has a certain dignity in their


eyes, for they speak of their friends to the westward as naked savages. .For ornaments,
they wear a piece of shell about four inches long, stuck through the septum of the nose,
and the village dandies may be known by the length and whiteness of this ornament.
Crescents of pearl-shell, necklaces of dog’s teeth, and earrings of tortoiseshell are also
worn. The women all wear the grass petticoat, and are tattooed in regular patterns on
the face, breast, back, and arms. Each has a capacious bag, netted with the finest jute,
in which food and other heavy loads are carried. Some are very neatly made, and
stained in coloured patterns. They appear to set considerable store by these, and refuse
to sell them for tobacco, asking an American tomahawk for a very ordinary specimen.
They are all incorrigible beggars for tobacco (kuku), and, after answering any question
put to them, are sure to add, ‘ You don’t happen to have a bit of tobacco about you? ’
in a coaxing interrogative wa\ r .
“ The cutter ‘ Saucy Jack,’ Simpson master, has formed a beche-de-mer station just
across the bay, but it was blowing too hard for us to visit them in the boat. The
captain was very ill w r ith fever, and sent off to the ‘ Ellaugowan ’ for medicine. They
were advised to go to Port Moresby to recruit. The natives work willingly in collecting
beche-de-mer, receiving tobacco in payment.
“ July 16.—Weighed and steamed round to Port Moresby, where we anchored about
4 p.m. Found the ketch ‘ Hibernia’ had arrived a few days previously from Cooktown,
with three horses and Captain Redlich, who intends starting a store. With this ex-
ception there has been no addition to the digging population since Mr. Ingham’s last
report. There has been much sickness, and scarcely a man has escaped a touch of the
fever. It is with pleasure lam able to report that the friendly relations with the natives
inaugurated by Mr. Ingham remain unimpaired. Men go and come between the camp
at the Laloki and the port, a distance of 12 miles, entirely unarmed, and have no
difficulty in getting carriers for their goods. The example set by those who arrived in
the ‘ Colonist’ is worthy of all praise, and has given a tone to the rest. There have
been two deaths since the ‘ Sappho’s ’ visit. There are only five men out prospecting;
the rest are divided between the Laloki camp and the port. Captain Webb, of the
‘Pride of the Logan,’ has kindly taken five of the sick men round to his fishing station
at Kerrepunu to recruir. Dissatisfaction is expressed at the apathy of many of the
diggers, who, though well equipped with horses and provisions, have not rendered the
least assistance to the prospecting party ; in fact, some of them have never gone a mile
beyond the Laloki. It is said that those who came in the ‘ Pride of the Logan,’ who
were spoken of by the Queensland press as the best equipped party that has left for
New Guinea, have done literally nothing in the way of cutting scrub or assisting in the
arduous work of prospecting this truly formidable country. I have held an inquiry
touching the death of a Mr. Neville, a gentleman of independent means, who only
arrived from England in the ‘ Chimborazo.’ The general opinion is that he over-exerted
himself, as it was no uncommon thing for him to walk to the Laloki and return the
same day. Poor fellow, he was found on June 20, lying dead on the track among the
long grass, about 3-J miles from the port. After proper identification he was buried
near the spot where he died, it having been found impossible to convey his remains to
Port Moresby. It may be some consolation to know that the sad offices were performed
by sympathising hands, for he was a general favourite, and that a religious service was
read over his remains by Ruatoka, the missionary teacher, of whom I shall have more to
say anon. Mr. Neville’s property remains in Ruatoka’s charge until Mr. Ingham’s
return, as that gentleman has deceased’s will.
“ On July 18, Captain Redlich having kindly lent us horses, Mr. Chalmers and I
rode out to the Laloki camp. The view from the top of the range immediately behind
Port Moresby is magnificent, but calculated to depress the spirits of even the most
sanguine digger, and convey an idea of the Herculean task before him. Broken ranges,
rising one above the other in apparently interminable succession, bar the approach to
Mount Owen Stanley, the dark blue outline of whose base forms a fitting background to
the landscape, whilst the summit is lost in the clouds. To the right is the lesser range
crowned by Mount Astrolabe, and on the tableland between five determined men are
struggling with the forces of nature in the search for gold. It is a scene to bring
reflection to the most thoughtless ; the grandeur of nature contrasted with the puny
efforts oi men, but men of whom the Colonies may justly be proud. Leading our horses
down the range, we descended into a wide basin surrounded by hills, and followed the
track through grass level with our faces on horseback, out on to the plains, which, but
for the high ranges in the distance, and dwarf cycads dotting the face of the country,
resembles some parts of the Warrego district. It may be described as well-grassed open
I 4


forest, lightly timbered with Moreton Bay ash. About 3| miles brought us to poor
Neville’s grave, which is marked by a neat pile of logs. Two of the Port Moresby tribe
accompanied us as carriers, and kept up with our horses at a fast walk with a load slung
on a stick between them. Halted at a creek a little less than half-way to give the
natives a spell, and rode on to the Laloki, passing through a narrow belt of scrub
differing in no respect from those at the back of the settlement at Somerset. About
two miles from the river the country changes to barren stony ridges, from whence the
river timber is plainly distinguished. The camp is situated on a slight rise below a bend
in the river, which is not more than 10 or 12 yards wide, with high banks; it consists
of a log hut, roofed with bark, and a few tents. We received a hearty welcome from
the diggers, and were glad to find there were only two men who could be called seriously
ill, although all had suffered more or less from fever. The worst cases are those in
which there is a sort of dropsical tendency. Mr. Chalmers gave a short but impressive
service, which was reverently listened to, and it was arranged that a party should be
sent out to convey the sick men to Port Moresby. Mr. Broadbent, the well-known
naturalist, is camped on a hill overlooking the diggers, and we spent a pleasant half hour
in looking over his collection of birds. Out shooting from dawn till noon, and occupied
till late in the evening in skinning the spoils of the day. Mr. Broadbent has no time to
think of fever, and it would be well if some of the diggers followed his example in the
matter of exercise.
“ We were astonished to find men living for weeks in one spot in such a climate, with
no other shelter than a calico tent without even a fly. The labour necessary to house
themselves comfortably would be the best preventive of fever. The diggers are here
at least two months too early. The river beds are still unworkable from the constant
showers on the mountains, although no rain has fallen at the camp for more than a
month. Those who have been out prospecting speak of the scrubs as being worse than
they have ever before met with, and the labour of cutting through them has told severely
on those so employed; yet they say this could be cheerfully borne but for the want
of rest, caused by swarms of mosquitoes, ticks, and a sort of scrub itch that drives
men frantic.
“ I am indebted to Mr. Hanran for the following account of what has been done :
A party of about 30 men left Port Moresby on Ist May, consistiug of those who came
in the ‘ Colonist ” and ‘ Swan.’ After crossing the Laloki they struck the left bank of
the Goldie River, which was heading north-east. About 17 miles from Port Moresby
they commenced to cut a track through the scrub, and penetrated seven miles further,
where, feed being scarce, tiie party camped, and sent seven men out to look for more
open county. These followed up the left bank of the river through dense scrub for
12 miles, but rain falling, brought on sickness, and compelled them to return. The
main camp was then shifted back seven miles to the right bank. Four men then
travelled on foot up that bank for 50 miles, when they found the river heading to the
south-east in a half circle. This occupied five days, but on returning they made the
camp in 35 miles in a day and a half, by steering a direct course. They found the
colour everywhere in the bed of the river, but never in the gullies. The country
traversed consisted of broken ranges and thick scrub, impassable for horses. They
found the natives friendly wherever they met them, and obtained their assistance in
carrying swags and pointing out the track. No sign of auriferous country thus far.
Meantime sickness had thinned their numbers, those who were bad with fever returning
to the Laloki. Seeing that the Goldie was heading to the south-east, with comparatively
open country, all returned to the Laloki camp, when the following party was organised
under the leadership of Frank Jones, namely, J. W. Murphy, Alex. M’Call, Dan. Connell,
and 11. Ferguson (all ‘ Colonist’ men), and a portion of the original patty of 10 who had
kept together throughout. This party started from the farthest camp on June 28, with
two horses and about four weeks’ provisions, as no game is to be found in the ranges,
and, after travelling in a south-east direction four days, came to the tableland, since
which no news has been received from them. They were then making for the head of
the Goldie, which appears to have its source in the Astrolabe or one of the coast ranges.
It certainly does not take its rise in the Mount Owen Stanley range. A party of six
are waiting till Jones returns to follow up what has been done. Before going to the
Laloki we had a meeting of the Chiefs, who expressed the satisfaction of the people with
the treatment they had received from the diggers. We advised them to avoid every-
thing that would tend to impair the present friendly 7 relations, more especially to impress
on their young men to refrain from purloining, which, if not put a stop to, would lead
to trouble. Also, if they did sell any portion of their land, to adhere to their part


of the compact, and not to try to sell the same land over again. We told them that the
principal difficulty in their dealings with foreigners was caused by their lack of authority
over their own people, and that if they did not punish offences against the whites, the
latter, in the absence of any authority, would be likely to take the law into their own
hands. In the event of a resident Judicial Commissioner being appointed here, he will
inevitably have to assume a sort of benevolent protectorate over these people, in
consequence of this want of authority in their Chiefs.
“ I was an eye-witness of the purchase of a piece of land by Captain Redlich, on
which he wished to erect a store. The portion bargained for was about an acre and a
half of stony unproductive ridge at the rear of the mission premises. Eleven persons,
including women and boys, claimed the land, and the price agreed upon, about 41. per
acre, was divided between them. Several onlookers immediately offered to sell their
land, but there were no buyers. These people have made a sudden leap of a thousand
years, from the ‘ stone ’to the ‘ steel ’ age, and American steel at that! The trade fantail
tomahawk, costing about 6d., passed current in the South Seas for years after Europeans
visited the islands; but these people will not look at anything short of an American
tomahawk, costing about 4s. 6d. retail. We had to pay our carriers one each, which
is expensive labour. While on the subject of land, I may correct a report that has
gained publicity, to the effect that the mission has bought up all the available land here.
The mission property does not exceed three acres, and the price above quoted seems to
have been the average amount paid for it. The native plantations are situated on the
slopes of the hills overlooking the port, and in no instance has a plantation been
sold.
“ On the evening of the day we interviewed the Chiefs I addressed a meeting of the
diggers, who spoke in high praise of the kindness shown by the natives to the sick and
to those who had been temporarily lost in the bush. The general desire on their part
is to live in harmony with the people. They expressed themselves as most anxious that
someone with sufficient power to repress lawlessness should reside among them, and
promised to support his authority. The objection to Chinamen arriving in crowds is as
strong as ever, but the summary measures proposed in the excitement of a first landing
find but little favour with the more sensible members of the community. They trust
that means will be found to prevent mere shanty keepers, whose only stock-in-trade
consists of enough iron to build a shed and sufficient liquor to fill it, from starting their
nefarious business in their midst, and urge that, inasmuch as an Englishman in a savage
land cannot divest himself of the allegiance he owes to his country’s laws, so the State
ought not to shirk the responsibility of providing for the due administration of those
laws. Although, from a digger’s point of view, some who have come to New Guinea
would have been better employed in wheeling a perambulator at home, they are, as a
whole, a most respectable class of men, and their conduct in the difficult circumstances
in which they are placed reflects credit on the Colonies from whence they came.
“ I cannot close this report without referring to the services rendered to the diggers
by Ruatoka, the Rarotongan teacher stationed here, and his excellent wife. Although
by no means passing rich on 15/. a year, this truly good Christian has fed and nursed
the sick at his own expense. Night and day his services have been put in requisition in
a thousand little ways, in which, without his assistance, the diggers would have been
unable to deal with the natives, until his own health has suffered. On one occasion, a
sick man having fallen exhausted on the track, he went out and carried him for five
miles on his back, and over the range to the port. All this has been done in singleness
of heart, without expectation or hope of reward, and, I feel sure, only requires to be
made known to ensure some recognition from the people of New South Wales and
Queensland.
“ In conclusion, I may add that but for the assistance received from Messrs. M’Earlane
and Chalmers, of the New Guinea Mission, in interpreting between the natives
and myself, my report would have lacked whatever interest it may be thought to
possess.
“ We leave to-morrow, July 22, for Kerepunu, a village 60 miles to the eastward,
from which place I may have an opportunity of forwarding a supplementary report.
“ I have, &c.,
“HENRY M. CHESTER,
“ To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Judicial Commissioner.
“ Brisbane.”
K 6853. K


“The Sydney Morning Herald,” Tuesday, September 24, 1878.
New Guinea.
We are indebted to the courtesy of the “ Brisbane Courier ” for an advance copy of
three additional reports from Mr. Chester. We give below the first of these reports ;
“ Stacy Island, South Cape,
“ Sir, August 27, 1878.
“In continuation of my previous report, I have the honour to inform you that
we left Port Moresby on July 23, and steamed along the coast inside the Barrier Reef to
Round Head. The reef is here not more than two or three miles from the coast, with
numerous openings. The day being fine and clear, the slopes of the Astrolabe Range
were very distinct. Patches of grass land bare of timber were probably taken for
plantations by the early surveyors, who, judging by their soundings, can scarcely have
been inside the Barrier. The average depth is from five to seven fathoms as far as the
Round Head, with occasional patches of reef. At Kaile, a village about 18 miles
from Port Moresby, several canoes came off with stone axes, yams, &c., to barter.
These people seemed more energetic than those of Port Moresby, not yet having been
demoralised by the sudden accession of wealth. Between Kaile and Port Moresby
five Niene (savage island) teachers are located at the different villages. They are like
fish out of water since Mr. Lawes’ departure, as that gentleman was the only person able
to converse with them in their own language. In their intercourse with the missionaries
and the Raratongan teachers they use the Port Moresby dialect.
“ Three or four miles west of Round Head are two villages built on piles in the sea
about half a mile apart, called Kapakapa. Canoes put off from them, but were told to
follow us on to Round Head. This headland is shown on the chart as a bluff imme-
diately on the sea, but there is a long low spit stretching out from it for a distance of
two miles. Anchored in six fathoms about 200 yards from a fine beach, and procured a
good supply of wood. We went about a couple of miles inland across a plain that is a
swamp in the rainy season, in which was a fine lagoon of fresh water, and were startled
at finding tracks of nailed boots until we remembered that Webb’s boat had probably
anchored here on the way to Kerepunu. The range of hills at the back is not more
than 300 feet high, and the villages are perched on their summits.
“July 24.—Weighed at sunrise. A good look-out from the masthead is necessary
here, as there are many patches of reef off Round Head, not shown on the chart. A
vessel making this part of the coast may easily recognise the Astrolabe Range by three
remarkable notches or steps in the hills. Anchored about 1.30 p.m., about four miles to
leeward of the western extremity of Hood Bay, off' which, on piles in the sea, is the
village of Hula. Mr. Chalmers and I beat up to Hula in a boat against a strong south-
easter, and put up on shore in the house of the native teacher, a Raratongan, and
his wife, named Taria. Shortly after dusk everyone went on board the village to sleep,
not daring to remain on shore for fear of an attack by the hill tribes, I saw here for the
first time native drums in process of manufacture. This had hitherto been as great a
puzzle to me as the apple in the dumpling was to George 111., and the explanation is
equally simple. They select a good-sized tree with a pipe in it, which is cut into lengths
and hewn to the required shape, resembling an hour-glass; the hole at either end is then
enlarged by burning.
“July 25. —Started at 7 a.m. to walk to the Kemp Welch, a fresh-water stream running
into Hood Bay. Taria and his wife accompanied us, and a few young men from the
village, one of whom carried a native shield given me by Taria. With this and a light
spear he illustrated their mode of fighting, which consists in a series of panther-like
leaps and bounds, now crouching to the ground with the whole body covered by the
shield, anon springing erect and hurling the spear with unerring accuracy of aim. The
road for about four miles ran through extensive plains, partially cultivated, in which
were cocoanut groves amidst thick patches of scrub. We met a troop of women
carrying heavy loads of food to Hula, and shortly after came to the cultivated land
outside the village of Kamari, which is five miles from Hula. Here we saw two gangs
of men, about 12 in each, ploughing the ground. Each man had two long sticks,
pointed at the ends. Standing in line, they drove these into the earth to the depth of a
foot or 18 inches, and then, suddenly falling back together, raised a broad sod the length
of the line and turned it over. Another mile brought us to the village. The paths
leading to it are well kept, and bordered with rows of cocoanuts, placed side by side as


close as possible. These are allowed to grow where they lie, and when about a year old
are planted out. Before entering the village we noticed a large platform of logs, with
the ground about it beaten hard and clean-swept. This is the market-place, where all
trade is conducted by the women. From thence a narrow lane, fenced with cocoanut
branches, led into the village of Kamari. We went straight to the Chief’s house, which
has nothing to distinguish it from the rest. The houses are all built on stout piles,
about 10 feet from the ground, with a broad platform of logs in front, and are two-
storied. The ridge-pole, which is about 20 feet or 25 feet from the ground, is supported
by forked trees, some of which are elaborately carved. The roofs and sides are covered
with thatch made of pandanus leaf. Breadfruit, crotons, and diacenc are cultivated in
small enclosures within the village, and the practice of burying the dead in the streets
prevails. Crowds of women and children flocked to see us as we smoked our pipes on
the Chiefs platform, and we estimated the population at from 1,200 to 1,500 people.
The land all belongs to the Chiefs, who are possessed of more authority than those of Port
Moresby, and the common people cultivate it, and are paid with the produce. Their
cleanliness goes no further than sweeping the streets and bouses, for on leaving the
village we found all the refuse heaped in a long mound by the roadside. The young
men and children are good-looking and remarkably intelligent. The unmarried girls are
easily recognised from their custom of letting the hair grow; the matrons have theirs
cropped close. A Chief from one of the mountain villages was the guest of our host.
He had come down on business in connection with the murder of one of his people, and
we afterwards heard that the Kerepunu people were responsible for the outrage, which
in the fulness of time means compensation or war. This man recognised Mr. Chalmers,
who some time before had visited his mountain home. Continued our walk three miles
further, to the village of Kalo, the road running along the top of a narrow grassy ridge
commanding a view of the sea and the M'Gillivray ranges in the distance. Kalo is a
larger village than Kamari, with a population of perhaps a couple of thousand. Similar
well-kept paths, bordered with cocoanuts, led up to the village, and we passed through
the narrow streets, crowded with people, with infinitely less annoyance than a strangely-
attired foreigner would experience in many parts of England. There is a kind of natural
politeness about these people, and they are very far removed from savages. The Chief
to whose house we directed our steps set food before us, and received, with much
gravity, the presents made to him. A great feast was in course of preparation when we
arrived. A row of stout poles, about 30 feet high and a yard apart, were bound together
with vines, and secured in position by long guys of cane. This extended 50 yards, and
were covered with cocoanuts to a height of 10 feet. The houses are not as lofty as
those of Kamari, but are similar in other respects. ■ The floors are made of soft wood
planks, about 2 feet wide, which appeared to have been the sides of canoes, being
rounded on top and hollow below. The Chiefs’ houses are distinguished by a kind of
spire, 12 feet high, built of poles and thatched. We saw two young girls undergoing
the painful process of tatooing at the hands of two ancient dames. The pattern was
neatly sketched out in some black pigment on the face and breast, and they seemed
quite unconcerned, although the blood followed every tap of the instrument. Kalo is
situate on the right bank of a river that has been named the Kemp Welch, in honour
of the treasurer of the London Missionary Society, but at a short distance from it, as
the river is continually changing its bed. There is a bar at the mouth, upon which a
heavy sea was breaking. We crossed in a canoe, and sat down on a log to await the
arrival of our boat, which was to sail round from Hula, but after an hour—seeing no sign
of her —set out to walk to Kerepunu, at the other extremity of Hood’s Bay, a distance
of seven or eight miles, along a hard sandy beach, ft was a trading day for the
Kerepunu people, and we were accompanied by some 50 women returning with loads of
food, weighing from 80 lbs. to 100 lbs. Passed the schooners ‘ Annie ’ and ‘ Pride of
the Logan ’ at the head of the bay, and found the ‘ Ellengowan ’ anchored opposite
Kerepunu, in the mouth of Hood Lagoon.
“ July 26.—Spent this day in walking through the seven detached villages that go to
form Kerepunu. One of these, built partly on shore and partly in the sea, is occupied by
a colony of fishermen from Hula. Large well-made fishing nets, with neat wooden
floats and shells for sinkers, hung on the platforms of their houses, but the all-pervading
odour of fish caused us to beat a hasty retreat. Almost every house had a tame parrot
or cockatoo ; these will be duly plucked when a feast is at hand to furnish finery for
the dance. We found also strong rope nets used in kangaroo-hunting and pig-catching.
Bread fruit and the Areka palm flourish in the streets, and many houses had orchids in
flower growing on the sides and roofs. Children accompanied us in our walk, and con-
tended for the honour of holding our hands. There is only one village built directly
K 2


on the beach, and, being inhabited by shipwrights, it presents at all times a scene of
bustle and activity that is sought in vain elsewhere. Quite a raft of logs was moored
near, and from dawn till dusk the blows of the stone axe never ceased. We saw them
commence a canoe. Four men worked at it in pairs, facing each other on the same side
of the log, and chopped alternately, the second blow invariably detaching a good-sized
chip. Three or four canoes in various stages of completion were lying near, with men
at work on them. One man was specially employed in carving and ornamenting the ends,
his tools being a spike nail and piece of wood for a mallet. Others were charring the
canoes inside and out, preparatory to launching, and all but the children were busily
employed. They appear still to prefer their own primitive tools to the axe and tomahawk
of European manufacture, at least for canoemaking; but use the latter for clearing
the land and cutting timber for their houses. An attempt has been made to induce
them to cut wood in readiness for the ‘ Ellengowan,’ but so far without much success.
The secret of this people’s industry is their geographical position. Their villages being
on a narrow peninsula, there is very little land available for cultivation, consequently
they must import ail the food they consume. Every third day is a trading day. The
women set off about 2 a.m., some on foot to Kalo, others in canoes, which they pole
round the lagoon to the Dundee River, all with heavy loads of fish and salt water for the
hill tribes. They ascend the Dundee for about two miles, leave their canoes made fast
to the bank, and trudge through swamp, scrub, and forest to the regular market-place,
to which come the hill women with an escort. Having exchanged commodities, they
resume their weary tramp, and it is quite 4 p.m. before they reach home.
“ July 27. —This day was devoted to exploring the salt-water creek that has been
dignified with the name, Dundee River. We left about 6 a.m., and crossed the lagoon,
which is about three miles long and the same in width. On getting to the landing-place
we discovered that we had no fresh water in the boat, which involved a walk of several
miles for a drink. Our native guide, thinking we were on a shooting excursion, led us
by a roundabout way through swamp and pandanus scrub, impassable except by keeping
to the paths, until we began to think he had lost himself. Four miles of walking, some-
times through forest teeming with pigeons, hornbills, and parrots, brought us to a clear
pool of fresh water at the foot of a small waterfall, where we lunched and washed the
mud from our clothes. While resting here, the Kerepunu women returned with their
loads, escorted by two young fellows who scorned to carry anything heavier than a
spear. Their purchases consisted of taro roots too small for food, and probably intended
for planting. By following the women, we reached the boat in two miles, instead of the
four we had travelled.
“ July 29. —Left in a boat for Kalo to instal a native teacher, and were nearly swamped
on the bar of the Kemp Welch. The Chief received us at the landing-place, and led
us to a house, which he placed at our disposal, detailing at the same time one of his
wives to attend to our wants and supply us with food. The scaffold seen on our former
visit was now literally covered with food to the very top of the poles, and the people
were all in holiday attire—the women in parti-coloured grass petticoats and elaborate
headdresses of shells, the men with long streamers of pandanus leaf on their arms and
legs. Good-humour and fun prevailed, and we mingled freely with the people, who
showed us much kindness. In the afternoon we pulled up the river against a strong
current for about three miles, passing several islands covered with cocoanut groves and
plantations. The various channels were blocked with trunks of large trees and debris
washed down by the floods. The bed of the river is gravelly and full of quartz pebbles.
It affords an easy means of reaching the ranges in the interior, as the natives told us if
they left at daylight in their canoes and poled all day, they were at the back of the
range at sundown. The harbour alone excepted, this part of the coast is far better
adapted for settlement than Port Moresby. It offers a fine field for missionary labour;
and it is to be hoped that Mr. Lawes will soon return to take charge of this the most
important district in New Guinea, where he is so well known and esteemed by the
natives. On returning to the mouth of the river, we saw the ‘ Sappho ’in the offing,
steering towards Kerepunu. Just before sundown we were sent for to see a procession
of young men and maidens perambulate the village. About 60 took part in the ceremony,
the men dressed in all the bravery of paradise feathers and necklets of pearl shell, the
women wearing heavy necklaces of dogs’ teeth, with pendants of the same reaching to
their waists. The women walked backwards, beating small drums with a slow mono-
tonous chant, while the young men kept time with their feet and long white wands
covered with streamers and hollow seeds. The party halted before certain houses and
sang, and after reaching the end of the village broke up and dispersed. The greatest
gravity characterised the proceedings, and those who in the morning had been romping


with us now took not the slightest notice of our presence. Returning to our quarters
we found supper prepared by the Chief’s wife, consisting of yams and taro, cooked in
various ways, and small delicious puddings made of sago and scarped cocoanut, baked
in banana leaves. We slept in a room in the upper story, about 40 feet long, into which
we climbed by a short ladder.
“At daylight on July 30 I walked to Kerepunu, and went on board the ‘ Sappho,’
and Captain Digby and his officers being anxious to witness the festivities at Kalo, I
returned Avith them in the steam cutter. It being low water the sea was breaking
heavily on the bar, so that it required considerable nerve to cross, especially as we did
not know the depth of water, and a monster shark was cruising at the back of the first
roller, as if on the look-out for 4 a fresh mess.’ Our landing created little excitement,
as the people seemed to have given themselves up to enjoyment, which not even this
unheard-of influx of foreigners could disturb. While I was away 10 pigs, each weighing
about 3 cwt., were sacrificed with all due ceremony at the foot of the food scaffold, and
a number of young women, in a state of absolute nudity, threw food to the people from
a platform. It appears that at each annual feast the girls Avho have been tattooed since
the last festival are required to perform this duty as evidence of the fact, and I am told
that several seemed overcome with shame at the exposure. Mr. Chalmers tells me these
people have a distinct idea and beautiful conception of a Supreme Being. To them the
Great Spirit is a most beneficent being from whom naught but good is received, while
the spirits of their ancestors are blamed for all evil that befalls them. A good yam
season is the work of the Great Unknown —a drought is caused by malevolent ancestors.
The whole proceedings at this festival seemed to have a religious significance, and it may
be regarded as a thanksgiving for a bountiful harvest. The distribution of food went on
all day to the people of three villages besides Kalo, viz., Papaka (inland from Hulu),
Kamari, and Kerepunu. We estimated that there could not have been less than 30,000
cocoanuts and 500 bunches of bananas, besides yams and sugarcane, on the scaffold
poles. Dancing commenced about dusk, but as there were no fires and lights, and women
principally took part in it, ’twas a very tame affair ; accordingly \ve started a dance, on
our own account, and very soon had by far the largest share of spectators, one of whom,
a very pretty lassie, deftly abstracted a red silk pocket-handkerchief from my belt.
After supper we sat on the platform of our house singing, and were in the middle of
‘ Nancy Lee ’ when a peremptory message arrived from the chief to 4 shut up,’ or his
people would fall sick. We resented this want of appreciation of our vocal talents, and
mildly suggested that it was all the same as their singing in the morning. 4 But,’ said
the Chief, who had come in person, 4 our God is accustomed to our singing, while he
won’t knoAV what to make of your noise, so please stop.’ We all slept at Kalo that night,
and left before daylight for Kerepunu.
“ About a week before the arrival of the ‘ Ellengowau,’ the schooners 4 Pride of the
Logan’ and ‘ Annie’ had been fishing in the bay near Keppel Point, and the latter
vessel had a station on shore. A dispute had occurred between her crew and the natives
about the purchase of some beche-de-mer. Several shots were fired and a native was
wounded in the arm. This rankled in the minds of the people, and three weeks after-
wards the young men from several villages combined to attack the foreigners. The
attack was made on the shore party at midday, but after thrusting a couple of spears
into the cook and standing a few shots they took to their heels. The whites say several
natives were shot and carried off. A night or two afterwards their curing-house was
burnt, with a quantity of provisions and trade, hut Avhether by accident or design is not
known. Both vessels cleared out, not thinking it safe to remain.
44 The district in which these villages are situated is knoAvn as Aroma. It is densely
populated, and therefore important from a missionary point of view. It was at a village
near Keppel Point that Mr. Chalmers nearly lost his life in May last. He had walked
through several villages with only the teacher, Taria, and a Mare native, named Jack, in
Mr. Goldie’s employ, who carried a double-shot gun. Mr. Chalmers saw that the
people were getting excited and that mischief was brewing, so they made for the boat.
There Avere several natives from the cannibal districts among the crowd, and the teachers
heard them consulting as to when they should kill the Dim-dims (foreigners). Finally,
someone suggested that they should wait till they reached the boat, and so capture and
kill the whole party. The clothes and trade were to go to the Aroma people, but the
bodies were to be given to the Orangerie Bay folks to be eaten! They were only kept
back by fear of the gun, and tried hard to induce Jack to fire it off. On reaching the
beach, Mr. Chalmers suddenly threw a quantity of beads amongst the crowd, and all
made a rush for the boat. A howl of disappointed rage arose, and for a few minutes
their position Avas critical, as the Chinese boat’s creAV lost their heads and ailoAved the
K 3


boat to get broadside on to the beach. But they were fortunate enough to get off safely.
It was during this trip that Mr. Chalmers made the acquaintance of Koapena, the Chief
at Keppel Point, whose people afterwards attacked the ‘ Annie.’ This man has great
influence throughout the Aroma district, and is dreaded by the people of Kerepunu.
After considerable difficulty, Mr. Chalmers succeeded in getting a message conveyed to
him, asking him to come to Kerepunu, and we found him there on our return from Kalo.
We took him on board the £ Sappho,’ and confronted him with Captain Webb, of the
‘ Pride of the Logan.’ The Chief gave much the same account of the affray as we had
previously heard. He is a splendid specimen of the ‘ noble savage,’ about 50 years of
age, 6 feet 2 inches in height, and has a determined look that bodes ill for those who
cross his path. He was terribly scared at the man-of-war, but did not betray it further
than by a nervous grip of ray arm, which I had linked in his lest he should make a
sudden leap over the side. After Captain Digby had made him several presents, he took
him on deck to see the crew exercised at general quarters. The rushing to and fro of
the men, the bugle calls and rapid words of command, fairly deprived him of speech, and
when a shell was fired from one of the great guns his legs gave way under him. He left
the vessel with assurances that henceforth there should be peace between his people and
the foreigners. We spent the rest of the day in exploring the Dundee, and, as antici-
pated, found that after about five miles it became a mere ditch, with scarcely water
enough to float a canoe.
“The ‘Sappho’ left on August 1, and Mr. Chalmers and I went in a boat with
Koapena to visit his village Maopa, at Keppel Point. We pulled in to the middle of the
bay, and up a salt-water creek that offered an easier means of reaching the village than
the long pull round the point. This involved passing near the villages that took part
in the recent attack, so we asked Koapena if the people would be likely to cause trouble ?
He was chewing betel at the time, but stopped, and looking fixedly at us for some
moments, said, ‘ What land will give you trouble ? Am not I with you ?’ and brought
his chunam spoon down with tremendous energy on the gourd, as who should say, ‘ I
should like to see anyone attempt it! ’ ‘ But will not these people bear malice against
the foreigners, and attack them if they return here to fish ?’ He replied, with a smile
of peculiar meaning, ‘lf they do, where will they go to live P Will they go up to the
skies? ’ After ascending the creek about three miles, we landed in a mangrove swamp,
and walked to Maopa. We saw here some crabs that reminded us of a story told by a
certain gallant admiral, more remarkable for ingenuity than for his veracity, when
teased by some ladies for a good sea story. ‘ Well, ladies,’ he began, ‘ I was sailing one
‘ day in the Mediterranean in a fine frigate, and bowling along about nine knots, when
‘ suddenly, while writing in my cabin, I felt the ship’s way stopped dead ! “On deck
‘ there !” 1 called out; “ What is the matter?” The lieutenant of the watch put his
‘ head down the hatch, and said, “ A most extraordinary occurrence, Sir; please come
‘ on deck.” I went on deck, and—would you believe it, ladies ?—the sea was literally
‘ alive with lobsters ! So thick were they that they actually stopped the ship’s way.
‘ I walked forward and looked over the bows, and, sure enough, there they were,
4 swimming about in their little red jackets ’ ‘ Why, admiral!’ exclaimed a lady,
‘ lobsters are not red till they are boiled!’ ‘Oh! d — it (beg pardon, ladies),’ said the
admiral, ‘ I forgot that !’ Now the crabs that we saw had certainly not been boiled, but
for all that their shells were a bright scarlet. After crossing a thin belt of scrub we
came out on a plantation belonging to Koapena, who made us sit down, while his people
got cocoanuts and sugarcane for us. The road lay through a fertile plain for about
five miles to the village, a little outside of which was Koapena’s country house. Here
we rested for a short time on a bed of leaves spread for us, and orders were given to
have food cooked against our return. Nothing could exceed the kindness and attention
of the old Chief. He and another, a sort of henchman, carried us over every little pool
of water or swamp on the road, and he was constantly assuring us that there was no
cause for fear. I flatter myself we felt less than he did on board the ‘ Sappho.’ The
village of Maopo is built between two sandhills, a short distance from the beach, and is
larger than any we have yet seen. The houses are altogether different from those in the
Kerepunu district, having the gables extending several feet above the ridge-pole, giving
a canoe-like appearance to the roof. They are built on piles and are two-storied, but
the upper room extends the whole length of each house, with a short ladder giving
access to it through a kind of trap-door. The ceiling of the lower room in the Chief’s
house was carved in geometrical patterns, and from it hung a number of wooden hooks—
like double harpoons —to suspend things by. Over the doorway, in an inclined position,
as if ready to fall on the heads of intruders, was the Chief’s war club, a stone disc, the
size of a cheese-plate, with a long handle, and at the opposite end was a pile of firewood


neatly stacked. The winter’s supply of yams was stowed away in the upper story, into
which we followed the Chief, away from the prying eyes of his followers, who crowded
the platform below, and there produced our presents. He took down a bundle from
the roof, and undid one wrapper after another until he came to his stock of feather
ornaments, which are only worn on great occasions, and, after long and solemn
deliberation, selected some, which he handed to us as the most precious gifts he had
to bestow. ‘ Put them on,’ said he, ‘ that all the people may know you are my friends.’
Thus decorated, we marched through the village, and found it, like Kalo, kept very
clean around the houses. After resting some time, we returned to Koapena’s country
house, where a dinner of taro and yams was served. These people, although so near
Kerepunu, have not yet learned to use tobacco; but the old chief took an occasional
whiff from our pipes, by way of impressing his followers. Koapena and a number of
his people accompanied us back to the boat, and we regretted being unable to spend
more time with him. I believe we have secured a valuable and powerful friend in this
Chief, and trust no new unpleasantness between the beche-de-mer fishers and the natives
will occur to mar the present relations. With Koapena’s assistance, it ought not to be
a very difficult matter to cross New Guinea to Huon Gulf, and with Mr. Chalmers for
a companion lam ready at any time to make the attempt. It was sundown when we
reached the boat, and 11 p.ra. before we arrived at Kerepunu.
“ During our absence a Rarotongan teacher, who had long been ill of consumption,
died. A new canoe was bought from the natives to serve as a coffin, and the ends being
sawn off and a lid fitted, it formed a tolerable substitute. The poor fellow was buried
the following morning at the foot of a shady tree, on a hill overlooking the sea; and
this being the first funeral of a foreigner, the whole population turned out to see the
ceremony. The children swarmed up the tree, and perched upon every overhanging
branch. We feared some accident would happen. The natives kept remarkably quiet
throughout the service, and sharply rebuked the youngsters for chattering.
“ It is melancholy to think of the number of good men who have been sacrificed since
the commencement of the New T Guinea mission. These poor fellows were brought from
their pleasant island homes in a delightful climate, dropped here and there along an
unhealthy coast, and left to their fate until it was convenient, for the c Ellengowan ’ to
visit them. If the place proved healthy, well and good ; if otherwise, their places were
supplied by fresh arrivals. Their pay is 15/. a year, out of which they have to clothe
and feed themselves, build houses, and buy land to cultivate. In an unhealthy climate
like this, men require something more than cocoanuts and yams to support life; and
these teachers ought to be supplied with meat, flour, tea, and sugar. They are the
true heroes of the mission, but at the May meetings at Exeter Hall who hears their
names ?
“ I have, &c.,
“ To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary,
“ Brisbane.”
HENRY M. CHESTER.
“The Sydney Morning Herald,” Wednesday, September 25, 1878.
New Guinea.
The following are additional reports from Mr. Chester, dated respectively three and
seven days later than the one we published on Tuesday, and for which we are indebted
to the “ Brisbane Courier
“ Sir, Stacey Island, South Cape, August 30.
“ Continuing my report of 27th instant, I have the honour to inform you that
I left Kerepunu on 3rd idem. The cruise along the coast offered little worthy of
remark. We anchored at Grange Island, Amazon Bay, Dufaure Island, Port Dudfield,
and Meikle Bay, and had intercourse with the natives. Those at Amazon Bay were
the most miserable specimen we had seen. They build their villages on the tops of
almost inaccessible crags for fear of their enemies from Toulon Island, who come across
to the mainland to plant, leaving their women in charge of two or three men only.
This gave rise to the report that there was a district in New Guinea inhabited solely
by women, hence the name Amazon Bay. We procured specimens of Masooi bark
there, and the natives say there is plenty of it. Mr. Chalmers and I went on shore
everywhere and made presents to the Chiefs. The canoes crowded round the vessel, and
hoop iron was in great demand, but the specimens of arms and ornaments offered for sale
K 4


were scarcely worth picking up. Between Orangerie Bay and South Cape are several
snug coves almost landlocked, which offer good shelter for small craft trading on the
coast. These appear to have escaped notice when the ‘ Basilisk ’ surveyed the coast.
There are no mission stations between Kerepunu and South Cape, but the hiatus will
he supplied on the arrival of the ‘John Williams’ in October. Arrived at South Cape
on August 10, and put up in Mr. Chalmers’ house, which is situated on the north side
of the island, facing the mainland. It is built close to the beach and in the centre of
the village, which is but a small one, at the foot of a hill 900 feet high. Although the
station has only been formed eight months, there is more land under cultivation than in
any station I have visited, and everything seems flourishing. The pumpkin and pawpaw
are well known in the south-east peninsula, and Mr. Chalmers has introduced a number
of vegetables and fruit, the seeds of which are eagerly sought after by the natives. Peri,
the teacher from Boera, will live in the memory of the New Guinea natives when most
of the European missionaries are forgotten. He is known from Boera to South Cape,
and along the shores of the Papuan Gulf, as the introducer of the sweet potato, which
bears his name. Peri-mota Show (Stacey Island) was selected as a mission station, with
a view to health, otherwise the people of the mainland are far preferable to live amongst.
The natives are very jealous of others holding intercourse with the mission, and, although
an insignificant tribe, appear to have considerable influence, through alliances with their
more powerful neighbours. The women are particularly ill-favoured, and might well
have suggested the idea of ‘ ghouls in a graveyard ’to the Arabian novelist. A night or
two after our arrival we heard an unusual talking in the village, and on going down to
learn the cause found the son of the Chief addressing an audience of two small boys and
a woman with great volubility on the fearful enormity of cannibalism; but, as Jack
Bunsby puts it, ‘ The bearing of the case lies in the application of it.’ He had no
sentimental horror of cannibalism in the abstract; he merely objected to becoming the
subject. It appears that a day or two previous a respectable father of a family departed
this life, and the widow being inconsolable for his loss, and determined that even in
death they should not be divided, dug up the remains on the day of the funeral and ate
them ! His speech was something to this effect: ‘ Oh, ye people of Show, what kind
‘of women are these who eat their own relations P If we permit this kind of thing we
‘ shall have them eating us after death. Let us kill them first, or, stay, let us banish
‘ them to the country of the Dim-dims. Begone! ’ His wife was also very energetic
in protesting, but as she had not been invited to the feast 1 mistrust the sincerity of her
convictions. The Show women were particularly venomous after the attack on the
‘ Mayri.’ They tried their very utmost to goad the men into attacking the siation on
shore, and when they found it impossible to screw their men’s courage to the sticking-
point they brought their shields out from their houses, and smashed them with every
mark of opprobrium and contempt. Long after the men made friends the women
avoided the station, and some are only now beginning to frequent the house. The
eagerness of these people for hoop iron causes them to work willingly in planting, house-
building, and cutting wood for the steamer. A piece of iron six indies or eight inches
long is considered a fair equivalent for a good day’s work, while red cloth and beads will
purchase food in any quantity. lamat a loss to discover whether a pig, a canoe, or a
human life is the most valuable. The same article will purchase the two first and atone
for the other, namely, a pair of shell armlets. The balance of evidence, however, is in
favour of the latter, as the deceased will probably have relatives, who must all receive
compensation. Stacey Island is favourably situated for holding intercourse with strangers
from other islands. The fame of ‘ Tamate ’ (Mr. Chalmers’ native name) has been noised
abroad, so that people from China Strait, and even from the Louisiade Archipelago,
visit him.
“ On the evening of August 13, having completed our arrangements for a walk
across the peninsula to Milne Ba}', which Mr. Chalmers had long contemplated, we went
over in a boat to Yarauru, a village in Catamaran Bay, from whence we were to obtain
carriers. We were met on the beach by the whole population, and escorted to the
Chief’s house, who was sitting in state to receive us with his son-in-law. ‘ Keep silence,
everybody,’ he cried out. ‘The great Chiefs are with me; let their voices alone be
heard.’ He then busied himself in looking after our gear, and seeing it carefully stowed
away in his house. After the usual inspection by the women and children, we withdrew
and arranged our camp for the night. The houses in this village, and indeed those of
all this part of the country, resemble those described at Maopa, but are much smaller
and have only one story. The portion devoted to the women was at the end farthest
from the door or entrance, and partitioned off by a sort of screen about two feet high.
Close to this was a fireplace, round which was a neat framework resembling a miniature


lift. From it depended a couple of loops of cord, in which our host was wont to sling
his heels in order to toast his nether extremities. Before retiring to rest everything was
arranged for an early start, and the old man Quiani seemed anxious to set off; but
about midnight he awoke us, and in a most lugubrious voice told us he had dreamt a
dream. Be droned away for about half an hour, the burthen of his song being the
terrors of the road we were to travel. He dreamt that the rain fell in torrents; thunder
and lightning worse than had ever been experienced was incessant; and, to crown all,
Mamoose (myself) and the China boy knocked up on the mountains, and could neither
proceed nor return. I thought this portion of the dream not unlikely of fulfilment, for
I had been leading a sedentary life for three years past, and was in no condition for
climbing mountains, but kept my thoughts to myself. ‘ Now that I have told you my
dream, will you still venture? ’ ‘ Certainly, old boy ; go to sleep, and let us do likewise.’
With a long-drawn sigh he fell back on his wooden pillow, and we fondly hoped we had
done with him, but at 2 a.m. he was as brisk as ever, calling out to us to get up, as a
new day had begun. It was impossible to be angry with the old fellow, so we made the
best of it, and sat talking by the fire till daylight. This affords an opportunity for a
sketch of the old Chief. He is about 60 years of age and 5 feet 7 inches in height, but
as wiry and active as a young man. His bald bullet head, seamed with scars, and little
twinkling eyes, gives a most comical expression to his face, in which, even when excited,
there is nothing of that ferocity one has been accustomed to associate with cannibals.
He is not only a great Chief, but a renowned sorcerer, with a reputation extending far
beyond the limits of his tribe. After the attack on the Mayri, wiien the sorcerers of
Show were compassing the destruction of the mission by all the spells known to them,
Quiani upset their machinations, and turned the tide of popular favour in the other
direction, since which he has proved a firm and useful friend.
“ As soon as it was light enough to see the loads were apportioned to the carriers,
not without the shirking and shifting usual on such occasions. Finally, everything was
shouldered by 6 o’clock, except our stock of hoop iron, weighing about 36 lbs. No one
would undertake this, and in an evil hour, thinking to shame them into picking it up,
Mr. Chalmers and I slung it on a pole and carried it’between us. A shout of laughter
greeted this performance, and the procession started. I began to think we had let
ourselves in for a good thing, when the Chief called a halt, and two able young fellows
coming forward relieved us of this awful nightmare. Our party now consisted of
Mr. Chalmers, three teachers, my Chinese servant, myself, and 20 carriers, five of
whom were women. We started at a brisk pace througii fig-tree scrub, up one ridge
and down another, past waterfalls with deep pools at the bottom of gorges, into which
the sun seldom penetrates, until about 11 a.m., when we came out on a river rushing
over a bed of shingle which falls into Catamaran Bay. We spelled here 10 minutes,
hut Quiani would not let us boil the kettle, saying we had still a long way to travel.
Now began the hardest travelling I ever experienced. We crossed and recrossed this
river some 20 times, the depth and current increasing with each occasion. At times
the bed of the river afforded the only practicable road. With cramps in the legs from
walking all day in water I trudged painfully along, sitting down occasionally to empty
the gravel from ray shoes, and devoutly wishing for the sight of a cocoanut tree to
indicate a village at hand. At length I was fairly exhausted, and sat down by the side
of a brook at the foot of a steep range. One good fellow, named Berigi, son-in-law to
Quiani, stuck by me and encouraged me to proceed. An artist of the tribe has per-
petuated this man’s features in ebony in the form of a chunara spoon, which I shall ever
retain as a memorial of a genial old cannibal, who, though bearing a striking resemblance
to the popular idea of ‘ Auld Clootie,’ I found a good-natured fellow and capital company.
By 3 p.m. I gained the top of the lange, and found the whole party camped there. It
was a spur of the Cloudy Mountain Range, 2,700 feet above sea level, and not more
than seven or eight miles from the sea in a direct line, although it had taken us nine
hours to reach it. Quiani insisted on our going on, but I considered I had done enough
for a first day, and determined to camp where I was. At length it was arranged that
Mr. Chalmers and the main body should press on to the village, leaving Berigi and two
more to camp with the teachers and myself. The top of the ridge was only a few yards
wide, and afforded barely sufficient ground for a camp. While waiting for the moon to
rise, Berigi suddenly declared he saw an old woman of the tribe who had died sometime
before, and commenced throwing fire-sticks on each side of the range to drive her away ;
but this not having the desired effect, he asked us to fire off' our guns, after which we had
peace. A light rain fell at intervals all night, hut we were too tired to mind that. At
daylight we found that, although we had the cooking utensils, the food had gone on.
We made tea with the milk of a cocoanut in the absence of water, and then began the
1! G 853. L


descent of the range, passing through plantations of taro surrounded by stout log fences,
until we came to a river which the natives say falls into a large lagoon at the head of
Orangerie Bay. Crossed an affluent of this, and rested a short time at a village of three
or four houses on the bank. The proper camp was at a larger village three miles further
on, and all the people had gone there, taking two pigs with them. After about three
hours’ travelling we reached the village of Diodio, where we spent the remainder of the
day and dried our things. Quiani came out strong here. He put on all his war paint
and ornaments, and regularly took charge of the village. Flourishing a big knife, he
marched up and down before the Chief’s house, where we were camped, and gave the
people to understand that the Dim-dims were his friends, and he would like to see
anyone disturb them. His excitement and energy were something wonderful for an old
man, and now and then he would whisper to us, with a comical wink, ‘ These people will
look upon me as a very great Chief.’ Everything was paid for through Quiani with
hoop iron, heads, and red cloth; in fact, be got everything lie asked for, and lavished
presents on his friends. All day the women were busy cooking, and in the evening
12 large pots filled with taro were placed before us, any one of which was a meal for
10 people ; but eventually it all disappeared, in addition to the two pigs. These people
showed better taste than those of Kalo, for they were continually pressing us to sing.
‘ Dana, uana ’ (Sing, sing) was perpetually in their mouths. Altogether we spent a very
pleasant time, and gave them cause to remember our visit for years to come.
“ August 16. —Started about 6 a.m., and travelled through a large plain covered with
dense fig-tree scrub for about eight miles, crossed two rivers, both falling into the lagoon,
and passed through three villages, breakfasting at the last. The road then hjy through
the bed of the second river for several miles. We had to clamber over boulders slippery
with moss, and pick our way carefully through a rapid stream, where a false step meant
a dislocated ankle or perhaps a broken bone, until we began to think we had done a fair
da\' ! s work; but here, as on the first day, a lofty range Heed us, which must be sur-
mounted before we could enjoy rest. The aneroid showed a height of 360 feet at the
foot of the mountain, and after a toilsome steep ascent we gained the summit, 3,360 feet
above sea-level. Pandanus trees, with roots 20 feet long, and large fig-trees with the
fruit growing in clusters on the trunk as well as on the branches, clothed the slopes and
crest of the range, which, like the first, was only a few yards wide. It was now 4 p.m.,
and we had been travelling 10 hours, so we arranged to camp here. But the day’s
work was not yet over for Mr. Chalmers. Word was brought that one of the teachers
had been taken ill half-way up the mountain, and he hurried down with brandy and
medicine to his assistance. Finally the teacher was carried up to the camp by the
natives, with frequent halts and relays of bearers. Quiani was very much concerned,
and said, ‘Did not 1 tell you the mountains were very difficult to cross, and that you
would never do it? and now I shall get into trouble for bringing sickness to the people.’
Saying this he seated himself beside the sick man, and commenced a series of incan-
tations, occasionally whispering and blowing into his chunum gourd and corking it
up, until at length he arose and expressed himself satisfied that no danger was to be
feared.
“ August 17- —It was most unfortunate that a thick mist obscured the view from the
top of the range at sunrise, as we hoped to have been able to see the level country and
the lagoon at the head of Orangerie Bay. Two hours of easy descent brought us to a
village on the brow of a hill 2,300 feet above and overlooking the head of Milne Bay,
where we halted for breakfast. A pig was purchased for four pieces of hoop iron and
a fantail tomahawk, and the Chief, seizing a spear, began walking up and down in an
excited manner as if about to attack us, but turning suddenly as the pig was borne past
on a pole he plunged the spear into its heart, and went on talking as if nothing had
happened. The women at this village were better-looking than those wc had hitherto
seen, and are not disfigured by tatooing. Instead of blackening themselves from head
to foot as a sign of mourning, they cover the breasts with a fringe of long grass hanging
from the neck. We noticed a pretty monument over a recent grave, consisting of a
miniature house constructed to scale and neatly finished, with carved wood sides orna-
mented with colours. Heavy clouds rested on the Stirling Range, and it was becoming
evident that if our journey had been delayed a couple of days it would never have been
made. A Scotch mist made the hill-sides slippery, and settled into a steady downpour
as we started. The talking and feasting at this village, added to the fatigue he had
previously undergone, began to tell upon the old sorcerer, and I was rather pleased to
see it, as the pace was not quite so hot as it had been. He assured us there were no
more hills to climb, and, after a difficult descent, we rested on a small island in a river,
expecting to reach Discovery Bay that evening. A long consultation took place, when,


with a grave face, Quiani informed us that there was a village a little off the road with
which he was at feud, and what better time could there be for making peace that) when
the Dim-dims were with him ? In vain we stormed and refused to hear of such a thing;
he had an answer for every objection. At last Mr. Chalmers thought he had clenched
the matter by saying, ‘ If we go to this village we shall have to part with the hoop iron,
&c., reserved for Vako-Vako (our last halting-place).’ ‘Oh,’ said Quiani, ‘is that all
that troubles you ? Fear not! I will bear all the expenses.’ Then began a number of
incantations to ensure a favourable reception. He scraped a quantity of cocoanut into
a shell, and the whole party anointed their heads and faces with it, and plunged into the
stream to wash it off. They next mixed some black pigment in a shell, and painted
their faces in various devices, while the old sorcerer mounted his favourite necklace of
shell, with a huge boar’s tusk attached, and put on his shell armlets and feathers. We
preserved a sulky silence all this time, and when the word to march was given sternly
bade him take the road to Vako-Vako. After about an hour’s travelling we w T ere dis-
gusted to find another small range to climb, and forced the old rascal to confess that
he was off the right track. There was nothing for it but to submit, as evening was
approaching, and right glad we were to make a village at last. We marched in with due
solemnity, having previously been assigned our places in the procession. The people
of the village had notice of our approach, and were seated round a circle of stones under
a cocoanut tree. A shout of welcome greeted our party, but no one rose. We made
the circuit of the stones, and then by Quiani’s direction seated ourselves within the circle.
He threw down his tomahawk with great force at the feet of the Chief, and Berigi did
the same with two pieces of hoop iron. These were evidently a peace-offering, or com-
pensation for some old cause of complaint. A grey-headed woman of the tribe then
came forward and embraced Quiani, and the Chief of the village started up and began a
promenade, brandishing a large club. Peace having been thus happily concluded, our
wants were attended to. A pig was killed, taro baked, and very soon silence reigned in
the camp, dhe house given us for our use was probably that occupied by the young
unmarried men. There were no women’s compartments in it, and at each end, in a kind
of rack, about fifty spears were arranged ready for instant use. In all these houses the
ends extend an inch or two below the floor to prevent the inmates being speared in their
sleep, and it is necessary to crawl in on the hands and knees. It was situated at the
edge of steep cliff overlooking Discovery Bay and the village of Vako-Vako. The
Chief’s wife wept bitterly for the death of her pig, which was sacrificed to entertain us,
but did not object to partake of it. It is a common thing in this part of New Guinea
to see women nursing the young pigs. Our carriers were in clover here, and wished us
to remain; but we started on the morning of August 18, and after dn hour’s travelling
arrived at Vako-Vako, a large village in Discovery Bay. It had been arranged that the
‘ Ellengowan ’ was to call here on the 19th, in case w T e were unable to continue our
original programme, which was to walk to Orangerie Bay, and thence to Farm Bay.
The Vako-Vako people were at war with the villages on the road, and this of itself
was sufficient to upset our plans ; but two days’ consecutive rain had so flooded the
country as to make travelling impossible. The Chief, Buniara, gave us a house to live
in, and did his best to make us comfortable; but the rain and swarms of blowflies
destroyed the pleasure we should otherwise have had. Crowds of natives flocked to
see us, and were never tired of examining our skins and feeling our limbs, speculating
the wdiile how T we should eat, until I began to feel like one of the plates in
Mrs. Acton’s cookery-book—marked out in joints. They baked a dog for us as
a great treat, and were quite disappointed that we did not partake of it. They began
to weary of us when the steamer did not come in, as expected, on the 10th, and hinted
that she was not coming at ail, upon which Quiani said, ‘ Never mind, there are
‘ 23 war canoes in my district, and if the steamer dees not come I will send for them
‘ to fetch you away.’ Thus we had crossed the peninsula (in about 60 miles), from
South Cape to Milne Bay, through a population of cannibals, and had seen more of their
domestic life than falls to the lot of most people. Our progress throughout was a royal
march, and we felt as safe as if in our own houses. We were virtually unarmed, for the
natives carried my firearms, and throughout the journey not a single article w 7 as stolen.
Our trip may not have been rich in scientific results, but at least we have demonstrated
that it is possible to travel amongst savages and cannibals in New Guinea without
resorting to coats of mail, explosive bullets, or dynamite. As for the road, I do not
think there is a square yard of ground in the country, even in the plains, upon which
to set the foot without treading on the buttress of a fig-tree, a root, or a boulder. I
have crossed a range in Oman, on the coast of Arabia, 10,000 feet high, the Lebanon,
and the sources of the Euphrates and Tigris, but never did I encounter such difficult
L 2


country. lam indebted to Mr. Chalmers for the opportunity; for, without his assist-
ance, and the confidence with which he has inspired the natives, the journey could never
have been accomplished.
“ The ‘ Ellengowan ’ arrived on August 20, remaining till the following morning.
A pig weighing 2 cwt. was purchased for 10 pieces of hoop iron, a tomahawk, and
knife, and more presents were distributed. Some of our carriers, in attempting to
recross the mountains, were nearly swept away by the swollen torrents, so they con-
cluded to return in the steamer. On August 21 we crossed Milne Bay to East Cape.
There are two Loyalty Island teachers here, but I question whether the place is suffi-
ciently healthy for them to remain. Next day we steamed through China Strait
to Dinner Island, on -which there are a few cocoanut trees, but no inhabitants.
Mr. M‘Farlane has purchased it from the natives of Heath Island, and employed a
number of them to clear it, with a view to forming a healthy central mission station.
There are two teachers on Heath and two on Tesle Island, all from the Loyalty Group.
It is to be hoped for the sake of the inhabitants of Moresby Island (Basilaki) that a
teacher will soon be sent there. I have christened this island the Victualling Yard, as
it serves as a sort of depot for fresh provisions for the people of China Strait and the
mainland. If a human victim is required for a feast, they make a raid on Basilaki,
and generally succeed in capturing one or more. Should any of them be caught at
sea in their canoes, they are invariably killed and eaten ; but, being a weak tribe, they
are powerless to reciprocate these little araenites. We left Mr. M’Farlane at Dinner
Island, and reached Luow the same day. It has rained almost without intermission
since August 20, and in consequence w r e have been unable to visit the villages in Farm
and Catamaran Bays. These people have always borne an evil reputation, and the
specimens we have seen at Luow have not impressed us -with any great liking for them;
but these are only stronger reasons for going amongst them, and we regretted being
deprived of the opportunity.
“ Our recent cruise will have dispelled the prevailing idea that. New Guinea is a
country solely inhabited by savage races with whom it is impossible to hold intercourse,
and that annexation is an easy matter. These people cannot be dispossessed of their
country as easily as the aborigines of Australia. They have vested interests and rights
that cannot be disregarded ; but I am sanguine that the day is not far distant when
this land will be opened up to the markets of Manchester and Sheffield. Copra in large
quantities may be procured in the districts of Hula and Aroma, and masooi, bark, cedar,
and ebony in the south-east peninsula.
“ It is remarkable that an agricultural people who do not eat human flesh should be
‘ sandwiched in,’ as it were, between the cannibal inhabitants of the western shores of
the Papuan Gulf and Orangerie Bay, in the south-east peninsula. Thanks to Mr. Lawes,
we are better acquainted with the legends of the Port Moresby district than those of any
other portion of New Guinea, east of the 141st meridian. According to these they are
the conquering race, who are gradually displacing the cannibals on the coast. The
Kercpunites, again, are a different race, and are said to resemble the people of Eastern
Polynesia. Mr. Chalmers kindly translated for me the following legend as told in
Rarotongan, by Peri’s wife, who had heard it from the people of Boera. Ages ago
Port Moresby produced food in abundance, but a quarrel arose, which resulted in a
secession of one-half of the tribe, and from that time the sago palm and cocoanut tree
gradually died out. About this time fire, which was previously unknown, was brought
to them by a dog. The people had noticed a brilliant light at night and thick smoke
by day in a large canoe becalmed off their coast, and knew not what it was. In those
days they lived on intimate terms with the birds ami animals, and could converse with
them. The turtle first volunteered to fetch news concerning this strange light, but
failed in the attempt. The pigeon next tried, but fell exhausted into the sea while
returning with a flaming brand. The dog then offered his services. He boarded the
canoe, and saw water boiled and food cooked by this mysterious light. Watching his
opportunity, he jumped overboard with a brand in his mouth, and swam ashore in safety
with his prize. He taught the people how to use the fire and to cook their food ; but
they forgot, in time, the benefits conferred by the dog, and treated him with ingratitude,
so he revenged himself by biting the people, and fomented the quarrel which led to the
dispersion of the tribe. Those who remained at Port Moresby were reduced to the
verge of starvation, but eventually their brethren, taking compassion upon them, taught
them the art of making pottery, and sold sago to them in exchange for earthenware pots.
Should small trading vessels visit the coast the following simple directions for their
guidance may be found useful:—
f< Keep the bulk of your trade out of sight, and if in a small vessel do not allow the


natives on board. Pay scrupulously for everything you receive, and if the owner/is not
satisfied return the article offered for sale. In all our traffic with them we never met
with a single instance of dishonesty in trading. Should anything be stolen, do not
resort to firearms, but stop the trading, and in most cases the missing article will be
restored. As Mr. Lawes remarks, ‘ Confidence begets confidence,’ and our experience
has abundantly proved this truth. Respect their women, and avoid , all excitement.
Having ascertained who are Chiefs, give them small presents ; but Chiefs will multiply
in an extraordinary manner if discretion is not used. It is a good plan to give presents
of beads to women with children in arms. Do not be over-confident, even though the
natives appear unarmed ; it is astonishing how soon they are supplied with weapons
in the event of a row. If a disturbance takes place on board while any of your party
are on shore, on no account fire a gun, but hoist a flag previously agreed upon.
“American tomahawks, tobacco, and knives are required to trade with the people
from Yule Island to Keppel Point. Stout hoop-iron about eight inches long, red cloth,
beads, and looking-glasses will pass current on the rest of the coast, although fan tail
tomahawks and knives are in great request. In an appendix I give a list, kindly
furnished by Mr. Chalmers, of most articles of food or commerce, in the dialects of
Port Moresby and Dauni, a knowledge of which will facilitate operations. Traders who
deal honestly and kindly by the natives may be sure of meeting with every assistance
from the missionaries and teachers, notwithstanding the prevailing impression that they
are interested in keeping strangers out of the country.
“ Since leaving Murray Island we have visited 26 villages and slept at 10.
We have invested 20 chiefs with the ‘ Order of the Red Nightcapbut Quiani
is Knight Grand Cross, and Berigi K.C. of the order. Perhaps the person best known
by repute on the New Guinea Coast, from Port Moresby to South Cape, after Peri,
is the late proprietor and editor of the ‘ Cook town Herald’ through a clever mechanical
toy, rejoicing in the euphonious name of the ‘double jubilee gymnasts!’ which he gave
to Captain Redlich, and which we secured. Wherever we went crowds flocked to sec
the extraordinary contortions of ‘ Missi Bayli,’ as it was called. We also constructed
a telephone with two jam tins and a couple of iguana skins, which afforded great
amusement to the people of Suow.
“ Finally, I have to express my thanks to the committee of the New Guinea Mission
for the readiness with which they granted me a passage in the ‘ Ellangowan,’ and for
the many kindnesses I have received from them during the cruise.
“ 1 have, &c.,
“HENRY M. CHESTER.
“ The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.”
“ Sir, Stacey Island, South Cape, September 6, 1878.
“ Since closing ray report of the 30th ultimo, Mr. M’Farlane has kindly furnished
me with the following particulars regarding the proceedings of the Brooker islanders
and mutineers since the murder of M’Court’s party and capture of their vessel. Being
in possession of firearms and a large quantity of ammunition, they have become a terror
to the people in China Straits and neighbouring islands, as well as a source of danger
to the native teachers stationed there. A canoe from an island in the Engineer’s Group,
calling on a friendly visit at Brooker Island, had 10 men killed. Shortly after they
shot the sister of the chief of Teste Island. They next went across in two of the
‘Retrieve’s’ boats to St. Aignan Island and killed a man, but were driven oft* with the
loss of a boat and six muskets. Sometime afterwards the teachers from Teste Island
went with the natives in their canoes to Lydia Island, and while there the Chief of the
island in the Engineer’s Group, whose people were shot, also arrived. Seeing the
teachers, and naturally supposing them to be one with the foreigners who killed his
people, he wished to kill them in retaliation, but the Lydia Chief protected them.
“ The leader is a man called Sam, and unless his career is cut short there may be
serious trouble in store for the teachers of the London Missionary Society who are
scattered amongst the islands.
“ There is no doubt that the murder of M’Court’s party was the result of their own
misconduct, and that it was planned their own men and carried out with native
assistance. If it is not considered desirable under the circumstances to punish the
mutineers and murderers, it is at least imperative that the firearms should be recovered
or destroyed without the loss of time. They have already proved disastrous to tribes
hitherto friendly, and may yet be more so to unwary traders visiting these islands.
“It would be an easy matter, I am told, to secure the ringleaders in the affair with
L 3


the assistance of the teachers and people of Teste Island ; in fact, the latter are only
awaiting a favourable opportunity to take vengeance for the murder of their Chiefs sister,
“ I have, &c.,
“HENRY M. CHESTER.
“ The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.
Appendix.
In the following list of words, as in all proper names in my report, the Italian vowel
sounds are used, being the plan adopted by the New Guinea mission :
English. Port Moresby. Dauni.
Water - - Lanu - - Goird
Cocoanuts - - Niu - - - Niu
Banana - - Piku - - Asae
Sago ... Rapia - - - Rapia
Taro - - Taro - - Udo
Yams ... Mao - - - Apoi
Pigs - - Poroma - - Poro
Tomahawk -11 a - Revareva
Knife - - Kaid - - Nigo
Hoop iron - - Italia - - - Gourigouri
Fishhook - - Kunai - - Aure
Needle - Turituri - - Din
Looking-glass - Varivari - - Ilu
Beads - - Akeva - - - Bordimdim
Red cloth - - Tapua-kaka - Upu
Spear - - lo - - - Arabia
Shield - - - Kesi - - - Opea
Club - - Kahi - - Putuputu
Sword - Kareva - - - Erepa
Paddle - - Ote - - Nose
Canoe - - - Yauaki - - Yaka
Bowl - - Tihu - - Gaeba
Armlets - - Toea - - - Kaviviie
Basket - - Ilaiala
Net bag - - Kiapa - - Marra
Pottery - - Uro - - - Gureva
House - - - Luma - - Numa
Massoi bark - ... Goobu
Ebony - Gahi
Native mahogany - ... Pauri
Cedar - - - Nara - - Ivini
N.B.—The district of Dauni extends from Orangerie Bay to South Cape. The
Port Moresby dialect will be understood in the Kerepunu district.
“The Sydney Morning Herald,” Tuesday, September 24, 1878.
New Guinea.
Brisbane, Monday.
The “ Ellangowan ” (s.), with Mr. Chalmers, arrived on Saturday from Karripuna
and Hula, New Guinea. She left there on the IQth, and did not visit Port Moresby.
She brings no news from the prospectors. Mr. Chalmers says that the mission teachers
at Hula took refuge with a friendly tribe, where their lives are safe for the present.
Three other natives are reported to have been killed near Port Moresby. The
“ Pride of Logan ” and “ Oscar,” beche-de-mer fishing near Hula, are all right. The
“ Ellangowan ” made the trips to and from New Guinea, including two days’ detention,
in seven days. She remains here for repairs, having experienced heavy weather during
her return trip. From further particulars it appears that Mr, Chalmers, having heard
of trouble at the mission station at Hula, about 60 miles east of Cape Moresby,


left Cooktown in the “Ellangowan” on the 14th, and returned on Saturday night,
Re states that the native teacher at Hula reported that two diggers had shot a native
for stealing a tomahawk, and burned him. The natives threatened the teacher, believing
that the men were connected with the missionaries, and said he must suffer. The
young men attacked his house, speared his pig, and destroyed his plantation.
Mr. Chalmers called a meeting of the Chiefs, and explained that the missionaries have
nothing to do with the diggers and beche-de-mer parties, and had no part in the late
murder. The Chief blamed his young men for the attack on the teacher, and said
they would protect him as a beloved child, and that the first to mpiest him should die.
At Kerepuna Mr. Chalmers heard that four natives had been shot at Port Moresby.
No. 27.
ACTING HIGHT COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS
BEACH, BART. (Received December 23, 1878.)
Sir, Levuka, 14th October 1878,
In continuation of my letter of 16th September*, I have now the honour to
report that I have received from the Commodore the letter of 20th September, a copy
of which is annexed, covering a reportf from Commander Digby, which is likewise
appended.
2. It will be seen from these documents that Commander Digby reports very
unfavourably of the prospects of the expeditions to New Guinea, and that his opinion
of the climate is likewise the reverse of favourable.
3. While I would not be disposed to give credence to travellers who represent New
Guinea or anywhere else as a terrestrial paradise, I would be as little inclined to come
to a hasty conclusion adverse to the country.
4. Anyone may be unfortunate in the season for visiting a new country. I heard, for
example, in Australia that Fiji was a land of perpetual rain and great unhealthiness,
whereas for two years there has been a general complaint of drought, and there is no
peculiar unhealthiness in the Colony. It is, in fact, an exceptionally fine climate.
5. By the same mail I find from the Sydney newspapers that the Rev. Mr. Chalmers
and Mr. Chester, deputed by the Government of Queensland, have gone into the
interior ; and Mr. Chalmers’s letter, which is very favourable to the country, is certain
to stimulate of new the zeal of all the adventurers in Australia. I append the slip from
the newspaper containing the information to which I refer.
6. I have not received any report from Mr. Chester, who, although appointed Deputy
Commissioner for Thursday Island, was not requested to proceed to New Guinea by the
High Commissioner; but the Commodore has very kindly forwarded to me, and I had
already found in the “Queenslander” newspaper, the accompanying printed
from Mr. Chester, which was written prior to his journey into the interior with the
Rev. Mr. Chalmers. Mr. Chester, I observe, signs as “ Judicial Commissioner,” but this
is a mistake.
7. While it may be taken for granted from these reports that no gold has yet been
found in payable quantities, it has been made clear that the natives at the particular
points visited are peaceful and hospitable, and that they are not hostile to the white man
as such, or disposed to resent their presence in the country. As in other Polynesian
islands, the coast tribes will probably be found to be of a different type from other
more savage communities in the interior, but, so far as these explorations have yet
gone, nothing has been more remarkable than the kind and peaceful character of the
natives.
8. Such being the case the obligation is all the greater to take every possible pre-
caution that the existing harmony should not be disturbed, and that, whether British
subjects are to settle on the Island, or simply a commerce opened up with the
natives themselves, efficient measures should be taken now to prevent the peace being
broken.
* No. 25. f See Enclosure in No. 26 page 67.
J See Enclosure in No. 26, pp. 68 to 73.
L 4


9. In the news from IS'ew Biitain, to which I refer in a separate Despatch,* it will be
found how soon the brightest prospects may be over-clouded ; and, I regret to say, when
I find that among the small body of adventurers two have already been committing
criminal assaults upon native women, I cannot regard them in any other light than as
men requiring to be made sensible that they are nut beyond the reach of the law.
10. There can be no doubt, I think, that in the case of attempted rape, in which the
depositions are attached to Captain Digby’s report, the witnesses were attempting to
screen the man in pretending not to know his name. If the requisite steps had been
adopted I doubt not the miscreant would have been discovered, and a proper punishment
might have tended to prevent a repetition of the offence by others. The ineffectual
action in this case contrasts somewhat with the parading of the armed men referred to in
my letter of the 19th August,f to recover a shirt and a bag stolen by the natives.
11. 1 notice also in Mr. Chester’s report a circumstance which occasions me much
anxiety. He says, “ I was an eye-witness of the purchase of a piece of land by
“ Captain Redlick on which he wished to erect a store. The portion bargained for was
“ about an acre and a half of strong unproductive ridsre at the rear of the Mission
“ premises. Eleven persons, including women and boys, claimed the land, and the
“ price agreed upon, about 41. per acre, we divided between them. Several on-lookers
“ immediately offered to sell their lands, but there were no buyers.”
12. If the natives of New Guinea have the same tribal and family organization as
Samoa, the Ellice Group, Fiji, and other Polynesian peoples, they cannot form any
just idea of what a sale of land in our sense means. They have nothing to live on but
the fruits of the soil; and though the temptation of the displayed goods may be too
much for them at the moment, they repent what they 7 have done so soon as they find
that they cannot pluck the bread-fruit and cocoa-nuts as before. They then regard the
white stranger who showed them all the wonderful hatchets and calicoes in a different
light, and he equally entertains sentiments of dislike towards the natives, as iie believes
and feels that they wish to regain possession of the land.
13. On the one hand, there is the benefit which the natives will derive from the intro-
duction of commerce, and which requires, as a condition of its existence, security of
tenure for buildings and certainty of return for outlays. On the other, there is the
certain crop of troubles and disputes from the unequally balanced knowledge of (he
parties, the growth of claims against the natives to be enforced by ships-of-war, and
the consequent insecurity from the very attempts made to make everything secure.
14. I am not prepared at the present moment to suggest what ought to be done,
because we scarcely possess sufficient information as to the actual condition of the tribes
of New Guinea. But in dealing with the settlement of British citizens in a new country
I would certainly 7 be disposed to regard with favour any measures to prevent any
wholesale dispossession of the people of the country of the lands upon which they rely 7
for subsistence.
15. Nothing may seem, on a superficial view, to be more fair than a purchase of land
from natives, and yet nothing be in reality more inequitable, from the different knowledge
of the parties as to the real meaning and necessary result of the transaction.
16. These are questions to be carefully and maturely considered, if possible, on the
spot, along with the no less pressing claims of the maintenance of peace and the extension
of commerce.
17. As to another subject referred to by Mr. Chester, that of the liquor traffic, I
certainly would, from the very outset, make it penal, as in Fiji, to sell liquor to
natives.
18. It will be a difficult matter to make conventions with the numerous petty chiefs
who seem to be the rulers of the country ; but it is a work which ought to be attempted,
not merely with the view to increase the opening for commerce and civilization which
has been made, but to secure, if possible, such an understanding as shall prevent the
natives taking the law into their own hands when any of the whites commit offences.
19- The advisability of a visit to New Guinea appears, therefore, to be as great, if not
as pressing, as before (although 1 must add that I have heard from a passenger from
Sydney by the mail that the latest news was that gold had been discovered in New
Guinea, but 1 have not as yet got any confirmation of the statement) ; and as the same
opportunity could be taken of visiting Duke of York Island and New Britain, treated of
* Not printed.
f No. 22.


in a separate Despatch, I have informed the Commodore that the report of Captain Digby
has not altered my desire to proceed to New Guinea as soon as he can supply me with
a ship, and considers the season of the year the best adapted for the purpose, should 1
not receive from you any instructions of a different tendency in answer to my letters
already sent.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. the (Signed) JOHN GORRIE,
Secretary of State for the Colonies, Acting High Commissioner for
&c. &c. &c. Western Pacific.
Enclosure 1. in No. 27.
Commodore Hoskins to the Acting High Commissioner for Western Pacific.
Sir, “Wolverine,” at Sydney, 20th September 18/8.
In accordance with my letter to you of the 24th August last, I have the honour
to forward herewith copy of Commander Digby’s report* of his proceedings in New
Guinea, dated 20th August 1878, received by me on my return to Sydney on the
12th instant, together with a copy of a telegramf founded on it, which I considered it
desirable to forward to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.
2. You will observe that up to the time of the “ Sappho’s ” departure the relations
of the gold diggers, who appear to be generally a respectable, well conducted set of men,
with the natives, had been quite friendljq and that they were to a great extent dependant
on the good offices of the latter for the means of subsistence when exploring for gold,
while the sickness and privation undergone by the expedition renders it likely that it
will be altogether withdrawn by. the time the bad weather sets in.
3. In conversation with me Commander Digby, who had himself visited the diggers’
camp at Laloki, expressed his conviction that no gold whatever had been found, and
that there was no reason at present to suppose that it would be, the reports to that
effect being spread by storekeepers and other interested persons.
I have, &c.
(Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Commodore.
Sir, H.M.S. “Sappho,” Sydney, 14th September 1878.
I have the honour to enclose depositions made by E. Redlick and P. Minnis,
respecting an assault made on a native woman at Port Moresby.
I have, &c.
Commodore A. H. Hoskins, C.B. A.D.C., (Signed) Noel S. F. Digby,
Senior Officer, &c., &c., Commander.
H.M.S. “ Wolverine.”
Edwin Redlick, being duly sworn, states :
On or about Saturday, the 20th July 1878, as I was returning from the Laloke river
at about 3 p.m., on coming close to the foot of the range I heard shrieks. I turned off
to see what it was, and found a white man on top of a native woman, with a child
standing alongside shrieking. I called out to the man to desist; he jumped up, the
woman ran one way, and he ran a few yards, when he stopped and asked me not to say
anything. I told him that as he had not effected his purpose, I would say nothing this
time, but mark him for the future, or words to that effect. I could identify him if he
was put before me. I have not seen him for a considerable time. The woman was
shrieking and struggling to the utmost of her power.—Dated at the Mission House,
Port Moresby, the 6th day of August 1878.
Declared before me, (Signed) Edwin Redlick.
(Signed) Noel S. F. Digby,
Commander.
* See Enclosure in No. 26, page 67.
■f Enclosure in No. 15.
M
E 6553.


Patrick Minnis, digger, being duly sworn, states :
I came down from the Laloke River with Captain Redlick. While I was holding his
horse I heard screams close to a garden. I saw a white man jump up ; he had fire-arms
in his hand. Captain Redlick was the first to speak. The man came up to Captain
Redlick, and asked him not to say anything about the affair; he. also asked me the same.
I said I did not know T about that, it was a tearful thing endangering men’s lives, and he
should be cautious. I could identify him. I have not seen him since that day. Ido
not know the man’s name, and don’t know whether he is here or not.—Dated at the
Mission Station, Port Moresby, this 6th day of August 1878.
his
(Signed) Patrick x Minnis.
mark
Witness,
(Signed) R. M. Pearson,
Acting Paymaster.
Declared before me,
(Signed) Noel S. F. Digby,
Commander H.M.S., “ Sappho.”
Enclosure 2 in No. 27.
Letter from Mr. Chalmers in “ Town and Country Journal,” Sydney,
14th September 1878.
Latest from New Guinea.
[By Electric Telegraph.]
Cooktown, Thursday. — The missionary steamer “ Ellangowan ” has arrived here with
important news from New Guinea. The Rev. Mr. Chalmers reports as follows:—In
last May I intended to make a trip across the peninsula, but was prevented going from
a large fall of rain. As soon as I returned to the South I found the natives at
Catamaran Bay quite willing and ready to act as guides and bearers, Mr. Chester, the
representative of the High Commissioner of Polynesia, being anxious to join the party.
So with teachers Ngatwaro Pi and Reoboama made it up. They knew nothing of the
country and the people. We had several visits from inland tribes, but they could not
say whence they 7 came. The name of the chief who was to lead the party was Kuavani,
an elderly and staunch friend. Having got all ready we obtained a ship’s boat, and at
four in the afternoon started for Yarawin, Catamaran Bay, arriving after sunset. We
had a right good reception from the people, who shouted with joy and delight when we
landed. We were led up to the chief’s house, where the old gentleman sat in state to
receive the party. He began by saying, “So you have really come to cross the
“ Galravaka.” We replied, “ Yes, we hope you are ready to leave to-morrow morning."
“ Yes ; but do you know that it is a long way off,” said the chief, “ and big mountains
“ and rivers to cross ; good, let us try it.” Some young men close by were very noisy,
and the chief turned to them, saying, “Be quiet; do you not see the great chiefs from
Dimdim are with me, and I wish to hear them speak ?” The party retired early 7, and
the natives were very thick all about us—head and feet, right and left. At two o’clock
in the morning the old chief awoke the party, anxious to relate a dream of his. “In
“ crossing the river some of the party bogged; the rain came on, and there was a
“ dreadful storm of thunder and lightning.” The chief then said, “ Will you really go ?
“ No, you must not go.” Nonsense,” we said, “we must;” and the party tried to
assure him there would be no thunder, and very little rain. The party were afraid
after this that the chief and his people would turn crusty, and leave them in the lurch.
At 5 all were up and preparing to go. We were happy to find the chief all ready.
Shortly after all were off, fifteen men, the chief, his son-in-law Berge, and five women.
From the great kindness of Miss Johnson and the ladies of the Bourke Street Congre-
gational Church, Sydney, we had a good supply of hoop iron and red cloth, hooks, and
other trade. We did not care for a large number. The party 7 travelled along a narrow
belt of level land, swampy, and thickly wooded. We ascended for 200 feet, when we
struck avay ib the south-east across the ridge, soon descending by the side of a very fine
waterfall to the sea level, then along the bed of a stream for some distance. Ascending
on the spur of a cloudy mountain 600 feet, thence down along level ground in a valley.


and the bed of a river through thick hush, until we struck a large river named Gaava, which
flowed away to the south-east, falling into the.seat-at Modena, Catamaran Bay. The
morning was dull and threatening rain. While resting af Gaava it rained a little, and the
natives all threatened to leave us, but they felt re-assured by ms telling them that it was
only a morning shower in the mountains—the breath of the valley returning in rain. We
crossed the river; and the sun shone, and all went shouting with?delight. At a place
where a woman, died long ago, all got a branch, and one was given by the chief to
Mr. Chalmers, and then all the natives ran along beating their feet and legs to prevent
the woman from retarding their progress. It was amusing to see the old chief spitting at
the rain, talking angrily at it, and asking us to exert our powers. There are many
affluents falling into the Gaava, and during the forenoon we were travelling in water
sometimes very swift, running over boulders and along pebbly, beds. Leaving the bed
of the river, we began ascending, and for three hours ascending and descending, the
walk terminating in an indirect ascent of 2,000 feet. We then stood on a ridge of a
cloudy mountain, called Ulruga, 2,700 feet above the sea level. Here we cooked the
first square meal, and thoroughly enjoyed it. The old chief w r as anxious to press on to
the village at the base of the ridge, and insisted on Chalmers accompanying him. The
party then divided, some remaining on the ridge camping, while others proceeded
onwards. It was now 4 o’clock in the afternoon, and still a long way to go, and we had
to run. We went along the ridge some distance, and then on to a spur of the Korapito,
and, descending, struck a river formed by numerous mountain torrents, called Bosariria,
flowing westward into a lagoon at Orangerie Bay. We passed through a small village
called Dunagere, along level land, thick with bush and plantations. At 11 clock we
-entered the chief’s house at Dio Dio, very tired, and glad for a rest. The chief and his
■people were delighted to see us. The excitement was great, and the old chief had a
most attentive audience listening to all he said about the “ wonderful dim dims,”
otherwise foreigners. The whole party were soon stretched on the floor, and slept soundly.
Mr. Chalmers was continually awakened by the old chief talking of the day’s, doing ; and
rthe mighty war canoe, “ Sappho,’’ he described as a floating land with a large population,
which had called at Tuan Stancey Island. At 3 o’clock we were roused by the old chief
saying it was morning. We told him it was early, and to sleep. He replied, “ Why, it is
morning, and talking time, not sleeping time.” After breakfast we started with Yeno
Yeno, chief of Dio Dio, hoping to be led by him to a lagoon* We walked along the
plains, through the thick bush and groves of cocoa-nuts and banana plantations. : We
crossed another large river, the Salrarar, which flows away west and north to a lagoon.
Finally he informed us it was too far, and he must be at home for the arrival of those
who had slept on the mountain. We . asked him to lead us to some hills near, and
we turned and recrossed the river at another place. After a long walk found ourselves
at the back of his house. During the day had visitors from all round. The district
is called Ariba, and comprises eighteen villages, fine rich land, and well watered all
round. It was generally supposed that cocoa-nuts require to be near the sea, but
here are cocoa-nut groves right away inland. They are very large groves, healthy -
looking trees, and covered with fine nuts. There are many large streams fed by torrents
from the range. . All fall into the lagoon, thus accounting for the great rush of water
we found immediately out of the lagoon when we visited it in April, and discovered
flood water as far west as Dufaure Islands. For miles round there is level country, with
thick bush. After the party on the mountain came in, and two pigs;and a quantity of
taro and yams and bananas were brought in with great shouting and blowing, we had
luncheon at a small village on the western bank of a stream called Deona, and proceeded
some miles along the bed, ascending gradually, until we came to where several mountain
torrents met with a small island in the centre. We were now at the. base of the range,
a place where no mountains appear on the chart. A great work was to be accomplished,
but before doing it the mountain spirits must be propitiated. The party were made, to
assemble on a .small island. An old cocoa-nut, which must be carried for the purpose,
was broken and-scraped into a large leaf; several kinds of leaves were then taken and
cut small, and placed alongside the scraped cocoa-nut. The old chief and five, others
sat round mixing all together, chanting in low monotonous tone, . When finished, they
stood up and gave a loud shout; and all, except ‘ourselves and the women,seized some
of the mixture, squeezed it over their heads, chests, and backs, then going into the
stream up to their thighs, stood with their hands closed and uplifted to their mouths.
Some pigs were fastened to poles by the legs, and two ends of the poles placed on cross-
sticks. The chief then took formal possession, and gave orders to spear, clean, and cut
up the pigs, and all were placed in earthenware pots and cooked. It made a splendid
meal. The whites were a great wonder; men, women, and children crowding around,
M 2


examining clothing, legs, and arms. The boots they could not understand; one was
taken off amid great shouting. Our heads were shaken, thumbs placed in their mouths ;
all were awe-stricken. The people are the same as on coast and the islands, speak
the same language, building similar houses, and with the same manner of burying
the dead. Next day we were off at daylight, and passed through several villages
along level land, through thick bush, over several creeks and rivulets, until we came
to a large stream called Bannina, and on to another larger stream. We then went
along this many miles, and then towards a valley leading to a range looking up
towards the mountains. The natives repeated some words very low, and afterwards
all shouted and plunged into the water. The old chief continued some time in
the water after the others in a crouching position, looking steadily and repeating a
prayer. When finished, he came out. We asked him if all was right? and he said
“Yes, yes; good, very good; they have gone, and Bununra, chief of Yalravalra, will
“ be prepared for us ; pigs we shall eat on the other side that mountain; armlets we
“ shall put on, and there shall be more taroo and yams given us than we know what
“to do with. Up, lads, away ! ” We commenced climbing until we stood on the top,
3,360 feet above the sea. The mountain is called Bohoboho. We rested there until
Pi, a native teacher, who was taken very ill, returned down 1,500 feet to get medicine
and a native to attend him. We ascended again. But before leaving the chief operated
on Pi. Kneeling over him he repeated a prayer, chewing betel nut, squirting the juice
on his stomach, then breathed into a calabash, and made Pi do the same. He then
passed his right hand over Pi, and turning to us said, “ All right now, Pi better soon;
but did I not tell you the road was long and difficult.” We slept soundly until nearly
daybreak, and started for the village. We soon saw Milne Bay, and a small island at
the head not far from Yalra Valra. We shortly reached Opepago. We slept and break-
fasted. This is a small village on the ridge 2,700 feet above the sea. The old chief
was glad to see us, and introduced us to chiefs and people. The whole party were
feaAed with pigs, taro, yams, Darere, his son, is an active young fellow. When a pig
was brought in on a pole, he addressed us as he leaped from side to side in the front of
his house, with spear in hand, and just as the pig came past he plunged his spear into
its heart, and called on us to cook and eat it, which we did partially. The rain began
falling, and we wished to descend the 2,700 feet. Kaurarma was anxious to remain for
another pig, but finally j ielded, and proceeded.
The women here are much finer-looking than on the other side —more buxom and
clearer skinned, and no tattooing. The men are the same as on the other side. We
left at midday, and descended to a level strip of land by the sea. The descent was
difficult owing to the rain. At some distance, we were told, there was a village to pass
through, and had better sleep there, which w T e consented to do. We met two boys from
the village, and we sent on before to prepare the way. We must descend again, but
before doing so incantations must be gone through. This time a seed from a tree was
taken, and beaten until it was quite soft, and then squeezed into the eyes of the chief
and his son-in-law, Berige. The eyes were soon inflamed. Then all decorated them-
selves, and put their hair right; then ordered to march, the chief and the old man
leading, we being close behind, the men and the women in the rear; all the way up the
chief picking leaves from various plants, and, addressing them, would throw them down,
speaking very low 7, not smiling at anything. A bird settled on a branch a little distance
ahead, and the chief stopped and called on it to go away, as it was preventing our
advance. We reached a village, and found it 900 feet above the sea. It is called
Bargofigofi. A number of men were seated on a stone circle, and we were marched
round them, the chief chewing betel nut vigorously, and squirting it out right and left
as he went along. When he had gone round he spoke thus to the men in the circle:
“ Here are great foreign chiefs come to see you, and here am I a Kuania with a number
of my people.” Room was made for us in the circle, but Kuania went out in front of
the houses. The men of the place left us, and sprang out in front of the houses. One
had a spear, another a native axe. They harangued and shouted, and rushed up to the
old chief, and feigned an attack on him.
At one time the men, women, and children were shouting. Kuania took his tomahawk
and threw it down before them; Berigi threw down two pieces of hoop-iron ; then the
old women came and wept with the old chief. All now appeared friendly. Our people
and the village inhabitants mixed freely. It seems some time ago some unpleasantness
occurred, when a party from this village were at Uararu; and now was the settling time.
We had a good night’s rest, all natives were happy, and pork and vegetables were in
plenty for us. This village is in a fine position and healthy. The chief is a nice fellow,
and did his utmost to make the party comfortable. Next morning we left for Yaloapla.


We descended on to level ground through thick bush and plantations, on to a at
the rear of the village Muddy. We were led round the back of the house of the chief
Bumara, who was on a platform in front waiting to give us welcome. Kuania was then
brought up to the platform, shouting “ Oh, deumara, I have brought you great friends ;
see, you, here is Tamati Chalmers, who has long been asking me to lead him across to
Gairamara. Here is Manoose Chester, the great chief and friend ; here are Ngalwavo
Pi and Reobo Tana, come to see me. Perceive them ; treat them kindly ; I have done
my part. Look well after them.” And away went the old fellow, and* we saw him no
more until evening. It rained a good deal. Had great crowds to see us. We hoped to
have been able to go from Valravalra to Orangerie Bay, and thence to the farm; but the
people of the Valravalra and the villages at Head Bay being at war prevented our ad-
vancing. But, apart from this, the weather so changed we could do nothing. It was raining
in torrents, and the country impassable. Before leaving South Cape we arranged for the
steamer to call at Discovery Bay on Monday, and see if we had arrived. It was raining
morning, noon, and night. Tuesday was a better day, and at noon the steamer arrived.
We went aboard next morning, and left for South Cape, where we arrived on the 22nd.
We do not advise teachers to be sent inland at present. It will be easier to get into the
country by canoe, by way of Orangerie Bay, and by the lagoon. Some day we will try
it. There is a break in the ranges at head of Milne bay, between Owen Stanley Range
and where we crossed, and there is a belt of level country extending from the lagoon to
Milne Bay, very thickly wooded. We have named range extending from head of Milne
Bay to North Foreland, and westward to Cloudy Mountains, away down to Orangerie
Bay, Orange Range. The trip was most enjoyable, and we hope to have many more
such. The following are the villages and chiefs in Ariba districts : —Diodio, chief Veno-
Veno; Dibgar, chief Bunari; Lana, chief Manopax ; Besugodoan, chief Tanmaroo ;
Kerbeda, chief Kuruaba; Iribare, chief Sivani; Bonua, chief Garia; Deredere, chief
Aniam ; Kaberati, chief Ranaa ; Dubunumasm, chief Abitu ; Mimagisoa, chief
Kanabuba; Diogi, chief Koaf; Polopote, chief Kanbraho; Gadoralu, chief Kenidi;
Bete, chief Kaworeai; Tambuhanc, chief Orapanipani; Raigeta, chief Tamga; Putu,
chief Aidwt; in all 18 villages. The villages above Valravalra are Ppepago, 2,700 feet
high, chief Narere ; Vargofigofi, 900 feet high, chief Gawata. The mountains referred
to in the report are Uruga, a ridge of cloudy mountains 2,700 feet high, between
Calamara Bay and the district of Ariba. It is thickly wooded to summit. Korapito
ridge, we descended from Urga to Ariba. It is thickly wooded with plantations along-
side. Bohoboho mountain we crossed to Valravalra, 3,360 feet high, of very steep
ascent, thickly wooded to the summit; Dagarugarau ridge, with a descent on Michope-
pago ; Moldvaonia ridge, descending going to Vargofigofi. The rivers crossed are Gaava,
running into Catamaran Bay at Modeva ; the river Bosariri, running through the
district of Ariba into a lagoon at the head of Orangerie Bay ; crossed at Dunagere some
miles from Diodio. The Sembrai, a large stream running to lagoon passing close by
Diodio; the Banna crossed after leaving Diodio; the Bavart, where we halted at a small
village on the bank for luncheon ; the Deona, which we travelled up some miles. From
the head Milne Bay on the coast and ridges along to Valravalra are about 50 villages.
The Valravalra people told us their village was small compared with Maivara, a very
large town at Bread Bay. The natives also report 12 villages on rivulets running into
Orangerie Bay and lagoon. The “ Ellangowan ” remains at Cooktown three weeks for
coal and a refit. Mr. Chalmers preaches here on Sunday.
No. 28.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the HONOURABLE SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, 31st December 1878.
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 22nd of November* in which, in compliance with the request
contained in the letter from this Department of the sth of October,! you state your views
as to the steps which you consider that it may be necessary for Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment to take, in order to preserve order in New Guinea, in consequence of the
expeditions of gold miners and other white persons who have recently proceeded to that
island.
* No. 24.
t No. 21.
M 3


2. Sir M. Hicks Beach desires me to inform you that he has, read your letter with
much interest, and is obliged to you for the care and attention which, you have given to
the‘subject, and for the observations and suggestions with which you have favoured him.
He has, since your letter was written,received through, the Admiralty*, a despatch
from the Commodore Commanding on the Australian accompanied by a report
from Commander Digby, of H.M. Ship “ Sappho,” of the result of his visit to Port
Moresby in July and August last, and of the state of affairs then existing in New
Guinea,
3. From those papers, which are herewith enclosed, it will be seen that the expeditions
which proceeded to New Guinea in the course of last summer have resulted in failure,
that gold had not, at the time of Captain Digby’s visit, been found in paying quantities,
and that the climate had proved to be so unhealthy that the expeditions could only be
kept in the country by a constant succession of fresh arrivals, Commodore Hoskins
being even of opinion that the expeditions might possibly be withdrawn on the breaking
up of the fine season in November last,
. 4. In these circumstances Sir M. Hicks Beach is of opinion that it will be unnecessary
for Her Majesty’s Government now to entertain the question of the annexation of New
Guinea, and that the decision in a matter of so much importance may properly be deferred
until further and more decided information has been received as to the likelihood of a
considerable white population establishing itself in the island. Sir M. Hicks Beach
would, however, be much obliged if, after perusing the accompanying papsrs, you would
favour him with a further expression of your views-upon the subject, and-he would
more especially desire to receive your opinion as to whether any more permanent
measures for the maintenance of order in New Guinea are necessary under present
circumstances than periodical visits to Port Moresby by.vessels of war, the commanding
officers of such vessels being furnished with commissions as Deputy Commissioners,
under the Western Pacific Order in Council of August 1877-
5. Sir M. Hicks Beach igialso inclined-to think:that a-similar commission in respect
of .New Guinea might.- properly >be given to .the Queensland magistrate. (Mr. Chester)
stationed at Thursday Island, in Torres and as bearing upon this point 1 am
to enclose for your information a copy of.Letters,Patent dated the 10th of October last,
by which the islands in Torres Straits have been annexed to the colony of Queensland,
thus bringing within the jurisdiction of the Government of that Colony the Murray
and Darn ley Islands,, in. respect of which you,granted to- Mr. Chester a commission
as Deputy Commissioner in February last.
I am, &c.,
ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
Sir A. H. Gordon.
No. 29.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Siu, Downing Street, 3 January 1879-
With reference to the letter from this Department of the sth of November, j* and
to your reply of the 9th of the same month, % lam directed by tne Secretary of State for
the Colonies to transmit to you for your information a copy of a Despatch which he
addressed to Chief Justice Gorrie on the 3rd ultimo,J respecting his proposal to visit
New Guinea in his capacity of Acting High Commissioner for the Western Pacific.
I am also again to enclose for your information the Despatch § from Mr, Gorrie to
which the Despatch from this Department of the 3rd ultimo is. in reply, and also three
further Despatches]) which have since been received from Mr. Gorrie relating to New
Guinea, and I am to say that Sir M. Hicks-Beach will be glad to be favoured with any
observations which you may have to offer upon the subject.
I have, &c.
Sir A. H. Gordon. (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
* No. 18, t No. 23. f Not printed. § No. 22, || Two only printed; Nos. 25 and 27.


No. 30.
ACTING HIGHT COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS
BEACH, BART. (Received January 20, 1879.)
Sir, Levuka, November 11, 1878.
I have the honour to send annexed copy letter from the Commodore, dated
23rd October, embodying a report from Lieutenant Musters, of H.M. schooner “ Conflict,”
in relation to the partj r of explorers on New Guinea.
2. I also annex extracts from Sydney papers containing the accounts of what had
been attempted and accomplished by members of the exploring party.
3. The Commodore in a private letter states ; —“ ‘ Conflict ’is at Moresby, and will
probably see the last remains of the expedition off the coast before she returns/'
4. It will be remembered that Captain Digby had to deal with two cases of criminal
assault upon native women, and the information contained in Lieutenant Musters*
report, and in the statements of returned members of the expedition appended, show that
there had been two cases of shooting natives with revolvers.
5. If indeed it be true, as the latest information from a returned member of the expedi-
tion would seem to imply, although I hope the statement may turn out to be unfounded
or exaggerated, that there has been considerable fighting with the natives around Port
Moresby, I fear that these incidental crimes of which we have heard have not been the
only acts of violence perpetrated.
6. The report that the “ Conflict ” has since the date of the reports forwarded by the.
Commodore been shelling villages I take to be mere rumour and untrue, but I have drawn
the attention of the Commodore to what has been stated.
7. If the expedition has terminated amidst demonstrations of hostility by the natives
towards white men, excited by acts of violence of the latter, I shall never cease to regret
that I had not been able to obtain a ship to visit New Guinea in time to make the
members of the expedition feel that they were very closely within the reach of law, and
to endeavour to make such conventions with the native Chiefs as would have shown our
desire to be just and friendly and well disposed to the native race.
8. Should the result of the expedition be, as seems now most likely, that no gold is
discovered, the country will be left to the desultory visits of traders and single adven-
turers. These may be controlled under the powers conferred by the Order in Council,
if they were confined to one locality; and I think it is well worthy of consideration
whether some effort should not be made in this direction, viz., the selection of a suitable
site, at Port Moresby or elsewhere, for a trading site, just as Port Apia at Samoa is
practically a white town, while the rest of Samoa is under the control of its own
Chiefs.
9. That is one of the subjects which I would keep in view if I were on the spot, and
had an opportunity of considering, with the advantage of local knowledge, the best way
of turning the large resources of New Guinea to account consistently with peace and
full justice to the native inhabitants of the island.
10. I would again beg to be allowed to earnestly press upon your attention the
impossibility of doing all the good which might be accomplished uuder the powers
conferred by the Order in Council without more help from the ships of Her Majesty’s
navy. I am aware that the squadron is at the moment in a position of temporary
difficulty from the retiring of the able Commodore and the going home of three ships,
but with the demands upon him by the great Australian and New Zealand Colonies,
the Commodore, however well disposed to assist in the w r ork of the High Commission,
will not be able to do so, I fear, with his present squadron.
11. The High Commissioner, being a new claimant for naval assistance, has doubtless
not hitherto been considered by the authorities at home who determine the magnitude
of squadrons ; but I perceive the work will assume great proportions, and it is a work
which, from the commercial and beneficial results likely to flow T from it, is w T ell worthy of
being recognised and facilitated by the departments which control the expenditure and
the ships.
M 4


12. I trust I will be pardoned for referring to these matters, but I do so in order that
the subject may be considered with the High Commissioner during his present visit
home. I know how his work in Fiji would be assisted by having ships more frequently
at command, but the work of the High Commissioner must simply without such
assistance fail to be performed.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) JOHN GORRIE,
The Right Hon. the Secretary of State Acting High Commissioner,
for the Colonies.
Enclosure in No. 30.
Letter from Commodore Hoskins to Acting High Commissioner for Western Pacific.
“ Wolverene” at Sydney,
Sir, October 23, 1878.
I beg to forward for your information the following extract from a report I have
received from Lieutenant J. G. Musters, commanding H.M’s. schooner “ Conflict,” dated
23rd September 1878.
Speaking of the diggers who have landed at Port Moresby in search of gold, he says :
“ From what I hear, their general behaviour to the natives has been good; with the
“ exception of one murder of a native at a place about 60 miles to the eastward of this,
“ by a man who is at present up country, I have heard of no outrages committed by
them. His report to people here is that the native had stolen a tomahawk, and, in
“ company with another man, he went to recover it. The native poised his spear at his
“ friend, and he, thinking it might be used, shot the native. I intend proceeding to the
“ scene of the murder to make inquiries.”
I have, &c.,
(Signed) A. H. H OSKINS,
Commodore.
Any further report I may receive respecting this murder will be communicated
to you.
Statement of John Hanran, October 8, 1878.
Latest from New Guinea.
Mr. John Hanran, one of the Colonist Expedition party, sends us the following from
•Cooktown, October 8 :
The cutter “ Prospect ” arrived at Cooktown from New Guinea on last Friday,
having on board eight of the prospectors. One of them, who is an intelligent man and
an old comrade, has given me the following information :—On the 12th August, six of
the Colonist party and nine of the Emily party started from Port Moresby, to explore
and prospect a river supposed to drain the north-west falls of the main range. This is
the river, mentioned by me in a previous, letter, that the Colonist party contemplated to
prospect. They crossed the Laluka at the old crossing-place near camp Chester, and
went up the Goldie River by the old track for about five miles, then left the Goldie and
■steered north, through a rough open country, the creeks and ravines only being scrubby,
for about 30 miles. Then they came on very rough country, mostly covered with scrub,
which they had to cut a road through for the pack-horses mostly all the way, until they
came to the river, which is about 70 miles by the road they had gone by from the Laluka.
This is the largest river seen by them in New Guinea. They named it the Brown River,
in honour of Peter Brown, a member of the Colonist party; the natives, of whom they
did not see many, no villages, only a few miserable huts, called this river the Mana-
Mana. After they had camped and rested only one day they commenced prospecting,
and did not find any indications of gold in this part of the river, which is very rough ;
also, the ranges at each side are very steep and scrubby, and found them getting more
so as they followed the river up into the ranges. They explored many places at each
side of the river for a horse track by which they could proceed up the river. It was on
their returning to camp from this arduous duty, on the evening of 24th August, that


Peter Brown lost his life. It seems that four of the Colonist men went across the river
on this memorable day. When they were returning in the evening they came on to a
spur from whence they could see their camp, but being doubtful whether they could
cross the river at this point, three of them went around to cross by the ford where they
had crossed in the morning; but poor Brown, heedless of their advice, and forgetting
that discretion was the best part of valour, would go down the spur and be home before
them. Alas! he has gone to that long home from whence the explorer can never
return. After looking for him all that night and the following day, and finding no trace
of him, they came to the conclusion that he was deceived in the depth of the water and
strength of the current, and in endeavouring to cross the river was drowned. On the
morning of the 26th, as they were getting breakfast on the bank of the river, they saw
his body floating flown the stream. They got it out of the river and carefully examined
it. They found no marks of violence on any part of the body, which was naked, only
the shirt being on, which proves he had stripped off for the purpose of crossing the river.
On the same day, in sadness and in sorrow, they buried him on the bank of that lonely
river which will for ever bear his name. Cruel fate has made him pay too dearly for
the honour by imposing on him the terrible penalty of an untimely grave. One of
the “ Emily ” party also nearly lost his life. He incautiously wandered away from his
comrades as they were exploring, and it seems that he met with some natives, who
wanted to surround him ; and, from experience, I am inclined to think they only wanted
to feel him, as it is customary with them to do so when they meet white men for the first
time. Unfortunately, he being alone, did not have the courage to gratify their curiosity;
they, insisting that he should submit to their inspection, which, perhaps, he did not
understand, frightened him, and, in the confusion, thought it was time for him to defend
himself. He was armed with a revolver, which lie fired off, and then ran for his life,
which he miraculously saved, and only received two spear wounds, from which he is now
suffering in the Cooktown Hospital. The late Peter Brown was a native of Scotland.
He was a man of great energy and endurance, and dearly beloved by his comrades, over
whom the sad event has cast a gloom of sorrow. That, and the unfortunate circum-
stances connected with the spearing of the other man, which might cause the natives to
retaliate, by attacking them in force, caused them to come to the conclusion that it was
advisable to discontinue prospecting that part of the country for the present, which they
reluctantly decided after three weeks’ very hard work. They returned to the Laluka,
and, after recruiting themselves and their horses for a few days at Camp Chester, some
of them decided to go to the top camp on the Goldie fliver, for the purpose of prospecting
the creek that runs into the Goldie from the north-east. This is the c ountry we were
prospecting last May, when the heavy rains drove us off. Four of the Colonist party and
four other parties, including in all about 28 men, are out prospecting where I have
described. The men that went over from Cooktown by the schooner “ Emily,” and
landed at Port Moresby about the Ist of August, are said to be good men, full of
energy and endurance. So are the men who went over by the “ Hibernia.” Mostly all
these men are out now trying the left branch of the Goldie, where they have found good
indications of gold, and other small branches leading into the left branch of the Goldie
are looking better, with strong colours of gold. The country seems to open out as they
go to the north-east, thereby inviting them, I hope, to success. Therefore 1 presume to
say that six weeks hence this part of the country will have had a fair trial, and that the
course of events during that time will reveal to us whether or not Dame Fortune has
proved unkind to the brave men that have struggled so manfully with the many obstacles
that fortify the precious metal supposed to be hidden in the virgin soil of New Guinea.
Return of Members of Expedition. 23rd October 1878.
2. Cooktown, Wednesday.—The “ Atjeh” landed nine passengers from Port Moresby
and left immediately. They had been brought on to Thursday Island by the “ Con-
flict,” and then transhipped. All are more or less ciestitute and suffering from fever.
They report that, up to the present, payable gold, as far as the} 7 were aware, had not been
discovered. The hardships in the scrubs simply fearful. The pioneers went as far as
the heads of the rivers, but found nothing payable. The rations failed, and the men
became sick: almost superhuman difficulties were met with. A few rough specimens
were found at the heads of the river. Some of the men who have returned have gone
into hospital. The balance of the “ Colonist ” party, with their leader, Mr. Jones, and
several horses, are at Port Moresby, but cannot get back. The opinion of the people
here is that the Governments ought to charter a vessel to bring them back, as they are
R 6853. ' NT


deserving of credit for their enterprise. A vessel could be chartered for less than 200/.
The war schooner left Thursday Island for Cooktown, and is expected daily. A strong
north-east wind is blowing.
Statement of James Willey. 24th October 1878.
Latest about New Guinea.
[By Electric Telegraph.]
3. Cooktown, Thursday.—Our correspondent telegraphs :
“ Have interviewed James Willey in the hospital, one of the “ Emily ” party. He
reports considerable fighting with the natives around Port Moresby. All the party in
the main camp at Laloki cleared for the port in consequence of the threatened attack by
natives. Willey was one of the furthest of the inland party who went up the left branch
of the Goldie, and he says he and a party of seven men took five days for a prospecting
trip. They left the highest camp 40 miles up the branch, and were away 10 days.
They came across villages thickly inhabited. The natives had never seen white men
before, and behaved very kindly. They found some prospects of gold all the way up,
but only strong colours. They returned, short of provisions, to the last camp. The
remainder of the party wanted to proceed higher up the river than they had been. This
was done, and they found more patches of grass on which to put their horses, and so
pushed on. Willey and others became sick with fever and returned to the port. The
party is now away some time, and none have returned. It is believed they are either on
payable gold, or are unable to proceed with horses. The furthest distance attained
was 55 miles from the upper camp. No colours of gold had been found in any of the
ravines or gullies, but only in the beds of the river. It is, however, believed there is
gold higher up to the dividing range, that is the Owen Stanley', but there were doubts
whether the party were able to reach it, consequent on the impenetrable nature of the
country. The natives are quite daring, and have no fear of horses, rifle, or dogs now.
Great trouble is anticipated. It is reported the war schooner “ Conflict ” had some
trouble on the eastern coast, and shelled some villages. The beche-de-mer fishers at
Kepple Point and Kerepuna, and in coast, are doing splendidly.
No. 31.
ADMIRALTY to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Admiralty, 24th January 1879-
I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit, for
the information of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, a letter from Commodore
Hoskins, dated at Sydney, the 3rd December, forwarding an extract from the “ Sydney
Morning Herald,” giving the latest news from Port Moresby, by which it will be
seen that the anticipations formed of the failure of the expedition, and the withdrawal of
the gold seekers at the close of the fine monsoon, are being realized.
2. 1 am to request that the enclosures to this letter may be returned when done with.
I am, &c..
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 31.
New Guinea.
Sir, “ Wolverene,” at Sydney, 3rd December 1878.
With reference to previous correspondence on the subject of New Guinea, I have
the honor to forward, for their Lordships’ information, a telegraphic report extracted
from the Sydney Morning Herald of yesterday’s date, giving the latest news from


Port Moresby, by which it will be seen that the anticipations formed of the failure of the
expedition, and the withdrawal of the gold seekers at the close of the fine monsoon, are
being realized.
I have, &c.,
The Secretary of the Admiralty, (Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Whitehall, London, S.W. Commodore,
From Sydney Morning Herald of 2nd December 1878.
New Guinea.
[By Telegraph.]
(From our own Correspondent.)
Brisbane, Sunday.
The “ Hibernia,” Captain Dunscombe, arrived at Cooktown from Port Moresby last
night. She brings 20 returned diggers. Another vessel also left for Cooktown on 24th
ultimo, with 10 more. The leader of the Colonist party reports the prospecting to be at an
end for the present season. On the return trip from last camp, on the right-hand branch of
the Goldie, the party experienced great difficulties and privations, the rivers being neatly
all flooded. Some horses were drowned, and rations and swags lost. Nothing further is
likely to be done till the wet season is over —if at all. The heavy rain that has fallen
there is making travelling heavy and perilous. There are a few men still at Port Moresby
with Captain Redlich, who has some provisions left; also Andrew Finlay, and a store-
keeper. The “ Conflict ” has not arrived yet. Captain Dunscombe intends making
another trip to take away those men not wishing to remain over the wet season.
The “ Ellangowan,” mission steamer, arrived safely at Booth Cape, New Guinea. The
Rev. J. Chalmers writes to say that everything is progressing favourably with the
natives and the mission. He has made recent explorations, and reports being well
received by the natives. He ascended 1,600 feet up the Cloudy Mountains, where
he found a most interesting people living, and expects to find inhabitants on the top of
the mountains. He also explored the Loone Range at the back of Orangery Bay lagoon,
where he was well received and feasted by the mountaineers. The lagoon is much
larger than at first it was believed to be. The inhabitants in these mountain districts
are similar to the coast natives, and very industrious. They have large plantations made
in terraces, to prevent the soil washing away in heavy rains. It is intended to place
teachers in Mondiri Mountain district, at the back of Farm Bay. The “Ellangowan”
had proceeded westwards to Keripuni, Hula, and Port Moresby.
No payable gold has been obtained by any of the prospectors, and New Guinea gold-
fields may be pronounced a failure for the present.
No. 32.
The HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Armitage Hill, 31st January 1879-
With reference to my previous letters on the subject of New Guinea, I have the
honour to enclose the copy of a communication which I have received from the
Rev. Mr. Lawes.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) A. GORDON.
Colonial Office.
N 2


Enclosure in No. 32.
To the Hon. Sir A. Gordon, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Reading, 21st January 1879-
With reference to our conversation last week about New Guinea, I beg to submit
to your Excellency the following items :
1. I have reason to believe, from the latest information I have received from Port
Moresby, that a considerable number of white men are likely to remain in that district
prospecting for gold. The several parties that went from Australia in the early part of
last year have met with little, if any, success. The miners suffered much from fever,
and many have returned disheartened and discouraged; but a considerable number of
experienced men remain, and are continuing their explorations. The misfortune of the
first party, and the apparent failure of their enterprise, arose principally from the fact that,
in the excitement caused by the discovery of gold, they went at a bad season of the
year. The rainy season was not over, the rivers and streams were all in flood. New
comers, and surrounded by luxuriant vegetation, the party soon became prostrated by
fever and lost heart. It was only about the date of our last Despatches that real
prospecting for alluvial gold began. The samples of sand which I brought down to
Sydney in January last were assayed by the geological surveyor of the New South
Wales Government, and found to contain 3 dwts. of gold per ton. Even this, I was
told, was payable ; but in any case the search is not likely to be abandoned until the
beds of these streams have been thoroughly examined. The heavy rains had prevented
this up to the time of the visit of H.M.S. “ Sappho.” Should there be any considerable
“ find,” a great influx of miners and others would immediately take place.
The discovery of quantities of “ beche de mer ” along the coast has already led to
several vessels going from Australian ports. The men on board these vessels are of the
worst character, and as they have their vessels to escape in there is but little self-interest
to induce them to respect native rights. It is from these vessels that difficulties have
already arisen with the natives, as reported in the colonial papers.
The current belief in the richness of New Guinea which prevails in Australia, together
with the certainty that gold has been found, renders it extremely improbable that New
Guinea will be abandoned until a much more thorough examination has taken place than
was possible during one rainy season.
2. I was resident for three years at Port Moresby, and found the natives friendly and
amenable to kindly treatment. I visited a great many villages, in most of which no
white man had been before. I went along the coast as far as China Straits in our little
mission steamer, calling at many places en mute. In none of these journeys or voyages
was I molested. The natives were at first suspicious, but always friendly. In the
district of Port Moresby, where I was best known, the natives had learnt to look upon
an Englishman as their friend, and placed unbounded confidence in him.
I grieve to see in the papers that friendly and peaceful relationships have already been
broken by some white men. The Australian papers report a native shot at Hood Bay,
and also a fight at Shepel Point.
There is reason also to fear more serious disturbances have taken place at Port
Moresby,
It is in this way that mischief is being done that may never be undone. In a very
short time bitter and hostile feelings may be aroused, which may never be allayed. A
few foolish, immoral, or dishonest men may close New Guinea to the peaceful enterprizes
of science or commerce, and make any future government or administration of justice
exceedingly difficult.
3. There is no native local government capable of dealing with the difficulties which
are sure to arise from the presence of a number of white men. There are no powerful
chiefs, as in many of the South Sea Islands, where their authority is often recognized over
a large area. Every village has its own chiefs, but in the Port Moresby district these
have no power to punish an offender, and exert really no authority over individuals.
The natives are generally thievish, and many of the white men are licentious. Diffi-
culties are sure to arise, and there is no native power to cope with them.
There is no native government that could be helped and strengthened to meet the
case. If bloodshed and perpetual hostility between the races is to be prevented, it
seems imperative that some foreign supervision should be taken, and a foreign judicial


authority established. The native chiefs would, I believe, welcome such an authority,
and rejoice in giving it their support. It must be remembered that the natives are in a
very primitive state, and have only now become acquainted with the civilized world.
A foreigner, vested with authority, would need to exercise it in a forbearing conciliatory
spirit, and he would be sure to win the confidence and goodwill of the people.
4. I have reason to believe that the foreign residents themselves are anxious to have
British authority established, and would gladly submit to it. Many of them are
anxious to respect native rights, and are desirous of conforming to laws that may secure
fairness and honesty in transactions with the natives. In confirmation of this I beg to
enclose a copy of a letter from the foreign residents at Port Moresby, received by the
directors of the London Missionary Society in October last.
I am not personally acquainted with more than three of those whose names are
appended, but I would point out to Your Excellency that several are undoubtedly
Germans, while some, I know, are Americans.
The different nations to which the foreign residents on New Guinea belong would
make it absolutely necessary that if British supervision be established, it should be
vested with authority to deal with foreigners of all nationalities.
Any further information respecting New Guinea which I can give you will always
be at your service.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) W. G. Lawes.
To the Committee of the London Missionary Society, Blomfield Street, London, E.C.
In view of the present position of affairs in New Guinea, and fearing complica-
tions may arise with the natives to their detriment; and whereas the Rev. W. G. Lawes
has laboured here for some years, has acquired considerable knowledge of the Motu
language, and has so thoroughly gained the confidence of the natives that they are
continually wishing he were still among them ;
We, also, the undersigned miners and others resident in Port Moresby, feeling this
will be most beneficial to Europeans as well as Natives, as complications are likely to
arise which he alone might prevent, —
Humbly beg his return to the land in which his labours have been so useful.
Should our petition coincide with your views of the situation, we pledge ourselves to
do everything in our power to assist him.
(Signed) James Armstrong. A. Hammond Page.
Rendall Broadbent. Heinrich Armur. (?)
Charles Glass. Ludwig Madden.
Henry Gernax. George Howarth.
Frank Jones. Edwin H. Balls.
Harry Caudzortz. George Buttingham.
Richard Ferguson. Saml. Stewart.
George Hope. E. Redlich.
Alfred A. Lewis. John McCormick.
Henry Tayler. James Burridge.
Maurice McEllegott. Andrew Stewart.
Robt. B. Alcom. Joseph Hill.
John C. Ross. H. J. Barnes.
Andrew Finlay. John A. Hay.
James Willer. (?) John Hair.
Conrad Miller. A. Goldie.
J. W. Armstrong. Charles Brown. (?)
Wm. Stansfield. Charles Hunstin.
Charles Ives. Nielsen.
Henry Carr.
Port Moresby,
28th July ■'lß7B.
N 3


No. 33.
ACTING HIGHT COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH,
BART. (Received February 18, 1879.)
Levuka, Fiji,
Sir, 10th December 1878.
In continuation of the letters as to New Guinea which I have already submitted,
I have now the honour to send copy letter from Commodore Hoskins, of 13th November,
with its enclosures.
2. I have also had the honour to receive from His Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales the telegram directing me not to visit New Guinea until so directed.
3. It will be seen from these enclosures that there had been fears in Port Moresby of
a native attack, as referred to in paragraph sof my letter of 11th November.* So far,
however, as Lieutenant Musters knew, there had been no attack and no fighting, but only
a scare on the part of some of the white men.
4. He unfortunately confirms the news as to at least one case of killing of a native
referred to in paragraph 4 of same letter.
5. I am glad to be able to state, with reference to paragraph 6 of the same letter, that
my supposition as to the untrustworthiness of the rumour that the “ Conflict ” had been
shelling villages has been confirmed. The Commodore writes under date 20th
November :—“ The extracts from the report of Lieutenant Musters commanding
“ H.M. schooner ‘ Conflict,’ which I forwarded to you on the 13th instant, will no doubt
“ have shown you that the telegrams alluded to were only idle rumour.”
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon.
JOHN GORRIE,
Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, Bart. Acting High Commissioner.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 33,
Commodore, Australian Station, to the Acting High Commissioner for the
Western Pacific.
“ Wolverine,” at Sydney,
Sir, 13th November 1878.
With reference to my letter to you of the 23rd October 1878, I beg to forward
for your information the following extracts from a report I have received from Lieutenant
Musters, commanding H.M.’s schooner “ Conflict,” dated 16th October 1878.
******
“ About the immediate vicinity of Port Moresby, when I left everything appeared
quiet, but a report had reached the Port that the natives inland were assembling in
force, and intended an attack on the camp at Laloke, distant some 12 miles. The
people who had been staying at the camp returned to Port Moresby, and appeared to
put some reliance in the story which was told to them by a Port Moresby native. But
they had seen nothing which, in my opinion, justified their returning in a scared manner,
particularly as some of them were on their way with provisions to relieve another party
about 40 miles further up.”
******
“ I conveyed 10 of the worst cases (of fever) to this Island (Thursday Island). Here
they are put up and given a free passage to Queensland."
“ The information I received about the murder of a native by a white man near
Kerepuna, where I mentioned in my last letter I intended proceeding to make
inquiries, appears unsatisfactory for the latter.
“ I beg to forward a copy of the information received from a Mr. A. R. Holmes, who
was staying at Kerepuna at the time on board the schooner “ Pride of Logan,” corro-
borated by the master of the said schooner; also that received from the missionary
* No. 30.


teacher at Ulao, about 12 miles from Kerepuna. Two whites appear to have been
implicated in the matter. I could make no further inquiries, as the two men implicated
were up country.”
I have, &c.,
(Signed) A. H. Hoskins,
Commodore.
Information received from Mr. A. R. Holmes respecting the Murder of a Native by a
White Man on Coast of New Guinea.
About the middle of August last “Fullerton” and “Thompson” informed me, on
their return to the “ Pride of Logan ” schooner, from which, vessel they had taken their
departure about two days previous on a prospecting cruize, that Thompson had shot a
native at their camp stationed between Kerepuna and Ulao. The native, who had been
with them previously on good terms, stole a tomahawk. Fullerton went to recover it.
The native, on seeing he was discovered, dropped the tomahawk. Fullerton picked it
up, and was returning to the lent. Thompson saw the native poise a spear at Fullerton,
and, in defence of his friend, shot the native dead with a rifle at a distance of about
15 yards. They then tried to sink the body in the sea, but, being unsuccessful, buried
it in the sand.
They then returned to the schooner, leaving almost everything behind, and returned
to Port Moresby in a boat belonging to Captain Webbe, master of the “Pride of
Logan.”
I imagine the schooner must have been about seven miles distant from the scene.
Information received from Missionary Teacher at Ulao, Coast of New Guinea,
respecting the Murder of a Native by a White Man.
The natives on missing their comrade proceeded to the place where the white man’s
tent was pitched, and found his body, which had been buried in the sand, exposed.
They saw the mark of the bullet, and went to the teacher’s house to inquire if he knew
about it. He said, “ No.”
The teacher is of opinion that the whites are suspected of the murder.
No. 34.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, 26th February 1879-
I am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 31st of January,* enclosing a copy of a letter from the
Rev. W. G. Lawes, respecting New Guinea.
I am to point out to you that the memorial addressed to the Committee of the
London Missionary Society by certain residents in Port Moresby, which accompanies
Mr. Lawes’ letter, bears date the 28th of July last, whereas the information contained
in the printed extract from the Sydney “ Morning Herald,”f which appears to indicate
that there is now less necessity for the presence of a person possessing Mr. Lawes’
qualifications, and which was forwarded to you for perusal in a letter of the Bth instant,J
is dated the 2nd of December last.
I am, &c.,
Sir A. H. Gordon. (Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
* No. 32.
f See Enclosure in No. 31.
f Not printed.
N 4


No. 35.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, K.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT HON.
SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART. (Received March 31, 1879.)
Government House, Brisbane,
Sir, January 23, 1879-
I have the honour to enclose a copy of letters addressed to the Colonial Secre-
tary, Queensland, by Mr. Chester, Police Magistrate, Thursday Island, who lately visited
New Guinea.
The accuracy of Mr. Chester’s interesting narrative may be relied upon.
T have Sc c
The Right Hon. Sir M, E. Hicks Beach, (Signed) A. E. KENNEDY,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 35.
Mr. H. M. Chester’s Expedition to New Guinea.
No. 1.
During a visit paid by Mr. Douglas to Thursday Island, Mr. Chester, the Police
Magistrate at Somerset, was instructed to visit that portion of the New Guinea coast
lying to the north of Thursday Island. He was subsequently instructed to visit Murray
Island, Darnley Island, and Port Moresby. The following reports were furnished by
Mr. Chester to the Government of Queensland, in obedience to these instructions. They
are now published for general information.
Instructions to Mr. Chester to visit New Guinea.
Mr. Chester,
As the final removal of the Government establishment at Somerset to Thursday
Island will shortly be carried into effect, and as your time will then be more fully
occupied than it is at present, I think it would be as well that you should, before the
north-west monsoons set in, pay a visit to the coast of New Guinea for the purpose of
obtaining some additional information in connection with the entrance to the “ Mai-
Cussar” or Baxter River.
You are authorised, therefore, for this purpose, to take the cutter and such of the men
on the station as you may think suitable. You may invite also, as volunteers, any of the
pearl-shellers whose services are likely to be useful.
Mr. Pennefather has expressed to me his willingness to co-operate with you, and to
supply a lugger and her crew for the purposes of the expedition. You will thus have a
pretty strong party, and be able to provide for the safety of all concerned.
I need scarcely, I am sure, impress upon you how desirable it is to encourage friendly
relations with the natives of the country in the vicinity of the Mai-Cussar, of which at
present so little is known. Endeavour to obtain samples of sago, nutmegs, ebony, and
any articles of commerce which might prove of value if the trading instincts of the people
can be stimulated. For the general purposes of the expedition, and for the purchase of
trade, you are authorised to expend an amount not exceeding 50/. Any samples of the
commercial commodities I have referred to, or any specimens of natural history, arms,
implements, or fabrics which you may obtain, should be forwarded to the Colonial
Secretary, Brisbane, together with a report on the expedition, which should be as full as
possible, giving details on all matters which are likely to be interesting to the general
public. If you are able to induce one or two young men or women to return with you,
I think it would be desirable to do so, as you would have an opportunity of teaching
them our language, and of thus more effectually securing friendly relations on some
future occasion.
I fear that it is somewhat late in the season for you to attempt a visit to the Outauata
River, which appears to be an interesting field for discovery; but if you should find it


possible, after visiting the Mai-Cussar, to proceed to the Outauata, you are authorised to
do so. You should not, however, be absent from Thursday Island for more than six
weeks, as it is necessary that you should be at headquarters early in January.
(Signed) J. Douglas.
Thursday Island, 21st November 18/7-
Mr. Chester’s Report.
Sir, Thursday Island, January 15, 1878.
I have the honour to report that, in accordance with your instructions, I left
Thursday Island in the cutter on Ist ultimo, and proceeded to Jervis Island (Marbiak)
to pick up the rest of (he party who had volunteered to join me on an expedition to the
Mai-Cussar River, in New Guinea.
At Marbiak I found two of the crew of the “ Neva,” who had just returned from the
Fly River, where they had been with Signor D’Albertis. One of them was in a pitiable
condition with fever and ague. They stated that they had been told to find their own
way to Somerset from the mouth of the Fly, and that, after a narrow escape from death
at the hands of the Hampton Islanders, the Katon natives brought them as far as their
village, and sent them on to Cornwallis. They found the New Guinea natives very
numerous and hostile where the year before they saw no signs of inhabitants. The
“Neva” was frequently attacked, and one of the Chinese crew was wounded by an
arrow. The original party on board the “ Neva ” included Signor D’Albertis, a
European engineer, three South Sea Islanders, and five Chinese sailors. One of the
latter died during the cruise, and the fate of the other four is uncertain. They are said to
have run away with the “ Neva’s” boat, and were probably killed by the natives.
We left Marbiak on the morning of the 3rd December, the party consisting of Messrs.
Jardine, Summers, Pennefather, pilot Wilkie, myself and son, together with five
Europeans and 16 South Sea Islanders, with two large boats belonging to Messrs. Jardine
and Pennefather. Mr. Pearson, manager of Bell’s station, kindly gave us the services of
one of his men to pilot us across the Orman reef, and also induced Mamoose, the Chief
of the Marbiak tribe, to go with us as interpreter for Talbot Island. We passed to the
eastward of “ Turnagain,” which is merely a mangrove swamp, and anchored for the
night about five miles from Talbot Island, in 10 feet water. Next morning anchored off
the north end of Talbot (Boigu) in four fathoms, opposite a village of four miserable
gunyahs, inferior even to those of the mainland. A canoe with seven natives came off'
to us. Each man had a small book in his hand or stuck in his waist-cloth. These
proved to be “ primers.” printed in English characters, but in the native language, and
the owners appeared to regard them with a kind of superstitious reverence as talisman
for their protection. One intelligent young fellow afforded us much amusement by his
anxiety to display his recently acquired knowledge; but it extended no further than
the first page, which he had evidently got by rote. One thing, however, was noticeable,
that whereas their notation never previously exceeded two, the}' now can count as far as
10 in English, though I doubt whether their own language is capable of expressing that
number otherwise than by repeating two five times. The native evangelists, as they are
termed, who are reducing these barbarous tongues to writing, are not as well educated
as an average English child of 12 years of age. Under their tuition the natives are
adopting new pronunciations of old words, and introducing new ones; the result is a
mongrel language, that will some day puzzle philologists. The very names of the
islands are altered to suit their notions. “ Marbiak ” becomes phonetically “ Mah-bu-
whack ” ; and Yorke Island, known to Jukes and McGillivray as “ Masseed,” is tortured
to “ Macheeg.” 1 must also protest against the practice of renaming rivers and places
which have once been placed on the chart. The position of the liver which has been
renamed the “Baxter” was fixed and called by its native name “Mai-Cussar,” on
Lieutenant Connor’s chart, two years before it was visited by Mr. McFarlane in the
“ Ellangowan.”
We landed on Boigu during the day, and sent Mamoose to secure the services of an
interpreter for the New Guinea coast. The whole island, with the exception of a small
mound opposite our anchorage, appears to be a swamp in the wet season. The timber
consists principally of mangrove and silk-cotton trees, with a few cocoanuts at the
western end of the island. The inhabitants are fine muscular men, and from the quantity
of dugong bones, crab, and turtle shells in the vicinity of their huts they evidently live
well. Scrub hens are also very numerous. Their huts are more miserable than
those of any island in the Straits, which is the more remarkable as they are
in frequent communication with the well-housed natives of New Guinea, Towards
R 0853. O


sundown Mamoose returned with a number of men, including the Chief, who also answers
to the name of Mamoose; in fact, this name is now applied to the Chief of any island,
and has been adopted by the natives, although previously unknown. It may not be
uninteresting to trace the origin of this novel application of a word foreign to their
language. In 1870 I visited Darnley Island, and, having studied with much interest
“Jukes’ Voyage of the ‘Fly,’ ” I surprised the natives by recalling names of people
who were then living but who have long since “ gone over to the majority,” and by
repeating a number of words in their language. The simple natives would have it that
I was Jukes himself, and told me that during the “ Fly’s ” visit I had changed names
with a man called “ Mamoose ” (signifying red hair), and from that time they never
spoke of me by any other name. In the following year I visited Marbiak, where the
Chief, whose name was “ Genai” insisted on my changing names with him ; since which
time, even among his own people, he has always borne the name of Mamoose. When
the pearlshellers arrived in the straits Marbiak offered a fine field for recruiting labour,
and, finding the Chief was called Mamoose, they concluded it was the native word for
Chief, and from hearing it so often the natives have gradually adopted the word.
On December 5 we took an interpreter on board, and, after a run of two hours and a
half, anchored in the mouth of the Mai-Cussar, close to left bank, in fathoms, the
river about one mile wide. Two canoes of Boigu men accompanied us. A short time
before our visit they had lost a man in a skirmish with the New Guinea natives, but
had since made friends. They told us there was a village a short distance inland, and,
in hopes of being able to communicate with the people, we landed a strong party,
numbering 11 Europeans and six or eight Polynesians. We crossed a belt of
mangroves, then an extensive flat covered with tea-tree scrub, and came out upon com-
paratively open country dotted with magnificent tree ferns and clumps of bamboo.
Crossed a salt-water creek on a slippery fallen tree, and halted for a spell. We reckoned
we had come about five miles, and, as the guides, when asked where the village was,
still spoke of it as a long way off, we questioned them more closely, and found we
were not even half-way. As it would have been impossible to reach the village and
return before sundown, and as there was no water to be found, and no native tracks
visible, we reluctantly retraced our steps, and after a bathe in the creek, regardless of
alligators, we returned to the cutter, somewhat fatigued with our exertions in such a
climate. Our progress through the bush was much easier than we had anticipated, as
the grass had been recently burnt, and in places the fallen timber was still smouldering.
We saw one or two wild pigs, a kangaroo, and a quantity of pigeons of a kind that are not
found in the Straits. We went on about 10 miles in the cutter, and anchored for the
night in 10 fathoms. The Boigu men declined to go any further. Continued the ascent
on the 6th without impediment, anchoring at night, and on the 7th passed a plantation of
cocoanuts and bananas, but still no signs of natives. The river now narrowed rapidly,
and a fringe of broad-leaved palms took the place of the inevitable mangrove on either
bank. Anchored at 4 p.m. at a spot about 12 miles beyond the furthest point reached
by the “ Ellangowan ”in 1875, the river being 60 yards wide. We landed a watering
party, some of whom wandered away in the bush, shooting pigeons and scrub hens,
leaving two of the cutter’s crew, a Darnley islander, named Spear, and my Chinese
servant, to fill the beakers from a small creek. A little before sundown the two boys
came running back, saying that the natives were mustering with bows and arrows.
Reinforcements were sent, but were not required, as no attempt was made to molest the
men in the creek. The cowardice of Spear, and the shameless way in which he justified
himself when upbraided with running away, although armed with a double-barrelled gun,
fairly convulsed us with laughter. “ You think me fool ? ” said he, “ No, no, me
“ no want to dead; when me been see him bow-an-arrow full cock, my word, me run
“ like h .” On the Bth we filled our tanks; but the water procured was so charged
with decayed vegetable matter as to be scarcely drinkable. While breakfasting on deck
we suddenly heard loud shouting • and thinking the watering party were being attacked,
we snatched up our guns to go to their assistance, but presently saw a number of natives
on the opposite bank shouting and waving greeen boughs. The words “ Boigu,”
“ Missionary,” “ Smoke,” “ Whitefellow,” were plainly distinguished. Several of us
jumped into the boat and went to meet them, taking a quantity of Turkey red, calico,
knives, and tobacco. Only eight or 10 men showed themselves, but there were many
more concealed in the bush. They bartered a few arrows, dilly bags, bone daggers,
and necklaces of dogs’ teeth; and we had no difficulty in persuading two of them to go
off to the cutter with us. These men had acquiline features and straight hair, and were
superior in physique to the Australian aboriginals. It was unfortunate having no inter-
preter, as they are evidently in constant communication with the Boigu men, who have


doubtless told them of the missionaries, and that they have little to fear from white
people. They understood the use of tobacco, and were eager to get it. In a short time
they disappeared, and we did not see them again. That afternoon Messrs. Jardine,
Pennefather, myself and son, with two South Sea Islanders, started to go farther up the
river in the skiff. A short distance above where the cutter was anchored we came upon
a raft made of bamboos lashed together, which is evidently their only means of crossing
a river; and about five miles further on we landed at a small plantation of cocoanuts,
yams, and bananas, partially surrounded by a fence in an unfinished state. The ground
was cleared of undergrowth, but the large trees were left standing, and killed by burning
round the roots. There were also trenches to drain the garden. On a slight rise behind
the clearing were four or five neat log huts, with arched roofs made of tea-tree bark,
high enough to admit of a man standing upright. The sides were formed of saplings
about four inches in diameter, laid horizontally between uprights, and the whole firmly
lashed with vines, forming a perfect defence against arrows. Each house had a porch in
front, formed by extending the arched roof beyond the gable. In one we found an old
dismantled native drum, which I took the liberty of appropriating, leaving in its place a
large piece of Turkey red and some tobacco. These camps are evidently only occupied
at certain seasons, probably by hunting parties, as the plantations are too small to
support many people. We continued the ascent for another five miles, and found the
channel becoming blocked with trees, as if by land-slips. The river was here 25 yards
broad, the water quite salt, and the influence of the tides plainly discernible. We com-
menced our return at midnight on December Bth, entered another branch on the 9th, and
anchored outside the mouth on the evening of the 11th, having had to tow the cutter
the whole distance. From the anchorage Boigu bore east-by-south, distance about
nine miles.
The Mai-Cussar is certainly a magnificent river. There is not a shoal or a sandbank
in it to obstruct the navigation, nor is there a dangerous bar at the mouth. We found
nine fathoms at the entrance, and carried deep water to the very head. Vessels drawing
18 feet can lie alongside the banks. There is probably a deep passage between Talbot
Island and New Guinea which, if properly surveyed and marked, would be available for
the largest vessels. If so, a man-of-war, by sending her steam launch ahead to sound,
could in moderate weather avoid Torres Straits altogether, passing to the eastward of
Cornwallis, and thence to the Brothers. In war time an enemy’s ship might thus elude
observation, and, before her presence was known, intercept every vessel passing through
the north-east channel. We saw several reefs and shoals that are not marked on the
chart, notably a reef dry at low water about half-way between Talbot and Cornwallis, the
latter island bearing south-east from it. There are also shoal patches about seven miles
south-east of Cornwallis.
I reached Thursday Island on December 15. It was my intention to have gone
further along the coast to the westward; but having to be at Somerset by the 20th idem,
to relieve Mr. Beddome, there was no time for further exploration. I regret this very
much, as I believe the coast in that direction offers a fine field for discovery. It is highly
probable that there are other large rivers affording access to the interior between the
Mai-Cussar and Frederick Henry Island, but it would be useless to attempt their
exploration in our cutter.
By the mail steamer I forward a few curiously-barbed bone-pointed arrows, an orna-
mented gourd containing lime used in betel chewing, and a sample of flax from South
Cape, New Guinea,
I have, &c.,
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Henry M. Chester, P.M.
Brisbane.
Mr. Chester’s letters, Nos. 2 and 3, dated July 20 and August 27, 1878.*
* See Enclosure in No. 26, pages 68 to 86.
O 2


No. 36.
GOVERNOR SIR HERCULES ROBINSON, G.C.M.G., (NEW SOUTH WALES,) to the
RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART. (Received April 14, 1879.)
Government House, Sydney,
Sih, 22nd February 1879-
At the request of Baron Miklouho-Maclay, I have the honour to transmit to you
herewith a copy of a letter which he has addressed to Sir Arthur Gordon, in his capacity
as High Commissioner of the Western Pacific.
2. Baron Maclay is an explorer and naturalist, who, with the object of carrying on
scientific researches, has been living for a long time in New Guinea. He is at present on
a visit here for the benefit of his health, which has suffered a good deal from the climate
of the north coast.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. (Signed) HERCULES ROBINSON.
Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, Bart.,
&c. &c, &c.
Enclosure in No. 36.
Lettre ouverte a Son Excellence Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G., etc., etc.
Excellence, Sydney, 23 janvier. 1879.
L’importance du sujet de cette lettre, et I’esperance quelle ne restera pas sans
resultat pour la sainte cause de Vhumanite, qui l’a uniqueraent dictee, me decide de prier
Votre Excellence de la lire avec attention, et de faire ce que Yotre Excellence jugeia
possible.
Je ne m’arreterai sur quelques details con§ernant ma personne, qu’autant qu’il me
paraitra necessaire pour faire comprendre a Votre Excellence en suite de quoi, et a quel
titre, je prends la resolution, elevant la voix au nom “ du droit de I’homme,” d’attirer
I’attention de Votre Excellence sur les dangers qui menacent de detruire pour toujour s le
bien-etre de milliers d’hornmes, qui n’ont commis d’autre crime que d’appartenir a une
autre race que la notfe, et d’etre les plus faibles.
Ayant debarque en Nouvelle-Guinee en I’annee 187 L pour des etudes scientifiques,
les circonstances d’abord, I’interet d’etudier une race primitive ensuite, m’ont mis en
rapports tres rapproaches avec les indigenes de la cote N.E. de la Nouvelle-Guinee ou
j’ai debarque. A force de patience, d’une conduite tr6s amicale et juste, j’ai fini par
gagner la contiance parfait des indigenes, qui d’abord et pendant des mois m’ont traite
d’une maniere bien peu aimable. La connaissance de la langue papoua acquise, m’a donne
la possibility d’etudier leurs rnoeurs et leurs usages. Ayant passe pres de trois ans parmi
ces gens, ayant eu le temps dejuger leur caract&re et leurs facultes, je prends un interet
serieux et desinteresse a leur destinee, surtout en prevoyant que I’invasion de la race
blanche en Nouvelle-Guinee peut facilement, ou presque certainement, mener h une suite
de catastrophes bien deplorables.
Je pense, pourtant, que beaucoup de ces injustices revoltantes des forts envers les
faibles, pourraieni etre prevenues, si les gouvernements des peuples civilises, ne meprisant
par la cause de Injustice , confirmaient et faisaient respecter les elements les plus simples
du droit des gens et du droit international. Quelques lignes signees d temps, par une
main autorisee et puissante, peuvent prevenir nne serie de meurtres injustes, epargner
dans I’avenir a la “ civilisation ” la honte, sous le titre de si punition meritSe” de massacrer
des femmes et des enfants.
Avant tout, je prie Votre Excellence de remarquer (je parle en connaissance parfaite
des faits) que le« habitants de la Cote-Maclay (partie de la Cote N.E. de la Nouvelle-
Guinee, entre le Cap Croisilles et le Cap King William), etant une population agricole et
nombreuse (pres de 15,000 a 20,000 homines au moins,) sont strictement lies au sol
qu’ils cultivent: chaque pouce de terre, chaque arbre utile dans la foret, les poissons
dans chaque ruisseau, etc., etc,, ont un proprietaire ! Cette propriete est reconnue et


respectee par les voisins. L’invasion d’etrangers qui voudraient occuper une terre dejd
occupee et cultive depuis des sidcles rnettraient les habitants de la cote entre les armes
des blancs et ceux des habitants des montagnes, qni ne voudraient pas ceder leur terre.
Des meurtres et des guerres sans jin auraient lieu, etc., etc.
Pour eviter des catastrophes semblables a celles qui ont desole les Mariannes, la
Nouv.-Zelande, la Tasmanie et autres, il ne serait que juste de declarer d temps, que
le Gouvernement Imperial, reconnaissa.nt le di oil des indigenes sur leur sol, ne protegera
pas les envahisseurs blancs, dans le cas ou les indigenes, defendant leur terrain, leurs
femmes, leurs enfants, et leurs autres proprietes, essaieraient de faire respecter leurs droits
a main armee, en s’opposant aux envahisseurs.
[Je prie Votre Excellence de retnarquer, que ce que je demande {droit sur le sol) a ete
sanctionne par le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste, en Nouv.-Zelande, en 1840, par le
Traite de Vaitangi.]
L’histoire du contact de la race blanche avec les peuples de I’Oceanie nous montrc
le resultat funeste de I’introduction des alcools par les blancs, dont les tristes suites
rivalisent avec les effets des maladies introduites et la poudre (dernierement la dynamite
en Nouv.-Caledonie) pour exterminer les races non blanches.
La merne histoire nous prouve que les tentatives genereuses des Gouvernements
Europeens pour proteger les indigenes contre les violences et les injustices des enva-
hisseurs blancs, sont ordinairement venues trop tard, quand le mal btait deja fait, quand
les torts des deux cotes avaient about! a exciter une haine insatiable et constamment
attisee.
C’est une raison de plus pour que Votre Excellence prenne ces remarques en
consideration. Les mesures pour prevenir le mal, plus tard irreparable, peuvent arrirer
encore d temps.
Pour ne pas fatiguer Votre Excellence, je me resume: j’ose demander pour ia protec-
tion des habitants de la C6te-Maclay que le Gouvernement Imperial,—•
1. Reconnaisse le droit complet des indigenes de la Nouvelle-Guinee (Cote-Maclay)
sur leur sol:
2. Interdise, ou rende improbable (par des taxes bien eievees), Vimportation et la rente
aux indigenes des alcools, des armes, et de la poudre.
(8i le § 1 a etc sanctionne par le Traite de Vaitangi, 1840, le § 2 a ete ordonne aussi
en Nouvelle-Zelande en 1852 par le Gouverueur Sir George Grey.)
Si Votre Excellence pense que puisque la Nouvelle-Guinee n’est pas encore annexee
par le Gouvernement Imperial, le Gouvernement de la Grande Bretagne n’a pas le
droit de proclaracr ces lois, je supplie Votre Excellence, au nom de I'humanite et de la
justice, de ne pas oublicr cette lettre, quand Votre Excellence jugera possible de faire
quelque chose pour mcs pauvres proteges de la Cote-Maclay, et d’etendre, si possible, ces
reglemeutations aussi aux autres parties independant.es de la Nouvelle-Guinee et aux lies
de la Melanesie.
En cedant a mes representations instantes et de sinter essees, le Gouvernement Imperial
meritera des siecles a venir le titre de juste et de sage.
Nicholas de Miklouho-Maclay.
Son Excellence Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
Gouverneur de Fiji et Haut-Coramissaire de
Sa Majeste Britannique dans le Pacifique Occidental.
No. 37.
THE RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART., to GOVERNOR A. E.
KENNEDY, K.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND).
Sir, Downing Street, 21st April 1879-
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the 23rd
of January,* enclosing for my information a pamphlet containing letters addressed
to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland by Mr. H. M. Chester, Police Magistrate of
Thursday Island in Torres Straits, respecting his expeditions to New Guinea in
December 1877 and July and August 1878.
I have read Mr. Chester’s letters with interest ; but I had, prior to the receipt of your
Despatch, already received copies of most of them through the Lords Commissioners of
the Admiralty,! to whom they had been transmitted, by the Commodore on the Australian
*■ No. 35.
t No. 26,
O 3


station, and I had communicated them to the High Commissioner for the Western
Pacific, who, as you are aware, is now in this country.
I should, however, be glad to receive a few more copies of the pamphlet containing
Mr. Chester’s letters, and I must again remind you that copies of such reports should
be communicated to the High Commissioner or to the Acting High Commissioner and
to this Department as soon as they may reach your Government.
I have, &c.
Sir A. E. Kennedy. (Signed) M. E. HICKS BEACH.
No. 38.
THE RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART., to the OFFICER
ADMINISTERING THE GOVERNMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Sir, Downing Street, 25th April 1879-
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Sir H. Robinson’s Despatch
of the 22nd of February,* transmitting to me, at the request of Baron Miklouho-Maclay,
a copy of a letter which he has addressed to the High Commissioner for the Western
Pacific respecting New Guinea.
This letter has also been communicated to me by Sir A. Gordon, by whom a direct
answer to it will be returned to Baron Maclay. I may, however, add for your own
information that I have authorised Sir A. Gordon to inform Baron Maclay that the
circumstances of the case would not justify Her Majesty’s Government in such action as
that which he proposes, but that the right of the natives to their own land is fully
recognized, and that, so far as British subjects are concerned, the High Commissioner
will do his utmost to check the introduction of firearms and spirituous liquors into New
Guinea.
I have, &c.
(Signed) M. E. HICKS BEACH.
The Officer Administering the Government,
New South Wales.
No 39.
ACTING HIGHT COMMISSIONER GORRIE to the RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS
BEACH, BART.— (Received July 5, 1579.)
High Commission, Levaka, Fiji,
Sir, _ " 28th April 1879-
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your Despatch of 4th February
1879,f to express my gratification that my efforts, so unsatisfactory to myself,
to bring the questions regarding New Guinea and the working generally of the High
Commission before you, should be deemed worthy of favourable notice.
2. The approaching completion of the leave of absence of the High Commissioner,
and the duty which I observe, from a telegraphic report of an answer to a question in
the House of Commons, you have laid upon him of reporting more fully upon these
important matters, relieves me of the responsibility of further referring to them,
except to keep the Department advised of any movements which may take place.
8. I annex a newspaper account from a missionary, the Reverend .1. Chalmers, of the
poisoning of native teachers in Orangerie Bay and Lawes Bay.
4. I annex a further extract in regard to the killing of Mr. Irons and Another at
Cloudy Bay.
5. A third extract from Captain Turpie, of the mission ship “ John Williams,” seems
to point to offences on the part of white men as the cause of these troubles.
* No. 36.
f Not printed.


6. H.M.S. “ Cormorant,” now in this port, has just returned from Cloudy Bay, New
Guinea, where Captain Bruce has been to investigate some of these matters. Commo-
dore Wilson, in the “ Wolverine,” arrived last night, and I have just returned from the
ship, but have missed him. There will not be time to write by this mail of anything
which may have been learned or done in regard to the various offences which are said to
have been committed in several of the islands.
7. I acknowledged in ray letter of Bth January 1879?* the receipt of two telegrams
relating to the subject of New Guinea, but I fear I have not yet formally acknow-
ledged receipt of one of a later date, received through his Excellency the Governor
of New South Wales, of date 22nd January, to the following effect:—“ Inform
“ Justice Gorrie I think it necessary he should remain in Fiji, and not be absent on
“ High Commission business without instructions. Brown’s case should await Gordon’s
“ return.”
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Secretary of State (Signed) JOHN GORRIE.
for the Colonies.
Enclosure 1 in No. 39-
Poisoning of Native Teacheks.
The New Guinea Massacres.
[“ Sydney Morning Herald,” March 27-]
The Rev. J. Chalmers, the well-known missionary, gives the subjoined account of the
Cloudy Bay murders :
“ On our return to the east of New Guinea, we called in Orangerie Bay, where we
found Mareare and his wife were dead, and heard that, the Isuisu teachers were dead ;
that all had been poisoned. The chief people of Dufaure were very much afraid, and
when they saw the steamer went off to the bush. The teacher came on board, and
after spending a short time with us, returned to the shore, and sent word to the natives
to return and meet me, assuring them we should not kill them. The next morning we
went ashore; all were assembled, and very anxious to give us compensation. I got the
following from the teacher Jakoba:—They were getting on well, and had finished their
house, cookhouse, and plantation, when suddenly Mareare’s wife took ill, lingering on
for some time. On the 20th January Mareare was seized with illness; he became
perfectly rigid, ‘just like a piece of wood,’ never spoke, and on the morning of the 22nd
died, his wife dying a very few minutes after him. The following day they were both
buried. After the burial, Meandi, the chief, came to Jakoba, and told him to keep
carefully indoors all his pans, kettles, and buckets, and never again to leave them out-
side, and to be careful what he eat and drank. He then told him that he and his people
were going to Auiau (Ellengowan Bay), to kill Nauagere, as he had just found out that
he had been to Dufaure, and that it was he who poisoned Mareare and his wife. He
said he was very much afraid of Tamate’s return, and he felt sure if he could show the
head of the prisoner it would be all right. Jakoba persuaded him to remain, and leave
Nauagere in the meantime.
“ Nauagere is a sorcerer employed by the people, and paid for what he does ; but, not
confiding in his magic power alone, he makes sure of his victims by poisoning.
“ We proceeded on our voyage, taking Jakoba and his wife with us, and called at
Isuisu, Lawes Bay. On going ashore we found the natives very shy, keeping well back
from the beach and near their houses. On our nearing their houses w T e saw they had
their arms all ready on the platforms. They denied the poisoning of their teachers,
saying ‘ they had just died.’ At Dufaure we were told that they had all been poisoned,
in order that the natives might get their hoop-iron, tomahawks, red cloth, and beads.
They were very anxious to make friends with us, and give compensation for the deaths.
The house so recently put up was standing with nothing in it, and in front were three
graves. A native of South Cape, who was at Isuisu at the time, buried the dead, and
surrounded their graves with a fence. ThejHold us the teacher (Toa kainga) from South
Cape had been there, and that he got the child and things, and that there was another
grave round the point.
* Not printed.
O 4


“ The South Cape people said very little to me on my arrival about the deaths until
the Sabbath, when, after speaking to them of the deaths of the teachers and the hope
those have who receive Christ, one suddenly turned round and asked me, ‘ What are you
going to do about those who died at Isuisu?’— £ What can Ido ? they were sick and
died.’ ‘No; they were killed; and Nauagere, of A uian, did it.’ ‘How was it done ?’
‘The dimdims were not very well, and he put poison in their food and drinking water.
He lived at Boneava ’ (inland village) ‘ during the day, and cause to Isuisu at night.'
“ Then, turning to a lad close by, he told him to go out and fetch in the plant used.
When the boy returned he had with him the roots and leaves of a plant used by the
natives in fishing. A little of it is put on the end of a long stick, which is thrust under
a stone, and if fish are there they soon come up dead. They got a cocoa-nut shell with
a little water, and pressed a little sap from a piece of the root into it, which soon turned
the water white. I said, ‘ What effect will that have upon me if I drink it now ?’ ‘ You
would soon die.’ ‘Come,’ they said, ‘take the boat and let us go down and take
Nauagere; we should like to eat him.’
“ Toakainga tells me that on his return from Isuisu with the child, an old man here,
who had been very friendly with us from the beginning, warned him against taking
medicine of any kind from the natives, and to look well after himself. At the Leocadie,
Dinner Island, and Teste, they gave the same story as to the poisoning, and that
Nauagere, a professional poisoner, was employed by the people of Isuisu, so that they
might get the teachers’ property.
“ It was difficult at first for me to believe that any of them was poisoned, but from all
I have learnt along the coast there is now no doubt whatever in my mind.”
Enclosure 2 in No. 39-
Killing op Irons and Willis.
The same gentleman writes as under respecting the recent deaths in New Guinea: —
“ Two gentlemen from Sydney came to New Guinea, accompanied by a workman, in
quest of cedar. 'The vessel they had chartered returned to Sydney, leaving them at
South Cape. Irons, one of the partners, determined to visit Cloudy Bay, and would
listen to no one as to the madness of the undertaking. So, assisted by Willis, their
workman, the boat left by the vessel was got ready. Seeing Irons and Willis determined
to go down the coast in a small open boat, and as we were going the same way in the
‘ Ellengowan,’ we offered to tow them down to Sandbank Bay. They gladly accepted
our offer, and on Tuesday, the 17th December, we left South Cape. On Thursday,
the I9th December, at 2 p.rn., when off the sandpoint between Cloudy Bay and Sand-
bank Bay, they dropped the towline, and sailed in with a fair wind to the point. We
proceeded on our voyage, anxious to get to Kerepunu because of the number of teachers
and their wives we had on board.
“On Monday, the 23rd December, we heard from natives of Kerepunu and Reokaro
that two men were murdered up the coast, and on making inquiry found that it could
be no others than those we left.
“ I was at Keppel Point lately, and there I heard the following particulars ; —The
boat got ashore; one man was very sick (Willis was sick when they left us), and
lay down on the beach. The natives of Mulapo, a village on the mainland opposite
Eugenie Island, came along, saw him lying there, and unable to help himself, being
unarmed they speared him. The}" saw another (Irons) walking about in the bush;
they rushed on him, caught him by the hair of the head, clubbed him, and cut his head
off. They left the bodies on the beach, broke the guns, took all in the shape of iron,
and left the boat with provisions.
“ Meeting Captain Webb at Port Moresby, on his way to Constance, and learning
from him he was going further east shortly, I asked him to call at Sandbank and
Cloudy Bays and make enquiries.
“We met Captain Webb the other day. Pie told us that on his arrival at Constance
he sent off an armed boat in charge of Mr. Hastings, his station master, instructing him
to examine all round the two bays. Near to the Sandy Point they saw a piece of the
boat and an old shoe lying close to the stump of a tree, and near to were marks as if a
straggle had taken place. They sailed along the coast inside of Eugenie, and close by
Mulapo. When the natives saw them they came rushing along the beach with their
shields and arms, and a number came into the sea near to where the boat was, as if to
get at the boat. To keep them off they were fired upon, and after some little time they
disappeared.


“ The boat went round Cloudy Bay to Dedele on Columbia Point. Hastings traded
with the natives, buying pigs and food from them. The natives were altogether too
friendly, and to anyone acquainted with them it was evident mischief was meant. They
tried to get the boat’s crew ashore, gave Hastings presents, showed him a piece of pork,
and invited him ashore to a feast, but none were tempted. They anchored off that
night. The following morning part of the crew went ashore to cook breakfast ; shortly
after, Hastings saw armed men sneaking about in the bush, and others assembling at the
village. He called to his men to hurry on board, and to come backwards towards the
boat, so as to keep the natives in front. The natives tried to cut off their retreat, but
failed. After getting on board, all soon had their arms. That the natives determined
to take the boat is certain; but Hastings and his men were too much for them. Several
were shot.
“ The ease with which the Mulapo natives got hoop-iron, tomahawks, and knives by
murdering Irons and Willis, makes the other villagers desirous of doing the same.”
Enclosure 3 in No. 39.
Opinion of Capt. Turpie, of Mission Ship “ John Williams.”
Captain Turpie, of the mission ship “ John Williams,” writes :
“ That within 1,500 miles of our port a nest of pirates landed from a vessel sailing
from these Colonies, who, after killing those in command of them, should be permitted to
carry on their lawless proceedings, —murdering boats’ crews and committing outrages
upon the natives of the adjacent islands, which if committed in a civilised land would
meet with speedy and bloody retribution, —seems incredible, but it is too true.
“ Recent intelligence from New Guinea states that a very hostile feeling exists all
along the south coast of New Guinea towards foreigners. This is not surprising to those
who know something of what is occasionally taking place on that coast. Would the
deliberate shooting and burying in the sand of the native of Hula some few months since
by our countrymen be likely to foster a friendly feeling towards foreigners ? I trow
not.
“ Would the outrage committed by one or two of our countrymen at Port Moresby
on the natives tend to increase their friendship for us ? I think not. There are man}
other matters which I could mention that are not favourable to friendship between them
and us. lam not at all disposed to paint the New Guinea natives as lambs—oh, no.
But, though savages, they are reasoning animals ; and it does not require a very great
amount of intelligence to understand that these same pirates referred to were conveyed
to their shores by white men, and that with the aid of white men’s guns they have com-
mitted outrages upon the natives which would not be borne for a day by civilized men.
No man is justified in taking the life of another unless that other has forfeited his life by
attempting or accomplishing a murder. It is a difficult thing to decide when among
savages how long to forbear; but lam safe to assert that no one should go among such
people without being extremely careful not to give offence ; and they must, if they wish
to avoid trouble, be slow to take offence. The teachers and missionaries have difficulties
enough to contend with, without additional ones being created by our own countrymen.
Neither is it worldly wisdom to thus impede the progress of their -work. It is an
indisputable fact that throughout the South Pacific commerce has followed rapidly in the
wake of missionary work. By creating wants amongst the people, the missionary opens
up a source of traffic which the trader, nor, the missionary, profits by. 1 write from
experience of these matters, and would conclude by saying, as I did two months since,
that great care and caution are requisite in dealing with these people. A more energetic
race of savages I have seldom seen.”
R 6853. p


No. 40.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, K.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT HON.
SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART. (Received August 27, 1879.)
Government House, Brisbane,
Sir, June 30, 1879-
Referring to your Despatch, dated 4th February 1879,* asking for reports
respecting the affairs of New Guinea by Mr. Chester, Police Magistrate at Thursday
Island, and my reply thereto, dated 7th May 1879,* I have now the honour to forward
a copy of a letter from the Honourable the Colonial Secretary, together with a copy
of a further report from Mr. Chester, dated 2nd June 1879-
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, (Signed) A. E. KENNEDY.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 40.
Sir, Brisbane, June 24, 1879.
Referring to Despatch of 4th February 1879, respecting the visit of
Mr. Chester, police magistrate at Thursday Island, to New Guinea, and requesting
that he may be called upon for an explanation of his omission to communicate with the
High Commissioner, I have the honour to forward herewith copy of Mr. Chester’s
report in reply.
I have, &c.,
His Excellency (Signed) A. H. Palmer.
Sir Arthur E. Kennedy, K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Governor, &c., &c., Brisbane.
Sir, Thursday Island, June 2, 1879-
1 have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 30th April last,
enclosing copy of a Despatch from the Secretary of State for the Colonies, re affairs in
New Guinea, and requesting me to report upon the same.
In reply, I have the honour to report that the expedition to New Guinea referred
to was undertaken Jby order of the Queensland Government, and not in my capacity
of judicial commissioner, my commission as such not extending to the Coast of New
Guinea.
Since receiving the above appointment nothing has arisen calling for report to the
High Commissioner, hence no reports have been forwarded.
With reference to my letter of 6th September last, I beg to state that about 18 months
before the native crew of the ketch “ Retrieve,” a British vessel, mutinied, murdered
their officers, burned the vessel, and joined the natives of Brooker Island with several
boats and a quantity of Snider rifles and ammunition. The commander of H.M.S.
“ Sappho ” was informed of this, but took no steps to punish these pirates when in their
neighbourhood. This being the case, and because I imagined that the suppression of
piracy was a matter that concerned every civilised Government, I made a report on the
subject.
It is a matter for regret that even now, after the special visit of H.M.S. “ Cormorant”
to Brooker Island, these miscreants should still be at large with both power and the will
to perpetrate further massacres.
I have, &c.,
The Honourable the Colonial (Signed) Henry M. Chester, P.M.
Secretary, Brisbane.
* Not printed.


No. 41.
The RIGHT HON. SIR M. E. HICKS BEACH, BART., to HIGHT COMMISSIONER
the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, September 6, 1879-
With reference to your letter of the 21st of January* and to the reply from this
Department of the Bth of the following month,* I have the honour to transmit to you,
for your information, a copy of a Despatch]- from the Governor of Queensland, with its
enclosures, containing Mr. Chester’s explanation of his omission to communicate with
the High Commissioner or Acting High Commissioner for the Western Pacific on the
affairs of New Guinea.
I have, &c.,
Sii A. 11. Gordon. (Signed) M. E. HICKS BEACH.
No. 42.
HIGHT COMMISSIONER the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to the RIGHT HON.
the EARL OF KIMBERLEY. (Received June 6, 1881.)
My Lord, Wellington, New Zealand, April 22, 1881.
I have the honour to enclose extracts from the “ Lyttleton Times,” respecting a
proposal for the colonisation of New Guinea now set on foot here.
2. I have also the honour to enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from
Baron Miklouho-Maclay, the well-known Russian naturalist and explorer, on the subject
of this contemplated expedition.
3. A copy of Baron Maclay’s former letter, j to which he refers, was forwarded to
Sir Michael Hicks-Beach on the 9th April 1879? during my stay in England. My
remarks upon it will be found in my letter§ to the Secretary of State of that date.
4. I propose to communicate with the promoters of the projected expedition in the
sense of the reply addressed by me two years ago at Melbourne to the directors of an
association having a similar object, my language on which occasion was so fortunate as
to meet with the approval of Her Majesty’s Government.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. _ (Signed) ARTHUR GORDON.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Enclosure in No. 42.
[By Telegraph. —Own Correspondent.]
Christchurch, Monday.
The following paragraph is published by the “ Times ” this morning :
“ Colonisation of New Guinea.— It will be remembered that about two years ago an
expedition was formed at Wellington for the purpose of exploring New Guinea, with the
view to the opening up of trade, and, eventually, the colonisation of a portion of it. A
barque, called the “ Courier,” was purchased for the purpose, and the members of the
expedition returned a few months ago. They were not so successful in a pecuniary
sense as was hoped, partly owing to the man who sold the barque having overreached
the purchasers in certain particulars, and to other circumstances inseparable from an.
enterprise hurriedly undertaken ; but the promoters have, apparently, gathered enough
to satisfy them that another expedition would be certain of success, for they are now
taking steps to form a company with a capital of 20,000/., with the same object as the
original venture. The “ Courier ” visited Astrolabe Gulf, on the north-east coast, and
* Not printed.
J Enclosure in No. 36.
f No. 40.
§ Not printed.
P 2


found the natives very tractable and disposed to trade. They parted with land readily,
showing a childish eagerness to acquire empty bottles, hoop-iron, old nails, &c., and,
according to the description given of them, were ready enough to work upon being shown
the -way. Scented woods were found in quantities, and tobacco and sugar were both, we
were informed, growing there. The idea of the promoters is to obtain about 2,000 men
with some capital, say about 200/. a-piece, colonise the land properly, and develop
trade generally. Mr. R. Mills, who accompanied the former expedition, states that he
has received a very large number of applications already, and he expects to be able to
sail about August. Mr. Mills has brought with him numerous views taken on the spot,
which give a good idea of the kind of natives and aspect of the country.”
New Guinea Expedition.
To the Editor.
Sir,
My attention has been drawn to an article in your issue of March 25, relative to
the proposed expedition to New Guinea in August next. As there appears to be some
misapprehension on your part regarding the disposition of the natives inhabiting the
part of the island in question, and the capabilities of the country for producing anything
in the shape of a profitable return, I submit the following :
You say. Sir; “ It is useless to lament over what is inevitable, and, from at least one
“ point of view, bjr no means without its beneficial side, since it is certainly better that
“ our working population should have the courage and energy to shift for themselves,
“ instead of remaining discontented and perhaps impoverished in our midst. But it is
“ quite another thing to remain silent when schemes are mooted which have for their
“ object to withdraw labour and capital from New Zealand, which might be advan-
“ tageously employed here, for the purpose of wasting them on enterprises which cool
“ reflection must make appear impracticable and visionary.” There is nothing visionary
about it. The promoters have received upwards of 300 applications from persons of
various trades and professions who are ready and willing to put up the requisite
“ stamps ” and colonise this particular part of the island. Having visited the island
myself, I can speak from experience, that a more desirable race of people than the
Papuans living in the vicinity of Astrolabe Gulf it is impossible to m -et with. It is true
they are heathens (worshipping the sun), but, Sir, they are not, as you state, “ backward
in civilisation and intolerable thieves and liars.” They are quite the other way, being
extremely modest and honest. Whatever they agreed to, they performed. You say,
Sir, there is no ebony there. lam prepared to state on oath that I have eaten from an
ebony howl of nearly two feet in diameter, and have seen four others of about the same
size.
Then again, Sir, you state: “ They have visited Astrolabe Bay, on the north-east
coast of the island, and found the soil fertile and the natives friendly and eager to
engage in barter, and they now wish to form a company with a capital of 20,000/. for
the object of colonising this Equatorial Utopia.” Admitted. But „o taking the
20,000/. out of the Colony, it is quite the contrary. This capital will be invested in the
purchase of a steamer and sailing vessel, together with whale boats, steam launches,
trade goods, provisions, fire-arms, and implements of every description necessary for the
establishment of a settlement. It is anticipated that a cargo of copra could be snipped
to New Zealand within four months of arrival in the country, leaving the steamer there
in case of emergency. Messrs Moresby, Stone, and Goldie’s works may be very good,
giving as they do a description of the southernmost part of New Guinea, where the
country is of such a marshy character as would not be conducive to the health of
Europeans residing there ; but as to Signor D’Albertis’ description of the island, it is
only excelled by his admiration for the Papuan ladies. But I speak straight facts when I
say that the native chiefs on this particular part have evinced the greatest desire for
Europeans to settle there.
As to climate, you can get any you wish for, the land being of a terracy nature, as
shown by the photographs we obtained on the spot. Sir, “ the apparatus can’t lie.”
None of our party, after remaining there a number of weeks, suffered from climatic
influences. Unlike the Marquis De Rays’ expedition to New Ireland, wdio remind us of
“ the foolish virgins who kept no oil in their lamps,” we took plenty of quinine, and
gradually reduced the doses till we could dispense with it altogether.
In conclusion, I consider that the article referred to appears to have been written by
one totally unacquainted with the subject he treats, or, at any rate, having a very


imperfect knowledge derived from works, in some cases written by persons who have
never visited this particular spot, Drury Sound. This expedition originated in Dunedin,
and not Wellington, as stated in the article referred to.
I am, &c.,
A. MILLS,
Secretary, New Guinea Expedition.
Christchurch, March 26.
Baron Maclay to the High Commissioner.
Your Excellency, Melbourne, April 9, 1881.
Learning from a recent paragraph in the “ Lyttleton Times ” that a scheme for
the settlement upon the Maclay coast (Astrolabe Bay) is now being promoted, I take
the liberty of reminding your Excellency of a request made by me in an open letter of
January 1879-
I wish to draw the attention of your Excellency to the fact that this tract of country
is thickly populated and that the land is entirely owned by different communities
engaged in tilling the soil, which has been under cultivation for centuries. Indeed, in
the forest, every useful tree has its particular and recognised owner. The fish, molluscs,
and all pr r .ace of the sea, rivers, and coast belong to the inhabitants of adjacent
villages.
As the natives of the Maclay coast have no hereditary Chiefs in the proper traditional
sense of the word, and the Chiefs “ de facto,” not “ de juris,” have only an influence
over others derived from their personal character and individual capacity, the sale of
land is a difficult matter.
A general consent to a sale of land to the intruders, is a very unlikely event, and
even should it take place, the land being communal property, each member of the
community has a right to claim his own share of the payment for it. Again, the
natives do not understand parting with their laud absolutely (for this reason I never
should have considered it right to attempt the acquisition of a freehold property on my
coast). Is it a just act on the part of a so-called civilised people to deliberately swindle
a simple-minded race of fellow-creatures out of valuable property for a few bottles, some
old nails, or “ trade ” axes ? . . . .
The request which I had the honour to make to your Excellency in 1879 I will now
repeat
1. That the right of the natives of the Maclay coast to the soil in the fullest extent
of the word should he respected,; and
2. That the importation of spirits should be prevented.
As a sincere friend of the natives, and as one who has lived with them for many years,
understanding their language and customs, 1 claim the attention of your Excellency.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) N. ue Miklouho-Maclay.
No. 43.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF KIMBERLEY to HIGHT COMMISSIONER
the HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, June 29, 1881.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the
22nd of April,* enclosing extracts from the “ Lyttleton Times ” respecting a proposal
for the colonisation of New Guinea, with a copy of a letter on the subject addressed to
you by Baron Miklouho Mad ay.
The communication which you propose to address to the promoters of the projected
expedition, in the sense of the reply made by you two years ago at Melbourne to the
directors of a similar association, appears to Her Majesty’s Government to be proper.
I have, &c.,
Sir A. H. Gordon. (Signed) KIMBERLEY.
* No. 42.
P 3


No. 44.
F. P. LABILLIERE, ESQ., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
5, Pump Court, Temple,
My Lord, December 11, 1882.
On March 26th, 1874, I had the honour of addressing* the Right Honourable the
Earl of Carnarvon, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, upon the importance to
British interests of the Island of New Guinea, especially in view of the possibility of
any foreign power becoming possessed of the territory—an event which I submitted must
necessitate an increased expenditure upon defences both by the Imperial Government
and the Governments of the Australian Colonies.
The Earl of Carnarvon deemed the question of so much consequence that his Lordship
at once submitted it to the Governors of the Australian Colonies and to other eminent
authorities, all of whom recognised its importance, and several of them recommended that
Eastern New Guinea should be included within Her Majesty’s Dominions. I think I
am also quite correct in saying that the correspondence which was laid before both
Houses of Parliament in July 1876 f shows that this step would have been taken if the
question of expense could have been adjusted between the Imperial Government and the
Governments of the Australian Colonies.
I venture to submit that the principal reasons which in 1874 I was able to bring
forward in favour of the extension of British authority to New Guinea have gained
strength in the interval which has elapsed, and that they have been brought into greater
prominence by recent events. 1 need only refer to the policy now being advocated bv
the French press, and notably within the last few days by one of its most leading
organs, the “ Journal des Debats ” of France, appropriating available territories in various
parts of the globe for the extension of her colonisation. This policy is also being carried
out to a considerable extent by the French Government extending in several directions
its protectorate —the first step usually taken by France when she intends to annex a
territory. On the Congo, in Madagascar, at Tonkin she has begun actively to pursue
this policy. In the Pacific she has within the last few mouths extended her protectorate
to the Island of Raiatea, in spite of an understanding with Great Britain not to advance
in that direction; and she is reported to have designs upon the New Hebrides, which
would, if carried out, bring her nearer to New Guinea.
As recently as November 27th a leading German paper, the “ Allgemeine Zeitung,”
strongly advocated the annexation by Germany of Eastern New Guinea. The Germans
being good colonists would be much more desirable neighbours than the French, who,
in tneir abortive attempts at colonisation, only succeed in excluding races capable rf
colonising from territories which they would soon develop. But it would be detri-
mental to British interests, both Imperial and Colonial, were Germany, France, or any
other power to possess such a large territory as Eastern New Guinea within 80 miles of
our Australian Dominions, and commanding one side of such a great ocean highway for
the commerce of England as Torres Straits are becoming.
The value to British commerce of the Island of Borneo has recently been conspicu-
ously recognised by a royal charter having been conferred upon a company has
acquired a considerable territory in the island. I venture to think that, important as
Borneo undoubtedly is to British interests. New Guinea is likely to prove of equal value
as a field of commercial enterprise, and for strategic and defensive reasons of far greater
consequence to us —perhaps all the more so, if allowed to pass into the hands of a
foreign power.
1 beg to submit that the occupation by the Imperial Government of one or two points
on the coast of New Guinea at a small cost would be sufficient for the purpose of annex-
ation till more substantially effected by the private enterprise of our people, which
probably would soon follow, or that a British protectorate might be sufficiently pro-
claimed and maintained so as to exclude any other nation from occupying any part of
tHL territory.
I have, &c,
(Signed) FRANCIS P. LABILLIERE.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Kimberley,
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
* See No. 2 in [C.-1566], July 1876,
| [C.-1566], July 1876.


No. 45.
FOREIGN OFFICE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Foreign Office, December 18, 1882.
The enclosed communication has been received from the Royal Colonial Institute,
calling attention to the detriment which would in their opinion accrue to the interests of
the British Empire if the eastern part of the island of New Guinea were annexed by
any foreign power.
It appears to Lord Granville that this question is one which principally concerns the
Colonial Office, and I am consequently to request that you will move Her Majesty’s
Secretary of State to deal with it and return an answer to the Colonial Institute.
The Council have been informed that their letter has been referred to the Colonial
Office.
1 am to add that Lord Granville has no reason to suppose that the German Govern-
ment contemplate any scheme of colonization.
I am, &c.
The TT nder Secretary of State, (Signed) T. V. LISTER.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 45.
My Lord, Royal Colonial Institute, December 9, 1882.
I have the honour, on behalf of the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, to
request the attention of Her Majesty’s Government to an article contained in the
“ Allgemeine Zeitung ” of the 27th November last, recommending the German Govern-
ment to annex and colonize New Guinea.
On reference to Parliamentary Paper, C.—1566, of 1876, your Lordship will observe
that on 29th April 1875 a large and influential deputation waited on Lord Carnarvon to
present a memorial from the Council and Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute,
strongly advocating the annexation of the eastern half of New Guinea by Great Britain.
Among the arguments adduced in favour of such action being taken one of the most
important was that its possession by any foreign power would for many reasons be highly
detrimental to British interests.
One of the deputation, the Hon. Arthur (now Lord) Kinnaird, remarked that
“ Germany was determined to be a great naval power, and would look to colonization
“ as the principal means to that end, and if she looked to New Guinea we may lose a
“ very important colony.” (Proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute, Yol. VI.,
p. 204.)
The Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, still holding the opinions expressed in
the memorial referred to, request me to convey to your Lordship the hope that the
whole question may have the earnest attention of Her Majesty’s Government, with a
view to the annexation of the eastern portion of New Guinea, in order to prevent any
action on the part of a foreign power which would be so seriously detrimental to the
interests of the British Empire.
1 have, &c.
The Earl Granville, K.G., , (Signed) F. Young,
&c. &c. &c. Hon. Secretary.
No. 46.
COLONIAL OFFICE to F. P. LABILLIERE, ESQ.
Sir, Downing Street, December 28, 1882.
I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 11th instant,* giving your views with regard to the extension of British authority in
New Guinea, and to acquaint you that the question is one which Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment are not prepared at present to re-open.
I am, &c.
F. P. Labilliere, Esq. (Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
* No. 44.
1’ 4


No. 47.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
Sir, Downing Street, January 4, 1883.
I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acquaint you that your letter* of the
9th ultimo to Earl Granville, respecting New Guinea, has been referred to this
Department.
Lord Derby desires me to state that the proposal that a portion of that country
should be annexed by Great Britain is one which Her Majesty’s Government are not
prepared to entertain, and that bis Lordship has no reason for supposing that the
German Government contemplate any scheme of colonization in the direction indicated
by the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ” of the 27th November.
I am, &c.
(Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
The Secretary to the Colonial Institute.
No. 48.
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.,
My Loud, February 28, 1883.
I have the honour to transmit herewith copy of a telegraphic Despatch received
from Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, Premier of Queensland, instructing me to urge on the
attention of the Imperial Government the expediency of annexing to the Colony of
Queensland the Island of New Guinea, only those portions of the Island not claimed by
the Government of Holland being meant.
In addition to the reasons stated in the telegraphic Despatch, I beg to call your
Lordship’s attention to the rapid development of several industries on the coast of New
Guinea and the islands adjacent carried on principally by Queensland colonists ; the
principal of these industries are gold mining, pearl diving, and Beche-de-Mer fishing,
which employ a rapidly increasing number of colonists, among whom it becomes more
and more difficult for the authorities appointed by the Queensland Government to exer-
cise adequate control, the jurisdiction of that Government extending at present onlv to
islands within 60 miles of the Queensland coast.
The High Commissioner of the Western Pacific is also quite unable, on account of
the very extended nature of his jurisdiction, to exercise an adequate supervision over
those settlers who are rapidly peopling the islands and coasts of New Guinea who are
beyond the 60 mile radius, and therefore practically outside all legal restraint in their
dealings with the natives and with each other. A glance at the map will show that
whoever is in possession of the southern coast of New Guinea, and more especially of
the mountainous peninsula forming the south-eastern extremity of the Island practically
dominates Torres Straits and its numerous and important islands, commands the only
direct approach to Queensland from Europe, and is able to establish an effectual b’ mkade
of the northern terminus of the trans-continental railway about to be extended trom
Brisbane to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Queensland has already experienced much inconvenience and some loss from the
escape and landing on her coast of political convicts and other malefactors from the
French penal settlement of New Caledonia, though that island is separated from her by
nearly 1,000 miles of ocean ; it is not unreasonable therefore that some apprehension
should exist in the Colony at the possibility of a similar establishment being formed by
some foreign Government almost within sight of her territory, and that the Government
of the Colony should be desirous of taking timely steps to prevent the occurrence of
such a misfortune. It is hoped that these reasons will induce your Lordship to give
the sanction of the Imperial Government to the proposal embodied in Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith’s telegraphic Despatch.
I have, &c.
(Signed) THOS. ARCHER,
To the Right Hon. the Secretary of State Agent General for Queensland,
for the Colonies.
* Enclosure in No. 45.


Enclosure in No. 48.
Brisbane, February 26, 1883.
Urge Imperial Government annex New Guinea to Queensland; reasons, large increase
steamer traffic through Torres Straits. Population settled there require Government.
Imperial coaling depot established ; danger to Colonies if other powers take possession.
Queensland will bear expense of Government and take formal possession on receipt of
Imperial authority by cable; letters by mail.
(Signed) Mcllwraith.
No. 49.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY to GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY,
G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND).
Sir, Downing Street, March 8, 1883.
1 have the honour to transmit to you a copy of a letter* from the Agent-General
for Queensland, enclosing a telegram from Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, instructing him to
urge Her Majesty’s Government to annex New Guinea to Queensland, and stating that
the Colony would bear the expense of Government, and would take formal possession on
receipt of authority from the Imperial Government.
2. On the day after the receipt of this letter I had an interview with Mr. Archer who
gave further explanations of what he understood to be the views and objects of the
Queensland Government in making this important proposal., Mr. Archer stated that it
was to be distinctly understood that the Queensland Government did not desire to
throw upon this country either the expense or the direct responsibility attendant upon
the course proposed to be taken, but requested only such powers and authorities as
would enable them to preserve order and repress abuses. He laid stress on two points,
first, the number of British subjects and other Europeans scattered along the coasts of
New Guinea, who are practically under no jurisdiction or control, and who enjoy
immunity from the consequences of all outrages and offences they may commit; and
secondly, the serious inconvenience and danger which would be caused not only to
Queensland but to the other Australian Colonies if any foreign power were to take
possession of that portion of New Guinea which is not claimed by the Netherlands
Government, and is in immediate proximity to Queensland. He also di'ew my particular
attention to the continued increase of Colonial and other British traffic through Torres
Straits, and the probability that the greater part of the commerce between Australasia
and the far East would before long take this route.
3. In answer to a question which 1 put to him on the subject he stated that in his
opinion it would not be sufficient to establish an effective jurisdiction over British
subjects in New Guinea, inasmuch as foreigners and ships hoisting a foreign flag would
not be subject to such jurisdiction, and there would still be, as now, no power responsible
for and capable of enforcing peace and good order generally.
4. I pointed out to him that before so grave a step could be considered it would be
necessary' to be assured that public opinion in the Colony would approve the annexation,
and that the Legislature would adopt the necessary' resolutions; and that there would
be no danger of any proposal hereafter to reverse the action now recommended.
5. Mr. Archer expressed himself as decidedly 7 of opinion that the Government would
receive such strong and general support in this matter as to prove that the Colony fully
approved the annexation, and that there need be no apprehension of any attempt being
hereafter made to throw off the obligations and responsibilities when once assumed.
6. 1 inquired whether it might not be apprehended that the occupation of the island
in the manner proposed would lead to difficulties with the natives, and Mr. Archer
replied that he did not anticipate any such consequence, as he believed that there is no
intention of interfering with them, at least, for the present, except in those places on the
coast where they are already in contact with whites.
7. I then informed Mr. Archer that the subject is one of the greatest importance as
to which a decision could not be formed without very full and careful consideration, and
that 1 presumed that before long I should receive through you full explanations of the
proposal and such details as might enable Her Majesty’s Government to judge whether
* No. 48,
R 6853.
Q


it can be entertained. In the meantime I stated that I could express no opinion upon
the questions raised by the telegram, which must be considered by me with my colleagues
in the Government when it has been more formally brought under notice.
8. I shall be obliged by an expression of your own opinion, accompanied by any
observations that may occur to you as likely to assist Her Majesty’s Government in
arriving at a right conclusion on this question.
I have, &c.
Sir A. E. Kennedy. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 50.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND.
Sir, Downing Street, March 13, 1883.
1 am directed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 28th ultimo* forwarding a copy of a telegram from the
Premier of Queensland desiring you to propose the annexation of New Guinea to that
Colony, and lam to transmit to you, for your information, a copy of a Despatch - )- which
the Earl of Derby has addressed to the Governor of Queensland on the subject.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
The Agent-General for Queensland.
No. 51.
THE OFFICER ADMINISTERING THE GOVERNMENT (WESTERN AUSTRLIA)
to the RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received March 27, 1883.)
Government House, Perth,
My Lord, February 15, 1883.
I beg to enclose a copy of a letter under date the 13th of December 1882, and
which has been received here from the Honorary Secretary of the Colonial Institute.
I venture to remark that the subject is one which can only be properly considered, if
at all, by Her Majesty’s Government as a question of Imperial policy, and I refer your
Lordship respectfully to my reply.
2. At the still recent Inter-Colonial Conference to which I was a delegate, Mr. Berrv,
who then represented Victoria, expressed himself to the effect that, in the future,
Australia would protect and look after the interests of the Australian Colonies in what
he called the Asiatic Islands. I believe this form of Colonial policy has indirectly
expressed by Queensland, but in another form, and more particularly with reference to
certain islands of the Pacific.
I have, &c.
(Signed) H. T. WRENFORDSLEY,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, Administrator.
&c. &c. &c.
" Enclosure 1 in No. 51.
Sir, Royal Colonial Institute, 15, Strand, W.C.
I have the honour, on behalf of the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, to
request your Excellency’s attention to an article contained in the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ”
of the 27th November last, recommending the German Government to annex and
colonise New Guinea.
On referring to Parliamentary Paper, C.-1566, of 1876, your Excellency will observe
that on 29th April 1875 a large and and influential deputation waited on Lord Carnarvon
to present a memorial from the Council and Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute,
strongly advocating, the annexation of the eastern half of New Guinea by Great Britain.
* No. 48.
f No. 49.


Among the arguments adduced in favour of such action being taken, one of the most
important was that its possession by any foreign power would for many reasons be highly
detrimental to British interests.
One of the deputation, the Hon. Arthur (now Lord) Kinnaird, remarked that
“ Germany was determined to be a great naval power, and would look to colonization
“ as the principal means to that end, and if she looked to New Guinea, we may lose a
“ very important Colony. (Proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute, Yol. VI.,
page 204.)
The Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, still holding the opinions expressed in the
memorial referred to, beg that your Excellency will be pleased to draw the attention of
your Government to the article, of which I enclose a copy,* as it is evident that the
proposed action would be most disadvantageous to the interests of the Australasian
Colonies.
I have, &c.
(Signed; Frederick Young,
His Excellency the Governor, Honorary Secretary.
Perth, Western Australia.
Enclosure 2 in No. 51.
Sir, Government House, Perth, February 15, 1883.
I have to acknowledge your letter under date the 13th December 1882, by which
you forward an article contained in the “ Allgemeine Zeitung,” and request the Governor
of this Colony to draw the attention of this Government to the subject of the probable
annexation of New Guinea by the German Government, and advocating for the reasons
you suggest a certain annexation by Great Britain.
In reply I beg respectfully to observe that so far as German interests may possibly be
extended in that part of the eastern waters, it appears to me to be venturesome, if not
out of place, to express an opinion with reference to a subject which is clearly Imperial
in its application and results, and therefore best referred for the consideration of Her
Majesty’s Government.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Henry T. Wrenfordsley.
Frederick Young, Esq., Honorary Secretary,
Royal Colonial Institute, London.
No. 52.
GOVERNOR THE RIGHT HON. LORD A. LOFTUS, G.C.B. (NEW SOUTH WALES), to the
RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received April 6, 1883.)
My Lord, _ Sydney, February 19, 1883,
I have the honour to enclose to your Lordship herewith an interesting memoir
on the subject of New Guinea, which has been placed in my hands by Dr. Robertson,
who has been lately employed by an English company to visit and report on certain
mines in Northern Queensland.
2. The proposed annexation of New Guinea to which this memoir refers already
occupied the attention of Her Majesty’s Government in 1874 and 1875, when the
correspondence between the Earl of Carnarvon and Sir Hercules Robinson was submitted
to Parliament.
3. Although I folly concur in the opinion expressed by Sir Hercules Robinson in his
Despatch of 7th September 1874 f that the expense and responsibility of annexing New
Guinea would far outweigh any advantages to be derived from it, except by the Austra-
lian colonies, yet I consider that circumstances have very much changed since 1874,
which give another aspect to the subject. At that time there was no direct steam
navigation with Queensland through the Torres Straits. European attention had not
been directed (as it now has been since the Exhibitions of Sydney and Melbourne) to
the growing wealth of Australia, and there were no motives which could induce any
European power to aspire to annexation in the southern seas.
* See Enclosure in No. 56, page t 34.
f No. 10 in [C.-1566] July 1876.
Q 2


4. But of late this has much changer!. The French Government has annexed Tahiti
and the adjoining islands. They have established a penal colony in New Caledonia,
and it is reported are seeking other islands on which to hoi st the French flag. Their
attention, however, appears to be now directed to the acquisition of those islands which
lie on the direct line to Panama in view of the construction of a future canal.
5. The German Government are also said to have an eye on Samoa, where the large
Hamburgh firm of Godefrey had formerly established commercial relations, but which,
since the failure of that house, have somewhat declined.
6. It is suspected that proposals have been lately made to the Russian Government
by a certain Baron Maclay-Miklouho (a naturalist who has been wandering about the
South Sea Islands for the past 12 years, and at times is a resident in Sydney), to annex
New Guinea, and to establish a naval and coaling station in the vicinity of Torres Straits.
I need not point out to your Lordship the great danger to Australia of such a design,
nor, in the event of w T ar, the facilities which such a position would afford a Russian fleet
for aggressive action against British and Australian commerce.
/. I may further draw your Lordship’s attention to the importance of the Pearl and
Beche de Mer fisheries referred to by Dr. Robertson, and which represent something
like a million sterling annually.
8. But there is another and a very important feature of this question which has only
been lately conceived, but which is now assuming a likelihood of being carried out. I
refer to the projected Trans-Continental Railway to connect Brisbane with Point Parker
in the Gulf of Carpentaria, "which line will eventually become the shortest route for
communication with England.
9. From the foregoing observations, and on a perusal of Dr. Robertson’s Memoir,
your Lordship will, I think, admit that the question of the annexation of New Guinea
has considerably increased in importance since it was first brought forward in 1874 and
1875, and that the danger of its acquisition by a foreign power has rather increased
than diminished,
10. 1 am informed that a portion of the western coast of New Guinea is under the
protectorate of the Netherlands, where a Dutch colony was established some years ago,
but that it has never extended itself into the interior.
11. I do not consider that the time has yet arrived for formally annexing or colonising
New Guinea, thus commencing an endless state of w'arfare with the native population ;
but it might be possible to conciliate the native tribes along the coast, and by establishing
friendly relations witii their chiefs to gain, with their concurrence, a protectorate which
would enable us to hoist the British flag, so as to preclude the possibility of its annexation
by any foreign power.
12. I have the honour to enclose to your Lordship a leading article from the “ Sydney
Herald” on the subject of the annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain, and also a
short article from the same organ alluding to the possibility of Germany acquiring New
Guinea with a view to laying the foundation of a German Colonial empire.
13. Dr. Robertson has now left for England, and will probably present himself at the
Colonial Office.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) AUGUSTUS LOFTUS.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 52.
My Lord, Sydney, December 29, 1882.
, When your Excellency requested me on the 15th instant to hand to you a
memorandum of my reasons for advocating the annexation of part or the whole of New
Guinea by Great Britain, I was not then aware that I would be obliged to leave for
New Caledonia the next day on a business matter of some importance. Hence the
delay in obeying your request.
I append a rough sketch chart* of the northern territory of Australia, showing the
relative positions of New Guinea and the most easterty islands belonging to the Nether-
lands.
As you are aware, the northern territory of Queensland has of late attracted much
attention from capitalists. At the present moment all known and available lands have
been taken up for pastoral purposes. Cattle stations have been or are being formed
* Not printed.


and the land stocked. The eastern coast is fringed by high mountain ranges, in which
extensive and productive auriferous mines have for years been worked, while recently
extensive discoveries of alluvial and lode tin, copper, silver, lead, and antimony have
been made, indeed, fresh discoveries of metalliferous ores are in these northern ranges
being daily reported.
The great and growing importance of this part of the Colony has only recently been
recognised by the Parliament of Queensland, who have determined to build several
expensive lines of railway to open up the resources of the country in Yorke Peninsula
and connect these mineral fields with the eastern seaboard.
Notwithstanding the discovery, comparatively little of a positive kind is known of this
part of the Colony. Exploration having devolved upon private enterprise, very little
has been done. Prospectors have not as yet properly explored the rugged mountain
chains or found their way among the tangled vegetation of the inland ravines or valleys,
so that all-important as recent discoveries have been in demonstrating the extraordinary
metalliferous wealth of the coast ranges of Queensland, there is fair and reasonable
grounds for believing that past discoveries have only been the beginning and will lead
on to greater and more important discoveries of metalliferous wealth, concealed at
present by a luxuriant vegetation and in solitudes of nature „s yet undisturbed by
civilised man.
Around Cooktown a large area of carboniferous strata is developed, and at least two
workable seams of coal have been found in proximity to the coast, while other coal
seams have been partially opened many miles inland.
The shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria (southern shores) is overlaid by rocks of
cretaceous age in which coal seams may yet be found.
The coast ranges referred to iise to an elevation of 5,000 feet in some parts, and are
covered with rich and fertile soil. Consequent on the elevation, the climate is superb ; it
resembles that of Devon or north of France, and is suited for the growth of European
fruits and vegetables.
The river banks are covered with dense tropical vegetation that grows on deep and
extremely fertile soils. With a sufficient rainfall these alluvial flats are excellently
adapted for the growth of sugar cane that matures with a rapidity unknown in the older
sugar growing districts of Southern Queensland. In this part of the Colony probably
over 1,000,000/. sterling is being expended at present in opening up sugar estates, where
only a few years ago the foot of the Anglo-Saxon never trod. On the success of these
experiments large additional areas will at once be opened up at a large expenditure of
money.
At the present moment Queensland requires 11,000 tons of sugar annually to supply
her markets. The produce of existing sugar estates is 19,000 tons. In two years the
produce will increase to 40,000 tons; in three years 50,000 tons may be expected.
The eastern coast is fringed by numerous coral reefs. Floating on the shallow waters
on these reefs, tripang, sea slug, or beche de mer abounds. The collecting of beche
de mer is conducted by English vessels manned by aborigines, an occupation for which
they are admirably fitted. In this trade, so far as my investigations have gone, 1 believe
that these natives are well treated and handsomely paid. It is a trade that, as a civilising
medium, deserves all encouragement. This trade is now assuming important dimensions.
The dried fish is sent from Sydney or Cooktown to China, wdiere its present value is
about 140/. per ton.
The great impetus that has of late been given to Colonial industries has, of course,
resulted in largely increased coast and maritime traffic. Existing lines of steamers are
being continually increased by new vessels of greater capacity and speed. New lines
of steamers have been established. Two years ago a direct line of magnificent mail
steamers to London began to ply once a month. It was soon discovered that even this
addition to the carrying trade was insufficient for the requirements of a prosperous Colony
eight (8) times the area of Great Britain. Bi-monthly steamers are now running to
London through Torres Straits, and still the trade increases faster than the means of
carrying it to foreign ports are supplied. All these steamers carry large numbers of
immigrants.
Passing over to the watershed of the Gulf of Carpentaria, we find on the southern
shores the Gilbert, Norman, Leichhart, Alexandra, and Roper rivers, the outlet for one
of the most extensive and fairest pastoral region on which probably the sun shines. A
port on the Leichhart river will in the near future be the outlet for a very hive of
industry. The richly grassed treeless downs stretch (level as the sea) to the S.S.E.
and E. for hundreds of miles; these are covered by wonderfully nutritious permanent
grasses that grow on deep rich loam, well watered, little subject to droughts, fitted by
nature for the growth of every tropical product. The climate is excellent, and by care
Q 3


English vegetables are readily grown. These are the finest pastoral areas of the
Australias. Tens of thousands of square miles of this country is at present being fenced
and improved, and stocked with sheep, the only impediment being the want of adequate
conveyance.
The gulf region abounds with metalliferous wealth, silver, lead, bismuth, auriferous
quartz, and copper ores of the richest known description are found over 200 miles of
country, beginning within 60 miles of the Gulf waters. From personal exploration of this
region I am enabled to state that little more than a beginning has been made in the work
of prospecting this country for minerals. With sufficient railway facilities this will
probably prove the most valuable and extensive mining region of Australia. The
resources being so varied and super-excellent it is to me a foregone conclusion that the
principal port probably in Australia will be on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Such a port (with the proposed trans-continental railway made) will be the starting point
of a large part of the passenger traffic with Britain, as by this route they would avoid
the rough weather of the southern coast and eight days of sea travel.
Pardon me for mentioning that Torres Straits separates the northern territory of
Queensland from the large island of New Guinea, lying to the north and east. The
nearest point of Australia mainland to New Guinea is about 70 miles. Torres Straits
are, however, partitioned off by coral reefs and numerous islands into several channels.
These islands are scattered over the tropical sea from land to land. All of these islands
have by a recent edict come under the jurisdiction and have become the property of
Queensland. I believe that the boundary of Queensland extends to within a very few
miles of the coast of New Guinea.
Of these islands Thursday Island is the more important as the port of call of mail
steamers to Britain, Netherlands, India, and China. It is contiguous to the mainland of
Australia.
Thursday Island is the centre of the pearl fisheries and beche de mer industries of the
straits and adjoining islands.
The importance of these industries can scarce be over estimated. Some years ago the
practice of diving for pearl shell was abandoned, and the resources of science solicited
for the better prosecution of the trade. Diving dresses and air-pumps are now employed.
The shell has by these means been traced from the mallow waters of the shores, where
formerly it was only possible to recover it by swimmers, to the deep waters of the Straits.
At the present moment the bulk of the pearl shell is recovered from 13 to 15 fathoms of
water. The area of distribution has by these meai s been found to be very extensive.
Pearl shell has been traced all along the New Guinea coast, where prolific beds along the
Warrior Reef have been worked; they have been traced across the Straits over the
Arafu Seas to the Dutch Islands of Timor Kupang, Timor Laut, the Am Islands, and
eastward along New Guinea to New Britain and the Solomon group of islands. These
recent discoveries give promise of a permanent and lucrative future for the trade.
This important maritime industry has been established and is essentially in the hands
of Sydney firms. A large capital is employed. The vessels in use are probably the
finest and best found and fitted of their class afloat; they range from 10 to 30 tons
capacity, are excellently built, carefully equipped, splendidly handled ; they are a credit
to the Coloni s.
In the beche de mer and pearl snell trades of the Straits alone upwards of 180 boats
are engaged, requiring about 1,500 men to man them. On the islands adjoining Thurs-
day Island the various owners have erected their stations at which the shell is stored,
sorted, and packed, where stores have been erected and habitations for the men provided.
Very great credit is due to the owners of these st ations for the superior manner in which
these have been planned and finished, as well as for the care and foresight that has been
displayed for the comfort of the men, clean, trig, substantial, of sufficient size, the picture
of good order. Stone or wooden wharfs have been constructed at each of these, with
tramways for conveying shell to the stores, and, in some instances, slips for the repair of
the boats have been built.
The beche de mer trade requires stations on the more remote islands for the prepara-
tion and drying of their fish, and in some cases these stations have been erected on
islands contiguous to New Guinea.
The men employed at these industries and avocations are all coloured; the divers are
South Sea Islanders; the crew, of Australians with a few Malays, They are all very
highly paid (divers often averaging to 50/. per month) and generously fed and clothed.
In no instance do they suffer abuse or are they subjected to ill-treatment, except when—
flushed with money—they arrive at Thursday Island, and are there permitted, nay,
enticed and encouraged, to spend large sums of money in spirits or in the purchase of
rifles and ammunition to be taken back to their island home, and afterwards used against


their own kindred or the unscrupulous white trader, who too often pays the penalty of
his unprincipled cupidity or unbridled lust with his life.
I have in the foregoing pages taken the liberty of sketching out the salient features
and resources and industries of Northern Queensland in the hope that your Excellency,
recognising the necessity of encouraging the development of these resources, will see the
importance of affording them protection from the presence of any powerful European
power acquiring a footing in these parts.
The exhaustion of the pearl shell and beche de mer fisheries on the coast of Australia
necessarily drives the fishers to seek out fishing grounds further and further from the
main land. At present the pearl shell is fished 50 miles distant, while, as I have
remarked, the largest shell has been found along the south-west coast of New
Guinea.
On my arrival here a few weeks ago after studying these industries I was somewhat
alarmed at newspaper reports that Russia, Germany, and France were each bidding for
that No Man’s Land, known as New Guinea. I can remember that some years ago the
question of annexing this great island was freely discussed in Home papers. The question
was indifferently treated by gentlemen whose distinguishing characteristic was their
utter ignorance of the question. Still the conclusion that was come to seemed to be
that New Guinea was too important an island to be permitted to drift into the possession
of a European power other than Great Britain. This opinion is generally entertained in
Queensland, and within the past six weeks leading articles have appeared in more than
one Queensland paper calling attention to this subject and the necessity of instant and
decisive action.
I am aware that the Dutch lay claim to a portion of the Island, which I think has not
been recognised.
I have not travelled in New Guinea, but from what I have seen of it, and from
extensive and minute inquiries that I have made, the Island possesses in the main the
character of Australia. It is mountainous in parts. It possesses rich alluvial flats, on
which wonderfully prolific tropical productions grow. Sugar cane, rice, cocoa nuts,
bananas are cultivated by the natives. There are many grassy plains and undulating
< mntry covered by an open forest. Its flora and fauna very much resemble that of
Australia.
The country is healthy as a whole. It possesses numerous large navigable rivers and
exceptionally fine harbours. Its mineral wealth, although unexplored, promises to be
varied and of great value. It is peopled by a stalwart race of men much superior in
intellectual develop’'"''A to the Australian, who, on the whole, are not hostile to
Europeans or trade. Several missionary stations have been established for years. The
natives trade with those on the continent of Australia.
The presence of such a country fitted for the occupation of white races possessing
resources favourable for European enterprise in such near proximity to Australia is too
severe a temptation to other naval powers to be permitted to remain longer unclaimed.
In the event f New Guinea being occupied by France, a convict establishment and a
social pandemonium would be (with all its attendant evils) raised in proximity to
Queensland. Already France has annexed several important Pacific Islands, and has
laid her plans for the annexation of the New Hebrides. If Germany or Russia hoists
their flag on its shores it would probably be converted into a grand naval or military
station, which, in the event of a European war, would be a source of the greatest danger
to Australia, unprotected as it is, and in times of peace a source of continual anxiety
and distrust. Endless complications would inevitably arise. Conflicting interests would
constantly crop up requiring the most careful and delicate diplomacy to adjust. Pro-
perty in Australia would be alarmingly depreciated in value. A perpetual menace
would be held out that could only be met by an appeal to the warlike proclivities of our
race, and the raising of expensive defensive forces, with the equipment of ships of
war. The ever increasing trade and the bounding prosperity of the Colonies would
be crippled and paralyzed. Society would be disorganised, and incalculable mischief
done.
The peaceful and prosperous reign of progress that now reigns in these realms would
be rudely broken, and the spear that has been transformed into ploughshares and pruning
hooks will once again be beaten into swords and rifles, calamities that would be avoided
by quiet and decisive action at present.
England, Australia, have everything to gain by the annexation of an Island so close to
her shores, and everything to lose by a course of procrastination. We ought not to
forget that both in the case of New Zealand and the Island of Perim, we only fore-
Q 4


stalled France by a few days or hours, and as the annexation of New Guinea is being
entertained by our powerful neighbour, your Excellency would in my humble opinion
be doing the greatest kindness to Australia to advise Her Majesty’s Government to
annex an Island so contiguous to her shores, and so necessary for her progress, peace,
and protection.
I am quite aware that annexation is distasteful to certain sections of society at home.
Probably we have too many blacks to look after, but I have yet to learn that these
black races could fall into the hands of a wiser or more benign governing power, or one
that over the whole Pacific is more respected and trusted by savage men, or one whose
strong arm could better defend them and fit them too for fulfilling the behests of
civilisation. There are no limits to the colonising power of the Anglo-Saxon races, no
limits to their enterprise or ambition, no limit to their ability to conquer nature, to
penetrate and explore remote localities, and to transform nature’s solitudes to theatres of
throbbing life.
Recognising the genius and pre-eminent qualities of our race for colonisation;
viewing, with an approbation that words cannot adequately express, the settlement and
progress that has characterised Australia; knowing as I do the boundless, nay the
illimitable, resources of the northern territory ; how enormously these resources must year
by year contribute to the world’s wants and prosperity if fostered and encouraged by
wise and discreet rulers; knowing all this, and seeing how perfectly unprotected this
enormous territory is, how defenceless it is, how open and exposed it is to attack by any
of the Queen’s enemies, it is with much apprehension that I look upon the probable
occupation of New Guinea by a European power other than Great Britain as a calamity
that cannot possibl} 7 be realised by any one unacquainted with the situation.
It is impossible to shut one’s eyes to the large of Germans already settled in
Queensland, and who are in the possession of the suffrage and enjoy all the rights of
Englishmen. In the event of hostilities with the German Empire, notwithstanding
their naturalisation, are these people not an element of dange-, and if New Guinea
becomes a German Colony would they not become a positive source and centre of
weakness ?
The defence of such a magnificent insular continent as Australia must ever be con-
sidered a sufficient reason for annexation.
The raising of the British flag on this “ No Man’s Land ” would, I believe, be not only
a popular, but would be considered a precautionary measure w T orthy of a great statesman
desirous to secure and maintain the peace and prosperity of a great country. It w 7 ould
be an act of defence not defiance, of economy rather than expense. It would interfere
with the “ status quo ”of no power. It would consolidate and establish the progress
and prosperity of Australia and maintain the supremacy of Great Britain, and this is
the apology that I have to offer your Excellency for taking up so much of the valuable
time at your disposal; and
I have, &c.
(Signed) James R. Robertson, M. D., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.
His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus, Governor,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 2 in No. 52.
If New Guinea is not annexed by Great Britain the probability is that it will soon be
annexed by somebody else. It is at least clear that European interest in this portion of
the Pacific is on the increase. We all know that towards New 7 Guinea wistful eves have
been turned by the Dutch, to whom the credit of having been among the first explorers
of the Island belongs. A short time ago we were told that an expedition of 3.000
Italians under Menotti Garibaldi was about to start for the purpose of setting up an
Italian colony in New Guinea. The Italian adventure came to nothing, but it showed
that our friend Signor D’Albertis had succeeded in engaging the interest of his countrv'-
men in the question of the annexation of the Island. We know that France is bent on
making up for any loss of influence she may have suffered in Europe by a vigorous policy
of colonial expansion. Nor is it to Africa and Asia alone that she is turning her atten-
tion. Nowhere else have the French been more active than in the South Seas. It has
not yet been announced that the French have designs on New Guinea, but they have
made it clear enough that they intend their policy in the Pacific to be a progressive one.
To the French, the Dutch, and the Italians, all of whom are supposed to desire annexa


tions in the South Seas, we must add the Germans. It is well known that of the classes
who have settled in the various groups of tl Pacific they are the most numerous. The
men who are doing most to make the 1 outh Sea Islands the homes of Europeans
are German citizens, and the leading firms in those Islands belong to German speculators.
Much as the French like to acquire territory in that part of the world, they do not, as a
rule, prefer to live there. They are better pleased to acquire colonies in which they can
set up French influence than those in which they can establish settlements for the French
people. The Frenchman’s idea of a colony is, for the most part, a place that is brought
within the compass of French commerce and French rule.
The German, on the other hand, does not look for centres which his country can
annex, but for those in which his countrymen can settle down and prosper. The familiar
notion of a German colony is not a region over which Germany bears sway, but one
which is occupied by Germans. Fondly as the German loves his fatherland, it seldom
takes much to induce him to leave it. Like the Scotchman, the Englishman, and the
Irishman, he is never more at home than when he is abroad. Loyal as he is to the
institutions of his own country, he can easily accommodate himself to those of any
country in the world. While retaining his language, his habits, and his idiosyncracies,
he finds no difficulty in falling in with those of other people. Remarkable as the stream
of Irish emigration has been during the last few years, that of German emigration has
been more remarkable. Almost every part of the world is being peopled, if not in the
usual sense colonised, by Germans, and it need hardly be said that German colonists
are among the steadiest, the thriftiest, and the most industrious in the world. But
though Germans are fond of colonising after their own manner, outside Europe they do
not trouble themselves very much about conquest. The German is as happy in another
man’s country as in his own. Although Germany has thousands of subjects in the
South Seas, so far as we know she has no territory there. Some years ago she nego-
tiated with King George of Tonga for a naval station ; but by native potentates a grant
of this kind is regarded as a loan rather than as a gift. In one of the groups near New
Guinea somewhat extensive territory is, we believe, claimed by German colonists, but
while there have been liberal appropriations there have been no formal annexations.
But Germans naturally ask why they should not annex some of the islands they are
doing so much to people. A short time ago there was talk of a German annexation of
Samoa, and T jw the German press is discussing the question of a German annexation
of Papua. Phe discussion may end with the press. The work which Prince Bismarck
has set himself to do is in Europe, not in the South Seas. There are aspects of German
colonisation which have not commended themselves to German statesmen. Some
Germans who stay at home are apt to think that many of their countrymen are too fond
of going abroad. But if Germany does not take up a colonisation policy to-day she
may do so to-morrow. The article from the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ” which we published
on Wednesday may not show what the German Government is seriously thinking about,
but it may be taken as showing what the German people are thinking about; and if we
may judge from this 'U’ticle, the German people think that the German Government
ought to annex New Guinea, the idea being that the island might be made the founda-
tion of a future colonial German kingdom. “According to our idea,” says this organ,
“ it might be possible to create out of the island a German Java, a great trade and
“ plantation colony, which would form a stately foundation-stone for a German colonial
“ kingdom of the future.” When Germans who live at home know more about New
Guinea they may speak wfith less confidence both of its climate and its resources. But
there can be no doubt that they are right in thinking that New Guinea is an island on
the acquisition of which they might congratulate themselves. We may add that if the
place is to be annexed by any other power than England we should be glad to see it in
the hands of Germany. Nor, if we are unprepared to annex the island, can we complain
if it is appropriated by Germany or France. We have no right to maintain a stationary
policy in the South Seas, and to complain that others pursue a policy of progress. At
the same time, if New Guinea is annexed at all, it ought to be annexed by England.
Apart from the value of the place, it will not be pleasant, and it may not be safe, to
have a foreign power so near the northern boundary of this continent. For what we
know of New Guinea, and for what has been done there, we are indebted chiefly to
British liberality and enterprise.
Desirable, however, as it may be for England to annex New Guinea, there is little
ground for expecting that she will do anything of the kind. The English Liberal party
dislikes annexations, and of late the dislike, instead of decreasing, has been increasing. A
proposal to annex Egypt would in all probability have wrecked even Mr. Gladstone.
Sometime ago Lord Kimberley suggested that the Colonies should go into a partnership
R 6853. R


with the Imperial Government in carrying out Polynesian annexations. It may be
doubted whether a Colonial Minister would be disposed to start even this idea now. The
notion is that England has too many Colonies, that colonists cannot be trusted to manage
black races, and that so far as South Sea Islands go what Australians want is not to
strengthen the empire, but to secure advantages for themselves and to throw the expenses
and the risk necessary to the securing those advantages upon the broad back of the
mother country. This, at least, is what the organs of English opinion have thought
hitherto, and we suppose it is what they think now.
It would seem that the German people are beginning to entertain the idea of becoming
colonists on their own account. We know that they have for years been an important
factor in the settlement of America and Australia, but hitherto their efforts in the esta-
blishment of colonies of their own have been too insignificant to deserve notice. It would
seem, however, from an article in a recent number of the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ” that
attention has been drawn to the Island of New Guinea, and a suggestion is thrown out
that the German nation should annex that somewhat mysterious yet attractive island,
with a view of thereby la}'ing the foundations of a German colonial empire. A proposal
of this kind is not without interest for Australians, and we hardly fancy that such a
scheme would be carried out without our neighbours in Queensland, for instance, having
something to say to it. Should the Germans undertake seriously to carry out this pro-
ject, it would probably be a somewhat different affair from the New Ireland colonisation
idea as carried out by the Marquis dc Ravs.
No. 53.
FOREIGN OFFICE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Foreign Office, April 6, 1883.
With reference to the letter from this office of December 18th last,* I am
directed by Earl Granville to transmit to you herewith, to be laid before the Earl of
Derby, copy of a Despatch bearing upon the subject of the movement in Germany for
the foundation of German colonies.
I am, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) T. V. LISTER.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 53.
My Lord, Brussels, March 31, 1883.
I have the honour to enclose an extract from the “ Precurseur ” of Antwerp, the
principal commercial organ of this country, which is greatly identified with the interests
of the large and influential houses established in that city, on the subject of a company
about to be formed in Germany with the view of colonizing New Guinea.
The members of this society propose to organise, in the first place, a scientific explora-
tion of the island, and gradually to take possession of it, and establish there a first class
commercial colony framed on the Dutch model. They hope to have little difficulty in
carrying out their object, as the island belongs to no European power, and no serious
resistance is to be apprehended from the natives.
The company, which will be formed on bases similar to the statutes of the North
Borneo Company, expects that the German Government will take definitive possession of
this German Colony as soon as its vitality shall have been firmly established.
I have, &c.
The Earl Granville, (Signed) J. S. Lumlev.
&c. &c.
II est question en Allemagne dc former line societe dans le but de coloniser la
Nouvelle-Guinee.
Les membres de cette societe se proposent d’organiser I’exploration scientifique de
cette ile, qui est une des plus grandes du monde, et qui est encore presque inconnue,
* No. 4',.


d’en prendre graduellement possession et d’y etablir uue colonie commer§ante de premier
ordre sur le module de celles de la Hollande.
La societe espere atteindre son but dV 'ant plus aiseraent que la Nouvelle-Guinee
n’appartient a aucune puissance, qu’il n’y a probablement pas lieu d’apprehender la
revendication du droit de propriete de la part d’aucun Etat de FEurope, et que la
resistance des habitants n’est guere a redouter.
On compte que plus tard le gouvernernent allemand prendra lui-meme possession
definitive de cette colonie allemande, des que la vitalite en sera bien etablie.
La societe se formera sur des bases analogues aux statuts de la Compagnie du Nord
de Borneo, qui s’est fondee recemment sous le protectorat du gouvernernent anglais.
No. 54.
The RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY to GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY,
G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND).
TELEGRAPHIC.
April 14, 1883.—Reuter’s telegram states Queensland Government taken formal
possession New Guinea ; please telegraph explanation.
No. 55.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT HON.
THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received April 16, 1883.)
TELEGRAPHIC.
April 16, 1883.—T0 prevent foreign powers from taking possession of New Guinea,
Queensland Government, through Police Magistrate, Thursday Island, took formal
possession in Her Majesty’s name on 4th instant, pending your decision on my Despatch
this mail.
No. 56.
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W,,
Sir, April 17, 1883.
I have the honour to transmit, for the information of the Right Hon. the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, the enclosed copy of a letter from the Hon. the
Colonial Secretary of Queensland to myself, and printed copies of letters from the Colo-
nial Secretary to his Excellency the Governor of Queensland, from myself to the
Colonial Secretary, from the Secretary to the Royal Colonial Institute to myself, copy
of translation of an article from the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ” on “ German annexation of
New Guinea,” and extract from a report of Captain Pennefather, of the Queensland
Government schooner “ Pearl,” on the capabilities of a harbour at Yule Island, New
Guinea.
2. In forwarding these documents I hope I may be permitted to bring under the
notice of Lord Derby and Her Majesty’s Government the very great importance to the
Australian Colonies, and more especially to the Colony of Queensland, of preventing
the acquisition of New Guinea by one of the great military powers of Europe which
would exercise a baneful influence on the future prospects of the Colonies by com-
R 2


manding the only channel of communication between them and Europe, India, and the
islands of the Indian Ocean by the northern route, and necessitate a state of prepared-
ness on the part of the Colonies that would entail on them a heavy burden, and be very
detrimental to the interests of these young communities.
It is also of great importance that law and order should be established among the
n ixed populations, rapidly extending their settlements among the islands of Torres
.Straits and the coasts of New Guinea, and I would most respectfully submit that so
desirable an end cannot be more effectually attained than by placing that island under
the immediate control of the Colony of Queensland.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) THOS. ARCHER,
Colonial Office. Agent General for Queensland.
Enclosure in No. 56.
Queensland.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane,
Sir, February 2 , 1883.
Referring to your letter of the 15th of December last, in which you enclosed a
copy of a letter from the Secretary to the Royal Colonial Institute, together with a copy
of the “ Allgemeine Zeitung,” relating to the annexation of New Guinea by the German
Government, I have the honour, by direction, to forward to you a copy of a letter upon
this subject recently addressed to his Excellency the Governor, and also a copy of
your own communication now under reply, and a translation of the article in the news-
paper referred to.
As his Excellency will probably be unable to forward this correspondence to the
Colonial Office by the present mail, I have to request that you will be good enough to
place the copy now sent before Earl Derby as soon as possible after the receipt of this
letter, in order that the urgent reasons which prompted the Colonial Secretary to send
the cablegram of the 26th instant may be explained without delay.
I have, &c.
The Agent General for Queensland, (Signed) R. Gray,
London. Under Colonial Secretary.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane,
Your Excellency, February 26, 1883.
I have the honour to direct your attention to a correspondence between the
Governments of New South Wales and Queensland and the Imperial Government,
extending from 17th April 1874 to 14th January 1878, on the subject of the colonisation
or annexation of New Guinea.
A partial result of this correspondence was the annexation to Queensland of certain
islands in Torres Straits-, viz., Tuan, Saibai, Talbot, &c.; but the main question, that
regarding New Guinea itself, seems to have been dropped, chiefly on account of the
Australasian Colonies (with the exception of Queensland) having shown a disposition to
regard it as a purely Imperial question, so far at least as the necessary expenditure was
concerned.
This Government is of opinion that the time has now arrived for reviving the subject
of the annexation of New Guinea ; understanding by this, not merely the extending of
British Sovereignty over such portion of it as is not claimed by the Government of
the Netherlands, but the including of such within the territorial jurisdiction of Queens-
land. -
With regard to the general question of annexation, I may simply remark that the
statement of the considerations in favour of it, as summed up in the Earl of Carnarvon’s
Despatch to Sir H. Robinson, dated Bth December 1875, still hold good, and with even
greater force than at that period, viz. :
“ (1.) That the possession of New Guinea and adjacent islands would be of value to
the Empire, and conduce specially to the peace and safety of Australia, the
development of Australian trade, and the prevention and punishment of crime
throughout the Pacific,


(2.) That the establishment of a foreign power in the neighbourhood of Australia
would be injurious to British, and more particularly to Australian interests.”
On the first of these considerations no stricture was made by the Imperial Govern-
ment ; and against the second nothing was advanced except an expression of confidence
—probably quite justified at the time —in the quiescence of other powers, so far as new
attempts at colonisation were concerned. I do not think, however, that such confidence
is any longer justifiable. Without entering into particulars, I may take for granted that
your Excellency is fully cognizant of various recent events which give evidence of the
fact that the Pacific region generally is now attracting the attention of more than one
civilised power, with the view to the establishment of centres of influence as well as
sources of profit; and I may state that, having regard to the circumstances referred to,
and especially to the accompanying letter from the A gent-General, covering a communi-
cation from the Honorary Secretary of the Colonial Institute, regarding a recent article
in the “ Allgemeine Zeitung ” (a translation of which is attached), 1 am myself of opinion
that the probability of the colonisation of New Guinea, or, at all events, the formal
occupation of some favourable point on the island, by some other power than Great
Britain, is very largely increased.
Independent of the fact that the occupation of some portion of the coast of New
Guinea can now with little difficulty be undertaken by the Government of Queensland, I
would further observe, having still reference to the previous correspondence on the
subject, that should it be decided to annex New Guinea to any one of the Australasian
Colonies, the same arguments, geographical and otherwise, which weighed with the
Imperial Government in favour of the annexation of the above-mentioned islands to this
Colony in particular, are equally cogent toward determining the selection of Queensland
as the Colony under whose jurisdiction New Guinea should be placed.
Further, such changes, having relation to this subject, as have arisen since the period
of the previous correspondence, are of a nature to furnish fresh grounds of expediency for
the annexation of New Guinea to Queensland, inasmuch as they prove how rapidly the
activity of the Colony is developing in that direction, and show also the closer relation-
ship, through increased facilities of communication, existing betwmen Queensland and
New Guinea. Among these I may enumerate, —
1st. The extension of telegraphic communication from Cooktown to Thursday Island.
2nd. The establishment of the Torres Straits mail service by the Government of
Queensland.
3rd. The establishment of a steam mail service between Thursday Island and Nor-
manton.
4th. The appointment oi Thursday Island as a station for one of the gun-boats now
being ordered by the Queensland Government.
And to these I would add the establishment by the Imperial Government of a naval
coaling depot in the vicinity of Thursday Island, —a circumstance that, besides having
an evident bearing upon the general question of the possession of the large island which
in the hands of another civilized power would divide with Great Britain the command of
these waters, points also to the nearest territorial jurisdiction, viz., that of Queensland,
as the natural source of for the safety and order of all settlements in
Torres Straits.
As one of the first questions likely to arise in connexion with this subject, should Her
Majesty’s Government be disposed to give it full consideration, is that of the initial
point at which to commence settlement, 1 would request your attention to the accom-
panying extract from the report of Captain Pennefather, of the Queensland Government
schooner “ Pearl,” from which it will be seen that a splendid harbour exists between Yule
Island and the mainland of New Guinea. This place the Queensland Government,
having regard to its extraordinary fertility, as well as safety of anchorage, would be
disposed to make the headquarters of colonisation ; and, in the event of the Imperial
Government deciding upon the annexation of New Guinea to Queensland, this Govern-
ment would also be prepared to recommend Parliament to grant the necessary appropriation
for defraying the cost of settlement, and maintaining, if necessary, an armed force for the
defence of the settlers—in this way meeting the objection which, more than any other,
seems to have determined Her Majesty’s Government against taking action in the matter
at the period of the previous correspondence.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Thomas McIlwraith.
His Excellency Sir A. E. Kennedy, G.C.M.G., C.B.,
T oowoomba.
R 3


In Re Annexation of New Guinea by German Government.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.,
Sir, December 15, 1882.
I have the honour to transmit enclosed, at the request of the Honorary Secretary
of the Royal Colonial Institute, a copy of a letter, together with a newspaper of the
27th November last, about annexation of the Island of New Guinea by the German
Government.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Thos. Archer,
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Agent General.
Brisbane.
Royal Colonial Institute, 15, Strand, W.C.,
Sir, December 13, 1882.
I have the honour, on behalf of the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, to
request your attention to an article contained in the “ Allgemeine Zeitung” of the 27th
of November last, recommending the German Government to annex and colonise New
Guinea.
On referring to Parliamentary Papers C. 1566 of 1876, you will observe that on the
29th of April 1875 a large and influential deputation waited on Lord Carnarvon to
present a memorial from the Council and Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute,
strongly advocating the annexation of the eastern half of New Guinea by Great Britain.
Among the arrangements adduced in favour of such action being taken, one of the most
important was, that its possession by any foreign power would for many reasons be
highly detrimental to British interests. One of the deputation, the Hon. Arthur (now
Lord) Kinnaird, remarked that Germany was determined to be a great naval power, and
would look to colonisation as the principal means to that end, and if she looked to New
Guinea we may lose a very important Colony. (Proceedings of the Royal Colonial
Institute, Vol. vi., page 204.)
The Council of the Royal Colonial Institute, still holding the opinion expressed in the
memorial referred to, request me to beg that you will draw the attention of your
Government to the article, of which I enclose a copy, as it is evident that the proposed
action would be most disadvantageous to the interests of the Australian Colonies.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Young,
The Agent General for Queensland, Honorary Secretary.
London.
German Annexation of New Guinea.
We (“ Sydney Morning Herald”) have been favoured by the Colonial Secretary with a
copy of the “ Allgemeine Zeitung” of the 27th November, which contains a long descrip-
tion of New Guinea, and finishes by urging that the island should be annexed by
Germany, as the foundation of a future German colonial kingdom. We give a summary
of the first part of the article :
“ 1. New Guinea is a part of the Australian division of the world and of the tropics.
“ 2. It was neglected on account of the attraction of gold in Australia, and still
remains a comparatively unknown land.
“3. New Guinea w T as explored by the Portuguese in the sixteenth century; in the
seventeenth almost exclusively by the Dutch, who seemed better satisfied with the
country than other European nations had been, but had already too large a field for their
labours (three times the size of the German kingdom) in Java, Sumatra, and Celebes, so
that gradually they gave up, the larger island.
“4. The explorations of Powell, Moresby, Macfarlane, &c. have made the island now
worth some consideration. It is considered useful by geological and biological people as
holding in its forests the key to solve problems—by London missionaries as a field to
win new souls—by better informed colonial politicians of all nations as a profitable field for
cultivation; therefore geographical inquiries about it are now little likely to come to a
standstill. As we Germans have learnt a little about conducting colonial policy, and as
our wishes and plans turn with a certain vivacity towards New Guinea, here is a short
resume of the geographical knowledge of others.


“ 5. Physical geography may well be in doubt whether New Guinea, which is more
than half the size of Germany in extent, belongs to the Asiatic island world or to the
Australian. No doubt the island forms a sort of connecting link between these two so
remarkably different regions of the earth.
“6. On closer survey it is not cut off so roughly from Asia as Wallace originally
thought. The principal axis of the island is directed, just like Sumatra’s, to the south-
east, as also the mountain chains, whereas in New Holland the direction is meridianal.
Also with respect to height, the New Guinea mountain chains seem to belong to the
same date as those of Sunda and Asia. If the two-mile-high Hercules Hill of Lawson
belongs to the category of imagination, yet the summits of the south-east half-island
attain tremendous heights ; and quite on the northern edge, behind low foreground hills,
there rise Alpine heights, one nearly 3,000 metres high. It can scarcely be doubted
that the central ridges —the Charles, Louis, and Victor Emmanuel Mountains—which
by European explorers have only been touched on their southern point, will be found to
be considerably higher. Through this we may, perhaps, account for the strong descent
and the waterfalls which the Fly River already has in its upper course.
“ 7- As in the Sunda and Philippine Islands, volcanic agency seems to have had an
important share in the formation of the surface of the island. Numerous mountains
show just as rounded a form as Mount Junghahns in Java. In Ihe immediate neigh-
bourhood of the north coast an island volcano burst forth into eruption just in sight of
Miklouho-Maclay (the explorer), and the frequent earthquakes are best explained by
the active volcanic agency of New Guinea. The sedimentary formations also seem, as
far as known, to be allied to those of the Moluccas and Sunda Islands. The lime rocks
of younger formation especially, which are characteristic of the north-west island, Papua-
Onirn, seem strongly to correspond with those of the so-called Asiatic islands ; and the
other sandstone formations, which form the predominant stone in the north of New
Holland, take their place in the south-east of New Guinea, only very gradually.
“8. That the world of New Guinea organism does not leave so sharp a line of division
between New Guinea and India as Alfred Russell Wallace wished to draw, Rosenberg
first proved, and the inquiries of Rafffay, Beccari, D’Albertis, &c. seem to result in the
same, although the reports of the inquiry as to this question are as yet by no means
finished. Undoubtedly the kingdom of Indian plants and animal forms is in New
Guinea a very marked one, and when we survey the world of organism of the large
island with the practical eye of the merchant, cultivator, and colonial politician—when
we reflect that the nutmeg tree, sago and cocoa palms, jute plant, sandalwood, ironwood,
ebony, and yams form the most important plants in a commercial point of view, we
especially think of India, That the different Indian cultivation plants, before all the
coffee and cinchona trees and tobacco, would find a particularly favourable soil in New
Guinea, is also not to be doubted. Also, it does not seem quite to be wanting in great
mammals of the highly organised order, though the affirmed occurrence of the rhino-
ceros in the island so far cannot be proved. The climate of New Guinea is, of course, a
perfectly Indian one, exactly like that of Java, characterised by an everlasting monoto-
nous tropical heat, and by the damp and dry monsoons, changing with the times of year.
The connexion with India extends even to ethnological relations, since clear-coloured
Malay races have occupied a great part of the coast as far as the extreme south-east,
whilst thi dark-coloured aborigines, who, ethnologically, are also not to be divided from
the negroes of the Indian islands, seem to have, for the greater part, retreated to the
mountainous interior.”
The following is a translation of the conclusion of the article from the newspaper :
“ When, therefore, New Guinea is, according to our opinion and without doubt, to a
certain degree the extreme branch of the East India island world that cannot be con-
sidered otherwise than in relation to Java and Sumatra with respect to cultivation and
civilisation, it is yet on the other side, and perhaps in a still much higher degree, also the
first branch of the Australian island world. We do not in the least doubt that once there
existed a neck of land between New Guinea and Ceram, and Bulu and Celebes; but just
such a neck of land existed even more probably between the North Australian Cape
York and the New Guinea Maikassa coast, and this last neck of land probably lasted
on into the younger geological formation, like the former. The high sandstone rock
islands of the Torres Straits—Tauan, Boigu, Saibai—are in a certain measure the remains
left behind of the isthmus, and the gigantic sandstone blocks which cover these islands,
like the traces of fresh landslips much noticed by travellers, point out to us one of the
geological forces which have destroyed the isthmus in the course of millenniums. The
erosive effect of streaming rain is on the coasts of New Guinea so powerful that it
perhaps would suffice quite alone to explain the work of destruction. But also the wash
R 4


of the sea is in the whole of the south-east during the south-east monsoon a fearfully
strong one, and the breakers naturally also gnaw into the rocks.
“ In interesting contrast to these disturbing forces, we notice moreover in the geological
appearances exactly on the same spot turned towards Australia very active building
forces, which appear to be endeavouring to join again together the broken band. We
are alluding now above all to the reef-building madrepores and millepores which to the
number of billions are at work straight across the Torres Straits, and which, partly
through their reefs, make the passage of the Straits, as also the harbours on the New
Guinea south-east coasts, so extraordinarily difficult. Also the mangrove woods which
cover the south-east coasts of New Guinea for a long distance, which retain on the land
through their root-work the deposited products of the flowing waters, and which thereby
effect a perpetual increase of the land, must not here be forgotten.
“ When we reflect that the land connexion of New Guinea with Australia consisted of
this until the geological later period, we cannot wonder if we, through its living world,
are reminded in a still higher degree of Australia than of India. In the midst of the
thick mangrove, cocoa, and sago woods appear in hard dry places extended tracts of the
Australian kangaroo grass and eucalyptus bushes; and to the New Guinea, Papuan, and
Malay the kangaroo is the principal game and the principal animal food, just as to the
Australian black of New South Wales. The predominance of pouched animals and the
poverty of large and highly-developed mammals remain characteristic of the island at
first sight, and also after its thorough investigation.
“ If we fix our eyes upon this large island according to its physical geography and
possible developing characteristics only from the standpoint of the colonial politician and
cultivator, it appears to us, from what we thus far know of it, not in the least as a con-
temptible object of possession. And in case the German Government make attempts,
as many wish, to acquire the island, we might perhaps, in the interest of our nation,
congratulate ourselves on the acquisition. According to our opinion it might be possible
to create out of the island a German Java, a great trade and plantation colony, which
would form a stately foundation stone for a German colonial kingdom of the future.
People will perhaps reply : The climate of New Guinea is a tropical one, unhealthy for
Europeans. We thereupon answer : Not so unhealthy as Java. And this report of the
tropical climate is, according to our opinion, through false inferences from the former
experiences of the history of colonisation, a much worse one than it ought to be.
“ Pioneers of civilisation, in the midst of the mangrove woods and swarms of
mosquitoes during the tropical rain and during the tropical heat of the sun, without
sufficient comfort, face all possible hardships. European soldiers, who must camp in
the open air, European sailors, who, after the monotonous ship fare, allow themselves to
be beguiled through the splendid tropical fruits into all sorts of mistakes in diet, feel the
tropical climate certainly unhealthy. But would it remain deadly if European cultivated
people could be sufficiently considerate about their health ? Besides, do not the
numerous Germans, who in foreign service—we are thinking particularly of Holland-
work as cultivators in the tropics, face just the same dangers ? From the German or
European colonists in New Guinea one ought to require just as little strained physical
work as is the case in other tropical Colonies. For that one would require tropical
people. The natives of New Guinea offer in tins respect no better prospects, but also
scarcely much worse, than those of Java or Sumatra, and of Cuba have offered each in its
time. Where they are rightly handled they appear, as a rule, to be very friendly to
Europeans, and much is their diligence praised already in their present primitive stage
of civilisation. From different races, at least with reference to this, something might be
expected if these, so to say, were placed under European guardianship. That the natives
are not advanced to the formation of a State might perhaps rather make their civilisation
easy than difficult. Effectual resistance to an occupation by the Europeans at least
would not be much to be feared from them. But naturally in case of need Chinese
labourers could just as easily be procured as for Queensland.
“ Finally, so far as the places are concerned which are fit for the founding of trade
factories, there are on the coast more than enough of them. All parts of the island
possess good harbours, and the Fly River offers an excellent natural road also into the
innermost heart of the land.
“ That other nations would not despise the colonisation of New Guinea if they were
not too powerfully engaged elsewhere is well known. Captain Moresby even affirms, in
the appendix to his book about the island, that it is for the English nation a ‘ duty ’ to
annex and colonise New Guinea. Perhaps we might, with quite the same right, affirm
it is the duty of the German nation to take in hand the colonisation of New Guinea.


The claims to possession of the Dutch on the west half of the island inspire us with no
very great consideration, and we deem it, therefore, quite superfluous to enter further
into them in this place.”
Extract from the Report of Captain Pennefather, of the Queensland Government
Schooner “ Pearl.”
March 6th, 1880. Made sail across the Gulf of Papua to Yule Island, arriving there
at 11 a.m. on the Bth. The chart not showing the passage between the island and the
mainland, anchored outside, intending to sound with the boats for a channel reported to
me to exist between the south-east end of Yule and the mainland, * * Brought the
vessel through a fine channel carrying 15 fathoms by the lead; anchored in the bay
within 200 yards of Yule in 10 fathoms.
I found this to be a magnificent harbour, capable of affording shelter and anchorage in
any winds. * * * The scenery here is very grand, Mount Yule 10,000 feet high,
and the Owen Stanley Ranges appearing to tower over us, while the island had a
beautiful green appearance, being apparently highly cultivated. ******
The people here do not live in villages, but in families, half-a-mile or so apart, with
neatly fenced plantations surrounding the clean comfortable houses which are so well
suited to the climate. The soil (black) is very rich, and capable of growing any tropical
productions.
I should say the island is healthy, judging from the appearance of the people, and its
height; there being no low- country, but undulating hills, all apparently capable of
cultivation. Sugar appears to thrive here. * * *
This harbour and the Island of Yule would form a splendid basis of operations should
New Guinea be colonised, the harbour offering every facility for shipping in the im-
mediate vicinity of the richest and most accessible part of the island.
No. 57.
The AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.,
Sir, 19th April 1883.
J have the honour to enclose a cutting from the “ Glasgow Herald” of the 17th
instant, containing a report* made by Dr. Robertson, at the request of his Excellency
Lord Loftus, on his “reasons for advocating the annexation by Great Britain of New
Guinea,” sent to bis Excellency on the 27th December 1882-
Dr. Robertson is a gentleman of high scientific attainments, and was sent to Queens-
land about two years since by a private company to examine and report upon the mineral
and other resources of the Colony; his opinions may therefore be assumed to be free from
the bias of local partisanship, and as they bear strongly on several of the questions I have
recently bad the honour to bring under the notice of Lord Derby I have thought it
possible they might be of sufficient interest to be worth his Lordship’s perusal.
I have, &c.
(Signed) THOS. ARCHER,
The Under Secretary of State, Agent-General for Queensland.
Colonial Office.
* See Enclosure in No. 52.
R G 853. S


No. 58.
The COLONIAL SECRETARY (NEW SOUTH WALES) to the AGENT-GENERAL
(LONDON). (Received April 19, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
April 19, 1883. — This Government views favourably annexation of New Guinea
to the British Crown,
No. 59.
The AGENT-GENERAL FOR VICTORIA to COLONIAL OFFICE.
8, Victoria Chambers,
Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W.,
Sir, 20th April 1883.
With reference to my conversation with you on the 18th instant, touching the
instructions of my Government respecting the annexation of New Guinea, I have the
honour to enclose for the information of the Earl of Derby a copy of the text of the
Telegraphic Despatch received from the Honourable the Premier,
I have, &c.
(Signed) ROBT. MURRAY SMITH.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 59.
Government or Victoria to Victoria Office.
(Telegraphic.)
18th April 1883. —Promptly and earnestly support action of Queensland Government
in annexing New Guinea.
No. 60.
GOVERNOR THE RIGHT HON. LORD A. LOFTUS, G.C.B. (NEW SOUTH WALES), to the
RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received April 21, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
April 21, 1883.— The New Guinea annexation is favourably viewed by this Govern-
ment.
No. 61.
GOVERNOR SIR W. F. C. ROBINSON, K.C.M.G. (SOUTH AUSTRLIA), to the RIGHT
HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received April 21, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
21st April.—My Government request me to convey their opinion that New Guinea
should be under British rule, and hope the action of the Government of Queensland may
have that result.


No. 62.
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to the COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street,
Sir, London, S.W., 24 April 1883.
I have the honour to enclose, for the information of the Earl of Derby, a copy of
a Telegraphic Despatch received on the 21st instant from the Premier of Queensland on
the subject of the annexation of New Guinea to that Colony.
I would beg most respectfully to call Lord Derby’s attention to the concluding
sentence of the Despatch “ Press early ratification,*’ which shows the anxiety with which
the action of the Imperial Government is awaited in the Colony; and I would most
earnestly beg —if the annexation cannot be at once ratified—that I may be authorised,
pending the final decision, to allay that anxiety by giving an assurance to the Govern-
ment of the Colony that the mother country will prevent any Foreign Power from taking
of New Guinea, an event that would be regarded by the Australasian Colonies
as an irremediable disaster.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) THOS. ARCHER,
The Under Secretary of State, Agent General for Queensland.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No, 62.
From Premier, Brisbane, to Agent General, London.
21st April 1883.
All Colonies heartily endorse our action, and are urging approval, consider annexation
by Foreign Power calamitous. Assure Lord Derby no expense Imperial exchequer.
Press early ratification.
(Signed) Mcllwraith.
No. 63.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT HON.
THE EARL OF DERBY (Received May 2, 1883.)
Government House, Brisbane,
Mr Lord, March 14, 1883.
I have the honour to transmit for your consideration copies of a letter dated
26th February 1883,* with other papers, on the subject of the annexation of New
Guinea.
2. The subject is one of growing daily importance.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby. (Signed) A. E. KENNEDY.
&c. &c. &c.
* See Enclosure in No. 56.
R 6853. T


No. 64.
THE ABORIGINES PROTECTION SOCIETY to the EARL OF DERBY.
Aborigines Protection Society,
3, Broadway Chambers, Westminster,
My Lord, May 14, 1883.
We are directed by the Committee of the Aborigines Protection Society to write
to your Lordship on the subject of the proposed annexation of New Guinea.
We desire, in the first place, to express our strong conviction,—a conviction which we
believe is shared by a large section of the public,—that if New Guinea is annexed, that
measure should be undertaken by Her Majesty’s Government, and the administration of
the Island placed on the same footing as Fiji or any other Crown Colony.
We venture to submit that such a course, so entirely in accordance with precedent, is
essential alike for the maintenance of the Queen’s supremacy, and for the establishment
on a secure basis of the rights of the native inhabitants of New Guinea.
In the judgment of the Committee, it is peculiarly undesirable that the work of
annexing and governing that great Island should be entrusted to a Colony which relies
for the means of prosecuting its tropical industries upon labour drawn from many of
the Islands of the Western Pacific. We are .unable to say whether there is any desire
at present on the part of the planters of Queensland to use New Guinea as a recruiting
ground for labourers, but we are of opinion that, however public-spirited and praiseworthy
may be the motives which now influence the action of the Colony, it is morally certain
that if the administration of New Guinea were placed in its hands, the temptation to
extend the labour trade to that country would prove irresistible. We, therefore,
earnestly deprecate the adoption of any policy by Her Majesty’s Government which
would virtually place New Guinea under the control of the planting interest in Queens-
land, and thus subject the natives to a labour system which, experience has shown, can
only be prevented from degenerating into slavery by the most vigilant supervision of
the Home Government. Even the most ordinary legal security against the perpetration
of injustice on the weaker race is absent in Queensland ; for your Lordship will remember
that heathen testimony is excluded from the Courts of that Colony.
We beg further to remind your Lordship that Queensland has laboured for many
years past under the imputation of having failed to take proper steps for the protection
of her own aborigines. The Committee desire me to forward, for your Lordship’s infor-
mation, a copy of a pamphlet on the conduct of the native police in Queensland, published
in Brisbane three years ago. We abstain from referring to such outrages as, unfortunately,
too often take place in the remoter districts of a newly settled country, and which are to a
large extent due to sheer inability on the part of the Executive to restrain the elements
of disorder; but it is obvious that the native police is a force for whose conduct the
Queensland Government is necessarily responsible. Your Lordship will perceive that
the enclosed pamphlet* consists of articles and letters which appeared in the “ Queens-
lander,” a Colonial journal of high character. They are manifestly written in good
faith, and, representing, as they do, both sides of the question, contain materials for
enabling the reader to form an impartial judgment. We understand that the compiler of
the pamphlet is willing to make himself responsible, in his own name, for the charges he
has brought against the native police, and to place the Government in the way of
obtaining trustworthy evidence on the subject, in the event of an official inquiry being
made.
We beg respectfully to urge that until such an inquiry has been made as should
vindicate the good name of the Colony, it is most undesirable that Her Majesty’s
Government should be a party to any arrangement which would place a great native
population, of the estimated number of three or four millions under the authority of the
Queensland Ministry. We regret to be compelled to make this remark, but the
published details justify the fear that in too many instances the operations of the native
police have been conducted with wanton cruelty; that revolting outrages have been
committed upon native women; that unoffending blacks have frequently been murdered
in cold blood; and that sometimes, even when the guilty have suffered punishment, the
work of repression has degenerated into a massacre. Moreover, the secrecy with which
the doings of the native police are surrounded, one evidence of which is the non-
publication of the reports of their officers, is calculated to strengthen the belief that too
little official supervision is exercised over the proceedings of the force.
* Not printed.


It would have been comparatively easy for the Colonial Government to ascertain the
truth or otherwise of the grave accusations to w T hich we have referred by appointing a
Royal Commission to inquire into the whole subject. This they were invited to do by
the Hon. John Douglas, ex-premier and formerly Agent General for the Colony in
England; but his proposal was not entertained, and Bishop Hale, Chairman of the
xAborigines Commission, was equally unsuccessful in his efforts to induce the Govern-
ment to take some action in the case of an alleged massacre of blacks to which he called
their attention. They will perhaps allege that the charges made are either untrue cr
greatly exaggerated, but it would manifestly be unsafe for Her Majesty’s Government to
take this for granted in the absence of inquiry, and in the teeth of the strong testimony
to the contrary which has been given by a number of respectable Colonists and never
disproved.
Your Lordship is aware that when the Fiji Islands were taken over by Great Britain
they were made a Crown Colony, and that by the establishment of a just administration
and of wise laws the native population nas thus far been preserved from the enslavement
and gradual extinction with which they were threatened.
The Committee earnestly hope that if Her Majesty’s Government decide to annex
New Guinea to the British Empire, they will follow a precedent which has been so-
eminently productive of good to all concerned.
We have, &c.,
(Signed) L. L, DILLWYN, Chairman of
Committee Meeting.
R. N. FOWLER, Treasurer,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, F. W. CHESSON, Secretary.
&c. &c. &c.
