

ANATOMICAL LECTURE
ON THE
NEW CONSTITUTION,
AND THE
BAD SUBJECTS TO WHOM IT OWES ITS PATEBNITY.
Delivered in the “ Royal Australian Circus”, York-stueet, Sydney,
on Tuesday, 17th January, 1854.
WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTEATIONS,
BY JOHN DUNIORE LANG, D.D.A.M.,
Decently one of the Representatives of the City of Sydney, in the
Legislative Council of New South Wales.
Government is for the benefit of the people; and when rulers pervert the government
to their own purposes, and oppress the people, then the remedy is with the people—
peaceably if they can, by revolution if necessary. A Government perverted by cunning
from its great ends is no longer binding upon its subjects.— Kirwan.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY F. CUNNINGHAMS, AT THE “ALBION PRINTING
OFFICE”, 113, KING-STREET.
1854.




ANATOMICAL LECTURE, ETC.,
(From the 11 People's Advocate” of the 21 st January, 1854.)
On Tuesday evening last, pursuant to advertisement, the
Rev. Dr. Lang delivered a lecture in the Royal Australian
Circus, York-street, under the title of “An Anatomical
Lecture on the New Constitution, and the bad subjects to
whom it owes its paternity,” the object being to “ bell the
two cats” that are just going home.*
The large and commodious Circus was literally crowded
in every part, there being not less than from 1800 to 2000
persons present. The Doctor was received witli the loudest
demonstrations of applause, and his lecture, which was a
highly interesting one, was listened to throughout with the
most marked attention, and the deepest interest.
We may here observe that the Circus has been fitted up in
a very superior style since we last visited it, and great credit
is due to Mr. Malcom for the arrangements which were made
for the convenience of all parties on Tuesday evening last.
The following is, as nearly as possible, a verbatim report of
the lecture.
-Fellow Colonists and Friends, —About this time last
year I happened to be in the City of Glasgow, where it was
hastily arranged that I should deliver one or two lectures on
the capabilities and prospects of Australia as a field for
emigration from the mother country, in one of the public
halls of that great city. My own idea on the subject was to
deliver the lectures, as I propose doing now, right off, as
Jonathan says, (laughter), and without any more ado about
it. But the kind friends into whose hands I had fallen on the
occasion, (and one has often more trouble with his friends on
such occasions than with his enemies), these kind friends told
me that it was absolutely necessary to have one of the notabili-
ties of the place—the Lord Provost, or Mayor, if possible, and
if not, one of the Baillies or Aldermen; and if even that were
found impracticable, at all events one of the members of the
City Council—to occupy the chair, or to preside at the meeting.
* The Honorable E. Deas Thomson, Colonial Secretary, and William Went-
worth, Esq., one of the present members for the City of Sydney. These
gentlemen are on the eve of embarking for England, where, it is expected, they
will “move heaven and earth” to get the infamous measure, of which they are the
authors here, passed into a law by the Home Government.


It was found, however, on making the requisite preliminary in-
quiries, that the Lord Provost was already engaged, agreeably
to the phraseology of the place, “ seventeen deep,” that is, that
for seventeen working days, at the very time 1 required him,
which happened to be, what is called in Scotland, New Year’s
Day time, (a time of general gormandizing in my country, if
there is any part of the Scotch year devoted to that purpose,)
his lordship was either to dine out or to dine in for the good
of the city ; and Baillie This was, in like manner, to dine so
often with Baillie That, and Baillie That with Baillie This,
that the idea of getting a Baillie at all to preside at the meeting
was almost hopeless. (Much and continued laughter.) In
these circumstances, I requested my good friends to allow me
to manage the matter in my own way, by dispensing with a
chairman altogether; and I pledged myself that if they did so,
we should get on as well as if we had all the Baillies in the
city, and the Lord Provost to the bargain. They were rather
curious to know how I should manage with this view, so as to
do without such an indispensability as they considered a
Baillie; but they were soon satisfied that I was in the right
after all. For when the audience were assembled, consisting
of about 1500 people, I got up and told them without further
preface that I understood it was customary on such occasions
for an entire stranger like myself, from a distance, to be in-
troduced to the company by some one or other of the notabili-
ties of the place, who would thereby give him a sort of
certificate of character, and say a word or two in his favour
to bespeak the countenance and support of the audience on his
behalf. And no doubt, I acknowledged, all this was very
advantageous for the obscure stranger. It gave him a sort of
popularity which he might perhaps have very little chance of
obtaining otherwise. It lifted him up into a sort of temporary
notoriety, and made him attract the public gaze, much in the
same way as a gentleman»s flunkey does, when standing up
behind his master’s carriage, and shining from the light re-
flected from the great man who is riding before him. (Bursts
of laughter, with loud and repeated cheers.) But, I confessed
I greatly preferred having all such matters managed on what
I designated for the moment, our Australian principle, which
was that every tub should stand upon its own bottom, and
every man tell his own story himself. (Renewed laughter and
cheers.) Now, I can assure you that, after this introduction,
which was received with a perfect burst of enthusiasm, my
good friends acknowledged that there was no want of any civic
notability in the case, any more than there is likely to be of any
colonial notability, from the Governor-General downwards, to
preside here this evening. (Renewed cheers.) To tell the
honest truth, I have been disgusted, a hundred times, in this


fair city of ours, these thirty years past, at the unmanly, ser-
vile, crouching spirit so frequently evinced by men of fair
standing otherwise, but who will on no account venture before
the public on any subject, or cause, whatever be its merits,
whether religious or secular, unless they have some colonial
official, or other notability, to grace the assembly with his
worthless presence, and to give it the whistle of his insignifi-
cant name. (Strong expressions of sympathy and approval.)
In short, I am for every tub standing on its own bottom, and
every man telling his own story himself. If it is worth telling,
the people will find it out in time. If it is not, the longer it
remains untold the better. (Renewed cheering.)
The story of this evening then, is to be an Anatomical
Lecture on the New Constitution and its authors, or in other
words, the bad subjects to whom it owes its paternity. (There
was some disposition evinced here to disturb the proceedings,
by one or two solitary individuals in different parts of the
Circus, who seem to have been sent and paid by somebody
for the express purpose ; but the meeting very soon put them
down and restored perfect order and propriety.) Now for the
information of those who have not learned Greek, 1 would
simply observe that the word Anatomical merely signifies
what would be designated, in one of those great Haberdashery
Establishments in Gcorge-street and Pitt-street—something in
the Cutting-up Department. (Loud and repeated bursts of
laughter "and cheering.) And as some politicians make it
their boast that their principle is Measures and not Men, I
would simply protest against such a principle on the present
occasion ; for it is both measures and men that 1 would
propose to cut up in the course of this Anatomical demon-
stration. (Renewed cheering.)
“ But what right,” I shall probably be asked by some
objecter,—“what right have you, as a professed Minister of
religion, to meddle with such subjects at all ? Mind your
own proper business, and leave these things to other people.”
Now, instead of replying to such an objection with any thing
of my own, which might perhaps be deemed unsatisfactory in
the quarter I allude to, I shall reply in the words of one of the
most distinguished Englishmen of his day—a man whose
splendid genius was the admiration of his country, whose
reverence for the Christian religion, of which he was a
minister, was undoubted and profound, and whose great heart
was filled with an ardent love for the cause of freedom and the
rights of men. The distinguished writer I allude to was the
late Robert Hall, of Leicester. (Cheers.) Here are his words:—
“ Though Christianity does not assume any immediate direction in the affairs
of government, it inculcates those duties, and recommends that spirit, which will
ever prompt us to cherish the principles of freedom. * * * * He who


breaks the fetters of slavery, ami delivers a nation from thraldom, forms, in my
opinion, the noblest comment on the great law of love, whilst he distributes the
greatest blessings which man can receive from man ; but next to that is the merit
of him, who, in times like the present, watches over the edifice of public liberty,
repairs its foundations, and strengthens its cement, when he beholds it hastening
to decay. It is not in the power of every one, it is true, to benefit his age or
country, in this distinguished manner, and accordingly it is no where expressly
commanded ; but where this ability exists, it is not diminished by our embracing
Christianity, which consecrates every talent to the public good.”*
(Strong expressions of sympathy at the close of the reading of
this paper.) Without deeming it necessary therefore to make
any apology for occupying the place and position I now do, I
shall forthwith proceed to the proper business of this evening.
(Cheers.)
To begin then at the beginning, and to lay down the first
principle in our proposed series of matters, it appears to me to
have been a great mistake all along, on the part of this com-
munity, to have taken it for granted, as it seems to have
tacitly done, that the present Legislative Council has any
right to frame a Constitution for the people of this Colony at
all. (Strong and general expressions of sympathy.) I deny
that it has any such right, whether inherent as a Colonial
Legislature, or derivative in virtue of any Act of Parliament
whatsoever. (Strong expressions of approval.) The Imperial
Act of 1850, although notoriously inadequate to our wants
and wishes, would nevertheless have been a great improvement
on our previous condition, if it had only been honestly carried
out. For it gave us a Ten Pound Franchise, which was cer-
tainly a step in advance at the time in the right direction—
(cheers) and it left the elective portion of the Representation
to be distributed by the collective wisdom of the day, agree-
ably to the principles of the British Reform Act—the latest
Act of the Imperial Parliament at the time at all applicable
to the case. Now, what, I would ask, were those principles
of the British Reform Act ? Why, they were simply that
the representation of the country should be distributed as far as
practicable, on the principles of population and property
combined. (Cheers.) There were doubtless great obstacles
in the way of carrying out such principles at the time in the
United Kingdom. For the Representative System in the
mother country had numerous and venerable abuses, of nearly
a thousand years’ duration, embedded in its very substance ;
and in many instances, in consequence of the vested interests
and alleged rights of parties in the case, these abuses defied
* “ There are moments in the fortune of States,” says the Hi. l Jit Honorable
Edmund Burke, “ wlien particular men are called to make improvements by great
mental exertion.” —Reflections on the Revolution in France.
The particular reason for this is stated as follows, by another eminent writer,
the justly celebrated Professor Heeren, of Gottingen: —“Nothing can be more
jealous than the love of liberty, and, unfortunately for mankind, experience shows
too clearly that it has reason to be so.”— Heeren's Greece.


Reform. But everything that was actually done under the
British Reform Act was done in accordance with the prin-
ciples I have stated; and the only reason why no more was
done in vindication of these principles, and why a second
Reform Act is now loudly called for in the mother country,
(loud cheers) and has been actually promised, on the part of
the present Government by Lord John Russell, (cheers) is
that it was impossible at the time to do more than was actually
accomplished. It was impossible at once to clear away the
whole of the abuses that had grown up in the representative
system of the United Kingdom, in the course of a thousand
years. But there tvere no such obstacles here in the way of
applying the principles of the British Reform Act to this
Colony. (Strong expressions of sympathy.) There were no
vested rights or interests in our case ; there were no ancient
boroughs or corporations here , with their charters from the
Henrys and Edwards of the olden time, to stand up against
Reform, and to claim protection for the monstrous abuses they
exhibited, and that had grown grey and venerable from the
mere lapse of time. (Strong expressions of concurrence.)
There was a fair field to act on here without injury to any
party or interest whatsoever. (Cheers.) But how was the
thing managed by the thoroughly unprincipled men who did
the deed of injustice and iniquity of which we all so
much reason to complain ? Why, instead of distributing the
representation of the country on the principles of the British
Reform Act—the principles of population and property com-
bined—(for they always go hand in hand in the colonies,) a
system of representation was concocted for the Colony, of the
most barefaced, impudent, and iniquitous description imagin-
able—a system of representation under which nearly one-half
of the population had only one sixth part of the Representa-
tion assigned to it, while the other half had five-sixths.*
* The men who perpetrated this piece of political villainy, pretend, of course,
to be ultra loval, and enthusiasts for British connection. Let them know, how-
ever, how their unworthy actions are characterized by honest men.
,{ A conspiracy,” says the distinguished American moralist, Dr. Channing,
“a conspiracy against the rights oi the human race,, is as foul a crime as re-
bellion ao-ainst the rights of sovereigns; nor is there less of treason warring
against public freedom, than in assailing royal power.” — Dr. Charming's Essay
on the Life and Character of Napoleon Buonaparte.
And again : . . ,
“The greatest crime against society, that of spoiling it of its rights, and
loading it with chains, still fails to move that deep abhorrence, which is due.
Regarding freedom as the chief interest of human nature, as essential to intel-
lectual, moral, and religious progress, we look on men, who have signalized them-
selves by their hostility to it, with an indignation at once stern and sorrowful.” Ibid.
“ There has always existed, and still exists, a mournful obtuseness of moral
feeling in regard to the crimes of political life. The wrongdoing of public men,
on a largo scale, has never drawn upon them that sincere, hearty abhorrence
which visits private vice. The true moral feeling in regard to the crimes oi
public men is almost to be created.”— lb d


(Loud and general expressions of indignation.) And this
virtually disfranchised half of the Colony, comprised the
whole population of this great city and neighbourhood ; the
political weight of every citizen of Sydney being reduced,
under the Electoral Act of 1851, to the vulgar fraction of
only one tenth of the political weight of a resident in the
Maranoa and Burnett River District, on the remote northern
frontier of the Colony. (Loud and repeated expressions of
indignation from all parts of the Circus.) In short, the un-
principled authors of that iniquitous Act turned into an actual
reality what has hitherto passed current in society, as a mere
harmless joke at the expense of that respectable part of the
community, the tailors—they made every citizen of Sydney only
equal to the ninth part of a man in the remotest Squatting
District in the Colony ! (Great laughter, mingled with strong
and general expressions of indignation.) Now, I maintain
that it were equally monstrous and suicidal, to admit for one
moment, that a Legislature constructed on such a system of
downright fraud, can have the shadow of a right to frame a
Constitution for us, the people of New South Wales. (Loud
and repeated cheers.) The men who perpetrated this noto-
rious fraud, and who now, with their friends and abettors,
constitute the Thomson and Wentworth majority of the
present Legislative Council, constituted under the Electoral
Act of 1851, are, in my humble opinion, in no respect superior
to a company of burglars who have effected an unlawful
entrance into some quiet Englishman’s house by the back
windows,* and who, after “ bailing up” -f- the family in the
kitchen, are swilling away at the wine, like jolly beggars, on
the first floor, and dividing among themselves all the plate
and money they can find in the house. (Loud and incessant
bursts of laughter and applause for some minutes.) Let this
then be our first principle, that the present Legislative
Council has no right whatever to frame a Constitution for us,
and that we will on no account recognize anything in that
way as at all binding upon us and the colony at large.
(Strong and general expression of concurrence.) But if you
should think my authority of itself insufficient in such a case,
* lie that entereth not by the door into the shecpfold, but climbeth tip some
other way, the same is a thief and a robber, John x. 1. Now this is just as true
in politics as it is in religion. “I will relate to you,” says Demosthenes, while
opposing a law introduced by Timocrates, “ what Solon once said against a man
who proposed a bad law. The cities, said he to the judges, have a law, that he
who counterfeits money shall be put to death. He thought this law was made for
the protection of private persons and their private intercourse ; but the laws he
esteemed the coin of the State. They, therefore, who corrupt the laws must be
much more heavily punished than they who adulterate the coinage, or introduce
bad money.” — Heeren's Greece.
t A well known colonial phrase, applied to the case of persons tied up or shut
up, for the time being, by burglars or robbers.


take, by all means, that of one of the greatest men of his clay,
the late Robert Hall, whom I have already quoted. “ Tame
submission to usurped power,” says that illustrious man, —
“ tame submission to usurped power has hitherto been the
malady of human nature.” (Strong and general expressions
of concurrence.) Let us take special care then, that this
malady shall not reach us.
The next thing which, in my humble opinion, is indis-
pensably necessary on the part of the liberal portion of the
inhabitants of this Colony, under existing circumstances, is to
put forth, for our own mutual information and guidance,
some declaration, embodying the principles on which any
Constitution for this Colony must be based, in order to its
being acceded to by us, the people of New South Wales.
Now there may be some difference of opinion as to the
comparative importance of the different principles to be em-
bodied in such a declaration ; but I believe there will be a
very general agreement, among intelligent persons throughout
the Colony, as to the following, on each of which I shall make
a very few remarks.
1. The first principle, then, on which I would insist on
having any Constitution for this Colony based, is that of
Universal Suffrage, or the possession of the Elective Franchise
by every adult male colonist who is neither a pauper nor a
felon. (Loud and general expressions of concurrence.) I
claim this as the natural and inherent right of men, of wliich
no person or authority on earth can have the shadow of a
right to deprive them.* (Repeated cheers.) I claim it,
moreover, as the right of Englishmen under the British Con-
stitution, as explained and declared by Lord John Russell at
the introduction into Parliament of the famous Reform Bill
of 1832 : and I mention Englishmen particularly—including
of course both Irishmen and Scotchmen—because it was in
England that the foundations of the British Constitution,
under which we now all live, were originally laid, and the
noble fabric reared to its present state of comparative perfec-
tion. (Renewed cheers.) But I claim this right still further
as a measure of absolute necessity in the present circumstances
of this Colony. In the course of the past week, a respectable
free immigrant, recently arrived in the Colony, called upon
me upon some clerical business, and told me in the course of
* God's thoughts, we are told in Scripture, are not as our thoughts, neither
are his wags our wags. Now what are God’s thoughts in regard to the
suffrage ? Why, they are such as the following : —Honour all men. And how
can we honour all men, if we deny, perhaps one-half or two-thirds of them, the
political franchise ?
Again; Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so
unto them. Now where is the man in the Legislative Council, that would like to
bo deprived of the Franchise himself?


conversation that, finding no other more eligible employment
open for him on his arrival in Sydney, he had gone and hired
himself, like an honest man, as a stonemason’s labourer; in
which comparatively humble employment he was receiving, to
my utter astonishment, wages at the rate of eighteen shillings
a day. Now will any man tell me that, in a country where
the very humblest class of labourers are earning such wages
as these, it would be at all practicable, even if it were proper,
to deprive these classes of the Elective Franchise ? The idea
is utterly absurd, and Universal suffrage must therefore be
the law of the land in New South Wales, whatever be the
consequences. (Loud and general expressions of concurrence.)
For my own part I have no fear of these consequences; and
in expressing such an opinion, I am not proceeding on a mere
theory or conjecture, but reasoning from actual history, from
well known facts. The Puritans of New England, a body
originally of about twenty thousand people, who left their native
land for conscience 1 sake, and settled in the wilds of America,
during the tyranny first of James, then of Charles the First
and Archbishop Laud, between the years 1620 and 1640,
framed their constitutions for the little colonies or states
they formed in the American wilderness, on the principle of
universal suffrage, which they conceived, and I think rightly,
they had found in the Bible or Word of God, And, strange
and incredible as it may appear to those who are at all
acquainted with the history of the numerous Revolutions that
have taken place in most other parts of the civilised world
during the last two centuries and a-half, these constitutions
have remained unchanged to the present day. I happened,
when I was in America myself in 1840, to attend a meeting
of the Legislature of one of these ancient colonies or states,
along with a literary and clerical friend who was thoroughly
acquainted witli the history of his country ; and he told me
that the constitution under which that Legislature still sat, as
the representative of a sovereign and independent state, had
been originally drawn up at a meeting of the first emigrantsheld
in Mr. Somebody’s barn, on the banks of the beautiful river
Connecticut, two hundred and thirty years ago, and had re-
mained unchanged to the present day ; the only change, if it
could be called one even in form, to which it had ever been
subjected, being the necessary substitution of the word people
for the word king, when the country became free and in-
dependent. In short, these honest men, the old Puritans of
the 17th century, did the right thing at first, by establishing
universal suffrage, and a government based on that principle
as the law of their land, and it required no mending after-
wards.* (repeated cheers.)
* The permanence and stability of these old Colonial Constitutions and Govern-


2. A second principle, equally important and indispensable
as the basis of a Constitution for this Colony, is that of Equal
Electoral Districts, or a representation based on the principle
of population. (Cheers.) In a long interview with which I
was honoured in London, shortly before embarking on my
return to the Colony, by these two distinguished patriots and
statesmen, Mr. Richard Cobden and Mr. John Bright,
members of Parliament, I was telling these gentlemen, at
their own desire, how I had endeavoured to get this principle
recognised and established in our electoral system, when the
infamous Electoral Act of 1851 was on the tapis in our Legis-
lative Council, of which I happened to be a member at the
time, as one of the two representatives of the City of Sydney ;
and how all my efforts on the occasion were defeated, through
the jugglery of oui Colonial Prime Minister, who represented
the Government on the occasion, (the Honourable E. Deas
Thomson, Colonial Secretary,) backed up, as it was, by the
downright treachery of some, and the downright servility of
others of the members of our Legislature at the period. I
was telling these gentlemen this circumstance, and illustrating
the propriety and justice of my proposal for the establishment
of equal electoral districts, based on the principle of popula-
tion, by shewing that, in the Colonies, where there are none
of those political obstacles in the way of the general distri-
bution of wealth that exist at home, it was notorious (the
thing having been satisfactorily ascertained) that equal
numbers of the population, whether in town or country—
such numbers respectively as would form a proper consti-
tuency, for a representative of the people, in any country —
were possessed of equal amounts of property or wealth; so
that the principle of population with us, actually implied the
principle of property also—when Mr. Bright told me (to my
utter astonishment, for I had thought such a state of things was
peculiar to the Colonies,) that the very same result had been
ascertained and established, from actual examination, even in
England, notwithstanding all the obstacles to the general
distribution of wealth or property that existed there ; equal
amounts of the population, whether in town or country, im-
plying equal amounts of property or wealth. This principle
of Equal Electoral Districts, therefore, is one which I would
insist on as the basis for any Constitution for this Colony, and
which I would never surrender. (Much cheering and strong
expressions of concurrence.)
3. The third principle which I would have embodied as
ments is just another illustration of the principle that God's thoughts are not as
our thoughts in these matters. “Such a Constitution will never stand,” our
Macquarie-street Legislators would exclaim ; and yet these New England Con-
stitutions have stood for more than two centuries. *


the basis of a Constitution, in any such declaration as I have
suggested, is a Legislature to consist of Two Houses, both
exclusively elective. (Loud and general cheering.) Ido not
by any means attach the same importance to the principle of
having a Legislature of Two Houses, as to either of those
already enumerated, viz., Universal Suffrage and Represen-
tation based on population exclusively. Some of the greatest
names in France were very lately of opinion that a single
House of Legislature was all that was needed even in that
great country ; and in my opinion a single House might have
been sufficient for all purposes here for a considerable time to
come. But as Two Houses would assimilate us in this par-
ticular, not only to Great Britain, but to the United States,
(cheers) I would willingly follow the precedent afforded us in
these two great countries—on this condition, however, that
both Houses should be exclusively elective, and the principle
of nomineeism excluded at once and for ever from both
Houses of the Legislature. (Loud and general cheering.)
4. A fourth principle on which I would insist, with the
utmost tenacity, in any declaration setting forth the basis of a
Constitution for this Colony, is the Repeal of the Squatting
Act of 1846, so that all the waste lands of the Colony should
thenceforth be open for purchase, and no rights of pre-emption
be either recognised or allowed, beyond one square mile on each
run; all Acts of Parliament, Orders in Council, and Colonial
Regulations to the contrary, notwithstanding. (General
cheering.) I think it is right and proper in such cases to tell
all one’s mind at once, and to state plainly and explicitly,
without any ambiguity whatever, how far one would insist
upon having the levelling principle carried on behalf of the
people of these Colonies; for this is a question in which our
fellow Colonists of Port Phillip are, perhaps, still more deeply
interested than we are, and in which, therefore, they will be
glad of our sympathy and concurrence. I would, therefore,
insist, on the part of the people, on having all past legislation,
whether Imperial or Colonial, on the subject of the waste lands
of these Colonies swept away, and these lands left as free for
purchase and settlement, with the exception I have mentioned,
for all future immigrants from Great Britain, as well as for all
actually in the Colonies at present, as the air we breathe or
the light of heaven. (Cheers.) At the same time, I would
by all means, leave the actual Squatters in undisturbed pos-
session of their respective runs, so long as they are not re-
quired for permanent occupation and settlement, on some
such terms as these runs were held on during the administra-
tion of Sir Richard Bourke, one of the ablest and best men
we have ever had in this Colony. (Cheers from the old
Colonists.) As I shall have occasion, however, to refer to


this point in the sequel, under a different aspect of the case, I
shall say nothing further on the subject at present.
5. A fifth principle I should like to see embodied in any
declaration setting forth the basis of a Constitution for this
Colony, but to which I would by no means attach so much
importance as to some of those I have already enumerated, is
that of No Government Support for the clergy of any
denomination. (General cheers.) This, I feel assured, will
be the necessary and inevitable result of the natural progress
of events in these Colonies, within a very short period—
(General expressions of concurrence) —and, looking forward,
as I do, with perfect confidence, to such a consummation, I
would not insist very strongly on a recognition of the prin-
ciple for the present, as part of a basis for our future Consti-
tution. Only let us have a popular Government established,
that is, a Government by and for the people, on the principles
already enumerated, and the Holy Alliance of Church and
State will very soon be disposed of in the right way, and that
for ever.* (General cheers.)
* The boasted alliance between Church and State, on which so many encomiums
have been lavished, seems to have been little more than a compact between the
priest and the magistrate, to betray the liberties of mankind, both civil and
religious. To this the clergy, on their part at least, have continued steady,
shunning enquiry, fearful of change, blind to the corruptions of Government,
skilful to discern the signs of the times, and eager to improve every opportunity,
and to employ all their art and eloquence to extend the prerogative and smooth
the approaches of arbitrary power. — Robert Hall.
Independently of all the other reasons that may be pleaded for the entire sepa-
ration of Church and State in Australia, there is a moral and religious one which
has hitherto been but little adverted to. It was a principle of the Mosaic Law
that the price of a dog or the hire of a prostitute should not be received into the
Treasury of the Lord, or in other words, that money received from such impure
sources should not be devoted to religious purposes. And we know that when
Judas the traitor threw down the thirty pieces of silver which he had received for
betraying innocent blood, the conscientious priests who had paid him the amount
in the first instance, would not receive it again for religious purposes, when he
brought it back to them, as it was the price of blood. But we have become, it
seems, a great deal more liberal in these Christian times, both in Italy and in
Australia. In the former of these countries, for instance, it is notoriously the
practice of the better class of prostitutes in the great cities of Venice, Florence,
Palermo, and Naples, to consecrate a fixed portion of their gains to the service
of Madonna, their chosen patroness ; and in Australia, where the revenue is almost
exclusively derived, from duties on intoxicating liquors, we employ a portion of the
fund, thus derived from the general intemperance of the country, or in other
words from legalised drunkenness, for the support of religion and the maintenance
of the clergy !!! No wonder if the interests of morality and religion should
suffer under such a system. But what are w'e to think of the clergy of all the
State—supported communions themselves anxiously desiring the continuance of
that system ? Only think of the Apostle Paul and his brother apostles supported,
as preachers of the Gospel, from the proceeds of a tax on drunkenness ! In
short the present system degrades both religion and its ministers of all commu-
nions alike. In such circumstances, as those of a country deriving its revenues
from intoxication, it is the plain and obvious d”ty of all ministers of religion to
touch not, taste not, handle not, the accursed thing —State pay. What better is
the ordinary Revenue, from which they draw their salaries, than the price of a
dog or the hire of a prostitute ?


Arrived as we now are at the third stage of our progress,
let us look for a moment at what the present Legislative
Council have done for us, under the infamous Electoral Act
of 1851, both in the way of framing a new Constitution for
us, and otherwise. I have already compared the men who
have fraudulently got possession of that house of ours in
Macquarie-street to a band of burglars, who have effected an
entrance into some quiet citizen’s house by one of the back
windows, and are sharing among themselves all the plate and
money they can find in the house. Now, I appeal to you all,
as to whether this is not an accurate description, and no cari-
cature, of what the Thomson and Wentworth majority of the
Legislative Council have been doing with the money of the
people of this Colony, for the last two sessions—creating offices
that are in no way requisite for the public service ; establishing
exorbitant rates of salary for all the higher offices, and leaving
the subordinates to subsist on a mere starvation allowance—
(Strong expressions of concurrence) —creating retiring pen-
sions in cases in which such a thing was never heard of before
in any Colony ; and last, but not least, in the four acts of this
drama of legalised iniquity, voting away the public money in
thousands, under the pretext of additional back salaries, in
the case of men who had been treated in the most liberal
manner as to salary before, and who only repaid this liberality
by betraying the cause of the people whose bread they were
eating all the while. (Loud and general expressions of indig-
nation from all parts of the meeting.) And all this, you will
recollect, was done while the public interests were neglected
in a thousand instances—while the roads and bridges through-
out the Colony were left in a state of shameful disrepair, and
“ moving accidents, by flood and field,” on all the highways
and byeways of the Colony, were of daily occurrence. (Re-
peated expressions of concurrence.) In short, there is no
denying the fact that these Legislative Councillors—l had
almost called them burglars—(laughter) have been making
very free of late with the people’s money.
I will not waste your time upon the franchise system of the
New Constitution, by contrasting.its inconsistencies, its glaring
deficiencies, and its cunning expedients to perpetuate the
reign of injustice, with the state of things which, I have
shewn already, both reason and justice, as well as the present
state of the Colony, imperiously demand, viz., a represen-
tation based on universal suffrage, as being the only basis on
which the franchise can now be placed, either with safety or
with propriety. But I will say a word or two on the in-
iquitous electoral system of the Act of 1851, which, it seems,
is to be perpetuated under the New Constitution, and ren-
dered still more intolerable by the singularly cunning but


contemptible expedient of rendering any change, under that
Constitution, virtually hopeless and impracticable.* The
object of all this, however, is too obvious to escape the notice
of any person of the slightest discernment. It is evidently
designed to perpetuate the thoroughly unprincipled system of
government, with which the Colony is at present cursed—to
subject the great body of the people throughout the Colony,
to the domination of a particular and privileged class—to
make the voice of the Colonists utterly powerless for the
future, and to force “ the iron into their very soul.” (Strong
and general expressions of sympathy.) In addition to all
these enormities, we are to have an Upper House of Nominees,
appointed first for five years, and then for life, to serve as a
millstone to be hanged around the neck of the Colony, to drag
it down to utter perdition. (Strong expressions of indigna-
tion.)
But the whole case of this vile conspiracy, against the
rights and liberties of the people of this land, becomes clear
as daylight in the arrangements contemplated in regard to the
waste lands of the Colony, viz., the perpetuation of the present
Squatting system, with its renewable leases, and its rights, of
pre-emption—a principle which virtually confiscates the public
property of the country, which sacrifices the rights and in-
terests of the vast majority of the Colonists, to the grasping
cupidity of a contemptible minority, and which places one
part of the community, for all time coming, at daggers drawn
towards another. (Strong and repeated expressions of indig-
nation.) And the last crowning act of that superlatively un-
principled and worthless government that has brought all this
iniquity to pass, has just, it seems, been consummated in the
issuing of the leases that have been so long withheld from the
squatters, from some compunctious feelings which, it appears,
are now all gone. This, in short, is the last kick which that
famous trio of conspirators against the rights and liberties of
the people of this land—the Governor-General, the Colonial
Secretary, and the Honourable and Learned Member for
Sydney—are giving the people before they leave it, I trust
for ever, at least as public men in any capacity whatsoever.
Now I have no hesitation in expressing my belief and con-
viction, that this land-question, treated as it is so much as a
matter of course, by our legislators, and slept over by the
colonial public, is nevertheless destined to become the great
battlefield of this Colony, on which the grand struggle for the
rights of the people will, ere long, be engaged in with might
* No change, in the Representative system provided by the New Constitution,
is to be practicable, unless assented to by two-thirds of the forthcoming Legisla-
ture : and with a Legislature so constituted as that Constitution provides, such
an assent would be utterly hopeless, (See Abstract of Constitution in Appendix).


and main; and on which the Standard of Freedom and
Independence for Australia will at length be reared, amid the
acclamations of thousands, in the sight of the whole civilized
world. (Loud and continued cheering.) This land question
of ours is merely a modern and Australian edition of the old
world-famous agrarian struggle of ancient Rome—the struggle
of the great body of the Roman people against the enormous
cupidity and intolerable domination of a particular and
privileged class, like that of our colonial squatters. And let
it be remembered, that this ancient struggle, between the two
great opposite classes of the Roman commonwealth, not only
convulsed the Roman State again and again, but gave ex-
istence to a state of things, which involved, at last, the
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. The senators of
ancient Rome occupied precisely the same position, in regard
to the great body of the Roman people, as the modern squatters
do, in regard to the great body of the people of Australia.
By downright fraud and usurpation, they had succeeded in
monopolizing, for their order, the public lands of the State,
throughout the whole Roman world; and they had each
enormous estates, like the runs of our squatters, all over
Europe, for which they paid the merest trifle to the public
treasury by way of Rent or Squatting License, and which
they cultivated, when they were cultivated at all, by means of
vast hordes of slaves. In this way the settlement of the
different European provinces of the Roman Empire, with “ a
bold yeomanry, their country’s pride,” was entirely prevented;
the small farmers who would have risen up into comfort and
comparative independence, and formed a bulwark for the State,
in seasons of emergency, under a different system, were vir-
tually driven into the towns, and transformed into an abject
semi-pauper town population ; and the vast estates or runs of
the Roman Squatters were inhabited only by slaves—China-
men, Coolies, Cannibal Islanders, and Convicts, I suppose,
purchased with the money of these Hereditary Titles-men.
(Great laughter.) And as these slaves had no interest in the
country, and no inducement to defend it, the provinces, in
which they were located in hundreds of thousands, were suc-
cessively overrun by vast hordes of barbarians from the north—
the slaves the meanwhile merely passing from one master to
another, without striking a single blow—and the empire
thereby fell at last, almost in one day.
Anti so will it be some of these days with the British empire
in Australia, if the Imperial Parliament are only sufficiently
left to themselves to pass the New Constitution of Thomson,
Wentworth, and Co., into a law, and to perpetuate the
monstrous grievance of this country, the existing monopoly
of its waste lands. I have no desire to assume the character


of a prophet by pretending to foretell future events ; but to
any person, even of the commonest discernment, it must be
clear as daylight, from the vast accumulation of combustible
materials now in progress all over Europe,* that ere many
years go round, there will be some great European war, in
which, if we can anticipate the future from the uniform experi-
ence of the past, Great Britain and France will be ranged on
opposite sides of the question, and their forces arrayed against
each other in all the deadly hostility of war. (Expressions of
concurrence.) Now as it is gold that supplies the sinews of war,
there can be no doubt that the fame of the great gold fields
of Australia will attract the future combatants to our imme-
diate neighbourhood, and change the scene of European war-
fare from the narrow seas of the old world to the bosom of the
vast Pacific. In such an event—taking it for granted that the
New Constitution has, in the mean time, been established,
and the present land system perpetuated by Act of Parlia-
ment—strenuous efforts will doubtless be made, by the future
local government of the day, to arouse the colonists generally
to defend the country against hostile aggression and French
invasion. And will you, the colonists of New South Wales,
be such consummate fools as to respond to any such call, to arm
for any such purpose ? (Indignant cries of No !) What
will you have to defend in such a case \ Not the country
surely, for you will have very little interest of any kind in it;
but the vilest system of government imaginable, including
the rights of the squatters to their runs, under the New Con-
stitution. (Strong and indignant expressions of concurrence.)
Oh no ! I am quite sure you will arm for no such purpose—
you will defend no such cause. On the contrary, you will
say, “ The oppressor’s extremity is Australia’s opportunity ;
now’s the day, and now’s the hour, for Freedom and Inde-
pendence.” (Great and continued applause.)
Besides, through the gross mismanagement and the culpable
neglect of our interests, as British colonists, on the part of
the Imperial authorities, the French have, in the mean time,
got two of the principal keys of the Pacific into their hands—
Tahiti on the one hand, and New Caledonia on the other.
* The state of Europe at this moment, is pretty much like iffiat of Germany in
the time of Luther. 11 y aura bientot dans I’Empire, un tumulte qui entrainera
pele-mele princes, magistrals, eveques— Le peuple a des yeux; il ne veut, il ne
pent etre mme par la force. — Luther, D' Aubigne.
And again : Les peuples ne sont plus maintenant ce qu’ils out ete jusqu'
a cette heure. Le glaive des guerres civiles est suspendu sur la tete des rois,—
Luther, D'Aubigne.
There will soon be a tumult in the Empire that will involve princes, magis-
trates, and bishops, and turn them all topsy turvy. The people have eyes; they
neither will nor can be dragged along by main force. * « s * The nations are
no longer what they have been hitherto. The sword of civil wars is suspended
over the heads of kings.


(Strong expressions of indignation.) Now although the
French are no great shakes at colonizing, they are a notable
people for “ playing at soldiers'”; and they have just secured a
position in our immediate neighbourhood that will enable them
to command our whole line of coast. No man, indeed, knows
better than that shrewd fellow, Louis Napoleon, that it would
be hopeless either for him, or for any other poAver in Christen-
dom, to seize and hold these Australian Colonies against the
power of Britain, and without the concurrence of the colonists
themselves : and I have no hesitation in expressing my own
opinion in the case, viz., that any Australian colonist who
Avould seriously propose anything of the kind—who would
propose to transfer the sovereignty of these colonies to France,
to Russia, or even to America—would richly deserve to be
hanged and quartered for his pains. (Strong expressions of
concurrence.) But it would be a totally different question for
Louis Napoleon, in the event of a great European war that
would place England and France on opposite sides, Avhether
he should not assist the liberal portion of the inhabitants of
Australia to get a thoroughly liberal government of their
own, instead of the Ncav Constitution and the Squatting
monopoly, protected, as we are supposing both to be, by the
British flag. (Renewed expressions of concurrence.) Let it
not be forgotten that the French contributed materially to
obtain Freedom and Independence for the United States of
America, in their great struggle with Great Britain: (cheers)
and it would surely be a feather in the cap of Louis Napoleon
to folloAv the same noble example—to assist in precisely the
same Avay, from his Colony of New Caledonia, in giving
Freedom and Independence to Australia. (Renewed cheers.)
It would be a most effectual way, in the estimation of the
whole civilized world, of repaying a portion of the great debt
of Waterloo. (Strong sensation.) Do not be alarmed, there-
fore, about the Ncav Constitution and the squatters 1 monopoly,
even though the Imperial Government should realise all the
fond anticipations of the Thomson and Wentworth majority
of the Legislative Council, and thereby do its Avorst for us, by
binding both of these millstones about the neck of Australia.
The womb of futurity is already big with Freedom and Inde-
pendence for tfiis community : and be assured that if nothing
else should bring about the wished-for consummation before-
hand, the first hostile shot on (he Pacific will be the signal of
the illustrious birth to the whole civilized world, provided we
are still to be subjected, in the mean time, through the ex-
pected connivance of the Imperial parliament with the Thomson
and WentAvorth majority of the present Legislative Council,
to a government of injustice and oppression. (Prolonged
cheering.)


In the meantime, the practical question for us to answer is,
What ought the liberal portion of the inhabitants of this
Colony to do in the present emergency I Shall we re-enact
the stale farce of petitioning her Majesty the Queen and the
High Courts of Parliament against the New Constitution and
the Land Grievance I For my own part, from what I have
seen myself these many years past, I am heartily sick of all
such petitioning, and would renounce it entirely for the future.
(Expressions of concurrence.) lam persuaded that a totally
different course would be far more effectual, both in strength-
ening the position and influence of the really liberal portion
of the Colonists here, and in obtaining for us all we want from
home. In one word, it appears to me to be the true policy of
the liberal portion of the inhabitants of all these Australian
colonies, under existing circumstances, to unite together in a
mutual League for the achievement of Freedom and Inde-
pendence for Australia. (Great cheering.) This, at all
events, is the right way to “ bell the Two Cats that are just
going home. (Laughter, and expressions of concuirence.)
Not that I have any idea that the great object to be kept in
view, the entire political freedom and national independence of
Australia, is to be accomplished immediately or very speedily ;
for all great changes in society, that are destined to be pei-
manent, must be preceded by a time of preparation.* Not
that I have any idea that the pursuit of this object will
imply either violence or insurrection. On the contrary, the
movement, in so far as I can anticipate its nature ant
character, will be one of enlightened reason, of calm deliber-
ation, and perfect peace.f But, circumstanced as we are m
these colonies at present, there can be no doubt that it will
• Almost all great enterprises are accomplished gradually, and by methods
which have been learned from many unsuccessful trials, from a slow accumulation
And ao-ain : Who that understands human nature, does not know that old
associations are not broken up in a moment; that to minds, plunged m a midnight
of error, truth must gradually open like the dawning day; that old views will
mina-le with the new ; that old ideas, which we wish to banish, will adhere to the
old words to which they were formerly attached ; and that the sudden and entue
eradication of long rooted errors, would be equivalent to the creation of a new
intellect ?— Dr. Charming's Essay on the Life and Writings of Milton.
And ao-ain • Nothing is more beautiful than to behold a new idea shine upon
the horizon of human intelligence; nothing is so legitimate as to cause it to
combat and conquer prejudice, customs, and the vicious institutions which resist
it.— Lamartine's History of the Girondists . Ill* 296.
t This is the only rational mode of procedure, as witness Dr. Chauning again.
He who, by an intellectual and moral energy, awakens kindred energy in
others, touches springs of infinite might, gives impulse to faculties to which no
bounds can be prescribed, begins an action which can never end. One great and
kindling thought from a retired and obscure man, may live when thrones are
fallen, and the memory of those who filled them obliterated, and like an undying
fire, may illuminate and quicken future generations.—/)!-. Chann\ng't Essay on
the Life and Character of Napoleon Buonaparte.


at once attract the attention of the whole civilized world, and
procure us the sympathies of millions on both sides of the
Atlantic. (Much cheering.) Nay, lam persuaded that it is
the only effectual means of bringing the Imperial Parliament
to its senses, and urging it to do us speedy and complete
jnstice. In the words of the poet, a little altered for the
occasion,
“ The League’s the thing
Will touch the conscience of the King.”
(Renewed cheering.) As I should be sorry, however, even to
seem to wish to take any person by surprise „in a matter of
such importance to this entire community, I have no intention
to make any formal proposal for the establishment of the
League, until the whole subject shall have been explained to
the public more fully. With the concurrence, therefore, of
the proprietor of the Circus, I propose, if nothing unexpected
should interfere, delivering a Second Lecture in this place,
next Tuesday evening, the subject of which will be The
Rights of Colonies, and especially the Right of these
Australian Colonies, to entire political freedom and national
independence. (Renewed cheering.) In the meantime, I
beg to thank you most sincerely for the very patient and
decorous attention you have shewn me throughout this long-
lecture, and to express the hope that I shall have the pleasure
of meeting with a large portion of your number next Tuesday
evening. (Prolonged cheering.)


THE NEW CONSTITUTION.
ABSTRACT OF A BILL,
To confer a Constitution on New South Wales, and to grant
a Civil List to Her Majesty.
WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
Preamble. —Setting forth the authority of the Council to frame
a Constitution for the Colony under the Imperial Act of 1850.
I. 11. 111. The future Legislature to have power to originate
Bills on all subjects; but any Bill or Act affecting Imperial ques-
tions or interests may be disallowed by Her Majesty, although
passed by the Local Legislature; the Privy Council to determine,
in case of any difference of opinion on the subject, what are Impe-
rial questions or interests and what are not, and the disputed Bill
or Act to be in abeyance till that determination is given. Bills on
the following subjects are declared to involve Imperial questions
and interests* ; viz. :
1. Bills touching the allegiance of the inhabitants of this colony
to Her Majesty’s Crown.
2. Bills touching the naturalisation of aliens.
3. Bills relating to treaties between the Crown and any foreign
power.
4. Bills relating to political intercourse and communications be-
tween this colony and any officer of a foreign power or dependency.
5. Bills relating to the employment, command, and discipline of
Her Majesty’s sea and land forces within this colony, and whatever
relates to the defence of the colony from foreign aggression, includ-
ing the command of the Municipal Militia and Marine.
G. Bills relating to the crime of High Treason.
* The following is the deliberate opinion of an illustrious Colonist, of far
higher standing throughout the civilized world than any of our late Constitution
Mongers in New South Wales, as to this distinction of Imperial and Colonial
subjects.
“ Many perhaps will be surprised to see the Legislative authority of the British
Parliament over the Colonies denied in every instance. These the writer informs,
that, when he began this piece, he would probably have been surprised at such
an opinion himself. For it was the result, not the occasion, of his disquisitions.
He entered upon them with a view and expectation of being able to trace some
constitutional line between those cases in which we ought, and those in which we
ought not, to acknowledge the power of Parliament over us. In the prosecution
of his enquiries he became fully convinced that such a line doth not exist; and
that there can be no medium between acknowledging and denying that power
in Aim cases.” —Considerations on the Nature and the Extent of the Authority
of the British Parliament: by Dr. Benjamin Franklin. New York, 1774.
The question as to Imperial and Colonial subjects will be somewhat similar to
the famous question as to Spiritual and Temporal subjects in the Dark Ages.
The Clergy of those times having got the principle recognized that the Secular
Power had no right to intermeddle with spiritual subjects, all subjects whatso-
ever were eventually made spiritual subjects, and the Church became the Legis-
lator for the world. The question in such a case as ours would simply resolve
itself into this other knotty question, which of the Two Powers in collision will
prove the strongest—the Imperial or the Australian —and that question can only
be answered in one way at last.


IV. V. The future Legislative Council or Upper House to con-
sist exclusively of Nominees, first for five years, and afterwards fox-
life ; one-fifth of their whole number to be officers of Government.*
VI. VII. Vacating of seats by Resignation or Absence.
VIII. IX. X. Regulations as to Trial of Questions, Appoint-
ment and office of President, Quorum, Divisions and Casting Vote
in the Legislative Council.
XI. XII. A Legislative Assembly, or Lower House, to be con-
stituted, and to consist of fifty-four Members in the first instance.
XIH. Qualifications of Electors—Twenty-one years of age, a
natural born or naturalized subject, having a clear estate of one
hundred pounds value, or renting a house of not less than ten
pounds yearly rent, or holding a Leasehold estate of that value, or
a Squatting License to pasture stock, or being a lodger paying fox-
board and lodging not less than forty pounds a year.
XIV. Provision for entitling Joint-ownex-s or occupiers to the
fx-anchise in certain cases.
XV. The present Electoral Division of the Colony to remain in
force, with a few insignificant exceptions, and these calculated to
increase the Squatting influence.
XVI. Provision as to the exhibition of Electoral Lists.
XVII. Electoral system provided by the Bill not to be suscep-
tive of alteration in future unless two-thirds of the Legislative
Assembly and a majority of the Upper House shall concur in such
alterations.f
XVIII. No property qualification different from that of Electors
required.
XIX. XX. XXI. XXII. XXIII. Clauses disqualifying certain
public officers, pensioners or persons holding offices of profit under
the Crown, ministers of religion| and Government contractors from
* A Nominee Upper House, consisting first of Five years’ men, and then of
Botany Bay Lifers, to resemble the British House of Peers, forsooth, and to give
us something more of the British Constitution, —as if there were the least re-
semblance in the two cases ! ! Hear what the j ustly celebrated Professor Gervinus,
of the University of Heidelberg, one of the ablest writers on matters of History
and Government of the present age, says on that subject.
“ The British Constitution is not fitted to be a formula for any other; it
may rather serve as a lesson to a people who in an equally patriotic spirit, and
desirous of making the same use of old and new institutions, might form one
adapted to their nature and peculiar character, which might rival the British
most in excellence , when it resembled it least in form.” — Gervinus'' Introduction
to History of \sth Century.
t It was natural for Botany Bay Lifers in expectancy to wish to see the whole
Colony besides once more in double irons. It would have been something like
the old blessed system of convictism restored with a vengeance. To prevent the
future Legislature from effecting any change on the proposed Constitution, with-
out two-thirds of a majority in favour of such a change, in an Assembly with a
decided majority of its members under the Squatting influence and therefore op-
posed to any change, was indeed a sentence of degradation to[this entire community.
1 r I he object ot this provision was simply to exclude Dr. Lang from any future
Colonial Legislature in New South Wales. The Squatting influence, which is
now all-powerful, must of course be maintained and kept pure as the driven snow
from the contact of every thing like liberalism or democracy. But if the New
Constitution should actually become the law of the land in this Colony, its authors
may rest assured that it will never break Dr. Lang’s heart to find himself exclud-


being eligible in tbe Lower House; and rendering their election
null and void.
XXIY. Places and time of holding Parliament.
XXY. XXVI. XXVII. One Session of the Legislature or Par-
liament to be held yearly; each Assembly to continue for five years,
unless dissolved previously; and the first meeting to be held within
six months from the proclamation of the New Constitution.
XXYIII. XXIX. XXX. XXXI. XXXII. Clauses regulating
Election of Speaker, Quorum, Division and Casting Vote of As-
sembly ; power of Assembly to sit and vote although all the writs
not returned ; and all members to take the oath of allegiance in the
prescribed form.
XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. Clauses regulating Resignation
of seats in Assembly; vacating seats in certain cases, and elections
on vacancies.
XXXVI. XXXVII. XXXVIII. XXXIX. XL. Clauses regu-
lating Standing Rules and Orders; presentation of Bills to the
Governor for Assent, and procedure in the case of disallowed and
reserved Bills.
XLI. No change to be effected in the Constitution unless assent-
ed to by two-thirds of the members of Assembly.
XLII. The Governor in certain cases to conform to Her
Majesty’s Instructions.*
XLIII. Clause regulating appointments to subordinate offices in
the Colony.
XLIV. XLV. XLVI. Judges to continue in office during good
behaviour; but to be removeable on the address of Parliament, and
their salaries to be secured during their continuance in office.
XLVII. XLVIII. XLIX. All existing Laws, Courts of Justice,
Commissions &c, at present existing to remain in force.
L. LI. No duties to be imposed on supplies for troops; but
duties, not differential, may be imposed although contrary to Acts
of Parliament.
LII. LIII. Clauses regulating the boundaries of the Colony,
leaving the northern one to be settled by Her Majesty ; and provid-
ing that no abstraction of Territory shall be made in future from
the three conterminous colonies without the consent of their respec-
tive Legislatures.
LTV. LV. Revenues of all kinds, including Territorial, to form a
ed from any Legislature to be constituted under it. On the contrary, the duty
of every honest man, in such a case, will, instead of knocking like a suppliant for
admission into the future Colonial Legislature, he to do his utmost, in whatever
way he can, to blow up the whole concern sky-high, as speedily as possible, by
means of some such Moral Force Gunpowder Plot as the Australian League
for Freedom and Independence ; which, the reader is hereby informed, was suc-
cessfully inaugurated on the 26th of January 1854, while these pages were passing
through the press. Looking at the New Constitution, therefore, on the one
hand,°and at the Australian League on the other, the colonists will exclaim with
the poet our bane and antidote are both before us.
* As if it were necessary to provide for any thing of the kind. It is a piece
of downright and unmitigated flunkeyism, shewing that its authors are not only
accustomed to wear double irons, but that they are proud of them and glory in
them.


Consolidated Fund and to be charged with the expense of collection.
LYI. LYII. A Civil List of £64,300 to be payable to Her
Majesty, including £28,000 for public worship, in lieu of all the
Crown Revenues to be surrendered to the Legislature.
LVIII. LIX. Clauses establishing Pensions to be payable to
certain officers after a certain period of service.
LX. The whole administration of the Waste Lands to be in the
hands of the Legislature.*
LXI. LXII. LXIII. Consolidated Fund to be charged with
interest on Government Debentures, and no money bills to be pro-
posed to the Legislature, or money issued, without the sanction and
warrant of the Governor.
LXIY. LXY. LXVI. How the Act is to be proclaimed, and the
word Governor to be understood.
LXVII. The foregoing provisions not to come into force, unless
certain Acts of Parliament are repealed and the present Land system,
with all its intolerable abuses, confirmed and perpetuated!! !f
* t These are the two Clauses that contain the whole essence of the New Con-
stitution—the present Land System to be maintained and perpetuated. It is a
gross outrage upon the common sense and right feeling of this entire community.
FINIS.
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
PREPARING FOR PUBLICATION,
THE FUTURE AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC:
A SOCRATIC DIALOGUE,
Between an English Gentleman, and an Australian Colonist of
Thirty Years’ standing.
(Writtten at Sea.)
N.B.—The publication of this Work, which will embody the
substance of the Second and Third Lectures recently delivered in
the “ Royal Circus”—on the Rights of Colonies—has hitherto been
prevented from the want of a sufficient supply of Stationery of the
kind required.
