



•L- >


THE WHOLE TRUTH,
BEING
«LaTEI\ J?APB{^S”
IN THE CASE OF
DR. FREDERICK BEER,
Containing a resume of the moral assassination
of which he has been a victim for more
than twenty-one years.


INTRODUCTION.
The following still “ later papers” —a designation they received
from the Hon. Henry Parkes, Colonial Secretary—contain my
second Petition to Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and
Ireland, summarising succinctly the, several/ac<s of my case, includ-
ing my protest against the position taken by Lord Carnarvon, the
documents resulting from the interposition of C, Sahl, Esq., Im-
perial German Consul, in my behalf, the letter of my brother, Mr.
Geoffrey Beer, of Paris to Lord Carnarvon, the opinion of counsel,
learned in the law, and a few comments of my own on the whole
ease. If these papers do not show that I have been the victim—
for more than twenty-one years -of an atrocious conspiracy, that
I have not to this hour received indemnification of any kind, not
even restitution to my civil and social status such as it was at the
beginning of 1856, nothing less than a revelation from Heaven can
establish my innocence. I show by an unbroken series of proofs
—not a single link bein,g weak or wanted, that a wrong —inconceiv-
ably great—has been done me under the guise of law; and I issue
these concluding papers to invoke the country to assist me in res-
cuing the sacred name of Justice from obloquy and dishonour.
F. BEER, M.D.,
Hyde Park Terrace,
Liverpool-street, 24th May, 1877.


To the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty
The humble Petition of Frederick Beer, Doctor of Medicine,
Doctor of Surgery, and Doctor of the Art of Midwifery, of the
University of Zurich, Switzerland and duly qualified Medical
Practitioner of Kew South Wales,
May it please your Majesty :
THAT Petitioner did in the month of April A.D. 1870 trans-
mit through His Excellency Lord Belmore, then Governor in Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales, a Petition to the Throne, in
which amongst other things the following facts were set forth,
namely:—
1. that your Petitioner arriveo. in the said Colony, and commenced
the practice of his profession in the year 1853.
2. That your Petitioner was very successful in his said practice,
and in the year 1854, 1855, and at the date of your Petitioner’s arrest
hereinafter mentioned, was in receipt of an income of £l,BOO per
annum.
3. That during the said period your Petitioner was the Medical At-
tendant of one Phillies Brown, known as the wife of Michael George
Brown, an Officer in your Majesty’s Customs in Sydney aforesaid.
4. That your Petitioner, being well acquainted with the curative
effects of the Extract of Belladonna, used that drug with very great
success in his professional treatment of the said Phillies Brown,
in the year 1853, as dressing on blisters and in suppositories con-
taining over five grains of this Extract, the said Phillies Brown suf-
fering then, and afterwai ds from a ring structure of the rectum.
5. That on the 10th day of February 1856 your Petitioner attended
the said Phillies Brown professionally, she being at the time preg-
nant and in great danger of miscarriage and suffering acutely from
irritation in the rectum. Your Petitioner then prescribed supposi-
each containing five grains of the Extract of Belladonna, one
to be introduced when the pains were excessive, and repeated every
three hours if required, to prevent such miscarriage and allay the
irritation.
6. That the miscarriage of the said Phillies Brown was thereby
prevented, and the said Phillies Brown was in the month of March
of that year delivered of a living child.
7. That on the 4th of March 1856 your Petitioner was arrested by
Inspector James Singleton, without warrant; and before any infor-
mation had been signed, was charged witli administering half a
drachm of Belladonna to the said Phillies Brown, with intent to pro-
cure a miscarriage; and your Petitioner was detained in cuBtod^^


8. That the said charge was heard before James Sheen Dowling,
Esquire, Police Magistrate, Sydney, on the sth. 6th, 7th, 10th& 11th
days of March 1856, and your Petitioner was committed to take his
trial at the next Criminal Court.
9. That the then Attorney General, the late Honorable John Hu-
bert Plunkett, as Grand Jury at Sydney for the said Colony, did not
find a Bill against your Petitioner; the direction to prosecute your
Petitioner being given by the then Solicitor General of the Colony,
the Honorable William Montague Manning.
10. 'J'hat your Petitioner was prosecuted by the Australian Mutual
Provident Society, and on the 81st of March 1856, the Solicitor of
the said Australian Mutual Provident Society applied to the said
Solicitor General for permission to deliver a brief to a Junior Coun-
sel to assist in the prosecution of the case which application was
granted. _ •
11. That on the 7th day of April 1856, an Information was filed
against the Petitioner, charging your Petitioner, in the first count
with administering Belladonna with intention to procure abortion
(the only charge on which he had been committed at the Police
Court), and in the second count, with administering Poison with
intent to kill and murder the said Phillies Brown; and the trial of
your Petitioner, on such information commenced on the 9th day of
April 1856, and was continued during the 10th, llth, & 12th of the
same month before His Honor Mr. Justice Therry, and a Jury of
twelve persons. The prosecution was conducted by Arthur Todd
Holroyd, Esquire, as Counsel for the Australian Mutual Provident
Society; and your Petitioner has since discovered that the presiding
Judge, the aforesaid William Montague Manning, Solicitor General,
the said Arthur Todd Holroyd, and several of the Jury were mem-
bers of the said Australian Mutual Provident Society prosecuting
your Petitioner.
12. That your Petitioner only obtained a copyof the depositions on
the 6th day of April 1856, although the same had previously and
frequently been applied for; and feeling conscious of his innocence
of the charge on which he had been committed, did not employ
Counsel to defend him; and it was only on his trial, on hearing the
information read, he was the first time informed, that a capital
charge had been laid against him.
13. That your Petitioner’s diary for the year 1855 containing en-
tries of attendance and operations on, and medicines for Phillies
Brown was in custody of the police, at the Central Police Office, and
at the suggestion of Mr. Singleton was not locked up with your Pe-
titioner in his cell; but on the following morning, the 6th of
March, the said diary was not given up to your Petitioner, and your
Petitioner has not seen it since it fell into the hands of the Police.
14. That during the first day of your Petitioner’s trial the presiding
Judge offered your Petifioner the assistance of Counsel, which your
Petitioner declined; but on the evening of that day— your Petitioner
being-again urged by the Judge—asked that Mr. Darvall or Mr.


Broadhurst might be assigned as his Counsel. —Your Petitioner had
cross-examined Mrs. Phillies Brown, and upon being interrupted
by the Judge in his cross-examination had stated his ability to
prove the witness had been diseased and was swearing falsely.
15. That on the second day of your Petitioner’s trial, Mr. Blake
was assigned as his Counsel; but your Petitioner never instructed
him, nor had any conference with him in any manner.
16. That on the evening of the third day your Petitioner insisted
upon calling further evidence, when Mr. Blakfe left the Court; Mr.
John Cornelius Horner, formerly an assistant of your Petitioner,
was giving evidence in your Petitioner’s favour, and was about re-
ferring to your Petitioner’s ledger, Mrs. Brown’s account being kept
by him, to prove that suppositories similar to those prescribed on
the 10th of February 1856 (which formed the subject matter of the
charge against him) had been taken by Mrs. Phillies Brown on the
24th of April 1855; the nature and qualities of Belladonna dres-
sings, Dzondy’s Pills, and other medicines prescribed for, and taken
by Mrs. Brown) under your Petitioner’s professional treatment, and
the identity of the accounts in the ledger with the receipted accounts
produced by Mrs. Brown, already in evidence on the trial, — when
His Honor stated, it was impossible to finish the case that night,
and adjourned the Court to the following day.
17. That upon the opening of the Court on the fourth day your
Petitioner’s ledger could not be produced. Your Petitioner asked for
leave to continue the examination of witnesses for the defence--
to recall John Cornelius Horner, and to allow him to call Dr. Will-
mott, then in Court, when His Honor refused to allow your Peti-
tioner to call any other witnesses, stating:—“Your Counsel closed
your case yesterday; besides, your trial has already lasted four
days.”
18. That your Petitioner had subpoenaed the following witnesses:
Dr. Salter, Jl C. Horner, Mrs. Nesbitt, Mr. Seath, Thomas Dent, T.
Kim, Mr. and Mrs. Bussell, Mr. Eobinson, Mrs. Hickey, Mr. Har-
graves, Mr. Dean, Mr. Eeynolds, and Ann Bay, and they were in
attendance to give evidence in your Petitioner’s favor. Your Peti-
tioner’s Counsel had not closed the case, inasmuch as Mr. .1. C.
Horner was being examined when Mr. Blake left the Court, and
your Petitioner by the refusal of the Judge was prevented from
proving, not only his perfect innocence, but that Mrs. Phillies
Brown was altogether unworthy of Credit.
19. That the prosecution of your Petitioner was entrusted to a pri-
vate Company, and was most unfairly conducted by Mr. Holroyd,
a Member of the said Company, who adduced evidence of eftects
said to have immediately followed the introduction of the supposi-
tories, and of appearances the result of Belladonna, which he, a
medical man, well knew, to be false, and which appearances could
not exist till after death; and also in the production of evidence
immaterial to the issue, and not in support of the information,
which could only have the effect of inflaming the minds of the
Jury and prejudice them against your Petitioner.


20. That yoar Petitioner was found guilty upon the perjured testi-
mony of Phillies Brown and Michael George Brown, and the evi-
dence of certain medical men, of the deadly effects of Belladonna,
who had had no experience in its application or use, and who did
not attend the said Phillies Brown professionally, or examine her,
before giving such evidence, as your Petitioner submits, as honor-
able men, they were bound to do,
21. That the said Phillies Brown was stated by Mr. Holroyd to be
in a good of health, and upon this falsa statement the medical
testimony was based, although Mr. Pritchard’s evidence given at
the Police Office, informed him, that Dr. O’Brien had reported un-
favourably of her state of health, and that no life could be accepted
when it was known that cancer had ever existed —when, in fact,
the said Phillies Brown was, at the time of the prescription by
your Petitioner, suffering from Rokitansky’s stricture in the rectum,
the result of venereal disease, communicated in the rectum, much
excited and inflamed by cold and exposure, and threatunings of mis-
carriage.
22. That the suppositories prescribed by your Petitioner had the
effect of preventing the miscarriage of the said Phillies Brown, and
during your Petitioner’s trial, she was nursing the child, with which
she was pregnant on the 10th of February before mentioned.
23. That your Petitioner received a sentence of ten years impri-
sonment, with hard labour, and was removed to Cockatoo Island in
the said Colony, where your Petitioner was placed under old con-
vict overseers; and for a period of four years was subject to the ex-
treme hard lal)Our of that penal establishment.
24. That during that period your Petitioner, by good conduct, and
extra labour, became entitled to a ticket-of-leave eighteen months
sooner than the time prescribed by the regulations, and received a
ticket-of-leave on the 21st of April 1860, and left Cockatoo Island
25. That in the month of September 1857, your Petitioner through
his brother Francis Beer laid all the facts before the first medical
authority in England —namely Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie, Baro-
net, Physician to your Most Gracious Majesty, with a view, to
obtain his opinion thereon.
26. That your Petitioner obtained the written opinion of Sir Ben-
jamin Collins Brodie on the case, containing the following passages:
—“ I cannot have the smallest hesitation in saying, that both the
charge and the verdict are utterly absurd. I can understand, that
Dr. Beer might have prescribed the use of Belladonna to Mrs.
Brown, with a view to prevent premature labour, but I cannot sup-
pose, that he or any one else would dream ol: prescribing it for the
purpose of; procuring abortion;” —thus showing, that the practice
and prescription of your Petitioner in IMrs. Brown’s case was
correct.
27. That on the 10th of June 1858 your Petitioner obtained an
interview with His Honor Mr. Justice Therry, whilst on a visit to
Cockatoo Island.—The ' opinion of Sir B. C. Brodie having been


shewn to him, when His Honor recommended yoiir Petitioner, to
present a petition to the Executive Council, and said that by the
verdict of the Jury, the case had been taken out of his hands, but that
the opinion of Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie threw a new feature on
the whole case; that the petition would be referred to him, and he
would report favourably on it, and on that account it would not be
necessary to prove the disease of the bowels of Mrs. Brown—of the
existence of which His Honor had since an opportunity to convince
himself bv the evidence of other medical men who had profession-
ally attended her. Accordingly, in obedience to the suggestion of
Mr. Justice Therry, your Petitioner applied to Samuel North, the
Visiting Magistrate at Cockatoo Island, on the 20th day of the said
month of June, for permission to present a petition to the Executive
Council, when your Petitioner was informed, that he would not
be allowed to present such petition.
28. That on the 7th day of May 1860, your Petitioner presented
a petition to His Excellency Sir William Denison, praying for a
remission of the remainder of your Petitioner’s sentence; but with-
out success.
29. That on the 24th of April 1861. a petition was presented to the
Honorable the Legislative Assembly at Sydney, signed by 1,564
inhabitants of the District of Braidwood, stating that, from circum-
stances which had transpired since your Petitioner’s conviction, they
had good reason to believe, that your Petitioner was not guilty of
the offence for which he was so convicted, and that evidence which
was not forthcoming at the trial of your Petitioner, and which could
not then have been obtained, would prove, that he was not guilty
of such offence, and that he was, therefore, wrongly convicted.
30. That the Honorable the Legislative Assembly appointed a
select Committee to take this petition into consideration, with power
to send for persons and papers, and that such Committee sat on the
Ist, 20th, 22nd, 26th, & 28th days of November 1861; 3rd, 6th,
10th, 16th, & 18th days of December 1861, taking evidence thereon;
and by their report to the Legislative Assembly dated the 16th day
of February 1862, they found, it was established incontrovertibly.
that many persons, whose evidence most probably would have seri-
ously affected the decision at the trial, were either in Court, or wait-
ing to be examined, whom your Petitioner was not permitted to
produce, and that evidence had since been procured which would
further tend to exculpate him from the alleged crime for which he
was convicted —viz : that of Sir Benjamin Brodie, and the evidence
of sundry witnesses examined by the select Committee.
31. That the evidence of Dr Salter, Dr. Alloway, Dr. Berncastle,
Dr, Brown, Dr. Eichler, Mr. W. J. Anderson, Surgeon, Mr. M Egan,
Surgeon, Dr. Cox, and Dr. Boyd, proves incontestably: —
(1) That abortion could not have resulted from the use of Bella-
donna, as administered; on the contrary, that its effects would
be to prevent abortion.
(2) That it could not have caused the .death of the child, except
through the maternal system.


(3) That as it was administered to the mother, none of the effects
stated to have immediately followed the introduction of the
suppository could result from its use. as a very considerable
period must elapse before it could be dissolved or absorbed.
(4) That as a rule the quantity could not in any way be dangerous;
And Mr. Dent’s evidence proved:
(5) That your Petitioner had been constantly in the habit of pres-
cribing this drug for other patients in larger doses than those
used in this case, therefore there was nothing unusual in its
application in that particular instance.
38. That the fact should not be lost sight of—whereas your Peti-
tioner was convicted o.'’ administering halE-a-drachm of Belladonna,
not more than five grains, or one sixth of that quantity, was ever
taken in one day, and the directions for its administration were, to
persist in its use, only according to its effects, which, if injurious,
would have very gradually developed themselves Without in
any way impugning the decision arrived at by the Jury, who tried
the case, and who, on the evidence before them, could perhaps have
arrived at no other conclusion, the said Committee had no hesita-
tion in reporting, from the evidence laid before them, that the use
of Belladonna, in the way prescribed, could not have procured
abortion, and, on that ground, they absolved your Petitioner alto-
gether from the charge, on which he had been found guilty. The
said Committee was further of opinion that your Petitioner ought
to have had an opportunity afforded him of placing his case before
the Executive Council, and that the visiting Magistrate was not
warranted in refusing your Petitioner permission to forward a peti-
tion to the Executive Conncil, as suggested by Mr. Justice Therry,
as it was clear that the letter of Sir Benjamin C. Brodie was pre-
cisely within the category prescribed by the regulation quoted by
the visiting Magistrate in justification of his refusal.
34. That on the 13th of April 1866, your Petitioner having served
the whole sentence of ten years passed on him, left Braidwood for
Sydney, and on the 20th of the same month, left Sydney for
Shanghai, by way of India.
35. That your Petitioner commenced the practice of his profession
at Shanghai aforesaid, and for four months was very successful,
haviner been chosen Medical Attendant to the American Consulate and
the Shanghai Gaol, and to the Customs there —when your Petitioner’s
trial and sentence in this Colony were spoken of by rival practi-
tioners; and your Petitioner at once lost position and practice, and
was compelled to leave Shanghai.
36. That on the 2nd of June 1867, your Petitioner arrived in Cal-
cutta, and there commenced the practice of his profession with very
great and was appointed medical attendant to the families
of twelve of the Baboos, at a salary of One hundred pounds per
annum each, and having gained the esteem of the professors of the
University, and some members of the Senate, a professorship in
pathology was promised to your Petitioner ; but after nine weeks’
8


residence, your Petitioner’s trial and conviction at Sydney, New
Wales, being spoken of, your Petitioner was compelled to leave
Calcutta.
37. That your Petitioner returned to Sydney on the 30th of Sep-
tember 1867 for the purpose of clearing himself from the foul stain
which his conviction had cast upon him, and soon after prosecuted
Michael George Brown for perjury; and although your Petitioner
proved, by the evidence of many witnesses, the perjury on six dif-
ferent assignments, the case was dismissed by the Police Magistrate
at Sydney, who was a relative to James Mitchell, Chairman of the
Australian Mutual Provident Society, and also Chairman of the
Medical Board.
38. That your Petitioner, by his Solicitor, endeavoured to obtain the
direction of the late Attorney General of the said Colony for the
prosecution of the said Michael George Brown for perjury, but
without success.
39. That the said Phillies Brown died in Sydney aforesaid in the
month of June 1868, and after death was examined by W. J. Ander-
son, Esq., Fellow of the Eoyal College of Surgeons, and J. C. Gil-
hooley. Esq.. Surgeon, and on the day of the said examination your
Petitioner received from Mr. Anderson a Certificate of which the
following is a copy ;
i. “We hereby certify, that on the 23rd June 1868, we made a
“digital examination of the rectum of the body of Phillies Adolphia
“ Brown, at the Lord High Admiral Inn, Botany Street, Surry Hills,
“and found, about an inch from the external orifice, a narrow an-
“nular stricture, and about an inch above this another stricture,
“ also annular, but broad, thick, and evidently of long standing.
“W. J. Anderson, F.R.C.S., 12 South Head Road.”
On the 27th of August 1860, your Petitioner obtained an affi-
davit from John Redhead, Surgeon, as follows :
“ I am a duly qualified medical practitioner, and was so on or
“before the month of September 1857.
“In the last mentioned month and year, I attended Mrs. Phil-
“lies Brown professionally; she then resided in Cumberland-street,
“in the City of Sydney, in the Colony of N.S.W. On examining
“her. I found she was suffering from an organic stricture of the
“rectum, in the form of a ring, about an inch from the sphincter,
“ and 1 found that the disease was one of long standing, and that
“ she had been previously treated for its reduction, but without
“ success. She was, when I was called in, in a state of continued
“irritation. The Phillies Brown above mentioned, is the same per-
“ son who, in the month of April 1856, appeared as a witness, and
“ gave evidence at the Criminal Court in Sydney, against Dr. F.
“Beer on his trial for the administration of Belladonna to the said
“Phillies Brown.”
40. That Alfred Swayne, Taylor, M.D.,F.R.5., in the 7th edition of
his Medical Jurisprudence, page 571, thus refers to your Petitioner’s
case:—
9


“ In 1856 a medical man was convicted before the Central Cri-
“ minal Court of Sydney of administering extract of Belladonna in
“a suppository with a view to procure abortion. None of these
“substances (Belladonna being one of those referred to) have any
“ influence on the Uterus except in affecting indirectly by their irri-
“ tant action on the system.”
41. That from the 4th day of March 1856 to the 26th of April
1860 your Petitioner was imprisoned at Darlinghurst, and on Cocka-
too Island, and that during such period the whole of the effects of
your Petitioner were taken away and disposed of, to the great pe-
cuniary loss of your Petitioner.
42. That your Petitioner has already expended upwards of £l,OOO
in procuring evidence for the Select Committee of the Legislative
Assembly, and in the prosecution of his case against Michael
George Brown, besides £7OO expended by your Petitioner’s brother,
on your Petitioner’s behalf, in going to England and obtaining the
opinion of Sir B. C. Brodie.
43. That the New South Wales Medical Board had not pub-
lished your Petitioner’s name in the list of legally qualified Medical
practitioners, as your Petitioner believes by reason of the convic-
tion before mentioned.
44. That your Petitioner being libelled in the Sydney Police News,
prosecuted one Mr. Murray, the writer of the libel, and on the trial
of the said Mr. Murray, the presiding Judge, John Fletcher Har-
grave, directed the Jury, that the reference to your Petitioner as an
expiree convict was justifiable, and the said Mr. Murray was
thereupon acquitted.
45. Your Petitioner, therefore, humbly submits to your Majesty,
Firstly, that his prosecution was, in fact, a persecution from
first to last That the arrest of your Petitioner before any informa-
tion had been signed, and consequently without a warrant signed,
was an illegal act.
Secondly, that the trial of your Petitioner without a finding by
a grand. Jury (or Attorney General) was illegal. That the said trial
was but a semblance of justice.
Thirdly, that no members of the prosecuting Society should
have been permitted to join in judging, prosecuting, condemning,
or sentencing, of your Petitioner. That the trial of your Petitioner
was an unfair and illegal proceeding, and that the sentence, degra-
dation, misery, and hardship during his ten years’ sentence, and
subsequent degradation, were not only illegal, but a false imprison-
ment of, and undeserved punishment inflicted on your Petitioner.
Fourthly, that your Petitioner presented a petition to the Hon-
orable the Legislative Assembly, in Parliament assembled, which
was ordered by the said Legislative Assembly to be printed on the
14th January, 1862, praying that the premises might be taken into
consideration; and that a resolution of the said Legislative Assembly,
be passed to the effect, that the Legislative Assembly would reccom-
mend your Petitioner to the favorable consideration of your Most
10


Gracious Majesty for a special pardon. That notices of motion
for referring the said petition to a select Committee of the said
Legislative Assembly were repeatedly given during the said Ses-
sion of Parliament, the Select Committee named, and in every in-
stance allowed to lapse, notwithstanding the strenuous exertions of
your Petitioner, and the repeated promise of the Honorable mem-
ber presenting the said petition, to procure the appointment of the
said Select Committee.
Fifthly, that your Petitioner had prepared a similar petition to
the present Legislative Assembly in Parliament assembled and
placed the same in the hands of the Honorable C. Dillon to present
the same, but the same has been returned to your Petitioner, with
an intimation, that no precedent exists of a recommendation for
pardon by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly, and that this
was the opinion of several members of the Legislative Assembly,
including the present Colonial Secretary.
Sixthly, that the Honorable the President of the Legislative
Council haa expressed a similar opinion.
Seventhly, that your Petitioner, therefore, as a last resource,
humbly and respectfully appeals to your Most Gracious Majesty
in the premises, and entreats your Most Gracious Majesty to grant
him (your Petitioner) a special pardon, in order that the honorable posi-
tion in society, held and enjoyed by your Petitioner before his pro-
secution and sentence, may be restored to him.
And whereas in reference to the above petition, your Majesty was
graciously pleased to command the then Secretary of State for
, the Colonies, the Right Honorable the Earl of Granville, to
communicate with His Excellency the Earl of Belmore, Go-
vernor in Chief of your Majesty’s Colony of New South Wales,
and the said Lord Granville conveyed your Majesty’s pleasure
in the following terms :
Downing Street, sth July, 1870'
My Lord,
I have to acknowledge your Lordship’s Despatch No, 60>
of 20th April, forwarding a petition to Her Majesty from Dr. Frede-
rick Beer, in which he prays for a special pardon in respect of a con-
viction and sentence passed upon him by the Supreme Court of New
South Wales in the year 1856.
I have also received your Lordship’s further Despatch No. 65,
of 26th April.
This case is one in which you must use your own discretion,
and with regard to which I do not see that Her Majesty can be ad-
vised to interfere.
I have, <fec..
Gbanvillb.
On receipt of this communication, and without conveying any
intimation of inquiry or other proceedings to your Petitioner, His
11


Excellency Lord Belmore elicited a written opinion on your Peti-
tioner’s case from Sir William Montague Manning, then Attorney
General of New South Wales,
Now your Petitioner most humbly informs your Majesty that
the said Sir Wm, \l. Manning was the original prosecutor against
your Petitioner, was always hostile to him, and had a large pecu-
niary interest in the Insurance Society, the “ Mutual Provident” of
Sydney, which Society mainly promoted and caused the miscarriage
of ju'tice of which your Petitioner has for the last 18 years com-
plained. It was moreover, the said Sir Wm. Manning, then Solici-
tor General, who constructed two counts of indictment against your
Petitioner although he (your Petitioner) was only committed to take
his trial on one count; and the second count, thus superadded by
tile said Sir Wm. M. Manning, contained a criminal charge of Mur-
der, although the then Attorney General, the Honorable John Hu-
bert Plunket did not, acting in lieu of a Grand Jury, a function that
belonged to him as Attorney General, find a true Bill {gainst your
Petitioner, and the whole of the proceedings in his (your Petitioner’s)
case were informal or hurried, and conducted by parties pecuniarily
interested in procuring a conviction to his great detriment and in-
jury, and promoted by a monied institution.
Moreover the said Sir Wm. M. Manning, in the legal opinion
he transmitted to His Excellency Lord Belmore, misrepresented the
aspects of your Petitioner’s case by dealing in mere conjectures as
to a possible culpability of your Petitioner in 1856, and he (the said
Sir Wm. M. Manning.) contradicted the conclusion arrived at by a
Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales,
which implicitly declared that your Petitioner’s treatment of Phillies
Brown in the year 1856, was proper, and which your Petitioner
maintains was in accordance with advanced German Pathological
Science, a conclusion corroborated by the carefully-prepared written
opinion of the late Sir Benjamin Brodie, Physician in Ordinary to
Your Majesty, and which (amongst other things) contained these
words :
‘ I cannot have the smallest hesitation in saying, that both the
charge and the verdict are utterly absurd.”
The aforesaid Official opinion of Sir Wm. M. Manning trans-
mitted to His Excellency Lord Belmore, with your Petitioner’s reply
thereto are amongst the printed papers marked respectively “ B,”
“ C,” and “ D,” in red ink.
Your Petitioner next appealed to the Honorable Henry Parkes,
then (1872) Colonial Secretary, who, before going into the merits of
your Petitioner’s Case, elicited the opinion of the Professor of Che-
mistry of the University of Sydney, the Honorable John Smith. M.D.,
M L C., President of the Council of Education and Dean of the
Faculty of Medicine, which opinion was embodied in the following
terms:—■
12


University of Sydney, 23rd February, 1874.
My dear Mr. Parkes,
“ I have perused the papers you handed to me relating to Dr
Beer, and have considered the particular point you wished my opin-
ion on, namely,—as to whether the extract of Belladonna, as pres-
cribed by Dr. Beer in Mrs. Brown's case, could have tended to pro-
duce abortion, or could have acted as a poison on the mother. It
is so long since I have had anything to do with medical practice
that my individual experience is of no value. I have, in fact, no per-
sonal experience of the action of this drug. But a case of this kind
is not to be judged by individual opinions. It often happens that
one medical man considers the practice of another medical man
dangerous, and the latter must justify his practice, either by show-
ing that his own previous experience was sufficient warrant, or that
recognised authorities agree with him. In Mrs. Brown’s case. Dr.
Beer could fully justify his practice on both grounds. He had on
previous occasions administered Belladonna to the same patient, and
to the same extent with good results, and he had frequently pres-
cribed this drug to other patients, sometimes in the same manner as
to Mrs. Brown, and to double the extent, with beneficial results.
This was proved before the Select Committee of the Legislative
Assembly in 1862, and would have been proved at the trial, for wit-
nesses were waiting to prove it, had the Judge not prematurely
dossed the case. Then as to authority it is incontrovertible that
leading practitioners in Europe speak in favour of even larger doses
of extract of Belladonna to be administered in the same way as an
antispasmatic, as in Mrs. Brown’s case,
From a careful consideration of the papers laid before me, I
cannot but agree with the Keport of the Select Committee of the
Legislature that “ abortion could not have resulted from the use of
Belladonna as administered; on the contrary, that its effects would
be to prevent abortion,” and further, that “as a general rule the
quantity could not in any way be dangerous.” I entirely concur
with Sir Benjamin Brodie, that '‘both the charge and the verdict are
utterly absurd,” and the painful conviction is left on my mind that
here we have a very lamentable miscarriage of justice.”
Believe me, <fec..
J. SMITH.
This opinion of Professor the Honorable Dr. Smith was printed
by order of the Legislative Assembly, Hew South Wales, made on
26th March, 1874.
Hereupon the Honorable Henry Parkes, then Colonial Secre-
tary, solicited the opinion of His Honor Sir James Martin, Your
Majesty’s Chief Justice of the Colony of Hew Soutli Wales, and
that opinion was (as orally conveyed to your Petitioner) favorable
to his claim for justice, too long delayed; whereupon the Honorable
the Colonial Secretary (Mr. Parkes) obtained the sanction of the
Executive Council to introduce a Bib xor the removal of all your
13


Petitioner’s disabilities; but this purpose was frustrated by a sudden
change of Government
The said Colonial Secretary before retiring from office left be-
hind him a Minute to the following effect: —
“ I cannot resist the conclusion that Dr. Beer has suffered wrong-
fully, and I should be glad if my successor in office would consider
the case as affected by the later papers.”
H. P. 6. 2. 75.
A change of Government having occurred in this Colony in the
month of December 1874, Your Petitioner applied to the presejit
Colonial Secretary, the Honorable John Robertson, for redress; and
the said Honorable Colonial Secretary thereupon obtained a legal
and official opinion on your Petitioner’s case from the present At-
torney General, the Honorable William Bede Dailey, M.L.C., which
declared that your Petitioner was wrongfully convicted in 1856,
and wrongfully suffered degradation and punishment for ten years,
and is still under a social and civil ban in consequence of the afore-
said miscarriage of justice. The formal opinion of the Honorable
Mr. Dailey is appended to the printed papers hereunto annexed, and
marked “ E” in red ink.
In consequence of the abundant and conclusive testimony in
proof of your Petitioner’s absolute innocence of the charges laid
against him in 1856, he was advised by the late Colonial Secretary
—to wit, the Honorable Henry Parkes—to apply to a private mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly for the purpose of introducing a
Bill to relieve your Petitioner of the social and civil disabilities con-
sequent on his wrongful conviction in 1856 ; and he (your said Pe-
titioner) obtained the services of Richard Driver, Esq. M.L.A., and
Chairman of Committees, who introduced such Bill, which was read
a first time, and which was couched in the following terms:
A BILL
to relieve Frederick Beer, M.D., from all disabilities consequent
upon his being improperly and erroneously convicted of
felony.
PreambIe. WHEREAS Frederick Beer, M.D., was charged before His
Honor Mr. Justice Therry, one of Her Majesty’s Judges of
the Supreme Court of the Colony of New South Wales, and
a Jury of twelve persons, on the 9th, 10th, 11th, <fe 12th days
of April 1856, at the said Supreme Court sitting at Sydney
in its criminal jurisdiction. And whereas the said Frederick
Beer was on the said 12th day of April convicted of the of-
fence of administering to one Phillies Brown a certain noxi-
ous thing called Belladonna with the intent to procure the
miscarriage of the said Phillies Brown, and in consequence
of such conviction was sentenced by the said Judge to ten
years hard labour on the roads or other pablio works of the
Colony. And whereas the said Frederick Beer served five
14


years of such sentence, and was afterwards released on ticket-
of-leave only for the residue of such sentence which said re-
sidue of his sentence was passed by him subject to the con-
ditions of such ticket-of-leave. And whekkas it now appears
that the said Frederick Beer was erroneously and improperly
convicted of the said otfence, and that there was a miscarriage
of Justice in the said conviction brought about by the erro-
neous evidence given at the said trial as to the effects of the
said drug, called Belladonna, founded upon the limited scien-
tific knowledge then possessed by many as to the nature of
the said drug. And -whebbas the said Frederick Beer was
unjustly and improperly compelled to serve and undergo the
said sentence as aforesaid. And whebeas it is right that jus-
tice should be done as far as possible in relieving the cha-
racter of the said Frederick Beer from any stigma attaching
thereto by reason of such erroneous conviction and in remov-
ing any disabilities under which the said Frederick Beer may
be brought in consequence of the said conviction remaining
unreversed. And whkbeas there is no process of law by
which the said conviction may be brought before Her Majes-
ty’s Courts of Law, and the said erroneous conviction may be
reversed. Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Ex-
cellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Hew South
Wales in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the
same as follows:
That all records and proceedings of the said Supreme
records. Court relating to the said conviction be wholly cancelled and
taken off the file or otherwise defaced and obliterated to the
intent the same may not be visible in after times or brought
forward to the prejudice of the said Frederick Beer or his
heirs.
And now your Petitioner most humbly but hopefully submits
to your Most Gracious Majesty, that in consequence of the state of
political parties in the aforesaid Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, the second reading of the Bill just reproduced was postponed
from week to week and was finally withdrawn, in the month of
August in the current year, a few days before the prorogation of the
Colonial Parliament; and in consequence of the conflict of parties
in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, your Petitioner
has no hope of obtaining even tardy justice, although he is well
aware, that a majority, if not the whole body, of Honorable Members
of the said Assembly, admit the justice of his claims.
Acting under the advice and at the suggestion of the present
Colonial Secretary, the Honorable John Robertson, your Petitioner
again appeals to Your Most Gracious Majesty, and he numbly en-
treats and prays for a special pardon under your Majesty’s Royal
hand, as he despairs of obtaining justice in the Colony of New South


Wales (although his innocence is chiefly in consequence
of the state of political parties in the said Colony, the business pro-
per of any year, for several years past, not having been done, within
or during the currency of each year respectively.
Your Petitioner therefore humbly invokes Your Majesty’s
Gracious interposition in his behalf, and prays and begs
for a special pardon.
And your Petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c., tfec
Datkd at Sydney, in the Colony of New Sauth Wales, this flfteenth
day of October, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-flve
R BEER, M D., C. 8., O.D.
The following is in substance the answer to this petition as re-
ceived by C. Sahl, Esq, German Consul, from Lord Carnarvon, the
appointed guardian of the fountain of Justice and Honor,
Sydney, 13th March, 1876.
I have the honor to inform you that I have received a commu-
nication from IJis Excellency the Governor to the effect: That your
Petition has been laid before Her Majesty the Queen by the Secre-
tary of State, but that his Lordship has not been able to advise Her
Majesty to interfere in the case, which has already received at various
times very full consideration.
(Signed)
To Dr. R BEER, C. SAHL,
Imperial German Consul.
Dr. Beer’s reply &c., &c. (or third Petition) to the above runs as
follows:
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Carnarvon, Secretary of
State for the Colonies, &c.
Hyde Park, Sydney, N.S.W., March 1876.
May it please your Lordship,
I have this month received, through C. Sahl, Esq., Consul for
Germany in Sydney, the substance of your answer to my earnest
and humble appeal to Her Majesty the Queen, entreating a free
pardon for a demonstrated miscarriage of justice of which I was the
victim in this Colony in the year 1856 —I beg most humbly and
respectfully to submit to your Lordship that the main feature of my
late appeal for justice —the disclosure of fresh facts bearing thereon
(vide Parkes’ minute)— seems to have escaped your Lordship’s at-
tention, and so far as I can understand your decision, it conveys
the impression that the matter of my Petition had already been fre-


quently dealt with on all its merits. But this could not have been
the case as I appealed only twice to Her Most Gracious Majesty,
and as the “ later papers,” to which I distinctly referred, on which
I chiefly relied in my second humble appeal to Her Majesty, dis-
closed facts that were not embodied’in my first Petition —indeed
could not be so embodied, in point of time, as they were subsequent
events— I refer now especially to the fact that both the past and
the present Government of the Colony have admitted that a miscar-
riage of justice occurred in 1856 (of which I was the victim) in this
Colony; but neither Government could practically determine the
means for the vindication of my character and the restoration of
my social status. Mr. Parkes, the former Premier, recommended
by a Bill, and a Bill was accordingly drawn up and read a first
time in the Legislative Assembly, but which lapsed through a poli-
tical crisis. Mr. Robertson, the present Premier advised an appeal
to Her Majesty as the surest, if not the only means of obtaining
such moral indemnification as is now alone possible, and which
would at least mitigate the sense of suffering from an injustice.
I therefore again most respectfully but urgently entreat your
Lordship to reconsider the later developments of my case, more es-
})eeially the conclusions arrived at by the two Governments of the
Colony, and by the Professor of Chemistry of the Sydney Univer-
sity, and Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, the Hon. John Smith,
M. C.C., whose opinion on my case will be found at length in the
papers which accompanied my Petition of the 15th October 1875.
I further implore your Lordship to consider the fact that your
last reply leaves me in a worse position then I was in previously.
In answer to my first Petition the matter was referred back to
the authorities to be dealt with equitably, the assumption being
that the power to so deal with here was vested in the local Go-
vernment. Your last reply treats my case as if it were dosed. Trust-
ing that this is not the aim and intent of your Lordship’s reply, and
beseeching a candid consideration of “the new matter ” contained
in my Petition of October 1875,
I have the honor to be
Your Lordship’s humble servant.
F. BEER.
This letter was enclosed in another from the brother of Dr. Beer
to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, of which the
following is a Copy :
Paris, 6th August, 1876
Letter of Mr. Geoffrey Beer to
The Right Honorable the Earl of Carnarvon, <fec.
According to the wish of my Brother, Dr. Beer of Sydney, I take
the liberty of forwarding to you (enclosed) his reply to your message
about his Petition to Her Majesty. The papers that follow under
baud are “ the later papers ” lo which he refers. At the same tijne


I would beg of your Lordship not to decide finally in this lament-
able matter until you shall have heard about it from the German
and Swiss Governments to whom our large and highstanding family
have now appealed for Dr. Beer, who seems to have to fight his way
against powerful colonial party interests. Our family in Switzerland
are some of the largest landed proprietors and industrials; a brother
and a nephew of mine have been headpartners for many years in old
commercial firms in Calcutta and Cawnpore. No means will therefore
be spared for our own name’s sake to obtain justice at last for our
relative.
A Legislative Committee having declared that he was wrong-
fully convicted, and Dr. Brodie and many medical and juridical au-
thorities having called the verdict absurd, it would be strange if this
was to be all the satisfaction and repairs the innocent victim had to
expect in a civilised country for 10 years wrongful detention and the
ruin of his entire promising career. We expect better from the pro-
verbial English Justice and Equity. It being proved:
1) That Belladonna, such as prescribed, is harmless.
2) That Dr. Beer never had any interest in Mrs. Brown’s life.
3) That at the time of the insurance, there was nothing the matter
with her to shorten life, or which the private family doctor was in
honour bound to divulge about family secrets to Insurance Com-
panies.
The subsequent assertions of the three Attorney Generals, in
disculpation of themselves and friends —i. e. “that Dr. Beer’s frau-
dulent conduct would have justified this verdict or even one for capital
crime, even if he were innocent of the crime itself,” are as unwarrantable
and absurd as the verdict itself. It is perhaps presuming too much
of human nature to expect that Mr. Manning should acknowledge
his own flagrant errors —to use a very mild term for it, and that
Messrs. Butler and Dailey should not prefer shielding their friend
and colleague from ignominy rather than a seemingly friendless fo-
reigner ; but fortunately they are, though powerful, not alone com-
petent —Truth must and will prevail at last in spite of these gen-
tlemen. In the meantime we have sent the papers of this cause
celebre to all the leading medical and juridical faculties, authorities,
and members of the Press in England, France, Germany, and Switzer-
land, soliciting their opinion.
I am, (fee., (fee.,
G. BEER.
London, 17th August, 1876.
I am directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 6th instant, forwarding a letter addres-
sed to his Lordship by Dr. F. Beer of Sydney, with papers presented
to the Legislative Assembly on the subject of Dr. Beer’s case.
I am Sir, <fec.
R. H. WADE.


The aid of Mr. Sahl was invoked in the ease by Dr. Beer who
in September of last year, sent him a letter of which the followinsr
is a copy :
Liverpool Street, Sydney, 12th September, 1876.
To Charles Sahl, Esq.,
Consul of the German Empire at Sydney, N.S.W.
Sir,
As a Bavarian I beg to crave your protection and to move you
in your official capacity to aid me in obtaining justice for a very
grievious injury done me as a man anfl as a medical practitioner
in this city now over 20 years ago.
The reason why I did not earlier claim your protection is, be-
cause I hoped that the authorities in power would see of their own
accord what was due to justice, and because I did not get sooner
possessed of certain official and legal proofs of having thus wrong-
fully suffered and unjustly endured the almost incredible persecu-
tion and hardships such as I complained of throughout, whilst with-
out such proofs the matter would have been too complicated for
you to unravel perhaps, though I never ceased during the whole
period to try to obtain justice or redress in some shape or other, al-
though in vain.—At last however my innocence has been officially
acknowledged by the present Attorney'General as well as by the
present and the late Colonial Secretaries (the Hon. J. Eobertson and
the lion. H. Parkes,) but still without obtaining any reversal of the
conviction or other redress of any kind.—l enclose for your guidance
a declaration setting forth the principal points of my case and
grounds of my complaint, besides all the official documents and affi-
davits and other papers, by which I am enabled to show what may
happen to a foreigner in this Colony, and by which I can fully sub-
stantiate my statement made to the Court at the time; viz:— that I
was the victim of perjury and of afoul concoction or conspiracy of the
principal witnesses suborned and produced against me, medical and
otherivise.
You will also be able to glean therefrom that I was wholly
illegally and lawlessly dealt with on the occasion, inasmuch as the
Attorney General filed no Bill, finding no reasonable cause, that
therefore the Crown did not prosecute, but that a private party was
allowed to usurp the functions of the Crown by their Society’s Counsel
prosecuting, and that this pseudo-Court, as constructed, consisted
of directly pecuniary interested members and shareholders of the
prosecuting Society, inclusive of the Judge, who put himself promi-
nently forward in conniving to bring about this miscarriage of jus-
tice, or of securing a conviction which he was himself much inte-
rested to obtain, being thus accuser. Judge, and Court in one body.
Besides this utter illegality of the arraignment and sham trial
during which many villainies were perpetrated on me as a helpless
foreigner, and of which the perpetrators are still enjoying the fruits
by social “elevations” and otherwise, I think I ought to point out to
you in regard to the merits of the case that the alleged crimes for


which I was airaigucrl could have never been perpetrated in that way,
and by those means at all, and that notwithstanding the most flagrant
perjury committed by the principal witnesses for the posecution (also
members of the Insurance Society) and partly “at their instance,”
no motive for the commission of my crime could be constructed,
whilst the alleged “ suspicious circumstances,” and apparent fraudu-
lent conduct towards the Insurances, have since either been proved
to rest upon perjury or to have been without foundation, or have
been satisfactorily explained as would have been the case had I not
been prevented from by the numerous respectable and
material witnesses in waiting, whom the Judge prevented me from
producing.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient and humble Servant,
F. BEER, M.D.
Accompanying this letter was the following Solemn Declara-
tion of Dr. F. Bebk.
(preamble) I, Frederick Beer, of the City of Sydney, in the Colony
ofN.S.W., Doctor of Medicine, do solemnly and sincerely declare
that I commenced practice in the Colony aforesaid, in the year 1853,
and after practising in the City of Sydney for the period of 3 years,
during which time I had been the medical attendant of one Phillies
Brown, I was called on one day to attend the said Phillies Brown
who was then pregnant, and found her suffering from a severe irri-
tation in her rectum, and slight premature labour pains, the effect
of a wetting; and to allay this irritation and otherwise give her
relief, I prescribed and caused to be administered to her, as on a
previous occasion, a small quantity of Belladonna, In doing this, I
was upheld by the best medical authorities at that time, and now
extant, amongst whom may be mentioned Prof. Troussan and many
others. The Belladonna was prescribed in the shape of 6 suppois-
tories to he used if required. Although only of these doses were
administered, the desired effect was produced, a miscarriage pre-
vented, and perhaps the life of my patient preserved. On the 4th,
day of March 1856, some days after the events above detailed, I
was arrested without warrant, and conveyed before the Magistrate
sitting at the Police Court, and there committed to stand my trial
for having administered the said drug with intent to procure abor-
tion.—On the 9th day of April of the said year I was put upon my
trial before the Justice Therry, and a Jury of 12 persons, of one of
whom only I knew anything; and then ensued one of the most
disgraceful proceedings ever perpetrated under the semblance of
Justice. — h eeling conscious of my innocence I did not deem it ne-
cessary to engage Counsel t® defend me but undertook that task
m self deeming the question about to be sifted of purely a medical
character. On the second day I was prevailed upon by the presid-
ing Judge to accept the services of Counsel in the person of one J.
J. Blake, Esq., a Barrister at Law of the City, who did not perform


his duty in the slightest degree, and who left me to resume my own
defence before my trial had closed. The chief witnesses for the
prosecution, the said Phillies Brown and her husband Mr. G. Brown,
were not only guilty of deliberate perjury in relating the facts of
my professional dealings with the said Ph. Brown but also so misre-
presented certain transactions with Insurance Companies (in which I
had acted as a friend should do), and which had no real bearing
whatever on the point at issue, as to make it appear that I had
wished to obtain an interest in the death of the said Ph. Brown,
whereas I should not in fact have gained one farthing by such event.
Several medical men, four of whom were enemies of mine
previously, and were, as I verily believe, antagonistic to me, gave
evidence in direct contradiction to all authority by swearing that
the dose as prescribed by me was calculated not only to cause a mis-
carriage of the patient, but to kill both the parent and the child,
although they must have known to the contrary by Pereira. The
Judge read to the Jury a passage of Pereira which bore no reference
whatever to the use of Belladonna, representing it at the time that he
was quoting that authority’s experience of the effect of such drug,
whereas, only one page from the passage quoted, was laid down
what would have broken down the case for the prosecution com-
pletely.
On the fourth day of the trial I proposed to recall a most ma-
terial witness, who had been partly examined when the Court rose on
the preceding day, when I was informed by the Judge that I could
not do so as Mr. Blake had closed my case the day before, and my
trial had already lasted four days—whereas I solemnly declare that
no such thing was the ease as Mr. Blake had left the Court, and the
examination of the last named witness fell to me, and therefore Mr. B.
could not have closed the case. The Judge also refused to permit me
to call several medical and other witnesses who were actually in at-
tendance, and whose evidence would have completely broken down
the case for the prosecution by showing the absurdity of the medical
testimony against me, and proving the falsity of the other evidence
adduced.
The Jury brought in a verdict of guilty on the first Count of
the indictment viz; “of administering the said drug with the intent
to procure abortion,” and I was sentenced to 10 years’ imprison-
ment with hard labour.
After serving over 4 years of my sentence, I was released on a
ticket-of-leave, which still restrained me from leaving this Colony
until the full period of my sentence had expired.
No authoritave report of the said trial is to be obtained as the
said Judge on retiring from office took his notes of the proceedings
to England with him, and he has since died there.
Subsequent to my conviction I discovered that the prosecution
had been instituted by an Insurance Society (in consequence of
something communicated to them by the said Brown), and that the
said Judge and some of the Jury were Shareholders of the said So-
21


ciety, and therefore interested in obtaining a conviction against me,
and that the prosecuting of Counsel was briefed by the said Society,
so anxious were they for my condemnation and to usurp the powers
of the Court themselves and to pack it with their creatures. —I have
charged the said M. G. Brown before the Police Magistrate with
perjury; but although the evidence there taken (appearing by the
depositions) fully justifies my allegation of perjury committed by
my accuser, yet the Magistrate did not consider it sufficiently strong
to call for the prisoner’s committal on such a charge, he (the P. M.)
being a relative of some of my enemies most compromised in this
case.
I protest against the proceedings recorded above on the follow-
ing grounds; namely,—
Iv That I was illegally arraigned, the Attorney General being the
only personage in a position under the Law of this Country to prose-
cute for a capital offence;
2. That the presiding Judge was virtually filling the incompa-
tible position of Judge and Prosecutor at the same time;
3. That the verdict of the Jury has been shown to have been
founded on perjured testimony and medical evidence which, to say
the least of it, betrayed a lamentable state of ignorance of the Doc-
tors present;
4. That I was wrongly denied the rights of calling evidence in
defence, not only of my liberty, but of my life.
During the twenty years which have elapsed since my sentence,
I have endeavoured by all possible means to obtain that justice and
the vindication of character which my case calls for, but in vain.
It is denied me on all sides.
I have petitioned not only their Excellencies the Governors of
the Colony, but also Her Majesty the Queen of England, but with-
out success.
My Petition with one signed by 1562 inhabitants of Braid wood
where I resided, was presented to the House of Assembly here, and
resulted in the appointment of a Committee to enquire into my case,
which Committee after a full investigation came to the conclusion
that I was innocent, and so reported to the said House.
I may mention here that,the remarks in the said report as to
my dealings with certain my giving certificates
of health, would have been omitted had I been allowed to explain
such before the said Committee.
I have tried, but in vain, to procure a Bill to be passed, through
Parliament proclaiming my innocence, and providing for the quash-
ing of the said conviction or granting a new trial.
And thus I am, after aJI my sufferings of mind and loss of repu-
tation and means, still cruelly obliged to remain shunned by those
who would otherwise associate with me, and with my professional
prospects for ever blighted, while on my character is branded the
stigma of “ Criminal.
I have the honour to be, &c., (fee.,
F. BEER.
22


Consulate of the German Empire
Sydney, 22nd March, 1877.
I have to acknowledge your letter of 16th March, enquiring
what has been done in your case since you addressed me six months
ago.
In reply I beg to inform you that I placed your case before the
Hon. the Colonial Secretary on the 25th Sept. 1876, and again on
the sth Dec. 1876. I received a reply dated 9th December, in which
I was informed that my communication had been brought under the
notice of the Minister of Justice and Public Instruction.
I am again addressing the Colonial Secretary and will inform
you of the result of my further application.
Your obedient Servant,
Cakl L. SAHL.
Consul.
Dr. F. BEER, M.D., C.D., O.D.
177, Liverpool Street, Sydney.
177, Liverpool Street,
Sydney, 27th April, 1876.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Sir,
Observing in a paragraph in this morning’s Herald that a Judge-
ship has been offered to Sir W. Manning, I feel it duty to ask
you to postpone his definite appointment until he has been exone-
rated from the grave charges made against him by me, and the
Swiss Government, in a Petition to be laid before Her Majesty the
Queen, which if substantiated against him, (as they already are) will
stamp him as an infamous moral assassin for all time to come, and
as utterly unfit to be entrusted with judicial functions. I have been
but too long the patiently-suffering victim of a murderous clique,
not to make at last a stand, and to endeavour to prevent any more
of my old enemies from getting beyond the reach of the law or of
censure. As I have been advised by my friends in Switzerland by
last Suez-Mail that the necessary documents have been sent by the
Swiss Executive to their Consul in London to be forwarded to Her
Majesty’s advisers, the issue cannot be long delayed, and I shall
be happy to give you in the mean time my further information you
may desire in this matter.
I have the honour to be Yours dec..
F. BEER, M.D., CH.D., O.D.
23


In re Du. F. Beer,
Copy, Opinion of Mr. T. H. Want.
“Sydney, August, 1876.
1. lam clearly of opinion that no redress can now be obtained
from the full Court in this case by way of quashing the conviction,
or of obtaining a new trial. The full Court has no power to inter-
fere as a Court in a criminal case that has once been tried by a Jury,
except to decide points that have arisen and have been reserved by the
Judge at the trial and here the case terminated with the verdict. This
has been several times decided and in late cases. Dr. Beer, therefore
can have no relief by any appeal to the full Court on the grounds
stated, or on any other.
2. As to what other relief may be obtained if any, is a question
of more difficulty. lam unaware and have not been able to dis-
cover any recent cases, where such relief as Dr. Beer requires, has
been granted under the English practice, though it is notorious that
many innocent persons were convicted in the beginning of this Cen-
tury (during the era of the press prosecutions), of publishing sedi-
tious libels.
To anyone perusing the reports and comments on this remark-
able and notorious miscarriage of justice, it must at once appear
that the conviction was grossly wrong, and that an unoffending and
innocent man has been punished for a crime which he never even
contemplated, let alone perpetrated. With the very high medical
authorities, whose opinions Dr. Beer has secured, and strong expres-
sions of able lawyers and statesmen as to the merits of the case and
his innocence, I cannot but think that Dr. Beer could obtain that
redress (and the only means I can discover for him), which we find
precedented in the old cases of attainder for treason by Parliament
which is the highest Court in the English Realm ; the most notable
of these cases being, those of Russel, Sydney, Cornish, and Arm-
strong, convicted of High Treason during the latter part of Charles
the Second’s reign, and reversed many years after in the reign of
William the Third, (vide “Hellam’s Constitutional History,” p. 160,
et sequitur.) Conviction for treason and felony then entailed the pen-
alty of forfeiture of lands and goods and other disabilities, as it still
does here, (though altered in England by a late Statute, 33 p. 34
Vic., C. 23, S. 1).
The old disabilities consequent on attainder could not be re-
moved except by the Parliament, to which recourse was therefore
had and with successful results.
I am therefore of opinion that, if our Parliament possesses the
same powers in this respect as that in England, and I think it does,
the only method for Dr. Beer will be to move the House of Repre-
sentatives here, as was done in the English cases cited, and endeavour
to obtain a reversal, in obtaining Avbich Dr. Beer should secure the
services of good Counsel and ask to be heard by such Counsel at the
Bar of the House.
24


Our Criminal Appeal Court is on the same footing as the Court
for Grown cases reserved in England, and is not a Court of error; the
Jurisdiction of both Courts is settled, by the cases of Queen v. Clark,
L. O. C. K. p. 54, and Queen v. Webb, L. li. 1. C. C. K. p.p. 378
and 380, which cases are clear and decisive on these points.
See also, Eeg. v. Murphy, and Reg. v. Bertrand.
(Signed) T. H. WANT, Chambers.'’
This view of the matter by Mr. Want may be quite correct under
an assumption that a wrongful conviction and miscarriage of justice
occurred somehow whilst the trial itself and the criminal proceed-
ings were fair and legal, but what is the law or procedure I may
f sk, to be followed where a man has not been prosecuted in the name
of the Queen, for a felony, nor tried by a legally constructed Court
and Jury at all, where the responsible Law Officer for the Crown
did not act, did not find a Bill, but where the victim has simply been
dragged by a private Society (imagining they had a grievance)
before a fictitious Court, consisting of their own pecuniarily inter-
ested shareholders, of prosecutors, and is then and there (to make
everything sure), garotted and lynched, so to speak, and their main
aim (death) failing, falsely imprisoned and rendered helpless by
this sham trial and sham conviction in the manner indicated by
Mr. Want? Dr. Beer has not been convicted'at all nor tried in the
name of the Queen in the ordinary way, though he was imprisoned
and suffered innocently. The whole prosecution or persecution was
an audacious, infamous, lawless, murderous, proceeding, under the guise
of law by that powerful M. P. Society whilst the responsible author-
ities shut their eyes, whilst the farce of Judge and Jury was plaved
before them. J J
But under Divine protection the victim of these unparalelled mur-
derous atrocities has at length, after many years of torture, so far re-
covered his strength so as to be enabled once more to raise his voice
cry out loudly, and still more emphatically “Murder, mur-
der, and to claim the assistance of the Samaritans that be, and this
notwithstanding the many shameless and brutal high-handed ef-
forts made by certain Officials such as 3 former Governors, 3 Attor-
ney Generals, and several Premiers, and by a number of villainous
Leaders of the Sydney Herald to keep his voice silenced and morally
drowned, nor will henceforth even the (a fraternal grasp perhaps)
abetting attkude of a Lord Carnarvon (polluting thereby the foun-
tain head of Justice) be able to drown his voice again, for magna est
veritas et praevalebit.
If any British subject is wrongfully dealt with or receives an
injury by official ruffians in Burmah, China, or Japan, how soon the
Home Authorities interfere and make a demand for indemnity, sup-
ported perhaps by a fleet, or if a naughty.gutter-child at the Rand-
wick Asylum receives a little too much of the birchrod, how soon
every-body is in arms, but let an unfortunate foreigner fall into the
hands of British garroters, lynchers and wouldbe assassins; and
25


escaping with his bare life claim justice and redress for an ack-
nowledged grievious done him by some British miscreants of
the upper-crust in this Christian city, how many Samaritans come
to his aid, or how many doors are quickly closed and barred by every
sort of open and underhand trickery, whilst the culprits are pro-
tected.
The outrages committed on Dr. Beer must have become appa-
rent to every justice-loving person from the very moment Sir Ben-
jamin Brodie in 1857 so fully endorsed Dr. Beer’s plea and accus-
ation, and that a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly in
Sydney (containing three able and honest lawyers such for example as
his Hon. Justice Fawcett) fully exonerated Dr. Beer from any at-
tempt at a crime by their Report to the House in 1862, not to speak of
the still later official Report on the case by the Hon. Professor Smith,
M.L.C., and other light thrown on the matter by the “later papers”
to which the Hon. H. Parkes drew the attention of his successor,
-the Hon. J. Robertson, by his Minute before leaving Office in 1875;
yet Dr. Beer’s deeply interested and implicated powerful enemies,
the would-be assassins and their abettors, have hitherto managed
to paralyse the arm of justice. For how much longer remains
to be seen. —
The importance of the introductory statements contained in
the above unbiassed opinion (the latest legal opinion) of an
able Counsel was no doubt known and steadily kept before their
eyes by Judge Therry and Mr. A. T. Holroyd, they therefore deprived
me of the most material evidence, (quite fatal to their case) given at
the Police Court previously by .Mr. J. C. Horner and of numerous
other material witnesses for the defence then waiting to be heard,
and by which as I had predicted to the full Court I should prove
“the principal witnesses” perjurers, and the whole proceedings a
concoction or conspiracy, and depriving me even of my Ledger
(over night) in which the frequent administration of the same drug
to the same patient and to the same extent were attested by Mr.
Horner and receipted by him as in part paid. From no good mo-
tives therefore did Judge Therry decline to reserve for the consider-
ation of the full Court the point submitted to him by me, viz:
whether an acquittal on the second Count, which the Judge had
charged the Jury over and over again was the only issue left for
them to consider, (and not the abortion count) did not entail the
quashing of the absurd verdict given. These legal worthies knew as
well as Mr. Want that a conviction by a Jury must stand in the ab-
sence of any point being reserved at a trial, and moreover that
dead men tell no tales. Hence all this united nefarious action
and co-operation to encompass the latter result. [Such a gross
miscarriage of Justice by mistake is and always was quite out of
the question!]
The conclusive legal proo/that the prosecutors knew Dr. Beer
to be quite innocent of the criminal attempts per Belladonna as al-
leged, even before they arraigned him illegally before a self consti-
26


tuted fictitious Court, and the proof of conspiracy and suborned per-
jury (already openly denounced to be such by Dr. Beer during that
memorable sbam trial) will form the next step in this “cause celebre,”
unless the official Samaritans show themselves henceforth more
active to bind up the still bleeding wounds of the victim, whose mis-
fortune it was to fall amongst such a gang of highway robbers, and
less obviously willing to endeavour, by non interference, evasion,
procrastination, (fee., (fee. to shelter and abet such misdeeds at the ex-
pense of their victim. Why, the very spring and fountain of justice
has now become polluted through these miscreants. “Murder
however will out.” Samaritans awake! Or what is the meaning of ;
lion. Professor Smith’s remark in his Report to the Colonial Secre-
tary (the Hon. H. Parkes (23. Febr. 1874) when he says that: “but
for the Judge prematurely closing the case, it would have been proved
at the trial as it was proved before the Select Committee of the
Legislative Assembly in 1862, that Dr. Beer could have fully justi-
fied his practice in Mrs. Brown’s case,” (fee., (fee.
What is the meaning of it but that this self-interested Judge,
this prosecutor and Judge, to whom I had promised to produce the
proofs of perjury and conspiracy (without however then knowing that
he was a pecuniarily interested member of the Society or a prose-
cutor himself) put his hand deliberately on my throat, garrotted me
morally, in aid of the conspiracy, and in order to secure a conviction.
Shall these hideous “ hidden springs ” not be uncovered at last in
all their ghastliness I
F. BEER.
Hyde Park Terrace,
Liverpool Street, May, 1877.
J A, Engel, Machine Printer 256, George-street, Sydney.
27


