

FfFF p
a^7
Caffjtbral Cfjurcf) of g»t.
S'j'bncp
dDi’ber of ikrbice
for tfy
Jfuneral of tfje late
honourable
Isnr Jfrebencfe lUcfjarb Itorban
H.C.iW.«S., h.a., M.p.
Hieutenant=#obernor anb Chief Suffice
of the
l£>tate of jjeto H>outh ®Meg
ilonbap, 7th JSobemher, 1949
at 10 a*m.


d>rber of £krbttt
Prelude —SOLEMN MELODY (Wolford Davies)
lloalm KOI
Lord, Thou hast been our refuge: from one generation to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and
the world were made: Thou art God from everlasting, and world
without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction: again Thou sayest. Come again,
ye children of men.
For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing
that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as Thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep; and
fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the evening it
is cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in Thy displeasure: and are afraid at Thy
wrathful indignation.
Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee: and our secret sins in
the light of Thy countenance.
For when Thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our
years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are three-score years and ten; and though
men be so strong, that they come to four-score years: yet is their strength
then but labour and sorrow; so soon passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of Thy wrath: for even thereafter
as a man feareth, so is Thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
Turn Thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto Thy
servants.
O satisfy us with Thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice
and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that Thou has plagued us:
and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.
Show Thy servants Thy work: and their children Thy glory.
And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper
Thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper Thou our handy-work.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world
without end. Amen.


ffirfiann
1 Corinthians XV, 20 to 58
The Very Reverend the Dean of Sydney.
O Saviour of the World (Goss).
The Most Reverend the Archbishop.
O God, the Rock of Ages,
Who evermore hast been,
What time the tempest rages,
Our dwelling-place serene;
Before Thy first creations,
O Lord, the same as now.
To endless generations
The everlasting Thou!
Our years are like the shadows
On sunny hills that lie,
Or grasses in the meadows
That blossom but to die:
A sleep, a dream, a story
By strangers quickly told,
An unremaining glory
Of things that soon are old.
O Thou, who canst not slumber.
Whose light grows never pale,
Teach us aright to number
Our years before they fail.
On us Thy mercy lighten,
On us Thy goodness rest,
And let Thy Spirit brighten
The hearts Thyself hast bless’d.
Lord, crown our faith’s endeavour
With beauty and with grace,
Till, clothed in light for ever.
We see Thee face to face:
A joy no language measures;
A fountain brimming o’er;
An endless flow of pleasures;
An ocean without shore.
Amen.
Praitpra
Upab Hacrb in S>aul
Alfred Henry Pettifbr, Govt. Printer.


