

th v
Ha-) a.
RESTORATION
t»i& 10 J e j i’AH 9
fto W
BURDEN BEARING
gismtrse.
Galatians, vi., i, 2.
Delivered in St. George's /fall, Bourke Street, Sabbath Evenings
August 20th, 1871.
JAMES TAYEOE,
J3aptist
" Has thy love of man grown chary ?
Has thy trust in him grown wary T
Hast thou coldly turn’d a deafened ear to sin’s repentant prayer t
Oh ! think that none can enter Heaven
Who has not others’ sins forgiven
And saved them from despair f
HUlhnmu;
B. NEEDHAM, 154 BOURKE STREET EAST.
THREEPENCE.


“ Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.”— Jesus.
“Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for
Christ’s sake, has forgiven you.”— Paul.
“ He that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him.”— John.
“ When a man is overtaken in a fault do not hold him down or point the finger at him.
Do not seek to sting him with reproach. Brethren, if a brother be overtaken in a fault,
restore such a one in the spirit of humility, considering thyself, lest thou also fall into
temptation. Every heart knows its own bitterness, its shame, its fears, its gloomy thoughts.
Consider thyself when thou art playing a lordly part, what evil inclination, there is in thee,
how thou, too, mightest be tempted.”— Rev. Donald Fraser, Presbyterian, London.
“ Our churches will be blessed by the best of all additions—the restoration of the fallen ;
for the earthiest vessels, such often bear the heavenliest treasures. When they are con-
verted they strengthen their brethren. None are so wise to warn; none so grateful to praise
redeeming love ; none so able to assuage the fears of guilt, and to describe the welcome
which awaits the guiltiest: and, following afresh the Saviour they had forsaken, they find
a heavenly ordination and a new anointing to ‘feed Christ’s lambs.’”— Rev. Richard Glover,
Baptist, Glasgow.
“ I know not on this side the grave the spot from which repentance, nay, reparation, is
excluded. Repentance is reparation. The man who, far on in life’s journey, has sinned
and fallen, makes reparation towards man if he repents towards God ; The servant of God
who has been ensnared of evil—who has even brought shame upon his name, and reproach
upon his church —yet even he, if he returns and repents —even he, if he walk humbly and
mournfully for his remaining days before God— even he, if he accepts with unmurmuring sub-
mission that sentence of comparative uselessness, which is the worst part of sm, and is willing
to stoop to humble work, and to be but a hewer of wood and drawer of water, for that
tabernacle in which, perhaps, once he stood a priest ministering—even he, if he comes back
—it is no imaginary picture—just to die amongst his people, making no secret of his grief
and of his repentance, and readily Offering up the remnant of a shortened life upon the
sacrifice and service of a penitent restitution ; even that man has upon him the mark of for-
giveness, is clad again with the white garments of a second absolution, and when he goes
hence, to be no more seen of the sinful, shall enter, washed and justified, within the inner-
most veil, to be forever a king and a priest in that sanctuary where sin is not. — Rev. C. J.
Vaughan, D.D., Episcopalian, London.
“ Beware of refined selfishness. Beware of aesthetic selfishness. Beware of aristocratic
selfishness. Beware of the selfishness of prosperity and respectability. Beware of the
temptation of the devil. Beware of anything that shall make you indifferent to the suffer-
ings and condition of those who are cast down by reason of their sins—-for you in your
estate are sinners, dependent every hour and every moment on the goodness of a pitying
God. Be you to your fellows what God is to you.”— Rev. H. W. Beecher, Congregahonalist,
New York.


lUstcrnitbit anft §urhen Bearing.
" Brethren, if a man he overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore
such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also he
tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.”
Galatians, vi., 1, 2.
In the verses now read, we have a variety of important counsels, the
earnest consideration of which cannot fail to prove instructive and useful.
“ The things written aforetime were written for our learning,” and the
words of apostolic advice to the churches of Galatia, are needed by, and
suited to, the Christians and Christian churches of our age. While we
consider the utterances of the loving and faithful apostle, may God by his
Spirit enlighten our minds, and lead us to a right understanding of his
word.
Verse 1. “ Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted.”
The apostle names the Christian believers of Galatia, “ Brethren.” All
men are brothers —all are the offspring of God, and, as such, members
of one family. This great truth is but little understood, and but feebly
felt by many. Christianity began with this. It taught, most emphatically,
the common parentage of humanity—the brotherhood of man. This
truth is designed to draw us together ; and it is fitted to check the
pride of some, and to raise the thoughts of others. God is our Father,
and we are His offspring ; and, therefore, brethren, whatever our condition
or circumstances—whether arrayed in the trappings of wealth or the rags
of poverty; whether honoured and esteemed, or counted as the filth of
the earth and the offscouring of all things. But the apostle names the
Galatian believers “ Brethren,” not because of a common relationship
as members of the great family of man, but as members of the household
of God, children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Just as the apostle
John’s favourite word to designate believers was “ Beloved,” so Paul’s


favourite word was “ Brethren,” and he frequently employed it in his
various epistles. Pressing upon the members of the church at Home the
duty and privilege of entire consecration to the service of God, he writes,
“ I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service.” Profoundly conscious of his need of divine help and guidance
in his great work as an ambassador of Christ, he besought the
Thessalonians, “ Brethren, pray for us.” Desirous of fixing the attention
of the Hebrews on Jesus and his work, he writes, “ Holy brethren, partakers
of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our pro-
fession, Christ Jesus.” And now very anxious to '.lead the Christians of
Galatia to the cultivation and manifestation of Christian kindness and for-
giveness, he uses the same word of tenderness—he names them brethren or
brothers.
The apostle enjoins a special duty—“ If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual restore such an one.’’ The words, “If a man,” evidently
mean, if any one belonging to the brotherhood, any member of the church,
•‘ be overtaken in a fault, restore such an one.” The clause, “Be over-
taken in a fault,” is variously rendered by expositors. Some interpret it as
meaning, be surprised or taken in a fault, and argue that the phrase is in-
tended to convey the idea that the person referred to is not an habitual sinner,
but one who has been unexpectedly snared by a sin. Others contend that
such an interpretation extenuates the sin referred to, and give the meaning
as being caught in a fault, not by it—overtaken in a fault by detection, and
before he can escape. A distinguished scholar gives the import of the
apostle’s words—“ If a man be surprised, detected, in the act of committing
any sin, so that his guilt is placed beyond a doubt”—What is to be done in such
a case? What is the duty of the brotherhood towards this brother who has
erred from the truth, or who has violated the law of Christ, and been sur-
prised in sin ? Is he to be treated with contempt and scorn, reviled and
defamed, set before men as utterly unworthy of one kindly word, or deed,
or look, and left to go further and further away from God and the ways of
truth and peace, until, feeling himself an outcast from the brotherhood,
hope dies in his soul, and all love crushed out of his heart, he either plunges
madly and recklessly into folly, or sinks in heartless despondency and
despair. No. The apostle tells the brotherhood what their duty is : “Ye
which are spiritual restore such an one.”
Who are the restorers ? “Ye which are spiritual.” There are some who
claim to be spiritual, who are ever ready to boast of their high attainments,
and, like the Pharisee of old, thank God that they are not as other men.
From such, in their fancied superiority, the erring, sinful, and fallen need
expect neither pitiful tenderness nor willing help. Such are not the class
of persons whom Paul designates “ spiritual.” The apostle in his letter
had once and again urged the Galatian believers to “ walk in the spirit,” and
now he says:—‘‘Ye who live in the spirit, and walk in the spirit”—prove
that you are so living and walking, by restoring your brother who has erred
from the truth or fallen into sin. Any who, professing to be spiritual, act
otherwise, and treat their fallen brother with scorn and bitterness, give


proof that they are not living in the spirit. “ For the fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem-
perance ; against such there is no law.” On this point I venture to quote
the words of a kind and large-hearted minister of Christ, who, in speaking
of the spiritual, says—“ They are men who are not at all sure that they are
the spiritual; men who are only sure that sin is a great sorrow to the sinner,
a great sorrow to the Saviour, a crushing burden on the spirit, which so fills
them with distress and pity, that they can take no rest and know no joy
until they have lifted it and borne it away. Men, on whom another’s
burden—a burden of shame and sorrow, which has bowed down some poor
despairing brother to the dust—presses heavily as their own; who have
looked into the conditions of His life, who “ Himself took our infirmities
and bare our sicknesses,” and who find some dim image of it in their own
hearts. The men and women in a church who are so spiritual, that they
are conscious of stooping from a great height to touch the sinner in the
depth—a height to which they thank God these low and base temptations
never climb—had better stay there, and leave the work of restoring sinners
to those who know, too sadly, that the devil is as near to them as to the
poor fallen one, and that it is by hard battle, through grace abounding
daily, that they keep themselves out of the same pit. They can see the
brother’s image in the sin as well as in the suffering, and feel, as the Lord
did, that the poor lost sheep is the one whom it is worth any sacrifice to save.*
Observe now tbe duty of the spiritual—“ If a man be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are spiritual restore such an one.” The duty enjoined is restora-
tion. The apostle uses a very significant word. It means to correct, to
restore ; but readjust, refit, is the precise import of the term. It is some-
times employed to describe the repairing of an edifice, and sometimes, by
medical writers, to describe the setting a bone or joint—the putting a dis-
located member of the body into its proper place. The Christian church is
not a society of perfected believers—of saved sinners, freed from every stain
of guilt and pollution; but of believers sanctified but in part, compassed
with infirmities, exposed to manifold temptations and trials, and constantly
in danger of falling into error or sin, and of thus bringing reproach upon
the name and causa of Jesus, and sorrow and anguish to themselves and
all who love their Lord. When any of the brotherhood do err from
the truth, or fall into sin, it is needful that the church, for the honour of the
Master —to guard her own purity, and to avoid all suspicion at connivance
with sin—should deal with the erring or sinning member. The duty of the
Christian brotherhood is to watch over each other, “to look diligently lest
any man fail of the grace of God—lest any root of bitterness, springing up,
trouble them.” It is worthy of notice, that while the Scriptures recognise
the necessity for the exercise of discipline in the church, they contain no
code of laws, if we except the Saviour’s words in Matthew xviii., 15, 17,
which seem specially to refer to personal offences—“ Moreover, if thy bro-
ther shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone ; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he
• “The Divine Treatment of Sin.”— Kev. J. B. Brown, London.


will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth
of two or three witnesses every word may be established ; and if he shall
neglect to hear thee, tell it unto the church ; but if he neglect to hear the
church let him [be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.” Beyond
a few general precepts, such as, “Withdraw from any brother that walketh
disorderly“ A heretic after the first and second admonition reject
“Be not partakers of other men’s sins is almost all we find. Without
entering into greater length on this matter of discipline, I venture to affirm
that exclusion from Christian fellowship should never take place until every
means of bringing the erring or sinning brother to repentance has been tried
in vain; and that after repentance discipline should cease, and the offender
be restored to the love and confidence of the brotherhood. This is the duty
enjoined in the text.
Eestoration implies reconciliation. The erring or sinning member of the
brotherhood has offended, but it is the duty of the spiritual to be reconciled.
In attending to this duty Christians are not to act upon the principle which
requires that the offender should make the first movement towards reconcilia-
tion. God does not act thus. We are offenders, and yet he beseeches us to
be reconciled to him. So we should ever manifest a readiness and forward-
ness to promote reconciliation, whether we are or have offended. The duty
is most important. If Christians cherish a revengeful spirit, if in enmity
and wrath they turn away from the brother overtaken in a fault, if they
cherish anger and malice in their hearts, all their holy services will be
profitless and unacceptable to God, and their own spirits strangers to true
peace and joy. But if they cherish and manifest brotherly kindness—the
love that suffereth long, and is kind, and covereth a multitude of sins—and
in the exercise of this love, seek reconciliation with the offending brother,
in order to his restoration, they will enjoy the peace of God, and be blessed
in their deed.
Eestoration implies forgiveness. The offending brother—the dislocated
member—cannot be readjusted—restored, unless forgiven. This duty of
forgiveness is frequently and emphatically enjoined in the word of God.
The Great Teacher again and again insisted on this duty, in the days of his
earthly ministry. Listen to a few of his impressive words: “ After this
manner pray ye—Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” “ And
when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have aught against any, that your
Father, also, which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespasses.”
“ Love your enemies ; do good to them that hate you ; condemn not, and ye
shall not be condemned ; forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.” On one occa-
sion, Peter came to Jesus and said, “ Lord, how oft shalL my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? until seven times ?” The Lord’s reply was,
“ I say not unto thee, until seven times, but until seventy times seven,” —
that is, not merely many times, but to an unlimited extent. Forgive as
often and as long as tby brother offends, and professes repentance. It is
the duty of an offender to express sorrow and ask forgiveness. When he
does this, forgiveness cannot be refused, consistently with the command of
the Lord Jesus, or the general spirit of His gospel. To enforce this duty,
and illustrate its importance, Jesus spake the parable concerning the two


servants, recorded Matthew xviii., 23-35. One servant owed his lord ten
thousand talents, and was bankrupt, he was unable to pay the debt—“ Then
the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and
forgave him the debt.” Herein the king treated the debtor as God treats
men. The debtor owed much ; he was unable to pay ; and the king forgave
him. Men have sinned—grievously sinned—they cannot pay their debt; on
their repentance and faith, God freely forgives them. The second servant
owed his fellow servant a hundred pence—a trifling sum, utterly insignificant
compared with the vast amount before-named—and yet the servant of the
king who had been so generously and freely forgiven, refused to cancel the
small debt due by his fellow servant, and cast him into prison. Though he
had received mercy, he showed none, and in this was manifested his hardness
of heart, and his unworthiness of forgiveness. But swift retribution came
upon him. “ His Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till
he should pay all that was due unto him.” This impressive parable Jesus
concluded with these words —“ So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also
unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.” There is the application of the parable, which, in a word, is
this : The servant who had received mercy, and would not show mercy to
another, was severely punished; thus, also, will God correct and chasten
us, if, after having received such rich tokens of his forgiveness, we cherish
an unforgiving spirit.
The inspired apostles of Jesus frequently urge upon the Christian
brotherhood the duty of forgiveness. Thus Paul wrote to the Colossian
church—“ Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any
man have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also
do ye.” And, in nearly the same terms he wrote to the Ephesians—“ Be ye
kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.” God gave his Son—sent forth his Son—
to reveal his heart, and to make known his message of love. He did not
wait for sinful, rebellious man to take the first step in order to reconciliation
and forgiveness. The Eternal Word assumed our humanity, and lived and
died for man’s weal; and now God for Christ’s sake freely forgives all who
believe the divine testimony and receive Christ; and all who are thus freely,
fully, generously forgiven, are enjoined as fully, freely, and generously to
forgive the erring or sinning member of the brotherhood—the man over-
taken in a fault. Eeconciliation effected and forgiveness extended, the man
overtaken in a fault is restored to the fellowship and confidence of the
brotherhood, and among all the members of the family there is joy and
song, for the lost is found, and the wanderer is brought home.
We have noticed the persons to whom the duty of restoring the erring
brother is committed—“ they which are spiritual.” The apostle tells us
further, in what manner, or spirit, the important duty is to be performed—
“ln the spirit of meekness.” The spiritual, led and endowed by the
Spirit, possess one of his gifts, a spirit of meekness—a gentle, a compas-
sionate, loving spirit—which, while it hates sin in all its forms, pities and
compassionates the sinner. Only such as possess this spirit are qualified
for the work of restoring. The proud, the haughty, those who in their own


estimation stand high above their fellow believers, were they to attempt the
work, would be likely to do harm instead of good, and drive the wanderer
further off from God. In seeking the restoration of a brother overtaken in
a fault, the spiritual will imitate the meekness and gentleness of Jesus,
their Lord and Exampler. It was foretold of the Messiah—“ A bruised reed
shall he not break, and the smoking flax he shall not quench.” In the
whole life and ministry of Jesus we see the fulfilment of this prediction.
Around him gathered the poor, the sorrowful, the sinning, the outcast.
His heart yearned in compassion and pitiful love over them, and words of
kindness and grace flowed from his lips. Towards his selected disciples he
ever cherished and manifested the tenderest forbearance and love. His
meekness of spirit, in seeking to restore his erring disciples, is specially
observable in his treatment of Peter. It is very evident that Peter was
greatly loved by his Master, and there was no lack of love in return. Again
and again Peter sinned, and was forgiven, but at last- his aberrations cul-
minated in his denying and disowning his gracious Master, when that
Master stood unbefriended, forsaken, and exposed to cruel mockery amid
his foes. It is needless to speak of Peter’s guilt. But see how Jesus dealt
with him. “ The Lord turned and looked upon Peter.” That was all: it
was, however, enough. The erring apostle was brought back, restored, won
to Christ for ever; and after his resurrection, how tenderly, in the spirit of
meekness, did Jesus deal with Peter, restoring, readjusting, the disciple
overtaken in a fault, reinstating him in his apostolic office, and commanding
him, “ Feed my sheep, Feed my lambs.”
The disciples, in their treatment of the erring, imitated the meekness
and gentleness of their Lord. They possessed the “ spirit of meekness.”
We do not read that they turned away from Peter, and held him up to con-
tempt and scorn, as the man who had denied his Master. On the contrary,
we find the erring disciple with John at the sepulchre of Jesus ; and on the
evening of the same day in the assembly in the upper room at Jerusalem ;
and after the Lord’s ascension, we see the same apostle standing in the
front of the apostolic band—esteemed, honoured, and loved. He had
sinned—but was forgiven and restored ; and we may affirm that no one loved
Christ more fervently, or served Christ more faithfully, than the disciple
who had been overtaken in a fault, and had been restored in a spirit of
meekness. ... , . , .
In the epistles to the early churches, we find several texts which clearly
show how anxious the apostles were that the brotherhood should deal kindly
and gently with offending members of the family of God, and seek their re-
storation in the spirit of meekness. In the church at Corinth it had been
needful to exclude from the fellowship a man overtaken in a fault. This
bad been done by the command of Paul. In a short time the apostle learned
that this act of the church had proved beneficial, and not destructive, to the
offender, and he wrote, interposing for the pardon of the guilty one. Thus
we read, 2nd Cor. ii., 6, “ Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which
was inflicted of many, so that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him,
and comfort him, lest, perhaps, such a one should be swallowed up with over-
much sorrow. Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love


toward him.” This text is so important that it may be instructive briefly
to notice the leading particulars. The punishment was exclusion from fel-
lowship with the brotherhood. It was inflicted of or by many; that is, by
the church, in accordance with the direction the apostle had given. The
punishment was sufficient, and the offender was to be forgiven. The
punishment was not to be continued, the offender was to be restored to
favour, reinstated in his former position, and his sin to be remembered no
more to his disadvantage. Not only was he to be forgiven and restored, but
comforted. Let him feel that he has your love and sympathy. Anything
short of this leaves a sting of bitterness in the heart. A reason is given for
this injunction : “ Lest perhaps such a one ” —the apostle avoids mention-
ing the offender’s name, so anxious is he that lasting infamy should not at-
tach to the individual—“ Lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrowthat is, should be utterly discouraged and over-
whelmed with grief, and thus rendered incapable of personal enjoyment, or
usefulness to the church. The idea manifestly is, that the continuance of
punishment after its proper object is accomplished, is productive of more
evil than good. Hence the Lord declares by his prophet, “ I will not con-
tend for ever, neither will I be always wroth ; for the spirit should fail be-
fore me, and the souls which I have made.” The apostle admonishes his
brethren to copy this divine example, and for the same reason ; and then
he adds, “ Wherefore ” —in view of the evil which would result from the
continuance of punishment—“l beseech you that ye would confirm your love
toward him.” Let it be permanent; and let it be manifested by unmistake-
able signs. The reference is probably to some public act of restoration to the
fellowship of the brotherhood.—ln the epistle of James, v. 19, 20, we read:
“ Brethren, if any of you ” —any of the brotherhood—“ do err from the
truth, and one convert him, let him know that he which converteth the sin-
ner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.” The erring one is a brother; the conversion is a re-
claiming, a bringing back from the pit into which he has fallen. The issue
is glorious—a soul is saved from death, and a multitude of sins hidden : not
of him who restores, but of him who is restored, and washed in the all-
cleansing blood of Jesus.—The apostle Jude urges upon the brotherhood
this great work of restoring in the spirit of meekness, “ And of some have
compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.”—Thus Jesus
and his apostles sought, in the spirit of meekness, to raise the fallen, to re-
claim the erring, to restore the sinning members of the family to peace, joy,
usefulness, and holiness. They neither said, nor taught others to say, let
those who have sinned go on in their sin, and those who have wandered
stray further off ; but they sought, in the spirit of meekness, to restore*
and they have left to the Christians of all time an example worthy of imita-
tion. Acting as they did, and manifesting the same kind and meek spirit,
ours shall be the upward joy that flows from the knowledge of souls being
saved, of guilty hearts being turned from sin to Christ—of brethren wounded,
bruised, broken, and cast out, being restored to the brotherhood. Some joy
when a brother trips, and falls ; be it our joy when the fallen brother is
raised, and readjusted.


Notice the motive by which this duty of restoring the fallen brother is
enforced—“ Considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.” The apostle,
you observe, changes his manner of address : he changes from the plural to
the singular, and suddenly appeals to each and every one of the spiritual—
‘‘Considering thyself, lest thou also shouldst be tempted.” John Calvin
interprets the words, as a warning against sin in the form of harshness, ex-
ceeding the due limits. The import of the words seems to be: “In dealing with
an erring brother, consider thyself—remember that which has happened to him
who has been overtaken in a fault, may happen to any of you. His case
may be thine; for thou art what thou art only by the grace of Him who is
able to keep thee from falling.—No believer—however great his progress in
the life of God, however great his attainments, however high his standing
among the brotherhood—is exempt from temptation. The statements of God’s
word prove that all believers will have much to tempt them in this present-
time state, enemies encompass them, they are sanctified but in part, they
have not yet attained to the stature of perfect men in Christ, and whatever
their position and circumstances in the church or the world, there are
temptations peculiar to their position and circumstances. In view of all
this, how needful the admonition —“ Consider thyself, lest thou also be
tempted.” John Trapp, one of the old quaint Puritan commentators, m
noticing this part of the text, writes :-“I have known a good old man, saith
Bernard, who, when he heard of any that had committed some notorious
offence, was wont to say with himself, Ille hodie, et ego eras, that is, he fell
to-day so may I to-morrow. And Mr. Bradford set down in his day-book
what good he saw in any man, bewailing the want of it in himself and
praying for more grace; and if he saw or heard of any evil in another, he
noted it, as in danger to do so himself; and still added, Lord have mercy
upon me,” This is the right use to make of other men’s sins ; and if all the
spiritual—each of the Christian brotherhood—would thus act, there would
be less harshness, and anger, and cruelty, and more humility, gentleness,
meekness, and love in our Christian churches.—Such is the first apostolic
injunction. Brothers, if a man—a brother—be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, con-
sidering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
The second injunction in the text is wider in its range. T erse 2—“ Bear
ye one another’s burdens and so fulfil the law of Christ.” Dr. John Eadie,
in his critical exposition of this epistle, remarks on this part of the text—
“ This verse broadens the sphere of duty enjoined in the previous verse;
or it presents that duty in a form not specialized as in the first verse ; the
spirit that restores a fallen brother should pervade ordinary Christian
relations.” The word rendered burden denotes a heavy weight, of trial or
temptation, internal or external, some portion of which is transferable and
can be borne by others. There are burdens which each one must bear for
himself—which are not transferable; and there are burdens which we can
help each other to bear—such as the burden of sorrow, affliction, infirmity,
and poverty. The injunction may be illustrated by a reference to the words
of the apostle in Romans xii., 15, and I. Thessalonians y. 14. In the
former passage he writes —“ Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep


with them that weep.” And in the latter passage he writes—“ Comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.” This is a
very beautiful exhortation. The feeble-minded or faint-hearted are to be
comforted or encouraged, in the spirit of that gracious Saviour who raiseth
them that are bowed down, and giveth rest to the weary and heavy laden;
the weak are to be supported, we are to lay hold of their weakness, sustain
it and strengthen it; and we are to be patient, long suffering toward all;
that is, the weak, the faint-hearted, the suffering, yea all men. Whatever
forms a burden, a heavy weight to our brethren, we are to take upon ourselves
and carry it for them, or with them. In acting thus, in bearing one
another’s burdens, “ye fulfil the law of Christ;’’ or, in so doing, “ye shall
fulfil—fill to brim—the law of Christ.” Dr. Lightfoot renders the clause,
“ye will rigorously fulfil the law of Christ,” the idea of completeness
being contained in the proposition. What is the law of Christ ? The
answer is : The law of mutual love so frequently enjoined and so affection-
ately and impressively enforced by Jesus. “ A new commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you that ye also love one an-
other. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved
you.” This law Jesus himself fulfilled. He took our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses. He ever sympathised with his disciples in their sorrows and
trials, yea, with all men, regarding all with pitying tenderness and love, and
ever seeking to minister to their need; and at last he died, bearing the sins
of humanity. “ The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and our
healing in his stripes.” And any man who, from right motives, and
influenced by the spirit of the loving Jesus, bears the burden of others,
obeys—fulfils this law of love. “He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God,
and God in him.”
Brothers, have you as disciples of Jesus been kept from falling—preserved
steadfast and immovable in the faith. Bless God who has kept you safe
amid temptations. Boast not. Let your grateful acknowledgment ever be,
"By the grace of God lam what I am.” Be gentle and merciful to those
who have fallen, and seek in the spirit of meekness their restoration to the
fellowship of the brotherhood. This duty is neglected by many—be it not
so by you. Labour to bring wandering and lost sheep back to the fold. If
successful in this work of love, great will be your satisfaction and ample
your reward, here and hereafter. And if at any time feelings of enmity
towards the fallen rise in your hearts, and harsh and cruel words are about
to drop from your lips—then consider thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
Remember the words of one of the old English Puritans—“ There is no
salt but may lose his saltness, no wine but may lose his strength, no flower
but may lose his scent, no light but may be eclipsed, no beauty but may be
stained, no fruit but may be blasted, nor soul but may be corrupted.”
Brothers, have you been overtaken in a fault, and brought sorrow,
anguish, and shame to your hearts ? Are you no longer in fellowship with
those who were once your chosen associates and much loved friends and
fellow-workers in the kingdom of God ? Do you feel yourselves outcasts,
forsaken, scorned, despised? Tour condition is sad, your circumstances
Adverse. It is very hard to bear the desertion of friends, and the scorn of


men; and, beyond all, hard to bear the enmity of those who profess to be
the disciples of the meek and gentle Saviour, and yet turn a deaf ear to
your prayer for peace, reconciliation, and forgiveness. But let not despon-
dency crush you. Turn to God. Let your cry be, “ Restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation.” Trust in the Lord Jesus, who despises not any—
who rejects no soul that seeks his grace. Hope on, hope in God, and your
night of weeping will be followed by a morning of song.
“ Have dark clouds thy life o’ershaded ?
Have thy bright hopes waned and faded
In the mist that seemed to shroud from thee the beautiful and fair T
Oh, think I the morning follows night,
Behind the darkest cloud is light—
But never in despair.”
Brothers, are you yet unsaved, with all the guilt of sin uncancelled, all
its pollution still uncleansed ? I bring you glad tidings : God the King, whose
laws you have broken—God the Father, from whom you have wandered,
reveals to you in the Gospel the new and living way of return to God,
holiness, peace, and life. Christ is the way—“ God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.”
Have faith in God. Believe the testimony he hath given concerning his
Bon—Receive, believe in the personal Christ, not in a creed, not in a his-
tory, but in the Christ himself, and thou shalt be saved. Saved I Par-
doned, purified, reconciled, accepted in the Beloved ; and when the earthly
life closes, when time vanishes, and eternity dawns, life shall be yours ;
life in Christ, life with Christ, life enduring as the life of Him who is the
same yesterday, to-day, and for the ages.
CUnon, Muslu, St Co,, Printer*, 72 Little Collinutreet Ka»t, Melbourne.
