





BULLETIN
OF THE
TERRITORY
OF PAPUA
Bulletin, No. 1.
1913.
NOTES
ON THE OCCURRENCE OF
Coal, Petroleum, and Copper in Papua.




Bulletin, No. 1.
NOTES
ON THE OCCURRENCE OF
COAL, PETROLEUM, AND COPPER
IN PAPUA.
By
J. E. CARNE, F.G.S.,
Assistant Government Geologist, New South Wales.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
HONORABLE JOSIAH THOMAS, M-P.,
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA, 1913.
SYDNEY : WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
*43»4 («) 191 S.




CONTENTS.
Introduction.
Chapter I.—Coal in Papua.
pack
1. Previous Mention and Historic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
2. Narrative of the Purari Coal Expedition of 1912 ... ... ... ... ... 8
3. Physical Geography of the Gulf of Papua ... ... ... ... ... ... II
4. Geology of the Western Division of Papua, Previous Mention ... ... ... 16
5. Notes on the Geology of the Route followed by the Purari Coal Expedition of 1912 19
6. Papuan Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Chapter ll.—Petroleum and Natural Gas in Papua.
History of Discovery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Other reported Indications of Petroleum in New Guinea... ... ... ... ... 40
Narrative of Official Examination in February, 1912 ... ... ... ... ... 42
Description of Oil and Gas Occurrences ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Papuan Oil Indications compared with those of Java, Sumatra, and Borneo ... ... 54
Notes on Crude Petroleum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
„ Natural Gas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
~ Origin of Petroleum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
„ Oil-bearing Strata ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
~ Nature of Productive Strata ... ... ...' ... ... ... ... 58
Geological Survey of Petroliferous Areas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Oil Horizons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •.. ••. 61
Leasing Conditions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Drilling Plants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 64
Cost of Drilling Wells ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••. 64
Striking Oil in Wells ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ... ••• 65
Shutting off Water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 66
Flowing Wells ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 67
Precautions against Fire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 68
Labour ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• .•• 69
Petroleum in New Zealand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70
Reported Indications in New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... ... 77
„ „ Queensland ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
~ ~ South Australia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80
„ ~ Western Australia' ... ... ... ... ... ... 81
„ ~ the Northern Territory ... ... ... ... ... ... 42, 82


Chapter lll.—Copper in Papua.
page.
Astrolabe Copper Field, Papua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8.3
Historical Notes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
Composition of the Ores ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
Outlook of the Papuan Copper Industry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88
Register of Mines, alphabetically arranged ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
LIST OF PLATES.
Facing i’a^e
Plate I.—Urania Natives, Kikori Division, Gulf of Papua ... ... ... ... ... 8
~ . IT.—Goaribari Natives, Houses and Canoe, Gulf of Papua ... ... ... ... 8
~ lll.—View on Upper Purari River, Gulf of Papua ... ... ... ... ... 15
~ IV.—Mackay-Little Expedition of 1908 returning down Upper Purari ... ... 15
~ V.—View on Vailala River, showing example of Native Canoe, Gulf Division ... 16
~ Vl.—Kiri Natives, Vailala River, Gulf Division ... ... ... ... ... 16
~ Vll.—Globigerina Limestone (section), Big River, between Curnick and Purari Rivers 23
„ VIII.—-Portion of above enlarged ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
~ IX.—Tertiary Marine Fossils, Dry Creek, Purari River Valley ... ... ... 26
X 26
~ )) )» ), )> ••• ... ... -LI
„ XI, —-Tertiary Leaves, Big River, between Curnick and Purari ... ... ... 26
XII 26
)} Ail -' 33 1) ••• ••• ... ...
„ Xlll.—Tertiary Marine Fossils near Cape Possession, X.W. of Yule Island ... ... 28
XIV os
) - /VJ - v • >5 a » n ...
~ XV.—Contorted Tertiary Strata, Pago Pago Point, Port Moresby ... ... ... 29
„ X VI. Plan of Malay Archipelago, showing Geographical Relationship of Dutch-Indies
Oil Fields to New Guinea and Australia ... ... ... ... ... 31
~ XVll.—Dubu (Men’s House), Maipua, Purari Delta, Papua ... ... ... ... 42
„ XVIII.—View on Vailala River near mouth—Natives trying new Canoe ... ... 42
~ XlX.—Vailala River Mouth—Natives and Canoes ... ... ... ... ... 44
„ XX. —Vailala Natives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
XXI. — Sago Palms, Upper Purari River ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
~ XXll.—Preparing Sago, Upper Purari River ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
~ XXlll.—Akauda Main Gas Spring, Vailala River ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
~ XXlV.—Akauda Gas Spring, Vailala River ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
„ XXV.— „ „ „ 50
~ XXVl.—General View of the Twingon Oil Reserve, Burma ... ... ... ... 60
~ XXVII. —View of Los Angelos Oil-field, California ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
~ XXVlll.—Section of Orbitoides-Limestone between Dubuna and Bootless Inlet, 18 miles
from Port Moresby ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
XXIX. —Portion enlarged ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87


LIST OF FIGURES IN TEXT.
PAGE.
No. I.—Section of Strata, Curnick River ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
„ 2. „ „ Cache Creek ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
3 94
» 3 5 5) 5 5 •• ••• ••• ••• •••
„ 4. „ Limestone Cliffs, Cache Creek ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
~ 5. ~ Strata at Kerema... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
~ 6. Plan and Section of Coal Creek Coal Seams, Purari River ... ... ... ... 31
„ 7.—Section of Strata at Oil Creek, Akauda, Yailala River, at scene of first oil discovery in
Papua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
„ B.—ldeal Section of Symmetrical Anticline ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
~ 9. ~ Asymmetrical Anticline ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
„ 10.—Section across Sanga Sanga Oil-field, East Borneo ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
~ 11.— „ Ledok Oil-field, East Java ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
~ 12.—Sketch Section of Sanga Sanga productive Anticline, Borneo ... ... ... ... 62
~ 13.—Plan of Astrolabe Copper Lodes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
~ 14.—Section showing developments at Anaconda Lode, Astrolabe ... ... ... ... 92
~ 15.—Plan of Dubuna Lodes ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... 94
„ 16. —Section of Dubuna No. 2 Lode developments ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
„ 17— „ No. 1 „ 97
~ 18. —Plan and Section of Elvina Lode developments ... ... ... ... ... ... 99
~ 19.—Section of Hector Lode ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
~ 20. Section of Laloki Lode ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
~ 21.—Plan and Sections of Mount Diamond Lode ... ... ... ... ... ... 108
~ 22.—Section of Pari Lode ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
~ 23.—Plan of Tobo Lode ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 110
LIST OF SECTIONS OF OIL-FIELDS AND COAL EXPEDITION ROUTE.
Opposite Page
I.—Geological Sections across the Petroleum-hearing beds of Moeara Enim, Sumatra... ... 58
ll.—Geological Sections in the Baku Oil-field, Bussia ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
111. —Section along route of Purari Coal Expedition of 1912. (Appendix).
Map showing route of Purari Coal Expedition of 1912, and distribution of Coal, Gas, and Oil in
the Purari and Yailala River districts, Papua. (Appendix).




INTRODUCTION.
In the following pages the aim of the Writer has been to present a connected history of discoveries to date
in regard to the special subjects dealt with.
Personal observations—especially concerning the recently discovered coal, gas, and oil—are
necessarily brief. Time, so essentia] tor geological investigation, was curtailed in the first instance by
limited food supply, which had to be transported on men’s backs.
In a foodless region—such as the rugged plateau between the upper Curnick and Purari rivers—
additional carriers would not have relatively increased the stock, each man consuming an average load
in three or four weeks. Only by a system of relays at the beginning can the necessary excess be carried
forward to cover a longer period.
In the second instance, examination of the gas and oil region was restricted to a short interval
between departure and the expected return of the Government steamer “ Merrie England,” rendered
necessary by an outbreak of dysentry amongst the first contingent of carriers.
A second brief visit to this interesting locality was duo to the courtesy of Mr. L. J. Cowley,
General Manager of the British New Guinea Development Company, with whom, on the return journey
from the Kikori in the Company’s steamship “ Wakefield,” several fresh groups of gas vents were examined
between the Purari and Vailala, and a second visit paid to those first discovered. On this occasion also
time was limited by necessity of avoiding detention of a vessel laden with carriers and labour recruits.
The possibilities of a valuable national asset in oil in Papua are great, the local indications
comparing favourably with those of the nearest commercial oil fields in the Malay Archipelago, which are
geologically and structurally identical. However favourable the natural indications may be, upon the
drill alone depends proof of workable oil fields.
So far as discovery of surface manifestations has proceeded, the gas and oil belt embraces an area
of about 200 square miles between the Yailala and Purari Rivers and the intervening coast line.
The absolute necessity for adequate provision against water and the possibility of an oil “ gusher ”
in a prospecting bore renders drilling a costly undertaking, even under more favourable conditions of
approach and transport than those of the Papuan oil region.
It is, moreover, imperative that the local anticlinal trend lines should be accurately determined and
mapped as a guide to drillers. Geological survey should precede or at least proceed pari passu with
drilling already decided on.
Boring plants should be of sufficient power to drill at least 2,500 feet, or more if necessary. As
dry wells are not uncommon in productive fields, failure of several preliminary bores should not cause
premature abandonment. Further effort, however, should be contingent on previous careful survey.
Of the coal resources of Papua, so far as ascertained, a favourable opinion cannot be entertained
altogether apart from inaccessibility and thinness of the seams. The coal is of Tertiary age, and of the
“ brown-coal ” variety, con taining a high percentage of constitutional moisture. The ash contents are
low, and under more favourable conditions a useful local fuel might be prepared by briqueting and
drying.


Hie prospects of the Astrolabe Copper-field are encouraging, and should induce further prospecting.
The more permanent sulphide ores below superficial zones of enrichment, though of low grade, are
highly basic, and therefore amenable to rapid and economical semi-pyritic smelting. Moreover, the extreme
furnace concentration involved in production of high-grade matte from this class of ore brings the small
gold and silver contents within range of profitable electrolytic extraction.
The most urgent need of the field is extended prospecting in the lower levels of the principal ore
bodies to determine reserves.
The 'Writer desires to express appreciation of the courtesy and assistance received from the Secretary
for External Affairs in the Commonwealth of Australia ; the Lieutenant-Governor of Papua and his
personal Staff; and the heads and members of the various Government Departments at Port Moresby.
To Mr. L. E. Henderson, R.M. ; Mr. L. N". Brown, A.H.M., and Mr. H. J. Ryan, A.8.M., thanks
are due for assistance rendered in the Gulf and Kikori Divisions, and for much kindly hospitality.
To his colleagues of the Purari Coal Expedition, the Hon. W. J. Little, of the Papuan Legislative
Council, and Mr. G. H. Massy-Baker, A.R.M., Daru, especial thanks are due for excellent camaraderie
and assistance.
To his departmental colleagues, Mr. W. S. Dun, Palaeontologist, Mr. O. Trickett, L.S., Draftsman,
Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye, Mr. H. P. White, and Mr. W. A. Groig, Analysts and Assayers, and Mr.
G. W. Card, Curator, the Writer is indebted for determination of fossils, drafting, assays, and analyses,
and petrological examinations respectively.
To Mr. D. Mackay, organiser of the Purari Expedition of 1908, Mr. D. McDonald, of Yailaia,
and the late Mr. E. McGowan, of Port Moresby, and Professor W. G. Woolnough, the 'Writer is indebted
for the photographs bearing their names.
Owing to an inherent defect in a new camera, the plates exposed on the recent expedition were all
failures.


CHAPTER I.
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.
COAL IN PAPUA.
PREVIOUS MENTION AND HISTORIC.
In discussing a specimen of jet from New Guinea before the Linnean Society of New South Wales* Baron
Miklouho Maclay —whose personal acquaintance with the .island was extensive —stated that, “as far as he
knew, the first discovery of coal in New Guinea was mentioned in the report of Van Deldon as far back
a 5.1828. Further details about the same coal on the same island, Lakahia, on the north-west coast of New
Guinea, are to be found in the account of the expedition of the Dutch Government steamer ‘ Etna ’
in 1858, edited by the lloyal Institute in 1862 (on pages 131-143). The opinion of the Scientific
Commission of the ‘ Etna ’ is that the coal on the island Lakahia belongs to a recent formation, and is a
‘lamellated ’ (blatter) coal.”
Probably the first sample of a carbonaceous mineral substance from Southern New Guinea was
that obtained by Signor L. M. D’Albertis, who made three expeditions into the interior from 1875 to 187 7.
Professor Liversidge, who examined the explorer’s mineral collections, described the samples as follows:—■
“ Lignite , Yarn Island—[Daru. —J.E.C.] —3 miles from the main land of New Guinea ; of a brown
colour; with lamellar structure, where weathered, somewhat like dysodile; exhibits a woody structure;
gives a brown streak or powder; breaks with a well-marked conchoidal fracture, yielding a black lustrous
surface; burns with difficulty, without flame; emits but little smell; and leaves a dark grey ash, very
bulky and resembling a wood ash. It is not sectile, but flies off in powder before the knife.”f
In 1883, Mr. Alexander Morton recorded a deposit of plumbago —[graphite.—J.E.C.]—from Port
Moresby district, which he described as of inferior quality and probably valueless except to the natives
who occasionally use it as a pigment. |
During the Writer’s recent visit to New Guinea he was informed of the local graphite (1) and shown
a sample which proved to be oxide of manganese. A similar specimen in the local museum was labelled
“graphite,”
It is, however, evidently present in the older rocks of the Territory, for . Mr. A. Gibb
Maitland, F.G.S., records that:—“The presence of graphite has been demonstrated over nearly the
of the whole known portion of the Possession, but always as an accessory constitutent of the schists ; in
* Proc. Linn Sop. N.S. Wales, Vol. 10,1885-1886, p, 853. t “ Minerals of New South Wales,” 1888, p. 250,
1 Proc. Eoy, Geoqrr. Soc. of Australasia, 1883, p 69.
42124—A


some eases it occurs in such quantity as to give a distinctive character to the rocks. In the most
graphitic of the schists, although the quantity is proportionately large, to remove the impurities (chiefly
quartz) by washing or other means, would be too costly to be remunerative.”*
In ISBS an expedition, organised, by the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, discovered a
thick seam of lignite in the bank of the Strickland River—a tributary of the Fly. The leader—Captain
H. C. Everill—in his report to the Society,f also mentioned lignite in the channel debris of the Cecilia
River, and noted that the river gravels differed in his opinion somewhat from those of the Strickland, in
that there “appeared to be more of the lignite or coal mixed with the stone, and the magnetic iron sand
was much purer and heavier.”
The Strickland River lignite was examined by Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, F.L.S., F.G.S., Government
Geologist of New South Wales, | who described it in the following terms:—■
“In places along the banks of the Strickland Rivera thick seam of lignite, or brown coal, was
discovered, of which samples were collected. The lignite is not of commercial value; it more closely
resembles that found in the Tertiary formation at Kiandra, in New South Wales, and at Lai Lai, in
Victoria, than the brown coal of New Zealand.”
In 1890 Sir William McGregor, in a despatch giving details of an expedition undertaken to explore
the course of the Fly River and some of its affluents, dated February 4, 1890,|| states that above the Palmer
Junction “ The hills are all sandstone and the alluvial soil of the banks contains much more sand than
humus. About half-a-mile above our camp —[30 miles from Palmer Junction and 560 from the mouth of the
river.—J.E.C.] —there is a spot on the right bank of the river where the bank is about 35 feet high, the upper
portion consisting of sandstone; then conies a seam of lignite 0 inches thick, then 10 feet of sandstone to
the water’s edge. ...... At some places the forms of trees are distinctly
distinguishable in it. It is merely a layer of vegetable matter—trees, leaves, Ac.—which has been
deposited recently and covered over by sand, which has got a certain amount of cohesion, so as now to
form a kind of soft rock, easily disintegrated.”
Sir William began the ascent of the Fly River in November, 1889, and reached his highest point—
-610 miles—on the 23rd January, 1890, without recording any further indications of coal or coaly
substances; though it is highly probable that such will be found in its watershed.
The first reference to the brown coal of the Purari River was by the same authority, who began
the ascent of that stream in December, 1893, and reached a point 130 miles from its mouth before
progress was blocked by the increasing ruggedness of the channel bed. The presence of the coal was
adventitious, as will be seen from the following extract: —“ In descending the river the presence of coal
was detected at Abukiru Island. The analyses given in the appended report by Dr. Jack (Appendix BB)
show that the coal is of excellent quality. There has been, so far, no opportunity of making a proper
examination of the district. Our knowledge at present is confined to this : that there is a largo
sandstone area there, and that it contains good coal.”^
In his detailed report he gave further particulars of the discovery;—“On the. 29th—[January, 1894.
J.E.C.] —a discovery of much interest was made. In the early morning I preceded the launch to the
Island of Abukiru—some half score of miles above the Purari bifurcation. While washing the horn with
* Ann, Rept. British New Guinea, year ending June 30th, 1892, p. 81. t Proo. Roy. Geogr. Soc. of Australasia, 111-V, 1888, p 182.
X Trans, and Proc. Roy. Geogr. Soe. of Australasia, 111 and IV, p. 205, II Ann. Rept. on British New Guinea, July 1, 1889 to June 30th,
1800, j>. 68. I Ann Kept. British New Guinea, year ending Jqne 30th, 1894, p. xvi.)


which to recall the boat’s crew on the appearance of the launch, I noticed a small black, glistening, speck
in the sand ; when cleaned it looked like coal ; this led to further search, when larger bits were found ;
and at the upper end of the island Mr. Moreton found enough in a few minutes to fill a raining dish. In
the sandstone of the main range something like coal had already been collected, but the pieces on
Abukiru Island were pure coal detached from sandstone altogether. As the coal was in sharp, clean,
crystalline masses in some of the specimens it does not appear likely that the pieces could have travelled
far. I am forwarding specimens for examination, and will, in a separate communication, submit proposals
for a skilled examination of the field, as the presence of coal there may exercise a great influence on the
future of this country.”*
The river-borne coal pebbles collected at Abukiru Island by Sir William McGregor’s party were
as already stated, referred to Dr. R. L. Jack, F.G.S., F.R.G.S., then Government Geologist of Queensland,
who, in an appendix to the above report of the Administrator, thus describes them: —“ From the
condition and appearance of the coal specimens A to V, I infer that they formed part of the shingle of a
river, and that none of them have been taken from a bed of coal in situ. The specimens are so much alike
in composition that they may all have come from a single seam ; or at least from seams of the same
geological age. Neither the labels nor the specimens themselves afford any hint as to whether the coal
belongs to the same formation as the green sandstones and limestones.”f
Remarking on the quality of the coal, Mr. J. B. Henderson, Queensland Government Analyst,
says ;—“ The composition of the coal has probably been altered by long exposure to running water and air,
so that it would be impossible to judge accurately of the coal in the seam from which this was derived.
Still it seems evident from the analyses, which show the samples to come from different parts of the same
seam, that tin 1 coal will be a good one for heating purposes. None of the samples gave a coherent coke y
and the pyrites in “K ” might affect its commercial value. The presence of the pyrites points to its
existence in the seam, and although it is not present in the other samples in quantity, it may have
weathered out.”| ■
To the above, Ur. Jack added : —“ I may add that the large percentage of “ moisture ” would appear
to point to lignite. The coal, however, does not resemble lignite in any other respect, and is very different
from the Yaru Island lignite described by Professor Liversidgo (Min. of New South Wales, 1888, p. 250),
and I believe, with Mr. Henderson, that the large amount of moisture is accidental. The coal, on the
whole, looks more like splint than any other variety.”] |
The ten water-worn pebbles of coal, submitted to separate analysis by Mr. Henderson, yielded the
following average composition :
Moisture 17’5 per cent.
Volatile hydrocarbons ... ... ... ... ... 37'2 „
Fixed carbon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 - 6 ~
Ash 6'6 „
99 - 9 per cent.§
The expedition organized by Mr. D. Mackay in 1908—which included the Hon. W. J. Little, of
the Papuan Legislative Council, Mr. A. E. Pratt, surveyor, and Mr. Eichorn—had for one of its objects the
* Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending June 30th, 1594, p. 25. t Ibid., p. 02. %lbid, \\ Ibid. [The high percentage of
moisture in farad coal has since been proved constitutional.— J.K.C.) §lbicl, p. 93, 4.
3
Coal in Hie western Division of I-apua.


location of the seam or seams from which the nodules were derived, but was unable to find Abukiru
Island, and came to the conclusion that it had either been entirely removed, or added to the mainland
by the filling of an intervening channel.
This expedition, however, was successful in finding coal seams in situ higher up the river, in a
tributary—Coal Creek —and at several points on the main western branch of the Purari, which it followed
for a considerable distance above McGregor’s furthest point.
From an epitome of Mr. Mackay’.s Journal the following description of the coal-bearing region is
taken ;—“ An important discovery of coal in situ, specimens having been previously seen in many of the
creeks. It appeared to be of excellent quality.”
“ Geography and Geology. —The whole of the area explored showed a succession of steep valleys and
knife-topped ridges, with very little level ground, and it was evident that the country is being rapidly
eroded. From McGregor’s furthest to the turning point the prevailing rock is limestone, apparently of
considerable thickness. Coal-bearing sandstone, and slate probably of lower Palteo/.oic age, were also found,
while water-worn pebbles of basalt, probably indicating basalt-capped mountains, were collected in the
Upper Purari. In the opinion of the Rev. J. Milne Curran, who examined the specimens, a faint venation
on a weathered piece of coal possibly indicates Glossopteris, in which case New Guinea coal measures may
prove to be an outlying basin of the Glonsopteris bearing beds of India and Australia.”*
The present Writer subsequently obtained palaeontological evidence from the underclay at Coal
Creek that definitely fixed the Tertiary age of the coal, as will be seen in another part of this report.
A small sample of coal collected by the Mackay expedition was submitted by the Queensland
Under-Secretary for Mines to Mr. J. B. Henderson for analysis, but there is no evidence to show from
what particular locality it came.
The analysis, No. 99, dated 14th July, 1909, showed the following composition :
Moisture ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 - G per cent.
Volatile hydrocarbons ... ... ... ... ... 44'1 „
Fixed carbon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4PI ~
Ash 4-2 „
lOO'O per cent.
In reference to this sample, Mr. Henderson reported to the Under Secretary under date
July 29th, 1909
“ I have the honor to report that the sample of coal referred to in the enclosed certificate was
crushed small when received from the Geological Survey Office, so I cannot report on its physical
condition. The proportion of water present is too high for a good ccal, hut this might bo accounted
for by the sample coming from close to the surface. It is not likely to bo mere adventitious moisture
in a sample carried from New Guinea ; it would surely have become air-dried during that time.
“ The coal is bituminous, and the small proportion of ash present would indicate a coal of good
commercial value if the moisture were present in smaller proportion.”
The approximate position of the coal in Coal Creek, about 8 miles above its junction with the
Purari River, is longitude 144° 30' E., latitude 6° 50' S.f
he Geographical Journal, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 5, November, 1911, pp. 4I&MS7. t Ann. Kept. Territory of Papua, year ending June SOUi 1909, p. 12S.
4
BULLETIN OP THE TEIiBJTOUY OP PAPUA.


At the end of this year several applications were received hy the Warden at Kereina to prospect
for coal in lands adjoining the headwaters of the Purari River, but none were executed.
Following on the discoveries made by the Mackay-Little expedition, a request was made hy the
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth, to the Premier of New South Wales on 27th September, 1910, for
the services of one of the Department of Mines geological staff to examine and report on the coal-field.
The Writer was selected for the duty.
In November, 1910, however, the Hon. Staniforth Smith, Administrator, and at the time Acting
Lieutenant-Governor of Papua, started for a preliminary examination of the field, accompanied by Mr.
L. L. Bell, now Chief Inspector, Department of Native Affairs, and Mr. A. E. Pratt, Field Surveyor; but
apparently no serious attempt was made to reach it, though coal was discovered in the Upper Kikori and
some of its tributaries, doubtless marking a continuation of the seams outcropping in the upper waters of
the western branch of the Purari, discovered by the Mackay-Little expedition of 1908.
From an account of the expedition furnished hy the Hon. Staniforth Smith to the Minister for
External Affairs* the following references to coal have been extracted ;
“ About 6 miles from where we left the boats —[on the Kikori. —J.E.C ] —a fairly large block of very
water-worn black coal was found in a small creek. No other coal was seen in this locality. If a good
coal seam could be located here it would he, I believe', more accessible than that found on the Purari,
although three small rapids are encountered on the Kikori before reaching our landing place.”
“ That night—[2oth January, 1911.—J.E.C.] —we camped on a creek that was strewn with lumps of
hard, black, shining coal; this we named Coal Creek. We followed this watercourse on 22nd January,
still seeing boulders of coal scattered about.”
Describing the geological features of the country 7 passed through, Mr. Smith states : —“ A noticeable
and interesting change in the country occurred when we were approaching the head waters of the Kikoii
River. In the beds of the creeks were found limestone, sandstone, mudstone and conglomerate, but no
volcanic rocks. The limestone contained many fossils, and a block of sandstone was secured which was
literally packed with clearly defined sea shells of various kinds. Unfortunately, all these specimens, as
well as others previously obtained, were lost in the raft disaster, and the effort to definitely 7 ascertain the
geological age of the region was frustrated. Associated with the sedimentary rocks were blocks of bright,
hard coal, belonging to the Palaeozoic period (carboniferous and permo-carboniferous); the fossilized beds of
limestone probably overlie or are interbedded with the seams of coal.” [There is no reasonable doubt that
the coal referred to is geologically identical with that of the Purari, and of Tertiary age.—J.E.C.]
Mr. Smith expressed the opinion that “ There is every probability of large beds of good coal being
found on the borders of the great plateau, although I do not think that any mineral of value will be found
in the elevated region caused by the upheaved coral beds. Coal has been found on the upper waters of
the Purari by the Mackay expedition, and it has been found by us, both on the upper and lower waters
of the Kikori River.
“ On the upper waters of the Kikori there is undoubtedly a very extensive field of excellent coal.
Unfortunately, the large number of specimens we were bringing down were lost when the raft capsized.
We followed down a creek for some days that brought us to the Kikori. Everywhere the bed was strewn
with lumps of good-looking, bright, hard coal, and for about 15 miles down the Kikori coal was seen in
* Ann. Kept. Territory of Papua, year ending June SOtli, 1911, pp. 1C5,106.
5
Coal In the Western division of EArtlA.


almost every little creek and waterway, as well as on the banks of the river. To attempt to develop this
field by the Kikori waterway is evidently impossible, as, for 100 miles, the river is one succession of rapids,
whirlpools, and gorges. There is no reason why the coalfield should not extend further west ; in fact, a
s r am of coal was seen on the western side of the river ; and, if so, it might be worked from the
Strickland River, which, it was estimated, could not bo more than 20 miles distant. The coal we found
on the lower Kikori was one isolated lump considerably weathered. However, as the creek was a very
small one, running north-west for only a few miles, it is evident that the seam from which it came could
not be far off.*
Mr. L. L. Bell also contributed an interesting account of this expedition to the Victorian
Geographical Journal (Yol. XXVIII, 1910-11, pp. 31-G3), but did not touch on the geology of the country
passed over.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, Lieutenant-Colonel J. 11. P. Murray, C. 8., was the first
to entertain the idea of a possibly more accessible route to the Purari coal via the Kikori and Seribi, and
in 1910 climbed Aird Hills, in the Kikori delta, with the object of viewing the intervening country.!
This route was successfully 7 tested by the Hon. W. J. Little, who, on the 17th March, 1911,
accompanied by Messrs. Evans and Stanton, started on a further examination of the Purari coalfield.
With twenty 7 native carriers, they ascended the Kikori to the junction of the Seribi, thence up the latter
to the junction of the Curnick, where they formed a depot, and hid their whaleboat. From this point the
expedition proceeded on foot, striking a north-easterly 7 course'for the Upper Purari, eventually reaching
their objective and securing large samples of coal. With the exception of one carrier, killed by 7 the Purari
natives, the party returned safely and expeditiously to the coast.
The samples taken from the two outcrops at Coal Creek were brought to Sydney by 7 Mr. Evans. The
Under Secretary for Mines having authorised analysis in the departmental laboratory?, each sample was
carefully 7 averaged, after close examination for identifiable plant remains. Plant stems were abundant
on the bedding planes, but no recognisable forms could be distinguished. The coal had all the appearance of
“ brown coal,” with highly bituminous layers Owing to drying on transit, it had to a marked degree,
exfoliated along the planes of deposition. Large average samples were carefully 7 taken from the whole of
each parcel, and these were carefully ground and mixed before selecting portions for analysis.
The composition of the coal is revealed in the following results, obtained by 7 Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye,
F.C.S., F.1.C., Departmental Analyst and Assay r er :
No. 1,874. From 12 ft. seam,J Purari River, Papua:
Hygroscopic moisture ... ... ... ... ... 18*89 per cent.
Volatile hydrocarbons ... ... ... ... ... 44 - 87 ~
Fixed carbon... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33'39 „
Ash 2-85 „
100-00
Sulphur in coal ... ... ... ... ... ... 0‘322 per cent.
Specific gravity ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-323 ~
No true coke formed ; only a loose pulverulent mass left on applying the coking test.
Ash ; Buff coloured, granular.
* Ann. Kept, Territory of Papua, year ending 1 June 30th, 1011, p. 170. + Ibid., year ending June 30th, 1910, p. 17. J Subsequently found to
be less than 3 ft. thick.—J. K, C.
6
bulletin op the territory op parla.


No. 1,87/5. From 3 ft. seam, Purari River, Papua :
Hygroscopic moisture ... ... ... ••• 2079 per cent.
Volatile hydrocarbons ... ... ... ... ... 4073 ~
Fixed carbon... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 - 5 o „
Ash 393 „
100-00
Sulphur in coal ... ... ... "... 1‘323 per cent.
Specific gravity .... ... ... ... ... 1'339 ~
No true coke formed ; only a loose pulverulent mass left on applying the coking test.
Ash ; Buff colour, granular.
Mr. Mingaye added the following note to his report :
“ The samples may be described as lignite, and are of litt'e value in their present state for commercial
uses. The question of crushing, drying, and briquetting the fine coal with 7or 8 per cent,
of tar might, perhaps, bo taken into consideration if the coal deposit is not too far from the coast.
The briquettes would bo of good value—the ash in the coal being very low.”
Of the above expedition, the Hon. Mr. Little published a brief report,* from which the following
is extracted :—“We continued in the coal seams (two) discovered by Mackay and myself on a previous
expedition; we made an examination of the seams and found that one was 12 ft. thick. We bagged
some samples, and then made a start on the return journey. I decided to travel south from here,
following the trend of the coal, as, if we could trace the coal to a point near the coast, it would make an
immense difference in its value. My anticipations were confirmed, as we discovered a 3 ft. seam out-
cropping (with the certainty of other seams beneath this seam) 10 miles from our camp on the Seribi,
where there is a good, deep, waterway', which leads to, I believe, a good, deep, harbour on the coast. This,
without doubt, is part of the same coal beds we discovered on the Purari, as we traced the strata, which
consist of limestone, sandstone, and shales, to the seam.”
Mr. J. P. Hennelly, Warden, Kerema, Gulf Division, reported : “ Coal prospecting has
engaged the attention of Messrs. Mawsonand Charpentier, who were for a few weeks exploring theKeuru
Hills country—[between Kerema and Vailala. —J.E.C.] —during February' and March. Mr. Charpentier
reported finding traces of coal, but not of commercial value. It is alleged that seams of a few feet in
thickness of a sort of bituminous coal were discovered, but it was of too recent origin to be of any use.
The native referred to—[Maipua. —J.E.C.] —in connection with reported gold discovery was alleged to have
discovered largo seams of coal about two or three years ago, but, although he was with Messrs.
Mawson and Charpentier, ho was unable to identify the spot again.”!
In Dutch Now Guinea —on the Iwaka lliver —coal is reported to be plentiful, but is of soft
quality', and forms a poor fuel, j
At a lecture delivered by the Hon. Staniforth Smith, before the Royal Geographical Society,
on his explorations in Papua, Captain 0. G. Rawlings stated that “ the coal discovered by' his party in
the Mirnika district —[Dutch New Guinea. —J.E.C.] —and by- Dr. Lorent/,, about 600 miles westward,
instead of being hard like the coal described by Mr. Smith —[from the Kikori Watershed.—J E.C.] —was
soft and useless.”);
* Ami. Rent. Territory of Parma, year ending June 30th, 1911, p. 203. t Ann. Rcpt. Territory of Papua, year ending 30lh June, 1911, p. 27,
£ The Geographical Journal, XXXVIII, No. 3, September, 1911, p. 248. § Ibid., XXXIX, No. 4, April, 1912, p. 332.
7
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF I'AT'UA.


Pursuant to the arrangement made’m'October, 11910, the "Writer left for Papua on December 30th,
1911, to join an official expedition to the Purari Coalfield, then being arranged under the supervision of
the Lieutenant-Governor. Its personnel embraced the Hon. W. J. Little, leader; Mr. G. H.
Massy-Baker, Assistant Resident Magistrate, Daru, in command of the native constabulary and carriers ;
the Writer; seven native police, and thirty-five carriers ; a total strength of forty-five.
After unavoidable delays, caused by sickness of the first selected contingent of carriers, a start
was made from the mouth of the Kikori River on the 18th March.
After successfully accomplishing its object, the expedition returned to Port Moresby on 2nd June
—all well.
Its success was practically due to the foresight and bushmanship of the leader. Mr. Little
had studied every requirement in planning the equipment, and allowed for all contingencies of the
commissariat.
The division of labour decided on being :—Mr. Little to pilot the way and supervise track cutting;
Mr. Baker to plot the route, and prepare sections of elevations; and the Writer to study the geology.
NARRATIVE.
The “ Merrie England ” left Port Moresby on the 27th January, 1912, with His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor, onboard ; Mr. H. J. Ryan, A. 11.51.; native police; prisoners, and free labourers, for
the purpose of establishing a new patrol station on the Kikori River. Daru was reached on the 30th, and
Mr. Massy-Baker taken on board. Sailing the following day, Goaribari, at the mouth of the Kikori, was
reached on March Ist. Stores were then unshipped, both for the new station and for the coal expedition,
and conveyed in whaleboats, towed by a launch, 20 miles up stream to the site chosen for the patrol
station to be established under Mr. Ryan,
The launch and whaleboats were returned to the “ Merrie England,” which sailed for Port Moresby
for Mr, Little, the Writer, and the coal expedition carriers and police, who joined the ship on February
Ith, and reached Goaribari on the 13th instant, after a brief call at Kerema.
Unfortunately, dysentry broke out the following day amongst the natives on board, and on return
of the launch from the new station, it was learned that it had made its appearance there. It was
thereupon decided by His Excellency to return the coal-expedition carriers and police to Port Moresby,
and quarantine them, whilst a fresh contingent was sought at the south-east end of the Territory.
On the return trip, Mr. Little and the "Writer were dropped off Vaimura, in the Purari delta,
joining Mr. L. F. Henderson, resident magistrate, who conducted both to the Vail ala oil indications,
which were examined in the interval.
A fresh lot of carriers having been obtained by Mr. Baker, the “ Merrie England ” arrived with
them at Kerema on the 16th March, with His Excellency also on board, A squad of seven native
police were selected from the Kerema contingent to accompany' the coal expedition. A start was made the
same evening for Goaribari, which was reached the following day. On the 18th, the coal party started
in three whale-boats, towed by a launch, for Kikori Station—about 20 miles up the stream—reaching
there the same night.
8
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


After a day, occupied in getting stores into the whaleboats, Ac., the expedition, in three whaleboats,
continued up stream in tow of a steam launch. Mr. Ilyan, with seven police and fifteen prisoners
accompanying it, to assist in conveying the excess stores as far as possible.
The first camp was pitched at the junction of the Seribi and Curnick, at the site of Mr. Little’s
depot camp on the previous expedition.
The second was pitched a few miles up the Curnick, at a point from which the land journey was
to begin. Rain fell very heavily' during the night, entailing the only disaster that befell the party.
The already swollen river rose suddenly 23 ft. C in. (as afterwards ascertained), swamping one of
the tents containing the carriers’ rice. About 3 ft. further rise would have swamped the entire camp,
though on the highest ground available. An attempt was made next morning to dry the rice ; a
good area of the jungle being foiled and a platform of logs constructed, it was spread out on calico, and
repeatedly stirred. The effort was doomed to failure, rain falling at intervals. Eventually, the whole
had to be dumped into the river, as fermentation had begun.
Finally, it was arranged for Mr. Ryan to return to his station for a fresh supply ; Mr. Baker
to await its arrival ; and the others to start on with the quantity saved.
The following extracts from the Writer’s diary convey'an impression of the method of procedure :
March 25 th. —Mr. Little and the Writer started with thirty-five carriers and four police along the
track cut on the 23rd, at the end of which Mr. Little piloted the track which was cleared by four police in
relays ; scrub knives being used for the purpose. The first day’s packing was, naturally, trying to the
carriers, many altering the adjustment of their loads to what they had been accustomed in their native
habitats ; but soon recognised the advantage of the method adopted in packing stores to the gold-fields in
the Northern Division, which the leader had shown them. The latter left their arms free when climbing
steep ascents, or descending precipitous declivities.
To the Writer fell the duty' of keeping the stragglers moving in the rear.
March 2 6th, —Started at 7.40 a,m. along Curnick River; weather fine. Camped early near river
bank.
March '27th. —-Carriers returned to Whaleboat Camp to bring up the fresh rice supply and the
remainder of the equipment left with Mr. Baker.
March 27th to 29th. —Devoted the three days to examining the vicinity, collecting and packing
fossils, which were hidden until return. Successful in securing a good suite of marine shells in situ, and
in the shingle of the Curnick. Mr. Baker and Mr. Thompson, patrol officer (who returned in place
of Mr. Ryan), arrived at midday on the 29th, bringing the whole of the balance of stores.
March 30th. —The forward party' again moved on, accompanied this time by Mr. Thompson and
his contingent, leaving Mr. Baker to await return of carriers—six days hence. With forty-seven
carriers—the Kikori contingent being especially stalwart—the great bulk of the equipment and provisions
was moved bodily forward. Camped at 4- p.m. on Curnick River.
March 31s<. —Started at 7.15 a.m. Still following Curnick. Camped at 4.10 p.m.
April Ist. —Started at 7.30 a.m. Passed bluff on west bank of river, consisting of sandstone
overlying shales, and shortly afterwards large masses of coarse volcanic agglomerate lying in the stream.
Loose specimen of shale found with perfect impression of Tertiary h af; later on, others in situ. Camped
at 3 p.m.
42124—8
9
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


April ‘ln i. —Started at 7.30 a.in. Followed river channel on loose basalt boulders, constantly
crossing and recrossing stream ; travelling slow and tiring in consequence, smooth boulders affording
treacherous foothold. Passed a good section on right bank, illustrating the geology so far seen.
Fragments of “brown coal ” picked up in river debris. River entered precipitous gorge in massive
agglomerates. For fear of being caught in an impasse, a short retreat was made to an eastern branch,
which led more easterly than the main stream. Shortly, however, it, too, was left, and a course struck
about E. 24° N. A stiff climb followed. Camped at 2 p.m., the carriers being fatigued with the rough
travelling, though the distance was slight.
April 3rd —Mr. Thompson started back with his own and the expedition carriers, eventually
reaching Mr. Baker at Fossil Camp on the sth,
April 3rd, iih, sth, Gth, 7th were devoted to examination of surroundings, etc. Having risen into the
volcanic plateau, no other rocks were visible, nor did a rough scramble down the camp creek afford
further information—the gorge becoming impassable before the basal sedimentary rocks could be reached.
April Bth. —The forward party moved on at 8.45 a.m., leaving Mr. Baker with a couple of lame
carriers, cook-boy, and one policeman. Good travelling, comparatively, for a couple of miles, then a deep
precipitous gorge. On reaching the opposite ridge, after a laborious climb, the descent was just as steep
into another stream, and so it continued throughout the eastward route across the plateau drainage.
Stopped for lunch on a swift and rocky stream of considerable size—-Big River. Drifted brown coal, and
boulders of fine-grained sandstone with well-preserved Tertiary leaves were found amongst the river shingle.
Camped at 4.20 p.m.
April 9th. —Started at 7.45 a.m. To-day’s tramp similar to the previous—up and down the sides
of precipitous gorges, progress in places being extremely difficult, and only accomplished by the aid of
vines and aerial rootlets. Camped at 3.10 p.m.
April 10th and. \lth. —Carriers returned to Mr. Baker on the 10th and the latter arrived with
them on the evening of the 11th.
April 12th. —Forward party got away at 8 a.m. Crossed usual volcanic rocks, at midday descending
into the largest stream since the Curnick (since named the Came by Mr. Baker, with the Lieut.-Governor’s
approval). About 200 yards down stream Mr. Little found his camp of a year ago—the first sign of
his route encountered since leaving the junction of the Seribi and Curnick, This discovery enabled the
position to be fixed in calculating relative distance to the Purari.
April 13th. —At midday the limit of easting was reached at a large stream (since named Cache
Creek) and the course was changed to northerly, following the stream up towards the main coast range.
About 3 miles up stream camp was pitched at 4 p.m.
April I ith. —Carriers returned to Mr. Baker.
April lath. —During the stay in this camp search for fossils was well rewarded, the basal beds of
Cache Creek at this point being sedimentary, agreeing with the sections on the Curnick.
April 16 th. —Mr. Baker arrived with balance of stores to-day, carriers failing to get through to his
camp on the 14th.
April 17th. —Carriers were given a spell. Excess stores, sufficient to take the party 7 back to the
Curnick, were cached here in a specially prepared" depot,
10
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


April 18 th. —The whole strength of the contingent moved on to-day at 7.20 a.m. Limestone cliffs
encountered up stream, then no further trace, as the channel was cut solely in volcanic rocks. Travelling
very difficult over huge boulders, crossing and recrossing of the powerful stream current rendered
necessary by precipitous valley walls. Camped at 2 p.m. at the only possible camping place, preparatory
to ascending the eastern valley wall.
April 19 th. —Mr. Little found a possible track out of the valley after one short block at a precipitous
face of rock. Crossing this valley a little higher up a year ago occupied two and a half days before the
opposite height was reached. After a steep climb of 1,840 feet the eastern ridge was attained about
8 p.m., and camp pitched, where sufficient water for the night was obtained in two small gullies.
April 20 th. —Started at 8 a.m., still rising along the ridge to the main coast range. The shoulder
of Mount Favenc was reached at 5,440 feet above sea-level. Here Mr. Little’s previous track on his
homeward route was struck. It led down an excellent spur on an easy falling grade to the north-east.
Water not being obtainable, a halt was not made until 4 p.m., when camp was pitched, water being found
at some distance down the northern slope of the spur.
April 21si.—Continued descent to Purari; reached level of Sedimentary Series, and later that of a
thin coal seam, loose specimens from which had been noted by the leader on his previous trip; readied
strong stony stream channel at the foot of spur, 3,440 feet below the highest point reached ; camped at
3.45 p.m. llained heavily at night.
April 22nd. —Continued down stream to junction of Coal Creek, which was followed up 3 or
4 miles to site of the coal find of 1908, which was reached about 12.45 p.m.
April 23 rd and 24 th. —Were devoted to opening up the coal outcrops and sampling the seams,
mapping the locality, &c.
April 25 th. —The camp was broken up early —the carriers and some of the police being sent back
to previous camp at foot of spur. Messrs. Little, Baker, and the Writer, three police and two carriers,
in the meantime followed Coal Creek to its junction with the Purari, where the Mackay-Little
Expedition camped in 1908 for some considerable time.
Whilst lunching at the river the party was evidently watched by natives, whose tracks were
frequent and plain; on starting up stream again to reach camp, they came out on points of jungle
fronting the stream, calling loudly. As the previous expedition had suffered from being friendly, no notice
was taken of them, which made them bolder in their approach and louder in their shouting. Being armed
with bows and arrows it was deemed advisable to give them a check. On their next disappearance for the
purpose of making a detour through the jungle to get nearer, the police were made to present arms, and on
their reappearance to fire a volley over their heads, which had the desired effect; they vanished like
magic, and were not further seen. Rain fell heavily at night.
April 26 th. —Started at 7.30 a.m. to ascend the spur to Mount Favenc, a halt being made at the
thin coal seam referred to, which was sampled. Camped for the night at Mr. Little’s highest camp.
April ‘27th. —By the time the descent into Cache Creek was effected it was too late to attempt to
make depot camp down the rugged channel—camp was, therefore, again pitched at the previous site
before the ascent. By the time the tent flies were erected a violent thunder storm brought a deluge in the
11
Coal in the western division of pafuA.


form of a waterfall over the steep cliff, at the foot of which the camp was located, two of the flies were
swamped, and the creek turned to a foaming torrent. After the storm passed the flies were re-pitched,
fresh sites were chosen, but limited space afforded little choice of location.
April 28 th. —An early start was made down the still swollen stream for Cache Camp : the current
taxed the strength of most in negotiating the frequent crossings ; camp was reached about midday, and
the depot found in good order, though a little dampness slightly affected some of the rice mats, the
contents, however, were used at once without loss. Heavy rain fell again at night, causing a flood in the
river. The white members of the party watched until it began to subside—about midnight—not wishing
a repetition of the previous night’s flooding.
April 2sth. —Was occupied drying clothing, preparing packs, etc., for return to the Kikori.
AprU 30 th. —A start was made at 8 a.m.; the flood having subsided, better travelling was made
down Cache Creek to where the track left it. Recent rain made travelling up and down the gorges
very slippery and tiring, but having a cleared track, two of the outward days’ journey wore covered in
one.
May 1 st. —Got away at 7’45 a.m., and reached Came River at mid-day, where trouble was antici-
pated, owing to heavy rain the two previous nights. By holding hands in groups all got over without
mishap—the strong helping the weak in the powerful current. A camp was pitched on the opposite bank,
and the afternoon devoted to search up stream for the source of drift-coal. Its flooded condition
eventually blocked further progress before the seam or seams were located. Camp was reached about
dusk, after a weary struggle.
May 2nd. —The Writer having a stiff knee owing to slipping on a boulder, had, perforce, to rest it
before continuing the journey. Mr. Little, however, with three volunteers from the “boys,” started down-
stream to find the site of his previous coal discovery. After a fatiguing effort, which involved swimming
the stream in several places, he succeeded ; measured the thickness of the seam, and brought back a good
sample. He volunteered to make a second journey in my company in the afternoon, but further strain
on the injured knee would have meant delay, and rations were getting very short. Very heavy rain fell
during the night, swelling the river to a flood ; fortunately, the party had avoided any risk on this
account by camping on the homeward bank.
May 3rd. —Got away at 7‘30 a.m., and made good headway, covering a previous three days’
journey by 4'30 p.m.
May ith. —Started at 7'45 a.m. and again covered a prior three-days’ journey. Rain fell as usual
at night, and unfortunately continued throughout the day. In fact, for the next three weeks rain fell
every day. In consequence, innumerable leeches of all sizes—from mere threads to large plump animals,
rendered life a torment. Dropping from the foliage, climbing from the ground, invading one’s clothing,
and circumventing leg guards and tightly-laced boots. Their enormous power of contraction and expansion
enabled large individuals to pass through openings altogether disproportionate to their normal bulk.
A halt for meals or camping was seemingly a concerted signal for advance of the enemy ; whole
brigades charging on common centres occupied by humans. The constant vigilance, and as constant
discovery of blood-thirsty scouts, confessedly got on one’s nerves. The ever-present thought in the Writer’s
mind was—the fate of a solitary individual, rendered helpless by accident under such conditions.
12
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PABtiA.


The bite of a leach especially in walking—is not noticed as one struggles through rain and mud;
but later it forms an irritable sore, which, if chafed, unconsciously or intentionally, develops a running
wound not unlike the prevalent “Scrub Itch,” which attacks most jungle travellers. During this day’s
tramp, which necessitated frequent crossing, and sometimes following, the channel of the Curnick, the
party had to contend with a powerful current. Fortunately, we were not aware that a bigger Hood was
closely following, for within half-an-hour of camping for the night the river came down a banker.
May sth. —Whaleboat Camp was reached at I'4o‘p.m. in heavy and continuous rain. Contrary to
the expectation of Mr. Little, the whaleboat from the new station on the Kikori was not at the camp —a
disappointment, because of shortness of supplies, principally for the natives. The non-appearance of the
whaleboat was due, however, to an alteration of the date agreed upon, when Mr. Thompson returned with
the Kikori contingent.
May 6th. —lt being imperative that some of the parly should reach Kikori station to hasten the
departure of the whaleboat and stores, the “ Mailo ” boys were set to build a raft, the “ Buna Bay ” and
“ Samarai ” boys to cut “rattan” (climbing palm), that wonderfully efficient substitute for rope and twine
which enters so largely into all native building and construction. The rest of the carriers were set by
Mr. Baker to make sago, under the direction of the “ Kiwai ” policemen, from palms noticed near by. Rain
fell heavily all day and night, but good progress was made', and by night the “ Mailo ” boys had turned out
a serviceable raft. It was constructed of green logs, 18 ft. by about 15 in. from which the bark was
removed. The timber was chosen by the natives because of its buoyancy. The four logs were placed
to give a width of 8 feet. Five cross saplings, let into grooves, were set athwart the logs and securely
bound with vine, at equal distances. On the latter a platform of thin saplings, from 1 in. to 2 in.
diameter, placed close together lengthways, was constructed, which formed the deck of the raft. Paddles
were chopped from a light white wood to aid the current drift, which was about 3 miles an hour.
May 7th. —Mr. Little, the Writer, and seven boys—three of whom were police—started at 7 - 20 a.m.
this morning down-stream, with about 2 in. of freeboard, providing the raft was trimmed. Rain
continued all day. Natives were seen along the Seribi, but no notice was taken of their calls, as they are
not yet regarded as friendly by the Kikori Magistrate. Continuous effort was made to avoid “swirls,” or
eddies, and “ back-washes,” which was possible in daylight with vigorous paddling, but in the darkness of
night a “ swirl ” was entered, and three complete circles made before the paddles overcame the pull of the
eddy. It was at first proposed to tie-up for the night, but as all was going well (though the darkness was
almost impenetrable owing to rain) the drift was continued until the welcome light of the new station,
which had been erected during our absence, broke through the gloom about 9 - 30 p.m. The Magistrate
(Mr. H. J. Ryan), sent the whaleboat, under Mr. Thompson, to tow the raft to the landing-place, and soon
the white men were receiving a warm welcome from their countrymen in this isolated region, and a
comfortable camp under a hospitable roof. The distance covered in the raft down the three rivers—
Curnick, Seribi, and Kikori—is estimated at about 35 miles. Slender meals were cooked on the raft for
all hands, on a flattened biscuit tin.
May Bth. —Mr. Ryan despatched the whaleboat up-stream early next morning to bring back the
rest of the Expedition. After two days’ strenuous pull against the strong flood current, Whaleboat Camp
was reached at 11 p.m. on the 9th, and the following evening saw all safe at Kikori station about
5 p.m. It was good to watch the delight of the natives—who are veritable childien in intellect —at
13
Coal in* the Western division Of fa pea.


short-commons ending in abundance. The effect of unrestricted “ kai-kai ” was markedly apparent for
the next few days, slimness had suddenly departed and drowsiness reigned undisturbed.
The Expedition remained at Kikori until the 21st, awaiting arrival of the steamer “Wakefield,”
which was to take it to Port Moresby.
In the interval trips were made to raised coral reefs at “Attack Bond,” forming ridges about
.100 feet in height; to Aird Hills, and generally round the station.
May 22nc/.-—Good-bye was said to the good friends at Kikori, and a start made on the return
journey. To the Writer’s unbounded satisfaction, the waterways of the delta were to be traversed to the
Purari; and a trip made up the Vailala to Akauda, Aru Aru, and the oil region generally.
Mr. Cowley, General Manager of the British New Guinea Development Company, owners of the
“ Wakefield,” was making a general tour through the delta channels, and to the various gas springs and
oil-seepages, between the Purari and Vailala, and the coast, in which he was keenly interested on his
company’s behalf. The succeeding part of the narrative comes more fitly 7 under Oil and Gas.
GULF OF PAPUA.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY.
The vast area of low delta-land forming the coast of the Gulf of Papua extends between the Fly
River and the Purari—a distance of at least 1100 miles following the coastline. Eastward of the Purari,
low hills appear, reaching to the coast, though intersecting rivers have each their delta system on a
smaller scale.
The principal rivers flowing into the Gulf are the Ely, Bamu, Turarna, Kikori, and Purari. As
these streams approach the coast, they split up into an intricate system of waterway s, reticulating the
low-1) ing land formed at their mouths. This geographical maze (only faintly indicated on the Admiralty
Chart) naturally has been but little explored in detail; it is believed, however, that the confluent channels
for a considerable distance back from the coast afford means of communication for light-draught vessels,
between the Purari and the Bamu.
The importance of some of the mouths of the delta streams caused early explorers to regard them
as independent rivers, until Theodore F. Bevan demonstrated otherwise.
Notwithstanding its unsuitable features, this vast malarial tract forms the home of numerous
natives, whose habitations are built high on piles where slightly elevated banks afford a lodgment, and
the means of slight cultivation. Sago, from the swamp-loving sago palm, is the principal staple of food,
supplemented by fish and crabs.
Whilst raised coral reefs in Papua mark stupendous uplift in Tertiary time, the growth of the
vast delta-land and its continuous encroachment on the sea is due to a recent gentle elevatory movement,
probably still in progress, supplementing the enormous deposition from the Gulf streams. Evidence of
this elevation is afforded by existing oyster shells attached to boulders found beneath the alluvium at
Akauda, where the Vailala River formerly flowed, but now above the tidal influence.
14
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


The gain of the land at the expense of the sea hy deposition and uplift is marked hy the enormous
tract of delta formation in the Gulf of Papua, and the encroachment of the land still further seawards
in shoal waters, sand hars, and mud banks extending from the river mouths, which form insuperable
barriers to navigation for many months of the year during prevailing south-east winds, which drive the
waves shorewards in formidable breakers. Even in favourable weather vessels of deep draught are
compelled to lie off some miles from the shore. The west coast is in consequence handicapped by absence
of accessible natural harbours, such as form a feature of -the east coast.
Pnrari River.
Previous Mention. —This river was first ascended above its bifurcation in the delta by Theodore
Bevan.
In 1 S9o, Hir William McGregor records that ; —“ On the Ist February an examination was begun
of the Groat Purari Fiver. The mouths of the river were first discovered by T the Uev. James Chalmers—
[in 1879. —J.E.C.],* —but they, and part of the river itself above its delta, were first systematically explored
and mapped hy Mr. Theodore Bovan. The two most eastern mouths are the Alole and Aivei, each
nearly a mile wide at the mouth, hut with many sand and mud hanks. The country near them is nearly
all mangrove swamps. The Aivei and Alele join about 4 miles from the sea and form the Purari.
For the first half-dozen miles the banks are covered hy mangrove only, and these at half a score miles
become mixed with pandanus and sago trees, but there is no real dry land for about a score of miles. At
the inner end of the delta the Purari gives off the Kairu, fully 30 miles by water from the sea. . . .
The land is all flat, and was one to two yards above the water in the river, covered by forest, with
occasional sago swamps. The soil is sandy alluvial.
“Just above the bifurcation the Purari is about half a mile wide, and 1 fathom deep. Half a score
beyond that again the banks rise, the soil is not sandy, and the trees are larger. Low hills begin about
the same place, and the land is suitable for cultivation. At some two dozen miles above the bifurcation
the river approaches the first mountain, and for a dozen miles passes along in a nearly north-west
direction close to the base. Specimens of the rock from this mountain have been pronounced to be
sandstone and calcareous sandstone.
“Some 75 miles from the sea there is the first considerable branch. The highest distance
reached was, by the river course, about four score miles from the sea. The river there was about 300 to
400 yards broad, and at least 3 or 4 fathoms deep, but it was swollen from rain that had fallen
the previous day.
“ On the north side, at a distance of 3 or 4 miles, there was a rough mountain, probably
3,000 feet high ; on the south side, low wooded hills and rich alluvial valleys.f
In a latter report \ Sir William mentions reaching a distance of 120 miles from the sea.
Further on in his report he states that:—“The time at our disposal did not allow us to go further
up the river than Biroe. The river was not perceptibly diminished in size there, but was in that district
much broken up by large islands. On the north side there was still the main range, 3,000 to 4,000 feet
* “ Work ami Adventure in New Guinea,” i>p. 143*147. t Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending 30th June, 1803, p. xviii and xix.
% Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending 30tli June, 1894, p. xv.
15
COAL IN TIIK WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


high, and low rugged hills on the south side. The main range was visible westward some 15 or 20
miles, presenting great toothed, nearly perpendicular peaks. Very little flat alluvial land lay between
the hills and mountains, but sago trees, which were rare from where the river first met the main range
to some 30 miles above the Aure, were becoming frequent near Biroe. Tlie formation all the way
remained sandstone, with nodules of grey limestone. The sandstone is dark blue or grey, usually fine-
grained. In arrangement it varies. At certain spots on the east end of Naivaia it dips at about 30
degrees to the south-east; at the north end it seems to dip in the opposite direction. In most other
positions it appears to dip at about 30 degrees to the south east or east, or to lie nearly horizontal,”*
The Maokay—-Little Expedition of 1908 recorded limestone country principally in the upper
reaches of the Furari, coal-bearing sandstone, and slate of probably Lower Paheozoic age; basalt
pebbles were also observed in the river channel.f
Vnilnla River.
Sir William McGregor credits the Rev. James Chalmers with the discovery of this river in 1879, J
which he named the “ Annie.”
On the 25th January, 1893, Sir William began the ascent of the Yailala, or Bailala, as it was then
called, and records that at : —“ Six miles it has become a river of about 200 yards in width, from Ito
3 fathoms deep, and with a current of Ito 11 knots. At 23 miles some low hills began, from 50 to 100
feet high. At 13 miles, river retained same size and character, except in passing between low hills it
narrowed to about 100 yards, forming pools from G to 7 feet deep.”
"The third score of miles of the Bailala traversed much fine alluvial soil with very low hills. The
liver remained about the same size, but so.no of the eddies were rather troublesome for the boats.
"The fourth score of miles lies through low wooded hills with forest land between.
“Rapids began at 80 miles with rough boulders in the river bed, very dangerous for the steam
launch. North lay a wooded mountain range, about 20 miles distant, attaining heights of probably
6,000 feet.”ij
GEOLOGY.
PREVIOUS MENTION.
Mu. R. Etheridge, Junr., states that:—“The existence of fossiliferous Tertiary rocks was announced
in 1876 by the late Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, who based his determination on a small collection made by
the late Sir William Maclcay 7 , at Yule island, during the ‘Chevert’ Expedition. Post Tertiary deposits
were shown to exist by the late M. de Miklouho-Maclay, on the Maclay Coast; and since then shells of
the same age have been met with at the Aird Hills, Douglas River, by Mr. Theodore Bevan.”
• Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending - 30th June, 1804, p. 25. t The Geographical Journal, XXXVIII, 5, 1911, pp. 483-487.
J Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending 30th June, 1893, Appendix G, p. 27. § Jbid., pp. 27, 28.
16
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


“ Rocks of Mesozoic age exist in New Guinea, as evidenced by Ammonites brought from the
Strickland River by the late expedition of the Australian Geographical Society. Although these are only
rolled specimens from the river hed, they satisfactorily show the presence there of deposits of Oolite age,
probably about the horizon of the uppermost Oolites. Lastly, my colleague’s collection contains a few
Tertiary corals and mollusca from Maiva, collected by Mr. Edelfelt.”
“ Sir William McGregor, Administrator of New Guinea, has forwarded a collection of rolled coral
specimens from the Fly River, evidently brought down'by the stream from its upper sources, where,
doubtless, the rocks from which these are derived are in place.”*
Amongst geological specimens collected by Sir William Macleay in 1875, from the coasts of New
Guinea, Cape York, and neighbouring islands, Mr. C. S. Wilkinson recorded the following fossils from
Hall’s Sound, which he regarded as Lower Miocene : f
Voluta macroptera. I Triton.
Voluta anti-cinijulata. Dolium.
Ostrea. Aslarte.
Gythereea. Gorhnla.
Crassatella. Leila.
Pecten. • Venus.
Turritella. Cypraia.
Nation. Tiro Echinoderms.
The fossils collected by Mr. Edelfelt from Maiva Village, at a height of about 200 feet above
sea-level, wore identified by Mr. Etheridge as—
Alreopora, sp.
Leptoria, sp.
Galaxen (near G. dams).
Dehocyathus,
Mr. Etheridge added the following note:—“The material presented by Mr. Edelfelt to the
Queensland Survey Collection is of too limited a nature to permit any definite statement to be made as
to the age of the beds, but they are either Younger Miocene or Pliocene, probably the latter:
The following additional Now Guinea fossils have been determined and described by the same
authority: —
Locality. Collector. Age.
Temnechinus Macleay a, Ten. Woods ]
Peronella decaijonahs, sp., Lesson j_ Wand Sir William Macleay ... Lower Pliocene
Pecten novce-Guineiv, Ten. Woods i
Dolium costatum, Deshayes J
Cyrena nitida, Deshayes )
Melania clavus, Lamarck V Aird Hills ... T. F. Sevan ... Post-Tertiary
Neritinn gngates, Lamarck )
* Geology ami Paleontology of Queensland and New Guinea, Jack ami Etheridge, 1892, p. 090.
| Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, I, 1575-G, p. 113.
+ Geology and Paleontology of Queensland and New Guinea, Jack and Etheridge, 1892, pp. 690, 691.
42124 -C


In a paper, “On Our Present Knowledge of the Palseontology of New Guinea,”* Mr.
Etheridge alludes to an olive-green mudstone full of comminuted marine fossils, chiefly mollusca,
from the head of the Strickland River, none of the species being nameable.
Pecten in sandstone from the Upper Strickland is recorded. The aforegoing wore too much
weathered for specific determination, but seemed to have more of a Tertiary than a Secondary aspect.
“At Observatory Pend, Strickland River, numerous travelled nodules and small boulders were
collected—[by the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia’s Expedition in ISSo—.J.E.C.] —revealing a
totally different kind of life, chiefly the remains of Ammonites. But amongst them is a bivalve, either an
Aucella or an Inoceramns. If the latter, it is decidedly of the typo of the Cretaceous /. concentrirns.
Unfortunately, the character of the hinge cannot ho ascertained. These, fossils are, however, of little
importance when compared with the Ammonites. Out of a number of nodules, in which the fossils are
indicated by impressions or casts, a fairly representative series has been selected, containing four more
or less recognisable species, or, at any rate, species which can be referred to one or other of the sections
into which the old genus Ammonites is now broken up, and the facies of which is sufficiently clear for
broad generalisation.”
“The section Stephanoceras is largely represented by an Ammonite of the group of A. calloviensis,
Shy., and even closely allied to that species.” The next species partakes of the
form of Stephanoceras Blagdeni, J. Shy., or equally well with S. coronatus, Prug
“Two rather well-marked Ammonites appertain to the group Stephanoceras lameUosum,
J. do C. Sowerby.” “Yet another Ammonite, which Ur. H. Woodward, who was kind
enough to examine casts of all these fossils sent him by myself, compares to A. UngnJatus. Quenst., of the
White Jura. . . . The square back, with its oblique costre, and the marginal crenulations, all convey
to this shell a much more Upper Oolite or Lower Cretaceous aspect than they give to it a Lowin'
Oolite facies.”
In the “Geology and Paleontology of Queensland and New Guinea,” in which the above is
repeated (pp. 694-697), Mr. Etheridge, referring to the brief outline of tlio Paleontology of New Guinea,
writes:—“ Briefly reviewing these facts, it is manifest that the oldest fossiliferous rocks on this island-
continent of which we at present have any record probably correspond homotaxially with the Upper
Oolites of other countries, more particularly the European, at the, same time displacing some relation to
the Indian beds of the same age. As regards the Inoceramns, it would appear to resemble an old-world
Cretaceous species ; but the specimen being a single one, too much stress must not bo laid upon this point.
It may simply be said that the Cretaceous rocks put in a claim for consideration.”!
Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, in his report on the specimens collected by the Geographical Society of
Australasia’s Expedition under Captain Everill’s leadership, states that above Observatory Pend :
“high precipitous cliffs along the river were formed of sandy calcareous strata, of a dark greenish colour,
full of fossil shells of Cretaceous ago ; among those collected are Qryphwa, Modiola, Aviculopecten,
Protocardium, Cidaris, Inoceramns, <tc.|
* Records of the Geological Survey of N.S. Wales, Vol. 1, Pt. 3, 1889, pp. 17*2-179, pi. 29.
+ Geology ml Paleontology of Queensland and New Guinea, Jack and Etheridge, p. 097.
t Trans, and Proc. Hoy. Geogr. Soc. Australasia, N.S. Wales Branch, Vols. 11l and IV, Ist Jan., 1885, to 31st Dee., 18SC.—1888, p. 204.
18
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


M. de Mi kl ouh o- Maclay collected the following species from a greenish sandy clay forming the
nearest hills to the coast line, at the Village of Bongu, Maclay coast. The specimens were determined
hy Mi', John Brazier, who states that they all belong to species at present living in the China Sea, in
Torres Strait, and around the Philippine Islands. The following is a list of his determinations* :
Ranella albivaricosa, Reeve. Cultellus (?), sp.
Nassa liquijarensis, A. Adams. Corbula crassa, Hinds.
Nassa, sp. Corbula albuginosa, Hinds.
Alitra, sp. Mactm, sp.
Oliva neostina, Undos. Tdlina (Tdlinella) AlcAndrewi, Shy.
Oliva siddia, Huclos. Tdlina (Arcopajia ) pinguis, Hanley.
Oliva, sp. Tdlina (Phylloda ) foliacea, Linn.
Oliva lepida, Duclos. Tdlina (Anjulus) (?), sp.
Oliva ispidula, Sowerby. Tdlina (Tdlinides) (?), sp.
Oliva, sp. Tdlina (Peroncea) scalpellum, Hanley.
Oliva, sp. Tdlina (Strigella) (?), sp.
Tcrcbra slraminea, Grey. \ Tdlina (Metis) spectabilis, Hanley.
Conus {Dendroconus) glaums, Linn. [ Venus (Chione) calophylla, Phillipi.
Stromhus canarium, Linn, | Venus (Chione) imbricata, Sowerby.
Bulla ampulla, Linn. .■ Dione bullata, sp., Sowerby,
Alys cylindrica, A. Adams. Dasinia canaliculata, sp., Sowerby,
Alys cylindrica, var, elongala, A. Adams. Leda pullata, Sowerby.
Atys, sp. Area (?), sp.
Dentalium longiroslrum, Peeve.
A. Gibb Maitland, P.G.S.t mentions the following fossils ; —“ At Helena, on the south of Hall’s
Sound, the strata consist of buff-coloured calcareous shales, sandstones, and conglomerates, and
thinlydiedded and massive limestones, which yield fossils. On an exposed surface the rooks appear to
be made up of sub-angular fragments of limestone. The following fossils were obtained from the
limestones :
( Conus.
Gasteropoda y
1 1 uritella.
( Cardita.
j Marginella.
Lamellibranchiata -j Pecten Nova;-Guinea, Ton Woods.
Pectunculus.
Venus, and fragments of indeterminable corals.
The beds from which those fossils were obtained were regarded as the equivalents of the “ Port
Moresby Beds.”
Notes on the Geology op the Route followed by the Puuari Coal Expedition.
From the mouth of the Kikori River up that stream to the New Patrol Station opposite Aird
Hills, no opportunity was afforded for examination of the country passed ; if, indeed, anything more
could bo gleaned from closer examination, for both banks appeared to be of the usual low-lying delta
alluvial.
At Kikori Station, about 20 miles upstream, the station occupies elevated ground about 78 feet
above river level, formed of alluvial, with water-worn boulders of sandstone (partly quartzitic), chlorite,
* Pruc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, 1885, IX, Pt. 4, p. 988.
t Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, 1891-2, p. 63.
19
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


and basa't. At the head of a small gully, from which a spring issued, close to the station, the basal beds
were seen to consist of conglomerate, evidently in situ.
From the Kikori Station a splendid panoramic view was obtained on the morning after arrival,
but not again, though the Expedition subsequently spent over a fortnight at the spot. Looking east and
south-east, towards the Purari, a dead-level plateau intervened between the distant high peaks of the
main Dividing Range and the Kikori. As surmised, the plateau subsequently proved to be volcanic
when crossed by the Expedition.
In the immediate foreground Aird Hills —consisting of several prominent cones—stand out
conspicuously above the delta level.
These interesting hills—from 800 to 900 feet in height above sea-level—consist of andesites,
comprising both hornblende and augite-bearing varieties, samples being obtained by the Writer and
determined by Mi - . G. W. Card, A.R.S.M., Curator, Mining and Geological Museum, New South Wales.
Though these excellent landmarks were not fixed by intersection on the first Admiralty Chart of
1816, their position is shown approximately on the latest edition. It is probable that Mr. T. F. Bevan
was the first to ascend and describe them. In 1888 he published the following account :
“The term, Aird Hills, describes an island of probably moderately recent upheaval, on which a
cluster of volcanic cones, some ten in number, and covering an area of about five square miles, are
surrounded by deep navigable channels of fresh water. The country for thirty miles to the south, and
for some ten miles to the north, is chiefly of low-lying alluvial formation. The general form of these
trachytic hills is a volcanic cone. The summit of this particular cone (the one ascended.—J.L.C. ), however,
is covered with a deposit, of semi-fossilised fluviatile shells, contained in an earthy mould or silty mud.” *
Specimens of the Aird Hills rock were also named trachyte by Mr. W. H. Rands for Sir William
McGregor. - ) -
The shells referred to were described by Mr. R. Etheridge, jun., as Cyrenn nitida, Deshayes,
and Melania clavas, Lamarck, and regarded as of Post-Tertiary age.
Evidence of recent uplift is also afforded by ridges of limestone, about 300 feet in height, on both
sides of the,Kikori River, beginning at “Attack Bend,” a couple of miles above the station. These
geologically-recent coral reefs have become metamorphosed into compact limestones, with occasional
pockets of unaltered coral. Amongst samples collected by the Writer, Mr. W. S. Dun, Palrcontologist to
the Geological Survey of New South Wales, identified Mwlerpora and Astroid corals, Area and
indeterminable gasteropods.
Wherever limestones have been encountered on previous exploring expeditions in Papua, they
have been designated “coral-rock”—not because of their origin, but because of the rugged surface they
present to the pedestrian. Carbonic and humic acids, formed from decomposing jungle vegetation,
corrode the limestone, chiefly where coralline structure renders it open to attack, leaving rough pinnacles
projecting, which impede and fatigue the traveller.
In ascending the Kikori above the station, and also the Seribi to the junction of the Curnick,
elevated ridges of similar limestones were observed, also sandstone cliffs ; but the exigencies of travel
prevented close examination for fear of delaying the return of the launch and whaleboats. As the return trip
was made on a raft by the Writer, the resolve to see more of the river banks when returning was defeated.
* pifth Expedition to British New Guinea, 1888, pp, 21-22. f Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, 1893-4, p. 91,
20
BULLETIN OF THE TBBIUTOUY OF PAPUA.


At rare intervals sandstones and mudstones were observed outcropping in the banks of the
Curniek until the Expedition was landed about I miles above its junction with the Seribi. From this
point —“ Whaleboat Camp ” —the journey to the Purari and back was made on foot, which allowed of
geological investigation en routs, curtailed, however, by the necessity for expedition which limited
transportation power for food supplies rendered imperative. Advantage, however, was taken of halts
whilst the balance of supplies was brought up to forward camps, to exambie the geological structure of
the country.
As soon, however, as the volcanic plateau was reached, the only variations in geology were confined
to the beds and banks of the deepest streams intersecting the route. Fortunately, fossils abounded in the
sedimentary beds ; some, however, in the youngest strata being excessively fragile and difficult of safe
transport.
About 1 mile south-easterly from Whaleboat Camp, on the Curniek River, the edge of the
basaltic rocks was encountered. Immediately underlying the volcanics conglomerates were noted, and
under these chiefly mudstones or clay shales, with thin beds of sandstone. Wherever the streams flowed
through argillaceous rocks their waters were turbid. As the route rose across the volcanic series, the
torrential streams, deeply dissecting the plateau, were beautifully limpid.
The track, laid to intersect the Curniek several miles.upstream, led over volcanic rocks—basalt and
agglomerates—for most of the distance, descending to the riv,er down a rugged stream which revealed
the underlying sedimentaries. The river was then followed along alluvial flats traversed by shallow
creeks, exposing the bed-rocks.
At No. 2 (or Fossil Camp) —where a halt of the forward party was made whilst the carriers
returned to Whaleboat Camp for the balance of supplies—a thin band of fossiliferous sand rock was
discovered, intercalated in mudstone, in a small creek cutting the river bank. The sandstone was
cxttemelv incoherent—so much so, that spraying water on the excavated material caused it to disintegrate,
a fortunate circumstance considering the fragile condition of the included fossils. From this outcrop the
following forms were identified by Mr. Run and Mr. C. Hedley, F.L.S., Assistant Curator, Australian
Museum.
Peclen. Columbella.
Pectunculus, cf. orbicularis. Cyprcsa.
Venus (I) Trivia, cf. Smithii.
Gorbula, &c. Turricula (?)
Natica. Turritella, 2 spp. ; d. vulgaris.
Murex. Terebra.
Milra. Oliva, cf. Djockjakartce.
Triton. Olivia, cf. nuda.
Solarium, cf. maxima. Ancillaria, cf. nuda.
Leda. Dentalium, 2 spp.
Chione. Obeliscus.
Osirea. Solidula.
Ringicula. Natica, cf. guaUcnnva_
Nassa. Area.
Pleurotoma. Ilicinula.
Trigonia, cf. imiosphera. Centhiopsis.
Sigaretus.
21
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


It i.s interesting to note that Mr. Hedley is ot opinion that the greater proportion of the Tertiary
shells collected are species new to science. *
In Mr. Dun’s opinion these forms constitute the principal elements of this fauna, and appear to he
of slightly deeper water habitat, and may be of Older Tertiary age. On a shingle bank close by in the
Curnick River, just below the junction of a western branch, a largo Hat slab of densely-packed fossil
shell sin a calcareous matrix was picked up. As no further specimens of this rock were found in the main
stream during miles of following, it is evident that the slab came from an outcrop on the western
branch. The fossils are beautifully preserved, and amongst them Mr. Dun identified the following
forms :
Pecten. Cerithium.
Venus (?) Turbo (?)
Area. Turricu/n.
I'enluneidus, and numerous, at present, Denlalium.
undetermined small bivalves.
On the way up this river, so far as it was followed, drift fragments of Tertiary brown coal were
observed. A sample collected for analysis on 4th May was not analysed until November, hence was,
apparently, exceedingly dry, yet the contained moisture reached 15-66 per cent. (See Analysis, page 36.)
The Curnick was followed until 2nd April, when, as it was trending too far northerly, a course
was laid about 24° north of east to avoid the extremely rugged country encountered on Mr. Little’s
previous outward trip. The object being to make all the necessary easting in the lower country, and the
northing following up a stream towards the main coast range forming the southern watershed of the
western branch of the Purari. The eastern course intersected the drainage of the coast range flowing
southerly to the delta. The Curnick as it entered the volcanic plateau became a rough precipitous gorge
between massive cliffs of volcanic agglomerate, huge masses of which had been noted in the .stream the
previous day.
Before the river bed rose into the agglomerates, interesting sections of the underlying sedimentary
rocks were exposed in cliff faces. The following sketch section roughly illustrates the stratigraphy ; —•
The sedimentary strata are of alternating fresh-water and marine origin, indicating littoral or
estuarine deposition. Largo Tertiary leaves, similar to those obtained later on in Came River, were noted
in shales immediately underlying the volcanic agglomerate.
* Jt is, therefore, ‘•■ratifying that Mr. Hedley and Mr. Dun have volunteered scientific description, and that the Secretary for External Affairs
has approved of the preparation of the necessary illustrations.


Plate VII.
Section of Globigerina Limestone Big River between Curnick and Purari.
Plate VIII.
Section of Globigerina Limestone, enlarged.




The next halting camp (No. 7) was pitched on a small stream which was followed down for some
distance in hope of reaching the underlying sedimentary rocks in its bed, but it became an impassable gorge
between vertical cliffs of agglomerate overlying tuffs at the creek level.
The surface of the volcanic area is formed of soil resulting from decomposing tuffacoous material
and vegetable humus, amid which large rounded boulders of basalt appear as representatives of the coarse
agglomerate. In their rounded form they simulate ordinary water-worn boulders ; but in the unweathered
agglomerates of the cliff sections are seen bedded in a matrix of tuffs, and doubtless owe their smooth
surface to volcanic attrition.
In most sections exposed in the plateau series, the lowest volcanic beds become gradually more
fragmentary, passing into the finest tuffs, but there was no arbitrary order—coarse agglomerates occasionally
alternated with the finest material. The dips of these beds art' also subject to great variation both in
direction and amount, as might be expected from their origin.
Dykes and contemporaneous flows of basalt were seen when ascending Cache Creek for some miles.
In these, columnar structure is marked, in some instances, on a gigantic scale The volcanic energy
exerted in ejecting the agglomerates must have been enormous, and the foci not far distant, for embedded
blocks of basalt were frequently noted, of dimensions representing many tons in weight.
On leaving No. 7 Camp, a deep channel (“Big River’') was crossed at midday. In the river
debris small specimens of Tertiary brown coal were noted, which, like the Curnick flotsam, contained a
high percentage of constitutional moisture.
In this stream also, large slabs, or flat boulders, of fine-grained compact sandstone contained well-
preserved Tertiary leaves and stems. So far these have not been identified, but are regarded by Mr. Dun
as distinct from Australian Tertiary forms so far discovered. (See page 26.)
Boulders of Globigerina limestone were also found in this stream. Each of the above had drifted
to the point of crossing, where the banks consisted of agglomerates and tuffs. It was noted, however, in
the next deep channel—which was followed some distance above the place of crossing—that the great
corrugations into which the sedimentary rocks had been forced by dynamic disturbance prior to deposition
of the volcanic series, cause the former to appear at greater elevations at intervals in the stream course.
The following day the largest stream between the Curnick and the Purari was crossed (subsequently
named after the Writer by Mr. Baker. On the return journey a halt was made at this stream to search for
coal outcrops ; but being swollen by rain, travelling was risky and difficult. Upstream good outcrops of
the underlying sedimentary rooks were seen, showing steep dips —which reversed in a short distance,
and extensive planation.
The following day Mr. Little located the coal outcrop discovered at his previous crossing down
stream in 1911. Though compelled to swim in several places, he managed to secure a fair sample of the
coal. In thickness and quality this seam corresponds with the Purari coal-seam of Coal Creek. ( See
Analysis, page 33.)
Heavy and continuous rain prevented close search for fossils in situ ; but petrologically and
stratigraphically the local sedimentary rocks agree with those of the Curnick under the volcanic series.
Several rugged stream channels were crossed during the ensuing two days easting, but their beds
were not scored deep enough to expose the basal sedimentary rocks.


On the 12th April a deeper gorge (of Cache Creek) was reached on the limit of the direct easterly
course. In descending to this stream, the basalt, agglomerate, and tuffs gave place to conglomerates,
then day shales (or mudstones) and sandstones in the following order :
Fig. 2.
A few miles up this stream Cache Camp (No, 11) was formed. Search for fossils was rewarded by
both marine and fresh-water forms. Limestone was also met in frequent boulders, and its source located
higher up.
As the stream was fo'lowed upwards its bed rose rapidly, until the volcanic rocks were again at
stream 1-vel, the sedimentaries being only seen at intervals just above water-level, and finally
disappearing from view as the highest point on this stream was reached in volcanic rocks.
About twenty chains below No. 11 Camp, and about G 5 feet lower, alternating marine and
terrestrial condit'ons were observed within a few feet. From clay shales and sandstones dipping N. 40° E.
at 57°, a number of marine shells and land plants were obtained. The latter occurring in soft rotted
shales, were difficult to transport, and their identification is therefore doubtful ; but there is no doubt of
their Tertiary age, as they are conformably associated with marine fossils of that division, as shown in
the following section :
Fig. 3.
Amongst the marine shells from this outcrop, the following forms have been identified by Mr. Dun :
Ai •ca, of. grnnifera.
Cerithium.
Dentalium.
Indeterminate bivalves and gasteropods.
These are regarded as Miocene or Pliocene.
Fig. 2.
24
BULLETIN OU THE TERRITORY OF I'AI'UA.


From boulders of impure limestone, calcareous sandstone, and shales in the river debris the
following forms were identified by the same authority :
Ostrcea. Nntica (?).
Potami'hs. Balanus.
Oliva. Indeterminable bivalve fragments.
Dental ium.
In ascending Cache Creek, the source of the limestone boulders was located in a massive outcrop,
about half a mile above No. 11 Camp, as illustrated in the following section. These beds dip N. 20° E. at
39°, forming an imposing cliff. Unfortunately, their relation to the shales and sandstones could not he
determined, the limestone alone appearing above the stream.
Its composition is shown in the following analysis by J. C. H. Mingaye :
2341.—Limestone from Cache Creek, Papua.
Water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-20
Calcium carbonate... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 97'75
Magnesium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I'Ofi
Manganese carbonate ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 0 - 04
Ferrous carbonate... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-43
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 - 36
Alumina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... OTB
Phosphoric anhydride ... ... ... ... ... ... ... o’o7
Organic matter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
100-09
In physical appearance it resembles an ordinary non-fossiliferous marble: but in impure boulders a few
fossils were discernible, amongst them Foraminifera ( Bilocnlinn ) and E hinoids (Scutella).
Above the outcrop limestone was not seen, either in situ or in channel debris, the stream bed being
in agglomerates and tuffs, with occasional dykes and flows of columnar basalt.
From the highest point reached in Cache Creek, an ascent of 1,840 feet was made to the top of the ridge
on the eastern side. The course continued on an ascending grade along the ridge forming the eastern side of
the gorge, until the highest point on the journey—5,440 feet above sea-level—was reached on the shoulder
of Mount Favenc, which probably rises to 6,000 feet. From this point a long gently-falling spur from the
mountain was followed north-easterly into the Purari Valley.
In the descent from Mount Favenc, sedimentary rocks were noted about 700 feet above the Purari
.—which is deeply intrenched in them. The first of these strata encountered was conglomerate, agreeing
with the sections on the Curnick and intermediate streams. About 375 feet lower a thin coal-seam was
42124—D
Fig. 4.


located at the head of a small channel, in which Mr. Little had noted drift coal in 1911. The outcrop
was too close to the surface, and too lightly covered, to afford a satisfactory section, though the dip of the
lower strata down stream was N. 40° E. at .33°. The greatest thickness of coal appeared to be Ift. 7-J in.
In composition it corresponds very closely to tire Coal Creek coal not far distant ; though in physical
appearance it seemed brighter and more bituminous, and certainly more friable. (For Analysis, see
page 33).
At the foot of the spur descending to the Purari, a fairly strong stream was met flowing from the
north-eastern slopes of Mount Favenc (called “ Dry Creek ” by Mr. Little on his previous trip on
account of its comparative dryness on that occasion). In this channel numerous fossiliferous boulders
were seen, as well as similar rocks in situ. Amongst the specimens collected Mr. Dun identified the
following forms :
Cerithium Pecten.
Solarium. Pectnncnlns.
Valuta. Venus.
Gorhula. Natica.
Lucina. Turritella.
Mya. Oliva.
Area. Dentalium.
Ostrcea. Gnsteropod, gen. (?)
Anomia.
Regarded by Mr. Dun as a shallow water formation of Newer Tertiary age.
Other specimens were collected between the junction of Coal and Dry Creeks and the Purari River
—where marine and terrestrial strata were in close conjunction, in fact, intercalated. From this locality
the following forms were identified by Mr. Dun :
Corbula. Oliva.
Lucina. Mitra.
Pectunculus (?). Cerithium.
Natica.
Mr. Dun remarks: “At present it is impossible to give a definite age for these, but I am of
opinion that they are probably Pliocene, but may be Miocene.”
From the floor of the coal seam in Coal Creek, at the site of Messrs. Mackay and Little’s discovery
in 1908, about 8 miles up from the Purari River, dicotyledonous Tertiary leaves occur in abundance
in carbonaceous clay shales. Others were collected from tuflaceous sandstone, as already mentioned,
from Big and Came, Rivers. None of the, former have, yet been determined, owing to the unsatisfactory
state of preservation after transport, but as similar forms were observed below marine beds in Cache
Creek, and intercalated in Coal Creek, the coal seams in association are probably Pliocene, or may bo
Miocene.
Mr. H. Deane, M.A., F.L.S., M.lnst.C.E., who kindly examined the better preserved leaves in
tuflaceous sandstone, in which the venation is clearly shown, has been enabled to identify leaves of the
type of Gmelina and Tristania, living genera abundant in the Australian region, and extending into New
Guinea.


Plate IX.
Tertiary Marine Fossils Dry Creek Upper Purari Valley.
Plate X.
Tertiary Marine Fossils, Dry Creek Upper Purari Valley.


I 1 1.ATI: XI.
Tertiary Leaves, Big River, between Curnick and Purari.
Plate XII
Tertiary Leaves, Big River, between Curnick and Purari.


It may here be recorded that amongst the specimens collected on the Upper Purari by Sir William
McGregor in January, 1891, when lie ascended that stream as far as Biroe, 130 miles from the mouth, was
“sandstone full of minute fossil remains,” as recorded hy Mr. W. 11. Hands, who examined the collection.
A boulder of calcareous gritty sandstone, containing Tertiary and Post-Tertiary fossil remains, was also
included.*
In specimens of blue limestone in the same collection from the Purari, Dr. B. L. Jack recorded
numerous fossils, hut only one in a recognisable conditiort : —“That one, a Belemnite, is of the utmost
importance, as this cephalopod is most characteristic of the Cretaceous rocks of Europe and Queensland.
The genus has not been met before, so far as lam aware, in New Guinea. I sent the specimen to Mr.
B. Etheridge, Junr., who confirmed my identification. Other Cretaceous fossils have been obtained from
the Strickland Biver.”f
In Coal Creek, and in a closely adjacent northern branch, huge masses, many tons in weight, of
limestone occur, evidently from outcrops at no great distance upstream. This limestone evidently does
not extend southerly to Dry Creek, for the absence of limestone in the shingle of that stream is very
noticeable.
Limestone in situ occurs at the junction of Coal Creek with the Purari. Judged by the rock itself
—for fossils could not bo found in the short time available for search—it appears to be of the same
character, and probably on the same geological horizon, as the other outcrops noted, or represented by
boulders in stream channels, though the Globigerina limestone of Big Biver may differ.
Vailala River.
The geology of the A r ailala Biver, from its mouth to a little north of Akauda, and between it and
the Purari and the coast, corresponds, in the Writer’s opinion, with that of the lower levels of the region
traversed by the Coal Expedition. In fact, it is more than probable that the same basal sedimentary
strata extend from the Yailala to the Kikori and beyond, under the higher land of the delta margin.
From Vaivera, about G miles from Vailala entrance, a suite of marine fossils was collected from the
bed of a s nail creek, a few chains up from the river. The dip could not be ascertained as the water was too
high, and rocks in situ only in its bed. The strata consist of impure limestone, mudstone, and sandstone.
From them the following forms were identified by Mr. Dun :
Nation, 1 ~ , ,
Loroulu ,
Area, 1 ~ ,
i _ ooten,
Nnssa, tln impure limestone. „ , In mudstone.
I J-) Q'iXtcxhxWfiXj
Donax, i
Oliva,
Terebra, J
In these rocks thin veins of arragonite are conspicuous, as at Kiri, Akauda, and other localities
in the district. Calcareous concretions and quartzitic bands likewise occur.
The rounded form of some of the concretions is very noticeable. Concretions such as these have
been noted in oil-fields in several countries, as will be found recorded under “ Oil.”
* Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending June 30th, 1894, p. 91.
j Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending 30th June, 1894, p. 93.


Mr. Dun regards the Yaivera fossils as representative of an estuarine deposit of Older Tertiary
age.
In numerous other localities within the boundaries specified—on the west side of the river at
Akauda; at the Orocolo Gas Spring, near the coast; at Aru Aru, Mura, and Apiri Gas Springs, similar
Marine forms were observed.
Very fragmental plant remains in sandstone overlie the oil rocks at Akauda; and in other
localities, but nothing determinate could be found in the short time available.
At Biai Point, on the coast •> miles west of the Vailala River mouth, a reef of rocks juts out—the
only one for about 150 miles. It consists of fossiliferous, calcareous conglomerates and grits. The pebbles of
the former consist of quartz, agate, Lydian-stone, &c. Amongst the fossils collected at this point, Mr. Dun
identified the following forms :
Area. Os trail.
Natiea. Corhula, &c.
which he regards of late Tertiary age.
At Kerema Bay, about 30 miles east of Vailala River, the following section was noted round
and beyond the north-eastern headland (Cape Cupola); the dip being to N. 50-55° E. at 40-45°; and
the strike N. 35-40° W.
Fig. 5.
The rocks comprising the section consist of sandstones, conglomerates, and shales ; in the two
latter, at Kerema Station landing-place, fossils occur. Amongst the forms collected, Mr. Dim distin-
guished the following :
Pontes. j Fungia.
i
Millepora (?). Fragments of Mollusca and Echinoids,
Large blocks of coral are included in these beds at Kerema.
The pebbles in the conglomerates shown in the above section range up to li inches in diameter,
and consist of quartz, Lydian-stone, schistose rocks, and greenish slate, &c.
Rough bouldery patches in the sandstones contain irregular fragments of hardened mudstone,
quartzite, slate, and fine-grained granite.
At the extreme west point of Kerema Bay a raised coral-reef forms the cliff', which has been
rendered cavernous by sea-action. Masses of unaltered coral are discernible in the otherwise metamor-
phosed coral rock. Conglomerates and grits form the basal beds,
28
BULLETIN OF TUB TERRITORY OP PAPUA.


Plate XIII.
Tertiary Marine Fossils near Cape Possession North-west of Yule Island.
Plate XIV.
Tertiary Marine Fossil (Cerithium) Dry Creek, Upper Purai Valley.


Plate XV.
W G. Woolnough.
Contorted Tertiary Strata, Pago Pago Point, Pt. Moresby, Papua.


Prom near Capo Possession, Mr. L. P. Henderson, 11. M., was good enough to collect a suite of
fossils for the Writer, whilst on his way from Kerema to Port Moresby.
Writing of the fossils, Mr. Henderson stated : —“ I procured these from the cliff's a little to the east-
ward of Cape Possession, near a village known as ‘ Kivori.’ Some of the loose shells were embedded in the
cliffs, but through the action of the sea were easily extracted from the dill's in perfect condition. The
other masses of shell formation were chipped out of the solid cliff, about 5 feet above high-water mark.
I hope these will be of interest to you. There arc many fossils to be got in these cliffs ; in fact, in some
places the cliff is just one mass of fossil formation.”
Cape Possession, lies a little to the north-west of Yule Island. Amongst the above specimens, Mr.
Dun identified :—•
Area, cf. rhonihea. j Xansu, cf. yemmatnla, Lam. var.
Cythcrea, 2 spp. j Vi/prim (?), cf. cinctn, Martin.
llandla, cf. nohilis, Beew. j Conn*, cf. viiuinms, Martin.
Oliva, cf. trwincta, Martin. |
Mr. Dun further expressed the opinion that these forms were either Pliocene or Pleistocene.
From the Port Moresby beds, at Pago Pago Point,-’coral fragments, mollusca, ami forarninifera
wore collected. These occur very sparingly on weathered bedding planes in the altered coral-sand rock,
which is highly contorted and puckered.
The concentric structure of huge chalccdonic concretions in the Port Moresby beds —-like the
coatings of an onion—is very marked and suggestive. The Writer collected specimens for examination,
under the impression that they probably contained microscopic organic remains. Mr. Dun has since
determined Radiolaria in sections prepared from them.
PAPUAN COAL.
Exploration in New Guinea, with a few notable exceptions, has been mainly confined
to proximity of the sea-board or its hinterland. So far as it has proceeded, however, no evidence
of Pahcozoic or Mesozoic coal has been discovered, nor even any indication of the presence of strata
representative of the productive Coal Measures of Australia. The nearest extension of the latter occur
on the north coast of Australia, at Anson Bay, to the south-west of Port Darwin. Boring to a depth of
over 2,000 feet, however, revealed but thin coaly streaks, and the presence of the characteristic Australian
coal fossil— Glo.sxopteris —at the lowest level, a fact which should have encouraged perseverance.
Whether these Permo-Carboniferous strata extend to New Guinea beneath the heavy cloak of
Tertiary deposition, remains to be proved as exploration extends into the little known Cordillera forming
the backbone of the island. Palaeozoic rocks undoubtedly exist in the north eastern portion, ai.d as far
west as Mount Victoria—the highest peak in British New Guinea.
The great hinterland of the Gulf of Papua with its vast system of water-ways, and the coastal
area as far eastward, at least, as Port Moresby, consist chiefly of Tertiary rocks —with paheontological
evidence of Upper Mesozoic nearer the head waters of the Gulf streams.
29
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


TJic coal seams so far discovered in the Purari and Kikori watersheds, and in intervening streams
are undoubtedly Tertiary, ard so far as palaeontological investigation has proceeded, probably of Pliocene
or .Miocene age, as will be apparent from the geological evidence recorded in another section.
According to A. Wickmann,* coal occurs of similar character in Dutch New Guinea in Miocene
strata:—“The next series mentioned by Wickmann is formed of steeply upturned Miocene clays and
sandstones ; they are coal-bearing, and contain Area and Ostnea. On the eastern side of the area a bed
containing Melania is included with them. They are mot with from longitude 1119° 45' E., onwards along
the sides of the river flowing into Walckenar Bay, and also at several other localities as far as longitude
140° 55' E.”
The Papuan coal is of the “ brown coal ” variety, with a large percentage of contained moisture,
the average percentage in the first ten samples being 17'05, and 17• 43 in eight samples recently taken.
It much resembles the brown coal of Sumatra, which contains a higher average of moisture—from 23
to 25 per cent. The constitutional character of the hygroscopic moisture is exemplified in samples
exposed to desiccation for several months, yielding 15 to 17 per cent.
Though the coal exfoliates somewhat on exposure, it is still fairly firm and lustrous, and would
stand a fair amount of handling.
Naturally, ignition is slow 7 , owing to excessive moisture. For stationary engine purposes, where
fire-box space is not a consideration, coal of the above character might be a useful fuel if abundant and
cheap. By briquetting and drying to expel excessive moisture it could bo improved. These are, however,
commercial questions to be determined if thicker and more accessible seams are discovered in the future.
At present, inaccessibility and thinness bar serious consideration.
At Coal Creek, in the Purari Valley, two seams were reported—B feet and 12 feet respectively.
These proved of about equal thickness, viz,, 2 ft. 7 in. to 2 ft. 9 in., and are undoubtedly portions
of the same seam dislocated by faulting.
The lower outcrop occurs in the bed of Coal Creek, about 8 miles above its junction with th
Purari, overlaid and underlaid by clay shales containing Tertiary plant remains. The seam here strikes
N. Gs° V., and dips S. 25° W. at an angle of 43°. About 200 feet on the south-eastern strike it is
abruptly faulted against sandstone.
About 350 feet south-westerly the second outcrop occurs, forming the surface of an original anti-
cline or fold, about 50 feet above the level of the coal outcrop in the creek. At the higher level all cover
has been removed, but the floor is of clay shales. This outcrop was reported to be 12 feet thick, but the
greatest thickness measured by the 'Writer was 2 ft. 7 in. The coal, though uncovered, occurred in
solid blocks, and evidently represented the full thickness of the seam, several openings confirming this
view.
Northerly, this portion of the seam has been removed by the erosion of Coal Creek ; southerly, it
is abruptly faulted against sandstone, a most typical fault-plane being exposed in the bank of a small
creek, in which crushed coal distinctly marks its strike and dip—or hade viz., strike, N. 16° W. • dip,
S. 74° W. at 70°.
* Quoted by Suess, “ Face of the Earth,” IV, 1909, p. 300.


The following plan and sections illustrate the occurrence of coal at Coal Creek :
Flax.
Fig. 6.
Examination of the strata in the vicinity of the outcrops revealed extensive folding and
disturbance. Faultings or dislocations relieving the strain against more rigid sandstones, as in the
instances mentioned. Hence, if the coal was workable, the cost of winning would be greatly enhanced.
Strata of the same geological ago were noted in the deeper channels between the Kikori and
Purari Rivers, at the base of an extensive volcanic series, consisting of agglomerates, tuffs, and basalt,
which constitutes, geologically, the most recent formation between the streams mentioned, disregarding
superficial alluvials and stream gravels.
The volcanics originally formed a broad level plateau, the upper surface of which, viewed from the
low level of Kikori Station, even now appears as a tableland, though the plateau itself, over which the
Coal Expedition passed, is deeply dissected by drainage channels falling southerly to the delta.
In the largest and deepest of these channels, as already stated, coal of a similar character has been
exposed where the underlying sedimentary rocks have been partially trenched by the streams


In the most important stream (Came River), a coal seam discovered by Mr, Little, in 1911 may be
identical with the Purari seam. Above this outcrop drift coal was found in the channel debris, as also in
the upper waters of the Curnick and Rig Rivers. This flotsam may appear to represent seams at higher
levels, but in each case the upper reaches of these streams have trenched their beds in the volcanic series ;
hence recurrent dissection of the basal sedimentaries at higher stream levels, as well as their varying dips,
indicates the folded and undulating surface of the latter prior to covering by volcanic material.
It is probable, however, that the thin friable coal seam in situ near the end of the north-eastern
spur from Mount Favenc, at an elevation of 325 feet above the Purari, is distinct from the Coal Creek
and Came River seams. In friability and lustre this coal differs from those mentioned, hut the difference
is merely physical, its chemical composition being identical.
As might be expected from the proved extension of the coal-bearing strata between the Curnick
and Purari, coal occurs much nearer the coast than the outcrops of Coal Creek ; and examination of the
lower reaches of the southerly-flowing streams, above their outlets in the delta, may still further reduce
the distance. But, so far as at present known, the inaccessible nature of the intervening country, to
say nothing of the character, thinness, and disturbed condition of the coal, renders it of no present or
prospective value to the Territory. Average samples have been analysed, which indicate the character and
chemical composition of the coals already discovered in the area examined, and afford an index to value if
thicker and more accessible seams be eventually located ; for it should be recorded, on the authority of
Mr. Little, that a 10 foot seam was discovered by the Mackay-Little Expedition, about 30 miles above.
Coal Creek, in the western brand) of the Purari, under conditions that eliminated any chance of error in
estimating thickness— i.e., under a waterfall. As, however, this outcrop is in totally inaccessible country,
commercially considered, the recent expedition was not prolonged in that direction. The, nature, of the
coal and its geological association are described by Mr. Little, as identical with those herein described, of
which it might be an abnormal thickening.
From the geologically recent age of the strata containing the earns it is unlikely that hard, dry
coals will he discovered in them, though, as already stated, useful fuel for domestic and stationary engine
purposes would be available if a workable thickness of brown coal should be discovered in commercially
accessible country. There is, in the opinion of the Writer, a possibility of coal being struck when boring
for oil on the, Vailala River, where it would be advantageously situated as regards outlet.
If intrusive rocks disturb the coal strata in the districts where these extend, then better coal might
be expected at the contacts with the seams. In the south-western portion of Sumatra contiguous intrusive
rocks have expelled all the excess moisture from the local coal, rendering it a useful fuel, for, as in the
case of the Purari coals, the ash contents are low.
The percentage of moisture in Sumatra coals is shown in the following extract (Tijdschrift van
het Koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap gevostigd to Amsterdam. Tweede Serie
Deel. xxnr. No. 2. 8 March, Leiden, 190(i, p. 23G.)
1. Unterpliocene kohle, ... ... ... ... 30 per cent.
2. Obermioceno ~ ... ... ... ... 19 „
3. Mittelmioceno ~ ... ... ... ... 14 „
4. Untereocene „ ... ... ... ... 3-6 „


Analyses of Papuan Brown Coal.
No.
Locality.
c
i
sTS 1
~ S3 !
i
Volatile
Hydro-
carbons.
Fixed
Carbon.
1
Ash. j
1
ifl
Specific
Gravity.
Remarks.
Collector.
Year.
Analyst.
Abukiru Island,
Purari River.
17'5
37-2
38-6
6-6
Average of ten analyses of
ooal nodules.
SirW. McGregor
1894
J. B. Henderson.
Upper Purari Ilivor
1.3 6
4M
41-1
4-2
Exact locality not known.
D. Mackay
1909
99
1874
Coal Creek, Upper
Purari River.
18-89
44-87
33-39
2-85
0*322
1-323
No coke formed. From
12 ft. (?) seam.
W. J. Little and
party.
1911
J. C. H. Mingaye.
1875
99 >5
•20-79
40-73
34-55
3-93
1-323
1-339
No coke formed. From
3 ft. seam.
11 11
>»
J) 99
2346
»5 5)
17 08
42-97
36-85
3-10
0-315
1-341
No coke formed. From
top seam.
J. E. Game
1912
9 9 9 9
2347
99 9 9
18-66
40-59
35-52
5-23
0-329
1-373
No coke formed. From
bottom seam.
19 91
91
99 9 9
2345
From small creek
on spur of Mt.
Favenc.
15-51
41-51
37-40
5*58
2-219
1 342
No coke formed. 1 ft. 7 J in.
thick.
1 1 99
99
9 9 9 9
3194
From Came River
17-00
42-33
34-58
6 09
Scam 2 ft. 7J in. thick
below camp.
W. J. Little ..
1
„
3195
,,
15 88
41-71
33-36
905
Drift coal above camp ...
J. E. Came
99
9 9 99
3196
Curnick River
Sumatra Middle
Palembang Beds.
15-66
23-25
38-97
37-59
7-78
Drift coal
Brown coal
9 9 9 9
99
9 9 9 9
42124—N
33
COAL IN THE WESTERN DIVISION OF PAPUA.


CHAPTER 11.
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.
WITH NOTES ON THEIR OCCURRENCE IN THE DUTCH-INDIES AND ELSEWHERE.
INTRODUCTION.
The Writer’s primary mission to Papua was coal examination, petroleum only being included immediately
prior to departure. If the latter had been the principal object, a prior visit to ad jacent oil-fields in the same
latitude would have been most valuable and instructive. Subsequent examination revealed considerable
differences between the stratigraphy of the latter and that of the Eastern American oil-field visited many
years previously. The broad domes of the Pennsylvania oil region are in no wise comparable with the
extremely narrow anticlines of the Dutch Indies oil-fields—with which the Papuan correlate. In the former
dips are imperceptible, save by levelling ; in the latter they are usually steep, confining the productive
arch in any one within exceedingly close limits, viz., 200 to 500 metres (660 to 1,650 feet).
NATURAL OIL AND GAS IN PAPUA.
The probability of the existence of oil naturally suggests itself whenever the latitude of British
New Guinea, or Papua, is considered in relation to the existing oil-fields of Java, Sumatra, and Borneo,
and oil and gas occurrences in Celebes, Ceram, Timor, and other islands of the adjacent Malay Archipelago,
embraced within 10 degrees North latitude and 10 degrees South latitude. But the question of attempting
proof apparently never assumed concrete form until shortly after the arrival of Messrs. G. H. Thomas and
L. Lett on the Yailala River in 1910, as employees of the British New Guinea Development Company,
Limited, in connection with contemplated saw-milling operations.
The first suggestion—according to the above—was received from an earlier local report of the
transient appearance of a low island oil' the river mouth, which it was conjectured might have arisen from
gas pressure, but which more probably was due to shifting flood sedimentation, so common in the delta
area, especially opposite disemboguing streams.
Beyond the mere fact of temporary accumulation of sediments, no actual gas phenomena were noted
in the vicinity, nor any seismic shocks experienced. A. Beeby Thompson records that an “earthquake
shock led to the formation of a great mud volcano beneath the sea off the southern point of Klias,
Peninsula of Borneo, where sufficient argillaceous material was ejected to form a now island 750 feet long,
420 feet wide, and 20 feet above sea-level, The eruption occurred on the crest of a well known anticline


Plan showing position of Oil-Fields in
Malay Archipelago and New Guinea.
Oil and gas springs.




with st'>ep sides, on which petroleum and gas exudations had frequently been observed in other localities
where it crossed the land.* The same authority records a similar eruption off the coast of Burma in
December, 1907, leading to the formation of an island 1,200 feet long, 600 feet wide, and 20 feet above
seadevel. Submarine eruptions have been recorded from the Caspian Sea, off the coast of Mexico, and off
the coast of Trinidad, where inclined petroliferous beds have been known to underlie the sea
“In several countries these discharges have been observed to follow earthquake shocks.”! It, however,
seems clear to the Writer, on the evidence, that the tirst real incentive was the accidental discovery by
Mr. G. A. Thomas of a gas spring at Opa in August, 1911, whilst seeking additional land for coconut
planting, which he and his partner, Mr. L. Lett, had begun close by on Kiri Creek on quitting the
company’s service.
Prior to this discovery the late Mr. E. McGowan, whilst prospecting for gold in the neighbourhood
with Mr. H. Swanson, on the strength of a native’s report, detected a “ smell of kerosene ” near Kiri Creek,
which he ref orted verbally to Messrs. Thomas, Lett, and others.
It is practically certain that Mr, McGowan passed close to the Opa gas springs without observing
them in the jungle, probably on the lee side in the petroleum or gas-tainted wind. He was, therefore,
the first to suggest the presence of natural gas in the locality on slight, but undoubted, collateral evidence.
Unfortunately for his credit, he failed to follow the indication as verbally acknowledged to the Writer.
Messrs. Thomas and Lett, on the other hand, immediately grasping the immense possibilities of the
discovery at Opa, followed the clue it afforded with the aid of natives from neighbouring villages, who
pointed out similar phenomena in other localities. Their action and their report to the local and
Commonwealth authorities led to the actual discovery of oil on the 22nd February, 1912, at Akauda,
about 30 miles distant, following the river.
Mr. Thomas’ statement to the Writer is substantially that, whilst searching for suitable land to add
to their plantation on Kiri Creek he happened on a “ boiling spring ” (1) near the village of Opa, which he
could not understand, and which the native youth with him called “ Avali,” but was unable to explain
the meaning of the terra.
The apparent ebullition was, however, found to be due to escaping gas bubbles through the muddy
water, which was cold, and doubtless —as later explained by Mr. L. F. Henderson, acting Resident Magistrate
of the Division at the time—the native name referred to this phenomena.
Several similar gas springs, with an accompanying odour of petroleum, were found in the vicinity,
the odour, according to the discoverer, being at times move pronounced than at others. At a later date
the Writer was unable to detect any distinguishable odour on the occasion of his first visit; but on the
second detected it in mudstone in a closely adjacent creek ; and, still later, Mr. E. R. Stanley, Government
Geologist of Papua, visited the site and informed the Writer, under date 3rd August, 1912, that he
discovered oil in the same creek when it was almost dry, apparently at the same spot, in mudstone. The
seepage was so slight, however, he was unable to collect a sample.
Search revealing no further indications eastward, Mr. Thomas continued his quest northerly, up the
east bank of the river, until about 3 miles above the village of Akauda, and about 30 following the
stream from Opa, he found a larger and more powerful gas spring on the 28th August, 1911, and
numerous other gas jets, both dry and through water. The natives with him were exceedingly alarmed
when the gas ignited on the surface of the water on the application of a lighted match.
* Petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910, p. 52. f Trans. Inst. Mining and Metallurgy, XX, 1911, pp. 217-21 S.
35
Petroleum and natural gas in papuA.


At the main gas spring there was a thick, frothy scum and a pronounced odour of petroleum. A
sample of the scum was collected, and personally submitted to the Federal authorities in Melbourne by
Mr. L. Lett in November, 1911. Subsequently it was handed to the Writer and subjected to tost in the
laboratory of the Geological Survey of New South Wales, as hereinafter'referred to (page 39).
Feeling assured that the indications he had discovered indicated oil, Mr. Thomas wrote to the
local Warden at Kerema announcing the fact, and asking for advice as to procedure. As this letter
is of historic importance, a copy is given from the official records ;
“Dear Sir, “Kira, Vailala lliver, September 2nd, 1911.
“ Mr. Lett and I are rather impressed with the formation of some country we saw up the river,
and fancy it should be oil-bearing.
“Should it prove so, can you give us any information on the laws of the Territory, as regards
the finding of Petroleum, or, can you tell us in which way we could get control over an area as a
reward for finding same.
“ Any information, bearing on the subject, we shall be very thankful to receive at your earliest.
“ Believe me,
“ Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) GARNET H. THOMAS.
“J. P. Hennelly, Esq.,
“ N.B.—Mr. Lett is anxious to go up the river, but is afraid of missing you when you come up ;
can you give us any idea when we may see you.”
Mr. J. P. Hennelly, Resident Magistrate and Warden, under date Gth September, 1911, replied,
advising an application to the Department of Mines for a license to prospect a given area.
The Lieutenant-Governor of Papua was verbally informed by Mr. Lett of the discovery on the
25th October, 1911, as appears from the following letter in the official records :
“Port Moresby, October 2G, 1911.
“To His Excellency the Lieut.-Governor, Port Moresby.
“ Your Excellency,
“Following the interview that your Excellency did me the honor to grant me yesterday,
I beg to report that I have discovered a Petroleum deposit on the banks of the Vailala lliver, in the
Gulf Division of Papua, and I beg hereby to make application for any form of reward that it may be
decided to grant.
“ I am, Your Excellency,
“ Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) LEWIS LETT.”
Mr. Lett shortly afterwards left for Melbourne, and on arrival in November, personally
interviewed the Secretary for External Affairs on the subject, and exhibited the sample mentioned
aforesaid.
On the 9th November, 1911, the Acting Government Secretary at Port Moresby conveyed His
Excellency’s instructions to the Resident Magistrate at Kerema, to visit and report on the alleged find of
petroleum on the Vailala, without delay.
36
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


From the official records, it appears that Mr. E. McGowan on the 30th November, 1911, on behalf
of himself and Mr. H. Swanson, notified the Government Secretary of Papua of their discovery of
kerosene on the Vailala, in June, 1911, in the following terms :
“ Post Office, Port Moresby, November 30, 1911.
“ The Honorable the Government Secretary,
“ Sir,
“ In Juno last I, accompanied by Mr. H. Swanson, discovered the presence of Kerosene on
a small creek, flowing, apparently into Kiri Creek, which joins the Vailala River on the left or eastern
side about 12 miles above the village of Vailala.
“The spot where we found the Kerosene traces is about 1J miles from Bahama Village.
Neither Mr. Swanson nor I having sufficient funds to provide a boring plant for testing the deposits,
I endeavoured to get into communication with capitalists in Australia prepared to do so. After
considerable delay I have been able to do so, only to find that though money is plentiful for the
purpose, that my correspondents understand that a Bill has been introduced into the Federal House
converting all such deposits into a Federal or State monopoly. Under the circumstances it is
apparently useless to apply for a prospecting license, but 1 think we have considerable claims on the
Federal Authorities, if the deposits prove payable, as the original discoverers. Hoping that you will
lay the matter before His Excellency, to advise me if it is necessary to take any further steps.
“ I have the honor to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“(Signed) E. McGOWAN.”
On the 16th December, 1911, Mr. L. F. Henderson, Acting Resident Magistrate of the Gulf
Division, furnished an interesting report, from which the following is extracted, as a record of the first
official inspection :
“Arriving at Kiri, situated on Kiri Creek, some 15 miles up the Vailala River from its mouth, I
called on Mr. G. H. Thomas, who reported the alleged existence of petroleum on the river, and found him
engaged in planting a lease with coconuts.
“He related the manner in which he made his first discovery of the indications of what he is
confident is an extensive oil-field. It appears that he was looking for a suitable piece of ground for
plantation purposes at the time.
“On the morning of the 7th inst. I went with Mr. Thomas (who kindly offered to give me every
assistance and information he could in connection with the matter) to a place approximately four miles to
the eastward of the river, and in the vicinity of Opa and Millipa Villages; the country passed over is
remarkably fertile and heavily timbered, until we reached some low hills which are of clayey formation,
Here we found the indications which had first attracted Mr. Thomas’ attention. Those consist of a series
of minute craters on a level, and located in wet clayey ground, at intervals of a few yards, for about a
quarter of a mile in an easterly direction. The mud and water in these craters was churning, as if in the
process of boiling (but was quite cold); and the ground in places was working as if some great pressure
from below was causing it to do so. On applying a match to the surface of the craters, I found that the
gas which was being exuded (and causing the bubbling action in its upward course), ignited readily as it
37
mtuoLFFM and Natural gas In parla.


escaped from the water, and gave a red and bluish flame. There was a slight odour arising, faintly
resembling kerosene, while the smell of the fumes resembled more than anything those of methylated
spirits. I saw ten or a dozen of these small craters at this point, all of which were actively discharging gas.
“ The local natives informed me that this phenomena has been known to them for many years, and,
as far as they know, has always existed. They call it llavila, which appears to be their name for the
peculiar boiling action, but they had no idea of the existence of the gas until Mr. Thomas came along and
demonstrated its presence by burning it. The fact that they were very much afraid on seeing this would
indicate their ignorance of its inflammable nature.
“ Having seen all that there was to be seen here, we retraced our steps, and next morning loft Kiri
per whaleboat, and proceeded about 30 miles up the Vailala River, to a point about 2 miles above Akauda
Village, on the left bank of the stream. The distance being accomplished after ton hours’ rowing, the
river fortunately being low and having a slack current. Hext morning, leaving the whaleboat, we went
some twenty chains east of the river, into the bush, where Mr. Thomas pointed out the second series of
indications he had found. Tinse resembled in every way those seen lower down the river at Kiri, but
were on a larger scale and more pronounced, the escape of gas from the earth being much greater.
“ One of these craters, or a series of small craters close together, was in wet clayey ground and
about 30 feet x3O feet in extent; the whole of the surface of this area was bubbling and giving off gas,
which, as it escaped from the water, ignited on applying a lighted match. The froth caused by the bubbling
had a very decided odour of kerosene. In this vicinity there were also a number of places where highly
inflammable gas was issuing from small fissures in the dry earth. The noise of the gas forcing its way
upward could be heard for some distance. Once lighted, these jets of gas would burn brightly for an
indefinite time. One remained alight for well over two hours, and was still going strong, after having
boiled a hilly-can full of water in quick time.
“Another larger fissure which I opened up, and sunk a hole on about 8 feet deep, gave off a
powerful jet of gas, which when ignited I found it difficult to extinguish by beating it with a branch of a
tree ; as a matter of fact we had to smother it with earth, and pour water on it to put it out. The native
police and other natives with us were very frightened, and it took some sternness to prevent them taking
ti the bush. The fumes of the gas, like that found at Kiri, resemble, more than anything else, those of
methylated spirit.”
“ There was nothing remarkable in the formation of the ground in the vicinity. It
consists of yellow clay on the surface, which runs to a depth of 3 feet, then came a thin layer of decaying
loaves ; after which a bluish-grey clay strata was met with, and this appeared to run for some depth, and
prevailed for the remainder of the depth of the hole which I sunk. At this depth (about 8 feet), the
fissure on which I was sinking branched off downwards in an easterly direction, and appeared to run to
a great depth, so I abandoned sinking.”
. . . . “On the river, in an almost direct line from the gas escape, I found an outcrop of
sandstone shale, running into the river. I found similar formations of shale across the river lower down
the stream, to the south-west.”
. . . “ A further outcrop of craters and gas, exactly similar to those already described, is to
be found about 3 miles to the south-west across the river from the Akauda ones, towards the coast, and
another is said to exist a considerable distance in the same southward direction, behind Orocolo,
38
feULLETIK OF THE TERRITORY OP PAPUA.


“ I did not sec any outcrops of actual oil, but at places in small watercourses in the vicinity of the
gas escapes some metallic scum was to be seen [iron oxide. —J.E.C.,] —but whether it comes from the same
source as the gas, I c innot say. I collected some of the scum and put it in one of the bottles, which lam
forwarding to you.
“ I do not profess to be qualified to give an expert opinion as to what source the gas found is
attributable ; I have simply related what I actually saw. There is no doubt about the existence of a
remarkable phenomenon, the true value of which can only be determined by an expert, whose opinion
would bo most interesting on the question of whether all or any of the several outcrops of gas are
connected with one another. They are certainly of a similar nature. I would respectfully recommend
that a scientific opinion be obtained as soon as possible.
“ In my opinion there is a great possibility that a very valuable discovery has been made, and that
I have no hesitation in saying that any layman would be fully justified in concluding from the indications
observed by me, that a deposit of petroleum exists on the Vailala River.”
After receipt of the report from which the above was taken, the Acting Government Secretary
wrote on the sth January, 1913, asking which of the localities was discovered by Mr. Lett. To this Mr.
Henderson replied on the 25th January, as follows ;
“ Adverting to your letter (No. 33/12) of the sth inst., relative to the find of the alleged petroleum
in the Vailala River district of this Division, I beg to inform you that Mr. Garnet H. Thomas, of Kiri
Plantation, Vailala River, claims to be the original discoverer of the alleged petroleum. Mr. Lewis Lett
is his partner, and they are jointly interested in the discovery, and claim to have discovered four of the
outcrops referred to in my report of the 16th ultimo. One in the vicinity of Opa and Aparuria Villages ;
one above Akauda Village, both on the left (east) side of the Vailala River; and the other two on the
right (west) side coming down the river from Akauda. The other, the fifth, outcrops behind Orocolo,
I understand from Mr. Thomas had not been seen by him, but he said he had been told by native
informants that it existed. The first discovery was made in the vicinity of Opa and Akauda Villages.”
The sample received by the Writer from Mr. Lett on the 14th December, 1911, was, by permission
of the Under Secretary for Mines, submitted to Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye for examination. It consisted of a
small bottle of dirty water and sediment, about 8 oz,, with a very small quantity of a greasydooking
substance adhering to the glass, but not on the surface of the water. The result of Mr. Mingaye’s
analytical investigation is given in the following statement: —
“Laboratory, Geological Survey, N.S.W., Department of Mines,
“December 19, 1911.
“1 have the honor to report as follows respecting an examination made of a small quantity of a
greasy substance in a bottle from New Guinea :
“ The material was found to consist largely of iron oxide, and a small quantity of greasy
substance having the odour of petroleum oil.
“On treating the material with petroleum spirit, an oily dark liquid was obtained, which on
separation from the watery solution, and evaporating, yielded about one cubic centimetre of a heavy
oil answering all the characteristics of crude petroleum oil.
“ Before giving a definite opinion, it would be necessary to obtain a larger sample of the material
for further examination, specific gravity, Ac., but 1 have every reason to believe that petroleum oil
is present in the material, and furnish a small tube containing a small quantity of the oil obtained,
39
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


“ I understand that methane is given off,and rises with the water,and very often when this is the
case a greasy substance is present which is not jietroleum oil, and consists largely of ferric oxide, the
iron being originally present in the water in the ferrous state, and oxidized by contact with the air.
The gases also in petroleum wells contain methane, ethane, and other gases.
“(Signed) J. C. H. MING AYE,
“ Analyst and Assayer.”
Other Reported Indications of Petroleum in New Guinea.
Professor A. Liversidge, F.R.S., &c., in his “Preliminary Notes on some rocks and minerals from
New Guinea”—read before the Royal .Society of New South Wales, December Ist, 1886*—
records “a fragment of stalactitic aragonite, but blackened and saturated with tarry matter,” amongst
Signor DAlbertis’ collection from the Fly River. It is possible that the “ tarry matter ” was asphaltic
residue from petroleum evaporation. At all events, the above record is significant in view of the recent oil
discovery' on the Vailala.
In 1894 Sir William McGregor recorded cold bubbling springs near Cape Labillardiere, on the
north-west coast of Moratau, or Fergusson Island, in the D’Entrecasteaux Group, f
Further on in his report a description of this occurrence is given :
“ The position of Cape Labillardiere, or of the end of the island near it, was obtained at night.
At my first visit there I reported that search had been made in vain in that neighbourhood for the
Roiling Springs described by Moresby, and said to spout up small rubies. At low water next morning we
noticed perhaps half-a-soore of bubbling springs near the beach, in salt water from six to thirty' inches
deep, over an area of about fifty by a hundred yards square. The nature of the bubbling outlets was
not quite clear. It was manifestly not caused by hot or boiling springs. Water certainly issues from
the ground containing air or gas, but it is quite cold, and it could not be made out that it differed in
tisto from sea-water, but that was not accurately established.
“There is a small plateau of level ground between the foot of the mountain and the sea which has
to he crossed by the little creeks that come down from the mountain, which is 2,000 or 3,000 feet high.
It appears most probable that these creeks arrive by subterranean passages to the foreshore and make their
exit there as the small bubbling fountains. The explanation of the rubies thrown up seems to be that the
springs open on a foreshore covered by mica. The bubbling jets drive up into the salt water large
quantities of these light micaceous scales, and in certain lights a bright imagination may see almost any
kind of gem it thinks of.” J
Hot springs occur in the southern island Duau, or Normanby Island ; but Sir William emphasises
the fact that those of Cape Labillardiere are cold. It does not follow that the latter are petroliferous, but
it would be unwise to neglect the possibility. Evidently the gas pressure has to be accounted for, otherwise
than in Sir William’s gravity theory.
Of the hot springs in the south island he records that; —
“ Village of Waipoiana, at the foot of Mount Sobia. It is a little village, with very small and dirty
houses. A little stream of fresh water enters the sea here. For about a couple of hundred yards from the
sea, along the course of this creek, hot springs and shoots of steam are given forth. The great mountains
*Jour*. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, Vol, XX, p. 228.
t Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending June 30th, 1894, p. xvi.
} Ibid., p. 21.
40
BULLETIN OP THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


forming the south end of Duau [Normanby Island.—J.E.C.] are schistose, and so are those forming its
north end ; but a large area of volcanic formation separates the two, and runs through the island. The
hot springs at Waipoiana are where the plutonic and schistose formations meet.” *
Petroleum was reported in the Gira Gold-field, in the north-eastern division of Papua. The Director
of Mines records the following announcement;—“Mr. G. H. Nicholls, the Acting-Warden of the Gira
Gold-field, in a recent report, states:—P. Lassen reports that he has discovered petroleum at Gira.
According to his own account, his tea had kerosene in it pn one occasion. He called his boy, and asked
him what ho had been doing with the kerosene. His boy replied that it came from the water. Mr.
Lassen went to inspect, and found the water covered with a thick film of what he said was pure kerosene. He
contends that it oozes from the ground over a large area. He has been prospecting the ground with the
hope of finding its source, but without success.” f
Mr. E. R. Stanley, Government Geologist, furnished the following report to the Lieutenant-Governor’
dated "2nd December, 1911 :—“I have the honor to inform you that, acting on your instructions, I have care-
fully examined the country in thevicinityof Linden’s Creek for mineral oil, and state that there is not sufficient
evidence to warrant a deposit of this nature. A mining resident at this locality states that in the dry seasons he
actually saw and tasted kerosene in the creek water. Having obtained from him the exact locality of
the alleged occurrence, I proceeded to examine water-holes and slowly running streams for an iridescent
surface-film so characteristic of oleiferous substances on water. The creeks are very close to the private
and boys’ houses, but there is absolutely no trace of petroleum in them. During my investigations in the
vicinity of these creeks, I discovered several greasy meat-tins laying about close to where the oil was
reputed to be discovered, and the possibility is, that the greasy materal has found its way into the water.
In tranquil pools of water one often finds an iridescent scum of oxide of iron, and this can easily be
mistaken for oil.
“ Further, from a geological standpoint, the rocks of the district are not likely to be oleiferous, being
a metamorphic series impregnated by many basic dykes and a few acid and intermediate rocks.”
In the early part of 1912 reports were current in Port Moresby, of petroleum occurrence on the
shores of a small island near Samarai. The resident believed he could smell kerosene when the tide was
out. So far as the Writer can learn, this report has not been investigated.
In Dutch New Guinea gas and oil occur as surface indications about due east of the Island of
Ceram (where oil has been proved by boring), near Fak-Fak, south of McGuer’s Gulf.
Gas springs have also been reported near Etna Ray, a little west of north from Aroe Islands. The
Writer is indebted to Mr. A. O. Mackenzie for the following information regarding the latter. Natives of
Dutch New Guinea informed members of the Celebes Pearling Fleet (having head-quarters at Dobo, Aroe
Islands), by whom they were employed, that kerosene was known to them in the locality mentioned. A
party thereupon visited the locality under native guidance. A gas spring and coal were located close to
the coast, but no oil was seen. Some of the coal was tried on a small steamer. Nothing further was
done, as concessions were refused by the Dutch Government. So far as the Writer could ascertain, none of
the localities in Dutch territory, in which indications of oil and gas have been found, have yet been
tested. The bare record, however, is of interest, as another link in the chain connecting Papua with the
productive oil-fields in Java, Sumatra, and Borneo.
• Ann. Kept. British New Guinea, year ending June 30th, 1894, p. 10. t Alln - Kept. Territory of Papua, year endins June 30th, 1911, p. 23
42124—1"


In the account of a recent British Expedition in Dutch New Guinea—probably abbreviated —a
tantalizing reference to oil is given in the following brief statement: —“ In the low foothills there were
strong indications of oil— [ltalics mine.—J. E. C.] —particularly noticeable in the vicinity of the coal,” * hut
no information is afforded of the nature of the indications, nor yet in a later reference.j -
In this place it appears advisable to record a possible indication of petroleum on the North Coast
of Australia opposite the Gulf of Papua ; with a reservation that the occurrence of “bitumen” in small
quantity does not necessarily imply an oleiferous origin. Recent boring operations conducted by the
McArthur River Mining Company, on Cook’s Mineral lease, 8 miles from McArthur River Station,
adjacent to the, south-western shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria, revealed small particles of “bitumen” in
limestone cores from 100 feet to 150 feet deep in the silver-lead deposits of that locality.
Bitumen, asphaltum, or mineral pitch, according to Dana, is a “mixture of different hydrocarbons,
part of which are oxygenated. The more solid kinds graduate into the pittasphalts or mineral tar, and
through these there is a gradation to petroleum. The fluid kinds change into the solid by the loss of the
vaporizable portion on exposure, and also by a process of oxydation, which consists first in a loss of
hydrogen, and finally in the oxygenation of a portion of the mass.” The most abundant deposits according
to the same authority, are superficial, but generally, if not always, connected with rock deposits containing
some kind of bituminous or vegetable remains.
E. H. Cunningham Craigj regards the bitumen of the famous Pitch Lake, of Trinidad, as
inspissated petroleum derived from an associated oil-rook, from which the Lake is still receiving additions
on a reduced scale.
Bitumen is also reported to have been found loose on the coast at Cape Wilberforce, near the
western head of the Gulf of Carpentaria, where the rocks are reported to be sandstone. Local reports
are also believed to have been current, ten or twelve years since, as to evidence of oil on the waters of
the Gulf.
Recently American visitors to the Northern Territory reported discovering indications of oil
somewhere in the Victoria River district, but nothing definite is yet known. §
Narrative.
The Writer reached Papua on the Bth January, 1912, to take part in the Purari Coal Expedition.
On reaching the mouth of the Kikori River an outbreak of dysentery amongst the native carriers forced
an alteration in the order of procedure, inspection of the reported oil indications on the Yailala River
being undertaken whilst the native contingent was returned to Port Moresby and a fresh one sought
further east.
On the 18th February the Hon. W. J. Little and the Writer were transferred from the “ Mervie
England” to the whaleboat of the Acting Resident Magistrate of the Gulf Division (Mr, L. F. Henderson),
who was waiting off the Vaimura River mouth in the delta, about 50 miles west of the Yailala .River.
Making way along the coast, sailing when the wind favoured, rowing when it ceased, the
Maipua River was entered late in the afternoon, and in a few miles the populous native village of
Maipua was reached, where the night was spent in a Government “ Rest-house,” erected by the natives for
the use of travellers.
♦The Geogr, Journ., XXXVIII, No. 3, Sept., 1911, p. 248.) f Pygmies and Papuans, by A. F H. Wollaston, 1912, p. 241.
t “Oil Finding.” 1912. pp. 98-100.
§ A Mr. Oswald, who held an oil prospecting licence some time ago, informed the Secietary for External Affairs that < zokerite had been
found south of Queen’s Channel, at the mouth of the Victoria I’iver,


Plate XVII,
E.McGouan Dubu (Men , s House), Maipua, Purari Delta, Papua.
Plate XVIII.
View on Vailala River, near Mouth, Papua.
(Natives trying new Canoe.)
D. McDonald.




February 19. —An early start was made, the party being increased by two native criminals arrested
by the magistrate (one for murder). These continued part of the Oil Expedition, and soon appeared quite
unconcerned. The route continued along the Maipua and other delta streams until the coast was reached
at ilie mouth of the Alele. Passing the coastal villages of Nomi and Orocolo, the Vailala River was reached
late in the evening, arrival being delayed by an attempt to make the coast at Biai Point, 3 miles west of
Vailala, where the only reef of rocks for 30 miles along the coast juts out. To make the entrance through
the treacherous—and frequently shifting—sand-bars athwart the river mouth, a long and trying pull to
Aindward was necessary, which sorely taxed the strength of the native police crew. The night was spent
in a Government Rest-house in the village of Vailala.
February 20. —An early start was made up the Vailala, a broad, powerful current stream, then in
flood. An extra scratch erew of the local natives was taken to assist the regular crew—a wild-looking,
yet merry crowd, mostly clad in armlets and nose ornaments.
The river scenery is tropical, and beautiful with flowering vines festooning overhanging trees ;
most conspicuous amongst the blooms being the deep scarlet D’Albertis creeper (Mucuna prurians).
Lofty groves of native bread-fruit trees fringed the banks with elegant foliage, their prolific and nutritious
fruit forming an important staple of native food. Nipa Palm ( Nipa fruticans), the most important native
roofing material, encroached on the river in the lower-lying areas.
A stiort halt was made at Vaivera, the site of abortive saw-milling enterprise, where, in a shallow
creek, marine fossils were obtained, which are described under the head of “Geology” in the Coal Section
(page 27).
Messrs. Lett and Thomas’ coconut plantation on Kiri Creek, about 12 miles upstream from the
river mouth, was reached at midday.
In the afternoon the first discovered gas springs were examined near the village of Opa, in
company with Mr. Lett. Rock outcrops being few and confined to shallow' creeks then in a state of flood,
closer investigation was deferred until the return journey.
February 21.—An early start, in which Mr. Lett joined, was made for the heavy pull of 25 miles
up-stream to Akauda Village, near which the most important gas springs are located. The stream course
became more serpentine, in two places almost completing the loop, less than a chain intervening after a
river detour of over 3 miles. At another almost completed loop local natives keep canoes on either side of
the isthmus to avoid the long pull round.
After a must exhausting struggle against the powerful flood current, taking advantage of slack
water on either side, Akauda was reached after 11 p.m., to the astonishment of the natives of this small
village. The commotion was great as the village constable roused the sleepers to move their canoes from
the landing-place. Here, in a partially completed rest-house, which Mr. Henderson had ordered on his
previous trip, a comfortable camp was made and used as a base for exploring the vicinity.
February 22.—Early this morning the most important group of gas jets was visited in company
with several local natives and the boat pullers, the distance from the village of Akauda being between
2 and 3 miles, and about 20 chains from the river on the east bank.
The largest spring is known to the natives as Ilumari, but the meaning of the term, whether
indicative of locality or movement of the water under gas pressure, is not certain, but most probably it
signifies the latter.


After a careful examination of the locality, a search was made for rock outcrops in a neighbouring
creek. Following it down towards the river, frequent jets of gas bubbles were noticed rising through the
water. About 4or 5 chains from the creek junction with the river some slight stains in the bed-rock
attracted the Writer’s attention, and on breaking up the rock with a geological hammer, crude petroleum
was observed saturating it, and globules followed further disturbance of the bed-rock. Wherever the
latter appeared above the water similar discoveries were made for a couple of chains; the stream
cutting athwart the strike of the strata, limited the oil-seepage to the narrow limits of the stream for the
distance mentioned. Less flooded conditions would probably reveal other seepages where the stream
course favoured.
February 23 and 24.—Were devoted to further examination of the vicinity of the gas springs,
and to breaking up the bed rock at the oil-seepage and securing adequate samples for analysis, etc. In the
afternoon of the 24th the river was crossed on the strike of the oil-rocks, and search made in the nearest
creek sections; a few gas bubbles were observed, but no pronounced stream.
February 25.—Further examination of the creek sections on the west bank was this day re warded by
the discovery of an oil-seepage, about three-quarters of a mile from the first find at Oil Creek, on the east
side. As further time could not be spared to the Akauda locality, a start down-stream was made in the
afternoon for Kiri Creek, which was reached in speedy time in the strongly flowing current.
February 26.—A further examination was made of the Opa gas group and their surroundings.
Additional evidence was obtained about half a mile distant in the form of mud springs. In the bed-rock—
mudstone—close to the Opa Spring, holes were sunk about 3 feet and a pronounced odour of petroleum
obtained. At this site Mr. E. R. Stanley, under drier conditions, obtained undoubted traces of oil, but
insufficient to collect.
Vailala was reached the same evening.
February 27.—Mr. Henderson and the Writer started on foot down the coast to examine a reported
gas spring at the back of the village of Orocolo, about 2 miles from the coast. About 6 miles from
Vailala the coast was left, on a line bearing N. 20° E., under guidance of local natives who, in about 2
miles, pointed to a slight depression on the ridge which trends parallel to the coast at the back of Orocolo
Village. Evidently the natives held the bubbling spring in some awe, for they refused to approach it
until the white men had reached its margin. The bubbling noise could be hoard at some little distance.
The Orocolo Spiring is of considerable size, and resembles those of Opa and Akauda, though the gas does
not ignite as freely. Returning to Vailala the same evening the Rest house was reached about dark.
Our entourage embraced natives of all sizes arid ages from the villages on either side of the river mouth,
who formed quite a procession along the shore. The river was crossed and recrossed in native canoes.
February 28. --Was spent at Vailala awaiting Mr. Little’s return from Kiri, where he had remained
with Mr. Lett on the way down, as the latter was alone and prostrated with malaria.
February 29.—Started along the coast this morning under sail for Kerema Station, in the Gulf
Division, where the “Merrie England” was to be met. The wind favouring, the 30 miles were covered
by 1 p.m.
From February 29 until March 16.—Was spient at Kercma awaiting the return of the “Merrie
England,” which put in an appearance oil the coast on the afternoon of the 16th, with the Lieutenant
44
BULLETIN OF THE TEBKITOBY OF PAPUA.


Plate XIX.
E. McGowen.
Vailala River Mouth, Papua.
(D. McDonald, and Natives repairing Canoes.)
Plate XX.
D. McDonald.
Vailala Natives, Gulf Division, Papua.


Plate XXI.
D Mackay.
Sago Palms, Upper Purari River, Papua.
Plate XXII.
D. Mackay.
Preparing Sago, Upper Purari River, Papua.
(Washing and Pressing; the beaten pulp.)


Governor on board, who shortly after landed from his whaleboat. About 9.30 p.m. all were on board,
and the boat under way for Goaribari, at the mouth of the Kikori, as already related in the Coal Expedi-
tion Narrative.
The continuation of the Narrative of the Oil Expeditions dates from the departure of the
s.s. “Wakefield” from Kikori Station on the 22nd May. Then followed a most interesting steamer trip
through winding channels in the delta, some of great width and depth, others narrow and shallow —■
necessitating constant soundings. The anchor was dropped just before dark.
May 23.—Yaimura was reached this day, and later the large villages of Kaimari aud Ukiaravi.
May 24. —This day was one of the Writer’s most interesting experiences in New Guinea. The
“ Wakefield ” was navigated through two narrow channels connecting the main delta branches of the Purari.
Hounding sharp bends the steamer would be head on in the jungle-lined bank, and shortly after stern on
as the current swung her round. Meanwhile, the mast an I top gear were tearing down overhanging
foliage, the decks and awnings being covered with greenery. These “short-cut” channels were remark-
able for their depth.
Sago palms {Sayus Icevis and rumphii) and bread-fruit trees lined the banks of tbe delta channels
with their graceful fronds and foliage. At the important villages of Ukiaravi, Kaimari, and another, with
estimated populations aggregating 9,000, sago mills in great number were in full operation. Large
accumulations of the beaten and squeezed pulp resembled saw-dust heaps at busy saw-milling centres. The
land hereabouts showed marked improvement, excellent soil being noticeable in the higher banks. The
ship was anchored for the night in an eastern tributary of tlie Purari, not far from the village of Nomi,
on the coast, about 3 miles west of Orocolo.
In the delta villages the percentage of children was remarkable; no sign here of a “declining
birthrate.” It speaks eloquently for the Governmental policy of patrolling and general oversight, that this
papulous region—in the not distant past a dangerous one—can now bo traversed by magistrates, patrol-
officers, or recruiters, singly or in couples, without danger, a result achieved with little or no bloodshed.
Punishment of offenders has been secured, weaker villages protected, and general confidence instilled in
the native mind, by firm, but just and humane treatment, the culprits returning to their villages
impressed with the power and fairness of the “ Governor ” —the name that stands for the administration
as well as the individual.
May 25. —-The steamer was taken as far up the Ainama (?) River as deemed safe navigation, the
chief difficulty being room to swung round for return. Soon after anchoring, Mr. Cowley, Captain Hunter,
Mr. Talbot,, and the Writer were rowed up to the village of Eperi, or Hepiri ; from there a tramp of
several miles, through rain aud mud for the most part, brought the party to Hepiri gas springs,
recently pointed out by the local natives. Rain fell heavily all day, making search for oil-seepages
in neighbouring creeks almost an impossibility, owing to the rush of water.
May 26.—The same party made an early start again upstream in heavy rain. The village of
Mura was reached at lunch time. The boat returned to the steamer which, later, anchored at the mouth
of (he Alvei, on the coast, to await the morning tide to cross out over the bar.
After leaving Mura Village the pedestrians tramped towards the coast, examining the Mura gas
springs on the track —about 2 miles south of the village. Here, excessive rain again militated against
successful oil finding, though a very pronounced odour of petroleum was obtained in soft blue mudstone in
tbe bank of a small channel near the springs.
45
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


The inarch was continued coastwards for several miles ; a long wade through tidal sago swamps
being negotiated before the coast was reached. The coast was then followed eastward beyond the village
of Orocolo to a new, but unoccupied trading house, belonging to the British New Guinea Development
Company. Discarding as much as possible of saturated clothing, a good meal served by the cook-boys
revivi d the party, which settled down on new copra sacks to await the arrival of Mr. Little and the
carriers with the camping equipment, which had been put ashore at Nomi, About 9'30 p.m. their arrival
disturbed the sleepers.
May 27.—An early start was made for Orocolo gas springs, Mr. Little and the carriers following
the coast to Vailala to await the arrival of the “ Wakefield,” on the morning tide, over the bar.
A further examination was made of the large Orocolo gas spring, again under the disadvantage of
heavy water in the channels. Strong odours of petroleum were obtained in two localities ; and reverse
dips were noted north and south of the gas spring—thus indicating an anticline. Captain Hunter
subsequently reported perceptible oil in a hole sunk in a creek—before the opening collapsed.
Vailala was reached about 6 p.m., and a comfortable camp made in the Government Rest house in
the village. Rest-houses are built wherever control extends, for the convenience of Government officers
and travellers, by the. natives under orders from local magistrates, payment being usually made in the
prevailing currency—tobacco.
May 28.—The “ Wakefield ” crossed in early this morning, after a troubled night at anchor in the
rollers. All hands got aboard early, and the ship headed up stream under full steam. In the delta about
eighty labourers had been taken on board from the Company’s recruiting cutter, at Ukiaravi. Their depart-
ure was the signal for frantic leave takings and loud wailing, which affected the nerves of the less venture-
some, who took headers into the stream as the ship got under weigh. Hence the “ Wakefield” was a full
ship as she stemmed the current. Unfortunately she got aground on a projecting ledge of rock, close in to the
western bank, whilst seeking to avoid imaginary rocks in mid-stream. After spending the rest of the day
endeavouring to haul her off with the winch, it was decided to abandon the attempt. The oil-seekers
to proceed up stream in the ship’s boat, whilst the cargo was unloaded.
May 29,—Starting early, Akauda Village was reached at noon, and the first oil-find (of February
23rd), shortly after lunch. The rest of the afternoon was devoted to securing additional oil-samples, by
breaking up the bed-rock in Oil Creek, and skimming the oil which rose to the surface of the water. Akauda
Rest-house was again reached about dusk.
May .30.—The west side of the Vailala was visited to examine a reported new oil-seepage about
30 chains from the Writer’s previous find on this side. Unfortunately the distance only proved about
7 chains, thus reducing the length of discovery. It was found by Mr. R. Hill on May 16th, in a small
creek, and is equally as important as the main Akauda find. Further oil-samples were obtained from
this site.
May 31.—A start was made down-stream at 6 a.m. this morning, but the “ Wakefield” was met
half way, having got off in the rising flood, which had been anxiously watched at Akauda. The unshipped
cargo had then to be taken on board. About 1 p.m. the nearest point to the Aru Aru gas springs was
reached, and the trarnpers again set out on an 8-mile walk to this group. The peculiarity of these springs
is that thin films of oil are brought up with the gas, and for a brief moment, are visible on the surface
of the bubbling muddy water. The ship was reached before dark, and a fresh start made down-stream,
until darkness prevented further progress, and the anchor was dropped.
46
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


Mr. E. R. Stanley personally informed the Writer in December, 1912, that in Ho Ho Creek—
between Yaivera and the coast towards Orocolo—good outcrops of mudstone and sandstone containing
plant remains dip southerly at 20° to 30°. Bubbles of gas were observed rising through sandstone in the
bed of this creek ; but oil was not seen.
June I.—The excellent police contingent which accompanied the Coal Expedition were disembarked
at Vailala this morning to walk to their station at Kerema, about 30 miles distant. Several of these
men deserve the highest encomiums for their faithful service ; especially deserving of mention were Passua
and Dobau, Kiwai natives, who have been long in the service. Respectful, reliable, honest, and patient
under trying and arduous circumstances. The Writer’s own orderly, Guha, though thoughtless, was most
constant and faithful in service.
About 11 a.m. advantage was taken of full tide to attempt the Vailala bar, with a recruiting cutter
in town But soon trouble began, the ship bumping heavily in the trough of the rollers, and eventually
getting broadside on on the sand-banks. The cutter cast off as soon as the ship got into difficulties, and
let go her anchor, where she remained until next tide and change of wind. After about twenty minutes
buffeting by the. rollers the “ Wakefield’s ” head was got round, and with full steam she gradually scraped
through the sand, and got free.
June 2.—After calling at the British New Guinea Development Company’s Oho plantation, where
1,000 acres are planted with coconuts, corn, cowpea, sweet potatoes, peanuts, cotton, etc., Port Moresby
was reached at 7 p.m., after an absence extending from the 11th February.
OIL AND GAS IN PAPUA.
Opa.
The first discovery was made adjacent to the village of Opa, near Kiri Creek, about 3 miles from
the Vailala River. Here several gas springs occur, some rising through cracks in the soil, others through
water. The most important consists of a muddy pool of saline water kept in a state x’esembling ebullition
by the escaping gas. Around the margin of the water, and down the overflow side, fine mud is deposited.
Approach to the central zone of activity was only possible on a platform of saplings. Long poles
forced down into the extremely fine mud of the centre were speedily ejected by the force of the ascending
gas. No decided odour of petroleum was noticeable on the first occasion, but it is reported to bo more
pronounced at times.
Gas was rising freely through fresh rain-water close by, without leaving any perceptible scum on
the surface. Nor did the main saline pool show any frothy scum as in the case of the main spring at
Akauda.
About 300 feet away from the latter, a dry gas jet was sunk upon for 8 feet, by Mr. L. F.
Henderson. Below the upper alluvial, cracks were discernible from which the gas escaped. At the time
of the Writer’s inspection this excavation was full of fresh water, over the surface of which the gas
burned freely on ignition, but displayed no evidence of oil.
47
Mtuoleum and Natural gas in papua.


On a second inspection, on the return journey, several other vents were discovered at Opa, in which
fine mud was the principal feature. These occurred several feet above the general level. No perceptible
odour of petroleum could be detected, but they undoubtedly had resulted from gas forcing fine mud and
water to the surface until the orifice was blocked by the gas finding an easier outlet.
On this occasion also, subsiding floods enabled a closer inspection being made of the bed of a small
channel near the main group of springs, though examination was still hampered by excess water. In two
sites, by sinking a couple of feet in soft blue, mudstone, a decided odour of petroleum was obtained ;
and Mr. Stanley subsequently, under drier and more favourable conditions, succeeded in obtaining
undoubted oil exudation in the creek bed, but in too limited quantity to collect.
To quote Mr. Stanley, under date -3rd August, 1912 :
“ I discovered oil in a small creek running north-east, and situated about 50 yards, or more, south-
east from the first lot of vents after passing through Opa Village to the east. I was unable to collect
some of the oil as the seepage was so small, and being situated right in the bed of the creek. The rock in
which it occurs is a mudstone. There are fragments of limestone and of sandstone to bo found in the
same creek. After breaking away some of the mudstone I was agreeably surprised to see the iridescent
film on the surface of the water, and a drop or two of dark-coloured oil. My pick-hammer also smelt
strongly of petroleum after T had finished lifting some of the mudstone from the bottom of the creek.”
Akauda.
The second “discovery” was a couple, of miles above the village, of Akauda, about 25 or 30 miles
further up the river. The principal gas pool at this site was considerably larger than that of Opa ; more-
over, it was covered with a thick frothy scum, the odour of which was very pronounced. From this
spring was collected the sample submitted to test in the Departmental Laboratory (see page 39). For the
purpose of confirming the latter, a large quantity of the scum was collected from the surface of the saline
water. But in each case, out of a number, on subsidence of the mud, clear water only was seen above it,
no trace of floating oil being visible. On stirring the sediment, however, an odour of petroleum was
noticeable,
A fair sample of the “ scum,” as collected, was subsequently examined and tested by Mr. Mingaye,
who reported as follows :
“Bottles containing mud, water, oil, leaves, much organic matter, &c., which appeared to be under-
going decomposition and giving off gas. Sample collected by Air. J. E. Came, from spring, Papua.
“ Analysis of the Wafer.
Grains per gallon. In 1000 parts.
“ Total solid matter (dried at 220° F.) ... ... 722-20 10-3172
“ Chlorine as chlorides ... ... ... ... ... 383-70 5-4815
“Sulphur trioxide, as sulphates ... ... ... Nil. Nil.
“ The total solid matter was found to consist largely of sodium chloride (common salt), with lesser
amounts of lime, magnesia, and potash, combined as chlorides and carbonates, silica, (fcc.
48
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PABUA.


Plate XXIII.
L Henderson
Akauda Main Gas Spring, Vailala River, Papua.
(White patches and ripples caused by escaping gas.)




“ A strong reaction was given for the presence of boric acid, which is probably present in deter-
minable amount.
“ On filtering the insoluble matter through a dry filter, about 250 c.c. of clear water was obtained
for examination. A strong odour of petroleum was observed in the sample. The sample maybe described
as a brine water, A small quantity of petroleum was extracted from the insoluble residue.”
The oil present in the Am Am gas springs is also almost imperceptible, even on analysis. A
sample was obtained for examination. Here, though the oil was clearly visible as a thin ring as each,
gas bubble burst on the surface of the muddy water, yet, on the mud subsiding in a glass vessel,, no oil
was present on the clear water. Doubtless the well-known absorbent property of clays for oil accounts for
its absence on the surface of the water under tranquil conditions.
At a later date (October), Mr. Stanley found oil in two places in Wahua Creek, close by. The
Writer examined the latter at the end of May, 1912, as a likely locality, but flood waters covered the
bed-rocks.
Following is Mr. Mingaye’s report of the sample taken from the muddy gas pool:
“ 2438'9.—Bottles containing mud and water from Am Aru Gas Spring, Yailala River.
“The mud and water were filtered, and sufficient of-’the clear water obtained to enable a partial
analysis bain ' made. Water alkaline, slight odour of petroleum oil. On evaporating a measured quantity
of water down to dryness, yielded :
Grains per gallon. In 1,000 parts.
“Total solid matter (dried at 220° F.) ... ... 842’60 12-038
“Chlorine as chlorides ... ... ... ... 424-62 , 6-066
“Sulphur trioxide, as sulphates ... ... ... Nil, Nil.
A quantitative analysis of the total solid matter proved it to consist mainly of sodium chloride, with
some sodium carbonate, calcium, and magnesium carbonates, silica, &c.—calcium carbonate 9’64 grains
per gallon, magnesium carbonate 1-60 grains per gallon, silica 1"80 grains per gallon. A strong reaction
was obtained for the presence of iodine and boric acid in the water ; 20 c.c. of the water readily shows a
good reaction for iodine.
“ A sample of water exhibited in the Mining Museum marked 1 lodine Water from the Source of the
Golnosk Water, Soerahaia Island, Java,’ was examined for comparison with the Papuan water. It is
estimated that the Java water contains about one-fifth more iodine than the Papuan water.
“The Java water appears to be utilised for the extiaction of the iodine contents, the iodine being
separated as a copper iodide, from which the iodine is extracted, and the copper formed into copper sulphate,
“It is possible that when the Papuan Territory is opened np, that the Aru Aru water may be of
some value for the extraction of the iodine.
“There is an appreciable amount of boric acid present, existing in the water probably as sodium
hiborate; but the sample received was much too small to enable the determination of the iodine and the
boric acid
“ A trace of petroleum oil was extracted from the mud.”
42124—G
49
PKTUOLKTtM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


After close examination of the Akamla gas springs, and failure to recognise any definite oil occurrence
the natives were instructed to point out any rock outcrops. Starting in a small creek near by, rock was
noted at rare intervals in the bed of the channel. Gas was also observed occasionally rising through the
water. Following the stream down, and carefully examining the limited exposures of bed-rocks, near its
junction with the river, the Writer observed darker stains than usual in bedding planes of certain sand-
stones and mudstones, which, on breaking up with a geological hammer, yielded oil.
With the aid of a geological hammer and tomahawk, oil seepage was exposed for a couple of chains
in the creek bed. Recent flooding had evidently removed any previous accumulations of oily scum on the
water, for none were visible, though on disturbance of the bod-rock it floated freely down the current and
impregnated the atmosphere with its distinctive odour. At the seepage gas was escaping freely. In the
bank a few feet from the oil discovery, Messrs. Lett and Thomas on a previous occasion had boiled their
billy-can over a gas-jet. On the occasion of the Writer’s second visit this jet was opened up and oil
obtained immediately’ under its surface vent.
The strike of the oil rocks was followed later across the river, where a second discovery was made
in mudstone in the bank of a creek, roughly about three-quarters of a mile from the first discovery. As
time was limited by the necessity of meeting the “ Merrie England ” at Keroma on a definite date, no
further examination could be made after February 25th. On May 30th, however, a further brief
opportunity was afforded of revisiting the site. On this occasion a discovery on the west side—by Richard
Hill, on May 16th—was examined and additional samples of oil obtained at both sites, the latest being
about 7 chains from the Writer’s find on February 25th, 1912. Here the oil occurs under similar, and
quite as favourable conditions as on the east side.
The samples first collected at Akauda were forwarded to Sydney for examination whilst the Writer
was absent on the Coal Expedition. Mr. Mingaye reports ;
“ Crude Petroleum Oil collected hy Mr. J. E. Came.
“The oil was largely mixed with water, mud, organic matter, leaves, twigs of shrubs, Ac., and it
was with difficulty that about 150 cubic centimetres were separated from extraneous matter so as to obtain
a sample suitable for analysis.
“The clear petroleum oil was of a blackish-brown colour in hulk, and of a dark yellow colour in a
thin stratum of transmitted light. The oil exhibited the characteristic fluorescence or ‘ bloom ’ and a
petroleum odour, somewhat masked by an aromatic smell due to leaves, twigs, &e., in the oil.
“The crude oil was found to have a specific gravity of 0-9744, and yielded on fractional distillation
as follows ;—•
“In 100 Parts. Specific Gravity.
“Petroleum spirit below 150° C. ... ... Nil
“Burning oils distilled below 300° C ... 20-8 0-9253
“Intermediate and lubricating oils with I
solid hydrocarbons j 1 1 ’’
“Coke 50
100-00
50
BULLETIN OP THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


Plate XXIY.
Akauda Gas Spring, Vailala River, Papua.
(Circles and white patches caused by escaping gas.)
Plate XXV.
Akauda Gas Spring, Vailala River, Papua.
(White patches caused by escaping gas )
L. Lett.
L. Lett.




“The crude oil is very free from sulphur compounds, an estimation yielding 004 per cent, sulphur.
The burning oil (kero,cue) was of a high density, viz., 0'9283, slightly straw-coloured, and exhibited the
blue lluorescencc peculiar to mineral oils. It was found that the oil distilled at a high temperature, and
commenced to come off at about 240° C.
“ The results obtained by the distillation of petroleum in the laboratory scale are not strictly
identical with those yielded in practice;, as a proportion of the heavier fractions are often ‘ cracked ’ into
burning oil, which by subsequent distillation yields lubricating oil.
“The small quantity of oil at my disposal prevented a more detailed examination being made of
the oil, hut sufficient has been done to show that the sample is a dense petroleum oil, free from benzine, or
light hydrocarbons, and yields a poor quality of burning oil (kerosene). The lubricating oils are of good
quality.
“ It is possible that if a boro were put down, that the oil found may vary in character, as the
sample furnished for analysis is apparently a surface oil, which has been in contact with organic matter,
gases, water, mud, ic., and exposed to the air for some time, which may alter its original composition.”
[The oil was not exposed to the air, as it was not visible until the solid strata were broken up.
The mixture of particles of organic matter was unavoidable owing to the primitive means available for
skimming and bottling.—J.E.C.]
Mr. Mingaye was good enough to append the following analyses of crude petroleum oils from
various parts of the world for comparison. It should, however, be noted that these represent the product
of oil wells, and not, as in the Papuan instance, of surface seepage. It would be unfair to compare
seepage oils with well oils, because of the loss of volatile constituents suffered by the former —even before
appearing at the surface.
A small sample of Yailala oil was tested in the Tjepoc Refinery, Java, for the Writer, with the
following results :
No benzine.
Boiling point, 230° C.
Between 230° and 300° C., 20° per cent, kerosene distilled.
At F. 325° 25 ~
Residue 50 „ good lubricating oil.
The Papuan oil appears destitute of the valuable benzine and other light spirits or oils ; but only
when the primary source is tapped by boring can a true estimate of its composition be formed. It is,
however, evident that it does not contain paraffine, which would be present in the residual heavy oil
seeping at surface.
Severn! oil horizons are worked in the Dutch Indies—in fact, in all oil-fields—from which different
products are obtained, ranging from light to heavy oils, and from paraffin to asphaltic bases. So it may
reasonably be inferred that Papua will be similarly favoured.
51
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


* Analyses of Various Petroleum Samples Tabulated by Mr. Minoaye—in 100
Parts.
Locality.
Sp. Gravity.
Petroleum
Spirit,
Benzine.
! Kerosene.
Intermediate
and Lubricating
Oils and Solid
Hydrocarbons.
Coke.
America—
Bradford
0-810
20 0
500
25-3
1-12
•787
320
64-4
Wyoming :
911
2-5
27-5
530
110
•844
15-0
45*0
320
Ecuador
•928
214
15-61
70-89
8-82
Canada—
Petrolia
•858
2-5
57-5
4-08
Gaspe
•847
S-75
48-0
40 0
2-75
Russia—
Balakhany-Sabountchi
■873
63
32-5
571
3 0
•853
20*0
400
35 0
Kerch
•940
10
9 0
83-35
625
■887
290
70-5
Roumania —
*859
18*9
80 6
05
•845
28-85
26-3
42 5
1-6
J » ......
■896
20
251
67-6
31
Germany—
Alsace
■886
4-0
31-4
52'7
7-9
Spain—
■921
78-0
io-o
East Indies—
0-869
1-35
25-78
67’98
Lower Burma
•834
9-0
57"5
32 0
0-2
>» >>
•825
925
6925
21-25
o-i
Eastern Archipelago—
•881
46-8
46-1
71
Sumatra
■771
37-2
520
5-9
0-5
■789
26-0
63-4
7-6
•75
41-2
44 0
14'8
*965
971
26
Timor
•825
67 "5
307
0'5
100
640
26.3
0921
780
100
82‘7
128
1-02
76-24
18-44
New Zealand—
0'971
90-0
9*75
No. 1 Borehole, Taranaki Petroleum Company
200
400
37 0
3 0
* Petroleum and its Products. Boverton Redwood, pp. 194-195.
t Sample of Crude Petroleum Oil from Sumatra in Geo. Sur. Museum, Analyst, j. C. 11.
t Preliminary Report on the Taranaki Oil-fields. Geo. Sur., N.Z. Analyses by Prof. T. 11. Easterfield.
DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON OIL AND GAS OCCURRENCES IN PAPUA.
Akauda. —The Akauda oil seepage occurs in the bed of a small creek near its junction with the
Vailala River, from sandstones and mudstones which are overlaid by 10 feet to 12 feet of alluvium.
Fragmental plant remains occur in the upper sandstones.
The strike and dip of these rocks indicate the limb of an anticline. The strike varies from N, 05
to 70° E. and S. 65 to 70° W. The dip from N, 20° to N. 25° W, at 15° to 25°
52
BULLETIN of the TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


The following cross section illustrates the direction and inclination of the strata. To fix a bore-site,
it will be necessary to determine the opposite dip of the anticline by sinking to bed-rock if natural sections
arc unavailable.
Sketch section across Oil Creek, Akauda, Vailala River.
Fig. 7.
Hill’s discovery to the west of the river, about seven chains from the original find by the Writer on
that side, occurs in similar rocks, containing marine shells of Pliocene or Miocene age. These strata are
apparently nearer the centre of the anticline, as the dip has increased to 56—57|-° to N. 50—55 W.
The strike indicates a bend in the anticline, as it here trends N. 35° to X. 40° E., and S. 35° to
40° W. The oil rises most freely along a joint in sandstone, striking north-west.
As already stated, this discovery was made by Richard Hill on the 16th May, 1912. Mr. E. R.
Stanley reported having discovered this site, but afterwards stated (in a letter to the Writer) that
Mr. Hill had evidently located it first.
A shaft was subsequently sunk half-a-mile south by Mr. I), McDonald to a depth of 20 feet,
from which a good sample of oil was obtained. Captain Hunter, of the British New Guinea Development
Company, reported to the general manager, under date 23rd June, 1912, that it had been filled with water,
also that: “ Judging from this shaft the whole ground is saturated with oil; you can smell the place
one hundred yards away.”
Aru Am Gas Springs. —About 6 or 7 miles east of the village of Aru Am, and 31 North-west
from Yailala River, at a point about 1 mile above Kiri Creek. Mr, D. McDonald states that this
group of gas and mud springs was pointed out to him by natives on the 4th March, 1912.
The site was visited by the Writer on 31st May, 1912. The nearest available rocks where the
strike and dip could be ascertained gave the following:—Dip N. 65 to N. 70’ W. at 52° to 55°. The strike
varied from N. 20° to N. 25° east, or parallel to Hill’s find a few miles further north.
Several gas springs occur at Aru Aru, with tire usual accompaniment of fine mud and saline water
On the surface of the most active, thin ring-like films of brown oil rose conspicuously on the whitish
muddy water, but as already indicated in the analysis on page 49, tiro quantity of oil is insignificant,
and is held by the clayey mud on its subsidence. Oil seepages were later detected by Mr. E. R. Stanley
closely adjacent in Wahua Creek,
Hepiri Gas Springs. —Three miles north-easterly from the village of Hepiri, and north-north-
east of the Ainama River, an eastern branch of the Purari.
These springs were pointed out to Captain Hunter by local natives early in April, 1912. The
rocks are similar to those of Yailala, and consist of sandstones and mudstones, with Tertiary marine
53
PETROLEUM AM) NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


shells. The nearest dip to the three small gas springs amounted to 02° to N. 10° W. The channels
exposing rocks were 100 flooded by persistent heavy rain at time of inspection to permit of proper
examination.
Mura Gas Springs. —About 2 miles from the village of Mura, close to native track to the
village of Arihavo on the coast —about 2 miles west of Orocolo.
Pointed out by natives at the beginning of April, 1912.
kSeveral springs occur on elevated ground, with the usual accompaniments of mud and saline water.
Several mud mounds attest former activity. In the sandstones and blue mudstones of a closely adjacent
small crook a pronounced odour of petroleum was obtained in sinking about 3 feet. The topmost
stratum of this hill consists of conglomerate. Hard calcareous boulders occur in the sandstones and mud-
stones.
o}>a Gas Springs (see page 17).
Orocolo Oas Spring. —This large spring was pointed out to Mr. L. F. Henderson and the 'Writer on
the 27th February, 1912. It is situated about 2 miles from the coast, on a low ridge trending east and
west, at the back of the village of Orocolo. The rocks are the usual sandstones and mudstones, with
Tertiary marine fossils. Several adjacent dips were taken, which indicate anticlinal folding at the spring
site, viz., N. 60° W. at 62° and N. 30° E, at 10°.
In a small creek closely adjacent the Writer obtained a strong odour of petroleum in about 2 feet
of sinking on his second visit on 27th May. Subsequently (23rd June) Captain Hunter reported obtaining
oil, but not sufficient to collect; he was, moreover, greatly hampered by water.
Faramamu Oas Springs (not seen by the Writer). —About 4 miles north-east of Muni Springs.
Reported by Mr. D. McDonald to have been shown to him and Mr. B. Hill by natives on 17th April, 1912.
Mr. Stanley, who visited this group, informed the Writer (3rd August, 1912) that he obtained a strong petro-
liferous odour at Paramamu, and at points 4 miles east-south-east, towards Vaivera Creek, and west-
south west about 3J r miles towards, and within 2 miles of, Mura.
I'airi. —About 5 or 6 miles north of Mura, after passing through Hepiri Village, Mr. Stanley
obtained a petroleum odour from some vents, notwithstanding heavy rain was falling, and had been for
twelve hours previously.
Papuan Oil Indications compared with those of Java, Sumatra, and Borneo.
Though such natural indications as gas springs and oil seepages practically cease when drilling
affords freer outlet and consequent reduction of gas pressure, still inquiry and observation confirm the
impression that productive oil-fields have been developed in the countries mentioned—as well as in others
—where the original surface indications were not more favourable than those of Vailala, in Papua. In
fact, instances are not wanting where gas alone indicated the commercial oil sands since developed. Such
was the case in the Banjar Sarie oil-field, near Moeara Enim, in Sumatra. In fact, E. H. Cunningham
Craig* states that; “ Many of the, greatest oil-fields known to-day have not a single surface indication
within their length and breadth.” It is, however, safe to add that these would not have been discovered
had not surface indications in neighbouring localities directed attention to definite structural features in
the local geology, associated with their occurrence.
* “ Oil Finding-,” 1912, p. 89.
54
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


In addition to gas springs and oil seepages other indications comprise mud springs and veins of
manjak or ozokerite. The mud springs of Papua are not of the imposing character of those figured in oil
literature under the name of “mud volcanoes.”
Mud Volcanoes. —Mud volcanoes or mud springs are common in ma-iy oil regions. They arise from
the evolution of gas from shallow petroliferous strata through mudstones impregnated with water. A.
Beeby Thompson states that they are : —“ -Slore prevalent where the oil beds closely approach the surface
on an anticline, or where steeply inclined outcrops of oil strata lie covered by damp alluvium, but they
are often quite absent where oil-bods lie at a great depth below the surface, or where the surface structure
is of too compact a nature to form cones of mud.”*
Natural seepages were known to the natives of oil regions long prior to the inauguration of the
natural oil industry. Those in some of the Moeara Enim oil-fields wore originally visited by Chinese, who
obtained the heavy seepage oil for preparation of lacquer.
At Wono Sarie oil-field, near Tjepoe, Java, native wells were sunk in the seepages, timbered, and
covered, the oil soaking into them being used long anterior to European occupation.
The Sanga Sanga oil-field of East Borneo was also indicated by oil seepages and gas springs, but
these have now disappeared.
Once an oil-bearing anticline has been located, no fr aher attention is given to surface indications,
the geological structure alone being regarded, and this is accurately defined by careful geological survey
prior to drilling.
In geological age and in stratigraphical arrangement, the Papuan oil-field is identical with those of
Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. From a study of the literature of the subject, it would appear that most
of the productive oil regions of the world are of Tertiary age, viz.: —
Baku (Russia). Sumatra.
California and Texas (North America). Java.
Burma. J apan.
Borneo.
CRUDE PETROLEUM
Crude petroleum from wells differs in density or specific gravity ; the heaviest oils, as a rule, being
those from shallow levels owing to escape of the more volatile constituents. The product of oil-fields
usually have specific gravities ranging from 0-780 to 1-0, but more commonly from 0-85 to 0-984. f
The oil-fields of Sumatra are noted for the low specific gravity of the natural product consequent
on the large proportion of benzine and other similar light oils or “ spirits,” upwards of 39 per cent, of the
latter being obtained in some districts.
Similarly high percentages are obtained in the Wono Sarie section of the Tjepoe oil-field of Java.
The heavy oil from seepages on the Yailala River, in the Gulf Division of Papua, having a
specific gravity of 0'97, is doubtless the residuum of a lighter oil from which the volatile constituents
have escaped. It is probable that lighter oils will be found at lower levels, even if not in the bed from
which the seepage oil escaped.
* “Petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910,” p. 52.
t A. Beeby Thompson, “ Petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910,” p. L 33.


A. Beeby Thompson* states that; —“ Different petroleums are composed of a mixture of different
hydrocarbons, but generally a main lino of distinction is drawn between :
“ (a) Asphaltic Oils, those which yield, on slow distillation, a dark asphaltic residue which is read ly
attacked by acids and dissolves in usual solvents.
“And (5) Paraffin Oils —those which yield on reduction to a low temperature an appreciable
proportion of light-coloured solid hydrocarbons, chiefly of the paraffin series, which are not
readily attacked by acids and normal solvents.”
No distinct line, however, can be drawn between “ asphaltic” and “ paraffin” oils, the terms being
only used for convenience of distinction.
The Vailala oil yielded no paraffin ; on distillation of burning oil the residue consisted of good
lubricating oil.
In some instances in commercial oil-fields, natural crude oil is of such a nature that it does not pay
to refine, but is sold direct for fuel purposes. Usually, however, it is the residue from refineries that is
used for fuel purposes.
The excess of fuel oil —or residuum—from Balik Papan Refinery, East Borneo, is at present
stored on the Sanga Sanga field in an ordinary dam formed of earth across a small valley in the Sanga
Sanga ridge, into which it is pumped from returning hopper barges.
In the sun heat the top of the exposed fuel oil becomes liquid for a few feet in depth ; below this
it is semi-solid. In loading to supply demand it is necessary to use a steam jet at the pump nozzle.
Large pipes are also necessary to allow of flow of such viscid stuff.
In oil-fields the different grades of oil are pumped to separate tanks —as at Sanga Sanga, from
which these are again pumped to an oil station on the Samarinda River, and from there conveyed in tank
steamers and hopper barges to the refinery at Balik Papan. This method of transport, however, wil 1
shortly be superseded by a pipe-line direct from the oil-field to the latter.
In South-western Sumatra the oil is first pumped to a central station, and from thence for about
90 miles to Pladjoe Refinery, near Palembang. on the navigable Lematang river.
Burma crude oil, according to A. Beeby Thompson,! “has a specific gravity of from 0 - 820 to 0 - 840,
and often contains from 5 to 10 per cent, of paraffin wax, which is extracted for the manufacture of
candles, but some Singu oil has a specific gravity below o'B2o, and contains a largo percentage of spirit.”
Japanese oils, according the same authority, contain from 35 to 40 per cent, of lamp oils, and
some contain solid hydrocarbons. Of California it is recorded —“ Only a few districts yield a light
oil from which fair illuminants can bo obtained, the bulk being dense and heavily charged with sulphur,
and suitable chiefly for fuel purposes.”
NATURAL GAS.
Gas springs or gas pools are a common feature of oil regions, but dry gas jets do not always
indicate commercial supplies of oil, or even its presence in some cases.
Turning to Australian instances, the strong outbursts of gas struck in the Grafton (New South
Wales) and Roma (Queensland) bores, are probably derived from coaly strata encountered in each.
* “Petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910,” p. ISO.
t Ibid., page 15. % Ibid., page 12.
56
fUJLLI'TIN OF TIIH TERRITORY OF PARRA.


"Whilst it would bo unwise to dogmatically assert that oil would not be struck at any depth in
these rocks, yet it must be conceded that all known indications are against the possibility. In each
case depths of ove r .‘5,700 feet have been drilled without the slightest trace of oil ; in each also, gas was
encountered in quantity only in coal-boaring strata.
Moreover, there is entire absence of the usual geological structure associated with the occurrence of
oil in the majority of oil-fields. The only disturbance noted in Australia in strata of the geological
ago of the beds penetrated in the above bores are faults. Folding is conspicuously absent. Though gas
doubtless exists in horizontal beds, still it is only in domes or anticlinal arches that it accumulates in
sufficient volume and under sufficient pressure to maintain continuous outflow for lengthy periods.
In both of the bores mentioned the pressure was insignificant, compared with the terrific force with
which petroliferous strata discharge imprisoned gas; the volume likewise was very small when similarly
compared. In both instances the gas gave out almost entirely. At the Grafton bore it is now only
sufficient to maintain a flame 2 inches long, which can be blown out witli the breath.
Usually, heavy discharges of gas bear with them light oil, or “spirits” in the form of spray, if
arising from oil-bearing strata.
As considerable attention has been given to the Roma and Grafton bores, and recently an endeavour
has been made to have them reopened as possible indicators of oil-bearing strata beneath, full descriptions
are given in another section.
In some oil-fields, gas is struck in enormous volume before the oil horizon is reached. At Sanga Sanga,
Borneo, the Writer viewed gas discharging from 8-inch casing at a pressure of over 500 lb. per square inch
This discharge had been maintained for several weeks. Instances were known where four years elapsed
before the pressure was sufficiently reduced to allow of further drilling. At the locality mentioned, a
long strip of the petroliferous anticline has to be left undrilled until the gas pressure lias materially
lessened. The roaring of the discharge from the 8-inch pipe could be heard from a distance of half a mile
or more.
A. Beehy Thompson* records that:—“ In West Virginia closed gas pressures of 1,500 lb. per square
inch have been recorded, whilst 500 lb. per square inch is a common pressure in many of the American
gas-fields, where an output of 20,000,000 to 30,000,000 cubic feet of gas a day has been measured from
wells not exceeding G inches diameter.”
The same authority states that;—“lt is generally admitted that the pressures are entirely due to
the accumulation of gaseous hydrocarbons, chiefly methane, which were formed with the liquid hydro-
carbons, and exist in a highly compressed condition dissolved in the petroleum accumulated in the beds
immediately overlying the oil strata. Petroleum is always accompanied by gas, except where it exists in
such position that the gas has all been able to freely escape, in which case the petroleum rarely flows from
a well, and never, unless left for a long time, rises to the surface unaided.”!
Gas from Decomposing Vegetation. —ln searching for gas indications, care is necessary to distinguish
between gas of superficial origin, and that of deeper conditions ; the gas in each case being move or less
identical.
From stagnant pools, where, swamp vegetation grows, or from channel pools, in which drifted
vegetable matter accumulates, and is covered by muddy sediments, gas bubbles arise as decomposition
proceeds. Sometimes the bubbles are frequent; but by stirring the mud, or probing with a pole, they
frequently cease to rise—the disturbance discharging the supply for the time being.
* “ petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910,” p. 62.
f Ibid., p. 63.
42124—H
57
I'KTUOI.Kr.M AND NATI'DAI. GAS IN PAPUA.


ORIGIN OP PETROLEUM.
Into the unsettled question of the origin of petroleum it is unnecessary to enter. The opinion,
however, of one of the latest contributors to the subject might bo quoted. E. 11. Cunningham* defines
his view as follows ;—-
“ Petroleum is formed from the remains of terrestrial vegetation accumulated in clays, sands, or
actual beds (which under other conditions would develop into carbonaceous shales, sandstones, and seams
of coal or lignite), by natural processes which can be not only reproduced in the laboratory, hut can also
be proved to have taken place in the past, and are taking place at the present, day.”
In other words, that, coal and carbonaceous substances, and petroleum, are different end results or
products of exactly similar origin. That under certain conditions buried vegetation becomes converted
into coal, lignite, or carbonaceous strata; whilst under other conditions, such as impervious cover, limited
water, low temperature, and considerable pressure, the product is oil.
It appears, however, extremely probable that similar conditions to those last mentioned must have
obtained with coal as a result, for coal is associated with most of the strata in Tertiary oil fields. In the
Moeara Enim oil region of south-western Sumatra,, oil-bearing and coaly strata alternate.
OIL-HEARING STRATA.
It is reasonable to assume origination of gas and oil in practically horizontally strata, when
necessary constituents and conditions are coincident. But horizontally implies greater diffusion and
commingling of products. Subsequent folding provides convenient receptacles at the tops of anticlines,
for separation and concentration of included gas and oil from associated water, in the order of their
gravities.
This separation is well illustrated in working oil-ficlds by rapid diminution, and final disappearance,
of gas and oil, and increase of water on the sides of narrow productive anticlines.
Accumulation of gas largely under compression within the oil itself, is the power that forces oil to
the surface when the impervious cover of overlying strata is pierced.
Reduction of pressure consequent on escape of gas, gradually lessens oil-flow until the weight of the
latter overcomes the pressure, and the well ceases to flow, though subsequent pumping operations are
assisted by intermittent gusdies due to local accumulation, and sudden escape, of gas within the well.
NATURE OF PRODUCTIVE OIL STRATA.
In Sumatra oil-fields the strata consist of sandstone, shale, calcareous sandstone, and limestone.
At Sanga oanga, in Borneo, they consist of sand-tones and shales (or mudstones), sometimes a litde
marly. Layers of quartz-pebble gravel occur in the series, causing trouble sometimes in drilling, owing to
the looseness of the gravel. A highly metamorphic limestcne is believed to form the basis of the oil
♦ “ Oil Findir#, 1012,” p. 11.
58
UUULKTIX OF THE TBRIUXOKV OF PAPUA.


SECTIONAL ELEVATION AND COMPASS SKETCH OF ROUTE FOLLOWED BY COAL EXPEDITION
WESTERN DIVISION, PAPUA


GEOLOGICAL SECTIONS ACROSS THE PETROLEUM- BEARING BEDS
MOEARA ENIM.
Residency, Palembang. South Sumatra.
C Transactions of the Kon. Ned. Ardrijks Kundig Genootschap, 1906 )
By Aug. von Tobler
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED BY W. A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, SYDNEY, N.S.W.


series. Coal seams occur in the upper beds, and were at one time worked to a small extent. Being more
resistant to weathering than the friable sandstones and soft shales in which they occur, the coal seams may
be seen outcropping where other evidence of stratification is wanting.
At TJepoe, in Eastern Java, in descending order the strata consist of limestone (fossiliferous)
overlying sandstones and shales.
Oil occurs in the sandstones interbedded in impervious shales. Fresh water occurs in the limestone
and has to be cased off in drilling. Salt water is encountered below the top oil horizon.
The Vailala-Purari oil strata consist—so far as surface outcrops are concerned—of sandstones, in
part fine-grained and calcareous ; and mudstones, with calcareous concretions.
A. Beeby Thompson (Petroleum and Oil Field Development, 1910, p. 64) states that; —“The great
producing wells of the Baku Oil-fields and those of Borneo, California, Burma, Galicia, and Boumania are
sunk in sands varying in quality from hard compact rock to loose flowing sands, closely resembling quick-
sands. Some of the oil from the Eastern and Texan oil-fields of the United States, and the Ontario
oil-fields of Canada, is obtained from limestones; but apart from these most of the oil of the world is
drawn ftom sandy formations.”
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF PETROLIFEROUS AREAS.
Geological Survey, as a condition precedent to boring, is recognised and adopted by all established
oil companies. All authorities unite in advising careful detail geological survey as an essential preliminary,
and regular employment of a geologist in each petroliferous locality. Especially is this condition necessary in
oil-fields such as those of the Dutch Indies (with which Papuan indications correlate) where production is
strictly confinfed to extremely narrow anticlinal foldings in Tertiary strata, and where stratigraphy is
cloaked—in most instances —by dense jungle growth, recent alluvium, or superficial disintegration in situ.
The necessity for accurate delineation of anticlinal trend-lines is emphasised by the fact that a few
hundred feet on either side of the crest of a fold means useless expenditure of several thousand pounds in
an unproductive well.
Though some authorities contend that whilst anticlines are especially favourable, they are not
absolutely essential for supplies of oil. The preponderance of evidence, however, in existing
points to them as the most common structural feature in the geology of commercial oil regions, and as
determining the migration of petroleum.
Tropical vegetation, deep alluvial, or rotted and crumbled rock, together with absence or rarity of
natural outcrops, renders geological survey slow and costly; hence sufficient time, labour, and equipment
should be provided prior to commencement of actual well-drilling.
Under the natural conditions defined, lines have to be cleared along the approximate trend of the
anticline to be tested, with frequent cross-lines for locating dips. Where natural outcrops are unavailable,
shallow shafts G to 30 feet deep have to be sunk to bed-rock, or defined stratification, to enable dips to be
recorded on both sides of the centre country.
As the trends of the folds or anticlines occasionally depart from the rectilinear, determination of
boring sites depends on empirical rather than apparent direction.


A map to workable, scale should be constructed, on which test hole?, and natural outcrops, strikes
and dips, are accurately charted. For this purpose the ground requires surveying and levelling.
Numbered pegs should be placed at shafts and outcrops, and at convenient points along the central line,
and these recorded on the map. Strike and dip being defined by the usual symbols, viz. :
S.W. at 35°<— —>N.E. at 45°
which define the direction or trend of the anticline, and the amount of the dip on either side as shown in
the following section across the above symmetrical fold :
Fig. 8.
The width of the productive portion would correspond approximately 7 to the points of the arrows on
the section. Outside of this, water would bo the chief product of boring.
On a productive anticline, such as illustrated above, two lines of wells would bo drilled a little on
each side of the centre line of the fold according to its width, but usually 7 from GOO to 1,000 feet apart.
If there be more than one productive horizon—several are most common—then intermediate wells are
drilled to each independently.
In symmetrical folding, well sites are equidistant from the centre line; but in asymctrical they 7
depend on amount of the lesser dip, as shown in the following cross section :
Fig. 9.
To reach the centre country in depth it would be necessary to bore to the left of the crest exposed
at surface as defined by the lower angle of dip.
Several parallel trend lines or anticlines usually occur in an oil-field, and such are believed to exist
in the Vailala-Purari area in Papua.
At Tjepoe oil-field, in Java, present surface topography’ is intimately associated with the productive
anticlines. At Sanga Sanga, Borneo, though the latter are connected with defined ridges, yet in places
the trend of the folding is independent of present surface configuration, the arch of the anticline
occupying valleys partly 7 dissecting the ridge. Here two parallel linos occur about 4 miles apart; one
only, however, has so far been proved pay 7 able. They strike north-north-east and south-south-west.


Plate XXVI,
General View of the Twingon Oil Reserve, Yenangyoung Field, Burma
(After E. H. Cunningham B.A., F.G.S. Oil-Finding, 1912).
Plate XXVII
View of Los Angelos Oil-Field, California.
(After A Beeby Thompson, F.G.S. Petroleum Mining and Oil-field Development, 1910, pl. 1.)
A typical illustration of an oil-fleld on a sharply inflected anticline where the width over which wells can be profitably drilled is confined to strict limits.




At Tjepoe four productive anticlines are worked trending approximately east and west, and
indicated by ridges rising 850 feet to 1,000 feet above sea-level. The extreme width of the oil region, so
far as proved, being about 30 miles, and the length about GO miles, including blanks and unproved areas.
The northern line is the longest, and the middle (Wono Sarie) the most productive. The greatest length of
continuous productive ground in any anticline yet proved is about two kilometres (6,600 feet), and the
width 1,650 to 1,980 feet.
The length of the productive portions are usually determined by gaps caused by the pitch of
the anticlines below the level of the plain. The outline of the oil bearing portions are, correctly speaking,
domes—which are usually regarded as the most productive receptacles in oil-fields.
Six oil-fields have been located on the middle line at Tjepoe, five on the northern and three on the
southern within the limits mentioned.
Fig. 11.
The productive length of the Sanga Sanga anticline, with gaps yet unproved, is a little over 10
miles so far as at present developed.
From the very few dips noted during the Writer’s hasty visits to the Yaiiala-Purari oil-indications,
it is evident that several trend lines occur, on which gas vents are situated, and in three or more instances
oil seepages as well. It is urgent that these anticlines should be accurately detined and mapped as a
guide to prospecting.
Oil Horizons.
In most oil-fields several petroliferous horizons have been proved ; all, however, are not worked,
some being more productive than others.
At Tjepoe, East Java, seven horizons have been proved at depths ranging from 500 to 1,500 feet ;
three being worked in the Blora field. In the Ledok field seven horizons have also been proved, but some
of the shallower oil-beds were rendered unproductive, through neglect to shut off water, before the present
Oil Company (De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij) obtained possession.
The depths of the proved oil-horizons in the Ledok oil-field range from 130 to 990 feet.


At Sanga Sanga, East Borneo, ten oil-horizons have been proved by drilling, but not all
commercial. The depths range from 330 to 2,062 feet. 1 \
From 330 to 396 feet ... ... Heavy oils are obtained.
From 1,155 to 1,320 feet ... ... Light oils „ • „
From 1,485 to 1,650 feet ... ... Paraffin oils are obtained.
From 1,980 to 2,062 feet ... ... „ ~ ~
Sketch Section of Sanga Sanga Anticline, East Borneo.
The output varies from 10 to 30 tons daily per well in most cases, though gradual diminution
lessens the individual output. One well in August, 1912, was yielding 600 tons daily from a depth of
1,495 feet, having formerly yielded 1,100 tons daily.
In Sumatra oil-fields the oil-horizons range from 150 feet to 2,300 feet in depth, in one instance—in
the north-east oil-field—to 2,700 feet.
Burma oil-horizons range in depth from 700 feet to 1,500 feet; Japanese from 000 to 2,000 feet;
and Russian to 2,000 feet. (A. Beeby Thompson,)*
Leasing Conditions.
In Java, Borneo, and Sumatra, and other possessions of the Netherlands Government, a square
block ten kilometres [6J miles on the side] is allowed as a prospecting area for three years, with option
of renewal for one year; and then another similar extension if required.
If oil is discovered a concession is then applied for for a term of seventy-five years for an area
desired, even up to the whole prospecting area.
•“ Petroleum Mining, 19X0,” pp, 15, 21, 34.
Fig. 12.


PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED BY W. A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. SYDNEY. N.S.W.




A fee of 250 guilders (£2O 16s. Bd.) per annum is paid for the prospecting area.
The concession rental varies according to the number of native residences, cultivation, etc. The
Government gives right to mine, but terms must be made with native owners for such land as may be
required for surface rights.
A. Beeby Thompson* writing of proved oil-field areas, states : —“ The general trend of legislation
is to fix a minimum area which shall constitute a separate lease, to establish a minimum distance from the
boundaries of properties within which wells may be drilled, and to define a minimum radius around
dwellings and boiler-houses where wells may be drilled. The minimum area of a plot is approximately
fixed by the two latter conditions where it is customary to have employees’ quarters and power installa-
tion on the property, but the gradual transference of town sites to the outskirts of the important long-
lived oil-fields, and the increased use of electrical power in some fields, diminishes the importance of these
points.
“ The establishment of a minimum distance from the boundaries of properties in congested oil-fields
like those of Baku, Bushtenari, and Spindletop, is only appreciated when the permanent injury that good
producing wells may sustain by incautious operations of negligent neighb airs is known
“ The incomplete exclusion of water from a well, or the employment of a flushing process for
drilling, or iti fishing for lost tools in a well in close proximity to a good producer, may cause the total
ruin of the producing well, and the loss of anything up to several hundred tons of oil daily.”
“In Baku oil-fields no property can now be independently worked within an area of less than 2 - 7 acres.
“ In the majority of cases in the oil-fields of the United States, where experience has shown that one
well is sufficient 1 1 exhaust several acres of land, the conditions themselves established a minimum area,
and no danger can result from such wide distribution.
“In Bussia the oil-lands are largely held by the Government, which grants prospecting licenses in
new areas on nominal terms over blocks of 100 acres, from which the lessee can select 27 acres, and
develop on a royalty basis. Some of the best original Baku lands were Imperial grants to distinguished
Bnssian soldiers, and others were leased in 27-acre blocks for a fixed annual payment of 7'B shillings an acre,
increasing ten times every ten years ; but subsequently lands within proved areas were leased by auction
on either a fixed sum per pood raised or a percentage of the net production. In the cost, royalties vary
between Is. 4d. and 15s. 9d. per ton, and from 25 to 50 per cent, in kind, but the high royalties are
payable on proved lands in specifically prolific areas, where a single well has at times meant a fortune to
to the owner.”
“ In India special laws for the leasing of oil-lands have been passed, and the acquisition of
Government oil-lands thereby simplified, and the royalty fixed at 10 per cent
“ The lessee’s rights are usually protected by stipulation of a minimum royalty after a definite
period allowed for exploration, so that in the event of no oil being found within the prescribed free period,
or the production being too small to leave a margin of profit under the conditions of the lease, the lessee
may abandon the land or open negotiations for new terms. It is also to the lessor’s interest to secure the
greatest development of his lands, and this is sometimes encouraged bv the introduction of a scale of
royalties whereby with each defined increase of production, within certain limits, the royalty per unit
is reduced.”
♦ “ Petroleum and Oil-field Development, 1910,” pp, 30-40.
63
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA;


DRILLING PLANTS.
In the Dutch Indies Canadian boring plants are most commonly in use, though Californian “ rigs’’
are also used, especially where timber is plentiful. Canadian drillers likewise are largely employed in
practically all oil-fields, as well as in coal and water basins, having achieved an enviable reputation in this
line.
Drilling is by wire cable and percussion tools. Steel rods arc used at starting down to 130 to
160 feet, also in water-flush drilling.
Water-flush drilling is fast, but unsuitable for test wells, and therefore more rarely used. In very
loose sands water-hush affords resistant pressure to that of the incoming sands and gas.
Under these conditions clayey sludge and mud is forced into the porous strata to block the interstices
The usual motive power for drilling is steam, generated with natural gas or oil-residues as fuel in
Java, Borneo, and Sumatra.
At Tjepoe, Java, solid -J-inch steel rods are used instead of wire cable in boring. Rods are advisable
as an adjunct to the latter —for under-reaming or fishing for lost tools. Hollow rods are required for
water-flush drilling, to allow of water passing down centre.
The initial prospecting plant in Papua, should, at least, bo capable of boring to a depth of 2,500
feet.
Size of Casing.
The size of starting-casing in oil well borina: is dependent on the number of water-bearing strata
likely to be pierced. In an entirely new field the diameter of the initial casing must be arbitrarily fixed,
10 to 14 inches being generally adopted.
In Sumatra, in the deepest wells, 2,300 feet or over, as great a diameter as 24 inches is occasionally
used, with a diminishing range of 2 inches in each fresh string of casing until the final of 6 or even 4
inches is reached.
With such large casing and frequent shutting ofl, the cost of a well is greatly enhanced.
COST OF DRILLING OIL WELLS.
Cost of drilling is naturally contingent on many factors, viz., accessibility, transportation, labour,
timber, casing, etc., absence of accidents, loss of tools, etc.
In Borneo the cost of drilling wells is stated to average about £4,000 per well to depths of 1,500
feet or more.
In Russia the cost is estimated at 65,000, though under adverse circumstances £lO,OOO has been
reached.
At Boryslav, in Austria-Hungary, the cost of drilling wells to depths of 3,000 and 4,000 feet is
given as £6,000 to £B,OOO. (A. Beeby Thompson. Petroleum Mining 1910—p. 27.)
Drilling costs are frequently enhanced by accidents to machinery and plant, but particularly by
10-s of tools in the bore-hole. Several months are sometimes lost in fishing for lost tools endeavouring to
avoid losing a costly deep well.
64
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAFUA.


New Zealand possesses some of the deepest oil-wells in the world. Mr. E. Be C. Clarke, mentions
partial costs in two instances, viz., the Moturoa and Taranaki Petroleum Companies drilled the Birthday
Well to a depth of 2,100 feet at a cost of £l,BOO. The Inglewood Oil-boring and Prospecting Company,
Limited, expended £6,780 in drilling 2,500 feet.*
Unfortunately, no financial statements are made in connection with the deeper wells, viz., 3,030
feet and 3,841 feet respectively.
Costs of boring operations in Papua are likely to be relatively higher than those of Borneo and other
Dutch Indian fields, where facilities are greater, and lengthy experience simplifies operations.
RICHNESS OF SOME OIL-FIELDS.
The richness of some small areas may be judged from the following account of the two most
important oil-fields near Baku, in Russia, by A. Beeby Thompson! ;—“ 1,940 wells, distributed over a total
area not exceeding 6 square miles, yielded in the year 1901 more than half the world’s supply of petroleum.
“ The strata are of Tertiary geological age, and the wells are difficult to drill on account of the
disturbed and loose nature of the strata, which makes it impossible to proceed without lining. The wells
often exceed 2,000 feet in depth, and occupy twelve to twenty months to drill, and some cost £lO,OOO,
The average cost of Baku oil-wells has not been much below £5,000.” •
DANGER OF INHALING GAS WHEN DRILLING.
A. Beeby Thompson; says that:—“ Petroleum gas when breathed in large quantities produces a
sensation of giddiness, and unless the sufferer supports himself against the derrick he is sure to fall to
the ground, but if he is removed to the fresh air the feeling wears off in a short time, although it is often
followed by a strong feeling of drowsiness, in fact, an almost irresistible desire to sleep. If a workman
does not recover from the asphyxiation in a short time, artificial respiration should be practised and
continued until signs of life appear.”
Drillers are the most liable to bo attacked in the way described when gas strata has been pierced by
the drill, before an oil horizon is reached.
STRIKING OIL IN WELLS.
In an initial, or purely prospecting, bore, though every provision should be made for securing the
well and shutting off superincumbent water-beds, no adequate provision can be made to store any
large quantity of oil if a spouter should be struck. In, or near, a proved field, of course, pipe-lines can
be extended to the drilling well ready for connection.
Beyond drilling with a gate-valve—with which to control the outflow, if possible, or let sufficient
escape to reduce gas pressure —little further can be done with an initial outfit.
When a flow of oil is struck, it is run, if possible, into a depression where earth-dams may be
hastily thrown up in which to conserve the product. But the usual experience with “ gushers ”is great,
and generally unavoidable, loss. In many instances —as at the “ Lucas Gusher ”in Texas, and at Baku,
in Russia —the greatest oil-flows have resulted in loss of drilling plant as well as oil. Salt water and
sand frequently follow oil ejected under enormous pressure ; the great quantity discharged has, in some
instances, caused the whole surrounding surface to cave, and the drilling plant to disappear,
* Geological Survey New Zealand, Bulletin No 14 (New Series), 1912, pp 33, 35.
| “ Oil-fields of Russia, 1904,” p. 21. X Ibid., p. 30«.
42124—1
65
MTROLEUJI and natural DAS IN PAPUA.


Even when a large proportion of the oil stream has been temporarily conserved in dams and
trenches, firing often causes complete loss.
The most profitable field is that in which a controllable flow is secured; first free-flowing under
moderate pressure, then discharged by pumping, or by means of natural gas under its own pressure, or by 7
compressed air.
Usually 7 on striking oil for the first time in a new field, or at a distance from an existing field,
where storage is not available, lengths of piping are screwed on to the gate-valve at the head of the casing,
and sufficient gas, or oil, or both, is let off to reduce the excessive pressure, and, from the, end of the
piping, the outflow is burnt until connection is made with storage lines.
The presence of oil—as spray —in the gas so burned, is denoted by yellow flame, and its quantity is
proportional to the density of the smoke.
It is also the experience of all oil-fields engineers that closing a well, even if the outflow is not
great, or not sufficiently strong to endanger the casing, will result in damage, or even loss of the well.
The oil, under pressure, finds a new outlet, which is evident on reopening in the diminished or entirely 7
absent flow. It is confidently asserted that a flowing well cannot be safely closed even for an hour.
SHUTTING OFF WATER IN OIL-WELLS.
Water—usually salt—is invariably associated with petroleum, or more correctly with the strata in
which the latter occurs, fresh water at shallow levels from surface percolation, and deeper-seated salt
water below.
Gas, oil, and water are commonly regarded as arranged in the order of their gravities in the
anticlinal arches of porous beds folded between impervious strata.
When not in excessive quantity in a producing well, separation can bo effected by drawing off the
water from the bottom of a receiving tank ; but when mixed with oil under strong gas pressure, an
emulsion is formed which can only be separated by distillation.
Naturally the presence of water in an oil-field increases cost of drilling, for it is imperative that
each water-bearing bed must be shut off; and this means a fresh string of casing on each occasion ; each
outer casing being bedded in impervious shales or mudstone below the water-bed.
Failure to shut off water encountered in drilling, eventually ruins the well, and frequently causes
great damage to neighbouring wells. Whilst the gas pressure is high, water is prevented entering the
well, but damage follows reduction of pressure.
A. Beeby Thompson points out the consequences of neglecting the water evil in the following-
quotation ; —“ln the early life of the Baku oil-fields scarcely a well could be bored in the rich district then
exploited without reaching oil,'at a moderate depth, in largo quantities, and generally a fountain. Wells
were bored as rapidly 7 as the primitive boring appliances at the disposal of the local proprietor's permitted,
and no attempts were made to exclude the surface and other water with which some of the intermediate
strata were impregnated. The strong gas pressure met with at the time, in even shallow borings, was
sufficient, in most cases, to prevent the inlet of water into the oil sources, and when the gas was exhausted
to such an extent that spouting ceased, and water was admitted, the wells were deepened to a more
prolific source. The irrecoverable injury so done to large areas has now been realized, and not only 7 do
up-to-date proprietors take special measures to exclude water, but most observers perceive that it is a


necessary procedure if the oil-fields are to bo preserved from complete ruin. Engineers now make
strenuous efforts for permanently and securely shutting of! water, and although no legislation has been
enforced dealing with the question, as in some other countries, it is the only way of preventing properties
from falling under the category of water producers only.”
“In a carelessly-bored well, carried down either by an unconscientious contractor, or a reckless boring
master, careful observations are not made, nor important details noted or communicated to the engineer,
the object of the men being confined to boring as many feet as possible within the twenty-four hours.
Water sources are struck and passed unheeded without a notice, with the result that the overhead water
follows down behind the casing unknown until an oil stratum is reached. Unless the gas pressure is
sufficient to overcome the water-head, the oil sand, which under normal conditions is at once recognizable
by its discoloration and odour, is so washed by the flow of water that it is perfectly white and inodorous,,
and is generally recorded in the boring journals as water sand. Many a rich oil stratum has been passed
in this manner, and many records exist of thousands of pounds wasted through such culpable oversight.
The loss of a well at a shallow depth is but the beginning of a long series of disasters which usually
follow, for the water flows behind the casing into the oil sand, which it impregnates and dilutes to a
large extent.”
“ In many cases, and formerly in most instances, the gas pressure, by the level of the oil in the
well, exceeds that of the water-head, and so for a time prevents the inrush of water into the productive
strata, and so long as such is the case no damage occurs through failure to shut off the water: but as soon
as the gas pressure decreases and the level of the oil falls, the water rushes into the well and displaces the
oil, the fate of the well is sealed, and the end approaches with astonishing rapidity. As a matter of fact,
the best, longest, and least troublesome life of the well has never been reached in many cases, as it is only
after the gas has diminished and the yield of sand decreased that a well’s normal and regular output is
obtained, which may continue for years.”
“ The course of the water admitted into the oil stratum is decided by local circumstances, but its
tendency is to flow towards the points of least resistance, which, in the neighbourhood of other bailing
wells, is in their direction. When water has reached a second or several other wells, the oil they
contain is gradually displaced, and a direct unrestricted communication is soon established—for water
possesses greater fluidity than oil—between the faulty bore-hole and other wells within its sphere of
influence. It is for this reason sometimes advisable to bail water-yielding wells at a loss, in order to
prevent water from diverting its course into a near well which is highly productive. During the recent
commercial crisis (1902), many firms shut down wells which gave a small unremunerative output of oil
and yielded a large proportion of water, but the scheme was fatal to the remainder of the property, for
immediately the former good producers fell off and gave mostly water.”*
FLOWING WELLS.
The experience in all oil-fields is, that flowing wells have a comparatively limited life, In some
instances duration is proportional to the volume—the greatest “ gushers ” soon exhausting themselves.
Regular flows, however, are frequently maintained for over seven years or more, with a gradually diminish-
ing output, until the flow becomes intermittent, a short interval of cessation following a gush, until the
gas pressure accumulates sufficiently to expel the oil. In pumping—which follows natural outflow —
intermittent discharge is also noticeable. Sudden gushes beyond the capacity of the pump are due to
accumulated gas pressure.
* “ The Oil-fields of Russia, 1904,” pp. 195,196.
67
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


Heavy “gushers” have rarely proved remunerative ; loss and damage, and frequently fire, result
from uncontrollable outflow. Steady producers, even by artificial discharge, in the long run, prove
most profitable.
Another aspect of the “gusher” or “spouter ” mentioned by A. Beeby Thompson* is that if it does
not ruin the well in a few days or weeks, often upsets the market, and brings the owner into legal
actions and disputes with neighbours, whose properties are frequently damaged by inundations of oil,
sand, and mud.
The same authority states that:—“One noted well at Bibi-Eibat yielded, in 1892, 480,000 tons
of oil in thirty days; and the first well drilled in Grosny gushed for years, although all known means
were tried to check the flow of oil.”f
Oil from non-flowing wells is usually discharged by pumping by means of “ working barrels.” In
some fields—Banjar Sarie, in Sumatra, for instance—the pressure of natural gas from adjacent wells is
utilised.
Where the daily output is small, pumping is intermittent to allow of accumulation of oil in such
wells. At Tjepoe, in Java, electrical pumping was being tried in August, 1912, on an experimental scale
at Wono Sarie oil-field ; electricity being generated by motive power obtained by means of natural gas from
adjacent wells.
Intermittent pumping costs very little, and wells yielding one ton monthly are reported to be
operated at a profit in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Canada by this system, j
TORPEDOING.
“ Torpedoing,” i.e., exploding a heavy charge of nitro-glycerine at the bottom of a well (with
diminishing or almost vanishing flow) to shatter the strata and thus temporarily renew the natural outflow,
is unsuitable save in hard rocks of greater age than Tertiary. Petroliferous beds of Tertiary age are
almost invariably too soft and crumbly ; frequently almost running sands ; hence do not shatter like those
of greater induration.
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE.
Strict provision should be made to guard against fire even when boring a prospecting well, owing
to the presence of gas discharging at the surface in likely oil-localities, and caution is especially necessary
against sudden discharges from the bore, as it penetrates porous sands and sandstones above the expected
oil-horizon.
Crude oil when freshly discharged, if exposed in open receptacles, gives off gas freely, which
increases the risk of firing.
Smoking should be strictly prohibited, and Notice boards erected at frequent intervals bearing
conspicuous warning against infringement of this most necessary safeguard.
Settlement should be fixed at some distance from boring operations.
♦ “ OiMieHs of Russia, 190 i,” p. 303.
t “ Petroleum Mining, 1910,” p. 62.
| Ibid., p. 58,
68
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


A. Beeby Thompson* advises that: —“ Immediately a well starts spouting, guards should be placed
all round to prevent anyone with a lighted cigarette, or an evil-disposed person from approaching, and if
the well is near a public road, watchmen should be stationed to prevent smoking, to enforce a slow speed
for vehicles, and to put out all carriage or cart lamps at night. All fires in houses, boiler-houses, or
buildings where gas is found to penetrate, especially on the side towards where the wind is blowing, must
be extinguished, or not allowed to be ignited until all danger is passed.”
LABOUR.
In the Dutch Indies coloured labour is cheap. Burma and all eastern oil-producing regions are
•similarly favoured. In Java, Sumatra, and Borneo, native unskilled labour is procurable at about thirty
cents (6d.) per day without food. Chinese and Arab coolies are also used at the principal oil centres. Of
the three nationalities the Chinese labourer is preferred.
Skilled mechanics in the refineries, foundries, and workshops, as well as those trained in erecting
derricks, are naturally comparatively highly paid. At Sanga Sanga, in Borneo, it was observed that in
the fitting shop in which all ironwork was constructed, all the machines were manipulated by natives.
If Papuan oil is found in commercial quantity, skilled labour will be a product of time and patience
from the native raw material. Yet from the Writer’s observation of the adaptability and perceptiveness
of some Papuans —particularly at the Yew Kikori Patrol Station—he strongly inclines to the belief that
firm and patient instruction will produce good results. In timber work particularly, the Papuan—-with
command of European tools, and the needful instruction in their use —should give a good account of
himself, for he is a builder by hereditary instinct.
Unskilled labour, on the other hand, is liable to be a serious problem because of its unstability.
Voluntary labour is rarely extended beyond the stipulated period of two or three years, and still more
rarely does it return after intervals of ease and indolence. It must be conceded that hard and constant
work has little to commend it in native eyes after immediate desires in the way of trade goods have been
gratified. Usually after experience of one term, the labourer in his native village relapses into his natural
condition of idleness, whilst his womenfolk labour more or less unceasingly to supply the family larder.
Yet it is indisputable that regular work under firm and equitable supervision is beneficial to both
individual and territory, which raises the question as to the wisdom of a certain amount of compulsory
labour for Government purposes in each district, for an equivalent of food and implements.
In the Vailala and Purari oil-field, however, local natives are numerous, and doubtless would
readily serve as labourers—at least for a time. The Papuan pay for unskilled labour is 10s. per month
and rations, and return to the various villages recruited at expiration of term of service.
Malaria.
The experience in Sumatra and Borneo is that clearing the jungle along the line of wells and
around residential quarters and Kampongs (native quarters), as well as round pumping stations, refineries,
&c., lessens Malaria.
If commercial oil-wells be proved on the Vailala and Purari Rivers in Papua, similar precautions
should yield like results, to the advantage of employees and the locality generally.
The Oilfields of Russia, 1904,” p. 307.
69
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


PETROLEUM, AND REPORTED INDICATIONS, IN NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALASIA.
NEW ZEALAND PETROLEUM FIELDS.
Mr. P. G. Morgan, Director of the New Zealand Geological Survey,* and Mr. 11. De Courcy
Clarkef have epitomised all that is known of New Zealand petroleum occurrences. From these interesting
Bulletins the following extracts are taken :
Mr. Morgan states that: —“Petroleum is known to occur in two localities within the subdivision
(Greymouth. —J.E.C.), namely, at Kotuka, near Lake Brunner, and at Dobson, about 5 miles from
Greymouth.”
“ Petroleum was discovered as a seepage in Petroleum Creek, near Kotuka, by Nils Martensen and
Giacomo Dentella.” |
“ At Kotuka, as stated in Chapter 11, surface seepages of oil have been known since 1897. These
occur near Deep Creek and its tributaries, Petroleum and Sawpit or lied Creeks. Here the modern
surface gravels within an area of half a mile or more in length, and some chains in width, show numerous
exudations of petroleum having a greenish-brown colour and a moderate degree of viscosity. In Sawpit
Creek a hand of outcropping Upper Miocene conglomerate also gives rise to an oil seepage. At the gorge
of Deep Creek, 2 miles north of Kotuka Railway Station, the Miocene sandstone, according to McKay,
contains traces of oil.§ This statement is confirmed by the fact that the freshly broken sandstone smells of
petroleum. The numerous shallow bores that have been put down in recent years, show that the strata
underlying the petroliferous surface gravels to a depth of about 350 feet, contain a considerable amount
of oil. A limestone stratum met with at depths varying from 381 feet to 455 feet, contains large
quantities of salt water saturated with carbon dioxide. The limestone is known to contain petroleum,
hut has not yet proved productive. Below the limestone comes a thick conglomerate containing thin
sandy layers that are reported to contain oil and inflammable gas. It is not known whether oil-bearing
strata occur below this conglomerate or not, but the presumption is that the oil and gas in it have a
deeper source.
“ About 1903 a bore-hole drilled at Dobson in search of coal encountered some inflammable gas at a
depth of 1,457 feet, and a thick oil, practically petroleum butter, at a depth of 1,747 feet
In May, 1909, perceptibly warm water was issuing from the bore, carrying with it small quantities of
a thick oil-scum, and bubbles of inflammable gas were constantly rising to the surface of the water in the
bore hole. In November, 1910, however, little or no oil-scum was observable, and the amount of
inflammable gas was much less than eighteen months previously.”||
Analysis of Kotuka oil. B. C. Aston, Analyst.
“ Crude Petroleum. —This is a brownish-black liquid oil having a specific gravity of 0 - 921. It
retains its liquid state when subjected to a temperature of—ls° C. On fractionating it by distillation, it
yields the following!! ;
Below 150° C. (light oils and naphtha). ... ... ... ... Trace.
150°—300° O. (burning oil, sp. gr. 0’863) ... ... 37 percent.
300°—400° C. (heavy oil, sp. gr. 0'884) ... ... ... 42 ~
Above 400° C. (tarry residue in retort) ... ... ... 21 ~
100
* Bulletin No. 13 (New Series), 1011.
§ Mines Kept. C.—lo, 1901, p. 1".
II Geo. Sur. N. Zealand, Bulletin No. 13 (New Series), 1911, p. 132.
t Bulletin No. 14 (New Series), 1912.
y. in mm i<,
J Ibid., p. 30.
•f Ibid., pp. 134-135.
70
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


I.
II.
Ha.
Specific
Specific
Per cent.
Gravity at
15-5“ C.
Per cent.
Gravity at
15'5° C.
Per cent.
Nil
14-50
Petroleum spirit (benzine), distilling below 1;"0° C. ...
15-00
0-753
9-00
0-790
10-53
Burning oil (kerosene), distilling between 150° C. and
300° C
42-00
0-850
30-20
0-856
35-52
37-70
0-895
41-45
0-889
48-48
1-30
1-05
1-23
4-00
3-80
4-44
•
10000
100-00
100-00
0-08
0-08
0 09
0-19
0-16
019
Calories, per gram (by calorimeter)
No. of pounds of water at 212° F. evaporated by 1 lb.
10,590
8,737
f 10,219 J (a)
19-76
16 30
[19-06] (a)
of oil.
“ A Complete Analysis made in September, 1910, of two samples from bores west of Deep Creek.
(Specific gravity of I, 0'863 ; of 11, 0'899.)
Dr. MacLaurin, Analyst.
(a) In these recalculated results no allowance has been made beyond eliminating 1 the water-percentage. In practice, were the oil actually free
from water, higher figures would be obtained.
I. Sample from bore on flat near store,
11. Sample from bore on terrace (A 2).
lI.A Analysis II recalculated, with omission of water.
“ A rough estimate gives the amount of oil obtained prior to 1910 as 14,000 English gallons.”
“ Recently the properties held by the Kotuka Oil Syndicate and the Lake Brunner Oil Company,
with additional ground, have been acquired by a London concern, the Kotuka Oil-fields Syndicate.”*
'‘The exploratory work of the last ten or twelve years consists in the sinking of a few test-pits, of a
small shaft 83 feet in depth, and of about twenty bore-holes ranging from 40 to 871 feet in depth.”t
The Taranaki oil industry is dealt with by Mr. E. De C. Clarke.t
“At the date of writing (May, 1911) four oil-prospeoting companies, holding rights in or near the
area under review, are in existence. Of these, two (the Inglewood Company and the Taranaki Oil and
Freehold Company) are not at present operating. The other two companies (the New Zealand Standard
Oil and the Taranaki Petroleum Company) are engaged in boring. So far, the Standard Oil Company
of New Zealand has met with no pronounced success. The Taranaki Petroleum Company has two flowing
wells, yielding together about 110 barrels per week, and has more than 0,000 barrels of crude oil stored
in underground tanks.”
In a footnote it is stated that :—“A prospectus issued in April, 1912, gives the weekly yield from
these two wells, and a third (No. 5), as 360 barrels.”§
In the historical section of the Bulletin Mr. Clarke states that the “ presence of oil near the Sugar-
loaves had been noted by the Maoris long before the arrival of Europeans.”
*Geol, Sur., N. Zealand, Bulletin No. 14 (New Series), 1912, p. 132.
t Ibid., p. 139, J Bulletin No. 14 (New Series), 1912, pp. 29-47. § Hid., p. 30.
71
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


In 1839 Dr. Dieffenbach noted the presence of oil near Moturoa, also a strong smell of sulphuretted
hydrogen gas about a mile from high-water mark.*
The periods of prospecting activity are divided into—First period, 1865-1868; second period,
1889-1912 (maximum activity and success, 1904-1912).
“The first attempt to reach the supposed oil-reseryoir was made at the end of 1865, when Messrs.
J. F. Carter, J. R. Scott, and J. Smith obtained from the Provincial Government the right to bore or
sink for oil on 50 acres of land near the Sugar-loaves. It was stipulated that a royalty of 3to 7 per cent.,
according to the depth, should be paid on any oil obtained. The first oil-well in the district, which was
afterwards known as the Alpha or “Oil or London” Well (1), was sunk as a shaft for a depth of about
60 feet (which was reached on the 24th March, 1866), and continued by boring to a depth of about 180
feet. As will be seen by a study of the log contained on a separate sheet at the end of this Report,
‘ indications ’ were met with at various depths, the best being at 60 feet, where occurred a seepage of
thick, greenish-brown petroleum, and at 180 feet, at which depth, according to Hector, oil to the amount of
about 50 gallons a week was skimmed oil the water.”
“ In order to develop these encouraging prospects, a company known as the Taranaki Petroleum
Company was formed about the end of 1866, with a capital of £IO,OOO. This Company also obtained
from the Provincial Government boring rights over an area of about 110 acres in the Sugarloaf Reserve
immediately west of Carter and Company’s lease ; also over the islands of Pararaki and (subject to special
conditions) of Mikotahi, and ‘ over all that laud Ring between said reserve and low-water mark.’ It was
stipulated that the Company should spend at least £3,000, at a minimum rate of £I,OOO per annum, in
sinking for petroleum before the work was abandoned.”
“ The best yield obtained by the Company from the Alpha Well was in July, 1867, when for a
short period oil was pumped at the rate of 80 gallons a day. It is not clear, however, whether this oil
cune from the, bottom of the well, or only from a depth of about 90 feet, from which level, when the well
was plugged at a depth of 110 feet, oil was obtained at the rate of 8 gallons per day. [t does not appear
that the Taranaki Petroleum Company deepened the Alpha Well after purchasing it.”
“ About May or June, 1867, another bore, known as the Beta, or ‘ Oil or Edinburgh ’ Well (3),
was begun by the Company, from which, at a depth of 91 feet, 40 gallons of oil were obtained in ten or
twelve hours. The yield, however*, soon fell off to 3or 4 gallons per day. Little else of interest, save the
losing of the tools at 510 feet, and the abandonment of the bore at 684 feet, is recorded concerning this well.
“ Two other bores (4) and (5) were put down by the Company without encountering any hopeful
indications. This Company was voluntarily wound up in 1868.
“The People’s Petroleum Company sank a well on an area of 4 acres to a depth of 516 feet,
apparently without tangible results. After amalgamating with the Taranaki Petroleum Company it was
wound up with it in 1868.”
“ The second period of activity began in 1889, when, owing to the exertions of Mr. Oliver Samuel
and Sir Julius Yosrel, a company called the Hew Zealand Petroleum and Iron Syndicate (Limited) was
formed in England. Plant was sent out from England, and an American driller (Booth) was engaged.
. . .“A site was selected at the base of the Breakwater (6), and drilling begun by Booth on the Bth
*Oeo. Sur., N. Zealand, Bulletin No. 14 (New Series), 1912, p. 30.
72
BULLETIN OP THE TERRITORY OP PAPPA.


January, 1891. At 915 feet oil was obtained at the rate of about four barrels per day. Shortly after the
tools were lost in the bore, and could not be recovered. Finally operations were abandoned owing to
want of funds, although the enterprise appeared to be on the threshold of success, and the driller (Booth)
claimed to be able to pump 160 gallons of oil per day, and strongly recommended deepening the well by 7
another 200 feet.
“ Finally the property of the Syndicate was sold to satisfy outstanding debts, the plant being
purchased by a syndicate of Taranaki and Sydney residents. Failing to recover the lost tools from
Booth’s well, another was started 8 feet away. At about 950 feet two or three barrels of oil per day weie
obtained, which increased to about ten at 1,000 feet. During this period the first consignment of crude
petroleum from Taranaki was shipped to the Balclutha Water Gas Company, which continued for some
time to be a regular customer. The Railway Department, also, for some years purchased crude petroleum
for manufacture of gas at its Petone works. Ultimately, owing to difficulties with water which could
not be overcome, No. 2 (7) was abandoned when at a depth of 1,100 feet (or, perhaps, only 1,021 feet). It
should be added that this well was cased to a depth of 885 feet, and, as in No. 1 (6), the water was found
to rise and fall with the tides.
“ No. 3 (8), or Mace’s, or the Herekawe bore, was then put down on Mr. Mace’s farm on the
Herekawe Stream, close to New Plymouth—Omata Road—and was abandoned on the 26th October, 1895,
after a depth of 1,534 feet had been reached. Little oil was seen, but large quantities of gas were met
with.
“ No. 4 (9), or Samuel’s bore (the No. 3 well of the present Taranaki Petroleum Company), was
begun on the 11th November, 1895. At 908 feet a large escape of gas w r as encountered, and at 910 feet
oil at the rate of ten barrels a day was obtained. Considerable difficulty was experienced in working the
pump, which was frequently blocked by the mixture of fine mud and oil. Shortly after this the flow 7
suddenly ceased, most probably owing to the caving in of the claystone which overlay the emptied oil-
seam. Boring was therefore resumed, and ‘ shows ’ of oil w 7 ere encountered at various levels down to
1,976 feet. At this depth oil at the rate of eight barrels a day was for a short time obtained by pumping.
Unfortunately, on the 22nd August, 1896, a fire, caused by the accidental ignition of the escaping gas,
destroyed the derrick and plant.”
“ A new plant was erected by October, 1896, and the water at 1,885 feet, having been shut off and
a packer placed at 1,934 feet, oil unmixed with water began to flow at the rate of 270 gallons per twenty-
four hours. After a great many accidents to tools, casing, &c., the bore, in spite of the considerable
quantity of oil which had been obtained from it, was finally closed down.”
“No. 5 (11), or Patt’s bore, is situated about 100 yards south-west of No. 4, and reached a depth
of 2,053 feet during the early part of 1898, but though several oil-bearing seams w 7 ere cut, at no level could
more than one barrel of oil per day be obtained.”
“ No. 6 (12), or Okey’s bore, about 4 miles south of the Breakwater, was abandoned at 302 feet
owing to difficulty experienced in boring through a course volcanic material.”
42124—K
73
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


“No. 7 (13), or Veale’s bore, situated near Okey’s bore, reached a depth of 1,220 feet, when the
Company’s rights were sold, and eventually secured by a New Plymouth syndicate, with Mr. Samuel as
principal shareholder. Under his superintendence this boro was deepened to 1,335 feet without
encouraging prospects.”
“ No. 8 (14), situated a few hundred yards south of No. 4 (9). Encouraging indications were met
with at 1,730 feet, the explosion of gas and oil encountered being sufficiently powerful to throw water and
mud to the top of the derrick. Below 1,730 feet, however, no traces of oil were met with to a depth
of 2,052 feet, when the bore was abandoned.”
“ No. 9 (15), close to No, 4 (9), was abandoned at 1,080 feet, without result.”
“Period 1904 to 1912.
“I. The Moturoa and Tarnnnki Petroleum Companies. —ln 1904 operations took a fresh lease of
life, when the rights and machinery of the Company which put down the bores No. 8 (14) and 9 (15)
were sold to a syndicate largely financed in Adelaide. Mr. G. C. Fair was engaged as head driller, and on
the 27th April, 1904, he began drilling the Birthday Well (1G), a few hundred yards south of No. 4 (9).
By January, 1905, the well had reached a depth of 2,100 feet at a cost of £I,BOO, without, so far as can
be now ascertained, having encountered any very promising indications. At this stage the Adelaide
syndicate, being unable to find further capita], sold the plant and rights to a small company called the
Moturoa Petroleum Company. . . .
“With the aid of a Government subsidy of £1 per foot for 230 feet, the Birthday Well was
deepened to 2,230 feet, when good oil was obtained. Difficulty, however, was experienced with the water,
and it was decided to re-case the well. In order to obtain more capital, the Moturoa Petroleum Company
was merged into the present Taranaki Petroleum Company. This Company has a capital of £120,000.
“By the 26th April, 1906, the bore was re-cased, and the waiter supposed to be shut off. The
casing, however, is in a very bad state, being very much bent, and having one or two holes punched right
through it. The depth of the well w’as increased to 2,345 feet, and good oil w'as obtained from it.
Eventually, owing to renewed difficulty with the water, the was abandoned.”
. . . “In 1907 the Company proceeded to clean out the boro, and during the year got down to a depth
of 2,2G9 feet. Throughout 1908 and 1909 this work was temporarily abandoned, but in 1910 fresh efforts
were made to clean out the w'ell and insert 6-inch casing. This work was carried to a depth of 2,320 feet.
Operations have ceased at this bore for a time.
“In August, 1906, Mr. Fair began putting down No. 2 (17), or Roy’s Well, situated between (16)
and (9), but unfortunately died before any great progress had been made. The sinking of the well was
continued, and is now proceeding.”
In No. 2 (17) oil and gas w r ero met with in small quantities at various depths, as much as two
barrels of oil per day being obtained from one seam at 1,872 feet. During 1909 a depth of 2,209 feet
w 7 as reached, and a considerable quantity of oil and very salt water obtained. It is said that during a
period of thirty-one days thirty-seven barrels of oil per day were obtained, but subsequently the yield
74
RUrXKTIX OP THE TERRITORY OF PARITA.


decreased. . . . Drilling was subsequently continued, under Mr. Berry, to a depth of 3,030 feet, when
on the sth January, 1910, a “How of oil at the rate of ten barrels per day began and has continued
steadily ever since.” . . . “ Simultaneously with the drilling of No. 2 (17), the Company began opera-
tions at two other wells, known as the No. 3 (9), and the No. 4 (18). . . . Very great difficulty and
expense was incurred in trying to clean and deepen No. 4 well of the Samuel Syndicate, but
ultimately success was attained. In May, 1911, a depth of 3,841 feet was reached, being more than 800
feet further below sea-level than any other well in the district, and has produced since the 2nd March,
1910, oil at the rate of about eight barrels per day. (In February, 1912, the production of this well was
reported as forty barrels per week). . . . “ Between 3,710 feet and 3,720 feet great gas pressure "'as
encountered, blowing water and oil to a height of 70 feet above the derrick, and necessitating the cessation
of work for some days.”
“No. 4 (18) well of the Taranaki Petroleum Company was drilled simultaneously with the
operations detailed above, but was closed down at 1,G78 feet, owing to difficulties with quicksand
No decided indications of oil met with.
“ No. 5 (25) bore, close to No. 1. Towards the end of February, 1912, this well, at a depth of
2,322 feet, struck a flow of oil estimated for the first day at 7'5 barrels. In April the flow had lessened,
but was regarded as satisfactory.
“11. The Inglewood Oil-boring and Prospecting Company {Limited). . . . The plant cost
£2,800, Drilling began September, 1907, and reached a depth of 2,500 feet on the 13th August, 1908,
when the boro was abandoned, as no decided indications of oil had been obtained. The cost amounted to
£6,780.
“111. The Moa Petroleum {Limited). —Drilling began August, 1907. Abandoned operations at
460 feet. :
“IV. The New Zealand Standard Oil Company {Limited). —Boring began December, 1907, on a
site (24) near the Carrington Road, close to the southern boundary of the subdivision, about 5 miles
south of New Plymouth, and within half a mile of the gas vents on the Huataki River. 3,200 feet
reached in early part of 1911. Nothing tangible obtained. Company went into liquidation.
“V. The Taranaki Oil and Freehold Company {Limited). —Company formed in 1906 to purchase
and explore a 10-acre block of freehold in Vogeltown, one of the suburbs of New Plymouth. Drilling
began June, 1907, and continued for oyer two years. First signs of oil met at 450 feet, and others down
to 975 feet, where a so-called petroliferous sand was met, reported to yield four barrels per twenty-four
hours. At 1,385 feet boring ceased for want of funds.
“VI. The Bonithorn Freehold Petroleum Company {Limited). —Forming to test freehold property
known as “ Bonithorn,” between New Plymouth and the Breakwater. Bore drilled by contract to
3,000 feet. No oil in quantity met. Company wound up Ist December, 1908.
“ VII. The New Plymouth Petroleum Company {Limited). —Drilling began March, 1907, and
ceased November of same year, owing to lack of funds. Depth reached, 1,060 feet.*
* Gcol. Surv. New Zealand, Bull. No. 14 (New Series.), 1912, pp. 29-37.
75
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS IN PAPUA.


Analyses of Taranaki Oil from various localities, together with an Analysis of
(Gisborne), and one from Kotuka (Westland), (a)
Oil
trom
Waitangi Hill
(i)
(2)
(3)
(5)
(e)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Per cent.
Specific
Gravity.
Per cent.
Specific
Gravity.
Per cent.
•r .-
S.2S
“o-S
Per cent.
Specific
1 Gravity
1 at 15 ’5 C
Percent.
Specific
Gravity.
Per cent.
Specific
Gravit}*.
Percent.
Specific
Gravity.
Per cent.
o , •
£ O
o *r
■ 2*
Per cent.
1 o . •
! tc
! 0-3
S- p*
;
Water
..
1’4
0-15
Nil.
2-7
..
9-5
0-2
Nil.
Benzine distilling below 150°C
20-0
0-764
15*0
0*799
0-85
5-C
0-7654
20-2
0-7601
14-0
0-7426
5-0
0-5
4-01
0-7594
Burning-oil distilling - between 150°
and 300° C
10-0
0-82*
42-0
0*841
30-0
0-8070
37-2
0-8053
42-80
0-8351
30-0
0-8317
20 0
39-0
Q-8J4J
42-4
0-S443
Luhricating-oil distilling between
300° C and 400" C.
Paraffin
24-0
13*0
20-3
I3'3
48-0
21*0
3.V2
22-0
22-1
10-3
20-5
14-5
59-0
Nil.
60*3
0-9002
47-8
0-9024
Pitch or coke
2-0
5-0
4-6
4 0
5-2
Loss
ro
3"0
4-0
2*5
0-5
Totals
100-o
lOO'O
.. 100-0
100-0
100-0
ioo-o
ioo-o
100-0
ioo-o
(a) For that distilling between 150* and 270° C.
Localities.
(I) From No. 1 Well, Taranaki Petroleum Company. Analysis by Professor (5) (Probably) from last well sunk by Samuel & Co., near the Breakwater,
Easterfield, June, 1906. Col. Lab. Kept., 1904, p. 24.
From No. 1 Well, Taranaki Petroleum Company. Analysis by Colonial (6) From New Plymouth, Col. Lab. Kept., 1907, p. 35.
Analyst, July, 1905. (7) From seashore, near New Plymouth. Colonial Analyst, July, 1905.
From No. 2 Well, Taranaki Petroleum Company. Analysis by Dominion Sample collected by Dr. Bell.
Analyst, April, 1910. Sample collected by the Writer. (8) From Main Waitangi Spring, Poverty Bay. Bull. No. 9 (New Series),
From No. 3 Well, Taranaki Petroleum Company. Analysis by Dominion N.Z.G.S., p. 37.
Analyst, April, 1910. Sample collected by the Writer. (9) From Kotuka, near Greymonth, 1906. Bull. No. 9 (New Series), p. 37.
Mr. Clarke’s conclusions are embodied in the following statement f :—“ After a study of the very
imp -rfectly revealed geological structure of the subdivision, and after a careful comparison of the generally
unsatisfactory bore-records, the writer lias come to the following conclusions :
“1. The chief oil and gas producing strata of the area are the rocks of the Onairo Series, which is
Miocene in age.
“ 2. The gas which is found escaping in considerable quantity from the rocks over the overlying
Pouakai Series, and the oil, of which a few undoubted seepages from the same rook occur, origi-
nated mainly or wholly in the Onairo rocks.
“ 3. There is no evidence as to the mode of origin of the gas and oil,
“ -1. No distinct anticlines or synclines can be distinguished in the rocks of either the Onairo or the
Pouakai Series, nor are there any geological data which justify the selection of bore-sites.
“ 5. Petrolaceous substances probably exist at or near the surface in the country to the east of the
New Plymouth Subdivision.
“6. The rocks in which these petrolaceous substances exist comformably underlie the Miocene rocks,
which are exposed in the subdivision, and are probably over 5000 feet below the surface of the
neighbourhood of New Plymouth.
“ 7. Oil has been found in payable quantities on the Taranaki Petroleum Company’s property.
“8. The oil-horizons as disclosed by boring near New Plymouth lie approximately 1,000 feet, 2,000 feet,
and 3,000 feet below sea-level; but, owing to the variable character of the strata, are ill-defined,
and are at varying distances from the surfaces in neighbouring bores.
* E. De C, Clarke, New Zealand Geol. Sujt., Bulletin No, 14 (New Scries), 1912, p. 41,
t Ibid., pp. 46, 47.


“ 9. The 3,000 feet horizon is the most productive.
“ 10. The 1,000 feet horizon is probably of least importance, but merits more careful prospecting thar.
it has yet had, especially near Booth’s Well (6).
“11. The position of oil reservoirs in the subdivision can bo determined only by systematic deep-
boring.
“ 12. A belt of country about three miles wide, in which gas-vents occur, extends from the Sugar
loaves in an cast-south-east direction for at least fifteen miles.’’
New South Wales.
Rumours have at intervals been current in New South Wales as to indications of oil springs, but in
every instance so far investigated the reports had no substantial basis.
Discussing the probabilities of oil-discovery in New South Wales in 1903, the Writer published the
following : —The absence of any recognisable evidence of oil-bearing strata in the Palaeozoic systems of
New South Wales leads to speculation as to the probability of such occurring in the deeply covered
Mesozoic basins in the west-north-west, in areas as yet unpierced by artesian water bores, as to some
extent indicated by the strong pressure of gas struck in the Roma No. 2 Bore. Unfortunately, here
again probability is discounted by the absence of certain physical conditions which have been proved to
govern the occurrence of oil and natural gas in America and elsewhere. Dome-shaped anticlinal arches
of strata, resulting from lateral regional compression, form the most favourable receptacles for accumula-
tion of these important hydrocarbon compounds in the order of their gravities. Under the roof of the
dome, gas ; lower down, oil; lower still, water, which subjects the former to high pressure. So far as the
author is aware, with the solitary exception of the Lapstone Hill and Kurrajong Monocline, the Mesozoic,
strata of this State have not been subjected to even moderate folding stress; but occupy, undisturbed
their original more or less horizontal or gently inclined position.”* Tertiary strata in New South Wales
—other than fluviatile —occur in horizontal beds forming the western plains; and have been pierced by
numerous bores into the underlying Cretaceous and Trias-Jura artesian water-beds.
In the Government bore in search of artesian water at Grafton, a considerable flow of natural gas was
struck at a depth of 3,100 feet. The following report by Mr. H, M. Baldock, Acting Road Superinten-
dent, to the Under Secretary for Public Works (under whose Department the work was carried out), was
officially communicated to Mr. E. F. Pittman, Government Geologist, in December, 1901 :
“Re-flow of Gas, Grafton Artesian Bore. There has been allow of natural gas at the Grafton bore
for some considerable time. I have no record of the first flow, but am informed that it is at about the
3,100 feet level.
“ In June, 1900, the gas would ignite at the top of the casing and send a flame 4 feet high of the
size of the casing.
“ In May last the gas ignited from the forge, which is 14 feet away from the casing, and considerable
difficulty was experienced in extinguishing it; the plant was in danger of being burnt at the time. Since
then every precaution lias been taken against fire. At times the gas is very strong and throws water half-
way up the derrick, and very frequently throws a strong stream of water from the top of the 5-inch casing.
* Jlemoirs cn the Gepl. Survey, N. S.‘Wales, Geology No. 3, 1903, p, 106.


Samples.
No. 1.
No. 2.
In 100’ volumes.
Carbon dioxide (CO.)
5-00
4-33
Fthylene (C.HJ
absent.
absent.
Oxygen (0)
0'50
0-16
Carbon monoxide (CO)
absent.
absent.
Methane (CH 4 )
40 33
SO'20
Hydrogen (H)
54*17
6.5*31
100-00
100-00
“There is a perpetual How of gas, which varies in strength, from the 5-inch casing.
“ I have partly made arrangements to tap the gas in the 5-inch casing, and intend trying it for
lighting the plant in place of the kerosene lamps now used.”*
For years the gas flow has been almost nil. In 1911 the flow, when ignited at the stand-pipe capping
the casing, made a feeble flame of about 1 \ inches in length, which was easily blown out with the breath.
It is highly probable that this gas, like that from the Roma bore, has its source in coal-bearing
strata, which were pierced at both sites. The Grafton bore, after passing through the superficial drift
supply, struck water at 1,070 feet, which rose to the surface, but subsequently receded. Though continued
to 3,700 feet, no further supply was reached. Coaly streaks were recorded between 2,205 feet and .2,288
feet, again at 3,366 feet, and a 7-foot coal seam at 3,419 feet. It is very probable that the bottom of the
bore is in the older Palteozoio rocks which underlie the Clarence and Permo-Carboniferous series.
An inflammable gas issues from Silurian rocks in the Lobb’s Hole Copper Mine, in the valley of
the Yarrangobilly, near Kiandra, the composition of which is shown in the following analysis by
H. P. White:—
“ Ho. 1302 : Gas collected from fissure in Lobb’s Hole Copper Mine. The gas is odourless, burns
with a light blue flame, and, when mixed with twice its volume of oxygen, explodes.
In composition this gas corresponds with an analysis quoted by Bischoffof gas from marsh ground,
which Contained 47437 per cent, of methane and 49419 per cent, of nitrogen.f Its composition, however,
removes it from ordinary gas associated with petroleum deposits, which usually contains from 75 to 95 per
cent, of methane or marsh gas.
QUEENSLAXD.
W. E. Cameron, 8.A., Assistant Government Geologist, in 1911 reported on the prospects of
obtaining oil at Iloma. From his report the following particulars are extracted :
“Roma Council’s Oas Born. —Artesian Hows of water were met with between 700 feet and 1,400
feet, amounting to 186,000 gallons per 24 hours, and were led to the surface between the 10-inch and
5-inoh casing by perforations in the 8-inch and 6-inch casings. A bed of sandstone was passed through
* .Memoir Geol, Survey N, S. Wales, Geology No. 3, 1903, p. 100,
f Cheiu, Geol., I, p. 730,


between 2,718 feet and 3,081 feet, which gave a very slight increase in flow. At 3,683 feet from the
surface an outburst of gas and mud occurred, and the following are the driller’s notes, kindly supplied me
by the Hydraulic Engineer, on the boring at this time ;
“ICth October, 1900. —Bore down 3,669 ft. 10 in. Tools became fast in hole, causing three
and a half hours’ delay. At 1.15 p.m. bore had a blow-up, lasting 20 minutes, throwing mud and water
to height of 50 feet. Fumes smell like natural gas ; still a quantity of gas coming up at midnight and
the early morning.
“ Strata passed through ; Grey shale and mud. Bored to 3,693 ft. lin.
“17th October, 1900.—Bore started to blow up again at 7 a.m., water being of a milky tint.
Pulled out tools, when jet was repeatedly thrown over top of derrick, eventually settling down to
intermittent spouts, varying from 16 to 25 feet.
“ Strata passed through : Grey shale. Bored to 3,709 ft. 8 in.
“A 4-inch liner was then lowered to the bottom, in order to shutoff the gas and prevent the caving
of the strata in which it had been first struck. Further attempts to deepen the bore were rendered futile
by the pressure of the gas, and an attempt to raise the casing ended in its parting at the 800 feet level.”
“ Tn February, 1901, the amount of gas flowing from the bore was measured by the Hydraulic
Engineer as 44,625 cubic feet per 24 hours, while the amount of water accompanying it was 39,411 gallons
per 24 hours. The temperature of this water was 113° F.
“The gas was allowed to waste freely for five and a half years. In February, 1904, the gas was
again measured, with a view of supplying the town, and showed a flow of 72,264 cubic feet in 24 hours.
In June, .'1906, the town was reticulated with pipes, and the streets lit with gas. The plant, after
running successfully tor a few days, was handed over to the Municipal Council by the Hydraulic Engineer,
on the 6th June, 1906, and householders were preparing to reticulate their houses. On 16th June the gas
supply suddenly gave out, and has never since been recovered in any quantity, though a little gas was still
reported as coming from the bore as recently as February, 1910.
“ After the cessation of flow of the gas, water still continued to flow from the 5-inch casing, and, as
far as I can learn, is still so flowing.”
'Hie Roma Mineral Oil Company's Hare. —“ The continuous flow of gas from the gas bore above
described, for so long a period, raised hopes that reservoirs of oil might be found in the same stratum, or
at greater depths ; and in July, 1907, a second deep bore was commenced, 234 feet south of the gas bore,
by the Roma Mineral Oil Company, assisted by a subsidy from the Government. The contract was for a
depth of 4,500 feet, the contractors being the Intercolonial Boring Company, of Brisbane.
. . . “On the 3rd November, 1908, the engineer reported that the 5-inch liner had been
lowered to 3,688 ft. lin., and drilling continued to 3,702 feet, when a heavy flow of gas was struck.
Within a few minutes this gas caught fire, and burned with such fierceness that in three or four minutes
the iron frames of the derrick were softened, and the structure collapsed in a heap over the bore.
“The gas fire was not extinguished til' 12th November, the flames meanwhile having diminished
considerably in volume, though they were still too fierce to allow of any near approach to the bore.


“ In January, 1909, attempts were made to raise the 5-inch casing, in order to replace the top
length, which had been injured by the fire. During this work the gas suddenly ceased altogether. . . .
“Boring have been resumed, a soft caving stratum was met with, and the boring tools became
fast. By the end of October, 1909, as attempts to withdraw the 5-inch casing proved unsuccessful, it was
found necessary to cut off the 5-inch casing about 20 feet above the bottom, and withdraw the whole of it
above that length. The 6-inch casing was finally got down to the 3,702 feet level, and the bore was
carried down through the, soft strata to a depth of 3,713 feet, the bottom of the bore, I am informed by
Mr. Schooley, the engineer for the contractors, being in hard rock-. The tools again got jammed, and
finally the bore had to be abandoned with three sets of tools at the bottom. ”*
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
At intervals reported indications of oil in South Australia are revived. The Rev. W. R. Clarke
in 1871 referred to a reported petroleum spring at Coorong, but added it was found to be a mistake)
“being probably at a point where certain animal substances have decomposed.”t
Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, Government Geologist, South Australia, alludes to the occurrence of
bituminous substances in that State in the following terms; —■
“An alleged discovery of bitumen and mineral oil on the sea beach at the mouth of the Glenelg
River and westward was reported upon by the Government Geologist in July, 1898. He stated that no
traces of bitumen could be detected on the beach, and the lumps previously found were probably erratic
fragments, washed up from some sourcesat present unknown, like those found along the coasts of Kangaroo
Island, York Peninsula, and Port Lincoln. As to the presence of mineral oil, suggested by the local
discoloration of the sea at the place visited, analysis showed that there was no mineral or trace of
bitumen present, but finely comminuted seaweed, causing the appearance of a scum.”j
Of Coorongite, Elaterite, or Australian Caoutchouc, in South Australia, Mr. Brown wrote ;
“This is an indiarubber-like mineral, which was discovered many years ago not far from the Salt
Creek, which empties itself into the Coorong, a salt-water inlet extending from the Murray mouth for
about ninety miles parallel to and a short distance from the coast. It was first observed on the surface in
little hollows in the sand on a run held by Mr. Gall, and resembled patches of dry leather ; it generally
occurred in swamps. The theory formed was that this substance had resulted from the overflow of
petroleum or rock oil, and boring operations have since been conducted at various periods, with the view
of tapping the oil-bearing strata from which this peculiar substance was supposed to have exuded. The greatest
depth of bore attained was somewhere about five hundred feet, and so far as is known the beds passed
through were Tertiary sands, clays, and limestones, resting on blue clay slate. An English company
imported boring machinery from America, with a view of renewing the search for rock oil, and after
spending £3,000 (the greater part of which was paid for incidental expenses) gave up the quest.” ....
“ There have been other discoveries which have led to some hope of finding petroleum, but, so far, on
investigation, there has been no substantial evidence of its existence in quantity. Thus in 1897 the
Advertiser of 25tb September stated that at Ethel’s Cove, three and a half miles from Normanville, a
large body of kerosene shale, ‘simply saturated with oil,’ had been found, the hill, four hundred and fiftv
* Queensland Mining Journal, Oct. 14th, 1911, p.p, 509, 510. + Indust. Prod. N S. Wales, 1871, p. 519.
X Record of the Mines of S. Australia, 3rd Ed., 1899 p. 180.
80
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF FArUA.


feet high, being ‘ one mass of this shale.’ We have heard nothing further of this. Again, it was stated
(March, 1898) that petroleum oil had been discovered at D’Estreßay, Kangaroo Island, and a company
was formed to work the claim. In 1896 it was reported that petroleum had been found oozing from a
swamp in the'Hundred of Kongorong, near the sea coast. So far as we are aware, nothing has resulted
from these discoveries.”*
In the Evening News (Sydney), 18th September, 1900, a further report was published on the
discovery of petroleum on Kangaroo Island, 5 miles from the coast.
In 1912, Kangaroo Island was again brought into prominence as an oil locality. Mr. L. K. Ward,
Government Geologist, was instructed to report, and furnished the following statement, according to the
Australian Mining Standard of 12 h, September 1912:—“The outlook is far from hopeful. Of the
discoveries that have been made, none are of such a character as to lend support to the belief that an oil-
field exisls on Kangaroo Island. The asphallum, or bitumen, to which such great importance is attached
by the discoverers, is cast up on the beaches in the form of ocean-borne fragments. Its source is unknown.
The discoveries of Coorongite have, in my opinion, no bearing on the possible existence of mineral oil.
Other substances, which were submitted to careful analysis by the Government Analyst, have shown no
traces of petroleum, or its derivatives. Of more vital importance is the geological structure of the
southern part of Kangaroo Island. Certain structural conditions must he fulfilled for concentration of the
oil, and I am of opinion that these necessary structural conditions are not present in the region which I
have recently examined. lam therefore unable, on the evidence acquired, to recommend the expenditure
of Government funds in boring for oil.”
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Has also had its reported discoveries of oil, but nothing eventuated. As early as 1866-7 samples
of “ bitumens, resins, inflammable amber-like minerals ” were recorded. In the Western Australian
section of the Victorian International Exhibition of 1866-7, P. Wallcott exhibited what was described
as an interesting series of the above : 1 The inflammable substance is of a dark brown colour, resinous
fracture, and soluble in alcohol. The bitumen or asphalt is free from sulphur compounds, and is, there-
fore, of value if occurring in quantity.” t The above were found in beds near the coast.
In 1902, in the Sydney Adorning Herald of the sth February, under the heading of “ Mineral Oil
in Western Australia,” the following appeared :
“ It is reported that there have been important developments recently in connection with the
petroleum and asphalt discoveries in the vicinity of the Warren River, and that arrangements have been
made to test the country, a contract having been entered into between the Westralian Mining and Oil
Corporation (Limited) and the Diamond Drilling Company, of Kalgoorlie, to sink a trial bore to a depth
of 1,500 feet.”
The Australian Mining Standard , 20th March, 1902, reported that:—“ Mr. Simpson, Mineralogist
and Assayer to the Geological Branch of the Westralian Mines Department, has furnished the Under
Secretary for Mines with an exhaustive analysis report on the samples of bitumen found near the Warren
River, on the South Coast. One sample yielded 49 - 47 per cent, of petroleum, and 49 - 37 per cent, of
* Record of the Mine of S. Australia, 3rd, Ed., 1899, p. 180, t Official Record, Melbourne, p, IC9.
42124 —L


asphaltine. Mr. Simpson remarks that this material must be regarded as extremely pure, and only
comparable to the best Syrian and Bermuda asphalt. He adds that, where found in samples of this
character, it is regarded as a valuable indication of the presence of underground stores of oil. A boring
plant has been sent to the locality to prospect for the supposed oil.”
Mr. E. J. Nankivell on the 29th May, 1902, in the same journal, writes:—“On the south-west,
coast of Australia there is a large tract of heavily-timbered karri and jarrah country, and it is practically
unpopulated. Roads lead from Bridgetown and Basselton to portions of the coast. For many years it
has been noticed that after a heavy north-west storm large quantities of bitumen in pieces, upwards of
four hundred pounds in weight, still viscid and ragged, as if recently torn from the fissure from which it
exuded, have been cast up on the beach some forty chains west from the mouth of the Warren River.
On the sea at this place there is a thick scum of reddish-brown hue, which, as the sun shines upon it,
gives forth a most beautiful array of prismatic colours. Analyses prove this to be petroleum. The
bitumen is of high specific gravity, and exceptionally pure.”
As nothing apparently eventuated from the drilling referred to, the reports have not been justified
as to oil-finding, at least so far as known to date.
NORTHERN TERRITORY.
In addition to the reported indications of oil and bitumen in the Northern Territory, recorded on
p. 42, the Writer is indebted to Mr. Atlee Hunt, Secretary for External Affairs, for a reference to an early
discovery by the Commander of H.M.S. “Beagle.”
Investigation at the Mitchell Library disclosed the following record by Commander J. Lort. Stokes,*
which, doubtless, gave rise to the report. Two wells were sunk for water, close to the Victoria Biver, 50
miles from its mouth ; their surroundings were described as follows : —■“ The sandstone, which prevailed
everywhere, was in a decomposed state; but there was a very decided dip in the strata to the south-east of
about 30 degrees. On the east side of Water Valley, I found the same kind of slate noticed before at
Curiosity Peak; but what interested me most was a bituminous substance found near the bottom of the
wells recently dug, and 23 feet from the surface of the ground. It was apparently of a clayey nature
when first brought up, but became hard and dark upon exposure to the air, and ignited quickly when put
into the flame of a candle.”
* “Discoveries in Australia—Voyage of the ‘ Beagle’ in the years 1837-43,” Vol. 11, 1846, p. 96.
82
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


CHAPTER 111.
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION,
PAPUA.
No. 545/15.
Territory of Papua, Government Secretary’s Department,
Port Moresby, 9th March, 1912.
Sir,
It has been suggested to the Government that advantage should bo taken of your visit to
Papua to obtain a further report on the Astrolabe Copper Field, and I have now the honor, by direction,
to ask whether, upon the completion of your expedition to the coal-fields, you could spare the time to
inspect and report upon the mineral field referred to.
I have, &c.,
H. W. CHAMPION,
Acting Government Secretary.
J. F. Came,-Esq., Assistant Government Geologist, New South Wales,
Port Moresby.
This request received Federal and State approval, but on the return of the Purari Coal Expedition
on the 2nd June, only the Dubuna, Mount Diamond, and Elvina Mines were found in a condition for
inspection, notwithstanding early intimation that it was essential that the nature and extent —so far as
proved—of the unaltered ores below water-level, or below the zone of oxidation, should be ascertained,
for upon these factors depended an intelligent estimate of the possibilities of the field.
Shortly afterwards an attempt was made to unwater the Laloki Mine ; unfortunately, the shaft
was found to have collapsed before the lowest level was reached. The upper cross-cut in the lode at 94
feet from surface was carefully sampled as soon as unwatered. As it was very desirable that the
composition and value of the lode in the lowest cross-cut at 150 feet should be compared with those in the
upper, a sample from the former was obtained through the kindness of Mr. P. R. Osborne, Manager of
the Dubuna Mine, who secured it when the mine was previously unwatered.
Deductions from the evidence thus obtained, and from assays of samples taken during a proving
option several years previously, kindly supplied by Mr. L. J. Cowley, General Manager of the British
New Guinea Development Company, and from others recently taken on behalf of the Gladstone Mines,
Limited, will be found under the descriptive notice of the mine.


No attempt was made to render the other adjacent mines available for inspection ; from two—the
Hector and Astrolabe—rich carbonate ores were exported when first opened.
It is regrettable that so little reliable data, on which to base an opinion, was available in many
cases. Owing to the apathy of owners, or some other reason, a number of workings could only be
examined superficially ; inspection, in some instances, being further handicapped by mullocking of outcrops.
Judged by present conditions, the prospecting impulse imparted by discovery was apparently very
evanescent, sale of interest being the chief aim of most. Failure of proving options over a number of
“shows” caused practical abandonment, though some of the tests under the option cannot be regarded as
conclusive, or even justified in some instances.
Where ores were stacked alongside shafts now full of water, average samples were taken for
determination of composition and values, but extent of proving, size of lodes, &c., remain unknown,
The position of the mines in July, 1912, may be judged from the following brief statement:—
M ine—
Anaconda. —Opened by two shafts—now full of water. A small amount of sulphides stacked at each.
No ore despatched. No work in progress.
Astrolabe. —Chiefly superficial excavations. Two shafts, one full of water, other fallen in. Outcrops (?)
covered with mullock. No work in progress.
Dubuna. —Two lodes systematically worked in superficial, enriched zones. Opened in lower grades
to 170 feet, but prospecting operations at present suspended.
Elvina. —Partly prospected by shaft, tunnel, winze, and several cross-cuts. Further proving in
progress. No ore despatched.
Empire. —Superficial openings—disclosing no values.
Gordon. —Two shallow shafts, several short trenches. No values disclosed; copper stains only. No
work in progress.
Hector. —Open cut, which exhausted oxidised ores. Low-grade sulphides exposed in bottom of cut,
opened by underlay shaft, now nearly full of water. Shaft on north side of ridge sunk to cut
lode on underlay, evidently too shallow. No work in progress.
Hercules. —Partly prospected by shaft at junction of sedimentary and intrusive rocks. A little
carbonate showing in outcrop. Shaft fallen in. No output. Taken up in July, 1912, for
further test.
Laloki. —Large pyritic lode opened by three shafts; two unavailable. Main shaft, 180 feet,
following underlay from 58 feet. Cross-cuts at 98 feet and 150 feet. Shaft unwatered to
127 feet, collapsed below. One ton of ore despatched. Reopened for sampling twice since
active prospecting ceased.
Lu Lu. —Opened by shaft to 33 feet; now fallen in. About 3J tons of siliceous carbonate ore
bagged at surface; none despatched. No work in progress; recently re-pegged.
Merrie England. —Shallow trenches ; slight carbonate stains in altered slates ; no output; no work-
in progress. Forfeited for non-payment of rent in 1910-11.


Moresby King. —Two shafts ; neither available. Tunnel, 30 feet. Ho output. No work in progress.
Mount Diamond. —Opened by tunnel and shaft; lower level prospecting in abeyance ; stoping on a
small scale in upper level in shaft. Small consignment despatched in July in 1912.
Pari. —Opened by tunnel, shaft, and winze ; latter in sulphide. No output. No work in progress.
Sapphire Creek (late J. R. Jones). —Shaft in gossan—fallen in. Shaft in sedimentary rock (slates
with films of calcite). No output. No work in progress Forfeited for non-payment of rent in
1910-11.
Tobo United —Opened by two tunnels a few feet apart. Main tunnel 97 feet long, with two short
cross-cuts, in oxidised zone; sulphides showing in floor between cross-cuts. No work in progress.
One ton of ore despatched. Forfeited for non payment of rent in 1910-11.
Plan showing locations of copper lodes in Astrolabe Copper Field.
(After E. R. Stanley.)
Fig. 13.
HISTORICAL.
The Astrolabe Copper Field was proclaimed on the 21st December, 190 G, though, according to the
Honorable Staniforth Smith, Director of Mines, the presence of copper had tern discovered some years
previously by Mr. J. McDonald.*
* “ Handbook of the Territory of Papua,” Ist edition,l9o7, p. 26.
Fig. 13


Tons.
cwt.
qrs.
lb.
Value.
£
1906-7
136
12
3
8
4,080
1907-8
175
19
1
10
2,479
1908-9
67
9
0
0
1,341
1909-10
71
19
1
10
1,439
1910-11
... 403
0
0
0
4,433
1911-12
... 993
15
0
0
9,681
Total
1,848
15
2
0
23,453
Copper has also been recorded at Woodlark Island, Reilly’s Creek, about 5 miles S.E. of
Kulamadau, and in the Sesa lease on the Island of St. Aignan (Missima), but apparently no workable
deposits have been located outside the Astrolabe Field. From a report on the latter furnished by the
above authority.* It is apparent that the Hector and Astrolabe Mines were the first taken up, in respect
of which reward claims of 160 acres each were granted.
At the date quoted fourteen prospecting areas, aggregating 1,020 acres, had been taken up, but it
is recorded that little work, if any, had been done on them. The greatest depth then reached in the field
was about 30 feet, and the greatest length of lode proved, 90 feet.f
Indications of copper were stated to extend as far south as Tupuseloi Head on the coast, and
20 miles further north at Mount Keith. Extracts from the report quoted will be found in the descriptive
notes on the different mines.
In 1911 Mr. E. 11. Stanley, Government Geologist of Papua, furnished a report on the field,!
from which it was apparent that work was even then only being carried on in four mines. The
period of active operations at the north-west end of the field extended from the beginning of 1907 to
the middle of 1908. In the following year it is recorded that little real development work was done.§
Useful development work, however, was accomplished at the south end.
The total output from the field to 30th June, 1910, amounted to 432 tons. In September, 1910,
the Dubuna output began, and from that date to 16th June, 1912, the total was increased to 1,848 tons
practically by this mine alone. The annual shipments of ore from the Astrolabe Field were as follows :
GEOLOGY.
The geological formations represented in the Astrolabe Copper Field were only cursorily noted
whilst examining the copper deposits. They appear to consist of altered and indurated sedimentary rocks
(originally sandstones, mudstones, conglomerates, siliceous limestones, and calcareous mudstones), intruded
by gabbro and basalt.
From the intimate association of the gabbro with the copper deposits —for they are invariably in
close proximity—it is reasonable to regard it as the ore-indicator, and as probably responsible for the rise
of the cupriferous solutions which invaded the sedimentary series after the intrusion of the former had
disturbed and fractured the latter.
* Parliamentary Papers—ordered to be printed 17th July. 1907. t Ibid. J Annual Report of the Territory of Papua, Ist July, 1910,
to 30th June, 1911, pp. 34-37. § Annual Report, Territory of Fapua, year ending; 30th June, 1909, p. 105.
86
Bulletin of the territory of papUA.


Plate XXVIII.
Orbitoides Limestone near Bootless Inlet.
Plate XXIX,
Orbitoides Limestone near Bootless Islet
(Section enlaraed.)




Overlying the copper rocks, and most recent, are the Astrolabe volcanic series—so conspicuously
represented at Hombron Bluff and Warirata—which consist of practically horizontal beds of agglomerate
and tuffs, 1,3<55 feet thick at Hombron Bluff The vertical jointing of these fragmental volcanic rocks in
the bluff wall-like face of the Astrolabe Range at a distance conveys a false impression of columnar
structuio.
Fringing the copper-bearing rocks coastwards from Dubuna are limestones and calcareous shales
containing orhitoides of a Miocene facies. * Resting on the margin of these conformably are the Port
Moresby beds with foraminiferal remains, probably of Pliocene age, and, like all the Tertiary strata of this
region, are highly crumpled and contorted by geologically recent volcanic forces.
A special fea'ure in the Port Moresby beds is the occurrence of huge chalcedonic concretions, which
are exposed, or freed, on weathering of the softer enclosing strata. These concretions are frequently of
large size, over 3 feet in diameter or more, and characterised in some cases by excellently displayed
concentric structure, like the coats of an onion. Microscopic examination by Mr. W. S. Dun, Paleonto-
logist, revealed the presence of Radiolaria, thus confirming the opinion of partial organic origin similar to
that of the well-known “flints” of the chalk beds of Dover, which owe their origin principally to the
remains of diatoms.
Under the heading of geology, Mr. Stanley states in his report:—“ By making a careful examina-
tion of the creek beds, I found that the contorted slates and limestones in which the lodes occur on the
lower slopes of the foothills below Hombron Bluff and Mount Warirata rest upon a dark-coloured gneissic
rock, which has been much disturbed, and crossed by numerous quartz veins. For the sake of convenience
this rock has been tentatively called ‘ Lalokite,’ being in my opinion the oldest rock of the series, and is
probably Archsean. The country in the immediate neighbourhood has been penetrated by several basic
dykes carrying metallic sulphides. These dykes do not penetrate the overlying horizontal agglomerate
beds of Hombron Bluff and Mount Warirata, nor do they penetrate the Tertiary beds nearer the coast,
and the probability is that they are very early Tertiary.”
The present Writer, in his brief examination, did not meet with the gneissic rock above recorded.
In other respects the geological facts were found as stated, with the exception of the older Tertiary strata
flanking the cupriferous rocks near Dubuna.
COMPOSITION OF THE ORES.
The visible supply of wholly, or partially, oxidised and enriched ores, is too limited for serious
consideration in estimating the possibilities of the field. So far as prospecting and development have
proceeded, it is abundantly clear that the future of the Astrolabe copper industry is entirely dependent on
low-grade pyritic ores. It is satisfactory, therefore, to note that, though copper values are undeniably
low, the composition of such deposits in the Laloki, Tobo, Dubuna No. 2 lode, Mount Diamond and Elvina
Mines, is eminently suitable for semi-pyritic smelting—the most rapid and economic reduction process.
Quantities, however, have yet to be proved ; it is imperative that these should be demonstrated before
smelting be considered.
Though developments to date have revealed, in two dimensions, promise of extensive pyritic
deposits in several mines, yet their common lens-shaped form renders it urgent that the three should be
ascertained within reasonable limits. In other words, that the length, breadth, and depth of the ore
bodies should be so far proved by shafts, drives, and cross-cuts, or tunnels, cross-cuts, and winzes, that a
reliable estimate of reserves may be made.
* These distinctive fossils are being further examined by Mr._F. Chapman,‘A.L.S., of the National Museum, Melbourne.
87
ASTROLABE COBPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


Mine.
Metallic
Copper
per cent.
Metallic
Iron
per cent.
Metallic Metallic
Cobalt Nickel
per cent, per cent.
1
Metallic
Antimony
per cent.
Metallic
Lead
per cent.
Metallic
Zinc
per cent
Silica
per cent
Calcium
Carbonate
per cent.
1
Sulphur
'per cent.
i
Gold
per ton.
, Silver
per ton.
Metallic
Arsenic
per cent.
*Laloki
2'SO
40-39
trace
trace
trace
3-34
1-57
43-87
dwt.gr.
3 6
dwt. gr.
10 8
+ do
Dubuna, No. 2 lode
336
3-82
43-08
37-94
o-
43
absent
0-22
insolub
2-70
e, 6'4 p
1011
sr cent,
absent
43-82
32 04
3 4
2 4
8 4
Mount Diamond
3'60
40-04
trace
trace
do
1-01
12-13
do
31-02
0 19
4 21
...
Elvina
3-10
36-26
do
do
do
0-25
3 02
9 12
do
3519
1 15
11 10
Tobo
2 00
29-54
0-88
13-65
30-48
3 6
10 21
Dubuna No. 2 lode (par-
tially enriched and desul-
phurised ore underlying
shipping grade)
6-08
35-14
absent
absent
absent
trace
3-66
7-79
absent
25-65
2 4
11 23
0-24
In no instance have strike levels been driven in the ore-bodies to prove their length, and rarely
have they been sunk upon to a reasonable depth. Some, however, are of sufficient width to justify an
opinion that the other dimensions are likely to prove proportional.
The composition of favourable smelting ores is shown in the following table of analyses of average
samples taken by the Writer and others. The results obtained from the Laloki Mine by the Gladstone
Mines, Limited, through recent sampling by Messrs. Klug and Adams, were kindly supplied by the former
as mutually agreed. These place the mine in a still better light, hut it has been deemed wise to strike an
average between the values of the two cross-cuts, so far as ascertainable, and to work on a lower average
grade.
* Average of portion of Upper and Lower Cross-cuts ; samples taken by J. E. Came (Upper Cross-cut), and P. R. Osborne (Lower Cross-cut),
t Average of Upper and Lower Cross-cuts; samples taken by Mr. Acaras for G. C. King—and P. R. Osborne.
The low average of silica (quartz) in these ores (9-06 per cent.) allows of considerable addition of
siliceous ores—like those of Anaconda and Lu Lu—in the furnace charge, though allowance must be
made for a very small percentage of alumina, or other refractory material, not disclosed in the partial
analyses. The Laloki ore is remarkably free from silica, recalling Mount Lyell ore in its greatest purity. To
at tempt to smelt this ore without a considerable addition of silica—-preferably in the form of siliceous copper
or gold ores, to satisfy the excess of iron—would be disastrous to the furnace linings and the enterprise.
Protoxide of iron, formed in the process of reduction, attacks fire-brick with great avidity—forming
iron silicate, or slag.
The low copper values will be enhanced by the appreciable gold contents in the Laloki, Dubuna,
and Tobo ores. The extreme smelting concentration necessary to produce a profitable matte from poo r
copper ores of basic caracter, brings their small gold and silver contents within the range of profitable
electrolytic extraction
OUTLOOK OF THE COPPER INDUSTRY IN PAPUA.
Copper mining, or more correctly prospecting, in Papua began in the Astrolabe Field in the latter
part of 1906, and was for a brief period vigorously prosecuted, For the past two years or more


operations have been restricted to stoping in the Dubuna Mine, and a little desultory prospecting in a
couple of others. Failure of proving options over the greater number practically caused abandonment
in 1910, several being since forfeited for non-payment of rent.
A few mines yielded comparatively small quantities of rich superficial carbonates ; others partially
oxidised and enriched sulphides—exportable at a profit. The former were soon exhausted, whilst the
visible supply of the hitter is, comparatively, negligible in contemplating future possibilities of the industry,
which, so far as discovery has proceeded, is entirely dependent on low-grade pyritic ores below very super-
ficial zones of enrichment.
The quality of the latter and amenability to treatment, have been demonstrated under Composition
of Ores.
Assuming a workable supply, as the result of future extended prospecting, then the question of
local smelting arises.
The low-grade pyritic ores of Astrolabe are highly basic, i.e., high in iron and sulphur, and low in
silica or quartz.
Basicity indicate* rapid and economical reduction by semi-pyritic, or blast furnace treatment, which
demands coke as a sine qud non.
Reverberatory smelting—most suitable for acid, or quartzy ores—on the other hand, requires wood,
or long flaming coal, for furnace and roast-heaps or stalls.
Papuan pyritic ores would form useful flux, which, under favourable conditions of cheapness and
abundance, might be profitably handled in conjunction with distant smelting enterprises labouring under
disadvantages of refractory furnacing material. But fullest development of the local industry involves
the whole—not part—of the visible supply. For this reason the wisdom of considering judicious
co-operation for achievement of the best results will be readily seen.
A local smelting plant would utilise local fluxing ores for reduction of all available varieties,
instead of the basic being depleted by exportation, and the acid, or siliceous, remaining untreated and
untreatable.
Local smelting involves preliminary co-operation and amalgamation of, at least, the principal mining
properties, and extended proving below water-levels, prior to the consideration of the reduction problem.
To entertain the latter before actual proof of supply, would be courting disaster, and failing to profit by
dearly-bought experience elsewhere.
Situation, transport, water supply, are further questions to be commercially considered—after proof
of supply —prior to establishment of local smelting.
Choice of a situation for a central reduction plant demands careful investigation, lest injury result.
In a moist climate like that of Papua, the effect of sulphurous oxide fumes discharged from a smelter
stack would be extremely destructive to native flora and economic plantations in the vicinity.
On the Astrolabe Range —from Hombron Bluff to Warirata—(on the southern and south-western
base of which most of the lodes occur) clouds of mist are common, arising from rarefaction of moisture,
laden air currents ; hence great damage would result from absorption of the sulphurous fumes where
prevailing winds impinge on its slopes.
The shores of Bootless Inlet, within the comparatively dry coastal area having Port Moresby as a
centre, might afford a suitable site from which prevailing north west winds would carry the fumes
seawards, and the south-east against relatively barren hills nearby.
42124—M


This site would probably also be found most central, and least diflicult for transport connection by
steam or electrical power, preferably the latter derived from Rona Ralls, on the Laloki River, which are
capable of supplying adequate power for all purposes. Fuel would prove a heavy item of expenditure.
Even if reverberatory smelting were considered with such basic ores the local wood supply is altogether
inadequate, and would soon become exhausted within commercial limits.
Coke and blast furnace reduction must, therefore, alone be considered. Against the cost of an
outside supply of coke—for New Guinea coal, so far as known, even if it were accessible, is non-coking and
unsuitable—cheap coloured labour must be offset.
Water supply might be conserved in the creek trending from Warirata past the Elvina and Mount
Diamond Mines, but more reliably from Laloki River.
Limestone, for increasing fluidity of slag, building, and other purposes, is obtainable on the .ine of
proposed connection, close to Bootless Inlet. The composition of the best quality is shown in the
following analysis by Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye:—
No. 2330. —Limestone, one quarter mile from Bogoro Creek, on track from Bootless Inlet to
Dubuna Mines.
Per cent.
Water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... o‘4B
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... 8D93
Magnesium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-27
Manganese ~ ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-29
Ferrous ~ ... ... ... ... ... ... o'B7
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10-66
Alumina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 - 62
Phosphoric anhydride... ... ... ... ... ... OT4
100-26
Care would be necessary in selecting limestone, for the quality varies greatly, silica being very
high in places, as will be seen in the following analysis, by the same analyst, of a sample from Iriama Scrub
on the Port Moresby-Hombron Bluff road :
No. 2356. —Limestone from Iriama Scrub,
Per cent.
Moisture at 100° C. ... ... ... ... ... ... o’so
Water above 100° C. ... ... ... ... ... ... P5O
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... 61T8
Lime (as silicate) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-25
Magnesium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 - 89
Ferrous ~ ... ... ... ... ... ... POl
Manganese „ ... ... ... ... ... ... OTB
Ferric oxide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 - 90
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29'22
Alumina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2-86
Soda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-14
Potash ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 - 37
Phosphoric anhydride ... ... ... ... ... ... 0-17
100-17


Cliff-like masses of a limey rock at, and in the vicinity of, the Gordon Mine contain 37'84 per cent,
of silica—chiefly as silicate of lime—against 44'72 per cent, of lime.
In the .production of a high grade-matte—which is the furthest metallurgical point advisable under
local conditions—from such low-grade basic ores, it will be necessary to roast or concentrate the first-run
matte. In this second process additional silica will be required; possibly refractory gold ores of
pyritic character, suitable for this purpose, exist in the gold fields of the Territory—particularly in
the north-eastern reefing areas (Woodlark, Missima, &c.), accessible to the coast, which could thus be
turned to mutually profitable account.
For these reasons it would seem unnecessary to add that development of low-grade copper deposits
to their fullest capacity, is altogether beyond the reach of ordinary miners or small capitalists. In fact,
large capital is absolutely necessary, for only on a large scale can low-grade propositions be successfully
attacked.
The extension of the cupriferous belt, however, beyond the furthest provings offers considerable
inducement for prospecting by ordinary miners. Rich superficial ores like those in the outcrops
of the Hector and Astrolabe Mines, or enriched zones beneath the cap as at Dubuna, could be turned to
immediate account, whilst the (probably) low grade primitive ores at lower levels would be available for
local smelters if such be established, either by direct sale or by the usual customs smelting tariff.
Everything, however, hinges on a strong effort to restore confidence in the local industry. It may
here be repeated that the most urgent necessity of the field is further, and reasonably extensive, proving
of the pyritic ore-bodies below water-level. There is a prospect of the Laloki lower levels being
systematically proved under an option secured by the Gladstone Copper Mines, Limited, of Queensland,
on the advice of Mr. G. C. Klug, Australian Manager for Bewick, Moreing & Co.
But'the Dubuna, Elvina, and Mount Diamond Mines also require adequate proving by following
the ore-bodies longitudinally and vertically.
If the necessary proof of permanence be forthcoming, then the Government would be justified in
establishing a tramline between Port Moresby and Sapphire Creek, from which connection could be made
by easy grade with Bootless Inlet, if local smelting should be determined on.
Tramway connection between the shipping port and the foot of the Astrolabe would be justified even
if only the Laloki Mine fulfils its promise of abundance, and is worked as at present contemplated by the
company holding the proving option, which under such circumstances would doubtless guarantee a
considerable income from carriage of ore to Port Moresby.
Beyond the mineral traffic—if it eventuates —plantation investments en route, and especially
beyond the rich Astrolabe Range, would be greatly benefited by rail connection. Last, but not least,
the salubrious altitude of Hombron Bluff would be brought within easy reach of the residents of Port
Moresby as a health resort and sanitorium, so essential in the tropics.
Register of Mines Alphabetically Arranged.
Anaconda (also called “ The Great Papuan Anaconda ”). —Area, 40 acres. Two shafts have been
sunk on the lode traversing this lease, which strikes N. 78° W., with an unascertainable dip to


N. 12° E. Yalo Creek intersects it twice; at the second intersection a shaft has been sunk to a
reported depth of 33 feet in the bank of the creek, 8 feet in gossan and 25 feet in sulphide of iron.
An average sample of the small paddock of ore at grass yielded the following results on assay :
2348. —(19) No. 1 Shaft, Anaconda Mine.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0'92
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32-62
„ lead ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... trace
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 - 30
Sulphur 27-89
Fine gold at the rate of 13 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 2 dwt. 17 grs. per ton.
A second shaft—as shown in the accompanying section—is reported to be 102 feet in depth. As
both were full of water, inspection was impossible. Mr, E. R. Stanley, however, records the following
description of No. 2 shaft from verbal information gathered ;—“ The working shaft has been sunk 40 feet
through gossan containing crystallized carbonates near the surface, and small irregular patches of copper
and iron sulphides at a depth. At 40 feet the shaft was sunk at an inclination of 70° to the south
for 20 feet. Here the shaft passed into unaltered sulphides, meeting a footwall dipping S. 10 E. at a
variably high angle. At this depth indications of a fair class of ore were met with, the specimens
containing chalcopyrite, with traces of bornite and quartz.”* A sample carefully averaged from the
small stack of ore at grass yielded the following results on assay :
2349. —(20) No. 2 Shaft, Anaconda Mine.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2-83
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34"30
Silica 22-15
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32'47
Pine gold at the rate of 12 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Anaconda Developments.
Fig. 14.
* Ann. Kept. Territory of Papua, year ending June 30th, 1911, p. 36.
92
fctJLLETIN OF Till'] TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


Astrolabe. —-The present condition of this mine renders it impossible to form an opinion. Whatever
surface features it once possessed are now completely obliterated by mullock and strippings, and the two
shafts are unavailable, one being full of water, the other fallen in. The only indication perceptible is a
slight seepage of copper sulphate in a small gutter naturally excavated through the waste material.
Judging from the shaft tips, lodestuff was not struck in either. The first operations consisted of stripping,
and later, sluicing, for loose boulders of ore in the soil and rock waste from the hill slope. The Writer
is inclined to regard the ore as liberated by weathering and denudation from a deposit more or less in situ
rather than adventitious.
The Astrolabe was one of the first mines discovered in 1906, for which an original reward claim of
160 acres was granted. In 1907 it was examined by the Honorable Staniforth Smith, Director of Mines,
whose account of the mine during its brief active campaign is of interest, especially in view of its present
unsatisfactory condition ; —■
“•Astrolabe Copper Syndicate. —This property is situated on a small watercourse running into
Sapphire Creek, and is purely an alluvial proposition, the working being in the old bed of a stream
whose course has been altered by falls of debris from contiguous rising ground. The method has
been to start from the upper intersection of the old bed with the present stream and advance with a
face as deep as the bottom of the old bed, throwing the strippings behind and bagging the ore.
“ On the brow of a small hill a shaft has been sunk 50 feet, and a drive put in running parallel
to the river, for 60 feet. Six feet from the shaft a lode was struck 4 feet in width, showing arsenical
pyrites, and assaying 3 per cent, copper, with a little gold and silver. No other lode matter was met
with in the drive.
“ About 80 yards from the shaft, further down the hill towards the river, another shaft was sunk
for 63 feet, and a drive running parallel to the river was put in for 90 feet, but nothing of value was
struck. r A tunnel is now being run in from the side of the hill to test the country underneath an
ironstone or gossan outcrop immediately above the old bed of the creek, now being worked, and from
the vicinity of which the copper ore in the river bed probably came.”*
So far as can be definitely ascertained from the Annual Reports of the Territory, the output to
30th June, 1908, amounted to a little over 91 tons, containing a reported average of 40 per cent, of
copper. The further output is not given separately.
Astrolabe Extended.— Under this name an application was made for 60 acres by W. C. Bruce,t
but there is no record of any prospecting having been done on the area.
Dubuna. —loo acres held under lease (M.L. 17), and 60 acres under application to lease, by Messrs.
A. S. R. Osborne and P. Charley. Principal developments on M.L. 17.
Situation. In Central Division, about 4 miles from coast at Bootless Inlet, and 18 miles by road
from Port Moresby. Elevation about 450 feet above sea-level.
According to Mr. P. R. Osborne, Manager, the Dubuna lodes were discovered by Captain A. S. R.
Osborne in September, 1908, whose attention was directed to the locality by a native, who exhibited
loose specimens of carbonate ore from the small channel on the south-east fall of Dubuna Ridge,
now known as Nabi’s Gully after the discoverer.
* Report on the Astrolabe Copper Field—Parliamentary Papers ordered to be printed July 17th, 1907, p. 3.
f Ann. Kept. Territory Papua, year ending 30th June, 1908, p. 109.
93
astrolabe copper field, central DIVISION, PAPUA.


Superficial prospecting revealed unpayable ore in situ, consisting of carbonate stains and a little
yellow sulphide, which were exposed by shallow openings in the bed of the channel.
Search was then extended over the ridge into a creek, where trails of loose gossan boulders were
picked up and followed back up the ridge to their source in the caps of the Dubuna lodes.
The following plan and sections illustrate the occurrence of the two lodes, and the main develop-
ment to July, 1912.
Plan of Dubuna Lodes.
Scale 200 feet to one inch.
Fig. 15.
Details of all developmental work to the 30th June, 1911, have been supplied by the Manager,*
viz.;—
feet. feet.
In No. 1 Lode—Shaft sinking ... 335 In No 2. Lode—Shaft-sinking ... 220
Winzing ... 29 Driving ... 253
Driving ... 465 Cross-cutting ... 135
Cross-cutting ... 92 Winzing ... 12
Rising ... ... 20 Rising... ... 25
Total ... ... ... 964 Total... ... ... 645
* Ann. Rept. Territory of Papua, year ending 30th June, 1911, p. 23.


Extension of lower level prospecting has been in abeyance for some considerable time, whilst
advantage is being taken of high copper values to exploit rich superficial ores in the upper levels.
The nature of these enriched deposits under the gossan cap is shown in the following partial
analyses of carefully-taken average samples :
No. 2381. —No. 2 Lode. From underlay shaft about 18 feet below tunnel level, or 82 feet from
surface. Width of lode, 12 to 13 feet. Sample an average of 10 feet.
Per cent.
Metallic copper... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6*oB
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35T4
„ nickel absent
~ antimony ... ... ... ... ... ... „
~ cobalt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ~
~ arsenic ... ... ... ... ... ... 0*24
„ zinc ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 3-66
~ lead ... ... ... ... present, less than OTO
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7*79
Sulphur... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25*65
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... absent
Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 11 dwt. 23 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
Dubuna No. 2 Lode.
Fig. 16.
95
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


Mo. 2332.—N0. 2 Lode. From underlay shaft, 58 feet below tunnel level, or 122 from surface
Sample taken from 7 feet wide on hanging wall side. Lode apparently faulted just below this
level as shown in section.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 - 82
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37'94
Nickel oxide I n
Cobalt oxide J
Metallic antimony ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
~ lead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0'22
~ zinc ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2'70
Silica .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10T1
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32-04
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... absent
Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 8 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
(H. P. White, Analyst.)
No. 2333.—N0. 1 Lode. From No. 2 Cross-cut in No. 2 Lens, 147 feet from tunnel mouth, and 35
feet from surface. Width, including level, 25 feet. Sample from 12 feet. Length of lens, 100
feet. Maximum height, 20 feet.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22'39
~ iron 2P70
„ lead ... ... ... ... ... .. ... trace
Silica 2-32
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 - 83
Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 6 dwt. 13 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
No. 2334.—-No. 1 Lode. From No. 2 Lens. Total thickness, 12 feet. Sample taken from two
faces, 7 and 8 feet wide, 273 feet from tunnel mouth, and 66 feet from surface. Length of
lens at present exposed, 45 feet. Height of ore above tunnel level, 13 feet.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13"40
„ iron ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 31-22
~ lead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... present, less than o'lo
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3’67
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur 26-91
Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 19 dwt. 14 grs. per ton.
{H. P. White, Analyst.)
96
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


No. 2335.—N0. 1 Lode. Beginning of No. 3 Lens in face of Main Tunnel, 324 feet from entrance,
and 80 feet from surface. Width, s. feet; length not proved (16th June 1912).
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9'oo
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33-46
~ lead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... present, less than OTO
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13-73
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30"56
Fine gold at the rate of 13 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 6 dwt. 12grs. per ton.
(H. P. White, Analyst.)
Dubuna No. I Lode (Longitudinal Section).
Fig. 17.
The Dubuna lodes occur in a narrow belt of sedimentary rocks, included between a massive
development of intrusive gabbro and a narrow dyke of basalt. The sedimentaries consist of ordinary
and very calcareous slates, passing in places into almost impure limestone.
From a ferruginous outcrop of the latter, close to No. 2 Lode, near the north-eastern corner of
M.L. 17, a representative sample was taken, which yielded the following composition:—
No. 2328. —(1) Ferruginous calcareous slaty rock—Dubuna Mine.
Per cent.
Metallic iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3-08
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... 46’21
Silica 40-98
Neither gold nor silver detected in sample.
42124 —N
97
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


The gabbro lias already been referred to as the “copper indicator,” the copper deposits being
always in close proximity. Two specimens taken from different localities, viz., Sapphire Creek, (30), and
near Anaconda Mine (29), have been submitted to petrological examination by G. W. Card, A.R.S.M.,
Curator of the Mining and Geological Museum, Department of Mines, New South Wales, who supplied
the following notes ;
“ Gabbro from Papua.—Two specimens are available, marked 29 and 30 respectively. There is no
essential difference between these, but 30 has undergone a form of alteration which may have affected its
appearance to some extent. It is an ordinary type of gabbro, calling for no particular emphasis or de
scription.
Megascopically :—These rocks are dark green in colour, but in 29 the opaque whiteness of masses of
felspar has given rise to a mottled appearance. These white. patches have an average dimension about
equal to a small pea, but a maximum diameter of two-thirds of an inch may be attained. They are pyritous
and slightly calcareous.
Microscopically, 29 is a normal gabbro consisting of a lime-soda felspar and pyroxene, with some
magnetite ; chlorite and quartz occur as secondary products, and much of the felspar has undergone
alteration to the aggregation of epidote, (fee., known as saussurite. The pyroxene is pale brown in colour,
and comprises monoclinic and orthorhombic varieties, with development respectively of diallage and
bastite It is in part alt* red to chlorite.
The basalt dyke occurs in the north-east side of the Dubuna lodes, about 3 chains from No. 2.
It strikes apparently N. 10 W., and has a thickness of about a chain. Two specimens submitted to
Mr. Card were briefly noted as basalts.
The country in which the Dubuna lodes occur has, owing to its position, been subjected to great
stress and strain, resulting in shearing, fracturing, and dislocating or faulting. On the hanging wall of
No. 2 Lode, shearing has developed a greasy serpentinous-looking material, containing silicate of iron—
from crushed slate. A similar feature was noted on the hanging wall of the Mount Diamond lode.
The two lodes occur about 24 chains apart at the main shafts, but their strikes converge towards
the north-west, No. 1 striking N. 10° W. and dipping S. 50° W. at a low angle, No. 2 striking N. 60° W.
and dipping N. 30° E. at 75°. The latter is. apparently displaced by a fault at 120 feet, which has thrown
it to the footwall side. A cross-cut in that direction from the lowest level on the underlay (170 feet)
encountered a solitary block of ore in crushed country at 30 feet from the shaft, which may represent the
plane of dislocation.
In Nabi’s Gully, on the south-eastern side of Dubuna Ridge, the occurrence of a little copper ore,
with a dyke in close proximity, a little to the south-westward of the true strikes of the main lodes, appears
to indicate another and more extensive dislocation.
Three ore-lenses have been proved in No. 1 Lode at Dubuna, in the enriched zone at, and above,
tunnel level, and extending for a few feet below;—
No. 1 Lens —Length, 100 feet; greatest width, 27 feet to 30 feet; greatest vertical thickness of
shipping ore, 20 feet; average width, 13 feet to 14 feet.
No. 2 Lens. —Length exposed to July, 1912, 45 feet; greatest width, 12 feet; height above tunnel
rails, 13 feet.
No. 3 Lens. —Just struck in July, 1912.
Intermediate, —-In back of lode between No, 1 and No. 2 lenses,
98
BULLETIN OF TUB TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


At tunnel level the blank between No. 1 and No. 2 lenses is 30 feet, the intermediate lens occurring
overhead in this interval.
Between No. 2 and No. 3 lenses a blank of 18 feet occurs.
jS 'hipping Ore. —The ore mined in the upper levels is loose and pulverulent when first opened, but a
hard, superficial skin forms on the exposed faces of drives and headings, due to chemical decomposition
and cementation. Exposure to atmospheric moisture tends to firing.
Output. —From September, 1910, to 30th June, 1912, 1,396 tons of ore were despatched, the agreed
returns of portion sampled to date being :
From No. 1 Lode—3o6-06 tons, containing copper 21'9 per cent., gold 4-4 dwt. per ton, silver
L 23 oz. per ton.
From No. 2 Lode—362-91 tons, containing copper 24-87 per cent., gold 4 dwt. per ton, silver 1-04 oz.
per ton.
Transport. —From the mine the ore is packed on horse and mule back for miles to Bogoro
Creek, thence by canoes to receiving shed at Tupuselei, and from thence to Port Moresby by cutter, and
by mail steamers to Port Kembla Works, the total freight amounting to £2 Is. per ton.
Elvina. —From the records it would appear that this mine'was taken up as a mineral prospecting
claim during the year 1907—-1908, 18 cwt. 1 qr. of ore being despatched, evidently for testing purposes,
but the result was not published. The site was subsequently secured as a lease.
Several lodes occur in the property, but only one has been prospected to any degree.
The nature and extent of the proving to the end of June, 1912, are illustrated in the following
plan and section : ~
Plan.
Fig. 18
The principal development is in a cross-cut at the bottom of a 46 feet winze, sunk from an upper
cross-cut at tunnel level. The ore-body is here 32 feet wide, but the length of the lens has yet to be
proved.
99
astrolabe copper field, central division, papua.


At the tunnel level ore has been exposed in the floor near the shaft. A short cross-cut at this
point encountered ore of good grade since inspection, but the extent is not known. Apparently these
upper “ makes ” are on the apex of the lens near the footwall.
A carefully-averaged sample from the full width of the lower cross-cut, yielded the following results
on partial analysis by H. P. White ;
2342. —(17) Elvina Mine, from cross-cut at bottom of winze from second cross-cut off main tunnel.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 3-10
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... 3G-26
~ cobalt ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
~ nickel ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
„ antimony ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
~ lead ... ... ... ... ... 0-25
~ zinc ... ... ... ... ... ... 3-02
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9-12
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur 35-19
Fine gold at the rate of 1 dwt. 15 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 11 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
The composition here revealed is admirably suitable for semi-pyritic smelting. Two large pyritie
lodes in the same property are dissected by Scott’s Creek, about GO feet below the level of the main lode
tunnel, and only a few chains distant.
From the principal creek outcrop, which forms a bar and small waterfall, a sample was taken,
which yielded the following results :
2343. —(18) Elvina Lease, Outcrop in Scott’s Creek. Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 4-47
„ iron 29-26
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21-34
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30'08
Fine gold at the rate of 1 dwt. 15 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 8 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
(H. P. White, Analyst.)
The high silica contents would render it an excellent furnace admixture with the basic ores of the
field.
A short tunnel (35 feet) has been driven into the northern bank of the creek, partly alongside
the lode and partly across its apparent strike, without revealing ore values. If the strike coincides
with the bar in the channel, then the exposed lens must be short; this, however, is still a matter for
proof.
A few chains further down-stream another large pyritie lode is exposed, which has bten opened
for a few feet only.


The Elvina ore-bodies, like others in the field, are evidently in the form of lenses, to prove the
dimensions of which, it will be wise to confine prospecting strictly to themfor the present.
Elvina South. —An underlay shaft has here been sunk in the apparent footwall under a gossany
mass. So far as inspection was possible in its present precarious condition, no sign of copper was visible
in the back of the underlay, nor had a rise been put up to pierce the gossan.
A short distance from the shaft, nearer the point of the spur, a trace of copper sulphate was noted
in a sheltered cavity in the outcrop, thus revealing the presence of copper in the flat-lying mass, hut the
indication of itself is insignificant, and the limited work done affords no evidence whatever. An opinion of
the prospect is, therefore, impossible.
Gordon Mine. —At this site large cliff-masses, consisting principally of lime silicate, show stains
of copper carbonate on joint faces, with a few leanly distributed particles of copper sulphide in one spot.
Near by a couple of shallow shafts and trenches have been sunk where indications appear most favourable,
without disclosing any values.
The site is close to the junction of limestone and intrusive gabbro, which probably accounts for
the presence of copper stains, and may have influenced the character of the limestone to a certain extent.
The composition of the latter is shown in the following assay :
2354.—(25) Gordon Mine rock.
Per cent.
Lime ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 4472
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 - 84
The larger portion of the lime is present as silicate, with some calcium carbonate.
Hector Mine. —Held as a reward claim of 160 acres, being one of the first mines opened in the
field in 1906-7. For a considerable period this mine has been idle. Rich carbonate ores were extracted
by means of an open cut, at the bottom of which low-grade partially oxidised pyritic ore is exposed.
Cross Section of Hector Mine Developments.
Fig. 19.
An underlay shaft, following the dip of the lode at an angle of 49° to S. 62° W., penetrated the
sulphide zone, but, being full of water, could neither he measured nor sampled.
Of the early developments, Mr. Staniforth Smith records: —“ The mine is situated near the Laloki
River, 12£ miles from Port Moresby. The copper ore was discovered near the apex of a little hillock,
and alongside the cap of an ironstone lode that had become exposed by the denudation of the limestone
101
Astrolabe COPPER field, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


strata. The development work so far carried out is on the ‘ open-cut ’ principle, and practically amounts
to two large ‘potholes,’ having horizontal access by means of two costeans. The direction of the lode is
36° west of north. It has been tested to a depth of 30 feet, and a length of 90 feet. It varies in
breadth from two to six or eight feet, and apparently has an ‘ underlie ’of 1 in 1.
“ For the first 22 feet from the surface the ore is carbonate of copper; below this, as deep as
the lode has been proved, is melaconite, or black oxide of copper, a dull powdery substance resulting
from the decomposition of the sulphide and other ores.”*
So far as can be ascertained from the records, the output from the Hector Mine, to 30th June, 1908,
amounted to tons, averaging about 25 per cent, of copper. It is probable, however, that other
consignments followed of which no record has been published, otherwise the total recorded output from
the field prior to exportation from the Dubuna Mine, would not tally with the aggregate individual
consignments specified.
The pyritic ore extracted from the underlay shaft sunk from the bottom of the open cut, has disinte-
grated into fines and partially decomposed. As the copper contents of the latter have been, to a certain
extent, partially removed by leaching, only the lump ore was sampled, which yielded the following results
on assay :
2353.—(21) Hector Mine.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... o'so per cent.
Fine gold at the rate of 1 dwt. 2 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 5 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
From the character of the pyritic ore, it is doubtful whether the copper contents would average, at
best, 2 per cent. Discarding the lump ore, which owes its resistance to silica, possibly the fines are basic,
and suitable as flux. But it is hardly wise to conjecture where reasonable opportunity for sampling the
ore in situ is not available.
On the north side of the mine-ridge a straight shaft has been started, evidently with the object of
cutting the lode at a depth on the underlay. Judging from the material raised in sinking, it is apparent
that the lode has not been reached; the shaft was not, however, open for inspection.
A short distance further north a shaft has been sunk in a gossanous outcrop. From the material
raised, it is evident that the gossan forms a very superficial capping on the ridge. In the soft country
penetrated by the shaft, traces of copper carbonate are visible, with equally slight traces of red oxide of
copper; leanly distributed pyrites also occur.
Hercules. —About one mile southerly from Mount Diamond Mine. The interesting feature of this
site is the occurrence of copper carbonates at the actual contact of the gabbro with the sedimentary rook;
(slate, or indurated mudstone). A shaft was sunk alongside the cupriferous outcrop to a reported depth of
30 feet in the gabbro, but, owing to its collapse, inspection could not be made. Judging from the tip
material, nothing of value was struck. A shallow cut at the copper-stained gossany junction—a few feet
away from the shaft—reveals stains of carbonate, and a considerable amount of soft black magnetic iron
oxide, which has a deceptive resemblance to “black ore,” and has doubtless been so regarded.
Considerable masses of this material (without copper stains) are visible in a small gully on the southern
fall of the ridge.
♦Report on Astrolabe Copper Field—Parliamentary Paper, ordered to be printed 17th July, 1907, p. 2.
102
BULLETIN OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


A sample from ihe shallow cut yielded the following results :
2341.—(15) Magnetic iron oxide with copper carbonate. Hercules Mine (outcrop).
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1'77
„ iron 6L46
Gold and silver traces less than 1 dwt. per ton of ore.
From the neighbourhood of Dubuna a small sample of manganese oxide was received whilst
examining the Hercules site. This was submitted to assay, with the following results :
2,340. —(14) Manganese Ore, near Dubuna. Percent
Manganese binoxide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83'36
Equal to metallic manganese ... ... ... ... ... ... 52'69
A similar sample was noted in the Mining Museum at Port Moresby, labelled “ graphite,” which
may have given rise to the reported occurrence of the latter in the district.
Laloki. —This lode is exposed for some chains by erosion of the valley of a western branch of
Sapphire Creek, the course of which it has influenced for a short distance. Above the lode outcrop the
creek is confined to a steep rocky 7 channel.
Fig. 20.
The cap of the sulphide ore is incoherent and friable—hence continuous exposure by denudation
without oxidation since the creek cut back to its present valley head. Loose blocks of gossan attest
former superficial oxidation prior to valley erosion.
Friability characterises the lode to, at least, the 150-feet level, and is likely to remain a permanent
feature. \The output from the shaft is practically all “fines ; disintegration is further increased by rapid
chemical action on exposure at surface.
103
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


Absence of silica nr other binding material, whilst metallurgical!}' desirable, is a disadvantage in
the furnace unless “lump ” ore is obtainable for admixture. Failing the latter, cintering or briquetting
would bo a necessary preliminary in blast furnace treatment, and heap, or stall, roasting in reverberatory.
The main shaft is situated at the head of the valley at the last exposure of the lode in that
direction. The brace is 595 feet above sea-level, and 385 feet above the Government Rest-house at
Sapphire Creek. Two other shafts have been sunk on the southern side of the valley, but these are not
now available. From the following section it will be seen that the main shaft is a difficult proposition
when water is to be handled. For further test a straight shaft should be sunk our. of the valley on the
dip side—to cut the lode at a greater depth ; connection with the existing shaft would then afford
necessary ventilation.
During the Writer’s stay at Port Moresby an attempt was made to unwater the shaft, but it was
found to have collapsed at about 126 feet.
No. 1 cross-cut, at about 94 feet, exposed a thickness of 37 feet of lodestuff; of this, 33 ft. 6 in. was
available for sampling. An average of the latter yielded as follows ;
2352.—(23) No. 1 Cross-cut, Laloki Mine.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2'BB
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42-42
~ nickel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
~ J cobalt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
„ lead ... ... ... ... ... present, less than 0'25
„ zinc 2-67
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-54
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46-10
Fine gold at the rate of 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 10 dwt. 21 grs. per ton.
(H. P. White, Analyst.)
As it was impossible to reach the lowest cross-cut—at 180 feet (following the shaft) —wilhout
re-timbering the lower section, which would have caused too long a delay, the Writer is indebted to Mr.
P. R. Osborne for a sample obtained when the lower cross-cut was opened on a previous occasion. This
was taken along the northern section of the cross-cut for a length of 30 feet. Following is the result
obtained in the Department of Mines Laboratory ;
2357.—(31) No. 2 (lowest) Cross-cut, Laloki Mine (finely crushed sample).
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 - 72
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 - 36
„ nickel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... absent
~ cobalt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... absent
~ zinc ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4-01
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4P64
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... P6l
Fine gold at the rate of 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 9 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
104
BULLETIN OP THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA.


From some sulphide ore raised from No. 3—or lowest shaft down the valley —an average sample
was taken which proved of lower grade : —■
2351.—(22) No. 3 Shaft, Laloki Mine.
Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 045
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 - 04
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 000
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45T8
■ Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
Additional evidence of the value of the Laloki ore is furnished in the following assays by Mr. W*
Poole, 8.F., when Director of the School of Mines, Charters Towers, which were kindly supplied by Mr.
L. J. Cowley, General Manager of the British New Guinea Development Company, on whose behalf the
assays were made.
No. 1. —From bottom of vertical shaft—[sB feet.—J.E.C.]
Copper ... 3-25 per cent.
Gold 3 dwt. 15 grs. per ton.
Silver 16 dwt. 8 grs. „
No. 2. —-From first cross-cut—[B4 feet.—J.E.C.]
Copper 5-4 per cent.
Gold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
-Silver ... 13dwt. 20grs. „
No. 3.—From No. 2 cross-cut —[150 feet. —J.E.C.]
Copper 5-33 per cent.
Gold 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
Silver 14 dwt. 16 grs. „
No. 3a.—Extra sample from No. 2 cross-cut.
Copper 4-6 per cent.
Gold 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
Silver 16 dwt. 8 grs. „
The extreme basicity of the Laloki ore—evidenced by the beforementioned analyses —renders it
eminently suitable for semi-pyritic smelting.
It will be noticed that whilst the gold and silver contents are almost identical in both these and
the Departmental assays, the copper values show great discrepancy. Whilst acidulated waters accumulated
in the workings since the former samples were taken may have leached the exposed ore faces to a certain
extent, it is unlikely that values would be affected to the extent indicated by the difference. Moreover,
the sample from the lower cross-cut supplied by Mr. Osborne, though taken about the same time, still
maintains the discrepancy. In any case it is wise to work on the lower returns.
42124—0
105
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.


The Writer’s sample from No. 1 cross-cut was taken as soon as the water was sufficiently lowered.
to mullocking, only 33 ft. 6 ins. of the cross-cut was available for sampling. An average
sample was freely chipped along the cross-cut, and the bulk thus obtained broken down at surface, -mixed
and quartered in the usual way. The result of assay was 2‘BB per cent, copper. A duplicate assayed for
Mr. King yielded 3‘4 per cent.
An exchange of assay results was mutually arranged with Mr. Klug—-representing the Gladstone
Copper Mines, Limited, who was also awaiting the unwatering.
After the lower portions of the workings were abandoned, the available sections were cleaned out,
and sampled in 5-feet sections by Mr. Adams, acting for Mr. Klug. The following results have since been
kindly supplied by the latter: —■
Average for 32 feet in vertical shaft (26 feet to 58 feet).
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... TOO per cent.
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49'6 „
Insoluble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 - 5 ~
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43-9 „
Gold, per ton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 - 2 dwt.
Silver, per ton... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 - 43 oz.
Average from No. I Cross-cut (40 feet in length).
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 4’oo per cent.
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47'8 „
Insoluble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 - 4 „
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46‘0 ~
Gold, per ton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3d dwt.
Silver, per ton... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0'63 oz.
Average for 15 feet in shaft, below No. 1 Cross-cut.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 - 3 percent.
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45-9 ~
Insoluble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5-7 „
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 - 7 „
Gold, per ton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 - 5 dwt.
Silver, per ton... .. ... ... ... ... ... 0 61 oz.
These results are ld2 per cent, better in copper than the average obtained from No. 1 cross-cut by
the Writer, and coincide closely with the results obtained from samples tested by Mr. Poole from the
lower cross-cut. As already stated, it has been considered advisable to strike an average between the
ascertained values of both cross-cuts. Even if the lower value be demonstrated by development, it still
affords a profitable margin, if the quantities be satisfactory. Any advance in copper contents will, there-
fore, proportionately increase the value of the property for investment.
At the 87-feet level, following the shaft, a filled drive was observed. It is reported, and there is no
reason to doubt the statement, that a strike level was started from this point and carried forward for
60 feet, the footwall being cut in a lesser distance at an acute angle. Subsequently, when deepening the
main shaft, the steel haulage-rope broke ; and during the long delay in replacing it, the contractors were
allowed to fix a windlass at the level, and stow the material from the shaft in the drive,
106
BULLETIN OF THE TERKITOUY OF PAPUA.


As already pointed out, the Laloki ore is pre-eminently basic, and therefore most suitable, in semi-
pyritic smelting, for fluxing less basic ores.
Lu Lu. —This lode occurs close to the foot of Mount Lawes, between it and the Laloki River, at the
jail farm. It was discovered by a small block of ore in situ, projecting a few inches above the level surface
of altered sedimentary rocks. Its apparent strike is X. 8° E.; vertical. Width, 3to 4 feet, so far as can
be seen. A shaft was sunk about 20 feet from the original outcrop to a depth of 33 feet, revealing oxidized
copper ores, oxide of iron and quartz. A little rich grey sulphide apparently occurred sparingly, judging by
the material raised, for the shaft is dismantled, and therefore unavailable for inspection of developments.
Ninety-six bags of ore raised during operations were stacked under cover. An average sample
yielded the following results :
2355.—(26) Lu Lu Mine.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 24'42 per cent.
Fine gold at the rate of 1 dwt. 2 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 17 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
This site was re-pegged just prior to inspection on Ist July, 1912.
Merrif, Enghmd. —This site was taken up by Tlios. McCrann in the year 1907 ; area, 30 acres. A
few shallow openings were made in a gossany outcrop carrying stains of copper carbonate. It is recorded
that 2, 1 , tons of ore were exported,* but the return of value is not given. Evidently it was insufficient to
induce further prospecting. The lease was forfeited in 1910-11 for non-payment of rent.
Mount Diamond. —The Mount Diamond Mine was applied for as a 60-acre lease by W. Scott,
A. M. Gors, C. R. Baldwin, and A. Chunn in the year 1907-8. f
The lode in this lease strikes N. 77° E., and dips N. 17° W. at 42°. It has been opened by
tunnel and shaft. The former cuts it at 98 feet from entrance, and continues in it diagonally until the
hanging wall is reached, and thence along it to the shaft, which reached the tunnel level in 120 feet from
the surface, partly on the underlay, the drive in the lode being 82 feet in length, including the angle.
The shaft is vertical for 80 feet—where the lode was struck—thence on the underlay to 120 feet.
From the 80-feet level a short drive south-eastward penetrated a lens of enriched black ore
(subsulphide) beneath the gossan, which at the time of inspection was being sloped in a small way for
export.
Its quality is shown in the following partial analysis :
2336.—(10) Mount Diamond Mine, 80-feet level, under gossan.
Per cent.
Metallic copper... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13T7
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3F78
„ lead absent
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 2T9
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37'23
Fine gold at the rate of 2 dwt. 4 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 10 dwt. 21 grs. per ton.
(H. P. White, Analyst.)
• Ann. Kept. Territory of Papua, year ending- June 30th, 1908, p. 105.
tAnn. Kept. Territory of Papua, 1907-S, p. 109.


Its basicity compares favourably with similar ore from the No. 1 Lode at Dubuna, but its copper
value is considerably less.
At 120 feet from the tunnel entrance a cross-cut has been driven across the lode in which the
following section was measured.
Plan and Sections, Mt. Diamond Mine,
Fig. 21.
An average sample taken along the cross-cut for 40 feet from the foot wall, anil for 15 feet along
the drive near the shaft, yielded the following results :
2,338. —(12) Mount Diamond Mine, from drive and cross-cut, Main Tunnel.
Per cent.
Metallic copper... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4'31
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3990
~ antimony ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
„ nickel... ... ... ... ... ... ... „
„ cobalt... ... ... ... ... ... ... ~
~ zinc ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0'93
Silica 13-76
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
Sulphur... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28'07
Fine gold at the rate of 1 dwt. 2 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 5 dwt. 23 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
A small creek dissects the lode on the south-west strike; below this intersection traces of copper
are discernible for a considerable width.


The main lode has been opened up for about 30 feet by a tunnel from the outcrop in the creek. It
here consists of massive pyrites 40 feet in width. An average sample yielded as follows
2337.—(11) Mount Diamond Mine, Top Tunnel.
Per cent.
Metallic copper... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2'90
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40T8
~ antimony ... ... ... ... ... ... nil
„ nickel ... ... ... ... ... ... trace
„ cobalt... ... ... ... ... ... ... ~
„ zinc ... ... ... ... ... ... ITO
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 10'51
Calcium carbonate ... ... ... ... ••• ••• nil
Sulphur... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 33 - 98
Fine gold at the rate of 12 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 3 dwt. 10 grs. per ton.
(H. P. "White, Analyst.)
The results of the above two analyses of unaltered sulphides from different portions of the lode
prove it to contain useful basic flux suitable for semi-pyritic smelting, and averaging 3 - G per cent, of
copper and 1 dwt. 15 grs. of gold.
Another outcrop, lower down the same creek, has been partially intersected in a short cross-cut
tunnel. Where the creek cuts the strike a soft black clay exhibits traces of copper carbonate. A sample
from the tunnel yielded only a trace of copper, as follow's; —•
2339.—(13) Mount Diamond, lower lode in creek.
Metallic copper, under OTO per cent. No gold or silver detected.
Pari. —South-eastward of Dubuna, between it and Mount Diamond Mine, is the Pari lode, which
was opened by Messrs. Osborne and Charley in 1909.
The following section revealsits mode of occurrence and the amount of development to July, 1912 :
Plan and Section of Pari Mine.
LONGITUDINAL SECTION
Fig. 22.
At a level about 160 feet below the summit of the hill in which the lode occurs, a tunnel was
started in country, the outcrop of the lode not being well defined at this point.


The tunnel was continued for 201 feet before ore was encountered after turning its course more
towards the apparent strike. At this point a winze was sunk in sulphides for 12 feet, the tunnel also
being extended 19 feet without further discovery.
Along the outcrop defined by gossan, higher up the spur, shallow openings were made without
revealing copper stains. A large block of gossan, however, outcropping high up the spur, displayed copper
carbonates.
A. shaft was sunk to intersect the tunnel, but, as will be seen from the section, was far too shallow.
The only ore so far discovered is in the winze. An average sample taken for analysis from ore
raised from it, yielded the following results ;
2329.—(3) Copper Ore—Pari Mine. . , Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... IT7
~ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21-78
Silica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2-00
Barium sulphate ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 - 92
Sulphur 27-49
Fine gold at the rate cf 3 dwt. 6 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate, of 8 dwt. 17 grs. per ton.
(W. A. Greig, Analyst.)
Sapphire Creek (late J. R. Jones). —At this site a shaft has been sunk in a gossany outcrop in
which thin films of copper carbonate are visible. The shaft has fallen in, but the tip material shows that
the shaft passed into slaty rook with films of calcite free from copper stains.
About 300 yards distant another gossany outcrop has been opened for a few feet, revealing faint
traces of copper carbonate. Evidently no payable ore was located.
Mr. Staniforth Smith inspected this site in 1907, when it was being prospected by the Astrolabe
Syndicate, his opinion being that “ no payable ore has, under present conditions, been disclosed here.”*
Apparently little, if any, further prospecting was done. Lease forfeited for non-payment of rent
1910-11.
Toho Lode. —This lode has been opened by two tunnels a few feet apart, both vertically and
horizontally in the south bank of Sapphire Creek, a short distance from the Laloki Mine.
The proving in the main, or upper, tunnel is shown in the following plan :
Plan of Tobo Mine.
Fig. 23.
• Report on Astrolabe Copper Field, 1907, p. 3.


In each of the two cross-cuts a narrow streak of copper gossan is rendered visible by seepage of
copper sulphate. In the tunnel floor sulphides appear between the cross-cuts, but the extent of the lens is
not ascertainable. The main tunnel is extended in very calcareous rock, from which an incrustation of
lime coats the walls and roof of the drive.
A sample of the sulphides cut in the floor, yielded the following return: —
2350. —(21) Tobo Copper Mine. Per cent.
Metallic copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 2’oo
„ iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29-54
„ lead ... ... ... ... ... . ... 0-88
Silica 13-65
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 - 48
Fine gold at the rate of 3 dwt. 0 grs. per ton.
Fine silver at the rate of 10 dwt. 21 grs. per ton.
If in quantity it would form a useful admixture with the Laloki ore.
The lower tunnel was blocked by fallen rook which dammed back water—a fair amount of irony
slime indicated that the sulphides had been struck, but inspection could not bo made.
Lease forfeited for non-payment of rent 1910-11.
111
ASTROLABE COPPER FIELD, CENTRAL DIVISION, PAPUA.




INDEX.
PAGE.
Abukiru Island Coal, Purari River 2, 3
Age of Coal in Papua 30
Ainama River, Purari Delta 45
Aird Hills 0, 10, 10, 20
~ Andesite 20
„ Fossils 17
Aivei River, Purari Delta 15
Akauda, Vailala River 14,43
~ Gas Springs 35, 43, 48
~ , Oil-field 40
Aide River, Purari Delta 15
Ammonites 17
~ Strickland River 18
Anaconda Copper Mine 92
Analysis of Akauda crude oil 50, 51
„ of Anaconda copper ore 92
„ of Astrolabe copper ores 88
„ of crude petroleum from various
countries 52
~ of copper ore, Dubuna No. 2 Lode... 95
„ of Elvina copper ores 100
„ of Iriaina limestone 90
„ of limestone, near Bootless Inlet ... 90
„ of limestone, Cache Creek 25
~ of lime-rook, Gordon Mine 101
„ of Mount Diamond copper ores ... 107, 108,
109
„ of Hew Zealand petroleum 71, 76
„ of Papuan brown coals 33
„ of Pari copper ore 110
~ of Purari coal 3,4, G, 7
~ of saline water, mud, &0., Aru Aru
Springs 49
„ of Tobo copper ore 11l
„ of water from Main Akauda Gas
Spring 48
~ of first sample of oil from Papua... 39
Anticlines as oil repositories 59
Apiri Tertiary marine fossils 28
Aru Aru, Vailala River 14
„ Gas Springs 46, 49
„ Tertiary marine fossils 28
Asphaltic oils 56
Assay of Hector copper ore, Astrolabe
Copper-field 102
„ of Hercules copper ore, Astrolabe
Copper-field 103
~ of Lu Lu copper ore, Astrolabe Copper-
field 107
42124—P
PAGE.
Astrolabe Copper-field, Papua 83
Copper Mine 93
„ Extended Copper Lode 93
Asymmetrical anticlines 60
Attack Bend, Kikori River 20
Aure River, Purari Delta 16
Bamu River, Gulf of Papua 14
Basalt dykes and flows. Cache Creek 23
Basalt, Dubuna Mine, Astrolabe Copper-field 98
Belenmite, Purari River 27
Big River brown coal 10, 23
~ Tertiary leaves 10
Birde, Upper Purari River 15, 16, 27
Bitumen, Gulf of Carpentaria 42
„ Victoria River, Northern Territory 42
Brown coal. Big River, Papua 10,23
~ Curuick River, Papua 10, 22
Cache Creek, between Curnick and Purari
Rivers 10, 11, 12, 24
Cache Creek fossils 10
Calcareous concretions, Vailala River 27
Capo Possession, Papua 29
Came River, Papua 10, 12
~ coal 12, 32
Casing of oil-wells —Size of 64
Coal, Came River 12, 23
Coal Creek, Upper Purari River 4, 11
„ coal seams, Purari River 30
Coal, Dutch New Guinea 30
~ in Papua, previous mention 1
„ Iwaka River, Dutch New Guinea 7
„ Keuru Hills, near Kerema 7
„ Lakahia, N.W. coast of New Guinea... 1
„ Seam on fall to Purari River from
Mount Favenc 25, 32
~ Purari and Kikori Watersheds 30,31
„ Upper Purari River 2, 4
Composition of Astrolabe copper ores 87, 88
Conservation of oil from “ gushers ” 65
Copper Ores, Astrolabe Copper-field 83
„ Woodlark Island 86
Coral-rock, Papua 20
Cost of drilling oil-wells 64
Crude petroleum 55
Cumick River 10, 13, 20, 21
~ coal 10
~ „ expedition route 6,9


PAGE
Danger of inhaling natural gas when drilling 05
Depths of oil horizons—Java, Borneo, &c.... 62
Description of Akautla oil seepage 52
Discovery of Akauda gas springs 35
„ of copper in Papua 85
„ of gas and oil in Papua 34
~ of oil at Akauda 50
„ of Opa gas spring 35
~ of petroleum near Akauda 44
Douglas Kiver, Gulf of Papua 10
Drilling plants 04
Dry Creek Tertiary marine fossils 26
Dubuna Copper lline 93
Dubuna Mine developments 94
~ No. 1 Lode, analysis of ore ... 96, 97
~ No. 2 Lode, ~ ... 95, 96
~ No. 1 Lode, section of workings 97
„ No. 2 Lode, ~ 95
~ ore-lenses 98
„ output 99
~ transport of ore 99
~ plan of 94
Dutch New Guinea—Petroleum indications... 41
Klvina Copper Mine, Astrolabe Copper-field 99
~ Mine, plan, and sections of workings 99
~ ores—Analyses of 100
~ South Mine 101
First report on petroleum indications in
Papua 36
Flowing oil wells 07
Fly Kiver, Papua 14, 17
Fossil Camp 9, 10, 21
Fossiliferous limestone, Cache Creek 25
~ rocks, Delena, south of Hall’s
Sound, Papua 19
Fossils, Coal Creek, Upper Purari River 20
~ Curnick River 9
~ Dry Creek, Upper Purari 20
„ Fly River, Papua 17
„ Hall’s Sound, Papua 17
~ Lower Pliocene, Yule Island 17
~ Maiva Village, Papua 17
„ Pago Pago Point, Port Moresby 29
„ (Post-Tertiary) Aird Hills 17
„ Upper Strickland River 18
„ Vaivera, Vailala River 27, 28
~ Yule Island 17
Fuel oil 50
Uabbro, Dubuna Mine 98
Gas from decomposing vegetation 57
„ „ Grafton Bore, New South Wales ... 77, 78
~ „ Ho Ho Creek, Vailala River, Papua 47
„ ~ Lobb’s Hole Copper Mine, Now
South Wales. 78
PAGE,
Gas, Roma Bores, Queensland 78
„ Springs, Etna Bay, Dutch Now Guinea... 41
Geological age of principal oil-fields 55
Geological survey of petroliferous areas 59
Geology of Astrolabe Copper-field, Papua ... 80, 87
~ of Vailala River, Papua 27
~ of Western Division, Papua 16
Glohigerina limestone 23
Glossopferis, Drill Bore, Anson Bay, Northern
Territory 29
Goaribari, Gulf of Papua 8
Gordon Copper Mine, near Port Moresby ... 101
Grafton Boro, New South Wales —Gas in 50, 57
Gulf of Papua 14, 15
Hector Mine, Astrolabe Copper-field 101
„ assay of ore 102
„ section of workings 101
Hepiri Gas Springs, Purari River 45, 53
Hercules Lode, Astrolabe Copper-field 102
~ assay of ore 103
Hill’s petroleum discovery, Vailala River ... 40
Hombron Bluff, Astrolabe Range 87
Inoceramus (Cretaceous?), Strickland River 18
Intrusive rocks, Dubuna Mine 97, 98
lodine in Aru Aru Gas Springs water 49
Islands formed by gas eruption beneath the
sea 34, 35
Kaimari Village, Purari Delta 45
Kairu River, Purari Delta 15
Kerema 8, 44
Kikori River coal 5
Kikori River 8,9, 19
Kikori Patrol Station 13, 14, 19, 20
Kiri Creek, Vailala River 35
Labour on oil-fields 09
Laloki Copper Mine 103
„ „ analyses of ores... 104, 105,100
~ ~ section of workings 103
Leeches 12, 13
Leasing conditions on oil-fields 02, 03
Length of productive anticlines 01
Lignite, Darn Island, Papua 1
~ Fly River, Papua 2
„ Strickland River, Papua 2
Limestone, Attack Bend, Kikori River 20
~ Cache Creek 11, 25
„ Coal Creek, Upper Purari River 10, 27
~ Upper Purari River 16, 27
Little-Kvans-Stanton Purari Expedition, 1911 0
Local smelting works considered 89
Lower Miocene fossils 17
Lu Lu Copper Mine, near Mount Lawcs 107


PAGE.
McArthur Uiver Bitumen, Northern. Territory 42
Mackay-Little Expedition, 1908 3, 11, 10, 32
Maclay Coast fossils, Xew Guinea 18
Maipua, Purari Delta 42
Malaria 09
Manganese oxide near Dubuna 103
Memo England Copper Mine, Astrolabe ...... 107
Mesozoic rocks, Xew Guinea 17
Mines in Astrolabe Copper-field, Papua 84
.Miocene or Pliocene fossils, Cache Creek 24
Mocara Enim Oil-fields, Sumatra 55
Moisture in Sumatra brown coal 32
Mount Diamond Copper Mine, Papua 107
~ ~ analyses of ores, 107,108,109
~ plan and section
of workings 108
Mount Eavene, Upper Purari River 11, 25, 20
Mount Warirata, Astrolabe Range 87
Mud volcanoes 55
.Mura Gas Springs, Purari River 45, 54
~ Tertiary marine fossils 28
Xabi’s Gully, Dubuna 98
Xarrativc of Vailala Gas and Oil Expedition,
1912 42
Nature of productive oil-strata 58
Natural gas 50, 57
Xew South Wales—Reported indications of
petroleum 77
Xew Zealand Oil-fields 70
Xomi Village,.Purari Delta 43
Northern Territory petroleum indications ... 82
Observatory Bend, Strickland River 18
Oil-bearing strata 58
Oil Creek, Akauda, Vailala River 40
Oil horizons, Sanga Sanga, Borneo 02
~ Tjepoe, Java 01
Opa Gas Spring, Vailala River 35, 43, 44, 47
Orbiioides limestone, near Bootless Inlet 87
Ore-lenses, Dubuna Mine 98
Origin of petroleum 58
Orocolo Gas Springs 44, 40, 54
„ Village 43
Outlook of the Papuan copper industry 88
Output of Astrolabe Copper-field 8G
„ of Dubuna Mine 99
Pair! Gas Springs, near Mura 54, 109
Pari Copper Mine—Analysis of ore 110
„ Section of workings 109
Papuan coal 29
Papuan oil indications compared with those
of Java, Borneo, &c 54
Paraffin oils 50
Paramamu Gas Springs, Papua 54
PAGE.
Pcrmo-carboniferous. strata, Anson Bay,
Xorthern Territory 29
Petroleum and natural gas in Papua 34
„ in New Zealand.. 70
~ at Opa Gas Springs 48
„ indications, Dutch New Guinea... 41, 42
„ Pak Pak, Dutch New Guinea 14
„ reported in Gira Gold field, Papua 41
„ reported indications in other loca-
lities in Papua 40
~ surface indications in Sumatra ... 41
Physical geography of Gulf of Papua 14
Plan and section, Elvina Mine 99
Plateau volcanic series 22, 23
Pliocene fossils, Papua 17
Plumbago (graphite), Port Moresby District 1
Port Moresby beds 29
Precautions against fire on oil-fields 08, 09
Productive anticlines 59, 00, 01
Purari Coal Expedition, 1910 8
Purari River 11, 14, 15
Pyritic smelting considered 91
Sadiolaria in Port Moresby beds 29, 87
liaised coral-reefs, Papua 14
Haft, preparation of 13
Rafting down Curnick, Seribi, and Kikori
Rivers 13
Rattan 13
Register of Copper Mines, Papua 92
Report on Vailala petroleum indications, by
L. E. Henderson 37
Richness of some oil-fields 05
Roma Bores, Queensland 78
Route of Purari Coal Expedition of 1912 19
Sanga Sanga Oil-ficld, Borneo 55
Sago palms : 14
Sappbb'e Crook Copper Mine, Papua 110
“ Scrub Itch,” Papua 13
Second report of petroleum indications in
Papua 37
Section across Ledok productive anticline,
Java 01
Section across Sanga Sanga productive anti-
cline, Borneo 02
Sections illustrating productive anticlines ... 00
Section of Anaconda Copper Mine 92
„ of limestone cliff, Cache Creek 25
~ of oil-strata, Akauda 53
„ of strata, Curnick River 22
~ ~ Cache Creek 24
„ „ Kercnm 28
~ of workings, Dubuna, No. 1 Lode ... 97
„ „ ~ No. 2 ■„ ... 95
„ „ Hector Mine 101
„ „ Laloki Mine 103


PAGE.
Seribi River, Gulf of Papua 9, 13, 20
Shutting off water in oil-wells 00, 67
South Australian reported indications of
petroleum 80
Staniforth Smith Expedition, 1910-11 5
Strickland River fossils 18, 27
Striking oil in wells 05
Sumatra brown coal 30
Symmetrical anticlines 00
Tertiary leaves, Big River 23
„ „ Coal Creek, Upper Purari ... 20
~ ~ Curnick River 10
~ marine fossils, Akauda, Orocolo,
Aru Aru, Mura... 28
~ ~ Cache Creek 24
„ „ Capo Possession 29
„ „ Fossil Camp, Curnick
River 21, 22
~ ~ Vaivera, Vailala
River 27
Tobo Copper Mine 110
PAGE.
Tobo Copper Mine, analysis of oro 11l
„ „ plan of workings 110
Torpedoing oil wells 08
Tupuselei Head, Bootless Inlet 80
Turama Kiver, Gidf of Papua II
Ukiaravi Village, Purari Delta 15
Vailala River 14, 10
~ bar 47
„ geology 27
Vaimura Village, Purari Delta 8, 45
Vaivera, Vailala River 43
“ Wakefield ” (S.S.) 14
Whaleboat Camp, Curnick River 9, 13, 21
Western Australian—Reported petroleum in-
dications 81
Wono Sarie Oil-field, Java 55
Younger Miocene fossils, Papua 17
Yule Island fossils P'
: 'iVil’iam C, illick, r.nvonnnrnfc Proper. -1013.
