

St Andrew’s gaibedral, Sydney.
21st APRIL, 1909
©r6er of Service
Co be useb at tbe
Burial
Plliam Saumarez Smith,
nut., D.D.,
Archbishop of Sydney,
metropolitan of new South males,
Primate of Australia and Casmattia,




©rber of Service.
While the Procession moves up the Nave the following
hymn ivill he sung ;
Alleluia ! Alleluia ! Alleluia !
THE strife is o’er, the battle done :
The victory of life is won :
The song of triumph has begun, —
A lleluia!
The powers of death have done their worst,
But Christ their legions hath dispersed ;
Let shouts of holy joy outburst, —
Alleluia!
The three sad days have quickly sped ;
He rises glorious from the dead;
All glory to our risen head !
Alleluia!
He brake the age-hound chains of hell;
The bars from heaven’s high portals fell;
Let hymns of praise His triumph tell;
Alleluia!
Lord, by the stripes which wounded Thee,
Erom death’s dread sting Thy servants free,
That we may live, and sing to Thee
Alleluia.!
Amen.


Then shall he sung : —
T AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord : he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, jet shall he live :
and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. —
St. John xi. 25, 26.
T KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my
skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God :
whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another. Job xix. 25, 26, 27.
B brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we
can carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord
hath taken away ; blessed be the Name of the Lord. 1 Timothy
vi. 7. Job i. 21.
Bomine, refugium. Psalm xc.
LORD, thou hast been our refuge : from one generation to
another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were made: thou art Grod from ever-
lasting, and world without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction : again thou sayest, Come
again, ye children of men.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday ;
seeing that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep:
and fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up : but in the
evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in thy displeasure : and are afraid
at thy wrathful indignation.
Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee : and our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance.


For when thou art angry all our days are gone : we bring
our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten ; and
though men be so strong, that they come to fourscore years :
yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow; so soon
passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of thy wrath : for even
thereafter as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days : that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.
Turn thee again, 0 Lord, at the last: and be gracious
unto thy servants.
O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon ; so shall we
rejoice and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast
plagued us: and for the years wherein we have suffered
adversity.
Shew thy servants thy work : and their children thy glory.
And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God he upon us :
prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, 0 prosper thou
our handy-work.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy
Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be :
world without end. Amen.
IF Then will he read the Lesson taken out of the fifteenth Chapter
of the former Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
Then an Anthem shall he sung :
“ Happy and blest is he who has endured,
lor though the body dies, the soul shall live for ever.’


Then shall be sung the following hymn :—
rpHROUGH all the changing scenes of life,
. In trouble and in joy,
The praises of my God shall still
My heart and tongue employ.
0 magnify the Lord with me,
With me exalt His Name ;
When in distress to Him I call’d,
He to my rescue came.
The Hosts of God encamp around
The dwellings of the just;
Deliverance He affords to all
Who on His succour trust.
0 make hut trial of His love,
Experience will decide
How bless’d are they, and only they,
Who in His truth confide.
Fear Him, ye saints, and you will then
Have nothing else to fear;
Make you His service your delight,
Your wants shall be His care.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom we adore,
Be glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
The body will then he borne to the West Boor , the Choir and
Clergy preceding and chanting
T OUT), now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace : accor-
ding to thy word.
For mine eyes have seen : thy salvation,
Which thou hast prepared : before the face of all people ;
To be a light to lighten the Gentiles : and to be the glory
of thy people Israel.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy
Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be :
world without end. Amen.


Processional Hymn as the Mourners move to the grave side :
TITOW bright these glorious spirits shine !
XX Whence all their white array ?
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day F
Lo ! these are they from sufferings great
Who came to realms of light,
And in the Blood of Christ have washed
Those robes that shine so bright.
Now with triumphal palms they stand
Before the Throne on high,
And serve the God they love amidst
The glories of the sky.
Hunger and thirst are felt no more,
Nor suns with scorching ray .
God is their Sun, Whose cheering beams
Diffuse eternal day.
The Lamb, Which dwells amidst the Throne,
Shall o’er them still preside,
Peed them with nourishment Divine,
And all their footsteps guide.
’Midst pastures green He’ll lead His flock,
Where living streams appear,
And God the Lord from every eye
Shall wipe off every tear.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
To God Whom we adore,
Be glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
The Priest shall say :
"jV/TAN that is born of a woman hath but a short time to live,
and is full of misery. He cometh up, and is cut down,
like a flower; he fleeth as it were a shadow, and never continueth
in one stay.


In the midst of life we are in death : of whom may we
seek for succour, but of thee, 0 Lord, who for our sins art
justly displeased ?
Yet, 0 Lord God most holy, 0 Lord most mighty, 0 holy
and most merciful Saviour, deliver us not into the bitter pains
of eternal death.
Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts ; shut not
thy merciful ears to our prayer; but spare us, Lord most holy,
O God most mighty, 0 holy and merciful Saviour, thou most
worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not, at our last hour, for any
pains of death, to fall from thee.
XpORASMUOH as it has pleased Almighty God of his great
mercy to take unto himself the soul of our dear brother
here departed, we therefore commit his body to the ground;
earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust; in sure and
certain hope of the Resurrection to eternal life, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may
be like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.
Then shall be sung :
~VT OW the labourer’s task is o’er ;
Now the battle day is past;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the tears of earth are dried ;
There its hidden things are clear;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the sinful souls, that turn
To the Cross their dying eyes,
All the love of Christ shall learn
At His feet in Paradise.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.


There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace ;
Christ the Lord shall guard them well,
He Who died for their release.
Father, in Thy gracions keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
“ Earth to earth, and dust to dust,”
Calmly row the words we say,
Leaving him to sleep in trust
Till the Resurrection Day
Father, in Thy gracions keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
Amen.
Then the Ghoir shall sing :
T HEARD a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, From
-*■ henceforth blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; even
so saith the Spirit: for they rest from their labours.
Then the Priest shall say :
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Answer : —
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
qvu Father, &c.,
A LMIGrHTY God, with whom do live the spirits of them
that depart hence in the Lord, and with whom the souls
of the faithful, after they are delivered from the burden of the
flesh, are in joy and felicity ; We give thee hearty thanks, for
that it hath pleased thee to deliver this our brother out of the
miseries of this sinful world; beseeching thee, that it may
please thee, of thy gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish
the number of thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom ; that
we, with all those that are departed in the true faith of thy
holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss, both
in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting glory; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


O MERCIFUL God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the resurrection and the life ; in whom whosoever
believeth shall live, though he die ; and whosoever liveth, and
helieveth in him, shall not die eternally ; who also hath taught
us, by his holy Apostle Saint Paul, not to be sorry, as men
without hope, for them that sleep in him ; We meekly beseech
thee, 0 Father, to raise us from the death of sin unto the life
of righteousness ; that, when we shall depart this life, we may
rest in him, as our hope is this our brother doth ; and that, at
the general Resurrection in the last day, we may be found
acceptable in thy sight; and receive that blessing, which thy
well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and fear
thee, saying, Come, ye blessed children of my Father, receive
the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world: Grant this, we beseech thee, 0 merciful Father,
through Jesus Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.
The Grace.
Concluding Hymn : —
XjlOR all the Saints, who from their labours rest,
Who Thee by faith before the world confess’d,
Thy name, 0 Jesu, be for ever bless’d.
Alleluia!
Thou wast their Rock, their Fortress, and their Might:
Thou, Lord, their Captain in the well-fought fight;
Thou, in the darkness drear, their one true Light.
Alleluia !
Oh may Thy soldiers, faithful, true and bold,
Fight as the Saints who nobly fought of old,
And win, with them, the victors’ crown of gold.
Alleluia!
Oh blest Communion ! fellowship Divine !
We feebly struggle, they in glory shine ;
Yet all are one in Thee, for all are Thine,
Alleluia!
And when the strife is fierce, the warfare long,
Steals on the ear the distant triumph-song,
And hearts are brave again, and arms are strong.
Alleluia!


The golden evening brightens in the west,
Soon, soon to faithful warriors comes their rest,
Sweet is the calm of Paradise the blest.
Alleluia !
But lo ! there breaks a yet more glorious day ;
The Saints triumphant rise in bright array ;
The King of glory passes on His way.
Alleluia !
From earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s farthest coast,
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
Singing to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
Alleluia!
Amen.


®rber of procession.
Choir.
Lay Readers.
Visiting Ceergy.
Ceergy of the Diocese of Sydney—two and two
(In order of Seniority in the Ministry, Juniors preceding).
Rurae Deans of the Diocese op Sydney.
Verger.
Lay Members of the Cathedrae Chapter.
Chancellor of the Diocese.
The Precentor.
Canons of the Cathedrae.
Bishops.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
Archdeacon of Cumberland,
Archdeacon of Camden
(Vicar-General and Commissary.)
Chaplains.
