

n- W?
i'fS!
f • * '
188 6 .




|SHE following Lectures were delivere 1 to the Members of the
Clones Giels’ Friendly Society by Miss Hamilton, late
Nurse of the Clunes District Hospital. They are the outcome of
valuable instruction received at various Hospitals in England, and
have been givjn to the Members of the Giels’ Friendly Society,
in Clones, in the hope not only of imparting information, and giv-
ing interest in the Meetings, but also with the view that the know-
ledge gained might be made the me ms of increasing interest on the
subject of Sick Nobbing.
Miss Hamilton has endeavored to magnify the office of a
b oese, and to show the Christian aspect in which a Nohse should
adorn her profession.
If such has been attained, her great ambition is realised.
Clunes Hospital,
9th June, 1888.




H^S^Slftfd'l
[Delivbeed on 19th January, 1886.]
|||BAR GIRLS-
I have been asked to speak a few words to-night, and
y f “ Nursing the Sick” will form the subject of my remarks. I hope we
may spend half-an-hour profitably by thinking what nursing means. And
speaking of nursing we must necessarily speak of nurses , and I wish in start-
ing this subject to tell you plainly what a Nurse should be and the position
she should hold.
I cannot do bel ter than quote a few passages from a book written of
one whom almost all nurses who have been trained consider a great authority
on Hospital matters. The name of Florence Nightingale is known far and
wide, she being the first who raised nursing the sick into an honourable
calling, and most unflinchingly laid bare the horrors of the old ystem.—
“ The study of nursing had an ir’-esistable attraction for her. Few people in
England at that time valued nursing. Florence Nightingale was convinced
that indifference arose from the all but absolute ignorance of what nursing
should be, and she set herself to acquire the necessary knowledge to enable
her to carry it out in the very best and most scientific way. She gave up the
life of so-called ‘pleasure’ which it was then considered a young woman of
her position ought to lead, and devoted herself to visiting various hospital*
at home and abroad, and perfecting herself in al the duties of a nurse. But
it was not until the year 1854 that her name came prominently before the
public. By the Autumn of 1854 the horrors of the Crimean war had reached
their climax. The Times newspaper was full day by day of the most thril-
ling and appalling descriptions of the suffering of the soldiers —which were
caused quite as much by the utte breakdown of the sanitary administration
as by even the deadly battles and trench work. There was not the least
attention paid to decency or cleanliness.” It was then Florence Nightingale
came forward, and on the 21st October she, accompanied by 34nurses, started
for the Crimea. From that time she became the heroine of the Crimean
wa ', and she will remain so while the English tongue exists and English
history is read. On the termination of this war a Nightingale Home wa»
founded in London as part of the British nations’ tribute of thanks to the
noble woman who had done so much to relieve our wounded and dying
soldiers.” , h-- —-C
This Nightingale Home is established for the purpose of training nurses,'
and a very distinguished nurse, who has been in half the hospitals in Europe,
has said—“ To Florence Nightingale we owe the wonderful change that has v
takm place in the public mind with regard to nursing. When this hjdy
firrt, began h r hospital training, hospital nursing was thought to be a pro-
fession which no decent woman of any rana. could follow. If a servant


turned nurse it was supposed she did so because she had lost her charac f er.
We have changed all that. Modern nursing owes its first impulse to Florence
Nightingale.” The book from which I have quoted goes on to say—“ I don’t
suppose that any of the young readers have ever seen a hospital nurse of the
now nearly extinct Gamp type ; but I have. I have seen her —coarse-faced,
thick of hmh, heavy of foot, brutal of speech; crawling up and down the
stairs, or about the wards, in dresses and aprons that made me feel (although
quite well, and with a good healthy appetite) as if I would rather not have
my dinner just then. These were the old-fashioned ‘ Sairey Gamps.’ But
Florence Nightingale has been too strong for even the immortal ‘Sairey.’ Go
now through the corridors and wards of a modern hospital—every nurse you
meet will Ire neat and trim, with spotless dress, and cap, and apron, moving
quietly but quickly to and fro, doing her work with kindness and intelli-
gence.”
I have thought it well to give you these quotations in commercing my
subject, as I should like you all to know the importance and dignity of nurs-
ing, and it is not taken up now a-days because a person is either too old or too
stupid for other employment; or, as Miss Nightingale puts it, because they
have “lost their character”! A really good nurse must needs be of the
highest class of character. She must be chaste, sober, a~d temperate in all
things. No gossip, doing her duty wdth punctuality and order— unseen as
well as seen. No mere eye service, but from the very highest motive.
Perhaps some have already thought I have not chosen a cheerful sub-
ject, but I hope to show them that long faces and melancholy looks do not
always constitute a good nurse, though anyone tending the sick who can be
indifferent to suffering is not fit for so sacred a duty ; but in many cases
cheerfulness is the best medicine, and is totally distinct from want of feeling.
On the other hand, solemn looks do not always indicate great feeling for the
sufferer. Ido not suppose many of you girls have had much experience in
sickness, but none are too young to learn the importance of cleanliness and
order. These are two essentials in nursing. It may not be the lot of any
present to follow the occupation of a Sick Nurse, but to almost everyone
there comes a time when they are called upon to tend those near and dear
to them, and it is then we feel the value of having gained knowledge on these
subjects.
It is also true that many diseases would not exist, were habits of cleanli-
ness and order enforced, and it is to these particularly I wish to draw your
attention to night. Ido not intend in this paper to enter upon the special
duties of trained nurses, or in any way touch upon the province of medical
men. Ty desire is to teach you somewhat of sanitary laws, which are the
first principles of nursing, and will endeavor to show you that strict obedience
and truth go hand in band wi f h cleanliness and order, and these four quali-
ties con bine to make a reliable nurse. You must bear in mind the fear of
dirt is the beginning of good nursing.
Cleanliness, which is sanitation, and includes ventilation, consists in
fresh Mir, rlean surroundings, cleanliness of floors, ceilings, walls, beds, and
bedding and utensils. The furniture should be of a kind which does not
rets n But or bad sme Is. No valences to beds, but a free current of air
elt wed pass under the beds. Soiled linen should never remain in the
room, it mtist be at once remov d, and where there is danger of infection
should be put into some disinfectant immediately on removal from the room.
By these remarks it will be seen the space under the bed must not be used
to store boxes'or lumber Still it is nr uncommon thing to find that that is just
what is done, and even as a receptiole for soiled linen. Let me here impress
upon you the importance of keeping the space under the bed clear and free
from dust. For this reason it is not advisable to have a carpet covering the


whole room. A square in the centre, or strips at the bedside, aie sufficient,
and admit of their being taken up frequently and shaken For a sick room
it is best to be without a carpet, as it is liable to retain dust and bad smells.
We must also be careful to guard against holes and corners of dirt. It is a
popular error to suppose a place is clean and tidy because the dirt and
untidiness is out of sight. There was once a wise Quaker who said “If we
must have dirt, let us hare it in the middle of the room where we can sea
it.” And so I would say to you girls, “hunt dirt and untidiness out of all
its lurking places into the middle of your rooms, and then it can be cleared
away.” This reminds me of another illustration. I daresay you have ail
heard of the Rev. Chas. Spurgeon, a celebrated preacher in England. A
servant girl once went to him and said she felt she had been converted. He,
wishing to test her, asked how she knew it. Her reply was, “Formerly I
used to sweep the dirt under the mats. Now I take up the mats, shake
them, and sweep the dirt away.” One of the practical lessons to be learned
from these are—“ Aim at being tidy out of sight, and what is in] sight will
take care of itself.”
We will now consider beds and bedding. A bed for a sick person
should (if possible) never be placed in a corner, but in such a position that
the patient is readily reached from either side. The iron bedsteads so much
in use are best for many reasons. Feather beds are bad, ani should be ex-
eluded from a sick room, specially in the case of long continued sickness or
in fevers. There is no doubt a good horsehiir mattrass, with straw paillasse
underneath it, is the best for a sick bed. It has the great advantage of being
even, and avoiding the uncomfortable hollows, which it is almost impos ible
to avoid a patient sinking into, when a feather bed is used, not to speak of
the heat engendered. The under blanket and sheet nust be firmly and
evenly tucked in, the sheet being well rolled over the bolster. The upper
bed clothing should consist of a sheet, one or two blankets, according to
circumstances, and a thin counterpane. Heavy quilted counterpanes keep in
the perspiration and other matters given off from the patient’s body, and are
most unhealthy—their weight also does harm. One great thing to aim at is
warmth with lightness. With regard to the linen (sheets, &c) cleanliness is
most essential to the recovery and comfort of the patient. By this' I mean
absolute cleanliness , noc merely a clean top sheet put on for the doctor’s visit,
and perhaps a soiled one underneath, but remember si much depends on
care in this respect. A careful attendant on the sick wdl aim at hav ng her
patient in such a condition that will admit of inspection at any time, there
is no danger to the patient in giving a bountiful supply of clean linen, pro-
vided always that it is well aired before putting on the bed or thepitient. I
would like, some other time, to show you by illustration how best to make a
bed with the patient in ; the way of removing soiled s teats and replacing with
clean ; how to remove and replace the nightdress with the least possible
fatigue or suffering to the patient. And here I would give a word of caution
—ln all your dealings with the sick be modest, respect them and yourselves.
I have said “the furniture of a sick mom should be of a kind which
does not retain dnst or bad smells.” In hospitals the furniture of a ward is
mostly such as can be scrubbed, being made of plain deal wood, and one often
hears the remark of visitors—“ How clean it all looks !” Now, in private
houses it is not likely we shall meet with such fu mi ure ; but in preparing a
sick room remove as far a; possible unnecessary furniture, and
remember what has been said about ke ping the space under
Have as few hangings end as little carpet as possioie. Whe'
permits the floors should be sc übbad, and at anyrate swept ev
utensils must be kept scrupulous y clean, and on no account m
be allowed to stand in the room.


So far, we have only spoken of cleanliness in all the surroundings of a
sick room ; but there is something else required, and that is ventilation-^ for
however clean a room may he, if it is shut up it will have a close smell, but
hejond that, air is necessary to sustain life.
“ Ventilation is the removal of the air poisoned by the breath and other
human emanations, and supplying its place with fresh air.” Now, most of
you will know that pure atmospheric air is composed of two gases —Oxygen
and Nitrogen—and that the use of Nitrogen in the air is to dilute the
Oxygen.
The poison we have spoken of is another gas, called Carbonic Acid gas.
This Carbonic Acid gas is always being given off by the breath and other
emanations from the body, and unless carried off by ventilation and admis-
sion of fresh air, the Oxygen, which is the life-giving gas, gets less and less,
and the air is charged with this poisonous gas. Most of us know the feeling
of weariness and drowsiness when we have been shut up for some hours in a
closed room with a number of persons, and we may be very sure then the
Oxygen is being very rapidly consumed and its place supplied with Carbonic
Acid gas.
I don’t know if any of you girls have seen an illustration of this, but it
can easily be shown. Take a lighted candle, and place a glass or jar over it.
You will find in a short time the flame will get less and less, until at last it
goes out altogether, the oxygen having been burnt up. The same thing
would happen if you put a bird or mouse, and covered them tightly down.
As soon as the oxygen was exhausted, Carbonic Acid Q-as having taken its
place, the mouse or the bird would die. So it is with ourselves. We are
constantly needing fresh supplies of oxygen to sustain life. Such being the
ease under ordinary conditions, it becomes doubly necessary in sickness, for
then the atmosphere given off by patients is charged with germs and vapours
of disease, and becomes absolutely dangerous to life if confined to a limited
space. Seeing then the necessity for ventilation we will consider how it can
be best done.
Windows should be opened from the top, for fresh air coming in at the
ceiling freshens the whole room without causing a draught, and foul air
escapes. Air coming in at the floor, or at the level of the patient, chills , and
foul air does not escape. The impure atmosphere being the lighter, ascends and
leaves the room by the open window. A fire is also useful for the purpose of
ventilation. The draught caused by the burning coal or wood draws the
foul air, which escapes by the chimney. Always air, if possible, from the
outer air, but in some chest complaints—in foggy weather, or when the heat
is intense —it is unwise to open the window. We must then ventilate by the
door, but before doing so the air in the passages must be freshened by the
outer air, otherwise we shall only be exchanging one contaminated air for
another. For ventilation to be complete there should be a perceptahle cur-
rent ..f fresh air passing constantly through the house. This is a thing
totally distinct from draughts. Before leaving the subject of ventilation, I
will add a few words on the ventilation of sleeping rooms generally.
Always let beds be stripped directly you are up in the morning, the
clothes being thrown right off the bed. Unhealthy excretions are given off
by all animal bodies, whether in health or disease, and these must be got rid
of as speedily as possible. Open the window before leaving the room, and
let a fresh breeze sweep through.
mi So far we have considered cleanliness and ventilation of the room and
all Ke surroundings, and hate seen the necessity for them. Now it is time
we thought of the patients, and we shall see the same rule holds good with
regard to them.


Many years ago, when persons were sick, they were put to bed, the
blinds drawn down, the windows closed, and they were left to sleep and he
quiet. These are all good in their way, and we will speak of them in due
course. But the idea of washing a sick person was not thought possible—it
would “give them cold, and otherwise be very dangerous ! ” The most that
was thought safe was to dip the tips of their fingers in water, and possibly
pass a damp sponge over their faces ! Happily science has taught us differ-
ently, though there is still too much fear in the use of soap and water ; but
we shall see that personal cleanliness is most essential to the comfort and
recovery of the patient, and also to the healthy, that they may be kept so.
It is necessary to the proper performance of the functious of the internal
organs that a certain amount of waste matter should be thrown off through
the pores of the skin. “In the skin are imbedded numerous sweat-glands
(about 3,000,000) which excrete moisture, (over 35 ounces in 24 hours, and m
sickness often more) partly through perspiration and partly through im-
perceptible evaporation.” Now to keep up this healthy action the skin re-
quires to be frequently washed, not merely the face and hands but the whole
body, and unless the pores of tUe skin are kept clean and free from dirt and
other impurities, much of this matter must be retained in the system, to be
rid of by less natural means, or to remain and lay the foundation of
various diseases. The mode of doing it safely, viz., washing the sick, will be
best learnt by ill ustration at the bedside. I must not forget to mention that
the nails require to be kept clean and short, and the hair earefully brushed
and combed every day, and where the patient is unable to perform this office
(for him or herself) the teeth and gums must be washed daily. What has
been said about bed linen holds good with personal linen. It is scarcely pos-
sible to be too clean in this particular.
Light has a direct chemical action upon life, and is second only to air
as an essential to growth, health, and recovery from sickness Not only day
light, but sun-light, and this should be meant to include colour —pleasant and
pretty sights for the patient’s eyes to rest; on. Who does not know the
pleasure and refreshment a few fresh flowers will give a sick person.
On the other hand, there are times when light is injurious, if not pro-
ducing actual suffering. Such, for instance, as some diseases or injury to
the brain, and in some affections of the eyes. These are special cases, which
require special treatment, but, taking it as a rule, it is no reason because
persons are sick they are to be condemned to gloom and darkness, any more
than that they are to be deprived of air, and we have seen how important air
(pure air), oxjgen, is to sustain life, and that the need of constant and fresh
supplies is increased in sickness, for th°n the atmosphere given off by patients
is charged with germs of disease. So you must remember the rules set
down for Ventilation and Light, remembering also “there is no rule without
an exception.”
We have now come to speak of Sleep and Quietness. “ Sleep in the
ordinary sense is necessary to repair the exhaustion caused by activity, and
to enable men to perform the duties allotted to them,” but what we are now
considering is Sleep in connection with sickness.
There is a golden rule which is generally accepted, and that is, “ Never
to wake a sleeping patient.” But here we must be careful not to mistake
exhaustion for sleep. On the other hand, those of us who have watched and
nursed anyone through a dangerous illness know with what delight and
thankfulness we have beard the quiet breathing, and seen the restful posture
which has taken place in our patient, and if we have been present at the
waking have known by the returning look of consciousness in the whole
face that the crisis is past, and that that sleep has been the turning point!
You will therefore see that watchfu I ness is necessary while the patient


sleeps A sick room should be quiet but. not gloomy The attendants the
same ; also any persons who are admitted into the room to see the patient,
but it is no uncommon thing for them, when they come near the sick room,
to “pull a long face,” and to go in with an air of depression, which often
does the patient real harm. In visiting the sick be natural, and take in
with you an air of brightness and hope, avoiding on the other hand unseemly
mirth or loud talxing. Above all, never speak in a whisper to another per-
son in the sick room, or hold conversation outside the door within hearing of
the patient, but not sufficiently close to be heard without straining the ears.
If there is anything to be said that is not advisable for the patient to hear
let it be said in another room. All sick persons are more or less morbidly
anxious to know what is going on, or to be done, and it is positive cruelty to
indulge in conversation in their presence which they are not permitted to
hear distinctly.
Avo'd the irritating practice of walking on tip-toe, or with a stealthy
tread. Some nervous or weakly persons have been considerably startled by
the sudden appearance of someone at the bedside when they thought they
were alone. Without noise or bustle, let your presence be felt m the room.
A well trained nurse is known by her walk and deliberate manner. She
walks steadily and firmly, and goes about her work in a decided manner, but
without noise, and when she speaks to the patient she does so in a clear but
low tone of voice. Nothing is more trying bo a patient than to whisper, and
quite unnecessary.
In all the duties of a Sick room show cheerfulness and alacrity in their
performance. Sick persons are very quick to notice signs of disgust or
reluctance, and it. is no sign (or mark) of refinement on the part of the at-
tendant to show these feelings, but a positive wrong and cruelty is done to
the sick person, who is dependent on them for the various offices which are
required in a sick room ; therefore whatever you may have to do, do it with
cheerfulness and willingness.
We have now come to the last two points, or qualities, which I said were
necessary to form a reliable nurse, namely, obedience and truth, and they
apply equally to trained and untrained nurses. We cannot over-estimate
the importance of these qualities in all that appertains to the sick. They
have been called the “ keystone and crown of a nurse’s character, and with-
out them she is valueless.”
A nurse, to be of use to the doctor, must be "ble to give an intelligent,
trustworthy account of her patient, but avoid giving her opinion, unless asked,
remembering it is her place to obey, his to direct ; but unhappily nurses and
patients are too apt to follow the treatment, or take the medicine, just so far
as in their judgment, or fancy, they think proper. And many sad instances
could be quoted to prove this assertion
It is a dishonest act, on the part of a nurse, only to change dressings, or
poultices, for fear of detection ; but there are many ways in which they can
be equally dishonest, and it is only in the condition and in the comfort or
otherwise of the patient’s surroundings, that their faithfulness is known.
Strict carrying out of treatment, administration of food, medicine, and
stimulants, at the time, in the manner, and in the quantities prescribed, con-
stitute an obedient nurse.
It is not hones! or truthful of a nurse to allow the doctor to think the
treatment, or things he has prescribed, are being duly given, or carried out,
whim such is not the case If for any reason they cannot be done according
to his directions, he should be told so, and he will decide whether they mi ht
to be continued, or fresh treatment adopted, remembering that upon hi n the
responsibility rests ; but as he cannot always be ar. the bedside of Iris patients,
he is in a large degree dependent on the truth of a nurse and her po 'er to


report accurately. To be able to tell the truth includes attention and obser-
vation to observe truly—trustworthy to carry out directions intelligently and
perfectly. And doctors are, for the most part, ready to see and acknowledge
these qualities in a nurse, and they have over and over again testified to the
relief it has been to them, when in attendance on a serious case, that “they
had left thei” patients in reliable hand,’.”
Tf directions have been forgotten, or a mistake made, confess it at once
—never attempt concealment, or untruth —lives have been lost and ruined
by want of candor and truth on these points. Attention to all these particu-
lars constitute a truthful nurse.
I have but given mere outlines on Sick nursing, but hope enough has
been said to interest you on the subject, and to show that Cleanliness, Ordev,
Obedience, and Truth, are four most necessary qualities in a Sick Nurse.
If I may have the pleasure of meeting you again, I would like to give
a few hints on Sick Cookery, which has been not inaptly termed “ Kitchen
Physic.”
In conclusion, all who undertake the office of a Sick Nurse will find they
have need of a large amount of patience and forbearance, and above all a
hearty liking for the work they have chosen.




[Delivered on 2nd March, 1886.]
fEAE QTELS, —
This evening I propose devoting the time allotted to me
i chiefly in practical work, which will consist in bed making for the sick
and helpless, and you will remember I told you in my first lecture this can
best be taught by illustration at the bedside. B"t before proceeding to this,
I wish to give a few nursing hints, which I hope will be of use to all those
who may he called upon to undertake the office of a sick nurse, whether
temporarily or by choice. The hints I shall give are intenled to help those
who may at any time be engaged in nursing, and to show them the import-
ance of personal cleanliness and care in the management of their own health,
so as to enable them to be of the greatest use to their patients.
This is a point frequently lost sight of, and especially so in Home
Nursing” and amongst friends. The general idea is, “we cannot do too
much for our relations and friends when they are sick.” An t this is quite
right and proper in a certain sense, but mistakes are often made by the most
kind and unselfish natures from want of knowledge. In their anxiety for
their friends they entirely forget themselves, until nature reminds them that
they too are mortal ! On the other hand, there are others who only think
of themselves and not of their patients Sucn selfishness should have no
place in a nurse’s character, or a sick room. Far better be without such
help! But there is a duty we ewe ourselves, which is quite distinct from
either of the extremes I have mentioned, and an acquaintance with hygienic
laws will help us very much to guard against falling into either.
We will first consider cleanliness with respect to a nurse (or anyone ful-
filling that capacity for the time being), an i that will include personal clean-
liness, and the manner in which she performs the special duties in which she
is engaged. Next we will consider Food, Rest, and Exercise in relation to a
nurse’s health.
It is of the utmost importance that a nurse should be scrupulously clean
in her own person and dress, for as a rule those who are particular in these
respects with regard to themselves will best know how to minister to the-
comfort of their patiens, and it is also an almost unfailing proof of the
quality of a nurse’s work. If you see a nurse careless in her dress and un-
tidy in her work, you may bo pretty sure the comfort of the p>tient suffers
more or less. But, beyond that, cleanliness must be maintained for our own
advantage.
If you remember what I told you about trie skin, and the need of con-
stant (if not daily) washing of the who e body, so as to keep up its healthy
action, whether in health or sickness, you will see the need of it personally at
all times ; and particular care should be taken in this respect when engaged


nursing the sick ; but I hare known some persons, I could almost say, make
a boast of how many “weeks they have been without once talcing off their
clothes ” ! At first sight this sounds like great devotion to the sick person, but
if they were better informed they would not make so rash a statement. No
good and efficient nursing can be done that way, and I shall speak more about
it when I come to that part of my subject concerning the rest which is re-
quired for a nurse properly to fulfil her duties.
In addition to the daily washing, which is ’so necessary a part of her
duty, special care must be taken with the hands, which require frequent
washing throughout the day, remembering that anything which has soiled
the fingers is a possible source of contagion to others and yourself. Pare the
finger nails close, and keep them, as well as the hands, scrupulously clean.
Be careful of a crack or scratch from a pin. These trivial things are often
overlooked, as we naturally bind up a cut or open wound, while the smaller
matters are taken no notice of ; but often they are the cause of finger
poisoning far more than the larger sores. However small the wound may be,
after being washed with cold water, it must be protected from dirt or other
impurities by a finger stall or other means of covering.
The dress of a nurse demands attention, and by this remark I do not
mean she ought to spend a great deal of time and thought over her personal
appearance. The simpler her style of dress is the better, and more in
accordance with her occupation But what I wish to impress upon all is
that it must be clean, and that every article of clothing worn in the sick room
be frequently changed, and of a material that will wash. It is not a cleanly
habit to wear stuff or woollen dresses in a ward or sick room. The dirt and
impurities cling to them far more than to cotton fabrics, and are known to
be a fruitful source of spreading contagion in infectious illness. Besides,
they are soiled all the same, although the dirt may not ba visible ; therefore
endeavor, as far as possible, to wear washing dresses when attending to the
nek.
And now a few words as to the manner in which the special duties of a
sick room should be performed. In ray former lecture I laid some stress
upon fhe necessity of obedience in carrying out the doctor’s directions con-
cerning treatment, administration of food, medicine, and stimulants. These
matters may be all strictly carried out, and yet little or no comfort result to
the patient in thei ■ performance, so we shall see that the mode of doing them
has a great deal to do in furthering good results. And here again cleanliness
and order must come in, for without these qualities discomfort is often ex-
perienced both to patient and nurse. And very often the nurse is in fault
for bringing about this state of affairs from want of management.
At times there may be a great deal of work to be got through in a hos-
pital ward or sick room, and it is only by an orderly arrangement of that
work that it can be done comfortably. To attain this, first see what there is
to be done, and then take up the duties one by one. Mistakes are often made
by commencing two or three things at the same time. The results are con-
fusion and ill-temper !
A pleasant, kind, but firm manner is required in dealing with the sick.
We must remember that thosi who need our services are generally we kened
in mind as well as in body, and are wanting in self-control —bodily suffering
pften makes them irritable and unreason .ble. In some instances patients are
Ungrate'ul and the friends selfish and inconsiderate; but we must not, on
inee accounts, neglect our duty, and a love of our work, and placing a high
Standard of duty before us, will help us much to overcome these difficulties..
It ha been said—“ Nurses are none the worse for having themselves passed
th) ough a severe illness. They are then better able to understand the pecu-
liar si ate of mind produced by bodily weakness, and are more likely to pay


attention to seeming trifles, which really make all the difference to a sick
person. They will remember how the banging of a door, the continued
creaking of a boot, the letting down of a blind roughly, a whispered, conver-
sation, or mysterious voices outside the door, can upset an invalid, and pro-
duce an excitement which may be hours in subsiding. The duties of a sick
chamber require to be done very gently, yet with firmness and decision.”
Endeavor then to combine gentleness with firmness ; and gentleness of heart
will give gentleness of touch, and produce sympathy with, and for, the
sufferer. By this Ido not mean it is always necessary to show that sym*
pathy by tears (though they have their right and proper seasons), or even by
repeated assurance of sympathy, but it will be shown by the manner in
which her duties are performed, and being careful of the feelings, tempers,
and sufferings of the sick ones. Anyone who by familiarity with'sickness—•
and it may be the perpetual presence of death—can become calous to it, or
suffering in any form, and (I regret to say) even find amusement in describ
ing them to others, should never undertake the office of a sick nurse. She is
not fitted for so sacred a duty. Outward quietness of demeanour is part of
a nurse’s training, and is helpful to her patients as well as herself.
.The best manner of serving food to invalids I hope to speak of on a
future occasion when we will consider Sick Cookery. I will now pass on
to food in connection with a nurse’s health and well being.
Grave errors are always being made in Diet, and no persons are more
liable to fall into them than those engaged in nursing, but it is a fatal mis-
take to be careless about taking meals regularly. No good work can be done
when exhausted for want of food, and the gnawing sensation which is pro-
duced has often led to the taking of stimulants in undue quantities, and at
odd times, which in some cases has been the ruin of useful lives. We must
bear in mind that the “ human body is a machine, or a system of ‘ works,*
more delicately constructed than a watch, more complicated and wonderful
than the most powerful steam engine. The ‘works’ of the body are organs
and tissues —as the heart, the stomach, the lungs, the arteries, the muscles,
the nerves, the skin —each of which has ajdistinct function or duty to per-
form.”
A healthy state of the body means also health and activity of mind. We
should, therefore, take every means in our power to promote bodily health.
Food is necessary to make warmth, and to form the material of which every
part of the bodily frame is m«de; and if we follow out the idea of the steam
engine we shall s e that Ihe food we eat is reallj the fuel of the bodily
machine, just as coal is of the steam engine, and that its end is combustion
and the production of animal heat. “Animal heat is caused bv the union of
the xygen of the air with the carbon derived from the food we eat. This
carbon, taken in as a part of our food, and being used to form the tissues of
the body, is dislodged, particle by particle, whenever we move a muscle, be
it of the heart, lungs, or limbs, and whenever we oink or feel; and it is
then that the union with oxygen (that is, the combustion) takes place. The
more intensely, therefore, we 1 hink, act, and fe s, the more carbon we burn,
and the more repairs our bodies need, and the m > e apidly are the particles
of our bodies burning up.” So in the act of barn g the body wastes by
throwing off its wornout particles. The same wi » the steam engine, but
with this difference, that while the stove of an e g' e requires replenishing
with coal, our bodies require food to replace the w n >ut tissues as fast as
they are consumed. Food is therefore necessary to form the body, and it
must be nourishing, that is, it must be blood-making “ The blood is simply
bone, muscle, and brain in a fluid state, and each draws from it the substance
required to renew itself ” Mixed food is best, as the blood consists of
different elements. Some of these are more abunoant in vegetables, others in


animal food. To give an instance —“ Bread and porridge are vegetable food,
and are classed with farnaceous or starchy foods, which are very important,
as they supply the principal elements which are burned within the animal
system.” We must therefore see that animal food is not always good, or is
it necessary to form a nourishing meal. But whilst food is being cooked it
is often deprived of its saline and mineral elements, which are also necessary
to animal life, and most essential; it is therefore necessary that its place
should be supplied in the form of uncooked food, such as milk, ripe fruits,
and vegetables that can be eaten raw ; fresh water and common salt. I
think enough has been said to show you how important a part food plays in
relation to bodily health, and will now pass on to consider rest.
It is said—“ Sleep is tired Nature's sweet restorer,” and another poet
calls it “ Nature’s soft nurse,” and so it is. We know it is often so when
watching our sick ones ; how glad we are when they have dropped off into
a refreshing sleep ! But it is equally important that a nurse should have her
seasons of rest, for no good nursing can be done (for any length of time) by
continuous attention in a sick room. If it is attempted, sooner or later,
there comes a break-down. Not only should a nurse have her meals away
from the sick room, but- she ought to have her place supplied tor several
hours, to admit of her having sleep also away from the sick chamber. And
here I will allude to the practice which prevails of persons lying down to
rest with their clothes on. If there were no other reasons against it, there
is this one : —Perfect rest cannot be obtained when hampered by our ordi-
nary clothes ; circulation is impeded, and complete rest of the whole body
cannot be obtained. It is also a lazy and uncleanly habit. The refreshment
caused by washing and change of linen fully compensates for the extra trouble
involved. I know there are cases in home nursing where persons are so
situated that they are obliged to do all, or the greater part of, the nursing
themselves ;'but whenever it is possible it should be shared by the several
members of the family, each one taking their appointed duty and seasons of
rest.
And combined with rest there should be exercise in the open air, for
fresh air is as necessary to life and health as wholesome food—in fact air is
food inasmuch as our material food would be useles without air. You will
remember I told yon when speaking of food that it is the oxvgen in the air
uniting with the carbon in the blood that fits our food fo-warming and
nourishing Ihe body “ Every time we draw air in, our lungs deprive the
air of a certain amount of oxygen, and every time we send breath out our
lu"gs BU Pply f* l6 place of that oxygen by a corresponding amo mt of carbonic
acid, which acts as a poison. ’ By this you will see how necessary it is, after
spending everal hours in a sick room or hospital ward, inhaling, as we must
to a certain extent, mtiated air, to spend part of the time allotted to rest in
exercise in the fresh air. Exercise is necessary to the healthv condition of
the muscles and to all the organs of the body. “ Muscular exercise acc derates
the circulation of the blood, increases the healthy action of the heart, the
lu' g«, and the skin, invigorates the nerves, stimulates the appetite, improves
the powers of digestion, and carries healthful energy wheiever the blood
penetr tes.”
But the muscles require rest as well as exercise. In this tbev differ
from the heart ard the lungs, which are always in motion whether we are
awake or asleep ; but the muscles and the neivous system which governs the
muscles, cannot work properly unless they have seasons of rest, during
which all their functions are suspended. This rest can only be obtamed in
sleep. We may and do rest the muscles to some extent by iving down, but
unless we sleep the brain and the nervous system are at work, and no human
being can keep in health without a proper amount of sleep. “ Too much


sleep makes us dull, too little exercise makes us lazj, but too little sleep is
much more injurious. Anyone who is forcibly kept awake will, ere long, be-
come insane or die.”
I hope, dear girls, you will all bear in mind that cleanliness, food, rest,
and exercise are necessary at all times, and special care must be taken to
folk w them out when engaged in nursing the sick.
Just a few hints in conclusion before proceeding to the practical part of
this evening’s work.
Let me caution you to be very particular with medicines and applications,
all internal and external remedies bein? kept apart. Always read the direc-
tions given on the bottle, specially so if the medicine has been changed ; the
quantity and times of giving it may be alfered. And very much depends
upon the punctual and conscientious administering of medicine. If a medi-
cine is to be of any use, it should be given regularly and by the nurse, who
should study to give an intelligent report to the doctor if certain results are
likely to arise by their administration. And this leads me to say a few words
as to the manner of answering questions. Aim at being concise and to the
point in replying, and in answer to the usual questions, “ How has the
patient slept, or taken the nourishment ?” do not give those most unsatis-
factory answers, Oh, pretty well,” or “ Pretty fair.” Such answers con-
vey no definite idea, and may be misleading, for what may be “ pretty well
and pretty fair” under some conditions are exactly the reverse in others. And
so with all the other questions a medical man may find it necessary to ask.
There are two chief points to consider in answering the question respecting
sleep, namely duration and quality, and that involves observation. The evi-
dence of a patient cannot always be relied on, for a sick person may sleep a
good many hours, and yet be only conscious of having dozed a little. The
sleep may be disturbed or sound, or accompanied by restlessness, talking,
etc. Try then in watching a patient asleep to observe these signs, and be
able to state clearly the nature and duration. A very little sometimes will
prevent a sick person from sleeping ; it often means bad nursing. The same
with the nourishment which is given ; notice the quantity taken, and whether
it has been taken wTh appetite or by dint of persuasion, or even refused
altogether; and here the manner of serving makes all the difference. A
sick person’s appetite may often be tempted by the way in which food is pre-
sented to them, which I will enter more fully into in my next lecture.




-g&. [Dblivbbbd on 25th Mat, 1886.]
fEAR GIRLS,—
There are two chief points to bear in mind in considering
the subject of Sick Cookery, namely that which is prepared in private
houses, and hospital diet. I shall not say much about hospital diet this
evening, as I do not consider that part of the subject would be of much help
to you girls, and therefore will make but a few remarks in passing. If there
are any present who may take up nursing the sick as their occupation in the
future, a very few weeks in hospital will give them an insight into hospital
diets j but as it varies in the different hospitals a detailed account just now
would be of little use. I will just mention that the dieting of patients in
hospitals is usually under the entire control of the resident medical officers.
There is a diet scale drawn out which regulates the quantity and kind of
food, which is adapted to the patient’s condition. The same rule holds good
(though in a lesser degree) in private houses when a medical man is in
attendance on a sick person, and in serious illnesses his orders should be
strictly carried out. Much harm, and even loss of life, has been incurred by
inattention and disobedience to the doctor’s directions in this respect. A
great many sad instances could be given where fatal consequences have
resulted when rules with regard to the dieting of the sick have been neglected,
and often because the friends thought they knew best, or they could not
resist the appeals of the invalid, totally disregarding the directions of the
doctor, who knowj from the nature of the illness where bad results must
follow on errors in diet. It does not often happen that hospital nurses have
anything to do in preparing the food for their patients. Her duty is in the
serving of it when it comes up to the ward, and in presenting it to each
patient in as clean and tempting a manner as possible, and then watching
how the food is taken. If it is either refused altogether, only partially eaten,
or that it disagrees, these are matters to bring under notice of the doctor,
and he will alter the diet according to the circumstances. Even if a nurse
had it in her power, or that it was her province, alteration of diets without
his sanction would cause endless confusion in hospital work. To say nothing
of the harm which might result to the patients were such a thing permitted,
the various details of book keeping would be materially interfered with, if a
strict rule were not made in this particular.


In large hospitals the nurses are not even allowed to enter the kitchen,
unless specially sent, but it must not be presumed on that account they are
totally ignorant of sick cookery. Where there is a training school attached
for pupil and probationer nurses, it forms part of their training ; not that
they are exactly taught to roast joints or mate pies, but they are instructed
in the preparation of beef-tea, gruel, custards, toast and water, barley water,
and other light foods which are required for a sick room. This is specially
helpful to those who are training for private nursing, for then a nurse may
he often called upon to prepare invalid diet. To those who have charge of
hospital wards, they have neither the time nor the opportunity for cooking 5
the nursing, and the supervision of all the details of ward work,
usually takes up all their time and attention while on duty, and
in their seasons of rest they are glad to be free from all responsibility of
their patients Even if it were not so, a ward or sick room is no place for
cooking. When this rule is neg l eeted, not only does the patient’s appetite
suffer, hut the air of the ward or room becomes impure, close, and unwhole-
some. But although a nurse may not actually do the cooking, she is respon-
sible for the proper serving to each patient, and when they are either too ill
or unable to help themselves, it is cl>arly her duty to feed them, or prepare
it in such a way that they can manage it themselves. For the helpless or
those who are obliged to lie on their backs, a feeding-cup (which is a cup
with a curved spout) should be used for all fluids, a clean cloth being placed
round the neck to prevent any of it either running down the neck or soiling
the nightdress. In the administration of food not only the kind and quan-
tity, but the frequency with which it is to be given are determined by the
medical men in attendance. When a patient is well enough to take solid
meals, they are generally served at intervals of about four hours. But those
who are only able to take fluids require feeding in small quantities and more
frequently, never allowing more than two hours to elapse between giving
the nourishments ; in severer eases every honr or even every half hour You
will remember I told you there was a golden rule in nursing, “ Never to
wake a sleeping patient;” but here is a case where the exception proves the
rule, for often the long sleep that a patient has after many days and nights
of suffei ing, if food were not given in regular quantities and at stated times,
the exhaustion consequent on the pain, or exhausting nature of the illness,
with want of nourishment, would be either considerably to retard recovery,
or hasten death. So be quite sure when you are attending to the sick that
you rightly understand the doctor’s directions in this particular. Food in a
fluid form can be given with perfect ease, and involves scarcely any trouble or
movement to the patient if the feeding-cup is used, and that the nourishment
is given slowly and with quiet determination on the part of the nurse.
Avoid, as far as possible, battling with your patients. The excitement in
their weak condition is very often attended with bad consequences. Use
ei( her decision or persuasion, as the case may warrant. Stimulants ought
never to be given except by the direction of the doctor, and then the quan-
til v ordered should be measured and given at stated times It is well to
ensure accuracy on this point, as well as in the administration of medi-
cines that a graduated measure-glass is used, and to remember that a tea-
spoonful means one fluid drachm, two drachms one desert spoonfu', one table
•poonful half a fluid ounce, two table spoonsful one fluid ounce.
''‘ever keep food in a ward or sick room. Some persons imagine that if
sick persons are unable to take the food when it is first presented to them,
by leaving it at their bedside appetite will come ; such rarely happens. Miss
Nigh; ale’s directions on this point are Do not keep the food, drink,
Or de caries intended for the patient in the sick room or within his sight.


The air and temperature of tire apartment aie liable to hasten putrefactive
decomposition, especially in hot weather, and the continued sight of the food
to cause d'sgust. Bather take up at the fitting time, and by way of surprise,
a small quantity of jelly, a small cup of beef tea, with a few narrow strips
of toasted bread, or any of the light nourishments that may be ordered.
This is much better than offering a few spoonfuls from a basin that has been
kept for many hours within reach of the patient’s hand and eye.”
It is a good rule to remember that the quantity of food served up to the
sick should be less than is required rather than more. It is always better
that a second supply should be asked for, rather than that a considerable
portion should be sent away ; and when a meal is overall that remains should
be cleared away at once. Patients soon come to loathe the very notion of
eating when fragments are kept perpetually before their eyes.
It is well to have such things as are taken cold in readiness on a table
outside the sick room, for it often happens that while they are either being
sent for or prepared, the patient either drops off to sleep, or loses the desire,
and so the favorable opportunity is lost, and difficulty may be experienced in
getting the patient to take nourishment at that time. Only under excep-
tional circumstances should a patient be asked—What can they eat?
Under many conditions of sickness the patient is the last person who
knows what food is best for their particular ailment, and in a great many
instances they are too ill to care whether they have any at all, and if asked
tl e question would reply, “ Oh, nothing just yet, only let me be quiet ” ! It
is then the nurse should know her duty, and follow out her instructions
faithfully. You will bear in mind I am not alluding to extreme cases of
sickness, when patients frequently express a desire for a particular thing, or
during convalescence from some disorders.
Having made ourselves acquainted with the kind of food most adapted,
the nurse’s duty is to prepare and present it to the patient in as clean and
tempting a manner as possible, and with such variety as the circumstances
will allow. It would be well if all girls had some knowledge of cooking ; it
ought to form part of their home training, for it is sad to witness the utter
ignorance which is sometimes revealed over the most simple of household
duties, and in no case is this more apparent than when the mother is either
suddenly taken away by death, or laid by with serious illness. Then how
gladly would they minister to her wants if they “ only knew how to do it ” !
Such ha - been the expression from many lips! Let it not be the experience
of any present this evening, but let each one strive to make herself acquainted
with every detail of household management. It is not derog it >ry to any
woman, but, on the contrary, adds a dignity and a charm in whatever position
she n ay be placed ; and the possession of ‘his knowledge is beyond what
words can describe. You must remember that “ Knowledge is Power.”
Sick room cookery is usually held to consist only of that which nurses
are fond of calling “ slops,” without at all considering how fitly they describe
the beef-tea broth and gruel they administer to their helpless patients.
And now for a few hints in the preparation of some of the most ordinary
kinds of nourishment which are required in the sick room.
After all that has been said about cleanliness of the patient, room, and
all the surroundings, it seems hardly necessary 10 say that all cooking utensils,
and everything connected with the preparation of food, should receive the
greatest attention, for much of ihe success is due to these seeming trifles.
Boiling or poaching an egg is one of the most simple of culinary operations,
yet how often they are badly done. If an egg is to be boiled, all that by
some persons is thought necessary is to put it into a saucepan of boiling
water, and let it gallop away until they think it time to take it out! The
result is that either the egg is boiled hard, or that the shell has become


cracked and let out all the white, and the vacuum thus caused is filled up
with the water ; or sometimes there is only enough water put into the sauce-
pan to half cover the egg. The consequence of this is that one side of the
egg is boiled nearly hard, whilst the other is hardly set. An egg boiled
either ~f these way- is not appetizing But now for the right way. It is
essential before putting in the egg that the water boil, and be of sufficient
quantity to entirely cover it ; the boiling should be done slowly. The
number of tninu f es it is boiling is the thing to go by, and that must depend
upon individual taste ; but from three to four minutes is the usual time for
a new laid egg.
Eggs can be poached two ways. One plan is to break an egg into a jam
pot, put it into a saucepan with boiling water, to reach half way up the jar,
and boil gently until the egg is cooked. The other way is to boil about half
a pint of water, adding a pinch of salt, into a f’ , yingpan. When the water
comes to the boil, the egg (which has been broken into a cup) should be
dropped in and boiled gently until sef. In both cases a slice of buttered
toast must be ready on which to place the egg when it is poached, and care
is required in taking up the egg with a fish slice so as not to break the yolk.
There are many other ways of cooking eggs, but these instances will
suffice for my present purpose ; but before leaving the subject of eggs I will
say a few words on beating up eggs, which operation ought never to be per-
formed in the sick room. The noise is often distressing to the patient, and
in some cases the sight of the preparation takes away the relish which would
be otherwise experienced were it brought into the room ready prepared.
Egg drinks admit of much variety, being beaten up with milK, wine or
brandy, tea or coffee. When intended for the two latter, it is best only to use
the yolk. After being beaten up, add a little sifted sugar and the milk, then
pour on the tea or coffee, stirring all the time. Difficulty is sometimes ex-
perienced in mixing the white of an egg with hot drinks. This arises from
two causes—insufficient beating, and adding the water, milk, or whatever
liquid is used, too hot. This must be several degrees below boiling point
when adding it to the egg. It is a good plan to beat the yolk and the white
Separately, then mix and beat together for several minutes ; after which the
sugar and the wine or spirit must be gradually stirred in, and then add the
other liquid. Whenever it is possible the white of the egg should be used as
it contains the albumen, which has valuable properties, and enters largely
into the composition of animal fluids and solids, and also exists to a large
extent in the Vegetable kingdom. The most familiar example we have of
this substance is the white of an egg, which is almost pure albumen. One
reason while over-boiled eggs and over-cooked meat is unwholesome, is that
the albumen becomes hard and indigestable.
Invalids sometimes experience a difficulty in eating bread. When this
is the case it is well to endeavor to tempt the appetite by cutting it thin, or
presenting it in narrow strips, which are easily taken up in the fingers. It
is good, too, to vary it with a little toast.
Milk enters very largely into sick dietary, and is a most valuable means
of conveying nourishment, and is almost the only kind allowed in some ill-
nesses. Take for instance Typhoid fever. Milk then forms the principal
means of nourishment. When a milk diet is ordered it is well to set aside
night and morning a certain known quantity, so that the doctor may be told
the exact quantity the patient has been able to take. It not unfrequently
happens that milk taken alone either occasions sickness, or gives rise to other
discomforts. When such is the case, by mixing soda-water or lime-water
With the milk, it will coirect any such unpleasant consequences. But some-
times repeated vomiting interferes with the giving of any kind of food.
When this is the case it is best to withhold it altogether, so as to allow the


stomach rest. Then -when food is given it must he in sma 1 quantities, and
it is be»t to begin with iced soda-water or mi lit and soda. In these cases of
persist' nt sickness small lumps of ice, given to the patient to suck from time
to time, relieve the thirst and help to allay the irritability of the stomach.
j'tnd here it may he useful to give a hint about breaking ice; it just
requires a little knack, which it is well to know It consists in splitting off
a piece the size needed with a strong pin or needle. It is done very easily,
without noise or waste. The quantity kept in the sick room should be
small, as it so soon melts, the rest being well wrapped up in thick flannel,
and kept in a cellar or other cool place until needed. Before leaving this
part of my subject I will say a little about drinking water. Great prejudice
exists with some in giving it to sick persons.
In a 1! diseases that cause a great drain on the fluids of the body, such as
diarrhoea, dysentiy, choleia, or fevers, the body craves for a supply of
moisture, and it amounts to cruelty to withhold cold water (that nature cries
out for) under the mistaken notion that it will do harm. On the contrary, if
the water is pure, filtered or boiled, it will do good, by supplying the fluid
matter to the blood which is being rapidly drained away rom it. But water
for drinking purposes must not be kept standing in the sick room ; it requires
frequent changing, as it quickly absorbs impurities, and would then become
dangerous if drank. Toast water is a useful drink for the sick room, but it
has acquired a bad reputation from its often being badly made. Care is
required that the crusts from which the toast water is to be made are only
of a nice deep brown, and not allowed to catch fire or blacken in the toasting
(this causes the disagreeable burnt taste which is so often complained of).
Tne toast must be put into a jug, and boiling water poured on to it, and left
to stand (cohered) until ccld, then strained.
There are several ways of making beef tea; two or three will suffice for
my p.esent purpose. It is important that beef tea is given freshly made, for
in warm weather, or in an impure atmosphere, it quickly undergoes decom-
position, so it is best only to make a sufficient quantity for each day’s use.
Much of the agreeable flavor is lost if beef tea is to be re-warmed, but if it
has to be done care urns' be taken to warm the tea up to the point at which
it is to be served and no higher. This ts best done, not by putting it on the
fire, but in a covered vessel placed in boiling water. Lean and juicy beef
must be chosen for making beef tea. A good steak is best for the purpose.
It is a mistake to think that the shin of beef makes the best beef tea. It
yields more gelatine, hut that is comparatively of little value. What is
wanted >s the juice of the beef. Having cut off all the skin and fat, mince
the meat finely, in the proportion of one pound of meat to a pint of cold
water; put into a saucepan and simmer gently for an hour or more.
Another very good wav is to mince the meat finely and put it in a jar
"having a closely fitting lid (the meat and water in the above proportions).
The jar is then put into the oven for an hour or two, according to the heat.
If only the extract is needed, prepare in (he same manner, but without water.
This will be found a useful pn paration to give in cases of extreme weakness,
or when the patient is unable to swallow much at a time, for in this way two
dessert spoonsful will contain as much nourishment as would be obtained from
a pint made in the ordinary way.
Fish is often the first solid food allowed when convalescence begins, and
if prepared in a tempting manner is much relished ; but as boiled fish is
mostly ordered for the invalid, it requires a little skill and care to prevent it
being an insipid dish. But before i numerating some of the modes of serving
fish, I will make a few remarks upon it as an article of diet. It is an invalu-
able article of food ; it contains little fat, is easily digested, and forms a very
suitable one for the dyspeptic, th< debilitated, and the brain-fagged. Dr.


Davy, in his book entitled “The Angler and his Friend,” says that “fish-
eaters are especially strong, healthy, and prolific. In no other class than
that of fishers do we see larger families, handsomer women, and more robust
and active men.” And missionaries have stated that savages who live mainly
on a fish diet are the most quick-witted, while those who live principally on
a meat diet are capable of enduring more fatigue- In warm climates fish is
particularly suited to the wants of the system, being less stimulating than
butcher’s meat; but for healthy appetites a larger quantity is required, as it
does not contain the sustaining qualities of meat, being more easily digested,
I shall not particularise the fish, as there are so many different kinds
both of fresh and salt water, and these again vary according to loc lity and
climate, but will content myself by saying that boiled fish may be made
sufficiently tempting and savoury for invalids if pepper and salt are judi-
ciously used in cooking, and there are few cases where a little vinegar may
not be used in boding or baking. Many of us who have been sick will pro-
bably remember the keen feeling of disappointment on seeing a boiled sole
served for our dinner. It may be the first solid food we been permitted
to take after a serious illness. Much of this disappointment could be
avoided if the fish were only carefully cooked and served; but under the
impression that food cannot be too plainly cooked for sick people, the fish is
just put into water and allowed to boil the prescribed time without even the
addition of a pinch of salt; so no wonder it is presented to the invalid in-
sipid and unsavoury.
Fried fish requires some care to avoid its having a greasy look or taste,
an objectionable thing at all times, and especially so to an invalid. It is not
the quantity of fat in which they are fried which gives this greasy appear-
ance, but the way in which the fish is served. Fried fish should be laid on
paper and placed on a dish before the fire, and when perfectly dry trans-
ferred to a clean hot dish. Then, again, if the fish (or in fact anything) is
put into the frying-pan before the fat boils, it will have that greasy, sodden
taste which is so nasty, besides being unsuited to the digestive organs of even
healthy persons. There are many kinds of shell-fish, but with the excep-
tion of oysters they are quite inadmissable in a sick room.
A paper on Sick Cookery would, I suppose, be incomplete without a few
words on the time-honored basin of gruel. Q-ruel and caudle are associated
in the minds of many of us with the “ Sairey Gamp” age, when the “ flavor-
ing” formed its chief attraction in her eyes ! Properly made, gruel is a useful
article of food, but oatmeal gruel requires good boiling, or it is apt to
be indigestible, and when given to patients of weak digestion should be
strained before serving. The way to make it is to take two tablespoonsful of
fine Scotch oatmeal, and mix it smooth in two or three tablespoonsful of cold
water, stir it into a pint and a half of milk or water, boil gently for at least
an hour, stirring frequently. Another and a quicker way is to put two ounces
of oatmeal in a basin, pour on it half a pint of cold water, stir a little, let it
stand a minute, then pour half a pint of boiling water over the mixture,
stirring quickly as you pour. Next pour the gruel through a strainer into a
saucepan. Boil the gruel ten minutes, add to it a teaspoonful of sugar and
a small piece of butter. Some prefer salt in place of sugar, so this must be
left to individual taste.
Barley gruel is an important article in the invalids’ dietary. It is gene-
rally made too hastily, and so much of its virtue is lost. Wash two ounces
of pearl barley in clean cold water, then boil it for five minutes in a pint of
water. Pour this water away, and put a quart of boiling water to the barley,
let it boil for three hours, strain and add any flavor that may [be desired.
Equal quantities of milk and barley gruel make a very nourishing drink, and
is especially useful in feverish cases. Barley gruel should not be mixed with


milk, or the flavoring before required for use, as in a warm atmosphere it
undergoes changes, and sometimes slightly ferments.
As it is not in my power to give you any practical demonstration in sick
cookery, I will conclude this evening by a few lessons in poultice making
and fomentations. You must hear in mind the object of these applications,
namely heat and moisture, but in fomentations be careful that the moisture
does not develope into wetting of the patient’s nightdress and bedding,
otherwise more harm than good will be occasioned, and much discomfort
result to the patient.
In my next lecture I shall endeavor to give you a few hints on the
management of patients during convalescence, and the nursing of sick chil-
dren.




.nfon- [Delivered ok 29th Juke, 1886.]
|||ear girls,—
Xf The p eriod of convalescence is often a trying one both
♦1 to patient and nnrse. The excitement, so to speak, is over; the anxious
watching with alternate hope and fear. Now, the danger is past, and there
is the gradual returning to everyday life and duties. On the part of the
patient this is sometimes weary work; the strength does not return as
quickly as they had hoped for, or it may be they miss the indulgences which
are accorded to an invalid. The nurse’s duties being lightened, she begins
to feel the strain which has been put upon her for some weeks past, and the
reaction sets in ; she too feels weary. Now these feelings on the part of each
should cause little or no disappointment. They are the natural outcome of
what has been gone through. The only proper remedy is change of scene
change for both. The convalescent should, whenever it is possible, go
amongst those who have not been intimately associated with him during the
illness. Such a change is the most likely to effect a speedy restoration to
the accustomed health ; fresh scenes and surroundings will sooner restore
healthy vigor and tone, and banish the remembrance of the sick room. The
nurse being thus set free will do well to take her rest before commencing
fresh duty. If good results were not firmly anticipated, we should not be
hearing so constantly of invalids being ordered a change of scene. Eut what
magical effects for the better are always being wrought are known to most
of us. Those of us who have taken a sea voyage will remember the exhilar-
ating effect produced by the fresh sea breezes, and the novelty of all the
surroundings ; and even if we have started on our journey weak and
depressed, these feelings have been speedily dispersed, and we have felt new
pleasure and zest in life.
The stage of convalescence should be marked by great caution, not only
to guard against oier-fatigue of the body, but moderation in diet Rood
should not be eaten to the full capacity of the appetite, though otfentimes
there is an inordinate desire for food, and it requires the exercise of self-
control to keep the appetite within proper bounds. The need for caution is
especially marked after typhoid fever, and in no other illness is the need for
self-restraint more necessary. Injudicious food, or food taken in too large
quantities, is often the cause of a relapse, which sometimes has a fatal termi-
nation, even after convalescence has been firmly established.
There are a few points 1 wish to bring before your notice with regard to
the nursing of sick children. The time has long gone by when it was thought
they needed no special nursing, as may be seen now in our hospitals, some of


which are specially devoted to children, and in most large hospitals there is
as least one ward set apart for them. As we have advanced in knowledge,
we have also learnt that they are liable to many of the same diseases as
adults, and that the nursing of sick children is not merely attending to
childish ailments, and with this knowledge we have found that attendance on
children does not unfit a nurse for nursing adults, but rather that her train-
ing is incomplete if she has not had some experience in their special manage-
ment. It has been said by one who has had large experience in nursing
children, that “ There are few occupations in nursing so satisfactory as nurs-
ing a sick child through a serious illness back again into health. The recovery
of the patient is so complete, its helpless dependence and unbounded faith
during sickness is so touching, its reward of gratitude so ungrudging, that the
reward far surpasses the work.”
But the utmost watchfulness is required of their nurse; quick and
accurate powers of observation, an intuitive knowledge of sickness, its signs
and manifestations, and an inexhaustible store of patience, cheerfulness, con-
trol of temper, the power to enter into the heart of a child ; for the child’s
eye is quick to discern its friends and to reject its enemies ; and, moreover,
that sound judgment and common sense that can temper discipline with love,
withholding with a firm hand the unwise indulgence, loving the child with a
great unselfish love.
The daily work in a children’s ward is much the same as in an adult’s,
but with this difference —the nurse must spend much more time over her
patients. In a great many instances they are entirely dependent on her
services, and the daily washing forms no inconsiderable portion of her duties.
The use of soap and water cannot be over-estimated ; the skin of a child is
so tender, so liable to chafe or break, that it requires the utmost attention.
Where splints or other appliances have to be used a careful watch must be
kept on all places where there is pressure,and the back needs special care ;
after washing it requires powdering. These precautions will help to harden
the skin and prevent redness and tenderness, which are the first signs of the
formation of a bed-sore. I have said children are dependant on the services
of their nurse; and this does not mean simply in the matter of washing
and feeding, or eyen attending to their vounds; but they require to have
their ailments described for them, as in many instances they are unable to
give an intelligent account themselves to the doctor. In children disease
runs a much more rapid course either to convalescence or to death ; symp-
toms succeed each other in quick succession, and require prompt action as
well as great watchfulness ; so before closing this lecture I will give a few
simple rules to be observed, before the doctor arrives, in cases
of sudden illness or accident, for it has often happened that
knowing what to do in an emergency has saved a child’s or person’s
life. I ight and fresh air are too important points to be observed.
Children may be compared to plants in this respect —the more you give them
the better they will thrive. It is a mistake to shut them up in close and
darkened wards or rooms, unless there is some special reason why the light
should be excluded ; but under ordinary conditions the more sunlight which
is given to children the better they will grow, with clear, healthy complexions ;
it develops and draws forth the vital powers, acting on the human frame as
on vegetation.
With regard to sleep, that depends in a great measure upon the nature
of the illness, but children require at ail times a good amount of sleep, and
when recovering from an illness ten or twelve hours is not too much for
them.
Sickness should not be made the time for spoiling or unduly yielding to
the whims of children. It is no reason because a child is ill that it must


have all it cries for. Firmness, as well as gentleness, is required in dealing
with them, for often naughtiness is as present in a sick child as when they
are in health, but it is wonderful how soon children know and learn to obey,
and this is very noticeable in hospit-ds and other public institutions where
children are gathered together; how very soon they learn to recognise and
obey the voice of authority, and how quickly they' fall into the routine of hos-
pital life. With reg rd to the amusements of sick children, it is impossible
in a ward or hospital to amuse them individually, so it is useless to attempt
it; but in most hospitals there are toys or books kept specially for them, and
it is a touching sight to go through a children’s ward and see the little
things surrounded with their toys, many of them alas! too weak and frail
to do more than look ! Bit even the sight of pretty and bright objects does
good, and passes many a weary hour, which would be otherwise long and
sadly spent, thinking only of their pain. There is one great difficulty that
nurser have to contend with in nursing sick children, and that is their
untrained habits. They are often dirty in their ways, but this can be
overcome by inducing habits of regularity, and by patience and firmness on
the part of the nurse. It is often a disagreeable part of her duty, but
when successfully accomplished places her among the ranks of efficient
nurses. The position of a sick child requires attention ; if it breathes with
difficulty the head and shoulders require to be raised with pillows. A child
lying flat on its back or side cannot take a deep breath, It is a great relief too
to change a child’s position by turning from side to side ; but in oases of
extreme exhaustion or weakness, following on fever or diarrhoea, great cau-
tion is required not to move the patient unnecessarily ; faintness or convul-
sions may result from lifting a ch id out of bed under such circumstances ; if
it has to be taken up keep the head low. A child may, after a severe illness,
fall into a stupor, which is really exhaustion, so the nurse should be on the
watch to give a little nourishment, remembering too the of giving it
little and often
A feverish child may always have cold water to drink if given in small
quantities. With regard to the diet of a sick child, the same rules should be
enforced as in attending to adults—follow out strictly the doctor’s directions.
The simpler the food children have the better, and it is not wise to yield to
all their fancies in this particular. Milk is invaluable in dieting sick children,
and may be used in a variety of forms. I should like here to give a doctor’s
views on the diet of the young, as so much of after health depends upon
the proper dieting during infancy and childhood. “The symmetrical and
healthy development of all parts of the body is greatly dependent upon the
food which is supplied to young children. Infancy and childhood should be
prriods of exceptional he dth ; yet it is during these ages that the greatest
mortality prevails. In many parts of the world more than forty per cent, of
all the children who are born die before the end of their second year, most
of them dying of diseases of the digestive organs, thus showing that some-
thing must he radically wrong in their diet. It is during the period of rapid
devcl iptrent of the bony structure that it demands food which is largely com-
posed of the bone-forming elements. Something must wrong in the diet
and habits of the Australian people to find so many with badly decayed
teeth even many of the children of not more than two or three years of age
having their teeth blackened and decayed nearly to the gums. The teeth
are connected with the general system, having nsrves, blood-vessels, and
absorbents similar to all o'her parts, and are largely influenced by all causes
which affect other portions of the body Various theories been advanced
foi this condition of the teeth, some attributing it to the lack of bone-making
m iterials in the water, others t ' the climate, &e.. but no one has suggested
that the greatest cause might lie largely in the diet. It is a common custom


here for young children to be fed on meat three times a day, the meat form-
ing by far the major portion of the meal- There seems to be a popular con-
viction that meat is very strengthening and nutritious, and cannot possibly
injure anyone. It is a well known fact that kittens and puppies if fed
largely on meat will often have Acs and die. In my sixteen years of medical
practice I have had much to do with the diseases of children ; and I have
rarely secu a child who was subject to fevers and spasms into whose diet
meat did not largely enter. Many of our leading physicians, while treating
such cases rigidly exclude all m at, some entirely prohibiting its use until
the period of the seoonl dentition. According to chemical analysis, meat is
not nearly as nutritious as many other substances—especially various grains,
such as Wheat, Oats, etc ; or vegetables, as Beans, Peas, etc, Many of these
foods containing a much larger proportion of bone-forming materials than
meat does. The Australians have descended from the English, a people who
have remnrkably good teeth. Is there not a very great difference in the diet
of the English and Australian children, and is not this difference to be found
principally in the amount of meat eaten P Climate should always form some
guide as to what should constitute our Food, and in a mild and temperate
country like this, where Fruit, Vegetables, and Grains will grow through the
year, the system does not demand a diet of heating and stimulating food,
such as meat affords. While all acknowledge the importance of various
foods, their action on the mental and physical powers has never been suffi-
ciently studied.
It is in the very early years of life that much of the future development
depends, and a child who is defrauded of elements which make a good found-
ation never recovers its lost ground. Common sense, guided by knowledge,
will save many lives—for health is not lost through accident, but through
ignorance of Nature’s laws ” !
I will now give a few hinrs chat will be found useful in cases of sudden
illness, or accident, and the first requisite is 'presence of mind. Whatever the
nature of the illness or injury may be, do what there is to be done quietly,
and without undue haste.
Convulsions occur from several causes—very frequently in children cut-
ting their teeth, and in young infants. When these occur, the child should
be at once put into a warm bath, the water reaching up to the neck. On
coming out of the bath it should be wrapped in a warm blanket, and a mild
aperient powder given. Further treatment will depend upon the circum-
stances after the doctor has seen it.
Croup is a serious disease, and requires skilled treatment; but prompt
measures taken before the doctor comes may be the means of saving the
child’s life. The child should be put into a warm bath and an emetic given.
One drachm (a teaspoonful) of ipecacuanha wine in water ; or if it is not at
hand, salt and water, or a little mustard and water, the object being to cause
vomiting. When the child has been put to bed, a mustard and linseed poul-
tice should be put round the throat, and aperient medicine given. This
treatment must be continued until the doctor comes. The cause of fainiing
is most frequently want of blood to the brain. At once then, lay the patient
flab, with the head lower than the feet. Open the clothes about the throat
and chest, give free admission of fresh air round the patient. The face and
cheat may be sponged with cold water, and if consciousness does not return,
mustard plaster to the soles of the feet and hot bottles to the body may be'
applied. On recovery keep the patient quiet, and give a little stimulant.
But in cases of fainting fiom loss of blood do not give stimulants as the faint-
ness is one great help in stopping the flow of blood. And that leads me to
say, when you see blood do uot be alarmed ; it often makes a great show but
is not always of any serious consequence. Every wound heeds, because in


every •wound blood-ves els are injured. But the kind of haemorrhage, as
well as its danger, varies with the size and nature of the bloodvessels which
have been injured. Sponge awav the blood with cold water, so as to see
whence the bleeding comes, and also to remove dirt or other impm’ities that
may have got into the wound. Then with the sponge make a little pressure
on the wound. You will then see if the bleeding comes from an artery or a
vein ; if from the former it will spurt out, and you will probably see the
vessel pumping. But when dark blood wells out in a steady stream, and
when the flow is increased by pressure applied above the wound, then a vein
has been injured. Unimportant hcemorrages from the smallest arteries or
veins may be arrested by pressure on the wound itself, or by pressing the
sides of the wound against each other, or putting a pad over the wound and
bandaging firmly. These temporary measures generally suffice until the
arrival of the doctor.
Hcemorrhage from the nose is sometimes difficult to control. Bathe the
nose and forehead with cold water; keep the patient quiet, and lying down ;
do not allow him to lean his head forward over a basin, this only increases
the hcemorrhage. If these measures do not stop the bleeding, a doctor must
be called in, as it is sometimes necessary to plug the nostrils.
Sprains are of frequent occurrence, resulting from blows or falls. They
are frequently tedious to cure, ana the injured part requires complete rest-
The first thing is to reduce the swelling and inflammation. This is done
either by leeches or cold lotions. When this is done embrocations and
bandaging, with rest, complete the cure.
Perhaps it may be as well to give a few hints about applying leeches.
They should be handled as little as possible. Having selected the part where
blood is required to be drawn, if a leech glass is not at hand, the box turned
over will do until they bite. When the leeches are settled they should be
left quite undisturbed. When they have drawn as much as is needed, if
they do not drop off of themselves, a little salt sprinkled on them will soon
make them do so. Bathe the bites with cold water and then close them with
pads of lint.
Burns and scalds are, unfortunately, of frequent occurrence so it will be
well to give a few hints on this subject. If the clothes of a person catch fire
tne first thing to do is to seize upon any available rug or coat, and wrap it
round the unfortunate creature, at the same time rolling the person on the
ground. These means may extinguish the flames. The next thing would be
to fetch water and drench her with it, as the smouldering clothes would con-
tinue to burn into the flesh. The clothes must next be removed, and this
requires the greatest care and caution to prevent breaking the blisters. Dur-
ing this operation it is best only to have those in the room who are necessary.
Two persons will generally be found sufficient.
With a large pair of scissors carefully cut through the clothing in such
a manner that it falls off of itself. Nothing should be done by pulling or
tearing, and on no account through false economy try to save the clothing ;
the life and ease of the patient are the things to be b. rne in mind. If any
of the clothing adhere to the skin you must leave it, only cutting round the
burnt part. The next thing, if the doctor has not arrived, is to protect tbe
burnt surface from the air. This may be done temporarily by app ying linen
rags which have been steeped in oil, salid oil, or linseed oil and lime water
(equal parts). These to be put over the burns and wrapped round with
wadding. In scalding by boiling water, milk, or other boiling liquids, cold
water should be plentifully poured over the person and clothes, and then
proceed as in the case of burning by fire. There is much yet that I could
tell you, but this much must suffice for the present, only adding in conclusion
a few words on the duties and responsibilities of nursing.


It is essentially a woman’s work, and a woman doing the best and noblest
of all works must do it in th« best of all ways. She ought to strive to
cultivate every go >d principle and qualification. Amongst these may be
mentioned energy, self-reliance, application, gentleness, kindness, affectionate,
sympathy, and cheerfulness. Nursing requires such care and intelligence
that even the most clever woman might devote herself to it without feeling
that it was unbecoming, or that she was fitted for a higher position. But it
must be borne in mind a nurse’s life is often a hard one. It is essentially
one of self-denial, and the constant crossing of one’s own will. There is
nothing that will try one’s patience, and test one’s character more than nur-
sing. But it may be asked —flow is a nurse to use her talents ? Not in
talking, but in action. The moral duties and actions of a nurse will suffi-
ciently designate her real Christian character. She must be firm, but p is-
sessed of a gentle will and hand. Real sympathy is shown more by act than
by words.
Second to rone in importance of the qualifications for a nurse is a
thoroughly good elementary education. Be a nurse’s character ever so good,
what will it avail if the patient dies through the ignorance of the nurse ?
Mental culture will aid the nurse in many ways. She will not only be able
to improve herself morally, but it will also assist her in the special discharge
of her duties as a nurse. There is much in the daily life of a nurse to blunt
her sensibilities. Familiarity with suffering tases from it its reality ; the
perpetual presence of death robs it of half its mystery and awe. Seek then
as an antidote to cultivate the spirit of reverence in the presence of these
realities ; encourage in yourself and in your patients a veneration for that
masterpiece of mechanism, the human body; so will you best preserve the
spirit of modesty and decency in them and in yourself, and whatever you may
see or have to do, by being met in that spirit, will pass by you untouched and
unsullied. Accept everything as it comes as part of your daily work. If a
nurse can make up her mind to all this she will not regret the work she has
undertaken.
I trust that these lectures have stirred up an interest in the subject of
nursing amongst you all, and that you will now look upon it in a different
light from that in which it has hitherto been held. I shall always look back
wilh pleasure to the evenings spent amongst you, and will ever be glad to
hear of the welfare and success of the Girl's Friendly Society.




