

The Coming
World Struggle
or
ROMANISM
versus
CHRISTIANITY


WE KNOW NO DEFEAT
The Australian Protestant
Truth Centre
FOR PROTESTANT AUSTRALIA
OUR AIMS
1. Set up to protect Australia from Roman
Catholic monopoly.
2. To throw out all traitors to the Protestant
cause, wherever they be found.
3. To protect every Protestant subject from any
vendetta waged against them by the Roman
Catholic machine.
4. To expose the influx of immigrants, specially
chosen by the Roman Catholic machine to
capture bonny Australia.
5. To fight in interests of Protestants who are
employed by the Roman Catholic machine,
and procure to them their rights.
6. To send out missionaries with the object of
gathering evidence against the Roman Catholic
machine, for the enlightenment of Protestants.
7. To print literature, of a fearless nature, on
points of disloyalty, victimisation and unfair
tactics employed by the Roman Catholic
machine.
8. To keep the rank and file of Protestantism
solid and united at all times in one solid
vote against the Roman Catholic machine.
9. To offer assistance and fraternity to all
Protestant peoples, irrespective of creed and
sect, with the paramount view of keeping
the Roman Catholic machine in check.
10. To show all true Australians that the
appalling condition of our country and the
world to-day is the direct result of the
operations of the Roman Catholic machine.
I Continued on page 3 of cover.)


The Coming World Struggle
or
Romanism v. Christianity
The Protestant Truth Centre came into being in the year
1910, and its message is definitely and only that of the
Bible. Numerous works have been published from time
to time, some being prophetical. Of these latter, subse-
quent events have shown that some of the statements made
therein have come to pass. The remainder will be fulfilled
at the proper time in the future. In Proverbs 29th chap-
ter 18th verse it states that where there is no vision the
people perish.
Many of our readers will remember that concerning the
Great War of 1914-1918 prophetical warning was given,
when in our writings we told the people the year hos-
tilities would commence.
Our Nation today is suffering from the aftermath because
of the teachings of the False Shepherds, (Ezek. 34 :1-8).
The time is more than overdue for a halt to be made, and
that we listen to the voice of reason. We are standing on
the edge of a precipice—a pit very deep, that has been
dug by the enemy within our gates, posing and assiduous-
ly working in our midst as an angel of light. We are
passing through troublous times and surely we can learn
our lesson in these days of tribulation.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
The masses have been falsely led to build their hope upon
the League of Nations—that Rome-ridden heterogeneous
conglomeration of races with diverse thoughts and ideas
impossible of unification. The League was brought into


existence by the machinations of the Jesuits, and the Cap-
tain of this organisation is the Pope. Is it not he who is
mentioned in Revelations 16th chapter, and who is direct-
ing the three frog-like spirits —Soviet Russia, The Jesuits,
and the false prophet Mahomet? The primary object of
the formation of the League of Nations was to draw the
British Nation into a net for the purpose of undermining
it, and reducing it to a state of impotence, so that when
the time arrives for striking, our nation will be so weak-
ened, that she will become an easy prey to the powerful
forces directed in the back-ground by the Pope and his
Jesuits. The undermining is almost completed, the tunnel
is almost ready and the fuse laid for the taper.
In a pamphlet published in 1931 entitled "Australia un-
der Rome Rule and the Coming War,” we warned the peo-
ple of this in the paragraph headed "China and Japan,”
and for the benefit of some of our readers who have not
read this pamphlet we quote the paragraph—
" Trouble has arisen between these two nations. Japan
has been continually harassed by the Chinese who are
goaded on by the Jesuits through their instrument
Russia. Japan knows how futile it would be to apply
to the League of Nations for justice, as the Jesuits have
control of the League, and well does Japan know
this stupendous fact. The Jesuits know the relation-
ship which exists between Britain and Japan and this
is the reason why they have always hated our friend
and ally.”
Our National leaders have been totally blind to the dan-
gers which threaten our Empire, as the result of her enter-
ing the League of Nations, and have failed dismally to real-
ise that there is but one true League of Nations necessary
for the permanent peace of the world, viz—The British
Empire, The United States of America and Japan, bound
together to form a true and holy alliance. It is this
powerful alliance which, by virtue of the Divine plan for
the government of the world, will be formed when the
war of the nations begins.


JAPAN
Long ago when the Jesuits commenced to concentrate their
forces on Australia by means of the press ahd propaganda,
Japan was held up as our potential enemy. Their efforts
to inculcate into the minds of Australians the fear of a
Japanese invasion increased in intensity, and today a very
large percentage of our people honestly and sincerely
believe that Japan will some day attack us. Should some
writer refer to the inadequate provision made for the de-
fence of our Australian shores, Japan is almost sure to be
singled out as the enemy to invade us. The minds of
young Australians have been poisoned, and when Japan is
discussed we think of the "Yellow Peril” that will one day
overwhelm us. The Japanese are often referred to as an
inferior race, yet facts indisputably prove them to be other-
wise. Their past history is a sufficient indication for us
to realise that they are friends and allies of our Empire.
In the Encyclopedia Britannica (11th Edition), from page
206 on it will be found that the Japanese have every out-
standing characteristic possessed by Anglo-Saxons and
which today is claimed to be typical only of America. They
are an Imperial race and have an intense pride in their
nationality, patriotism, and loyalty which arise from their
history. As the Encyclopedia points out at page 273 —
what other nation can point to an Imperial family of one
unbroken lineage reigning over the land for twentyfive cen-
turies, and goes on to say "Is it not a glorious tradition
for a nation that its Emperor should be descended directly
from that grandson of "The great heaven illuminating
goddess,” to whom she said, "This Japan is the region over
which my descendents shall be Lords. Do thou my august
child, proceed thither and govern it. Go! The prosperity
of thy dynasty shall be coeval with Heaven and Earth.”
This sounds very much like the promises made to David,
that his seed shall endure as the sun and moon before him.
If a newspaper report is given of some Japanese happen-
ing it is not the exception to find "a twist” given to it,
that puts them in a false light. All this is part of the
Jesuits’ propaganda. Read any of the many magazine
articles that deal with the China-Japanese situation and


almost every time harsh criticism is hurled at Japan. We
know, and the real leaders of our Empire know, what
the "something” is that is back of all the propaganda.
Indeed, "things are not what they seem.” We therefore
urge loyal Australians not to be misled by "Popish pro-
paganda,” for Japan, "by her fruits,” has proved herself
over and over again outstandingly loyal to Britain. She
ever will be so, for there is a Divine hand at work and
Japan is taking her part in the Divine plan.
Look at things from a different angle; Suppose we were
attacked and Japan captured even a portion of Australia.
Would she be able to hold it? What about her beaten
and jealous foes Russia and China, under the whip of the
Jesuit? Do you think they would sit idly by and see Japan
extend? NO, Japan is no enemy of Australia or our
Empire.
The China-Japanese war will be renewed from time to time
eventually involving the whole world. Japan knows that
sooner or later Russia will strike her, and is preparing
for this time by consolidating her position in China. As
we pointed out in our pamphlet "Australia’s False Hope,”
out of the clash of arms in the far east will come the war
of the nations.
There seems to be a mighty hand guiding little Japan.
Had she listened to the voice of the League of Nations
and refrained from strengthening her position in China,
what an opportunity Russia would have had when she is
ready to strike. Japan, however, knows what is coming and
was quite ready to withdraw from the League of Nations,
which she knows quite well to be whiteanted by the Jesuits
who are the all-powerful schemers behind Russia today.
A famous writer said in 1920, "If Great Britain and the
United States of America were only wise to what was com-
ing during the next fifteen years they would bind Japan
to them with bands of steel.”
ROME’S OBJECTIVE—
THE DOMINATION OF THE WORLD
Always bear in mind that Rome has realised the need for
urgency. She is leaving no stone unturned which might
help the furtherance of her plan to control the whole


world, and bring everyone under what the Romans are
pleased to call the "Only True Church”—but which is
in reality "The Mother of Harlots” (Revelation 17:5).
Her great attempt is to bring to fulfilment the long cher-
ished plan of the domination of the world by Imperial
Rome. It therefore behoves all true Protesetants to watch
and not be misled or duped by the propaganda of the
Jesuits, to whom everything British is anathema, as witness
the recent abolition of the Oath of Allegiance to Our King,
passed by the Irish National Government under the Lead-
ership of De Valera. No opportunity is lost whereby Pro-
testants might be lulled to a sense of security, and the
Church of Rome exalted. Take, for instance, the unem-
ployment question. Quite recently Archbishop Kelly
speaking in Sydney deplored the fact that there was so
much suffering on the part of those unfortunate enougfi
to be forced by circumstances to accept the dole, or to be
placed on rations, and he voiced the desire of Rome to
nelp these unfortunate people by finding some solution
of the difficulty THROUGH THE CHURCH, while at
the same time he knew that the position had been created
by the Jesuits through their agents the Communists. This
is all done to gull the people outside the Roman Church
into the belief that Rome is their friend, and not the snake
in the grass about which we have given warning on so
many occasions.
The majority of active Union Officials are Romans under
the control of the Church. There can be no doubt that
the strike agitators, who reduced working hours and in-
creased wages, have been responsible for breeding a most
dangerous feeling of disloyalty amongst the masses with
the idea of using them at the appointed time to fight (un-
consciously perhaps) against their own people. This is
how the civil wars will start, and Protestants, fooled by Ro-
man propaganda, will be used to overthrow Law and Order,
so that Rome might step in to achieve her purpose. How
can this be avoided you ask? Remember reader, there is
in your hands a great power and upon you rests a great
responsibility. This power has been used by Rome most


effectively, and you have unthinkingly helped the further-
ance of her plans through the medium of the ballot box.
But it is not yet too late to retrieve the position.
Whilst the Unions have been advocating adult suffrage
here in Australia at the instigation of the Jesuits, who
desired to use, and have used your vote for their own
purpose, and while adult suffrage is permitted in Rome
for the election of Parliament, and while the King of
Italy is given the crown through lineal descent in a like
manner to the King of England, YET the masses have no
vote, and consequently no power in electing the Pope, the
head of the Roman Church. He is elected at a delegation
of the Roman Bishops and Cardinals—NOT THE PRIESTS
from every country. We hear very little of the King of
Italy, (who is a puppet in the hands of the Church),
but much is heard of Mussolini and the Pope, who is ac-
knowledged as King. Remember it was the POPE and
not the KING of ITALY who took the salute of the Fas-
cists at a recent gathering, after which the Pope gave an
audience to Mussolini, which lasted for more than thirty
minutes. It would be most interesting to know just ex-
actly what took place at that interview. We do know that
Mussolini gave temporal power to the Pope and made a
gift to him of the piece of land on which the Vatican
stands, fje is now a King, and 300,000,000 Roman Cath-
olics throughout the world pay homage to him.
Let us fully realise the significance of this fact. By the
acquisition of Kingly territory of his own, it enhances the
Pope’s world prestige. Rememder it was MUSSOLINI,
and not the KING OF ITALY, who gave it.
RUSSIA AND COMMUNISM
Australians will do well to ponder over the part Russia
and her Communism—as a powerful arm of the Jesuits —
will play in the coming world struggle. As is well known,
Russia is the home of Communism in its worst form, and
is today, by reason of intense hatred of the British Nation,
the most sinister power Britain will have to face when
hostilities begin.


To show all true Australians the type of men in Russia
who dance to the tune of the Jesuit, it is well to give a
short sketch of the life of Russia’s present Dictator, Josef
Stalin:- He is the General Secretary of the Communist
Party, and although he nominally holds a minor official
position, his is the most important position in Russia.
Born in 1880, he is an Asiatic by birth. From a very
early age he showed a natural instinct for lawlessness and
by reason of his organising ability became leader of a band
of hooligans. His mother’s pride in him and also her des-
pair of reforming him at home, led her to dedicate him
to God. He became a student at the theological seminary
at Tiflis, and then a monk. Here he learnt to read. The
only book he ever read thoroughly is "Das Capital,” by
Karl Marx. The qualities possessed from boyhood viz,
ruthless violence, cunning of the highest degree, and great
physical courage, were the weapons he used right through
his revolutionary career. He stood for direct action —mass
demonstration. In his early twenties his physical des-
cription is rather interesting—"medium height, power-
fully built, low forehead, black hair, black moustache,
small eyes and face freely pockmarked.” He was exiled
many times and returned to continue his revolutionary
activities. In 1907 he and his men robbed the Tiflis
branch of the Russian State Bank, killing fifty people.
To him life is nothing except something to take. He is
obsessed with the spirit of vengeance, and to satisfy his
revenge he would stop at nothing. He was once flogged
for inciting mutiny. When the revolution came the Gov-
ernor of the prison at which he was flogged was dead.
Stalin rounded up every member of the Governor’s family
down to the third, fourth and fifth degree, had iron
weights tied to their feet, and men, women and children
were cast into the sea. Such was this man before the
revolution and he is the same today. He and his like
control Russia, and what a powerful instrument in the
hands of the Jesuits she will be in the coming struggle.
While we hear reports of the wretched state of the Russ-
ian people, we know she is arming. She has an air force
consisting of over 1,400 aeroplanes and a huge army
with all the modern abominations of war, and while she


is using every effort to keep her military activities secret,
information from reliable sources does come through at
times. • When she is ready she will strike at Japan in the
Far East and at Britain in the middle East. Let us not be
gulled by the cry we so often hear "she has no money —her
people are starving—famine haunts the land” and other
catchwords. This is all to camouflage her preparations
for war; when she is ready she will fight.
LEADERS OF ALL NATIONS VISIT THE POPE
Visits to the Pope at the Vatican by highly placed rep-
resentatives of all nations are of frequent occurrence.
Kings and Prime Ministers make obeisance to him.
Recently Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald visited Mus-
solini, and the newspapers gave prominence to his visit to
the Pope at the same time. Like others, he made his obeis-
ance. Wake up, Australia! Wake up, Britain!
Some three years ago, a prominent Methodist Minister of
Victoria, (the Rev, C. Irving Benson) was among the visit-
ors from our own country, and it was reported that he
received the Pope’s blessing. The Methodist Connection
in Victoria had something to say, then.
We never hear however, of the Pope making or returning
visits. He sits enthroned. In his own blasphemous words
he is "The Vicar of Christ on earth.” All must come to
him. How and what is this entangling spider’s web that
Rome throws out that causes nations’ leaders to be drawn
to her Vatican-Parlor, and there poisons them? (or as
Rev. 17 : 2 puts it, 'With* whom the kings of the earth
have committed fornication,”)
THE COMING WAR
There is the Great Armageddon ahead, and it appears as
though the years 1934 to 1936 will be eventful. Prior to
this however, our Empire will be plunged into trouble by
civil war and strife of more or less intensity, instigated by
the cunning and scheming of the Jesuits; for have they
not whiteanted every British movement? But RIGHT
must prevail —It will prevail. Justice is on our side and
we must be earnest and sacrificing for the Truth.


The war will be a Religious War, Roman Catholicism
versus Christianity. Do not be gulled by Churchianity
which has been fraternising with the Jesuits, for they have
consciously or unconsciously assisted the plans of the
enemy within our gates.
With the Prophetic mind, we saw that Russia would be
controlled by the Jesuits, and how cunningly have they
camouflaged it. By invitation leaders of our Empire
have visited Russia. How very careful has the Soviet been
to dress its windows before-hand so that only the right (?)
impression would be given, and no suspicions aroused.
The Jesuits’ agents have been active throughout our
Empire, closing every avenue through which information
could leak out. We have been caught in the net spread
for us by Rome. Our vision has been blurred by Jesuit-
ical cunning. They have sought to camouflage their
every move, such as the closing of their own Church in
Spain and the dissolving of the Jesuit order during the
past twelve months and removing their activities to Rome’s
other arm which embraces the Communistic organizations
throughout the world. It is these organisations, with the
scheming Jesuitical brain at the back of them, which have
done so much to bring about the present industrial unrest
and depression.
So quietly have the agents of Rome been working in our
midst that nearly all of our National Business is transact-
ed and controlled by her servants. Information of a Nat-
ional character is made available to Rome, while at the
same time it is most difficult. and often impossible for
Protestant Parliamentarians to obtain the same informa-
tion. WHY? WHY?
The Church of Rome professes that she is unchangeable.
Jeremiah 13 : 23 says "Can the Ethiopian change his skin
or the leopard his spots?” It is vitally important to re-
member that the Roman Church is unchanged and un-
changeable.
Where will it all end? The Lord reigneth, our God and
Father, Christ.” He it was who said, "Thus far and no
further.” With His foreknowledge He knew how man-
kind would drift away and worship "The Beast,”


So, through the prophetic writings of the Chosen Men
of Old, He speaks to us. We have the witness of past
happenings proving that prophecy never lies. To the
understanding ear and the seeing eye the plan is being
perfected. The Day of the Lord draws nearer and events
move with increasing rapidity, all in preparation for the
Great Armageddon War, which, as is foretold in the Book
must take place shortly, within the space of two to four
years. The nations fighting on the side of Christianity
will be The British Empire, America, and Japan, against
which will be the Dragon King of Heathen Darkness,
as the Frog-like Spirit of Revelation 16 :13, who is to
command the armies of the heathen. There are 800
million heathen from whom picked men can be chosen.
It would be possible to raise a vast army from among the
heathen when they are awakened, as Scripture foretells
they will be.
Then there is the second army of 110,000,000 Mohamme-
dans to be taken from India, Persia, Afghanistan, and
other minor places. The chief god of the heathen will be
Confucius. The chief god of the second army, Mohamet,
The third army, is the Beast army which will represent
Papal Rome and her confederacies, and kings who can
support her to the extent of 247,000,000 people who are
of the vast false systems of religion throughout the world,
separate entirely from heathen, gentile, or the Mohamme-
dan or Christian Israel. Against this motley array
there remains 100,000,000 nominal Christian protestants
who have to combat the entire field. Little wonder then
that it is the great Day of God Almighty, because it will
be left to the great Captain above to win the battle. He
will do this through those who "quit themselves like men”
and who submit themselves under His control and will.
THE RIPENED HARVEST
There is no doubt about the fitness of the time when this
war will take place. It is called a ripening of the harvest.
This shows clearly that the coming unto the time of Arm-
ageddon will be gradual, even as the seasons pass into har-
vest. There has to be a ripening time. Events must come


and go until the pressure upon the sea of humanity ripens
into a universal foment in which the above armies will
become involved with a view to the settlement of a
world’s peace. In the midst of apparent peace and in-
dustry there will come the command unto Israel to put
in the sickle for the harvest is ripe, for the harvest is the
world according to Christ’s parable. The sun and the moon
shall be darkened and the stars will withdraw their shining.
This passage shows the moral influence that will be
brought to bear upon "The Sun” Great Britain. "The
Moon” Judah of Palestine’ and the "Stars” as the smaller
Christian dependencies under Great Britain, possibly in-
cluding America. The heavens and the earth shall shake,
showing that high or low, bond or free, rich or poor, all
will be affected by the clash of arms. When all this is
finished, and the God of Israel has won the victory for
His arms and His people, the millennium will be ushered
in. No one can read the 3rd of Joel, verses 13 to 21,
without seeing that the Armageddon, as the ripe harvest,
precedes the millennium or years of peace, as found and
promised in the sacred pages.
THE MODE OF WARFARE
The methods of warfare are ever changing. Close forma-
tions no longer exist. Men cover in dug-outs to withstand
the aerial attacks. Open trenches are practically useless.
Revelation 16 gives some light on the methods of warfare
relative to Armageddon in the latter times.
Verse 21, "And there fell upon men a great hail out
of heaven, every stone about the weight of
a talent; and men blasphemed God because
of the hail; for the plague thereof was ex-
ceeding great.”
This verse at once suggests Aerial Armaments to be the
order of the day. The great hail from heaven is none other
than the aerial bombs that will be used in great numbers.
The significant point in this verse is the Hail Stone weigh-
ing one talent. Now a talent in English weights and meas-
ures is 119 lbs. avoirdupois. At the recent Aerial man-
oeuvers in England, bombs weighing 112 lbs., or one hun-
dred-weight were used.


It will be readily seen that the hailstones weighing one
talent or 119 lbs, are none other than the bombs, of a sim-
ilar weight, from aeroplanes. When we read Revelations
from this angle we gain some of the prophetic import,
and make profitable reading and studies. The plague of
hail was exceeding great, and such will be the case when
multi-thousands of airships and planes meet in conflict
at this time.
THE EFFECT OF ARMAGEDDON
"And every island fled away and the mountains were
not found.” (Revelation 16 : 20.)
This verse gives the effect of Armageddon upon the na-
tions of the world. The term "Island” here means the
boundaries which isolate nation from nation and kingdom
from kingdom. By the removal of islands or isolating
boundaries there remaineth no mountains or nations, for
where there are no boundaries there will be no kingdoms,
for all will be one in the hand of Ephraim, as the Christian
British Israel House, speaking the covenanted language
universally.
THE CLIMAX OF THREE GREAT EVILS
The benefits which will be derived from the issues of
Armageddon will be manifold. The three devils, or Frog-
like Spirits, which represent the vast majority of anti-christ-
ian countries and cults, will have tried their hand at over-
throwing all law and order, and each will strive for rule
and dominion. This final war can be looked upon as
the cleaning up of a very fast age, prior to setting up the
thousand years of peace. It is likened unto an earthquake,
and for this reason. When an earthquake overtakes Japan,
it leaves very little standing of the old order of things,
and a great earthquake, like that in the prophecy, will
wipe out the entire old order of things, so that Christ can
set His foot upon Mount Zion, and call for peace and
righteousness. The thunders and lightenings denote bombs
exploding in the air at night with terrific percussion, such
as was not since men were on the earth. The three evil
frogs meet their doom in the great clash of arms. The
prophetic word is particularly emphatic in this regarding


the city or kingdom of the Beast. The Beast kingdom
will be divided into three parts, (Rev. 16 ; 19), in which
any ecclesiastical Christians will withdraw from her, leav-
ing the other two parts of Dominican and Jesuitical orders
to carry on till they fall or are overcome.
EZEKIEL’S CONFIRMATION
The Prophet Ezekiel, in chapters 37, 38 and 39, has some-
thing to say regarding Armageddon. He is emphatic re-
garding the Alliance between Great Britain and Japan, as
the ships of Tarshish, and Sheba and Dedan, (chapter
38 ; 13) - He also refers to Russia as Gog and Magog,
who were given over to ravenous birds and beasts of the
field. Russia, being the home of Bolshevism, has so far
fulfilled this injunction, (chapter 39:4). From Ezekiel
we get a different aspect of the great struggle, but we
learn this, that Russia will be included in the Gentile
Armies, and also the Mohammedans from Persia, (chapter
38 :5). This confirms our prior claims as to the Frog-
like Spirit of Mohamet being involved in the war, having
included Persia previously as a Mohammedan country.
Having these facts before us, we are face to face with
certain truths which cannot be eliminated.
FACE THE FACTS
The Armageddon is not yet fought, but has to take place
before the Advent of Christ. It is, therefore, pre-millenial.
In comparing the last war with Armageddon, certain events
did not happen. The Mohammedan conquest, and the
heathen awakening, and the gathering of armies did not
take place. Again the beast-frog was not overthrown, for
he still lives as Papal Rome. Russia had to be crushed,
but this was not so. The past war was a justifiable effort
on the part of the strong to protect weak Belgium, but it
will be hard to justify the objective of the heathen and
gentile armies in the next war, allied against Judah of the
Jews and Israel. We must look for the allied pact between
the heathen Dragon, Mohamet, and the Beast of Papal
Rome, before Armageddon is correctly placed. It must
be known by these terms. It will be seen at a glance that
the war will be a holy war, wherein man’s deepest emo-


dons will be involved. In past wars men of all denomina-
tions have fought side by side, but not so with Armaged-
don. Mohamet’s great dominion conquest is going on
right now. Papal Rome’s hungry talons are after suprem-
acy. Here are two great religious forces working to gain
control of the avenues of commerce, and of the world.
We feel that many now living will see this war, because
the years come and go, and the preparation is going on
all the time. It only wants a concentrated effort, either
from Papal Rome, or Mohamet, upon Christians to mass-
acre them, and the ball would start to roll. It would be
beautiful to think we were done with war, but the over-
tures of evil have designed it otherwise. Let us then face
the facts before us and await the time, knowing that they
who lift the sword shall die by the sword, and we, living
by, and lifting the banner of Christ, will die in Him, who
must come to put all enemies under His feet who now
dwell in the earth, which is the Lord’s footstool.
THE BRITISH EMPIRE
The Australian Protestant Truth Centre stands four-square
behind the glorious truth that Britain is Israel, and knows
that our great Empire is indeed the Israel of the Bible, and
Israel means literally—ruling with God, and is mentioned
in the Bible in the prophetic despatches some 2543 times.
In Genesis 12 : 2 it says "I will make Thee (Israel) a great
Nation,” and we ask, what nation today, other than the
British Nation fulfills the following Biblical prophecies re-
lating to the Israelites?
They would be gathered into a place of safety.
They would be spread out to the very ends of the
earth.
They were to inherit and colonize the waste parts of
the earth, and more particularly, to acquire the land
lying between the Nile and the Euphrates.
They would become a company of Nations.
They were to possess the gate of their enemies.
They would rule over many nations and be ruled over
by none.
They would keep the Sabbath.


The Roman Church knows that we are Israel—God’s cov-
enanted people, and knowing also that the ultimate des-
truction of its political and infallible claims will take place
at the close of the coming Armageddon war, it is making,
through its agents the Jesuits, frantic and redoubled efforts
to overthrow the British Empire and set up world-domin-
ion. To students of prophecy, Rome’s hatred of Britain
and all that it stands for, is but one of the "signs of the
times.”
In a future publication we will deal very fully with this
important question of British-Israel, and show to our peo-
ple what a glorious heritage is theirs.
♦ ♦ ♦
CONCLUSION
The object of the pamphlets and booklets, published and
circulated by the Australian Protestant Truth Centre, is to
bring the Australian people—in fact the people of our
Empire —to a realisation of the danger which exists as
a result of the undermining of the Empire by the power-
ful organisation of the Jesuits, and to place before them
the evidence of the approaching crisis, and the means em-
ployed by our enemies to weaken us before the actual clash
of arms begins. The Jesuits know quite well that we are
the covenanted people who block their path to world dom-
ination, and they are straining every nerve to finally crip-
ple Britain and bring us under the iron heel of Romanism.
The time is getting short, and we therefore implore our
people to open their eyes to the danger that besets them.
Consider all the facts, weigh all the evidence, read the daily
papers in a new light, and it will not be long before you
realise that the coming struggle will be between two forces
viz.—Romanism and Christianity.
PUBLICATIONS
The Protestant Truth Centre has published other pamph-
lets. If you have not yet read them, write for them, (see
particulars on page three of cover).


Further publications will be made from time to time, and
may be obtained upon application.
Also it is intended to reprint many articles published prev-
iously, and which are at present unobtainable.
GOD SAVE OUR KING AND EMPIRE
Whillas <6 Ormiston, Ltd., Printers, Adelaide
