

61 o
Record of
Thomas Grieve Adamson
T am worth
N.S.W.


SYNOPSIS OF PUBLIC RECORD OF T. G. ADAMSON.
TAMWORTH.
Pioneer farmer on 500 acres virgin bush on Goonoo Goonoo Estate.
Have worked up to 800 acres, farming and grazing. (In a good season
has produced 3000 bags of wheat, 2000 bags malting barley, 300 tons
lucerne hay, 2 tons lucerne seed, 15 tons honey, 22 tons canary
seed, 2 tons mustard seed, 15 tons millet, 500 bags maize, 5 tons tobacco,
and so forth).
1. Honorary Secretary of Burrangong District Hospital, Young, for
sevep years, and originator of the present building. Raised many thou-
sands sterling for it.
Honorary Secretary and originator of a score of public movements at
Young. Thanked by the then Premier, Sir William Lyne, at Young. Also
thanked by Mr. J. Chris. Watson, M.P., the first Labor Prime Minister
of Australia, Sir John See, Mr. W. A. Holman.
2. Honorary Secretary and one of the originators of the first butter
factory at Young.
3. Many years ago and recently originated the idea of converting the
Coiyrt House at Young into a High School building. The records of the
Town Council will amply prove this. But the credit has been given to
another.
4. Shipped the first direct shipment of lucerne and wheaten chaff,
about 300 tons, to Manila, in the Philippine Islands, and my Anzac son
went with the consignment, endeavouring to open up trade with Aus-
tralia.
5. Won the only medal ever awarded to Australia for honey at the
London Dairy Show in 1914, 10-ton lot. The medal is in the Australian
Museum. Press reports are available.
6. Originator of the Tamworth District Soldiers’ Fund, prior to days
of repatriation, which provided for all classes.
7. President Nemingha Patriotic League, which built a war widow’s
cottage, and raised thousands for patriotic services.
9. During the war, at the request of the people, received the March of
Freedom Troops at Nemingha. Asked by the Federal Government to
march with the troops from Tamworth to Maitland, and from Murwillum-
bah to Brisbane.
9. Thanked by the Military Authorities for aiding the recruiting
efforts. Specially thanked by Col. Lamrock, Commandant Liverpool Camp.
10. Entertained the following public bodies at request of Government:
The Scotch Agricultural Commission, 1910 (see official report).
The Embassy of Agricultural Engineers, Uruguay, S. America.
The Minister of Education and 200 Rural Camp boys from Sydney,
and on my own volition entertained and invited to the district Mr. Austin
Wilson, the Special Trade Commissioner, Port of Hull, England, and such
visit resulted in Australian produce going to England.
Dr. Elwood Mead first visited our State on my invitation re irrigation
of the Peel Valley, and in reference to lucerne growing.
11. Many years ago originated the idea of getting Tamworth district
on the “films” for exhibition in England. Put a week in on the work with
the operator, bore all expense. The views were exhibited in England, and
Press reports appeared.
12. Worked for white labour for tobacco culture in lieu of Chinese
labour. See Agricultural Gazette ~ article; arranged for the lucerne seed
of Tamworth to be photographed and illustrated in the Agricultural
Gazette, which very materially benefitted the Tamworth district, for
orders actually came, up to 20 tons, from Western Australia, South Aus-
tralia, Victoria, and Queensland.
13. Queen Bee (rearing artificial). Our apiary has sent up to 1500
queens in a season all over Australia, and even to South Africa. Imported
pedigree queens from Roots, U.S.A., and from Italy. Won score| of first
prizes at Sydney R.A. Show, for honey, queen bees, barley, bees wax, oats,
lucerne seed, and so forth.
14. Honorary Secretary and originator of the ploughing of certain
large areas of land on Goonoo Goonoo Estate forthe benefit of returned
soldiers. 118 horses were engaged, and I had the honor of turning the
first furrow.
15. Honorary Secretary of the Tamworth district War Memorial Com-
mittee. About 2000/3000 men left here, and 200 were killed.
16. Honorary Organiser-Secretary of the soldier settlers of the North
and North-West, about 300 members. Elected unanimously, and act as
their spokesman in land matters.
17. Received public presentations from—
The citizens of Young—a valuable gold watch.
The staff of Young Hospital—a valuable Maltese Cross,
The soldiers of Tamworth district—a medallion, engraved “The
Soldiers’ Friend.”
and also one from the children of Arakoon.
18. Attended Apiarist’s Conference at Stawell, Victoria, as President
of N.S.W. Apiarists’ Association.
19. Two sons served at the war, one on Anzac for six years 59 days,
reported dead three times, one year hospital in Sydney, on return about
30% disability for life. Two farm hands went to the Front at my request,
and one killed in action at Gallipoli, and the other in France.


20. Two sons and one daughter married, all pioneering on the land.
21. I have been invited to speak at the London Stock Exchange on
behalf of Australia, and also at Edinburgh.
22. For over a score of years have been publishing articles in the
English Press, re migration, and so forth.
23. My publicity has actually brought people to our district.
24. At request of Federal and State Governments, supplied repre-
sentative agricultural exhibits for London many a time, in an honorary
capacity. These exhibits were referred to in the English Press.
25. Aided the various Government Departments many a time in their
publicity literature. (See Government publications), and thanked many
times for services.
26. Documentary evidence available on demand of every statement
made.
27. I have travelled over New Zealand, Friendly Islands, Samoa, Fiji,
England, Ireland, Scotland, and most of Australia.
28. Have employed up to 35 hands at harvest, and generally worked
8 to 10 hands all the year round.
29. As an example of originating capacity and tenacity of purpose,
I conceived the idea of providing for the education and loving care of the
fallen heroes’ children (some 14,000) in 1915, and worked on it on my
own for five years, issued some 3000 circulars and letters, pamphlets, etc.,
at my personal expense to the amount of £3OO. Eventually the Prime
Minister of Australia asked me in writing for detailed scheme, supplied
it, and the Federal Government adopted it. The funds went to over a
million of money. Documentary evidence in proof of this available on
demand. Elected a member of the Anzac Committee, 1919, and also on
the Educational Anzac Committee for the children of the glorious dead,
at the Town Hall, Sydney.
30. In 1910, while I was the guest of the Scotch Agricultural Com-
mission at dinner, Sir Carlaw Martin, Chairman, I put the idea before
them of asking the British Government, for a free grant of, say, ten or
twenty millions of money to settle Australia with our own race and blood,
so that Australia could be held by us. I also put the same idea before
Sir Joseph Carruthers in writing before he commenced his publicity cam-
paign. I also had put it before Sir Charles Wade.
31. Worked on the rabbit problem for a number of years, did a good
deal of publicity. Professor Laby, Chemistry, Melbourne University, invited
me over to talk the matter over with him. I went, and he said that he.'
considered experiments should be carried out on the lines suggested by
me. The Graziers’ Association asked me to address them on the subject.
But the Federal Government declined to go on with experiments. At
present some such experiments are being carried out in N.S.W.
32. Submitted to Government an article on Fodder Conservation, and
Sir Joseph Carruthers told me at the Farmers’ Conference at Maitland that
it had so much merit in it that he had circulated it to all members of the
Cabinet.
33. One of the foundation members of Tamworth Industrial League,
which is bringing about the establishment of woollen mills at Tamworth,
costing £150,000; £30,000 has already been subscribed.
34. The Tamworth “Leader,” 9/11/23, contains an article on Armis-
tice Day by me. It is a sample of my work, and shows my knowledge of
Home and of Europe.
35. Aided the Technical authc-ipies of Sydney in introducing Technical
Education to Tamworth.
36. Have written many articles re the education and training of the
bush child.
37. Passed the Imperial Civil Service examination as a lad. Have
had experience, successful, as an administrator, controlled a couple of
hundred people, and showed a saving of over £lOOO per annum on the
work. (Documentary evidence available).
38. Originated the Oxley celebrations at Tamworth, and organised
the recent Soldier Settlers’ Conference at Tamworth, at the request of the
settlers. 200 attended. The Minister of Lands presided, and the total
cost of the Conference was about 70/-. Settlers came 140 miles by road
to attend it.
Elected life member of the Burrangong District Hospital, Young, by
the public in recognition of services.
For some years irrigated by artificial means (pumping and spraying)
50 acres lucerne land. Won first prize for lucerne seed at Brisbane Show.
Was brought up on a farm in Edinburgh, won my way from scratch
in the Civil Service in N.S.W., and have had 18 years’ life on the land.
Cleared virgin bush, 65 trees to the acre, and some of the trees 15 feet in
diameter. Know the problems by first hand experience, and knowledge.
Have been through fire, drought, hailstorms on crops, flood, caterpillars in
crop, and so on. In constant touch with the soldier settlers, who visit and
write me. I visit them at their centres and so obtain a wide knowledge, by
direct means, into the hard practical facts of life on the land in all its
ramifications.
By my representations obtained a 40% reduction in freight charges
on the railways, for honey.
T. G. ADAMSON.


-
'
■■ I •
. ..
■iv ■■ in ■ "in: U■ : ■ I .on ■ - , - I : .
?
