





RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
BOROONDARA
GENERAL CEMETERY.
1859.
MELBOURNE:
Printed by g. whitton, us, flinders lane, east.
1859.


snarh nf &mim:
O y/ '^ : '/ L / '" ly A’!'! Yr cm.vrwi JtT TlB-59), Roman Catholic
O'. DALMit-Mf, Unitarian.
P. Wesleyan Methodist.
•J'OIIN f). DBMMgg; I Baptist.
German Lutheran.
fIHIPBRIg'tMWWI* Church of England
THOMAS JOHNSON, United Methodist.
THOMAS JUDD, Independant


.Established by Act of Council, under the provisions of the
Act 17 Viet. No. 12.]
BOROONDARA GENERAL
CEMETERY.
Office;—^? 7 THE CEMETERY-*
In pursuance of the 6th Section of the above
Act of Council, whereby it is enacted u That
the Trustees of any such Cemetery shall have
power and authority to make such Rules and
Regulations, and to do and perform, and cause
to be done and performed, all such acts, matters,
and things as may be necessary and proper for
any of the purposes aforesaid, and for directing
the positions of all graves and vaults to be made
in the said Cemetery, the depths of the graves
and construction of coffins to be admitted into
vaults, and the covering of vaults so as to
prevent the escape of any noxious exhalation or
evaporation in the said Cemetery, and for pro-


tecting the buildings, monuments, shrubberies,
plantations and enclosures, therein and thereof
from destruction or damage; and shall have
power to prosecute all persons who shall or may
at any time do or cause to be done any damage
to any such buildings, monuments, tombstones,
shrubberies, plantations or enclosures. Pro-
vided that the said Trustees shall not by any
rule or regulation, or any act, matter or thing,
at any time interfere directly* or indirectly with
the performance of any religious ceremony in
the burial of the dead according to the usage
of the communion to which the deceased may
have belonged, or with the original distribution
of the said lands or hereditaments, made or
intended by the said deed of grant or other
conveyance to and amongst separate and distinct
religious denominations and communions. Pro-
vided that no such rule or regulation shall be
in force until the same Jias been submitted to
the Lieutenant-Governor and the Executive
Council, and published in the Government Ga~
zette .” The Trustees of the said Cemetery,
with the concurrence and approval of the Govern-
ment, make and promulgate the following Rules
and Regulations :


Hulls unit Htgulntinns
OP THE
BOROONDARA GENERAL CEMETERY.
1-—All charges must be paid when orders
are given, or before the ground or vault is
opened.
2.—By the Bth Section of the Act, “Any
person making a vault, or erecting and placing
a monument in the Cemetery, by, and with the
permission of the Trustees, under these Rules,
and upon the payment of the charges therein
mentioned, is entitled to have maintained and
kept up a vault, monument, or tombstone, accord-
ing to the tenor of such permission, to, and for
the sole and separate use of such person or
persons, and his or their heirs or representatives
for ever.”


3.—Application for such permission to be
made at the office of the Trustees. A certificate
of permission, in the form set out in the sche-
dule, will be granted to the party applying for
such permission, on payment of the charges in
Schedule B.
4.—The charges will be remitted for the
burial of any person on evidence being produced,
before two of the Trustees, that the relatives
or friends of such persons are unable to pay the
costs and charges.
5. —Orders for interment
the person in \hafge of the
the Imurs of Tei/t a.m. and r
previous to interment.
v —The Trustees will cause all ordinary
graves to be dug, but when a brick or other
grave or vault is required, it must be con-
structed under the direction of the Trustees, or
some person duly appointed by them; and in
case interment is to be made in any private
grave or vault belonging to another person, the
consent, in writing, of such person must be left
with the order. No grave to be of a less depth
than six feet.
7.—When giving the order for interment, a


form of application for burial, containing the
name, age, and late place of residence of the
deceased will be provided, and must be filled up,
where practicable, and entered in the interment
book.
B.—The time fixed for the funeral to be at
the Cemetery must be punctually observed.
9.—The hours fixed for interments will be
from Ten a.m. to Six o’clock p.m., in the months
of September to April inclusive; and from Ten
a.m, to Four o’clock p.m. in the other four
months, except on Sundays, when the only hours
for funerals will be from Two to Five o’clock p.m.
throughout the year.
10.—All monuments, vaults, graves, and
gravestones, to be kept in repair and proper
condition at the expense of the owners.
11.—Everv co
grave/to be pneke'
1 by a (slab of spone or ifron. v
12. —A drawing of every stone, tomb, pedestal,
and a plan of every monument, must be sub-
mitted to the Trustees for their approval. In
the erection of tablets, copper cramps must be
used.
1 B.—Wooden fences allowed, but if not kept


in proper repair, they may be removed by order
of the Trustees, without notice to the owner.
14.—N0 servant or other person employed by,
or engaged in any duty on behalf of the
Trustees, will be permitted to receive any
gratuity for the discharge thereof.
15.—The ground will be open daily to the
public from sunrise to sunset.
16. —A plan of the Cemetery, showing the
situation of the purchased and other graves, will
be kept at the office, and may be inspected at
the charge set out in Schedule B, and registers
of all grants will be kept by the Secretary.
17. —Any person wilfully or wantonly de-
stroying, or doing or causing to be done any
damage to any monument, vault, tombstone,
building, erection, railing, fence, shrubbery, tree,
or plant in the Cemetery, is guilty of a mis-
demeanor, and being convicted thereof, is liable
to be punished, as prescribed by the 14th Section
of the Act 17th Yict. No. 12. *
18.—No dogs will be allowed to enter the
Cemetery.
19.—N0 funeral will be allowed to take place
in the Cemetery without a certificate from a
deputy-registrar, or coroner holding an inquest


or enquiry on the body to be interred, or from
a magistrate; such certificate to be delivered to
the person in charge at the Cemetery, before
the funeral enters the gates.
21.—The Trustees reserve the right to add to
and make any alterations from time to time in
the charges and regulations.
(Signed)
Michael O’ Grady,
Thomas Cubitt Balmain,
Thomas Johnson,
William Finger,
Frederic Atkyns,
John S. Denbigh,
Trustees of the
Boroondara
General Cemetery.
Thomas Judd,
Boakd Room,
Hawthorne, 1859,


.
\
“ The foregoing Regulations, made by the Trustees of the Public
Cemetery established at Boroondara, have been submitted to
the Governor and the Executive Council.
“JAMES SERVICE,
>
“ Commissioner of Crown Lands and Survey.”






[Schedule A.]
iFnrm nf Ctrtifirnte nf Higljt of 33nriiil
IN THK
BOROONDARA GENERAL CEMETERY.
On the application of and
upon payment of the sum of
the Trustees of the Boroondaea General
Cemetery, in terms of, and as authorised by
the Act of Council, 17th Victoria, No. 12, have
agreed to grant, and do hereby grant, unto the
said nermission to dio- ov
permission to dig or
make a grave or vault, on that piece of ground,
feet long, by feet broad, lying
within the portion of the said Cemeterv appro-
priated for burials, and marked
No, , Compartment , on the map or
plan of the said Cemetery, kept by the said
Trustees, with permission to erect or place, on
the said piece of ground, a monument or tomb-
stone, on payment of such charges as may from
time to time be established. And it is hereby


declared, that the said shall he
entitled to have, maintain, and keep up such
vault, monument, or tombstone, according to
the terms of this permission, to and for the sole
and separate use of the said
and his (or their) heirs or representatives for
ever: provided always, and it is hereby de-
clared, that this grant is made subject to the
terms and conditions following, viz.: First,
that the said piece of ground shall be kept
and used by the said his
heirs or representatives, solely as a burying
place, and that no other use shall be made
thereof. Second, that no enclosing wall, fence,
building, monument, or tombstone, shall be
erected or placed on said piece of ground, until
a plan thereof shall have been exhibited to the
said Trustees, and their authority given for the
erection thereof. Third, that the said grave
or vault, and the said wall, fence, building,
monument, or tombstone, shall be maintained
and kept up by the said and
his heirs or representatives, in proper repair, to
the satisfaction of the said Trustees. Fourth,
that the said and his heirs or
representatives shall, in the use of the said piece


of ground, and access thereto, be subject, in
every respect, to such rules and regulations as
the said Trustees of the said Cemetery may from
time to time make; and shall not be entitled
to exercise the right to bury or inter therein,
except on payment of such charges as shall
from time to time he established by the said
Trustees.
Given under our hands and seals, at Boroon-
dara, in the Colony of Victoria, this
day of A . i). 18
(L.S.)
(Vs.).
(1.5.)
(1.5.)
(1.5.)
Trustees of the
Boroondara
General Cemetery
Signed by the above Trustees , \
in the presence of I
- Register NO-
Compartment


[.Schedule B.]
3knnntkra Ctmtttnj Cljargra.
Gazetted 14 th May , 1867.
PUBLIC GEAYES.
£ s d
Single Interment in open ground ... ... 1 10 0
Ditto of Children under five years ... 0 10 0
Ditto of Still-born Children ... ... 0 6 0
PEIYATE GEAYES.
£ s d
Land for Graves, 8 feet by 4 feet ... ... 1 10 6
Special Land for Family Graves, 8 feet by 4 feet 313 6
Ditto ditto 8 feet by 8 feet 616 6
Ditto ditto 8 feet by 12 feet 13 2 6
Sinking each Grave 7 feet ... ... ... 1 5 0
Ditto for first additional foot ... 0 5 0
Ditto for second ditto ... 0 7 6
Ditto for third ditto ... 0 10 0
And so on in progression for every additional foot.
Ee-opening each Grave or Yault... ... ...100
MISCELLANEOUS.
£ s d
For all Interments that take place not in the
usual hours, an extra charge of ... ... 010 6
For all Interments that take place on Sundays,
an extra charge of ... ... ... ... 1 1 0
But if the Grave be opened on the previous day,
the extra charge will be only ... ... 0 10 6
For all Interments without the required Notice
(see Eule 5)
If a Public Grave, an extra charge of ... ... 0 10 6
If a Private Grave, an extra charge of ... ... 1 1 0
Charge for permission to erect Headstone, Tomb
or Half-tomb, upright Pedestal or Monument 0 10 6
For Lead Plate with Name ... ... ... 0 1 6


[ Addenda.
RULES GAZETTED 18th OCTOBER, 1864.
No. s.—Orders for interment must be given to the person
in charge of the Cemetery at least eight working hours
prior to the hour fixed for the funeral; if not, an extra
charge will be made. (See Miscellaneous Charges.) No
free interment vfill be allowed without the above notice.
No. 20.—That on all interments taking place on Sundays
an additional fee of one guinea be charged.
RULE GAZETTED 14th MAY, 1867.
No. 11.—Every coffin in a vault or brick grave must be
bricked in and covered by a slab of stone, slate or iron ;
and every coffin must have on the lid a lead or copper plate,
with the name of the deceased and the year of death
stamped thereon.
RULES GAZETTED 18th AUGUST, 1871.
No, 22.—That for the future no Bath, Caen, or other
soft stone be allowed in the erection of any monument or
gravestone.
No* 23.—That in consequence of the danger attending
re-interments under heavy monuments, all such monuments
lor the future be built on substantial foundations, extending
to the depth of the grave, to the satisfaction of the Trustees.


[Schedule C.j
FORM OF INSTRUCTIONS FOR GRAVES.
Answers to he written opposite to the following Questions , at the time
of giving Orders .
1, What denomination ?
2. If selection be made by the Trustees or applicant ?
3. Name of the deceased ?
4. Late residence of ditto ?
5. Rank of ditto ?
6. Age of ditto ?
7. From what parish to be brought ?
8. Minister to officiate ?
9, Day of Funeral ?
10. What hour, and if usual or extra ?
11. Number of grave on plan issued ?
12. If a common grave ?
13. If a family grave (not bricked) ?
14. What depth, and other dimensions 15
15. If a family vault or brick grave ?
16. What depth, &c. ?
17. If first or second interment?
18. Nature of disease, or supposed cause of death :
Signature of
Representative for Undertaker.)
Order received this
o’Clock.
