





ALONG THE ROAD TO CUE,
AND OTHER VERSES.
/ J 5
v- .
ANDREE HAYWARD.
“ Geraldton Express.”
PRICE :
ONE SHILLING.
Express” Company..


jj i vay;O-i 0_ 6 y OOQ <> V v <jyO y -y yy V V *.■ v .-■ yy V iy j> iy
•fi : f- iH 'tff «V'Hu ’ti : %i" Vtff' tfH'
7H E following verses, together with many others, with
even weaker claims to reproduction, originally appeared in
the columns of the Oerai.dton Express over the pen-name of
“ Viator.” Whether such fugitive pieces possess sufficient merit to
warrant their reclamation, and present re-appearance, may he safely
left to the public If the latter decide in the negative, their verdict
will not clash with the opinion of
Tll ri AUTHOR.
< A -* - ... A A • O r •* * ’• 0


H.L.WHITE,
Hlong the Road to <2ue.
And Other Verses.
The race for gold that charms the hold
Finds toil for man and henst,
And they, who left, the blast of old,
Are daily streaming East.
The whips that crack along the track
Are strong—the horses, too ;
And strong the words the teamsters use
Along the road to due,
The words they use
To mark their views.
Along the road to Cue.
(), fierce heats down the sun o’erhead,
High poised in cloudless skies ;
Thick lies the dust beneath our tread
And thicker swarm the flies.
lint flics and heat and dust and thirst
And nags that pull askew.
They each and all get soundly cursed
Along the road to Cue,
Had. worse and worst,
They all get cursed
Along the road to Cue


ALONG THE ROAD TO CUE.
I've seen some travellers look askance,
And others chafe and fret ;
I've known the passing camel’s glance
Betoken pain’d regret—
He cannot make his protest heard,
Unlike the cockatoo
Which shrieking flies from many a word
Along the road to Cue.
The horse-power words
Which shock the birds
Along the road to Gue.
Thames bargemen hide resourceful lips
Behind their blackened pipes,
So do the mates of sailing ships
That fly the Stars and Stripes.
I’ve heard them both of old, and each
Gan objurgate “ a few,”
But loftier heights than those they reach
Along the road to Cue.
Choice gems of speech
Beyond our reach.
Along the road to Cue.
I've heart! bluff costers bless their mokes
In soft enraptur’d tones ;
I know the way the gangers coi.v
The men who lift the stones ;
And yet 1 somehow fancy • oth
Could learn a thing or two
Some u /-to-date appropriate oath.
Along the road to Cue,
Some brand-new oath
Of native growth,
Along the road to Cue.
’Tis sad that wit should waste its lire
And rhetoric spend its force
Upon the unresponsive wire,
The unreflecting horse.
The waste, per hour, of motive power,
If had' I say be true,


ALONG THE ROAD TO CITE.
Would surely drive ten head of stamps
To crush the quartz at Cue,
Ten head of stamps
To wake the camps
Between Day Dawn and Cue.
In truth I never knew before
(For all the songs I’ve sung)
One-half the plenteous verbal store
That marks our Saxon tongue.
So don’t decline this wreath of mine,
’Tis honest merit’s due,
Knights of the lash, who earn your cash
Along the road to Cue,
Who ply the lash
With “ blank” and “ dash”
Along the road to Cue.
Twas an unpretentious grog-shop in a dusty mining centre,
Flanked about with empty bottles that were growing more and
People called it the “ Excelsior,” but “ Abandon hope who enter,”
Would have been a titter legend for the board above the door.
Alexander was the landlord Mr. Patrick Alexander—
Strangers mostly called him Alec., but his boon companions Pat.;
And his usual coign of vantage was a broken-down verandah,
Where -the township’s hardest cases sprawled and swore and
smoked and spat.
Then a local paper’s par spread one morn the news afar
That an angel in a bodice had appeared behind the bar ;
And the frenzied rush that followed marked an epoch new, mo-
thinks,
For that little corner shanty, where Belinda brought the drinks.
For indeed she seemed an angel to our starved imaginations,
Though the unromatic Alee used to claim her for a niece :


"BELINDA
Not a man but would have bartered for her smile the Wealth of
Nations,
From the youngest new chum digger to the sergeant of police ;
And the magic of her presence shod a subtle hanky-panky
On that dingy shrine of Bacchus, and the crowd assembled there,
Till the hardest heart was softened, and the synonym for “ blanky ”
Seldom rose above a whisper on the whisky-scented air.
Though the rival barmaids there in the fashion of the fair,
Tossed their heads in scornful comment on Belinda’s golden hair,
Though they pulled her charms to pieces and declared she was a
minx,
No one swerved from his allegiance—where Belinda brought the
drinks.
Beal chained-lightniug was the whisky, and the rum sent strangers
raging.
But Belinda’s thirsty lovers soon made havoc in the stock ;
And the landlord’s smile grew 7 daily more expansive and engaging,
For the rows of empty bottles would have paved an acre block.
Never knights of old so loyally mustered to their sovereign’s banner
As the boys from shaft and windlass to the queen of Alec's l ar :
Popping co.ks and jingling glasses nearly drowned the cracked
“ piauner, 1 '
When the local Paderewski played “ ’E dunno where ’e are.”
Nights of revel, days of graft, when our luck was in we laughed,
And when Fortune frowned, forgot her in the fiery cups we
quaffed
Memory’s chain still hinds them to me. and the strongest of the
links
Takes me back to Alec.’s parlour—where Belinda brought the
drinks.
But one hitter day she left us, and a storm of lamentations
Echoed through the tents and humpies in the days our darling
E'en the wild seductive '‘two-up” lost it’s ancient fascinations,
And the usual Sunday dog-fight seemed a spiritless event.
Nevermore shall ] behold her, but my recollection lingers
On that tiny winsome figure, conjured up from years gone by ;
Still I feast my o»os in visions on those ring'd and tapering fiuge's,
Flitting from the fierce Jamaica to the flasks of “ Heal Alackay.’’


IiRMXDA.
Nevermore ! aye, there's the nib ! 0 that township in
And the hurried nightly bee-line from the camp-fire to
Every other scene of revel into dull oblivion sinks
By the side of Alec.’s shanty—where Belinda brought i
QitoM,
We left the Yule log in the North,
But not the Yuletide feast,
In those dead days that drove us forth
To South and West and East.
What though we bartered homo and clime
Nor count the new for loss,
We cling the more to Christmastide
Beneath the Southern Cross.
I wander back in dreams again,
Through lands where daylight dies
To let the wheels of Charles’s Wain
Across the frowning skies.
Our tardier sun will sink to sleep,
From vaults of steel-blue gloss.
Where never drifting storm-clouds creep
Athwart the Southern Cross.
In dreams 1 hear the tempest blow,
About the Elder Land ;
Belike their earth is white with snow,
As ours is while with sand.
Belike around their cliffs and caves,
The wind-lashed breakers toss—
While scarce a ripple stirs the waves,
Beneath the Southern Cross.


BEXEATH THE SOUTHERN CKOS?.
Their oaks tower up from frost-bound turf,
Our scrub is parched and lean ;
(Three thousand leagues of restless surf
Must chafe and yawn between).
Half-hid the shrinking snowdrop stays,
Half-hid the lichened moss—
Our bolder wild-flowers proudly blaze
Beneath the Southern Cross.
Aye, twain the climes and twain the skies,
And twain the trees and flowers :
But over-sea the old world cries
“ Your Christmas tide is ours.
The blood-bond claims one fleeting space
From quest of golden dross,
One Yule for us and all our race
Beneath the Southern Cross f”
Then thunder back the loud “ Salve /”
From Newer Britain’s mouth,
From every land and every sea
That rings the waking South,
(Though half a word of waves divide,
Our hearts can bridge the fosse)
“Kinsmen, wo keep the Christ ua-ttidc
Beneath the Southern Cross.’’
©yYefeome fo dafWrC
Ho 1 vintners, set your taps allow 1
Ho ! minstrels, hang your drums !
The man of brag, and bounce and blow,
The Great Explorer comes.
Let envious tongues their sneers renew,
And fret and fume and vapour.
He's travelled all Australia through
From East to West—on paper.


WKSTRAr.r.v's WELCOME TO CALVERT.
Of hairbreadth scrapes let buslnueu prate
In prose, or bards in verse ;
Let shipwrecked tars their woes relate,
He’il cap them all with worse.
What though thev strove fierce thirst to bilk
Pent up in wave-tossed vessel,
lie went three days without the milk
That hears the brand of Nestle !
To grasp his hand admirers flock.
Their thioats grow hoarse with cheers—■
Stout chip from old heroic block
Of Cockney pioneers !
The eyes of all are turned to him,
Old idols fall to pieces,
The stars of Burke and Wills grow dim
And Leichardt’s fame decreases.
Secure of fame, no sneers he heeds,
Whose fame no sneers can hurt,
HeTl live when time has dimm’d the deeds
Of Warhurton and Sturt ;
When talk of Eyre to charm shall fail,
Uor Gregory’s feats enchain us—
When dark oblivion hides the tale
Of Stanley Africanus.
Their course such short-lived comets run
With meteoric whiz ;
Can comets match the morning sun,
Or their achievements his ?
Through darkest Attic's wilds afar
Stout Stanley led his forces,
But Calvert drove to Marble Bar
Behind a pair of horses !
At Rome (as bold a deed, 1 ween,
As that historic march)
He sometimes takes the ’bus between
The Bank and Marble Arch.
Or sallies, stick and gloves in hand,
Instead of swag and billy.
Along the wilds that part the Strand
From trackless Piccadilly.


WBSTRALIA’s WELCOME TO CALVERT.
Our English flag, from strand to strand,
Floats proudly in the breeze,
What wonder, when the Vlother Land
Sends forth such sons as these ?
Bring out the fife, the flute, the drum—
And some strong man to thump it,
(No need to bid the bueler come,
Our guest can blow the trumpet).
He came, he saw—this godlike man—•
He saw, he conquered Perth ;
0 for the days when Earnum ran
His “ Greatest Show on Earth,'
Where else, between the Northern Light
And Aus-tra-lis Aurora,
Could man devise a fitting site
For this self-styled Explorer?
Ufte sKge of
Timeo Danaos, et dona ferentes. — Virgil.
Although their advent brought us fortune's tide ,
1 love not strangers from the other side.—Free translation.
Swift to thy scrub-clad strand,
My helpless, hapless land,
A restless, hustling band
From Eastward journeys ;
Crowds neither slow nor small
Flock in at fortune’s call,
Doctor’s like hailstones fall :
It rains attorneys.
Strong men who wield the pick
Come flocking westward thick,
Harry and Tom and Dick,
(Hto and Louis


THE AOE OF JARRAH.
They crowd, each hurrying craft
For’ard and likewise aft ;
Some bring a banker’s draft,
But more a bluer
Old idols, one by one,
They lay bold hands upon,
Even our good Sir John
Their scorn arouses.
The quest of gold they mix
With baneful polities
Some even mock our Six
Historic Houses,
Ah, me ! It grieves me sore
To hear the batteries roar
Where only roamed of yore
The mild bungarra.
This age of gold and gain
Brings nought but strife and pain ;
Give me, ye gods, again
The atre of jaraah !
€{rea£ sKcjjeefi'ee.
Let others sing blythe odes to Spring
Or anthems for our land devise,
Or twang the lyre, in fond desire,
With sonnets to some fair one’s eyes.
The map unrolled by greed of gold
The shores that smile—the bush that frowns
Come, paint these climes, my men of rhymes,
With all the wealth of verbs and nouns !
To you both nouns and verbs I give ;
Leave me — to equalize the debt—
The (Heat Colonial Adjective,
The Australasian Epithet !


THE GREAT AUSTRALIAN ADJECTIVE.
It permeates all bush debates
Where gum-trees tower or dust-storms dance,
From Cambridge Gulf to Bass’s Straits,
From Palmerston to Esperance.
O hills and dales of Xew South Wales,
Tell me what word you hear the most !
In Melbourne streets it rings and greets,
Jt rings along the Queensland coast.
When westward surged the tide of flight
It came in newer lands to live
Across the Great Australian Bight,
The Great Australian Adjective !
Talk not to me of silken cords
Across the trackless seas that reach ;
A firmer bond this word affords,
This simple word of Saxon speech.
“ One life, one soul, one heart, one throne,”
Thus ran the Laureate’s song of yore.
One adjective, and one alone,
He might have added—nothing mure.
It girdles space to bind our race
With links that none may strain or fret ;
Of brotherhood a symbol good,
Our Great Australian Epithet.
We dress it up in various ways
To soften down its aspect grim ;
A dash affords a paraphrase
And blanky is a synonym.
So, just to hint the word in print,
Ingenious wiles are oft displayed,
For those who write for ears polite
Can’t always call a spade a spade.
Hut round the push and in the bush
They’re not so strangely sensative ;
Unmasked and bare it riots there,
The Great, Australian Adjective.
Go up and down by plain or town.
Through stately street or lonely scrub,
That lurid word will still be heard
From grand hotel to hackblocks pub.


THE GREAT AUSTRALIAN ADJECTIVE.
Where swagsmen tramp by farm and camp,
Whore fettlers toil along the line,
It floats along—terse, frequent, strong—
A password and a countersign.
You wish to hazard, say, a doubt
That weather w ill be warm or wot—
Both words are meaningless without
The Great Australian Epithet.
Mates breathe it low when tempests blow
And coasters ply along the deep ;
All stock can tell its import well
From camel trains to travelling sheep.
Swift comes the word when lips are stirred
To cope with woes of floods or fire* ;
I fancy, too, when things look blue
It’s sometimes flashed across the wires,
O magic sound ! O word renowned,
You're vulgar, senseless, coarse—tud yet
You seem to make our world go round,
You Great Australian Epithet.
Recipe for a Mining Q^pert,
Take an ordinary man
built upon ti e usual plan
■ mind his former calling, ’tisn’t likely he'll be missed-
Lead him gently through the mazes
Of a few tough mining phrases,
as kaolin zones and gossan, vnghs and dioritic schist.
Then confer upon the same
Some good double-barrelled name,
look through burke or Debrett 'twon’t be difficult to
When the patronymic’s minted
You must get it neatly printed
a lengt iv string of letters hanging like a tail behind.


RECIFE FOR A MIXING EXPERT.
Make him affable and glib ;
Man who’ll take a hand at crib,
Or perform on the piano (when there’s scarcity of Hates) ;
Dress him in a Norfolk jacket
With some riding pants to back it,
Finished off with brand-new gaiters and a pair of varnished boots.
Let a collar free from speck
Hide his ample wealth of neck
(The last attribute’s essential—he need only look the fop),
Let a nugget quaint and massive
In his neckcloth lurk impassive,
While a dazzling snow-white helmet sots his visage off on top.
Ho must wear a genial smile
Free fro n any trace of guile,
On a face as frank and open as the cloudless skies above ;
But, to keep him in the running,
He should have the serpent’s cunning
(Not the harmlossness connected with the legendary dove).
Prime him up with mystic hints
Of a reef, struck not long since.
And some specimens collected from a stack of quart.; at grass,
Then complete his field equipment
With an Invoice for a shipment
Of machinery—a compass and a magnifying glass.
Have I got him down complete
From the head-gear to the feet ?
No, there’s one absurd omission—thing I should have mentioned
You’ll have wasted all your trouble
Lf he hasn’t got quite double
Of a common man’s endowments in the matter of a thirst.
And capacity to hold
Underneath his shiit-front’s fold
All the wet a thirsty camel can contrive to stow away.
There, in suitable apparel.
Stands our man, lock, stock, and barrel !
Turn him out to earn his tucker —he won’t starve in W.A.


WEST R ALIA.
: Ueoo ifonr^etdi.
Patient she stood upon the Western shore,
Pensive she waited by the Western gate.
None came to tell her of the gifts that fate
Would lavish on her from his golden store.
Behind her lay the desert, and before
A broader waste—untracked, inviolate—-
Lay rippling idly in majestic state
Or heat against her feet with echoing roar.
Yet ever and anon the dauntless went
To pierce the secrets of the untrod miles
That yawned to Eastward. Names that none forget
Stand boldly writ atlrwart our continent—
Gray, Gregory, Warburton, Eyre, Forrest, Giles—
They wrought and dared and passed. She was not
Then whispers, gathering volumes as they rolled,
Circled and spread and swelled into a cry
A trumpet call, reverberant and high,
A golden summons from a harp of gold—
Till she, whom slumberous stillness chained of old,
Woke to the knowledge that her hour was nigh ;
Rose up to grasp the crown which Destiny,
Long time withholding, dared no more withhold.
And, decked with royal tiara, stretched her hands
To c'.asp the sceptre that was hers by right,
For on her hearing smote the gathering hum
Of hurrying thousands from the elder lands,
And hustling harbours broke upon her sight,
Thick-thronged with stately ships. Her time was


BACCHUS WORSHIP.
©Y^orj&^ip.
~ Another ‘ worshipper of Bacchus,’ who looked a perfect wreck,
toed the mark, and was discharged with a caution. —Police report.
We’ve a mighty lot of singers about woolsheds and their ringers
In the papers of this glorious Southern land ;
We’re familiar with the figures of the stockmen and the diggers,
And the men who carry bluey through the sand.
But I’ve more than once reflected there’s a class that’s been
neglected,
One offshoot from our stout old British trunk ;
Yet he’s no exotic alien, hut a ’climatized Australian,
And the name by which we know him is—The Drunk,
Now of course I’rn not referring (that’s a hackneyed theme, though
stirring)
To the process known as “ knocking down a cheque!,”
When the jirn-jam stricken victim of the liquor that has licked him,
Wakes to find himself a temporary wreck.
No, I mean the drunk whose calling is so thoroughly enthralling
That all other things are practically sunk ;
While his Bacchanalian ritual is absorbing and habitual,
The recognised hard-ea e—police-court drunk.
'Mongst his country’s benefactors, spite of manifold detractors,
I respectfully submit our friend should rank :
For his country’s treasury waxes fat and bloated on the taxes
That he pays for his excursions “ on the tank.”
Every year we note there s risen some compact and massive prison
To inspire the baser criminals with funk :
Courts of law shoot up like rockets—lawyers slap their breeches
pockets
And the man who pays the piper is the drunk.
Tis his boast and his enjoyment to provide some light employment
For the leisured class who call themselves police,
,\nd his harmless little quarrels point invaluable morals
For the sermonising justice of the peace.


TO A CAMEL.
He's admittedly a loafer, but lie doesn’t need a sofa,
Or a hammock or a deck-chair or a bunk.
Give him only, for his shoulder, a verandah post or boulder,
And he’s picturesquely happy—is the drunk.
He's a fruitful source of income to his fatherland (straight dinkum !)
He’s a type at once übiquitous and queer,
He's a commentary graphic on the evils of the traffic
In the cups that both inebriate and cheer.
Would he not repay perusal as he rushes to his “fusel,”
Like to martyrdom some mediaeval monk ? - '-(j "
>See him kiss the hand that stings him! How -is it'no Homer
sings him ?
There’s material for an epic in the drunk.
Ho a dan^ef.
Camel —quaint, ungainly beast,
Typo of Patience, Labor’s priest,
From the storehouse of the blast.
With the doormat-colored hide,
And the dusky Pathan guide
Standing turbaned at thy side.
Thing of neck and joints and hump,
Steed of frequent jolt and bump,
Nomad cistern, vagrant pump.
Beast of pack in Orient clime
With a patience half sublime,
From the earliest dawn of time.
Emigrant from far Bombay,
Tell me, have you come to stay ?
Answer, alien—exile, say.
Host thou ponder o’er thy fate ?
This is but the “ Golden Gate.”
Canst thou guess the ills that wait T


TO X CAMEL.
League on league of sun-scorched track.
Scanty feed and galling pack
Wait thee, friend of man, “ out back.”
Wheresoe’er the lust of gold
Tempts the wanderer, charms the bold.
Strong or weak or young or old—
Wheresoe’er the pioneer
Cuts his way, devoid of fear,
Desert ship, ’tis thine to steer !
On he goes through thorn-set brake,
Wind-swept plain and waveless lake —
Thou shalt follow in his wake.
Night shall bring thee, travel-worn,
Measured rest from burdens borne,
And a load renewed the morn :
Till the darkest night of all,
The last earthly even-fall,
Snaps in twain the cords that gall ;
And, the longest journey o’er.
Thou shalt rest to rise no more,
Exile on an alien shore.
Croaking Care, avaunt, bo still !
Tempt me not young heads to fill
With these prophecies of ill.
Creature of the glossy coat,
Sweeping tail and swan-like throat,
Let me strike a livelier note I
Nowadays no biped harks
To Cassandra-like remarks,
P’raps you’ll live as long as Parkes.
Sand you love, and sunny skies,
If you also dote on flies,
Here’s an earthly paradise !


THE SNEER OF SEPTIMUS HURT.
Haply, too, tlie menu wins
Yonr approval —bolts and pins,
Mulga scrub and empty tins.
Let me just one word beseech
In your own melodious speech,
Gurgling snort, or bubbling screech.
So ! By Allah and Mahound,
Friend, may “ Hooshta’s” welcome sound
Ofttimes bring thy limbs to ground !
Lo, I wish thee wealth of days,
Strength to toil and time to graze,
Peace and plenty. Go thy ways !
Ufie op iieptimaA Siurt
“ Miners are birds of passage. Who are they to have a vote, and maybe
upset the settled policy of the Government? Enough of pick-and-shovel
representation.”— Attorney-General Burt , 1898.
From the throbbing heart of the city, from the homo of wrangle and
prate,
Where the chiefs of the land take counsel for the weal of the growing
State,
Ring out far and wide the message ; for great, in sooth, is the need
That the searchers for gold may hearken, that the dwellers in tent.
mav heed.
’Tis the void l of the trained debater, scornful and sharp and pert,
The gibe of the glib-tongued lawyer —the sneer of Septimus Burt,
’Tis a voice that has rung aforetime since the days when the world
was new,
Wherever the sweating thousands have toiled for the favored few ;
’Tis the horsehair wig that is speaking to the roofing of cabbage-tree.
Stiff broadcloth and spcckless linen to moleskin and dungaree.
The puny quill to the pickaxe, the gown to the clay-stained shirt,
The man of words to the worker —the voice of Septimus Burt.


THE HNEKI! OE SEPTIMUS HURT.
For a murmur rose from the goldfields, and some grew grave at th*
cry
(Like cattle chafe at the thunder in the calm of a cloudless sky)—
“ A vote is the free man’s birthright ; ye have fooled ns long with
your tricks,
Let the will of the people govern and not the will of the Six.”
So some in high places hearkened, and sprang to their feet alert,
For they knew that the storm was on them—not such was Septimus
'Hurt.
Quoth he, “ ’Tis a senseless clamour ; yon fight in a hopeless cause;
Your work is to ply the pickaxe and ours is to frame the laws.
Get hack to the shaft and the windlass, with your tools in your horny
clasp,
Nor trouble your wits with matters too deep for your wits to
. grasp ;
(Jo, Scratch in the earth like rabbits : go, tunnel like moles in the
Thank God for your Heaven-sent rulers like me,” cried Septimus
Hurt.
Will an epigram, think yon, daunt them ? Will they swerve from
their path at a breath .’
The men who have laughed at I’eril, and closed in his lair with
Death.
Now a hitter reckoning awaits yon, short shrift shall he yours at our
hands,
Who have sneered at the rights of Labor, and mockixl at her just-
demands.
Too late you may rue your folly, to late to recant or 'vert.
You may find your own lips have spoken the knell of Septimus Hurt.
There's a higher judge than you wot of—His Honor .lodge Good
Report ;
He is rolled in no tinselled ermine, he is pent in no crowded court :
His praise is unstinted honor, his ban is a blighting curse.
His fiat no man may question, his sentence no court reverse:
He has dealt with your cast* already in the formula grim and curt,
“ Condemned ! anil the Lord have merer on the soul of Septimus
Hurt!”


THE SOXIi OF THE STAMPS.
11l the days when our wrongs air righted, the day when our tongues
are loosed,
When the 1 litter jibes you have uttered come home, like the chicks,
to roost;
When they rise from the past to shame you, tlrese words von would
fain forget,
When the Forrest phalanx is shattered and the star of the Six has
When the eye of your leader wanders o'er the dead and the sorely
hurt,
One form he will seek in vain for—the form of Septimus Burt.
song of tfie sßtamp^.
There’s a dialect no text-books acknowledge,
No manuscript cramps,
A language unstudied at college,
Unravelled in camps ;
How many have heard it, I wonder,
As it scatters the silence asunder ?
The growl of the battery thunder—
The song of the stamps !
As their cadence grows fainter or firmer,
Their staves sink or swell,
Can we fathom the message they murmur,
The tidings they tell 1
Can we sever, for all we have striven,
The voices of angels in heaven
From the muttering of fiends unforgiven
That mock us from hell ?
Let it echo through forest-clad ranges
Or wail through the wold,
It is only the setting that changes,
The burden is old,
Of dreams that can gild with their glamour
Tire dull toil of pickaxe and hammer,
Of the scurry, the struggle, the clamour,
The madness for gold.


THIS SOSO OF THK STAMT'S.
’Tis the song of a method-born madness,
That know we—and vet
Does it thrill through the pulses with gladness
Or chill with regret ?
’Twixt the sweet and the hitter the choice is
The message that grieves or rejoices—
Is it psean or dirge that it voices,
A call or a threat ?
Does it tell of the spoils that will fall to
The conquerors’ swords,
Of the wealth of some newer Rialto
Than Raylcy’s and Ford’s ?
Of the goal in its manifold guises
Which fair fickle Fortune devises,
Of the lottery that bristles with prizes
And reeks with rewards ?
Of the riddles that beckon their readers
Through transient griefs,
To a haven of mullocky leaders
And seven-ounce reefs ?
Of the stakes that are free to all comers,
Of the crop from a million of summers,
Of the heroes w ho ’listed as drummers
And rose to bo chiefs.
Of nuggets whose memory lingers
’Mid memories of bliss,
Like the touch of her delicate fingers,
The breath of her kiss ;
Of crushings from stone-stacks that glisten,
Yields only a “ magnum” can christen—
Have vou mused on that picture ? Then listen
A moment to this.
’Tis a prayer to the goddess whose region
Her votaries tread :
A wail for a massacred legion,
A dirge for the dead :


THE SONG OF THE STAMPS.
A tale of hopes shattered and blasted,
Like the lives they uplit and outlasted,
Yet nourished till spring-time Mas wasted
And summer had fled.
A grim tale of lurking diseases
And fell shocks that stun,
Of the night-time that drenches or freezes,
The blistering sun.
Of the misery that lashed us to borrow
Some Lethe to deaden our sorrow,
Of the demon that whispered “ to-morrow’’
Till morrows were done.
An archive of sore tribulation
By North and by South :
.V page from the loro of a nation,
A word from her mouth :
A list of the forces that fought her,
.V breathing of threatenings and slaughter,
A record of peril by water
And peril by drouth.
A requiem for those who have perished
Where pestilence lowers
(Par off from the loved ones they cherished
In happier hours),
For the graves by a thousand new rushes.
Now I wonder at times in night hushes,
Is it quartz or men’s bones that it crushes,
This monster of ours ?
To the goddess of gold, she whose psalter
And shrine are in camps—
A battery servos her for altar
A furnace for lamps—
’Tis the homage her votaries render
In a litany of rhythmical splendour,
The chant of the acolytes who tend her,
The song of the stamps I


OUR I’iONHERS.
©ur
There’s souk* news eome in from Eastward—not the kind of fairy
tale
That you sometimes hear from loafers on the tank —
It’s a different kind of story I’ve been hearing. I’ll go bail,
And there’s specimens to back it at the bank ;
And I won’t be fool enough to miss the chance to make a rise,
Like I missed it on the Feather and the Peak.
If von take the crimson climate and the water and the flies.
Why, there's nothing much in thrco-pound-ten a week !
Three-pound-ten a week, or four,
Red-hot prices at the store,
And the water’s often brackish and your eyes are some-
times sore.
Letter strike the tent and pack
Tools and tucker for the track.
You've a chance to strike a Bayley’s, same as others,
further back.
There was just bough sheds and humpies where there's now a
bustling street,
When the team brought up my hluey from the port.
’Twas a whisky case, upended, served the warden for a seat,
And a canvas tent was good enough for court.
There was “Stow a wav from boilers ” on the desk before the
And prisoners were chained to mulga trunks ;
Now they’ve built a:i A 1 courthouse for the lawyer chaps to speak,
The covm» in wigs that barrack for the drunks.
Yes. there’s too much jaw and mag,
So 1 mean to roll my swag
For a " thing survey Eastward,” as the bloke says in the
rag ;
And unless my luck forbids,
There’s a chance to make the quids
Without tumbling over parsons and the women with the
kids.


OUR PIONEERS.
Now there's gaols and banks and churches ’stead of diggers’ touts
and camps,
And the day’s gone by for roll-ups at the wells,
And the roaring of “ the Army” licks the roaring of the stamps,
And the blooming township’s littered up with swells.
For there’s men with Norfolk jackets and with double-barrelled
names,
All looking for the pool they’ve come to scoop ;
There’s experts in the grog shops and there’s experts round th«
claims,
And, for all I know, there’s experts in the soup !
Blow the toffs and blank the blanks,
Blow the lawyers and the banks ;
In a year or two I reckon there’ll be cabbies on the ranks.
Blow the mining experts too
And the stick-up-collared crew.
There’s a better show out Eastward for the likes o’ me
and yon.
Take my tip—l’ve followed digging for a little (blank the Hies I),
For a quarter of a century or more,
And it isn’t very often that a chap can make a rise
In places where there’s thousands been before.
You may fossick round or dry-blow, but you’ll find that weights ant-
You may graft for wages—doesn’t matter which—
You may knock out boots and tucker, with a pound or two to spare.
But you’ve just got “ Buckley’s chance” to strike it rich.
False reports may make you dance
For a little (damn the ants !) —
If you never sight new rushes, well, you've just got
“ Buckley's chance.”
Ever Eastward sweeps the flight,
And I shan’t knock off the fight
Till the South Australian border makes me sling nay
miner’s right!
Nearly twenty years a digger, and I’ve seen above a bit,
And I’ve learnt that fiction ain’t so strange as fact,
But when camps grow into townships, then it’s time for me to quit
And—what’s that vou say about the Homesteads Act .’


THK OTHER HIKE.
There’s a lot worse things, my sonny, than a perish for a drink,
Or claims that duffer out, or flies or drouth :
Do I look the kind of follow that would settle down, d’ye think,
With a lot of back-blocks cookies in the smith ?
Just to dig and tramp and batch,
Very like it’s no great catch,
And you sometimes do a perish, and you sometimes strik#
a patch.
But this life’s at best a blend—
And when things are worst they mend,
So it’s odds I stop a digger, barring turn-ups, till the end.
There’s some news come in from Eastward, and the news will start
a rush,
There’s a camel-team up-loading at the well,
And I’re got no quart* a-waiting for the blooming stamps to crush,
And I’ve got no house or furniture to sell.
Sso 1 guess I’ll pull the tent down, and I guess I’ll roll the swag,
And lay in a few weeks’ tucker from the store,
Tinned dog, tobacco, matches, and some flour—a fifty bag—
And a bit of tea and sugar—nothing more.
Tea and flour and potted dog,
And a month, maybe, to jog;
Just a new chum’s job, I reckon, same as falling off a log.
Some folk talk (at school at least)
’Bout contentment bein’ a feast:
Where’s the sense in bein’ contented when there’s fortunes
Ten long years back he had turned his face
To the track of the sinking sun ;
He had striven his best in the hard-fought race,
Now ho knew that his race was run.
All night he had raved as a man distraught,
In the gray of the dawn he died ;
And the last faint words that the watchers caught
Were, “A spell —on the other side.’’


THE OTHER SIRE.
Through the maze of ways where the tent-men wend,
He had travelled in fancy far ;
And now lie was back at the Horseshoe Bend,
And now at the Marble Bar.
They were wide, wide fields that his mind went o’er-
’Twas a long, long tramp that night—
From the fevered creeks of the Northern shore
To the sands of the wind-lashed Bight.
He would count his gain, he would curse his loss,
Anon of old mates he spake—
How one he had buried at Southern Cross,
How one was at Carey’s Lake.
Now ho dwelt on the wealth of some distant field,
Now he raved of some bootless rush,
Or told of his claim and the looked-for yield
In the days when the stamps would crush.
We could only listen, could only wait,
While the sands of the life glass went;
For death, that knocks at the palace gate,
Creeps under the ridge-pole tent.
And, when planets pale in their great grave dome,
For sign that the new day comes,
His mind strayed back to his Eastern home
And the shade of the Gippsland gums.
He was there at the end, In the old green glades.
Where the rain-fed torrent leaps ;
Far out of the plains where the mulga fades,
The shores where the mangrove creeps.
And the scarred sheer rock we had camped below,
That loomed through the dawning dim—
Though to us it seemed but an ironstone Wow—
Was a snow-capped hill for him.
He has gone, may be, to a further side,
He has left for a longer spell
Than he recked of then. For the gulf yawns wide,
And—who cometh back to tell ?
There’s a mound the more in that straggling row
That tells of the death king's wand,
And a good man gone from the world I know
To the bourne of the world bevoud.


KVOI.UTION.
Q^ofufion.
u The frilled lizard (Chlamylomurm Khu/i) from Roebuck Bay, Westera
Australia, #he latest addition to the London Zoo, has aroused considerable
interest among naturalists. It is believed to elevate its frills when angry ©r
©xeited.” —London paper.
From distant shore, Nor’-West by Nor’,
They’ve borne this captive far :
At first he seems as sunk in dreams
As other lizards are.
Professors wise with ecstaeies
His strange acquirement fills—
His tail they tweak, and, wond’rous freak !
He elevates his frills !
His human type, though times are rips
For progress, change, reform,
Stretched lizard-wise, his foes defies,
Where “office” keeps him warm;
Till caustic Leake gets up to speak,
Till Simpson scoffs at bills,
Then note the change, how swift and strange—
He elevates his frills !
Yet blame and praise in different ways
They each have won on earth ;
One makes his mark in Regent’s Park,
One struts the stage in Perth.
With rage both choke when men provoke
Their apathetic sloth :
Would God the Zoo had got the two—
We could have spared them both.
L’Envoi.
The moral’s clear as horehound beer,
()r sun at high noon-day—
Gut hors (or try) at Bunrury,
Am) NOT AT RoERCCK B.W.


XMAS : A RKTIIOSI'ECT.
: a S^efro&peot,
The bold bells chime for the Christmas time
Through the breadth of a world grown old.
And it comes to the spot where the chimes arc not-
From the hush of a Wessex wold
To the wider weald of the last vast field
That wakes to the thirst For gold.
Let me gather a spray from the far away,
A leaf from the long ago—
Five years have passed since I saw you last.
Where the hedges were draped with snow,
And the lawn lay white in the waning light,
The lawn where the roses grow.
I can feel the thrill of the lingers still
In mine for a space that lay:
They were soft and fair as the snowflakes there,
They stole like the flakes away—
And there come to my head some words 1 said,
And some—that I dared not say.
Just the hackneyed knell of a long farewell,
Glossed o’er by some careless jest,
But never a word of the love that stirred
To the depths of an aching breast.
Or the pent back fire of a vain desire—
What matter ? I think yon guessed.
Was it half of my pain that 1 longed in vain
For the fruit on the topmost bough.
For the dainty prize with the grave gray eyes
That lighted the flax fringed brow ?
Was I fit for your care in the days that were,
My Queen ? Am I fitter now ?
Vet the speech repressed was in truth the best
When less than a speech might grieve :
There was never as much as a dream to clutch
Or more than a dream to leave,
And words that had sprung to my waking tongue
Died back on my lips at eve.


THE YORK VOLUNTEERS.
There’s a Christmas more for the piled up store
Of the past with its strange linked chain :
The night falls black on the dry red track
That severs the scrub-clad plain,
And the ghosts we raise from the dark, dead day*
Sink back in the dark again.
(Ufie onC
England, stand firm ! Though thy enemies cluster
Round thee like hounds when the boar is at bay,
Pay no attention to Jonathan’s bluster,
Heed not the worst that the Kaiser may say.
Let them buzz on, like the flies round the sugar,
Why should their buzzing bring tremblings or fears
What matter Kaiser or Cleveland or Kruger,
When you’ve behind you—the York Volunteers ?
England, stand firm in the hour of thy perils .'
Thou art our mother in woe nr in weal.
Oversea kinsmen shall champion thy quarrels,
Bonds that are silken are stronger than steel.
Soldiers we’ll furnish if you find commanders,
Troops we’ll despatch you ’mid thunder of cheers :
Stalwart Canadians and bronzed Africanders
And (from Australia) —the York Volunteers.
England, stand firm though the battle cloud gathers !
Aye, though the wicked encompass thee round,
Sea-girt Britannia, the home of our fathers,
Under thy banners their sous shall be found.
Sore though thy trouble, they need must be stringent
Ere we will see thee dethroned by thy peers.
Sydney was first with the Soudan Contingent,
Now 7 it’s our turn with —the York Volunteers !


TO THE “ IiUJU.ETIX.”
©Io ffie Suffetin,
Hail, red-winged herald ! who may count thy readers,
Through crowded cities or by lonely camps ?
A fig for Australasians and Leaders —
Thy beacon blaze outshines their feeble lamps.
How oft thy charms have lightened life’s dull burden,
Killed the long hours, lit up the cheerless scene ;
Would I might render thee a fitting guerdon,
My Bulletin.
Breathes there a man, short of the veriest dullard,
Whose pulse vibrates no quicker as he reads
Those stores of forceful English, plain and colored,
That strip the trappings from the Fat Man’s creeds
Satire that cuts and epigrams that tickle,
Mixed with hard logic or with pungent slang—
These make thy dreaded name a rod in pickle
For many a gang.
O, chronicle adorned with fact and fancy,
Along thy page what well-known figures pace !
Sweeney the swagman and the drover Clancy,
Or Steelman—harder than the hardest case.
What memories flock of Banjo’s” swinging ballads,
Of Lawson, name of names to conjure with !
Of her who deftly fashioned fashion’s salads,
Our Sappho Smith !
Hop’s facile pencil, turning subjects solemn
To laughter-moving shapes, we know right well—
The cynic candour of the “ Wild Cat column,”
The quips of Titus Salt or Silas Snell.
Bedford and Becke, Montgomery and Dyson,
Make thee an anvil where they strike their sparks.
With thee we stray from Talleyrand to Tyson—
From Pope to Parkes.
A heaven of chase and war, so tell the Maories,
Awaits the warrior who bravely dies ;
The Moslem’s thoughts turn upon dazzling houris,
That smile behind the gates of Paradise.


So, when my spirit wakes from Death's dark shunters,
I crave not harps or crowns or “ glorious sheens
I do but ask—perennial Christinas numbers
Of Bulletin *.
@y/ fio ?
The remains of a prospector, who appears to have died of exhaustion,
some mouths ago, have been discovered at Sandy Creek, between Menzies and
Lake Darlot. —Loeal Tehyram,
Now hid is the screed that we lief would road
And the tale we would fain discern hid.
There’s a life the less, and yet none shall guess—
Be he simple who reads or learned—
His race or his name, or whence he came,
Or whither the dead man journeyed.
For the crumbling dust holds fast its trust,
Death’s ear is a dull and cold ear.*
Away on its course goes the victor force ;
What matters one unknown soldier .’
And whether he died at the Christmas tide
Or passed to his rest with the old year.
Never tears were shed at that lone deathbed,
There was never a priest to pray there.
’Tis a blighted spot, whither help came not,
Nor hope to the man that lay there —
Whether suns rode high in the flaming sky
Or pitiless stars held sway there.
Was he bound in mind for the last new find,
Where some treacherous beacon beckoned
Had ho counted the cost for a reckoning lost,
The price for a point mis-reckoned ?
Came, madness first from that hellish thirst,
And terrorless death but second ?
* Can honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery s*othe the dull, cold ear of death?— Gray's Elegy


ROOM FOR THE LEPER.
Are there hearts that ache for the dead man’s sake,
Nor fathom his silence truly ?
Of old or of young were there hands he wrung
Or a home that he left but newly,
For the desert wold and the guarded gold
A lid a death on the outmost Thule ?
Then cover his bones with a cairn of stones,
So his spirit shall hold you blameless.
For Sandy Creek hath no tongue to speak,
And dumb are the skies and shameless.
Nor aught we know of the dead below
Save only the dead was nameless.
for tfie Tsepcr,
Way for the march of the alien bands
That flock to our shores from Asian lauds !
Yellow or olive or brown or black—
What does it matter ? Way I Stand back !
They are all our brothers, the preachers say :
They ask not welcome, but only way.
Down the Eastern coast they have swarmed and pressed,
Shall we bar their rush to the waking West ?
From stately Brisbane to struggling Broome,
Way for the alien !
Room, make room I
Up the scrub-fringed track, through the lone sand-plains,
Forward and back go the camel trains.
Backwards and forwards, and to and fro,
Beside their camels the Pathans go.
While the teamster waits for his looked-for load
And the horse is edged from the goldfields road.


Uoom for the! i.EPF.n.
Does the slave of the Koran pause to think
Fre he sullies the pool where the white men drink ?
Is the hcast less precious without the groom ?
Way for the Pathan !
Room, make room !
Way for the plodding and thrifty Chow,
With the small slant eyes and the child-like brow !
Though he brings cheap labor and nameless sin,
Stand from the portals and let him in.
There’s a dazzling gloss on the shirts he scrubs.
And who waits so well at the Fat Man’s clubs ?
In peace let him toil, for be comes in peace,
And wide is the land of the Golden Fleece.
What barm though he reek with the opium fume .’
Way for the Mongol !
Room, make room I
Ho ! toiler and craftsman and artisan,
Make way for the rush of the small brown man !
Can ye stem the force of the tides that flow
From Yokohama and Tokio ?
From day to day they arc trickling south,
To snatch the bread from the white man’s mouth.
They wait but a treaty, these -Japanese,
To come in their thousands, not twos and threes.
Let our statesmen sign it (and court their doom).
Way for the brown man 1
Room, make room !
Must we borrow a horde from Malayan lands
For sailors and shearers and station hands ?
M ust the Syrian hawker stalk hither and hence
In the guise of a turbaned pestilence ?
Is Demos monarch in naught but name
That men gaze unmoved on so foul a shame,
That we open the ports of our land so wide
For the inward swirl of the fo-tid tide ?
Through the land where the wattle-blossoms bloom,
Way for the leper !
Room, make room !


What's ix a Same ?
in a flame?
“ Bergrath gchmeiseer, the celebrated mining authority, commi«sioned by
the Berlin Government to report upon Goolgardie and the Murchison, is said
to command a professional fee of no less than four figures for a report on a
single property J.uudou Truth.
Oli, prophet of the world-wide fame,
From far Germania’s dime.
I wish you'd brought an easier name
To suit my artless rhyme.
You’re, welcome, friend, as flowers in spring.
Or rum-and-milk in winter,
But words like these are hard to sing—
And harder for the printer.
There's many a man who writes reports
Signed “ Mining Engineer,”
And talks a lot of sampling quart/.,
While sampling quarts—of hcer.
But such small fry compare with yon
Like derringers with cannons—
Come, tell ns what yon think of Cue,
And what yon thought of Hannan’s ?
O'er many a camp your fame is heard.
Through many a golden land :
With hated breath they quote your word
Along the hustling Hand.
You’ve learned your craft in all its Hues
By prairie, veldt, and college.
And what yon haven't learned of mines
Is—something less than knowledge !
Then let the earthen pots give room,
]STor risk a fatal hump :
They say your smile can cause a boom,
Your frown produce a slump !
And just a simple hint from you
That claims arc looking poorly
Would pulverize our gold-tipped Cue
And double-damn Kalgoorlie.


RECRIMINATION ANlt REQUIEM.
Likewise—a harder way to reach
The ladder’s topmost rung—
You know 7 that there are times for speech
And times to hold your tongue.
When freely flows the sparkling “ chain,”
And dust-parched throats grow moister,
You’re reticent as any clam.
And dumb as any oyster !
’Tis said for one report, forsooth,
You charge a thousand ! Whew !
But though I read that tale in Truth
I’m not so sure it’s true.
’Tis hard to think such wealth exists,
They tell such tales, these miners ;
'Tis hard, that is, for journalists
And needy penny-a-liners.
You don’t require to spread your fame
(Like some) with blow and bounce :
I only wish that hallowed name
Was easier to pronounce.
I’d do your work for less, although
I couldn’t do it nicer.
But then I’m nobody, I know,
And you are —Bergrath Schmeisser.
J^eoriminafion —ancj Requiem.
[December, 1895.]
H. W. Venn ( loquitur ) :
Our P.M.G. lias got his lines
Into a hopeless mess,
There’s growling over all the mines
And grumbling in the Press.
I'm paid to boss the railway cars,
Yon take my word for that—
Why doesn’t Shell cut out the pars
And paste them in his hat ?


RECRIMINATION AND REQUIEM.
That mails go wrong is nought to me,
I’m not concerned with wire,
They’ve never burnt my effigy
And set a street on lire !
Complaints grew shriller every day,
Like doh — ra—me — -fa — sol!
I merely give a shrug and say
It isn’t me—it’s Sholl !
11. A. Sholl ( loquitur ) :
The comments that these papers print
Are getting extra warm ;
Indeed the bolder seem to hint
There soon will be a storm.
I know that journalists must live,
And geese are bound to clack,
But still I think the boss should give
That muddler Venn the sack !
I never knew employes found
Their troubles to annoy :
I thought their days were one long round
Of undiluted joy.
It’s hard to be misunderstood
By all one’s fellow-men,
But slanging me will do no good.
It isn’t me—it’s Venn.
[The opinion of the public on the matter may be extracted
following inscription found in a Perth cemetery, circ. 1920,]
R. I. P.
Pause, traveller, where the cypress shade
Wards off the beams of Sol :
Beneath this tombstone Venn is laid,
That marks the bones of Sholl!
The fame they earned can never fade,
Nor needs the help of verse :
Whatever blunders either made
The other capped with worse.


ALONG THE OUEF.NOUGH FLATS.
Unspeakable as turbaned Turks,
To paint them history fails
One tried to run the Public Works,
The other botched the mails.
Which bungled worse no mortal knows,
It still remains iu doubt,
Because a goaded country rose
And roughly fired them out.
In many a humbler sphere of life
Where honest duluess thrives,
They might have led, remote from strife.
Most estimable lives :
And, rich in honors and rewards.
Have slept beneath the grass,
Regretted by the local boards
Of Bunbury or Vasse.
Then drop a tear above their dust,
And ponder o’er the fate
That greatness on them cruelly thrust,
Yet could not make them—great.
But Lord preserve a State called free
From more such public men
As R. A. Sholl, ex-P.M.G.,
And Harry Whittall Venn !
®)\fong tfie S[reenoagft ©JPaC/v
I loathe the city’s brazen lungs,
The crowded struggling street,
The endless hum of clattering tongues,
The din of bustling feet ;
The football follower’s frenzied joy,
The songs of amorous cats ;
But no such things as these annoy
Along the Greenough Flats.


ALONG THE GUEENOUGH FLATS.
The townsman racks his restless brains
Till fame or wealth arrives ;
The digger plods through scorching plains
Or gropes in darkened drives.
Dreams come to break the squatter’s rest
Of tick-infested “ fats.”
Give me the cocky’s humble nest
Along the Greenongh Flats.
Peace ushers in the breathless morn,
And peace the sighing eves ;
The springtime brings the waving corn,
The summer hinds the sheaves.
Our niggard earth is spread for utiles
With wealth of verdant mats.
And universal nature smiles
Along the Greenongh Flats.
No newsboy whoops his strident call,
No Army bangs its drums,
And, what perhaps is best of all,
No mining expert comes.
Folk from the world without are few.
Witli one exception—that’s
When honeymooners hill and coo
Along the Greenongh Flats.
While cities wrapped in sleep remain
The cockles gird their loins ;
They build their hopes on golden grain.
And not in golden coins.
With deep contentment in their hearts
(And wikiflowers in their hats),
They plough their fields and drive their carts
Along the Greenongh Flats.
No agitators scream till hoarse
For richer people's blood :
Few things disturb life’s placid course.
Save now and then a flood.
Oh. come where strife and bickering cease,
Fate’s blows and discord’s pats,
To roam in blest bucolic peace
Along the Greenongh Flats.


SUBSET AND MOONSHINE.
anc| Moon&ftine.
The lengthening shade far talleth,
The last of the sunset flies ;
The calm of the even enthralleth,
The din of the daytime dies.
Cloud pinnacles blaze, imprinted
With the gold that the dead sun minted :
Cloud castles hang, purple-tinted,
Low down in the western skies.
On the waste of the sand dunes niggard
That border the great gray plain
Shines a heaven transformed, transfigured
With the wealth of her rainbow stains.
There are tints beyond painters’ brushes
In the colour that flames and flushes,
And fades in the nightfall’s hushes
Till only the night remains.
Then the black of the east is broken
By the gleam of a silver comb,
That severs the shades in token
Of light for a lightless dome ;
Till the sheen of the soft moon tinges
The hills where the lean scrub cringes,
The shores that the ocean fringes
With eddying bights of foam.
Shores barren and bare and bitter
In the blaze of your noonday heat,
Ye are changed when the moonbeams glitter,
When the night and the stillness meet,
To gaze with a longing tender
On the need of the land and lend her
A mantle of silver splendour
To fashion around her feet,


WANTED AT PERTH,
©yv'cmfec} at
[August, 1897.]
Come back, John! It makes a man wonder
To think of the sights you have seen,
And how did they treat yon “ down under ?"
And what did you think of the Queen ?
Well, the cables have told us about you,
With the rest of the salt of the earth;
But, old man, we’ve been lonely without you,
And you’re terribly wanted at Perth.
Brother Alec declares that it’s splendid,
The way Witt’noom’s been running the realm,
But the line weather’s just about ended,
And it’s time you were back at the holm.
Some of these brand-new members are beauties,
And they’re scheming for all they are worth,
To make ducks and drakes of “ the duties ”
And raise dreadful ructions at Perth.
They’ve been saying sharp things in the papers
Of the games that the Law has been at,
And the men who doom prison escapers
To a dose of the barbarous “ cat.”
High time you were back, John, to hear it,
And to blush for the land of your birth,
And your colleagues who keep up the spirit
Of the “ Swan River system” at Perth.
There’s that Water Scheme, John, you munt drop it,
For the country won’t stand it, old man.
There’s a rumour afloat—you must stop it
In quick time, or nobody can—
That our Treasury cashbox sounds hollow,
That of Government funds there’s a dearth;
All this smoke means a flare-up to follow,
And that’s why you’re wanted in Perth.


ALEC’S GOVE WITH SAMPLES.
Do you ever think, John, with contrition,
When you’re pacing the hurricane deck,
Of those pledges on mine law revision
That yon made them at home “ through your neck ?”
Are there things that you wish you’d left undone
When you ponder at night in yonr berth ?
Ah, promise is one thing—in Loudon,
Performance another—at Perth.
Come hack from the land where they pamper
Their guests with rich Mansion House cheer :
Come hack to our tinned dog and damper,
Corned heef and colonial beer I
May your shadow, John, never diminish,
lint grow with your years and your girth :
And—take my last tip as 1 finish—
Von are wanted d d badly at Perth.
Sjoae coitfi. Jgampfe/,
[March, 1896.]
With apologies to the author of “Andy’s Gone with Cattle."
Our Alec’s gone to work the strings
With Bull, the speculator :
Our Alec’s gone with mines and things
Across the far Equator.
He’s left his mates to stand at hay
With perils round them looming.
There's hell to pay in W.A.
Since Alec went a-hoomiug.
The blindly-groping Forrest crowd
In sore dejection limps on
(There's none to barrack for them loud
’Gainst Illingworth and Simpson).


ASSEMBLY.
Oh, who will give cold shoulder now
To every civic snarler ?
Perth tongues are growing bolder now
Since Alec left his “ parlour.”
The country’s in commotion now.
Gods tremble in their temples,
For far across the ocean now
Our Alec’s gone with samples.
Big brother John is sunk in woe.
Poor Shell’s a shingle shorter.
And all Venn’s cake has turned to dough
Since Alec crossed the water.
Oh, may vast hauls reward his net
Beyond the wildest rumor !
And flocks of plutocrats beset
The pathway of the boomer.
May heaven send us golden rain,
British and Yank and Gallic I
And when the Session comes again
God grant ’twill bring us Alec.
A’s the Assembly, alive and alert :
B’s the bigwig of the barristers, Burt ;
Connolly and Connor come next in the band,
Called from the uttermost ends of the land.
I) is for Doherty, the partner of Con. :
E stands for Ewing, elect of the Swan ;
F for the Forrests—Duke A. and King John.
G is for Gregory and George, and. Great Heaven
H has a following of senators seven—
Holmes, Hubble, Higham—Forrestians all—
Harper and Hooley and Hassell and Hall,


THE I.ASI) WE LEFT BEHIND.
I is for Illingworth—high are his aims ;
.1 is juristical juvenile .lames.
K is for Kenny and Kingsmill, a brace
Kindred electorates have sent to their place.
L is for Leake, erstwhile leader of trots,
Likewise the letter for Locke and Lefroy.
M is for Moran, of Monger the foe ;
Mitchell and Morgans all mining men know.
N is a letter which one one denotes ;
O is for Oldham and old Captain Oates.
P is for Phillips and Piesse or Pi-csse;
Pronunciation beats me, I confess :
P’s Pennefather as well (and the Press).
Q is for Quinlan, of little account ;
R is tor Kason, the Man of the Mount.
T is for Throssell, so anxious to please ;
I' might be Ewing, but he’s in the E’s.
Y stands for two vastly varying men,
Versatile Yosper and victimised Venn.
W is Wallace, who’s well understood
Way hack at Yalgo, and Wilson and Wood.
X are Cross benches so many that seat.
Y-Z are useless. The tale is complete.
Tsanc} cue l3ej?t Sicft'mcj.
C&lum non animum mutant , qui tram mare currant . —HORACE,
They change the sky above them
But not their hearts who roam.—KIPLING.
The east grows gray for Christmas day
O’er plains athirst with drouth ;
Dawn clips and mars the flickering stars,
The Cross swings low to south.
We’ve drunk the land wherein we live,
We’ve drunk the tiovS that bind.
I have another toast to give—
The land we left behind.


THE LAND WK LEFT BEHIND.
Thu skyline sees a crimson change,
The morn comes bright and bold
To tip the roof of Moresby’s Range
With slanting beams of gold.
By noon our summer sun shall smite,
Our whirling dust-storms blind,
While sleeps, still wrapped in stormy night,
Ttie land wo left behind.
Far off, mayhap, the snow-cloud lowers
O’er English lanes and dells,
Or wraps in white the ivied towers
That house the pealing bells.
Far off, enwrapped in storm and frost.
Banked fog or piercing wind,
How oft it holds the hopes we lost—
The land we left behind !
South, east, and w r est long since we pressed
We left such scenes as these
To tread the strands of distant lands,
To burst through silent seas.
Yet sometimes memory strikes a chord
That racks the exile’s mind,
And longing thoughts turn back toward
The land we left behind.
I see the moor, the mead, the marsh,
The linos of leafless trees,
The headlands standing sheer and harsh
To mock the angry seas :
The copses shod with fern and moss,
The very brooks that wind,
Rain-fed and willow-fringed, across
The land we left behind.
The mid-day sun that blinds our gaze
Looms faint and cold and gray
Behind the banks of blue-black haze
Ten thousand miles awav.


A JIODEItX ELIJAH.
Though fame or gold new homes may hold.
Not ours. God wot, to find
New lauds to pay us for the old—
The laud we left behind.
Speaking with reference to the resignation of the Attorney-General, Sir
John Forrest observed that the last member of his original Ministry had now-
left him, and he might say, in the words of Elijah of old, “ X, only I, am left,
and they seek my life to take it away."
Seven years ago .1. Forrest and Co.
Took hold of the Government strings.
There were live, all told, in the push, you know,
To draw the pay and to run the show
And several similar things :
I was quart-pot king of that tight little ring
And the rest wen 1 pannikin kings.
A K.CAI.G. and a sworn P.C.,
I've served my seven years’ term.
But there’s never a one that’s left hut me
Of the old original firm.
In the words of the prophet of old, I say
(For my Bible I never forget).
They seek my life to take it away”—
But they haven't got rid of me yet.
Sing hey, sing ho, for .I.F. and Co. !
There were five in my first string hand ;
There was Shentou G. as the M.L.C.
To mould tlic Council to my decree,
While Marmion managed the laud :
And Burt and Venn were the other two men
Who pulled in that four-in-haud.


A VfOnKKX ICI.UAH.
Sir George, as yon know, was the first to go,
Promotion for him was a cert,
The next one was Alarmion to give me the slip
(He's gone, since then, on a longer (rip).
And Venn was a little too free with his lip.
So out went Venn—in his shirt.
How I’ve wrung the hand of the last of the hand.
And hidden good-Bye to Burt.
Where are the four that I ruled of yore.
1 that am despot deft !
Scattered and strayed are that old Brigade
I, only I. am left.
Still on the throne I have made my own.
Playing my hand for the most alone,
Foot on the necks of men :
Careless of what they think or say,
Who seek my life to take it away,
As they sought in the prophet Elijah's day
(See Ist Kings, xix., 10).
In Shenton's place I put for a space
One Parker, a glib Q.C.,
But things got darker for Stephen Parker
When he turned aside in his stiff-necked pride
To wrestle a fall with me :
For he dropped down straight from his high estate
Like a shot-riddled Bronzewing pigeon—
Poor Parker! he hasn't got up again yet.
His eake is dough and his star has set,
And Richardson’s loss wasn't much to regret
When Richardson found religion.
Junior partners come and go
Out of the firm of Forrest and Co.—
What odds does it make to the Boss of the show
What sold of place they find it ?
I've only to shuffle the cards in my fist.
Or give my kaleidoscope a twist,
And the same old comet comes out of the mist
With a different tail Behind it.


WHEN HICKV HAYNES GETS BOLDER.
Seven fat years have I held the post,
Collared the boodle and ruled the roast.
Sat on my perch and made my boast
That no one could knock me oft' it.
They may seek my life to take it away.
But Providence watches o’er Forrest, J.,
In the same identical vigilant way
That Providence watched, in Jezebel’s day,
The life of Elijah the Prophet!
©y/fien JfayneA EJctA S^ofeler.
“ 1 am still new to political life, but J trust that as I grow older I shall
gr»w bolder.”— Hob. R. S. Haynes.
Older, perhaps, and yet more old :
But—bolder ! Can he ? Will he ?
Then let us gild retorted gold,
And daub with white the lily.
E'en now he makes the judges blench
By straight blows from the shoulder—
The Lord have mercy on the Bench
When Picky Haynes gets bolder !
Perhaps hcTl follow throats with force
To work his little wishes,
And knock John Forrest off his horse
To get our loaves and fishes.
And in that decorous Council where
Old fossils blink and moulder—
Great Scott ! They’ll have to arm the chair
When Dicky Haynes gets bolder.
<Ke ®y/oufel Rot SSriiiuC.
He would not drink with me. And that though I
Signed softly to him as he drifted by,
Waving my hand toward the vaulted liar
Wherein the ministering angels are—
Beer and Belinda, Thalia and three-star.


THJS CAPTAIN WHO WANTEB A BHAVK.
A«d where long glasses musically clink—
Me would not drink
He would not drink with me. Though from on high
A summer sun blazed from a burnished sky,
Though suffocating dust storms whirled and beat
Along the tumult of the dusty street,
And the fierce flagstones thrilled and throbbed
heat—
Not though I strove his arm through mine to link
He would not drink !
He would not drink with me. And then, when I,
Half-hurt, half-wondering, said simply, “Why?"
He turned, his honest eyes all blurred with mist,
He turned, and in a choking whisper hissed
Something about the Prohibition List.
So, after all, it was as well, 1 think.
He would not drink.
fiffie ©apfaln coßo <§fy/anfeil a
[March, 1898.]
Where tlie billows melodiously roar
By the sands of the Fremantle shore,
Lay a vessel last week
Badly wanting pratique,
And a skipper who grumbled and swore.
A message he sent o’er the wave,
“ One boon, Dr. Lovegrove, I crave—
Let my gig put me down
For an hour in the town,
For I’m badly in need of a shave.


THK CAPTAIN WHO WASTED A SHAYK.
We’ve had smallpox aboard, it is true,
But no need for this monstrous ado.
We’re in quarantine, hut
I should like my hair cut,
And I really must have a shampoo.
The Doctor wrote courteously hack,
“ Such permission would cost me the sack,
While the yellow flag's fast
To the top of your mast,
And your passengers curse on Carnap.
if you’ll only just wait for one day
I'll he happy to give you your way;
We don’t want the smallpox
In our workshops and docks—
Go on further—to Champion Bay.
If there's any ill-feeling displayed,
I’ll explain 'twas the interests of trade
That made me cut short
Quarantine at that port,
And 1 don’t think they need he afraid.
.V strong piece of clothes-line or cord
Will ample protection afford,
If they fasten the gear
To the side of the pier
To keep venturesome microbes aboard.”
When Pitts took this document in,
He steamed away north with a grin,
And the very next day
His ship berthed in the Bay,
And a barber was lathering his chin.
But, resentfully, Geraldton cits
Waxed wroth and collected their wits
To inflict a hard shock
On the Fremantle Doe.
And teach a sharp lesson to Pitts.


THE RIOT WHERE XO OXE WAR HURT.
And the drift of the words that they spoke,
On the law that the lawmaker broke,
May come as a “ slap”
To the Doc. and the Cap.
Who regard quarantine as a joke.
Ufte cohere Ro cocnS (Hurt.
[April, 1808.]
They have riots, I know, in the land of the spud.
Which are not unattended with spilling of Mood,
As the blackthorn encounters the constable’s crown
And the stalwart policemen like ninepins go down.
When the amiable Hindoo is ripe for the fray
There are nice little shindies in peaceful Bombay.
Things get lively, at times, in Hyde Park and the Strand,
When the suffering Socialist gets “ out of hand.”
But —except in Westralia—'tis safe to assert
Thera was never a riot—where no one was hurt.
What a blood-curdling story they pitched ns last week
Of a tumult colossal, Homeric, unique !
Of a crowd of wild diggers, some ten thousand strong.
Who hustled and chevied a Premier along:
Of ear* that were deafened by salvoes of groans,
Of lives that wore threatened by bludgeons and stones !
Vou’d have thought from the published reports of the fray
Bed Hell had broke loose in Kalgoorlie that day,
And that scores had been trampled to death in tli« dirt
In that terrible riot—where no one was hurt.
Every Tom, Dick, and Harry uprose in his ire
(At least all who'd a shilling to spend on a wire).
And swift to .1. Forrest their messages How,
“ My God, we are proud of such heroes as you.”
There was steady consumption of whiskies and beers,
As they proffered him cannons and raw volunteers.


VX MKMOBIAM.
And swore (though the offer was just a bit late)
To give up their lives for the Law and the State :
And condemned, in expressions incisive and curt.
That throne-shaking riot—where no one was hurt.
Where the roofs of Kalgonrlie gleam bright o'er the plain,
They are carefully checking the lists of the slain.
There’s a square yard of glass come to grief in the shops,
And five buttons the less among seventeen cops.
There’s a lame dog who met with a happy release;
There's a bellman in quod for a breach of the peace.
There’s a couple of crestfallen pressmen, for both
Know they’ll never again be believed upon oath.
And Sir John 1 Yes, his hat and one cuff of his ?birt
Got crushed in the riot—where no one was hurt.
dlq Memoriam.
WILLIAM EWART
GLADSTONE
Born December 29, 1809. Diets Mat 19, 1898,
Mourn. Britain, mourn ! and veil thy stately h«ftd,
And still thy people’s voice, and stay their tread—
’Tis meet. The greatest of thy sons is dead.
(durs are thy glories, ours to share thy gloom—
Did we not watch without that darkened room ?
We claim our place beside the Tribune's tomb.
Dead. And a nation’s tears unhidden spring.
Net those the barren tributes courtiers bring,
To mark the death of conqueror or king.
Stronger his fame than Tyrant Death is strong,
Who lavished gifts so rare, and life so long.
T® help the feehle and to right the wrong.


W MBHORIAM.
Hushed is the clarion voice men knew so well,
That rose in bold demand, or pleading fell.
To sway a listening senate to ite spell.
At rest the heart that beat, the mind that wrought.
For men—his brothers. Little else he sought.
Lay the great Leader down, his good fight fought.
Lulled at his grave be faction’s hiss and hate,
A truce to party fend. He served the State:
His greatness went to make his aountty great.
Foe to injustice, friend of the oppressed.
Lay him with Britain's kero-dead to rest.
Where words are vai». the simplest words are best.


FRINTE® AT THE (e EXPRESS ’’ OFFICE, OERAL^TON’.
