

fern 'Pftm i-
Kc tacitsue
H’irA.o
Box 4
VICTORIAN PULrxi.
BY THE REV. ALEXANDER MORISON,
AT THE COLLINS STREET CHAPEL, MELBOURNE.
Psalm cx. 3.
Tht people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauty of Holi-
ness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth;
The work of humiliation is past! the sufferings of Him, who was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
had terminated in that agonizing, but triumphant cry, “It is
finished!” The degradation of the grave was the last step of
descent: and now, in this prophetical psalm, bursts upon our ears
the coronation strain, “ The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at
my right hand until I make thy enemies thy footstool.” Jesus
ascends the throne of the universe; the sceptre is put into his
hand; and his sway is felt and acknowledged even by his adver-
saries. The subjects of his kingdom are described in this third
verse, which we propose to take in the simple order of the words
themselves, and attend to the rich suggestions they contain.
I. “ Thy people.”
1. They are his by gift, by the donation of the Father. Such
is the declaration of our Lord, “No man can come to me, except
the Father which hath sent me draw him.” “ I pray for them
which thou hast given me; for they are thine, and all mine are
thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. Those that
thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost.” “ This is
the Father’s will, that of all which he hath given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.” Now


this is a matter of Christian experience. We may find a diffi-
culty in reconciling such an attraction with our speculative notions
of human liberty. It would appear as if the two diametrically
crossed each other, and that the gift of our persons by the Father
to the Son, by the resistless influence exercised over our nature,
must interrupt wholly the freedom of our action. But when we
leave the region of speculation, and descend to the simple observ-
ance of the fact, it is found that the gift of the Father has become
an actual free-will offering on the part of the subjects of Christ’s
kingdom. Every child of God is conscious that a powerful re-
luctance, and strong opposition to the reign of Christ in his heart,
has been marvellously subdued, and that in defiance of all his
prepossessions—his mind, will, feelings —he has really been drawn
into the condition of a subject of King Jesus; and that, too, con-
tradictory as it may seem, by his own full consent and most ardent
desire.
2. They are his by purchase.
When the Redeemer came into the world, he did not come on a
peradventure as to the result; he came to perform a great work,
and it was equitable that he should “ see of the travail of his
and he satisfied .” He came to lay down a price, and it was but
just that an equivalent should be returned. Therefore he loved
the Church (which is his kingdom and fulness), and gave himself
for it. The Corinthians are reminded of this by St. Paul, “Ye
are not your own, for ye are bought with a price; therefore
glorify God in your body, and your spirits, which are God’s.’’
The obligations founded in creative power, and in the tender
watchfulness of a ceaseless Providence, that crowns individual
life with loving kindnesses, are not urged, but only redemption
price, which, beyond all controversy, settles the question of pro-
perty in their persons. Again, the same apostle says, “He gave
himself for us that he might redeem (purchase) us from all ini-
quity, and purify us unto himself a peculiar people.” We need
not, at present, enter into refined inquiries, as, “ From whom was
this purchase made ?” “To whom was this price given ?” The
language is tropical, but beautifully appropriate. As to God,
there is a violated law, and Christ redeems us from the curse of


the law in being made a curse for us. As to other forms of
antagonistic powers, Christ redeemed us from the thraldom of
Satan, and the wretched slavery of sin, by destroying the work of
the Devil, and by being made a sin-offering for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore,
3. We are his by power.
Between the king and his people there must be a close resem-
blance. The unity of his kingdom is founded in this likeness :
u Beloved now are the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be; but when he shall appear we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is.” “If any man, therefore, be in
Christ, he is a new creature : old things are passed away, behold
all things have become new.” There is an almightiness of power
from Christ exerted in the nature of each subject of his kingdom
to produce this image of himself; and it is because of this re-creat-
ing energy that they are said to be his people. He has declared
the impossibility of any one being a member of his kingdom
unless this power has produced the essential change. “ Verily,
verily, I say unto you, except ye are born again ye cannot enter
into the kingdom of God —and so far from entering, they can-
not even see that kingdom.
11. Thy people should be willing.
We shall best illustrate this idea by its contrary. The public
papers tell us of the condition of affairs in France. The Emperor
of the French is in a most unenviable position, for his people are
not willing. The country is withheld from revolt and anarchy
only by terror and the force of arms. Liberty is stifled, and the
rights of the public are trodden down to a great extent. Plots of
assassination aim at the life of the poor monarch; and the com-
plete subversion of the government would perhaps be hailed gladly
by the majority of all classes. The same may be said of almost
all the continental nations. How different is the state of the
kingdom of Christ! his people are willing.
1. There is most earnest attachment to the person of the
Sovereign.
Love to Christ—not to a system of truths, not to a spiritual or


moral abstraction—but to a person, even Jesus, is of the deepest,
fondest, most enthusiastic nature. “ Whom,’’ says the apostle,
“ not having seen ye love; in whom, while yet ye see him not,
but believe, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”
Loyalty to Jesus burns bright in the bosoms of his servants. It
is the all constraining, all absorbing passion of their being. They
glory in their King ; they risk and sacrifice objects the most
endeared, and valued, and cherished —wife, children, and even
life—to maintain and assert his honour. He is the centre and
circumference of their delights. They exult in his beauty, his
glory, his grace. Words cannot describe the energy, the intensity
that lives in the sentiment, whose simple expression is “ Thou
knowest that I love thee.”
2. Christ’s people are willing, for they love the constitution
and laws of his Kingdom.
As British subjects we have a loyal attachment to the person ot
our Queen; yet, perhaps, the laws of the realm we may feel to be
burdensome, and discover flaws and blemishes in the British Con-
stitution. It may consist with our loyalty to the sovereign to
endeavour strenuously to have such laws annulled, and to procure
changes in the constitution, but it equally proves that we are not
willing. The citizen of Zion has no such feeling, is actuated by
no such discontent. The strong affection cherished to the Great
King descends and spreads itself over all that pertains to his
Kingdom. His views are expressed thus, “Oh ! how I love thy
law : it is daily my delight.” “ I regard thy commandments con-
cerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way.” He
has respect to all the King’s statutes, and esteems his words more
than his necessary food. They are his meditations day and night.
He wants no alteration, no amendment. The most absolute
acquiescence and complacency is felt in all the arrangements and
provisions of this government.
3. They are willing, since they approve of the discipline even of
the kingdom.
A criminal at an earthly tribunal hates the law by which he has
been coerced; spurns at, and reclaims against the penalty it in-
flicts j and will justify himself, however guilty, to the dishonour


of that law, and the attempted exposure of the iniquitous cruelty
of its punishments. He is not willing. In the Kingdom of Christ
there are also pains and penalties. The sceptre of the King of
Righteousness is often an iron rod that strikes deep into the flesh
of his disobedient subjects. Their hearts, not unfrequently, are
pierced through with a sword. Their soul is in bitterness and
grief. Their words are, “ I am consumed by the blow of thine
hand. When thou, with rebukes, dost correct man for iniquity,
thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth.” Their
period is one of darkness, wherein is no light; of sorrow, which
appears unsolaced; of mourning and wailingly seeking the light
of their Sovereign’s countenance, and find that darkness and
clouds cover the face of his throne. Yet they accuse not him,
theirs is self accusation. In the heaviest stroke, when the very soul
is cleft, they know that a hand of infinite love has brought it down.
The severest trials and afflictions they feel to be infinitely short of
the demerit of their sin 5 and are assured that he does not willingly
afflict or grieve the children of men. They are so entirely willing,
in these untoward circumstances, that they would almost not
have it otherwise; and as wave after wave passes over their heads,
and wound upon wound enters their soul, they look up joyful and
confident, and say “ Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
111. In the day of thy power.
This relates to the in-gathering- of the people, and the origina-
tion of the genial temper and disposition of willingness just de-
scribed.
We often look to the instrumentality employed, and expect
effects to which it is quite inadequate. We also look at the mate-
rial operated on, and are surprised to discover how unimpressible
it is. Ministers go forth as the ambassadors of Christ to proclaim
the news of salvation, and to gather in the peculiar people. They
speak in the wordsjof impassioned eloquence, and with the autho-
rity of their Lord. discourses are the productions of
vigorous intellect, invested jn the beauties of a refined imagination.
But who believes their report ? and to whom, by them, is the arm
of the Lord revealed ( To none, apparently none ! This is the


day of their power. Then there are, on the part of the hearers,
the powers of the understanding, the capacity of weighing- evi-
dence, the instinctive sensibility to the influence of urgent motives,
the thirst for happiness ; and rest of soul in such certainties as the
Gospel offers, its healing balm for the sin-wounded conscience, and
the glorious aspirations of its blessed hopes. How, then, are these
powers, instincts, and desires, dormant under the sound of joyful
news, and of unutterable bliss ? This is the day of their power; and
it is nothing worth. On the other hand we often witness results to
which the instrumentality was apparently altogether insufficient;
and produced in circumstances wholly unfavourable ; and wonder-
ingly ask, how is this? What, for instance, was there in St.
Peter’s simple sermon on the day of Pentecost to occasion the con-
version of three thousand souls ? We read a sermon of White-
field, and inquire what on earth is there in these bald statements
to produce the mighty changes he witnessed ? We peruse the
calm, unimpassioned, stern logic of Jonathan Edwards’ sermon on
Justification, and exclaim, how could this have proved the occa-
sion of those marvellous revivals, which, from that day, and on-
ward, have characterized the history of religion in New England?
The answer is “ the day of thy power.” The whirlwind and the
earthquake do not move the prophet in the Cave of Horeb ; but,
when the still small voice is heard, he comes forth to its mouth.
Not by might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the living
God. When that power is present, the stammering’lips of the
most incompetent preacher carry a divine eloquence to the heart.
When that power is present, then the hearts of the cultivated and
untutored are alike opened to attend to the things spoken. The
day of power is a day of ingathering, and multitudes of souls are
daily added to the church, of those who are saved, by such agents
as prove that the power is of God alone.
The same may be observed of the Gospel itself, the grand in-
strument of divine power. Behold what transformation it pro-
duces. The infuriated madman, brought by his word to sit at the
feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind, is the type of its effi-
cacy. What in man is dark it illumines ; what is low, it raises
and supports; to the base it gives the spirit of nobility j to the
impure, holiness; to the rebellious, loyalty ; and to the malicious,
love. Yet to the Greek it is foolishness, to the Jew a stumbling-
block, to the worldly learned it is superstition, and to the sceptical
debasing credulity. Whence, then, its power ? “I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew, and to the
Greek.” By this engrafted word we are born from above. It is
the mould into which our old nature is cast, and from which the
new nature arises, bearing the image and superscription of God ;
and the day when that Gospel comes to the heart, in the demon-
stration of the Spirit, is the day of Christ’s power.


IV. In the beauties of holiness.
The former words are susceptible of another rendering-. u Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy armies.” In this view
the Church of Christ is presented to our contemplation under the
figure in Solomon’s song, u Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an
army with banners ?” The host of Christ with ardour of alacrity,
“ willing,” comes forth to vindicate his honour, and maintain his
cause in the midst of his enemies. This is their costume, u the
beauties of holiness.” They wrestle not with flesh and blood,
but with principalities, with powers, with the rulers of this world’s
darkness, and with spiritual wickedness in high places. There-
fore they take the whole panoply of God. Having put off the
works of darkness, they are clothed with the armour of light.
They are beautified with salvation. Not only have they on the
glorious robe of a Saviour’s righteousness; not only do they stand
justified in the imputed perfection of their Lord, they are also
adorned and fortified by internal holiness. The King’s daughter
is all g'lorious within; that is, the collective church of the re-
deemed, in each individual member, is perfectly renewed in the
spirit of their minds. Each man of God there assembled is wholly
like the God-man in spiritual excellence. Into his kingdom
nothing that is unclean can enter. The brightness of their cha-
racters are beauties, not simply beauty, comprising the whole
range of all possible virtue. They are brilliant orbs, reflecting
every hue and tint of purity and grace. Brilliant orbs we say, for
they are —
V. “ From the womb of the morning.”
The metaphor is full of suggestion; all God’s children are twice
born men, the reality of the Brahmin’s vain boast; and therefore
“ from the womb of the morning,” They are innumerable as the
dew drops, that, in the earliest beams of the sun, glisten on the
forest’s pride, and on the tender grass. They are the results of a
power or influence that works in silence, in darkness, mysteriously.
Whence is the dew ? does it fall from heaven, or is it an exhalation
of earth ? Say both. So by the regenerating influence of the
Holy Ghost, the spirit of the Father, and the Son, operating on
the earth of our nature, a new and a glorious being is produced ;
no longer of the earth, earthy, but divine and heavenly. But that,
which is the morning’s calm birth, is also most refreshing and
most renewing to the earth itself. The rain and the snow come
from heaven that the earth may bud and bear fruit; and so of the
word of God. But in the dew the uninterrupted and invariable
element of renewal is declared. From it, not so much, perhaps,
from rain and snow, the fragrance, as a morning sacrifice and as
an evening incense, ascends to God, and the kindly fruits of the


earth are matured. We are bold to say that whatever is good
and great, pure, noble, and ennobling, pertains to the Church of
Christ, and to that Church alone of all the earth.
VI. Thou hast the dew of thy youth.
As the previous metaphor declares the numberless host and
marvellous production of the people of God, this exhibits their
invincible power. The construction is difficult. Literally it is
“to thee is the dew of thy youths.” The whole verse relates to
the subjects of Christ’s kingdom. In each of these Christ is repro-
duced 5 and the immortal vigour and deathless energy of the King
of Kings dwells also in each soldier of his armies. The freshness
and power of youth, its “ dew,” is the essential distinction of
redeemed life. What we are accustomed to consider as the order
of nature is reversed in this instance ; we grow old as time advances,
the powers of nature decay, soon the head becomes hoary, and the
limbs palsied. But this order of things is exactly reversed in the
regenerated man. As the outer man perishes day by day the
inward man is renewed; as the one grows old and tends to the
grave, the other grows in the freshness of youth. While eternity
rolls on this expansion into youth, still fresher, and newer, and
more powerful will be the experience of the saint, for the kingdom
he inherits is incorruptible, undefiled, and fadeth not away,—peren-
nial in this idea of perpetual and expanding youth. These mate-
rial heavens and the earth shall wax old, and be rolled up as a moth-
eaten garment, and pass away; but the Lord’s years are the same :
and, from the identity between himself and his people, they also are
changeless, except such change as is involved in higher develop-
ment of glorious immortality.
Who, then, is on the Lord’s side ? Which of you are the sub-
jects of Christ’s kingdom ? Perhaps you will say “it is not to me
the day of his power —not the time of the Father’s attraction;”
but remember that shortly after the day of Pentecost, the morning
prime of that power, Stephen had to say to the assembly of his
people, when his face to look upon was as the face of an angel,
“ Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcjsed in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.” Does not
the Father expostulate, the Son beseech, the Spirit sweetly strive ?
Is not the power of the Lord ever present, with his faithfully and
simply declared word, to heal ; and only cursed unbelief prevents
the glorious results ? Oh, who would not long to share these ?
Who would not desire a place amidst the shining ranks of God’s
host! Who would not desire to feel the love of Christ shed abroad
in his heart! To stand arrayed in the beauties of holiness' and
realize immortal youth ! Happy is the man who is in such case !
Yea, happy is he alone whose God is Jehovah Jesus ! Amen.
Goodhugh and Hough, Printers, Flinders Lane, East.
