

AEK.I&IOOS PAhfS.
BOft IO
Being the Rev. A. Paul’s “Chapter of
History,” Criticised and Re-written
nr THE
REV. HUGH LIVINGSTONE,
MINYIP.
Abridged and Revised by direction of the Synod.
“ Jealousy violates contracts, dissolves society, breaks wedlock,
betrays friends and neighbours; nobody is good, and everyone is
either doing or designing them a mischief.”
(Seeking:
E. J. Hall & Sons, Pbintbbs, Rybie Street.
1898.




INTRODUCTORY.
Tn his recent pamphlet, entitled —“Syncleronomy,” (Note 1,) the Rev.
Arthur Paul, of St. Kilda, claims to occupy a position, “on a very much
smaller scale of course,” he reminds us, somewhat similar to that
occupied by his great namesake. To claim this is, he confesses a
humiliation, for which not he, but others, are to blame. In fact, the
pamphlet is a noisy series of complaints of being treated in a very
unworthy manner by those who should have received and treated him
with all the honour due to an apostle. The men selected for special
accusation are three ministers of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, with whom is placed one of the elders of the Geelong
congregation. Why Mr Reid, the elder in question, is so placed is not
very clear; but the three ministers, Messrs McDonald, Sinclair, and
Livingstone, are alleged to be specially guilty of ingratitude, because
Mr Paul had a prominent part in the settlement of each one of them
into their respective charges. But the minister of St. Kilda compares
himself to a higher than an earthly apostle. He says on page Bof his
pamphlet, “As a greater than any ordinary sufferer put it, ‘ For my
love they were my enemies,’” The evident meaning of this is, that
Mr Paul was treated as unworthily by the three ministers and the
elder as our Saviour was treated by His enemies. It is a dreadful
accusation, yet Mr Paul is very much in earnest about it. He takes
credit to himself for having abstained, as he says, “now for ten years,
from putting pen to paper in my own behalf.” And yet he complains
that, with a few exceptions, no one in the Free Church has risen up to
•cry “shame” on the shameless treatment to which he has been
subjected.
Mr Paul knows, as we all know, that the office and position of an
apostle has passed away. Still, there is a sense in which we may use
the word. As Mr Paul has had a prominent place in the past history
of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria; as he took a leading part
in the re-construction of the Synod; and as his age, experience, knowledge
and ability, if not his wisdom, fitted him to take the lead in her
business, he should be the father and the leader of the Synod, and
in that sense our apostle. If Mr Paul is not at present our apostle,
he has no one else than himself to blame.
It is well known that the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria
has had an unhappy but instructive history. For seven years, from
1870 to 1877, she had no supreme court, the Synod in the former year
having been broken up by an internal disturbance. In the latter year


the Synod was re-constituted, and has had an unbroken existence ever
since. Mr Paul was prominent both in the breaking up of the former
Synod, and in the re-construction of the present one. Since 1877, the
history of the Church may be divided into two periods of about 10
years each. Mr Paul’s relation to the Synod during the first period
was very different from the relationship he occupied to the Synod during
the second period. He is, it should be remembered, a member of the
Synod to the present day. But, for the first ten years, after the
re-construction, Mr Paul was clerk of the court, representative with the
Government, editor of the Church’s organ, teacher of the students,
framer of the model deed, and the trusted adviser in every ecclesias-
tical movement. Por the last ten years he has turned his back on the
Synod. According to his own confession on page 10 of his pamphlet,
he has not for the last ten years been seen at one of the Synod
gatherings. Ho reason w r as given for this sudden change of conduct. His
conduct in this matter has been a complete puzzle to the other
members of the Synod. Hot only has he not attended meetings of the
Synod, but also has refused all ecclesiastical fellowship with his
brethren, and even, excepting perhaps Mr. McDonald, of all intercourse
of any kind. Has Mr. Paul any reason to complain of any want of
respect to him, during the first period ? I know of none. Why
should Mr. Paul complain of want of respect to him during the second
period ? When Mr. Paul acted as an apostle and showed the signs of
an apostle, he was treated with the respect due to au apostle; when he
ceased to act as an apostle, his conduct was regarded with the dis-
approval it deserved. It could not be otherwise. This is the
foundation of the difference between Mr. Paul on the one hand and
the Synod on the other, put in a nutshell. But we shall have to go
more into detail.


THE APOSTLE OF ST. KILDA.
Part I.— Mr. Paul’s Abandonment of his Leadership.
Section 1. — Mr. Paul's idea of Apostolic claims.
The pamphlet shews how mistaken Mr Paul is, in the true nature
■of leadership, and in the reasons for according to any member of a
court such a position. He should remember the saying : “ The tools
to him that can handle them.” Presbyterian parity does not involve
a denial of leadership ; but a leader must be fit to lead. Leadership
does not mean that only one mind must think and only one opinion
must prevail. It does not mean that a Synod exists only to register
the decisions of a leader and carry out his ideas. Por a leader to act
as if he expected this is simply to run his head against a stone-wall.
God has not made all minds alike, so that even those who are in
practical agreement on all essential matters, may differ on minor
points. A leader will consider the minds and consciences of others,
and so manage his business that those who may differ from him and
from one another, will yet agree in a common decision. One who
expects his word to be law in everything, who will never give or take
in minor points, is not only incapable of being a permanent leader,
but also of being in orderly association with bis fellow men. Like
Acesius, “ he should set up a ladder and climb up to heaven by him-
self.” If Mr. Paul, remembering this, had exercised the ordinary
wisdom expected in a leader, he might have been our apostle to this
day. As it is, we did not take the position from him. The truth is, he
got crossed in some minor matter, and in a “ huff ” abandoned his
leadership. Why should he now complain, if others, with greater
loyalty to the cause, have stepped into the position, and are to the
best of their ability, carrying on the work ?
Mr. Paul founds his claim to be regarded as an apostle, not on
■qualifications possessed for the position ; but partly on past services
rendered to the Church, and partly on benefits bestowed on three of
the ministers, namely, the three aforenamed, Messrs, McDonald,
Sinclair, and Livingstone. He parades the fact that he had a leading
part in the settlement of these ministers into their present charges.
These ministers, he holds especially guilty of ingratitude in not still
acknowledging his claim to leadership. “ One would think,” he says,
“ that if I were no apostle to others, I might be comparatively of
some account to these gentlemen.” True, Mr. Paul as their leader in the
Synod, took a leading part in the settlement of these ministers (Note 2).
Yet, it is not correct to assume that these charges were ecclesiastical
pocket boroughs in his gift; or that all of the ministers were needy
adventurers that would remain without charges, but for his patronage ;
or that there was some secret agreement that for the price of an


induction, they were to sell him their birthright as Presbyterian
ministers. To concede to him a leadership such as Mr. Paul expects,
because of a connection with their settlements in their charges, would
be as discreditable to him as to them. To concede to him a leader-
ship as rightly due to him, because of suitable qualifications, would be
to do him real honour. That was the honour accorded to Mr. Pant
during the first period of the present Synod’s existence. That honour
he lightly threw away, and now he complains of its loss. He can
only blame his own folly. This should be a sufficient reply to a large
portion of the pamphlet. We need take no further notice of all the
vapouring about what was done for the Church and ministers. No
legitimate claim either to respect or gratitude is denied.
Section 2. —How Tie abandoned his Leadership.
I shall now proceed to give a narrative of certain events belonging
to the history of the Church from May, 1887, until May, 1889, a period
of two years. Some of these events may be afterwards more fully
discussed. In the “Introductory” portion of this reply, I stated
that Mr Paul was clerk of the Synod, representative with the
Government, editor of the Church’s organ, and teacher of the students.
This narrative will show how Mr Paul gave up these offices. It will
show also that during this period, he ceased to attend the meetings of
the Synod.
On the 4th of May, 1887, the Governing Court of the Pree
Presbyterian Church met in annual session at Geelong. Calling me
to one side, Mr Paul informed me of his intention of resigning certain
offices he held, namely the clerkship of the Synod and the office of
representative with the Government. He had a particular favour to ask
me; he wished me not to oppose the acceptance of his resignation.
“I really mean it,” he said, “I am getting an old man, and it is time
some of the younger men went into harness.” My readers may
believe that I was not very willing to be pledged to this. I was not
long in the Church. I was new to its business. However, being urged
by Mr Paul, lat length gave him the desired promise. He then put
the resignation of these two offices before the meeting. As he expected,
the other members of the Synod were very unwilling to accept them,
and pled with Mr Paul to retain them. After a long discussion,
during which Mr Paul promised to give all the assistance possible to
whoever would be appointed to succeed him, it was agreed to do as
he wished. The question now was who should succeed him ? None
of the country ministers could conveniently take and efficiently fulfil
the duties of these offices. The choice of the Synod must fall on the
one other city minister, viz., the minister of Geelong. Mr Sinclair was
naturally unwilling to be saddled with these new duties, but relying on
Mr Paul’s promise, he finally agreed to accept the offices and was
appointed.
The following is the motion recorded in the minutes in the hand-
writing of Mr Paul himself.


“The clerk then intimated his desire to be released from the work of
his office on account of long service, and requested the court to accept of
his resignation and to nominate a successor. Thereafter it was moved by
Mr Livingstone and seconded by Mr Paul and agreed to that the resignation
be accepted ; also that Mr Sinclair be appointed to the vacant clerkship ;
and also that he be representative of this court and church with the
Government in succession to Mr Paul, the resignation of the present clerk
to take effect from the close of the present annual meeting and entry of the
minutes thereof. Further, that a committee consisting of Mr Sinclair and
the Moderator be appointed to draw up a suitable minute in connection
with the said resignation of the clerkship. Also that the change of
representative be intimated to the Government, after the business now in
hand for the titles offices is cleared off.”
Mr Sinclair entered on the duties of the clerkship at the next
meeting of Synod. He did not become representative with the
Government in succession to Mr Paul for two years. In the meantime,
the committee appointed to draw up a suitable minute had a private
conference with the other members of the Synod, at which it was
agreed not only that a suitable minute be drawn up, but also
that a suitable testimonial in the form of a purse of sovereigns
be presented to Mr Paul. Both members of the committee
were eager to start the business, but a misunderstanding occurred as to
who was to take the lead, with the result that each sent subscription
lists throughout the colony to collect money for the purpose. Copies
of these are still in my possession. The one is as follows:
“TESTIMONIAL TO THE REY. A. PAUL.
Subscription List.
At a conference of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, it was
agreed to ask the members of the congregations to contribute towards a
testimonial to the Rev. A. Paul, on the occasion of his retirement from the
clerkship of the Synod, in recognition of his long and faithful services
rendered to the Synod, and to the Free Presbyterian Church generally.”
This was signed, “ W. R. Butteose, Convener.”
The other I received from Mr Sinclair. The object was stated to
be, “ Por the presentation to the Rev. Arthur Paul, of St. Kilda, of
a sum of money, in grateful recognition of his lengthy and valuable
services to the Pree Presbyterian Church of Victoria, as clerk to the
Synod and agent with the Government, &c.” Not only was there a mis-
understanding as to the one to take the lead, but also as to the exact
object of the testimonial. Was it to be for the clerkship only, and
therefore to be presented immediately; or for both the clerkship and
the agentship with the Government, and therefore to be presented
when the second resignation, that of representative, should take effect?
These misunderstandings probably caused some delay. At any rate,
the matter could not be brought to a proper conclusion in a day.
Before it could be brought to a proper conclusion, Mr Paul’s attitude
to the Synod changed, and became such that the carrying out of the
committee’s purpose was a sheer impossibility. I bring this forward
as a clear proof, that in accepting the resignation of Mr. Paul of these
offices, there was no ill-will whatever to him. On the contrary, it was
out of consideration to his wishes, and with the greatest regret that
they consented to the acceptance. There was every desire to do him


honour, and it was never dreamed but that as usual he would be found
in his place in Synod, still as of old, the leader in the business, giving
that advice in every time of difficulty he was so fitted to give. The sun
still shone brightly, but soon there were the mutterings of a storm.
Mr. Paul’s connection with the organ of the Synod was abruptly
terminated before the period we are now dealing with, namely, in
December, 1886. It was his own doing. He suddenly, without
consulting his brethren, stopped the issue of the Presbyter. As financial
difficulties were the reason assigned, nothing in the meantime was done.
His termination of his position as teacher of the students was equally
unsatisfactory. During 1887 one student was receiving instruction
from him. Three months after the resignation of the clerkship, there
was a puzzling neglect of correspondence relative to the work of the
student. A personal interview of Mr. Sinclair deepened the impression
that something was wrong. That was in September, 1887. The student
retired from the work. Mr. Paul has not had a student since.
The next meeting of Synod was held on the 2nd November, 1887.
I was not present. A.t this meeting three petitions were presented
from members and adherents resident at Drysdale, Durham Lead,
and Charlton, praying for steps to be taken to have the sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper dispensed in their midst. Mr. Paul was opposed to
the granting of these requests. The matter was deferred. The next
meeting was held in January, 1888. I was again absent. The matter
of the three petitions came up again. Mr. Paul was still opposed.
Mr. Sinclair intimated he could not agree to vote for their rejection,
but agreed to Mr. Paul’s proposal that the consideration be deferred
until the annual meeting in May, on the plea that there would likely be
a larger attendance. Mr. Paul has never attended a meeting of Synod
since.
The annual meeting of the Synod took place as usual in May.
The consideration of the three petitions was resumed. A.s Mr. Paul
was not present, and as none of us could conscientiously reject the
petitions, the prayer in each case was granted. The arrangements for
Drvsdale were placed in the hands of the Geelong session, and those
for Charlton in the hands of the Wimmera session. For Durham Lead
special arrangements were made. An interim session was appointed
with Mr. Paul himself a member. It has been said that the granting
of these petitions is the real cause of Mr. Paul’s isolation. We have
heard that he has said so to some of his friends. He has never said so
to us. I shall examine this idea afterwards. In the meantime, it may
be seen from our arrangements, we were utterly unconscious of having
given offence.
Mr. Paul’s absence from the annual meeting in May, 1888, was
a cause of great uneasiness to his brethren. He had all along held so
strongly to the duty of each member being present at every meeting
of the Courts, and especially at each annual meeting, or of sending
an ample and sufficient apology, that his absence from the annual
meeting without apology of any kind was significant of something
wrong. The next meeting, no doubt, in the hope of discovering what
was wrong, was appointed at St. Kilda. This, in itself, was not un-


/usual. We had met before in Mr. Paul’s church. I myself
was received into the Pree Presbyterian Church of Victoria, as a
minister, at a meeting held in the Free Presbyterian Church, at
St. Kilda. The appointed meeting took place on November the 21st,
1888. The church door was open, everything was in readiness, but
TVIr. Paul was absent. From the manse, the usual invitation to
dine was received and accepted, a sign of our ignorance of any cause
x)f offence. The inmates of the manse were in profound ignorance as
to Mr, Paul’s whereabouts. We afterwards learned that he had taken
train to Creswick and then walked to Grlendonald, The “ best friend
of the Church ” there, to his credit be it said, was indignant at his
action, and thought he should be severely dealt with. Perhaps it
would have been better for us all if his advice had been followed.
At this meeting, a motion was moved by Mr. Ewen McPherson,
the elder from Murtoa, and carried, that one of the members of the
Court write to Mr. Paul, asking the reason of his absence. I was
chosen to do the duty. It was a duty undertaken reluctantly. I
had some instinctive feeling that Mr. Paul was angry, and I hated to
have to do with an angry man. Mr. McPherson urged his motion on
the Synod, on the plea that if there was anything that had offended
Mr. Paul, a letter was the way to discover what it was and to remove
it. Although, even before this, some signs had been given of an
unfriendly feeling on the part of Mr. Paul to Mr. Sinclair, there was
supposed to be no reason why he should be unfriendly with me; and
therefore I was chosen. The letter I sent was brief, its contents
being restricted almost to the terms of the motion. The following
is a copy:—
Murtoa,
December 7th, 1888.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
By a motion agreed to at the last meeting of the Governing Court,
I was requested to convey to you the Court’s regret on account of your
absence from that meeting, and their desire that you would furnish them
with the reason for it. I shall be glad to hear from you re the above matter
at your convenience.
I remain,
Rev. and Dear Sir,
To Rev. Arthuh Paul, Yours very sincerely,
St. Kilda. Hugh Livingstone.
Whatever else may be said about this letter, I think it will be
admitted, it is civil and deserved a civil reply. The following is a copy
of the reply actually received.
St. Kilda, 10th December, 1888.
Rev. H. Livingstone.
Dear Sir,
I have your letter of the 7th. The late Dr. Begg used to say that the
present race of young ministers would be the better of being put under
examination as to their proficiency in the useful quality of common sense.
Your letter seems to indicate that you and your friends in Synod would be
a good deal the better of passing such an examination.
Yours truly,
(Signed) Abthue Paul.


The sending of such a reply was not merely an undeserved insult
to me personally, but was really an insult to the Synod whose agent I
was. And an insult to a Synod is an insult to the One in whose name
it meets, and by whose authority it acts. An insult to a Church Court
is an insult to the Great King and Head of the Church. To deny this
is to deny one of the fundamental principles of the Disruption. This
is why contumacy is as much a matter for discipline as heresy or
immorality. Perhaps Mr. Paul held that in his absence, we were
unworthy of the respect due to a Court meeting in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ! In his letter he acknowledged us as a Synod. In
his pamphlet he still acknowledges us as the Synod which he took
a leading part in re-constructing. In face of this, I do not
know what excuse he can offer for his conduct.
There are rules for conducting business and for ministerial inter-
course that every Presbyterian minister is expected to follow. If a
minister who has taken an active part in Church Courts wishes through
old age and infirmity to drop, as Mr. Paul says, out of the field, he can
easily make this known. Mr. Paul could have asked and obtained
leave of absence, if he wished, for the remainder of his days. There
was not the slightest need to be unfriendly about such a matter. If a
minister finds the passing of a motion touch his conscience, he can, nay,
he is bound to, dissent (Note 3.) If he does not dissent, he becomes re-
sponsible forallthatis passed. Mr, Paul recorded no dissent. What he did
was this. He refused to attend the Synod, and he refused or neglected to
fulfil duties laid upon him by the Synod; but he retained his membership
in the Synod, and, having never recorded his dissent since, he retained
and retains his responsibility for all its actions up to the present day
(Note 4.) We may say this also, that the Synod gave Mr. Paul a golden
opportunity of making known any possible grievance, but he threw it
away; and therefore the Synod knows nothing officially, up to the present
day of any grievance that Mr. Paul may have.
The reply of Mr. Paul to my letter was not laid on the table of
the Synod. I have retained it ever since in my own possession. Its
contents were, of course, made known to the Synod. According to
my wish no further action was taken. As time went on the unfriendly
attitude of Mr. Paul to the Synod became more and more manifest.
Since the sudden stoppage of the Presbyter in December 1886, various
proposals had been made to start another organ, with Mr. Paul as
editor as before, but he merely “ snuffed ”at the idea. At length we
started without his aid. In March, 1889, appeared the first issue of
the Quarterly. A copy was sent to him, as to others, but was
immediately returned. Although it was understood that Mr. Sinclair
was to enter upon the duties of representative with the Government,
as soon as the business then in hand was cleared off, it was found
that Mr. Paul would neither clear off the business then in hand nor
give effect to the resignation. On April 17th, 1889, Mr. Sinclair,
feeling as we all seemed to feel, that there was likely some private
grievance that Mr. Paul had against him, in the spirit of the directions
laid down by our Saviour in Matthew xviii, 15-17, sought a private


interview with Mr. Paul, for the purpose of discovering, if possible,,
what that grievance was, and of removing it. He went to the manse
at St. Kilda, and was informed that Mr. Paul was not in. No doubt
this was true. But he was informed afterwards that Mr. Paul could
have seen him if he had liked.
Matters were coming to a head ; something had to be done.
This was the feeling at the annual meeting of Synod in May 1889.
Action was taken. First, the money collected for the testimonial,
which, through Mr. Paul’s unfriendly attitude, only amounted to
£27 15s. 10d., was ordered to be returned to the subscribers, and the
matter ended. Secondly, the Durham Lead business was placed in
the hands of the Geelong session, to act as an interim session, and
Mr. Paul’s connection with that matter terminated. And, thirdly,
the moderator was instructed to notify the proper department of the
change in the office of representative. This proved to be a more
troublesome business than we apprehended. Strange to say, Mr.
Paul opposed this with all his might. But it was finally accomplished
in spite of him. More will have to be said about this. Here we see
the great change in Mr. Paul’s relation to the Synod and its offices.
In the end of 1886 he suddenly closed his connection with the Church’s
organ, and refused to renew it. In May 1887, he resigned certain
offices, pledging his word that he would do all in his power to assist
his successor. About September of the same year, he cut his con-
nection with the teaching of the students. Since January 1888, he
has never attended a Synod meeting. He gave evidence of being
offended at something, but refused to give the reason. The matter
ended by his being removed from the office of representative with the
Government to prevent him from blocking the business of the Church.
And yet he complains of being badly treated. Is there anything in
all I have stated to lead anyone to cry shame on any shameless treat-
ment to which he had been subjected. I think the shameless treat-
ment was on the other side. If he had a grievance, why did he not
make it known ? That he has waited for ten years without putting
pen to paper on his own behalf is not much ,to his credit. But the
remarkable thing is, that after waiting ten years before he would
venture to put pen to paper on his own behalf, he leaves us now, so
far as any statement of his is concerned, as much in the dark as ever
as to what his grievance really was.
Section 3. — Searching for a reason.
No doubt, Mr. Paul complains very bitterly of our attitude and
actions towards him since May, 1889. But that is after he hadcompletely
broken with the Synod. We shall yet have to show how unreasonable
he is even in that. But the question in the meantime is, Do we know,
or can we discover anything that will account for the sudden change of
attitude in Mr. Paul towards the Synod, previous to May, 1889 ? Is
there anything that will justify the charge, that previous to that date,
“ for his love, we were his enemies ? ” Supposing he had put pen to
paper in his own behalf, what would he have had to say ? Personally,.


we could not account for Mr. Paul’s attitude. Direct and official
reasons were refused us. Still, reasons came to us, mostly in the form
of whispers going amongst our people, and professing to come from the
manse at St. Kilda. They are the following:—
1. Mr. Paul wished to see how we could get on without him.
2. Mr. Paul took offence because we dealt with the business of the
three ‘petitions in his absence.
3. Mr. Paul took offence at the granting of the petitions.
4. Mr. Paul was offended because the sacrament of the Lord's Supper
was dispensed in the Charlton district.
The first was given by Mr. Paul to a friend from New South
Wales, who reported it to us. If this were the true reason, he has
taken a curious method of having his wish gratified. It appears, too,
that he is now not satisfied with the result. But, remembering, that
in comparison with him, we were mere “ babies,” and that none oE us,
in his estimation at least, are “men of much consideration in respect
of mental power or religious experience,” and also that we had a
contumacious apostle on hand, I do not think we have done so badly.
We have carried on the work of the Church for ten years, not only
without him, but also, we may say, in spite of him. If it is not in as
good a position as it would have been if he had continued our apostle
and given us the benefit of his great ability and ripe experience, what
else could he expect ?
In connection with the second reason, I may remark, that no
request was made to us to defer the matter until he would be present.
At his own request, the coming to a decision was put off from
November, 1887, until January, 1888, and from then until the annual
meeting in May. It was the custom to defer business from sub-
ordinate meetings until the annual meeting, but it was not the custom
to defer business from the annual meeting to a subordinate one.
But if it had been known that that was Mr. Paul’s wdsh, his wish would,
no doubt, have been gratified. The reason implies a charge of a want of
consideration for his feelings, but, I think, it breaks down entirely.
But, if it does not, then will this justify the long alienation of Mr.
Paul from his brethren, and all the misery into which he has plunged
the Church through his action ?
With regard to the third reason, we heard it from various
sources. From a letter received from a friend, dated 31st March,
1893, five years after Mr. Paul had ceased to attend the Synod, I
give the following extract: —“ I hear that he has told one of his elders
that the reason of his attitude was the granting by Synod of petitions
for Sacraments. It seems he finds it advisable to offer some kind of
justification now. It was reported to me that he also said, he does
not care who knows it.” Another informant reported that he had
asked Mr. Paul to tell him plainly why he was not attending the
the Synod, and he replied, “Oh, they are chucking sacraments about.”
With this may be joined the fourth reason, which is but part of the
same. That Mr. Paul had some special dislike to the administration


of the Lord’s Supper in the Charlton district, we learned from Mr.
Hugh Mclnnes. As Mr. Paul has, in the pamphlet, made a furious-
onslaught on what he calls our sacramental policy, the consideration
of these last two reasons may be deferred until we come to discuss what
the pamphlet says on the subject. As a matter of fact all these
reasons were rejected by us, at that time with scorn. We could not
believe that Mr. Paul, for reasons like them, would act as he has done.
I, for one, cannot believe it now.
Section 4. — Mr. Paul's Interpretation of his Action.
In portions of his pamphlet, Mr Paul tries to make very light of
his action. It was merely a non-attendance at meetings of Synod.
“ Now,” he says, on page 13, “ there is no hard and fast rule as to
attending presbytery meetings. I have known ministers in Scotland
who were so little in attendance at meetings of their presbytery that
the others proposed, in joke, to advertise for them ; and nearer home,
perhaps Mr. Sinclair will consider the case of Mr. Mclnnes, of New
South Wales, who has borne a leading part in sacramental gatherings
in Victoria, yet he attends no presbytery. —Nothing of that sort ever-
counted as an offence against him.” Mr Paul has evidently forgotten
that since 1638, it is the law of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland,
a law in force both in the Established and Free Churches of that
Presbyterian country, that “absence from presbyteries be censured.”
And it is a law that can be put in force in any presbytery under the
sun. Still it may be true that some country ministers with no taste
for Church business may be very remiss in their attendance at Church
Courts. And it may be their brethren may remind them of their duty
by proposing in a jocular manner to advertise for them. Surely Mr.
Paul does not mean to suggest that we should have advertised for him.
Other methods of finding a reason for his absence failed. Would a
jocular advertisement have been more successful ? But, to be more
serious, does Mr. Paul compare himself to an obscure country
minister, whose absence from a Church Court would never be missed ?
Does he compare the small and struggling denomination in Victoria,
needing the loyal aid, in her times of difficulty, of all her ministers,,
elders and members, with the large and flourishing Churches in
Scotland, where half the members of the Church Courts might be
absent, and the business not suffer ? In our Synod, the absence of
one member is felt, whilst the absence of an apostle is a serious
business indeed.
But there are a few facts of history, overlooked by Mr. Paul,,
that are utterly inconsistent with the idea that it was a mere case of
non-attendance. I have already stated how Mr. Sinclair, on the 17th
of April, 1889, sought a private interview with Mr. Paul. No doubt
this is one of the things he sneers at as “ nagging.” Two years later,
about April, 1891, the Synod appointed a deputation to wait on
Mr. Paul, consisting of the Eev. Mr. McDonald, of Hamilton, and
Mr. Eeid, the elder, of Geelong, to endeavour, if possible, to discover
the cause of the alienation, and a way of restoring peace and harmony.


It is true they dined at the manse, but as soon as Mr, Paul got a hint
•of their business, he abruptly left them. Mr. Reid afterwards wrote
begging an interview, either officially, as a delegate of the Synod, or
privately, as a friend. No result followed. Now, if Mr. Paul’s
interpretation of his action was correct, here were golden opportunities
■of removing misunderstandings. He could have said—lt is true, lam
not attending the meetings, but you can get on without me; I have
given you the best of my days, and I now wish to drop out of the
held. JSo doubt the Synod would have regretted his absence, but
would have acquiesced in his decision, and rejoiced in his explanation.
As a result of the failure of the deputation, the Synod at length
recorded the following censure on Mr. Paul for his conduct.
“ The moderator and other members of the court, spoke with regret at
Mr. Paul’s inexplicable isolation from his brethren, and the seriousness of
such behaviour in view of the ordination vows taken by every minister of
this church.”
The sending of a copy of this censure was delayed, in the vain hope
that perhaps some change might take place that would render the
sending of it unnecessary. It should be noticed that it is as mild a
censure as could possibly be passed —little more indeed than a reminder
to Mr. Paul of his duty to the Church. It was not published in the
Quarterly . In the meantime, before he knew anything of this censure,
Mr. Paul took to returning all communications sent through the clerk
back unopened. These were mostly circular notices sent to all members
of the Synod. At length at the annual meeting of Synod held in May,
1892, it was resolved to send a copy of the censure to him. It was
addressed by the Rev. Mr. Scott, who was assisting Mr. Sinclair, and
whose handwriting was not recognised by Mr. Paul. It was opened,
but returned with the following address, no doubt, to insult Mr Sinclair
and the Gaelic speaking portion of his congregation ;
“Mr. Sinkler,
Gaelic Church,
Geelong.”
And yet Mr. Paul says, it was merely a ease of non-attendance at
presbytery meetings. I may at this stage remark, that from the end of
1891 until about the end of 1896, Mr. Paul refused to receive any
communication from the Synod. Every communication was returned
unopened. It may be said, why write to him at all? We answer, we
were in a difficult position. He was still a member of our Synod,
and we had no wish it should be otherwise. We could not ignore him.
When we called the roll, his absence was recorded on our minutes.
Circular notices had to be sent to all the members at times, and therefore
to him, and the question was raised, would it be legal to omit sending
them to him. Besides, he held papers and documents in his possession
that we believed should have been handed over to Mr. Sinclair. Copies
of the model deed could not be procured from him, and the Synod had
at length to go to the trouble and expense of getting another set of
copies printed ; a fact that lays a deep disgrace on Mr. Paul. When
Mrs Paul died, the Synod deeply sympathising with him, in his


bereavement, instructed the moderator to send him a letter o£condolence.
This was done, and was duly returned unopened. Mr. Paul’s excuse
for all this is simply that Mr. Sinclair used all methods of which he is
an adept to hunt him out of his retirement. All this conduct, however,
is utterly inconsistent with the idea that it is a matter of mere non-
attendance at the presbytery meetings.
Mr. Paul is especially unhappy in his reference to Mr. Mclnnes,
of New South Wales. It is quite true that Mr. Mclnnes does not attend
presbytery meetings. But the reason, as Mr. Paul kuows very well,
is that the presbytery of which he was a member became defunct, and
has never been constitutionally revived. Mr. Mclnnes also refused to
attend the Supreme Court of the Church, because certain members
whom he regarded as legally having a right to attend were excluded.
Mr. Paul approved of this. But mark, Mr. Mclnnes gave a definite
reason for his position, and on that reason the Synod took definite
action. Besides, Mr Mclnnes never refused to meet the members of
the Synod, —he was ready to receive letters or deputations. At the last
meeting of the Synod, Mr. Mclnnes was present by invitation, and gave
an address with a view of removing the difficulty. Mr. Mclnnes’s conduct
in this respect was honourable throughout, and consequently, he will be
honoured when MrT Paul will be remembered in another manner. It
would have been well for Mr. Paul, and for us all, if he had acted as
presbyterially as Mr. Mclnnes has done.
Section s.— Mr. Paul's justification of Ms action.
I now call particular attention to the following paragraphs from
pages 6 and 7 of the pamphlet: —
“ There is never a great smoke but some inward combustion is at the
foundation of it. Some secret offence, no doubt, is responsible for so much
jealousy and detraction, as has been levelled against me. The first beginnings
of this unworthy habit arose from a religious difference. The dislike which
I showed to certain loose ways of sacramental observance gave the first
occasion to it. Hardly any pains to examine into the qualifications of some
whom they admitted into communion were taken by these ministers, and
my counsels recommending caution were snuffed at. Had the signs of
Providence been of any weight with them, the promoters of that sacramen-
arian policy might have taken a lesson. Very severe experiences, both of
a domestic and a personal nature overtook those ministers from another
colony, whom they employed as their helpers on that occasion. But the
lessons were not heeded. Somehow the notion has got into the mind of
some who now direct the counsels of the Free Presbyterian Church, that
the way to extend the body is to gather in communicants off-hand. They
have run away with the idea that this work was neglected until they
appeared on the field to take it up. And they do not trouble to enquire
what may be the reason of that difference, which no doubt obtains, between
their own practice in that matter, and the more cautious way followed by
their predecessors, that is in effect by Mr. Alexander MTntyre and myself.
Perhaps when all things come to be weighed in an even balance, it may
turn out that not a less, but a greater and more reverent regard to the
purity of communion services is the cause why the earlier ministers were
reserved in the practice of them. There are worldly-minded people in
the Free Church of Victoria as in all other religious connexions, and an
easy way of entrance to the Lord’s Table will, of course, be popular with
them. The minister who adopts it will become popular with such a class.


and he will save himself a great deal of trouble besides. This is one deep-
source of the mischief now operating in the Free Church of Victoria.
Men who make high pretentions to superior piety do not take it kindly
when their methods are taxed with unfaithfulness. My objections to the
Sinclair ways of communion have never been forgiven. But Mr. Sinclair
had his training in a very had school, so far as that matter of admitting
to membership is concerned. A former resident of South Australia, who
was familiar with the discipline of the Free Church there, once informed
me that he ‘ never saw a communion table fenced till he came to Victoria/
There is no reason for concealing the fact that this discovery of the-
loose practice referred to which Mr- Sinclair and his friends were prepared
to follow, went very far towards alienating me from their society. I had
thought to see the Church which I had been themeans, under Providence,
of setting up in Victoria, going forward in a faithful, if not in an outwardly
flourishing course. But with the too evident disappointment of my hopes'
in that respect, my interest in the doings of the three ministers ceased. I
could not but fear the worst for tiie struggling denomination ; and events
have shown that this fear was not unfounded. Since the surprise, which
was sprung upon me in this matter of lax communions, I have taken n»
part in any action of the ministers referred to, and refuse any responsibility
for them. At the same time I did nothing which even the Sinclair ill-will
can twist into the shape of an active or avowed opposition. The worst I
have done has been confined to strictly letting them alone.”
In justice to Mr. Paul, I have given the whole of these two
paragraphs. This, in my opinion is the most important part of the
pamphlet. Here, if anywhere, we have a reason for Mr. Paul’s-
disloyalty to the Synod. Here, if anywhere, we shall find the
justification of his action. Hence it will merit a very careful examin-
ation. But the trouble is, that the more we examine tlie statements
and compare them with the facts of history, the more difficult it is to
understand what Mr. Paul means. It is plain, however, that Mr. Paul
charges the three ministers, Messrs McDonald, Sinclair and Livingstone
with deliberately adopting, contrary to his wish and warning, a new
and unfaithful sacramental policy ; admitting on easy terms, and with
little or no examination worldly minded persons to the communion
table, for the sake of popularity. The discovery, not of what we had
done, but of what we were prepared to do, was a means of alienating
him from our society ; and the surprise sprung upon him in the
matter of lax communions, led to his taking no part in the actions of
these ministers since; that is, to his abandonment of the Synod. It
must have been a serious matter indeed that was sprung upon him as
a surprise, when he thinks it will justify him, in the eyes of sensible-
men, in ceasing to attend the Synod without assigning a reason.
More than this, the unfaithfulness was evidently so manifest to all
beholders, that the Eev. Mr. Pinlayson, of Brushgrove, and the Eev.
D. Mclnnes, the only two ministers we employed from New South
Wales, became involved in the same condemnation ; the early death
of the one, and the domestic afflictions of the other, being judgments
of God upon them, for taking part in an unfaithful sacramental
policy. In this dreadful way he justifies his disloyalty to the Synod.
His statements in other parts of his pamphlet that he wished for
quiet, for a peaceful end to his days, to drop out of the field after
incessant battling with outside enemies are all moonshine. He had a


special reason for retiring. We were unworthy of his presence. We
were even unworthy of being told a reason, and hence had to wait ten
years for the reason to he told us in this particular manner. We had
to wait ten years for an opportunity to reply to secret charges
whispered by Mr. Paul to his friends; and by them whispered to the
members of our congregations. But all things come to him that waits.
A minister’s reputation is, or should be, very dear to him, not
merely for his own sake, but for the sake of the cause he represents.
Destroy a minister’s reputation and you destroy his influence. Destroy
his influence and you destroy, on the one hand, his power for good,
and on the other, his living. The statements of Mr. Paul are
calculated to destroy, if believed, a minister’s reputation in any
community. They are especially calculated to destroy a minister’s
reputation in the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria. For our
congregations are composed principally of Highlanders or their
descendants, who from their early training thoroughly dislike anything
in the shape of unfaithfulness in connection with the Lord’s Supper;
and who are mostly followers of the late Rev. Alexander Mclntyre, and
who, consequently would refuse to have anything to do with a policy
that he, if alive, would disapprove of. Mr. Paul knows all this, yet he
has written them.
A reply now is necessary. But if the case were an ordinary one,
a denial of the truth of the reckless assertions, and a call for some-
thing of the nature of proof would be quite sufficient. But in this
case, something more is expedient. Mr. Paul has shot his bolt from
Glasgow in Scotland. It is not certain whether he will ever return to
the Colony. In the meantime, members of the country congregations,
at least, are loudly calling for some explanation on our part.
A. —The three Petitions.
We must consider these again, for the onslaught on our
“ sacramentarian policy,” as Mr Paul is pleased to call it, cannot be
understood without. Prom a private letter, dated November 11th,
1887, received from Mr Sinclair, I give the following extract: —
“There were petitions from Drysdale, Durham Lead and Charlton for
the dispensation of the Lord’s Supper, containing respectively 30, 57 and
37 names. Re the two former, Mr Buttrose and I were appointed to visit
the one, and Mr Paul and I the other, with a view to report at the next
meeting on the matter; and the Charlton petition was held in abeyance
considering that Mr (M.) Mclnnes wrote that the time of the celebration
would not suit before March. Besides, your presence would he desirable,
since you are the nearest ordained minister to that district.”
I had a certain connection with one of these petitions. As Mr
Sinclair states, I was the nearest ordained minister to the Charlton
district. The missionary stationed there, not being qualified to ad-
minister the sacraments, it fell to my lot to visit that district several
times during 1886 and 1887, principally for the purpose of administer-
ing the sacrament of baptism. On one of these visits, I was asked
what steps they should take to have the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper dispensed in their midst. When information
is sought from a Presbyterian minister relative to rules and


forms of procedure, he is bound by the traditional rules of the
Church to supply it. I did so, and did so willingly, although I
expected the burden would be laid on myself and my session. It never
entered into my head that there would, or could, be any possible
objection or opposition to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper being
dispensed in a place where we had a missionary stationed for years.
(Note 5). I informed them that the proper step to take was to send a
petition to the Synod; and at their request wrote the outline of
a form. Mr Sinclair’s letter informing me that three petitions had
been presented to the one meeting of Synod, was, to use the language
of Mr Paul, “a surprise sprung upon me,” as well as upon him;
hut I did not lose my head over it, nor did unworthy suspicions of my
brethren enter into my mind. However, I can easily understand how
much of a surprise it would be to one with a mind constituted like
that of the Rev. Arthur Paul. This was the first meeting of Synod,
after the resignation of the clerkship. While clerk, all papers of the
Synod passed through his hands, and all the Synod’s business was
arranged by him. I had even seen him come to a meeting with the
minutes already written. As Mr Sinclair was now clerk, of course,
there was a change, and perhaps to Mr Paul, who had been clerk from
the start of the Synod, a very distasteful one. Yery likely, Mr Paul
knew nothing of the petitions until they were read by the clerk.
This, evidently, is the “surprise sprung upon him” which has so upset
him. As I said before, Mr Paul was opposed to the granting of these
petitions. The granting was deferred, and in the meantime, at his desire,
deputations were appointed to visit two of the localities and report to
next meeting. Only one of these deputations fulfilled the duty laid
upon it by the Synod. That one reported favourably to the granting
of the request; the other, that of which Mr Paul was a member and
convener, had no report. I have already stated how these petitions
came up at the January meeting, and how the requests were finally
granted at the annual meeting in May, 1888. I may add that the mem-
bers present in November, 1887, and January, 1888, were Messrs Paul,
Sinclair and Buttrose, ministers ; and Mr Hensley, elder from Geelong.
At the meeting at which the requests of the petitions were granted
there were present, Messrs Sinclair, Buttrose, McDonald and
Livingstone, ministers; and Mr Hensley, elder from Geelong. In
granting them, we were unanimous. Mr McDonald had no connection
with the petitions further than to give his vote.
B. — Mr. Paul’s alleged reason for opposing the granting of the
Petitions.
"What really was the reason Mr. Paul gave for opposing the
granting of the petitions F The petitions were signed not only by
those who had been communicants, and by some that intended to
apply to be received as communicants, if the petitions were granted;
but also hg adherents generally. The impression on the minds of those
who got up the petitions being that the more names there were on
the petitions, the more likely were the requests to be granted. A
large number signed that had no intention of becoming communicants.


and who would not become communicants if they were asked. This
accounts for the large number of names attached to the petitions, as
we saw, 30 to the one from Drysdale, 57 to the one from Durham
Lead, and 37 to the one from Charlton, or 124 in all. Mr, Paul took
the view that if the petitions were granted, the names of all these
would, as a matter of course, be put upon the communicants’ roll,
without any further examination. The others took the view, which
they afterwards acted upon, that if the petitions were granted, the
matter would be placed in the hands of interim sessions, who would
examine each applicant for membership in the usual manner. Mr.
Paul must still believe that his view was carried out; must still
believe that the whole 124 names were added to the communicants’
roll without any further examination. In no other way can I account
for the language he has used. This is what he must mean by certain
“ loose ways of sacramental observance,” extending the body by
gathering in “ communicants off-hand,” “ the loose practice Mr.
Sinclair and his friends were prepared to follow,” and “ this matter of
lax communions.” If not, I call upon Mr. Paul to state what he
means bv these expressions. If the foundation of the accusations is
the idea that the 124 names were placed on the rolls without any
further examination, then the accusation is based on a perverse
imagination. So far from it being true that the 124 names were
added to the rolls, as a matter of course, the petitions were granted,
interim sessions were appointed for each place, in due time the
ordinance was dispensed, no one was admitted but by certificate, or
examination, and in the three localities the number of new com-
municants whose names were added to the rolls of the Church, were
less than 20 (Note 6). Supposing it is held that there was an irregularity
in having petitions signed by so many that were not intending com-
municants, there was an easy remedy that Mr. Paul as leader of the
Synod ought to have suggested, and if it had been suggested, I am
sure it would have been carried out, viz.; to send the petitions back
to be re-signed only by those who wished to be communicants. It is
a common thing if a document is irregular, to have its irregularity
corrected. But Mr. Paul urged the rejection of the petitions
simpliciter , and no doubt Mr. Sinclair gave dire offence to Mr. Paul
by his refusal to agree to their rejection. There was a want of
wisdom in Mr. Paul as a leader demanding that Mr. Sinclair should
go against his conscience. If that is the offence to which Mr. Paul
refers, then Mr. McDonald and I having been absent, are not in-
volved. But I have not the slightest doubt, that if I had been
present at the January meeting in 1887, I would have sided with Mr.
Sinclair, and stood against Mr. Paul.
C. —Was there anything wrong with the Charlton Sacrament?
It may be remembered that amongst the whispered reasons for
Mr. Paul’s conduct were two, the discussions of which we deferred.
Nothing more need be said re the granting of the petitions; but a
word should be said about the Charlton sacrament. About the end
of 1890, or a little more than two years and a half after Mr. Paul


ceased to attend the Synod, there were persistent whispers that it
was the sacrament at Charlton that was the cause of offence. Some
said it was because we had no fully ordained minister there qualified
to administer it. But that would imply a rule that the sacrament
should-not be administered except where there is a resident fully
ordained minister. There is no such rule. A station can have the
sacrament dispensed as well as a settled charge, provided the Synod
agrees, and places it under the charge of a session. Mr. Paul himself
agreed to this at Camperdown. He was interim moderator of the
session there till he proposed, and got carried that Mr. Sinclair be the
moderator there. In Charlton, the law and practice of the Church
were fully and strictly carried out. What objection there could be
to a few old men and women, too attached to the Pree Presbyterian
Church to be willing to communicate with any other denomination,
and too feeble to go a long distance to communicate in some other
part of the Colony in connection with their own, having the sacrament
dispensed in their own congregation, and thus being enabled to fulfil
the command of the Saviour they loved, is more than I can tell. To-
me, the fact of objecting is unaccountable. If the fact of the
Charlton sacrament is the excuse for Mr. Paul’s conduct, he has very
much to answer for.
X). —The alleged new Sacramental Policy.
It is not a fact that we adopted a new sacramental policy.
Whether we were unfaithful or not in the carrying out of the policy
is another matter. Mr. Paul, in his own estimation, of course, is as
able as the All Searcher of the heart, to know the inward motives
that influenced us ; and I presume from his knowledge of the heart,
lie proclaims our motives to be unworthy. We desired the favour of
worldly-minded persons, alleges Mr. Paul. Be it so. I have no
answer to one who claims to know more than any ordinary mortal
man can know. It will be sufficient answer to show that our policy
was the usual sacramentarian policy of Churches holding to Disruption
principles. We had the very same policy as Mr. Paul himself. He
is or was the moderator of a kirk-session. He, I understand, ad-
ministered the sacrament as a rule, twice a year at St. Kilda. If so,
lie is not as reserved in the practice of them as I am. As a general
rule, I have only administered the sacrament once a year in each
place. The late Rev. A. Mclntyre re sacramental observance was
no rule for others. Por Mr. Paul to represent himself as following
the same practice as Mr. Mclntyre, is not honest. As a matter of
fact, Mr. Mclntyre did not feel called upon to take a leading part in
sacramental observance. He regarded himself to be called to be a
missionary evangelist to his Gaelic speaking countrymen throughout
the world. He refused to be the regularly inducted pastor of any
congregation, and to be bound to the ordinary duties of a moderator
of a kirk-session. He was not against the administration of the
sacrament in itself. He would at times assist other ministers, but he
himself seldom took the lead in sacramental services. If all ministers
followed Mr. Mclntyre’s practice, there would be no regularly


inducted pastors of congregations, and no regular administration of
the Lord’s Supper. The question is not, did we, or did we not, follow
the practice of Mr. Mclntyre, but did we follow a practice that Mr.
Mclntyre, if with us now, would disapprove of ? I challenge Mr.
Paul to say that we did.
E. —‘Did we snuff at Mr. Paul's advice ?
Mr. Paul says, “ Hardly any pains into the qualifications of some
whom they admitted into communion were taken by those ministers,
and my counsels recommending caution were snuffed at.” It should
be remembered that this and the kindred statements involve a slur
upon the whole eldership of the Church. Does Mr. Paul forget that
the ministers are only moderators of kirk-sessions, and that in the
matter of admission to membership, we have only our own say and
vote? Does he forget the right of every elder to examine, to
deliberate and vote in the case of every applicant ? Let anyone go
through the whole roll of elders in the three charges, and say if they
are likely persons to stand by and see a minister for the sake of
popularity, admit worldly-minded persons to the communion. Up to
the time that Mr. Paul forsook the Synod, there is only one occasion
on which I could be held responsible for admissions to the sacrament.
This was the first time the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was
dispensed in the Wimmera in connection with the Eree Presbyterian
Church. It was at Burrereo on the 16th October, 1877, only about
three months before the last meeting of the Synod Mr. Paul ever
attended. But as a matter of fact, this sacrament and also the two
following ones, were administered under the direction and superintend-
ence of an interim session, of which, of course, I was moderator, but
the members of which were Messrs Paul, Sinclair and McDonald.
So it follows that the only sacrament for which I could be responsible
was one in w T hich Mr, Paul had the same say, vote and responsibility
as I had myself. More than that, Mr. Paul was present and not only
preached the action sermon, but also himself administered the
ordinance. Mr. Paul expressed no disapproval of anything that
occurred on that occasion. That he ever taxed me with unfaithfulness
in admitting persons into the communion is utterly untrue. That I
ever snuffed at any advice given me by him re the sacrament is
also utterly untrue. If anything of the kind occurred, it must have
been before the 22nd of February, 1888, that being the last day on
which Mr. Paul and I met face to face. As Messrs Paul, Sinclair and
McDonald were the members of my interim session, I invited the
whole of them not only to the first dispensation of the sacrament, but
also to the second and third, which were to be held, the one at
Kellalac on April the Ist, 1888, and the other at G-re Ore on April
the Bth. I received a reply from Mr. Paul about the middle of March,
declining the invitation. The following extracts from the letter I
received deserve particular attention :
“Yours of the 7th inst. should hare been acknowledged before now. I
should have been punctual all the more, because an answer to your request
must be in the negative I understand that you will have


both Mr. McDonald and Mr. Sinclair with you, which lam glad of. It
relieves the reluctance which I am sensible of in saying ‘ No.’ The
people in Branxholme are in great expectation at the prospect of having
Mr. Finlayson, and I hear from Mr. McDonald that you are to assist at
the Branxholme celebration. I hope the presence of the Angel of the
covenant will be vouchsafed them, and also at the subsequent services in
the Wimmera.”
Let it be remembered that this was written a month after the last
time I had spoken to Mr. Paul. Would he have written as he did in
this letter, if he had discovered a new and unfaithful policy, if he had
taxed me with unfaithfulness, and I had snuffed at his advice ? I have
now given evidence showing that Mr. Paul’s statement, so lar as I am
concerned, cannot be true. If by snuffing at his advice he means the
refusal of Mr. Sinclair, and, I presume, Mr. Buttrose, to reject the
petitions, neither Mr. McDonald nor lam involved in that. We were
not present and never heard Mr. Paul’s advice.
E. —Messrs Finlayson and Mclnnes.
Nothing in the whole of Mr. Paul’s pamphlet has given more
surprise and pain than the following statement: “ Had the signs of
Providence been of any weight with them, the promoters of that
sacramentarian policy might have taken a lesson. Very severe
experiences both of a domestic and personal nature overtook those
ministers from another colony whom they employed as their helpers on
that occasion. But the lessons were not heeded.” As I have already
intimated the only two ministers we employed to assist us from another
colony were Messrs Finlayson and Mclnnes, from New South Whales.
One reason for employing these and these alone, of the ministers from
another colony, was their command of the Gaelic language, and
consequently their usefulness in preaching the Gospel to their Gaelic
speaking countrymen. In making the above statement, it is hard to
say whether Mr. Paul wishes to pose as a man so holy, fearing the
Lord so thoroughly, that the secret of the Lord is with him (Psalm
xxv, 14) ; or, as a re-incarnation of Zophar, the Naamathite.
G. —Has Mr. Faul justified Ms action?
If all Mr. Paul has written rc the sacramental policy were true,
it would not justify his conduct towards the Synod of which he was
and is a member. We can conceive of one being impelled to withdraw
from brethren walking disorderly ; but, even then, it would be the
duty to withdraw in an orderly manner. One can always dissent
against any action that touches his conscience, and can have reasons
recorded, if thought necessary. One dissenting is always held clear
of responsibilitv. But if there is no recorded dissent, a member is held
to have agreed, whether he was present or absent, and is held
responsible for what is done. If a member believes the views or
practice of a church to have changed, so that he cannot any longer
retain his membership, he can either retire by resigning, or can protest,
and on the ground of that protest he can seek to build up another
church of a purer kind. ....


If Mr. Paul had acted in any of these ways, his conduct would
have been more consistent with his present allegations. We might
have regretted his action, and yet have retained for him our personal
respect. Mr. Paul made no attempt, in connection with our
sacramental policy, to dissent, protest or withdraw in an orderly, or in
any manner. He retained his membership. He was one of us so far
as our records are concerned. At the same time, he neglected to
attend our meetings, and attempted to ignore us. Such a course of
conduct cannot be justified. It could not be justified even if the alleged
grievance were real, much less, when it is only imaginary. If Mr. Paul
could point out anything wrong we had done, it would not justify
him ; but much less, when he was, as he himself confesses, influenced
merely by the fear of what we might do (Note 7).
Section 6. —Mr Paul's Jolce.
On page 13 of his pamphlet, Mr Paul says: —“ But my action in
this matter has been based on very definite grounds. I never was
anything more than an associated member of the Church Court where
Mr. Sinclair now rules.” This is certainly nothing more than a joke.
The trouble is to know how to treat it. Should I simply smile and
pass on without any further remark, or should I carry the joke out,
by proceeding to prove that Mr. Paul is as much a member of the
Court as Mr. Sinclair himself? Perhaps, under the circumstances the
latter course will be the better. But let us fully hear what he has to
say on the matter. He says on page 12, “There is one other matter
which concludes the review of a very distasteful business; it relates to
my personal standing in the Pree Presbyterian body. It is, apparently,
Mr. Sinclair’s leading purpose to represent me as an ordinary member of
the Synod which he dominates, and to convey to his admirers the
notion that lam in rebellion against presbyterial authority.” There
is a quibble here. Mr Paul is certainly one of the most extraordinary
members of a presbytery or Synod the world has ever seen. No one
would speak of him as an ordinary member. But is he a constituent
member the same as Mr. Sinclair is? That is what I shall undertake to
discuss. His language amounts to an admission that if he is a member
in the same sense as Mr. Sinclair, he is in rebellion against presbyterial
authority. If we can prove the former statement, the truth of the
latter follows as a matter of course.
On page 9 of his pamphlet, Mr. Paul says “It should be mentioned
here that neither the function of clerk to a Church Court nor yet the
post of representative with the Government require that the person
acting must necessarily be a member of the Court.” We are not such
innocents as not to know that. But, does Mr. Paul wish us to believe
that he is not a member of the Court ? The clerk of a Court need not
be a member, unless there is a special rule to that effect. But if Mr.
Paul will turn to page 8 of the published “ Act of Reconstruction ” of
our Synod, he may read the following:—“The quorum of all meetings
of the said Court to consist of not less than three ministers, one of whom
shall be, or shall be chosen to be, moderator and another cleric." Mr.


Paul was clerk for ten years in accordance with that rule. Let him
remember, it is a poor thing to have a poor memory. The office of
representative in the Titles Office does not of itself imply membership
in a Synod. For instance, a law agent might be employed to act.
But Mr. Paul in the Registrar-General’s Office was for, I presume, 20
years registered as “Moderator of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Victoria.” I think that implies membership of some sort, even
although the membership be not ordinary.
On page 14 he says, referring to a leave of absence accepted by
him from the Synod:—“ Of course, it had the effect of making me
appear in the act of owning the Synod as a body having authority.
As already shown such an authority neither has, nor, in the nature of
the case, can have any existence unless I were voluntarily to accept it,
which as yet, I have not done.” He is then, not a member of the
Court, in the sense of being under its authority. Then, as a minister
not under the authority of a Court, except that Court be a Kirk-session,
is not a member of the Court, it follows that Mr. Paul is not a member
of the Synod. That is his answer to the charge of rebellion against
presbyterial authority. If Mr. Sinclair had acted as Mr. Paul has done
that would be ecclesiastical rebellion, for Mr. Sinclair is a member of
the Court, but Mr. Paul is not, and therefore, no matter what he does
he is not in rebellion. But let us go on with the joke.
If Mr. Paul was not, and is not a member of the Synod in any
ordinary sense, is he a member in any sense, and if so, in what sense ?
Mr. Paul’s reply to this is, “ Simply I acted as an associate with them,
till the present organization was set up.” The present organization
was set up on the 28th of March, 1877. Before that, as a Court, it had
no existence. His statement must refer to action taking place before
that date. The records of what was done previous to the re-
construction of the Synod on March 28th, 1877, show that the Rev.
Messrs Mclntyre and Paul united together with the Rev. J. Sinclair as a
visiting minister from South Australia, to ordain Mr McDonald, and
induct him to the pastoral charge of the Hamilton congregation. The
following is recorded in the Act of Re-construction re Mr. Sinclair’s
position, “ The Rev. John Sinclair, a minister of the corresponding
Church in South Australia being present, it was agreed to request him
to sit and act with the brethren as an associated member during the
present sitting, and Mr. Sinclair having acceded to the request, took
his seat as a member of the Court.” Mr. Sinclair was the only
associated member present on the occasion. There is not the slightest
hint that Mr. Paul was also an associated member. But suppose we
were to say that the whole Court, as they call it, was composed simply
of associated members we know that as soon as Mr McDonald was
ordained, three of those present, exclusive of Mr. Sinclair, who as
merely an associated member could only be an onlooker, proceeded in
a most solemn manner to constitute the present Court of the Church,
The following is a portion of the “ Deed of Re-construction.”
“We, the undersigned ministers of the Free Presbyterian Church,
now, and heretofore exercising our ministry in the Colony of Victoria,
met for the purpose of re-constructing a governing court for Presbyterial


■superintendence of the congregations adhering to this Church
After prayer in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by virtue of that
authority which He has committed to the office-bearers of His Church, do
now constitute ourselves into a court for the spiritual government of the
affairs of Christ’s house among the congregations adhering to the Free
Presbyterian Church of Yictoria, and in room of the Synod formerly
acting ”
Done at Hamilton the twenty-eight day of March, 1877.
(Signed) Alex. Mclntteb.
Aethtje Paul.
William McDonald.
If it were true that Mr. Paul simply acted as an associated
member with Mr. A. Mclntyre and Mr. McDonald until the present
organization was set up, then when the organization was set up on the
28th of March, 1877, he ceased to have any legitimate connection with
the present Court. But so far was he from acting on this supposition
that we find him acting as a constituent member for ten years ; and
then without a word of warning suddenly ceasing to act as a member.
He affirms his latter action was based on definite grounds. He was
never anything more than an associated member in the present Court,
If he was simply an associated member until the Court was set up, that,
of course, was at an end when the Court was set up, that is on the 28th
March, 1877, If he has been simply an associated member since, on
some other plea, he must have been associated by the Court itself. Can
Mr. Paul find any record on the minutes of the Court of such association?
If he cannot, then his representation of his own position is erroneous;
And his action if based on that supposition is based on a piece of
absurdity. That Mr Paul was regarded and treated as a constituent
member of the Synod and is still so regarded is a fact, and that Mr.
Paul allowed the Synod to regard and treat him as such without objecting
or correcting what from his present contentions he must speak of as
a mistake on the part of the Synod, is a fact. That Mr. Paul was
merely an associated member of the Synod is an idea never heard of
until the pamphlet was published. If Mr. Paul all these years
knowingly allowed the Synod to treat him as a constituent member,
without correcting the mistake, is he not guilty of deception ? Mr.
Paul took his seat, for ten years, but as a member having a full right
to sit, deliberate and vote. He took his seat as the minister of the
Pree Presbyterian congregation at St. Kilda. The congregation was
one adhering to the Synod, and under its spiritual superintendence.
That he had his ministry before the present Synod came into existence
•does not affect the question one iota. He with others constituted a
Synod in the room of the former, that took the place and was heir to
■the privileges and power of the former. In the “ Act of
lie-construction,” it is affirmed that the rights, and consequently the
-duties and responsibilities, of the members constituting the new Synod
will be as great as they were in the old. The congregation of St.
Kilda was represented in the Synod by a member of its kirk-session,
And Mr. Paul as moderator of the session signed his commission. All
this is utterly inconsistent with the idea that he was only an associated
member.


In Presbyterian Churches we find, no doubt, a difference as to
the ground upon which a minister has a right to membership in a
presbytery. Some put it on the ground of ordination, so that all
ordained ministers residing within the bounds, whether in charge of
congregations or not, have a right to a seat in a court, and all the
privileges of membership. Others debar those who are not in charge
of congregations, unless they are admitted by special rule. But under
every Presbyterian constitution the pastors of congregations and an
elder from their kirk-sessions are the constituent members, that is, the
members by the constitution itself, and not by special rule. To
arrange matters according to Mr. Paul’s contention would be most
irregular. The office-bearers and members of the St. Kilda congrega-
tion have the right of complaint and appeal against any action of
Mr. Paul, and the Synod have the right of hearing them. How could
this be carried out if a member of the Court could say —I am only an
associated member of the Court, you have no jurisdiction over me.
Mr. Paul calls himself a Presbyterian • minister. His contention is
contrary to Presbyterianism, and consequently contrary to pledges
he has given again and again. Did he not, in connection with his
ordination in Scotland, answer in the affirmative the following
questions: —
“Are you persuaded that the Presbyterian government and discipline
are founded upon the Word of God, and do you promise to submit to the
said government and discipline, and to concur with the same, and not to
endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or subversion thereof ?”
“ Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly, in the
spirit of meekness, unto the admonitions of the brethren of this Presby-
tery, and be subject to them, and all other Presbyteries and superior
judicatories of this Church, where God, in His providence, shall cast
your lot ?”
Mr. Paul may raise the quibble that this has reference to the
Free Church of Scotland, but still, they show the true relation and
spirit of every genuine Presbyterian to the Courts of which he is a
member, and Mr. Paul cannot act contrary to this without denying his
Presbyterianism.
The same principles and pledges are implied in the Fundamental
Act of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and Mr. Paul’s
relation to that Fundamental Act is set forth in the following extract
from the Act of Re-construction: —
“ The ministers now present,” that is, Messrs A. Mclntyre and Paul,
“ having been members of the said (former) Synod at its last meeting,
hereby declare their continued adherence to the principles set forth in the
Fundamental Act of the said Synod, adopted at Melbourne, on the ninth
day of May, 1848, and that such adherence as the said Act declares is a
condition of the enjoyment of any status, office, or privilege, within the
Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria.”
This shows the position of Mr. Paul. He is still pledged to the
Presbyterianism of the Fundamental Act, and in fact, holds his
present position of minister of St. Kilda on the ground of that pledge.
Any position contrary to Presbyterianism is contrary to his pledge.


If he is only an associated member, and consequently, as he alleges,
not under the discipline of the Synod, this is contrary to Presbyterian-
ism and contrary to his pledges.
But Mr. Paul affirms that he is a minister upon a higher footing
than Messrs McDonald, Sinclair and Livingstone, that is, he denies
Presbyterian parity. Presbyterian parity is one of the fundamental
principles of Presbyterianism. This is contrary to his ordination
pledges and the original and renewed pledges to the Fundamental
Act. Mr. Paul affirms this on the plea that as a member of a former
Synod he can have no compeer in the present one that took its place.
In the Model Trust Deed of the Church, which, according to Mr.
Paul’s boast, is the work of his own hand, there is provision made for
the re-construction of new Synods from time to time. This shows the
faith of Mr Paul in the future progress of the Church. According to
his idea, the members of every newer Synod must be on a lower foot-
ing than the members of a former. How low the status of a Free
Presbyterian minister may eventually be, it is hard to say. According
to Mr Paul the difference of footing consists in this, that as a member
of a former Synod he can associate himself in a latter, and take a
leading part in the ordaining, inducting, suspending and deposing of
ministers, but they cannot deal in any way with him. They are under
law to him, but he is above law to them. He is only under law to the
ghosts of the defunct presbytery, and they must come from their
graves to try him, or he cannot be tried at all!
When did Mr. Paul discover this? Did he know it all along? Or
is it a recent revelation to himself ? Did he only make the discovery
ten years ago, when he suddenly ceased from attendance at the meetings
of the Court? If so, could he not have had the common courtesy to
make it known ? What a world of trouble he might have saved himself
and us ! Mr. Paul did not answer the questions and sign the formula
of the present Synod. Neither did Mr. McDonald. Is Mr, McDonald,
on that ground only an associated member of the Synod? Mr. Paul
never thought so. Mr. Paul claims that he had his ministry before the
present Synod came into existence: so had Mr. McDonald. No doubt,
he answered questions and signed a formula identical with the present
questions and formula, but it was before the constitution of the present
Synod. Did Mr. Paul not do the same ? How did he become a
member of the former Synud ? Were there no questions and no
formula? There is not a bit of difference between Mr. Paul and Mr.
McDonald. The Trust Deed says that Mr. Mclntyre and Mr. Paul
“ did at Hamilton in the colony of Victoria, on the 28th day of March,
duly ordain and set apart to the office of the ministry that he might
be a minister of the Free Presbyterian Church, along ivith and
having equal powers with themselves the Eeverend William McDonald.”
That was before the constitution of the present Synod, and in fact was
preparatory to that constitution, so that the then ministers might have
an equal share in it. It is quite true, that since the constitution of
the present Synod neither Mr. Paul nor Mr. McDonald was asked to
answer the questions and to sign the formula. It is quite true that


Mr. Sinclair and Mr. Livingstone, since the constitution of the Synod
did answer the questions and sign the formula. It is true that the
answering and signing were necessary steps to be taken before they
entered upon their present ministry, but that does not place them on
a lower footing than Messrs Paul and McDonald; for the questions
and formula were framed that those answering and signing might, as
is found in the Trust Deed, “ after due examination be effectually
pledged to the unity aforesaid and thereupon might be admitted as
ministers into the said governing court upon a footing of parity with
the said Eeverend Alexander Mclntyre, Eeverend Arthur Paul and
Eeverend William McDonald.” Presbyterian parity is recognised in
the Trust Deed which Mr. Paul himself has framed: so Mr. Paul in
the Trust Deed contradicts Mr. Paul in the pamphlet.
All who now join the Synod are by answering the questions and
signing the formula pledged to a unity. What is that unity ? Just
the standards of the Church. Mr. Paul says that he never signed the
formula, but he took good care that ail who took part in the
re-constitution of the Synod should be pledged to that unity. Listen
to the following from the Trust Deed:
“ Now therefore it is hereby declared and assented to by the parties to
these presents that the said Reverend Alexander Mclntyre, Reverend
Arthur Paul and Reverend William McDonald by the said deed and
publication thereof did express consent and yield conformity and were
pledged effectually to the unity aforesaid in such manner and to such effect
that they became qualified under the provisions of this present Trust to
meet together and being met to act together as a Synod or Governing Court
or Governing Assembly for the exercise of spiritual superintendence over
the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria.”
Mr. Paul qualified himself with Mr Mclntyre and Mr. McDonald
for constituting a new Synod in place of a former one, by pledging
himself and them to the very same principles as are embodied in the
present questions and formula. With them he constituted the Synod.
He became the clerk of the Court, and held that office for 10 years.
He sat, deliberated and voted on all matters coming before them. He
took the lead in every discussion. He was the leader in all acts of
discipline. Although he was never, except temporarily, in the office
of Moderator, he was registered in the Eegistrar-General s office as
“Moderator of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria.” And yet
he has the face to say that he was only an associated member. I
think I have proved he was a member in the fullest sense of the word,
as much a member as Mr. Sinclair, and therefore in rebellion against
presbyterial authority. So much for the joke.
Section 7.— Mr. Paul's jealousy of Mr. Sinclair.
In his pamphlet Mr. Paul speaks of his being the object of
“jealousy and detraction.” Beyond the natural indignation at his
conduct there is nothing that I know of to warrant the accusation.
When Mr Paul forsook us, what was there about him to be jealous
of ? As for detraction, we did our level best to keep his conduct
secret, until, in self-defence, we had to speak of it. It was not our


wish to publish and parade his doings before the world. But, the
pamphlet reveals a strange jealousy on the part of Mr Paul of
Mr Sinclair. Some cf the special attacks on Mr. Sinclair which prove
this will now be noticed.
A. — Did Mr. Sinclair dominate the Synod , and mis-manage
its business ?
Mr. Paul affirms that he did. He supposes that Mr. Sinclair was
his successor, not only in the offices of the clerkship and representative
in the Titles office, but also in the position of leader. Perhaps, in a
sense he was. A town minister is in a better position to take the lead
than a country minister. But the other ministers were not exactly
nonentities. Mr. Paul did not always think us such. If Mr. Paul had
condescended to drop into one of our meetings, he would have found
us trying to take our share in the business. We are all prepared to
take our share in the responsibility. Mr. Sinclair, lam sure, does not
wish to receive all the praise, nor is it right that he should bear all the
blame. If the business were mismanaged, we all had our share in it.
Even Mr. Paul himself, who should have been present at our meeting
and helped us to manage it better, must bear his share of responsibility.
B. — Did Mr. Sinclair blight Qlendonald.
There are one or two at Glendonald not attending the services at
present. No doubt some of these were good friends of the Church
once, and may be so again. It is, however, not correct to say that
Glendonald is blighted. But, if it is, how can the blame be put on
Mr. Sinclair ? I have heard several reasons for the present alienation
of some who were good friends once, but none of them involved
Mr. Sinclair.
C. — Did Mr. Sinclair seek after newspaper notoriety.
It is strange we never heard of this. Newspaper notoriety is no
worse than pamphlet notoriety.
D. —Did Mr. Sinclair condone the second marriage of a man
whose former partner was still living ?
If Mr. Paul wishes us to understand that Mr. Sinclair condoned
a case of bigamy, then the reply is, “ no.” If he wishes us to under-
stand that Mr. Sinclair admitted to the communion certain parties,
after a divorce and second marriage, the reply is still, “ no.” It is
supposed that the reference is to Mr. Murdoch McKay, a former
resident of the Wimmera, but now of New South Wales. That
gentleman has assured the writer, and has authorised him to make
use of the statement that Mr. Paul himself, at Gre Gre, strongly
advised him to get a divorce, which he sometime afterward did. But
if there is anything wrong with Mr. Sinclair’s conduct, it is not in the
way of a nasty insinuation in a pamphlet sent from Glasgow, that
Mr. Paul should deal with it, but by the discipline of the Church.


E. —Did the late Dr. Nicolson, of Hobart, disapprove of
the “ Quarterly .”
He requested his name to be placed on the list of subscribers, by-
letter, and received, till his death, six copies of each issue, the same
number which he received of the Presbyter. At first he feared lest some
commendation of the Free Church of Scotland referred to it latterly,
but found it was not so.
F. —Is Mr. Sinclair a veritable Pluralist ?
In Scotland, a pluralist is a man who seeks to have more charges
or offices than one, so as to secure a large income. Is Mr. Sinclair a
pluralist in that sense ? He has charge of the congregation at
Geelong, to which Drvsdale was added at the earnest request of the
people there. For this the stipend was increased by £5O per annum.
The preaching at Drysdale every Sabbath afternoon necessitates the
keeping a horse and buggy. How much, if any, of the £5O is there
likely to be left at the end of the year, when all the expenses are paid?
Mr. Sinclair takes his turn in preaching at the various stations, but as
his own pulpit must be supplied, even if he gets at times a fee, there
is seldom any pecuniary benefit. I know that Mr. Sinclair is generally
out of pocket. He also preaches once a month in a hall in Melbourne.
What does he gain by that ? Where is there any sign of greed in
Mr. Sinclair’s self-denying labours. If he had loved money or ease, he
might have restricted his labours to Geelong itself, and not troubled
himself about anything outside, as Mr. Paul himself lor the last ten
years has done at St. Kilda. Mr. Paul has displayed the greatest
ignorance of the present position of the Church. He speaks of
Meredith, Clarendon and Glendonald as charges under the thumb of
Mr. Sinclair. There are but few services held at Meredith. Clarendon
never was a charge. Glendonald, with Meredith and Durham LeacC
were charges under the care of the late Rev. J. J. Stewart, M. A. But if
it were true that Mr. Sinclair extended his labours to take in all these
places, and keep them going till ministers could be got for them, would
that not be following the example of the late Rev. A. Mclntyre, his
predecessor at Geelong, who preached over two colonies, and whose
extensive and abundant labours were the subject of praise in deliver-
ance of the Provisional Court, written by Mr. Paul. Evidently what
was a praise in the one, is a crime in the other.
Section 8. —The probable clue to the maze.
The readers of Mr. Paul’s pamphlet and of this reply will feel
they are in a maze, and be hopeless of an outlet. But I believe there
is a* clue to the maze. It was to be expected that one with Mr. Paul’s
impractical temper, suspicious and jealous disposition, readiness to
find fault, and to put the worst construction on any action of friend or
foe, would, as a leader, sooner or later, come to grief. Failure as a
leader was inevitable in one who based his claim to leadership, not on
ability but, on gratitude. But the history of the Free Presbyterian
Church shows that Mr. Paul has been a failure, not only as a leader,
but even as a co-operator in building up a Free Church cause. He
himself confesses, on page 5 of his pamphlet, that the late Rev. A.


Mclntyre was “ the one only whole-hearted and ever-loyal co-operator
whom las yet met with in Victoria.” If this were true, it could be
accounted for in two ways; Ist, Mr. Mclntyre was only a portion of
his time in Victoria; 2nd, Mr. Paul was more accustomed to defer to
one, to whom he was under an obligation, than to demand that
unquestioning deference he expected from all others. But perhaps,
if the whole truth could be publicly told, it might be seen that even
Mr. Mclntyre was no exception to the rule. It is well known that
on the breaking up of the old Synod there was a temporary breach
between the late Mr. Mclntyre and Mr. Paul. The late Rev. Peter
McPherson and the late Rev Allan Macvean were loyal co-operators
for a time, but were glad to escape from him ; the one finding a refuge
in the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, and the other in the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
But in the present case, we stuck to our guns. It is Mr. Paul
who has practically left us. He took offence at something. That it
was at our sacramental policy is incredible. Whatever it was the
alienation was, in the first instance, with Mr. Sinclair. The petitions
re the sacraments were not heard of before November the 2nd, 1887.
We have evidence that the alienation with Mr. Sinclair began before
that date. No doubt, the refusal of Mr. Sinclair to reject the petitions
simpliciter would intensify a dislike already in existence. Personally
I have no evidence of any dislike on the part of Mr. Paul
before the receiving of the snappy letter at the end of 1888. Friendly
letters were received by me from him up to the beginning of June, 1888,
nearly a month after the granting of the prayer of the petitions.
Can we account for that dislike to Mr. Sinclair? We think we can.
However, for certain reasons only hints can be given, sufficient for
those who can read between the lines. The reason, we believe, will
be found in connection with the Camperdown-Purnim district.
The station of Camperdown became connected with the Free
Presbyterian Church about 1880. It originated in a secession from the
larger Presbyterian body, owing to a change in the form of worship.
As it included at least two elders, there was material at once for a
session. This was recognised, and Mr. Paul became the first interim
moderator. About 1881, Mr. Sinclair was settled in the charge of
Geelong, and he being the nearest ordained minister, was, on the motion
of Mr. Paul, appointed as his successor, interim moderator of the
Camperdown session. This position he has retained to this day.
About the end of 1881, Mr. McDonald, of Hamilton, the only
minister in the Colony of the denomination capable of preaching in
the Gaelic language, learning that there were a number of Highlanders
in the districts of Framlinghara and Purnim, that were favourably
inclined to the Free Presbyterian Church, being personally invited by
them, conceived the idea of visiting them, preaching to them in Gaelic,
and inducing them to unite with the station of Camperdown in
forming a Free Church charge. The movement gave every promise of
success. Mr. McDonald opened up correspondence with a minister
in New South Wales, from whom he extracted a promise to visit


Victoria and preach in those localities. But Mr. Paul put a stop to
the whole business. He was the leader, and Mr. McDonald had no
right to interfere with a leader’s business. As he said to the present
writer, during a visit I paid to Victoria, in 1882, it was Mr. McDonald’s
place to look after Hamilton and not after the Colony. That, of course,
was reserved for Mr. Paul himself. This led to the writing of that
famous, or perhaps infamous, letter to Mr. Munro, of Framlingham,
dated January sth, 1882. That letter was a tremendous snub
to Mr. McDonald. It was also a fatal stab at any hope of a Free
Church charge being established in that district. But Mr. Paul did
not understand it in that sense. Having put the movement in the
background, he thought that when he was ready, and had what he
deemed a safe preacher to offer, the offer would be accepted. In this
he was doomed to disappointment. To one accustomed to expect his
own ideas to be carried out in everything, the failure to get a minister
settled in the Camperdown-Purnim district was a tremendous slap in
the face. He put the blame on Mr. Sinclair. His influence must be
greater than his own. After all, this was a groundless suspicion; but
I believe this groundless suspicion is the foundation of that dislike to
Mr. Sinclair, in which after a time we all became involved, and which
has been growing in intensity ever since. Under the influence of that
dislike arose the imagination that his influence in the Synod was at an
end. This led him to separate himself from its members, and in a
“huff” to refuse to attend its meetings.
Paet 2. —Me. Paul’s Attack ok the Synod.
Section 1. — Contradictory Accusations.
That Mr. Paul is angry and has nursed his anger from 1889 to
the present day is plain to the readers of the pamphlet, but the reason of
his anger is not so plain. His explanations are not only extraordinary
but also contradictory. On the one hand, the accusation is that the
members of the Synod are trying to compel him to attend the meetings
of the Court; on the other hand, the accusation is that the members
of the Synod are trying to expel him from their fellowship. The
manner in which Mr. Paul see-saws from the one hand to the other
is something marvellous.
A. — That we are trying to compel him to attend the meetings
of the Court.
On page 7 of his pamphlet, Mr. Paul says: “ Mr. Sinclair
especially employed all methods in which he is an adept, to hunt me
out of my retirement, and the others, who seem merely to follow him*
backed up his policy. There is a peculiarly repulsive and even
disgusting aspect of this restless ingenuity, which Mr. Sinclair used
to goad me out of all patience.” Again on pages 12-13, he says :
“ But the fact that I have taken no part with them seems to have
given dire offence ; and a great deal of what Mr. Sinclair comically
calls ‘ conciliation ’ consisted in various manoeuvres to bring me into
attendance at their meetings This, however, was the


sum and substance of the Sinclair pretext for constant nagging and
disturbance.” It may be sufficient, after what has already been said
in the first part of this reply, to say that the various manoeuvres
referred to, can only mean the necessary correspondence of a clerk of
Synod with every person still regarded as a member of the Court; and
the various attempts to interview Mr. Paul, with a view of discovering,
if possible, a reason for his isolation. It was not strictly speaking a
compelling him to attend the meetings of the Court. They may be
spoken of as attempts at reconciliation, but not as in any sense
comical. The more his conduct and theirs is examined by a fair-minded
person, the more will they be justified and he condemned. They have
attempted to|meet him in a Christian manner. Has he attempted to
meet them in a Christian manner ? He may sneer at their efforts as
“ comical conciliation,” but there is One above who does not sneer at
Christian efforts at reconciliation. He does not regard a Synod seek-
ing a reason for the absence of a member as guilty of “ nagging and
disturbance.” When it becomes evident that a member is offended,
He does not regard the trying, in a Christian manner, to discover the
offence, in the hope of removing it, as “repulsive and disgusting.”
But with Mr. Paul such conduct goaded him out of all patience, and
led him to forget his manners, and return letters unopened.
B. — That we are trying to expel him from our fellowship.
But the same Mr. Paul on the first page of his pamphlet says;
“ Apparently they would not regret if they could exclude me from
having any place or consideration in it altogether.” On the next page
he says: “ They will hardly allow me the standing of a Free Church
minister at all. Their object, indeed, seems to be to make me the
object of another act of expulsion such as the Unionist directed
against me in 1857.” Here we may observe Mr. Paul speaks doubt-
fully for he uses the words “apparently,” and “ seems to be.” But on
page 14 he speaks positively, for he says: “It is for the Free
Presbyterians of Victoria to say whether they are going to look
passively on, while this new act of expulsion, like the Unionist Act of
1857 is being worked out to a conclusion,”
C. — Are we plotting to take the people and properties of the
Free Church into the Union ?
Mr. Paul not only accuses us of trying to expel him, but also
hints very plainly that our object is to get rid of him in order to join
with our congregations and properties the Union Church. On page 4
he says : “ The Unionists expelled their own brethren, to have the
way clear for a new alliance with strangers. What is it that
Mr. Sinclair and those acting with him have now in view ? ” On the
next page, he says: “ The late Allan Macvean, minister at Brunswick,
deserted the Free Church connexion, and went over to the Union,
taking a large slice of Free Church properties along with him.” And
on the last page, he says : “ What is the ultimate end aimed at by all
the persistent agitation it would be hard to say. Nothing liker the
methods of the late Allan Macvean has been witnessed in the Free


Presbyterian body since Mr. Macvean’s time.” It is extremely amusing
to see how adroitly Mr. Paul twists the fact that he has refused for
the last ten years to attend the meetings of the Synod into an accusa-
tion that we are trying to get rid of him. Our keeping his name on
our roll is, in his estimation, nothing more or less than a Unionist plot
to expel him. Unionist plots are the bane of Mr, Paul’s life. They
are the scare-crows of his daily existence ; the night-mares of his
midnight slumbers. The letter to Framlingham was the nipping a
Unionist plot in the bud. Even the Hamilton trustees, according to
Mr. Paul, refused to sign the Trust Deed under the influence of
Unionists.
D. — Was there a conspiracy to seize on the revenues of St. Kilda ?
But Mr. Paul hints, if he does no more than hint, of accusations
more extraordinary still. On page 14, he says: “ But if it is to be
a condition of office in the Church, that every man must bow to the
golden calf represented by Mr. Reid and Mr. Sinclair, (rich men both,
yet not satisfied), then lam not in it.” Mr. Paul knows very well
that there is no such condition in the Church; so that, what I
presume is a threat of resignation, is meaningless. I am doubtful if
it is correct to say that Mr. Reid and Mr. Sinclair are richer than
Mr. Paul. I do not learn of either taking trips to Scotland, and
printing and circulating inflammatory pamphlets throughout the
world. Ido not think it is true, at least of Mr. Sinclair. However,
I never felt it my business to inquire into the financial position of anj
of the brethren. I hope they are all richer than I am, both in faith
and in purse. But what do the words, “ yet not satisfied ” mean.
Especially what do they mean when taken in connection with the
following questions of Mr. Paul; “Is it the revenues of the St. Kilda
Church that are the objectives of this Reid and Sinclair combination ?
Or rather is it not ? In other words, is it not the design now in hand
to be quit of me by starving me out? ” To understand this, it is to be
remembered that the St. Kilda congregation is endowed. In connection
with State aid to religion sufficient funds were secured to build certain
houses, the rents of which are available for the minister’s support.
In fact, at present there is scarcely any other support, so that without
receiving these rents, it is doubtful if Mr. Paul could continue
minister at St. Kilda. Mr. Sinclair is one of the trustees of the
St. Kilda property. That he with Mr. Reid combined to seize on the
St. Kilda revenues is to me an utterly absurd idea. This charge would
be tenfold more serious than the preceding one if it were not tenfold
more ridiculous. The revenues of St. Kilda belong to the St. Kilda
congregation to be used for congregational purposes. They are used
now to support Mr. Paul, and if he ceased to be minister of St. Kilda,
they would, I presume, be used for the support of his successor. (See
Appendix). How any member of the Synod could put one
penny in his own pocket, is more than I can conceive. Unless in
payment for supply, for any member of the Synod to take to his own
use the revenues of St. Kilda would be a breach of trust. But the
members of the Synod have a right to see that those revenues are not


put to a wrong use, and perhaps they may be called upon to exercise
their right. At this stage, I may say that Ido not know of anything
to warrant even the suspicions, much less the accusations, implied in
Mr. Paul’s statements. I hope lam saying this, without prejudice, to
any right, I or any other member of the Synod may have, to take
steps, if thought advisable or necessary, to compel Mr. Paul to
explain his meaning or prove and justify his statements.
E.— Sinclair ill-will.
Mr. Paul alleges that he has been the subject of “jealousy and
detraction ” and “ Sinclair ill-will.” Reading Mr. Paul’s pamphlet,
one is led to believe that it was the manifestation of these things that
led him to forsake the Synod. But that is a thoroughly wrong
impression. As I have said, Mr. Paul forsook the Synod early in 1888.
On page 8 of the pamphlet, he refers to the notice sent to the
Government re the office of representative in May, 1889. He says;
“ This is the first evidence I had of the “ malevolence which had been
silently growing up against me.” Mr. Paul himself is then a valuable
witness that he had no evidence of ill-will previous to that date. He
therefore left the Synod before he had any evidence of “ Sinclair
ill-will.” All the evidence he had to justify the charge of ill-will on
the part of Mr. Sinclair and the others belongs to a period after that
date. I shall now proceed to examine that evidence.
Section 2. —The Comedy of Errors,
The earliest evidence he had of what he calls the “Sinclair ill-will”
he puts as follows;
“ The position of representative with the Government, which I
resigned in favour of Mr. Sinclair, he managed to such an effect that
I received a notice from the Government, informing me that my
license to celebrate marriages in Victoria was cancelled. In other
words, the action taken by him and the rest in this matter, led the
Government to believe that I had been deposed, and that my resigna-
tion of the duties of representative was a compulsory and penal one.
This was the first evidence I had of the malevolence which had been
silently growing up against me I took my own way of setting myself
right with the Government, and the effect is, that though Mr Sinclair
is now “ representative,” he is not successor to me in that office.
In effect, I retired upon that status, of a Free Presbyterian
minister, which I had before Mr. Sinclair and his friends were heard
of in Victoria, and which I never owed to, or held in subordination to
any of them.”
That Mr Paul received a notice from the Registrar-general’s office
that his licence to celebrate marriages was cancelled is a fact. It is a
fact, however, for which we disclaim any responsibility, and therefore,
it is a fact that cannot be given as evidence of ill-will on our part.
That the action taken by us led the Government to believe he was a
deposed minister, and that the resignation was compulsory and penal is
not true. Notwithstanding Mr Paul’s denial, Mr Sinclair is his
successor in the office of representative with the Government. Mr


Paul, both before and after the event referred to, held the status of a
Pree Presbyterian minister. His status as such was not and could not
be affected, so that his statement on this subject is extraordinary.
It may be remembered that the motion that Mr Sinclair be Mr
Paul’s successor in the office of representative was moved by me and
seconded by Mr Paul himself. But, it was not to take effect until
certain business then in hand should be cleared off. It was found that
Mr Paul would not go on with the business, and then it became necessary
for the Church to act. las Moderator in May, 1889, was instructed to
notify the Government of the change. I asked for an extract of minute
and for direction as to what office the notification should be sent. I
was told to send it to the Registrar-general’s office, it being supposed
that if that were the wrong office, it would be forwarded from there to
the proper quarter. It has been said that Mr Paul complained to his
friends that he could never get a sight of the notice sent to the
Government. And yet he has characterised it as an attempt to deprive
him of his licence to celebrate marriages. If he never had a sight of
the notice sent to the Government, it was his own fault; he could hare
had a cbpy any time for the asking.
It was in the terms of the following motion: —
‘'lnter alia— Mr W. J. Reid moved, and Mr Angus Cameron seconded
and it was unanimously agreed to, that the Moderator, the Rev. Hugh
Livingstone, inform the proper officer in the Government service that at a,
former meeting of this Court, the Rev. Arthur Paul, of St. Kilda, resigned
the office of agent or correspondent with the Government for the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and that the Rev. J. Sinclair, of Geelong,-
has'been" appointed'to succeed him; and request that Mr Sinclair be
accordingly acknowledged from henceforth and till further notice, as the
age,pt or correspondent or representative with the Government.”
Is there anything in this to lead the Government to believe that
Mr Paul was a deposed minister? Is there any evidence in this of a
malevolence silently growing up? Surely a Synod can take proper steps
to have its business carried on without being chargeable with ill-will.
A. —The cancelling of Mr Paul's Licence.
J On my return from the Synod meeting of May, 1889, I sent to
the Registrar-general the notification of the change in the office of
representative as instructed. In a day or two, 1 received notice that
Mr Paul’s name was removed from the list of ministers licensed to
celebrate marriages. To say that I was amazed and alarmed is a mild
way of expressing my feelings. I felt some mistake had occurred, and
had a fear that it arose from misunderstanding my notification. To
me, it was some inexplicable mystery, and I feared calamity. What
shall I do, I exclaimed—write at once —telegraph —go myself. The
latter I decided upon, in the vain hope, as it proved, that I might
prevent notice of this reaching Mr Paul. Telegraphing to Mr Sinclair
to join me at Geelong, I started next morning for Melbourne. There,
we had an interview with the late Mr Krone. He understood our
business, at once. “ Mr. Paul,” he said, “ has been here. It was a
mistake of our clerk for which he has been reprimanded. We have


satisfied Mr. Paul, that it was a mistake on our part, and that you had
nothing to do with it.'’ Yet, Mr. Paul now says; we led the'
Government to believe he was a deposed minister, and on this he
founds a charge of ill-will.
B. — T\ie office oj Representative.
The office of representative has only to do with the Titles Office.
Mr. Paul seems to have been in ignorance of this fact. Evidently the
impression on his mind was that the office had to do with all
Government business. We started with the same idea. We had this
excuse: we were new to the business and were feeling our way. Hence
the mistake we made in sending the notification to the Registrar-
general’s Office instead of to the Titles Office. However, mistakes
can be rectified. The notification reached the proper place at
length; but, here a new difficulty arose. It should have been signed
by Mr. Paul. Of course he refused to sign it. But it would never do
for the business of the Government and the Church to be obstructed
by stubborn opposition. There is a way to manage such cases. The
officer to whom the unsigned document was sent, said that he would
“ settle Mr. Paul’s hash for him,” and he did it: and in spite of Mr.
Paul’s unfriendly attitude and action, Mr. Sinclair became Mr. Paul’s
successor in the office of representative.
C.— The Registrar-general's Office.
It is a surprising fact that Mr. Paul, who so far as I can discover
has never been Moderator of the Synod since the re-construction, has
been registered for twenty years, at least, in the Registrar-general's
office as Moderator of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria. This
must be what Mr. Paul meant when he called himself the “ head ” of
the Church. This helps us to understand the reason of the cancelling
of his licence. In Presbyterian churches the moderator is changed
every year, and consequently there is a change in registration. The
clerk in the Registrar-general’s office, on getting my notification signed
as Moderator, thought there was the usual change in the office of
Moderator and cancelled Mr. Paul’s licence as Moderator accordingly;
But on ouriuterviewing Mr. Krone and learning of the rectification
of the mistake, we were told by that gentleman that he understood
from Mr. Paul that the other office was to stand. We asked, who had
the choosing of the officer to represent us, and were informed of course
that we had the choosing ourselves. Then we said, it is the Synod’s
wish that Mr. Sinclair succeed Mr. Paul. Notwithstanding this Mr.
Paul did continue registered as Moderator of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria. While registered in this way, he was the only one
through whom business on behalf of the Synod, such as registering other
ministers could ordinarily be done. Yet, Mr. Krone allowed this
business to be done through Mr. Sinclair. All this time, we were iq.
profound ignorance of the fact that Mr. Paul was registered as
Moderator. Whether he knew it himself or not, I cannot say. I believe
the truth is that Mr. Paul, the late Mr. Krone and the members of the
Synod all got into a fog over the business of registration. But the fog
.• !1i :>• m -'i ■. :)vra6ti "ui.


clearing away. When Mr. Paul left for Scotland, the next usual
quarterly return was sent to the Government Statist, by Mr. W. Paul,
who informed him of his father’s absence from the colony. This was
the notification referred to in the following correspondence. It led to
a certain result.
Office of the Government Statist,
Melbourne, 18th September, 1897.
Reverend Sir,
Having been notified that the Rev. Arthur Paul has left the
colony, I have the honor to request that you will be good enough
to forward the authority necessary for the removal of his name from
the “ List of Registered Clergy.”
You are informed that his name should have been removed and
re-registered upon his cessation of office as Moderator, he having been
registered under Sub-section 11, Section 4, Part I, of Marriage Act, i.e„
as Head of Denomination.
I have the honour to ho,
Reverend Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
{Signed) Richd. W. D. Treacet,
Assistant Government Statist-
Free Presbyterian Manse, Myers Street, Geelong,
4th October, 1897.
The Government Statist,
Melbourne.
Sir, —In accordance with the request of your letter of 18th ult., I
hereby authorise your removal of the name of the Rev. Arthur
Paul, of St. Kilda, from the “ List of Registered Clergy,” he having
left the colony for a time. On his return I will hope to advise you,
that his name may be re-registered.
I am,
Yours respectfully,
{Signed) John Sinclair,
Representative with the Government of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
Office of the Government Statist,
Melbourne, Bth October, 1897,
Reverend Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 4th
instant, and in compliance with the authority contained therein have
removed the name of the Rev. Arthur Paul from the “ List of
Registered Clergy.”
I have the honour to be,
Reverend Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
{Signed) Richd. W. D. Treacet,
Assistant Government Statist.
It may be noticed that the business of the Registrar-general’a
office, is now taken over to the Statist’s office. This correspondence
shows that the difficulty and absurdity of Mr. Paul’s position is ended.
Owing to his departure for Scotland, Mr. Paul’s licence as Moderator
had to be and is now cancelled. Mr Sinclair has received instruction,,
on his return, to register him as an ordinary member of the Synod.
The comedy of errors will then be ended.


Section 3.— The Melbourne Service.
The second matter upon which Mr. Paul relies to prove “ ill-will ”
on the part of Mr. Sinclair and the Synod is the holding of a week-day
service in the Protestant Hall, Melbourne. “ Anyone,” he says, “ to'
whom the discipline of St. Kilda was obnoxious, had but to turn to
Mr. Sinclair’s gathering at the Protestant Hall, in Melbourne, and he
was sure of a welcome.” Mr, Sinclair was not the originator of the
service in Melbourne. It was the late Eev. J. J. Stewart that started
that cause; and it was in response to a petition signed by the people
who wanted it, which was granted by the Synod in February, 1892, four
years after Mr. Paul had ceased to attend the Synod. When Mr.
Stewart got the call to Glendonald, Mr: Sinclair was requested to give a
weekday service, so as to keep the friends together, and he agreed to do
so. If this had been any interference with Mr. Paul and his work in
St. Kilda, the Courts of the Church were open to receive his dissent
or complaint. As he never dissented or complained in any way, he
must be held to have agreed. There was never any interference with
the discipline of St. Kilda. If there was any interference with the
rights of St. Kilda, where is the complaint ? How is it that the Synod
has never heard of such a complaint ? Does not a Synod exist for the
purpose of hearing and settling complaints P It is not true, as
Mr, Paul alleges, that the Melbourne service was intended as a means
of “ conciliation.” It was simply intended as a means of preaching
the Gospel to those that wanted it there. St. Kilda does not include
Melbourne. How can the preaching of the Gospel outside of
Mr. Paul’s charge, and without any dissent or complaint from him be
an evidence of ill-will ?
Section 4.— The Presbyterial Visitation of St. Kilda.
The next matter Mr. Paul relies upon to prove his charge of
“ill-will” is the presbyterial visitation of St. Kilda. As a matter of
fact, arrangements had been made to visit all the congrega-
tions, either by deputy or by a meeting of the Synod. There was
nothing, in itself, exceptional in the visitation of the congregation of
St. Kilda. But, of course, there were certain difficulties that had to be
faced in connection with this particular visitation. It was nearly ten
years since we had met at St. Kilda, and during the whole of that
period the minister of the congregation had been absent from the
meetings of the Court. But, it was urged, that instead of these being
reasons why we should not go on with the visitation, they were reasons
why we should. If we delayed having a visitation of the congregation,
it might be held that we had abandoned our spiritual jurisdiction. If
Mr. Paul still continued a member of the Court, (and he had never
resigned his membership and we had never removed his name), we had
a right to know the reason of his long continued absence from our
meetings. Other methods of discovering that reason having failed, a
presbyterial visitation might be successful. Besides, it was said by
members of the congregation at St. Kilda, that we were afraid to meet
Mr. Paul, or we would not have stayed away so long. The following
is a cepy of the motion authorising the meeting:—


“The Court having before them the unaccountable and long
continued isolation of the Rev. A. Paul, of St. Kilda, and the improper
views arising therefrom according to rumour, agreed, on the motion of
the clerk, seconded by Mr. Reid, to meet in the Free Presbyterian
Church, St. Kilda, on Wednesday, 14th October next, at 11 o’clock a m.;
the minister to be notified, and the meeting advertised, that the con-
gregation may have an opportunity of being present, and the
moderator to preach.”
Can any sensible person see in this any evidence of “ ill-will ” to
Mr. Paul? Whether we acted wisely or otherwise, we did not act
from any feeling of ill-will to him. We would all hare rejoiced, if we
could have got the difference, whatever it was, settled in a proper and
Christian manner. But Mr. Paul’s view of it is as follows : “If the
spirit of mischief had been given a free hand, nothing more mischievous
and destructive to the Church’s welfare could well have been put in
shape. It was admirably fitted to make the whole Free Church
denomination ‘an infamy to the people,’ and in that respect it has well
answered its purpose." (Note 8). When reading this extraordinary
language, oneisledto ask; Does Mr. Paul really know what heis saying?
The foundation of his extraordinary statements evidently is that the
meeting was called “ without leave either asked or obtained by the minis-
ter.” Whoever heard of a Synod asking leave of a minister under its
jurisdiction to meet in his church ? It would be a comical idea for a
Synod holding a presbyterial visitation, trying to hire a hall in the
neighbourhood of the church to hold its meeting. Mr. Paul was our
leader once, and our business is done according to his training. He
has as leader appointed meetings in churches, without leave either
asked or obtained of the minister, and has taken the lead in a
presbyterial visitation, when the minister was as unfriendly to the Synod
as he himself now is. He cannot complain, if we have followed his
example. What is there about St. Kilda that to hold a meeting of
the Synod there, is fitted to do all the dreadful things he has said.
Surely, that is to give a very bad character to St. Kilda. I shall
afterwards discuss the Trust Deed and the minister’s rights alleged
to be guarded there. Mr. Paul says : “ one of the elders was advertised
that Mr. Paul was to give an account of himself.” The only foundation
for this statement that I can discover is that in a private conversation
it was asked, if Mr. Paul’s wilful absence from the Synod for such a
long period would be discussed, and the reply was, that “ it could he.
Mr. Paul goes on to say; “Of course this rare specimen of the
Sinclair temper could have but one ending ” This is not true: it could
have had a far better than it had. The meeting of Synod at St.
Kilda, on the 14th of October, 1896, could have ended as previous
meetings had ended. Mr. Paul might have been in his place at
the meeting, and the long isolation might have ended. Or, if that would
have been too much to expect from an apostle of Mr, Paul’s peculiar
turn of mind, he might have done as he did on the 21st November 1888.
He might have left the church open and have gone on his travels to
Glendonald. “ The gates of the church,” says Mr. Paul, “were found,
as they always are on other days than the Sabbath —that is, locked.


Mr. Paul tells the truth, but he does not tell the whole truth. It
would have been no surprise to us to find the gates of the church locked,
so long as we could have gone to the manse and asked for the keys.
The surprise was to find the gates of the manse locked, and three of
Mr. Paul’s sons standing guard, even, it is alleged, with threatening
language, as if we were a band of robbers, instead of being a peaceful
Synod coming to hold a meeting of the Court in one ot the churches
under our jurisdiction.
It is to be remembered that Mr. Sinclair is a trustee of the St.
Kilda property. He reminded Mr. Paul’s sons of his position and of
his rights as a trustee. They replied that they would admit him as a
trustee, on condition that he would not take any of the members of the
Synod with him. Mr. Sinclair refused to accept admission on these
terms. The conduct of Mr. Paul’s sons naturally caused some excitement
amongst the members of the Synod and the members of the St. Kilda
congregation who had come to attend the meeting. It is not true that
any were reproached as “cowards.” I did not hear the word used, nor
will I use the word now. Yet, I cannot help feeling that there was a
want of manliness on the part of Mr. Paul in refusing to face the
Synod, and in leaving his three sons to fight his battle. Here, I may
say, I am sorry to find Mr. Paul writing in such a flippant manner re
the “ D.Y.” Surely he has forgotten what these letters stand for.
Nearly a page of Mr. Paul’s pamphlet is taken up with an
attempt to convict the members of the Synod of ignorance of Pree
Church principles - r and through that ignorance acting contrarily to
their profession. But when the facts are known, the attempts will
be seen to be a failure. There was at least one present who had been
in many an ecclesiastical disturbance, and who, consequently, did not
lose his head. He gave very guarded advice, and his advice was finally
taken. It was that the Synod should do nothing whatever but what was
spiritual. The trustee should open the gate of the church-yard, on
his own responsibility. He w T as to do it as Caesar’s representative, as
one entitled to hold the property for the use of the Church. The other
trustee was absent. The key of the gate could not be found. The
trustee got a plumber to open the gate. When the trustee had an
open gate, he invited the Synod to enter. A meeting, in accordance
with ancient precedent, vras held on the ground. A motion was passed
that we adjourn to meet at Geelong. The meeting then closed. The
trustee left the gate as he found it. I defy Mr. Paul or any other to
say that there was the slightest mixing of things secular and spiritual.
We gave the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God.
The only disturbance came from the sons of Mr. Paul, who were loud
in their threats of legal proceedings, and who attempted by physical
violence to prevent the lock of the gate being fixed. That their threats
were mere wind is seen by the fact that no attempt has been made to sue
us for trespass. This was not the first attempt in our history to prevent
a Court of the Church meeting at an appointed time and place. The
other attempt was at Hamilton. Mr. Paul’s own opinion of that may
be seen from the following extract of the minute written by him :


“This unseemly violence offered to the members o£ a Court of
Christ’s House was, however, defeated by the good hand of an over-
ruling Providence.” Mr. Paul of 1883 thoroughly condemns Mr. Paul
of 1896.
A. —The Censure passed on Mr. Paul.
It was not to be expected that the conduct of Mr. Paul could pass
without some action. The Court contented itself with passing the
following censure, and sending him a copy.
“ The Court resumed consideration of the treatment at St. Kilda
yesterday by the minister there ; after which the clerk moved and Mr.
Livingstone seconded, and it was unanimously agreed —That the Synod
gravely censure the Rev. Arthur Paul, of St. Kilda, for the uncalled-
for and aggravated affront offered by him yesterday (October 14th,
1896) to this Court, of which he is a member, by locking the Synod out
of the Church there, similar conduct to which he had emphatically
condemned in others —his conduct being in direct opposition to his
ordination vows, and the constitution of this Church as subscribed by
him; and the Court require him to express his deep regret for this,,
and, (to use his own words regarding another case) for ‘ setting
himself to reject all conciliatory overtures ’ from this Court. The
fact was also dwelt upon that Mr. Paul’s conduct was without cause
given or known to the brethren.”
The passing of such a censure was quite within the power of the
Court, as may be seen from the following extract from the “ Code of.
Discipline ” drawn up by Mr. Paul himself.
“ SITMMAEY PeOCEDUBE. —
Aggravated contempt of the authority of any court, or physical
violence, or threats used to obstruct the proceedings of any court, or
the convening of its members when the offence is committedin presence
of the court, or against the members of it, in order to prevent the
court being constituted, may be dealt with summarily without an act
of process, as the gravity of the case may require.”
B. —The Telegraphic correspondence with Mr. Paul.
The copy of the censure sent to Mr. Paul was not returned by
him. To the astonishment of the Court, at its next meeting held at
Geelong, on the 13th January, 1897, the moderator reported receiving
a telegram from Mr. Paul, which he laid upon the table. It ran as-
follows ; “ Without prejudice regret you mistake your jurisdiction.”
After the long silence, and the declared determination to have nothing
more to do with the Synod, it looked as if our censure had some good
result.
I took the business of replying to Mr. Paul in hand and wrote
the following reply, which the Synod agreed to, and instructed the
moderator, Mr. McDonald, to send: “We do not mistake our juris-
diction, as a ministerial member of this Court can only cease to be
under its jurisdiction by the Court’s acceptance of his demission of his
charge, or by some formal process, or by death.” This reply was
based on the idea that Mr. Paul disputed our jurisdiction over himself,
that is, our right to pass the censure upon him. We afterwards
discovered that that was not disputed. A second telegram came
from Mr. Paul next morning : “ Your telegram yesterday irrelevant.


You still mistake jurisdiction. Communicate.” The word
communicate , as all members of Presbyterian Courts know, means —
make it known to the Court officially. Mr. Paul had at length opened
up communication with the Synod. But what was meant by mistaking
our jurisdiction was a puzzle. So I wrote the following reply, which
was again sent by Mr. McDonald: “ Kindly explain how we mistake
our jurisdiction. Have communicated.” Before a reply could come
to this the Synod closed and I was on my way home. This telegraphic
correspondence was published in the Quarterly of March, 1897, in
connection with the report of the Synod meeting. The next meeting
of the Synod was held on the 4th of May, two months later than the
preceding one. At this the reply to the former telegram was read as
follows : “ Model Deed gives a minister right to appoint all meetings
in his own church, sections 22 and 23. Thanks for to-day’s telegram.”
The following reply was drawn up, principally by the clerk, and was
sent to Mr. Paul by registered letter: “ Sections 22 and 23 of Model
Deed require trustees to permit the minister to hold all meetings for
proper purposes in his church; and section 26 requires trustees to
obey all directions of the Governing Court. Eor any minister to have
sole right to appoint all meetings to the exclusion of this Church
Court would be subversive of the Presbyterianism conserved in the
Deed and Code of Discipline, and would lead directly to Congrega-
tionalism. The Code of Discipline states ‘ that the Presbytery
retains a paramount power of visitation over the congregations and its
officers, and may exercise such power at any time, as they see cause.’ ”
This telegram and the reply were published in the Quarterly of June,
1897. There was no intentional separation of one part of this curious
telegraphic correspondence from another. Each telegram from
Mr. Paul was published in connection with the report of the meeting
at which it was read. Each reply was published in connection with
the report of the meeting which authorised it. There was not merely
a month, but three months, between the publishing of the reports.
This shows how carelessly Mr, Paul has written and how little he has
inquired into the facts. The plain statement I have written should be
a sufficient reply to any charge of artifice or trickery in separating the
telegrams. Yet Mr. Paul, ever ready to put the worst construction on
everything, writes of the matter as follows :
“ Mr. Sinclair’s way of evading the Trust Deed was very
characteristic. He took a month to give in his pleas against my read-
ing of it. He separated the telegram above mentioned from others
which led up to it. He left the preceding telegrams in one number
of his periodical by themselves, as if they were the entire correspon-
dence. Then, after a month, he printed the last telegram by itself,
apart from the preceding ones, to which it was a climax. Even then
he did not venture to quote the language of the Trust Deed, which
would have staggered even those who seem ready to take his word for
anything. Mr. Sinclair may, likely enough, think that such a method
is honest, but if another opinion on it may be ventured alongside of
of his, it may safely be thought that Mr. Sinclair’s way in this matter
is much like the artifices used in electioneering literature, in which
anything that will cast a dust in the electors’ eyes is considered
quite fair.”


In sending his first telegram, Mr. Paul should have been more
explicit. To tell us merely that we had mistaken our jurisdiction was
to tell us practically nothing. It was quite natural for us, under the
circumstances, to suppose he referred to himself. It apparently came
as an answer to the censure we had sent him. Even the second
telegram, though it revealed that Mr. Paul did not mean himself, did
not make the matter any plainer. He says it was at our own request
he had sent a telegram informing us that we had mistaken our juris-
diction. It was after we had received two telegrams containing that
assertion that we asked him kindly to explain what he meant. The
answer we then got was a reference to two sections of the Trust Deed,
with the assertion that “ Model Deed gives a minister right to appoint
all meetings in his own church.” The first part of the Synod’s reply
to this was a reference to the duties of trustees. They are required
to permit the minister to hold all meetings for proper purposes in his
church. This was laid hold upon by Mr. Paul, and he asserts that
this was a begging of the question. By begging the question, he
explains, he means, taking for granted the matter in dispute. But
what is the matter in dispute? The last part of the answer shows
that Mr. Sinclair took for granted that Mr. Paul would not dispute
the right of presbyterial visitation. We hold that the holding of a
meeting for the purpose of a presbyterial visitation, or even the hold-
ing an ordinary meeting is a proper use of a building belonging to a
congregation under the Synod’s spiritual jurisdiction. All the
privileges belonging to a minister, if a charge is vacant, belong to the
Governing Court. When a minister is inducted these privileges are
vested in him as the delegate of the Governing Court. It retains its
spiritual jurisdiction over him. For a sufficient reason he may be
deposed and his privileges revert to the Governing Court again. The
Code of Discipline says plainly :
“ Notwithstanding the delegation of the presbytery’s authority
into the hands of the pastor ordinarily, the presbytery retains a
paramount power of visitation over the congregation and the office-
bearers; and they may exercise such power at any time, as they
see cause.”
Now, if I understand Mr. Paul aright, to exercise that paramount
power of visitation by calling a meeting of Synod in the St. Kilda
church, in order to discover, if possible, a reason for the minister’s
isolation, is “ in clear contravention of the minister’s rights, as these
are guarded and guaranteed in the Trust Deed of the St. Kilda
property.” According to Mr. Paul no presbyterial visitation could
be held, unless he was first consulted and his consent obtained. And
even then, he himself, and not the Synod, would have to approve,
direct and appoint the meeting. That, as the Synod in its answer to
Mr. Paul’s last telegram said, would be Congregationalism and not
Presbyterianism (Note 9). But Mr. Paul rejoins, “ But what answer
is that to the provisions of the Trust Deed itself? ” It may be no
answer to the provisions of the Trust Deed itself; it does not profess
to be that; but it is an answer to Mr. Paul’s interpretation of the
Trust Deed. The Trust Deed, as Mr. Paul says, is from end to end


his own' composition. “ Probably, therefore,” be says, “ I know the
intent of that proviso that Mr. Sinclair tries by his double plea to
evade. Well, then, so far as the proviso guarding the minister’s rights
answers the purpose its framer intended, it was designed exactly as a
check on such high-flying Presbyterianism as Mr. S. wants to practice.”
This means, of course, it was designed to prevent a Synod or
Presbytery from exercising its paramount power of visitation, except
the minister of the congregation consented and himself appointed the
meeting. The Code of Discipline is also from end to end Mr Paul’s
own composition. According to Mr. Paul’s interpretation the Trust
Deed and Code of Discipline are contradictory; the one makes
provision for preventing, and the other for holding, a presbyterial
visitation. When he drew up the Code of Discipline, there was the
prospect of having to deal with a minister alleged to be in rebellion
against presbyterial authority. The statement in the Code of
Discipline re the paramount power of visitation was inserted with a
view to its exercise. In accordance with its provision there was a
presbyterial visitation, in which Mr. Paul took a leading part, without
the consent, and without the meeting being appointed by the minister.
Did Mr. Paul know at that time that there was in the Trust Deed a
proviso forbidding the exercise of that power, under such circum-
stances ? Or did Mr. Paul intend in drawing up these to create two
classes of ministry ; ministers whose churches were under the Trust
Deed, and ministers whose churches were not; ministers whose
charges could not be visited without their own consent, and ministers
whose charges could ?
It is true Mr. Paul framed the Model Trust Deed. It is true he
is the best judge of what he intended by its various provisions. But,,
it does not follow that the Synod is bound to accept his interpretation.
The members of the Synod have the right to interpret the Deed for
themselves. It is their duty to interpret doubtful clauses in consistency,
if possible, with plainer clauses, and with the presbyterianism of the
whole. The assertion of Mr. Paul, we may again state, amounts to
this, that the holding of a presbyterial visitation in his church, without
his consent, and without his calling of the meeting is “in flagrant
defiance of the St. Kilda’s minister’s rights, as the Trust Deed of the
property secures them.” Now let us look at the 22nd and 23rd sections
of the Trust Deed and see, if according to our interpretation, this is
true. In the 23rd section, w r e find that the minister is, while holding
the office, to occupy the property and“ exercise his ministerial functions,
without let or hindrance.” Now, we may ask, was the holding of a
meeting of Synod in his church, a possible interference with theexercises
of his ministerial functions? Some may think, it might interfere \yith
the holding of another meeting by him at the same time in the church.
But, it should be remembered that the holding of another meeting
anywhere, during the sitting of a Synod, by any member of the Synod,
is illegal. Besides it was part of Mr. Paul’s ministerial functions to
be present at the meeting and to take part in its proceedings. There is
nothing, then in section 23 to show that we in any way infringed any
right of Mr. Paul as minister of St. Kilda.


In section 22, provision is made that the trustees do and shall
permit the church to be used for its proper purposes, by the congregation,
the minister and other office-bearers. Did the by nod in any way
infringe this provision ? If a presbyterial visitation is a proper
purpose, surely not. Perhaps Mr. Paul himself did, when he astrustee
prevented the congregation using the church for a proper purpose,
viz., of being present at a presbyterial visitation. Section 22 also provides
that the trustees shall permit the church to be used for proper purposes,
“ at such time or times and at any time as the minister shall approve
of, direct and appoint.” But does this mean at such times exclusively ?
Unless it does, I cannot see that any right of Mr. Paul’s was infringed.
But like a great deal of the language of the Trust Deed, the statement
is not clear. If it read hut only at such time —then we would have
to admit that Mr. Paul’s interpretation was right. It would follow
that a congregational and anti-presbyterial proviso was found in a
Presbyterian Trust Deed. The question, then, would be raised, Did
Mr. Paul intend this at the time, and thus betray the confidence of
his brethren? But even so, the Synod have a very easy way of exercising
their paramount power of visitation. It is only a matter of procedure.
If in such churches as are under the Trust Deed, the minister for the
time being has the right to appoint even Synod meetings in his own
church, all the Synod has to do is put the duty upon him. If a
minister refused to obey a Synod, he can be suspended for contumacy,
and then all his privileges fall into the hands of the Synod.
Section s. —The Search in the Titles OJice.
Mr. Paul says on page 6of his pamphlet; —“ There is a minister
now in the Free Presbyterian body who employed himself lately in a
diligent search at the Titles Office, for a considerable time, to see if
any iniquity in my dealings with the Free Church Trusts could be
made out, and he set a leash of Q-eelong lawyers on the same scent to
hunt me down.” On page 9, speaking of Mr. Sinclair and the Church,
he says, “He has made it a bye-word in the Government Offices by
his jealous inquisition into imaginary wrong doings.” Here, then, is
another matter on which Mr. Paul relies to prove his charge of ill-will.
But when the truth is known it will be seen to be another example of
Mr. Paul’s readiness to put the worst construction on every action of
anyone with whom he is unfriendly.
The conduct of Mr Paul and especially of three sons of Mr Paul
■in connection with the presbyterial visitation to St. Kilda was so
inexplicable that the cry was raised—This must be a fight for the
property. We were asked by members of the church, how is the
property at St. Kilda held, and we could not answer. The property
consisted of land on which were erected the church and manse, and
of land on which were erected other houses, the rent of which formed
the income of Mr Paul as minister. One question raised, was : Is the
whole of this property under the Model Deed or only part ? Another
question was: Is Mr Sinclair trustee for the whole or only a part ?
As we were threatened with legal proceedings by Mr Paul s sons, it
was desirable to know whether the property in whole or in part was


held on behalf of the Free Presbyterian Church or not. If Mr.
Paul was doing his duty to the Synod, there could have been no
difficulty in getting full information from himself. But, as he admits,
for ten years he was in an unfriendly attitude, and no inquiry for
information would be received by Mr. Paul. As I have already stated
even the copies of the Model Deed, printed at the Synod’s expense,
could not be obtained from him. In what other way could we obtain
that information, but by instructing Mr. Sinclair, our Agent with the
Government, to discover that information for us, by making as complete
a search as was possible, in the Titles Office. Mr. Sinclair not being
able to understand one or two points, did consult a lawyer, who sent
his clerk to complete the search, and who discovered a memorandum
bearing on the case that Mr. Sinclair failed to find. It was to Mr.
Paul’s interest as well as ours that the search should be thorough; though
it was not to Mr Paul’s credit that it was necessary. It is not true that
“a leash of Geelong lawyers Were employed to hunt him down.” (See
Appendix.) It is not true that Mr. Sinclair made the Church a bye-word
in the Government offices. We think we know the meaning of this. On
one occasion, when Mr. Sinclair was seeking for information in the
office, a young man who was passing from one place to another said,
“I know what you are after.” That young man’s name is known.
He should take care lest a complaint be made to the head of the
department. Mr. Sinclair, the representative of the Church in the
Titles Office, has a right to all necessary information, without being
the subject of remark either in or out of the office by any of the
clerks; even if one of them be a friend of Mr. Paul or his sons.
There were other reasons why a search was advisable. I had a
distinct recollection of Mr Paul bringing before the Synod and seeking
its sanction for a certain arrangement with regard to the rents of the
houses. But no minute of this could be discovered. In July, 1889,
Mr. Paul wrote to Mr. Sinclair desiring his resignation of the trustee-
ship of the St. Kilda property, giving as a reason that he had been
appointed under the wrong section. As this letter was sent after Mr.
Paul had ignored communications from Mr. Sinclair, it was somewhat
surprising. Mr. Sinclair wrote back that before he would do so, he
would like to have an interview with him to learn more fully the
reason of the request. This Mr. Paul refused, saying it was not
necessary, but still urging him to sign the resignation. Mr. Sinclair
replied that if he would not see him, he would first consult the Synod.
Mr. Paul wrote again to say that he found that Mr. Sinclair was not
appointed under the wrong section, and thatitdidnot matter whether he
resigned or not, but his “refusal was instructive.” Mr. Sinclair did
not actually refuse. The same request, it appears, was made to Mr
Thomas Watson, the other trustee, and complied with. But Mr. Paul
made no use of the resignation. He holds it still it is supposed. So
that Mr. Watson is in this position; he has all the responsibilities
of a trustee, yet Mr. Paul may cut him off at any time by handing in
his resignation to the Government. Matters like these were calcu-
lated to lead to a distrust of Mr. Paul; and if Mr. Paul is now not the
object of so much distrust, he may for that thank Mr. Sinclair and his
search in the Titles Office. That search is no evidence of ill-will.


Section 6. —The Leave of Absence.
On page 14 of his pamphlet, Mr. Paul says in reference to his
leave of absence,
“On a recent occasion, I wrote to him, in his capacity of a co-
trustee, in order that I might carry out a medical advice, recommend-
ing me to take an over-sea voyage. There was not a line in the letter
to indicate that it was written to anyone but himself, or about
anything outside business of the St. Kilda Trust. But Mr. Sinclair
took on himself, nevertheless to bring this letter before a meeting of
his Synod, and to have it dealt with as an application for leave of
absence addressed by me to them. Having thus got the letter
twisted into a sense which it did not bear, he then procured that the
Synod should agree to “ grant the application for leave ” ; though, of
course, no such “application” had ever been made. Further, he
procured, that “the irregularity of the application should be over-
looked,” the irregularity being nothing but his own gross misuse of
my letter. I have no doubt, but that Mr. Sinclair was willing enough
to see my back turned; but he could not, apparently, forego the
opportunity of putting such an unwarranted construction on, and
making such an unwarranted use of, my letter. Of course it had the
effect of making me appear in the act, of owning the Synod as a body
having authority over me.”
Why did Mr. Paul send his letter to Mr. Sinclair as a co-trustee
just as the Synod was meeting ? Did he expect that Mr. Sinclair
would say nothing to the Synod about such a letter and ask no advice
as to what he should do? Suppose Mr Sinclair had said nothing to
us, or that we had at the time taken no notice of the letter; but that
afterwards we had found the charge abandoned and declared it
vacant; what would Mr. Paul have said ? Would he not have said,
the Synod knew very well I was leaving, I wrote to Mr. Sinclair, and
it was his duty to bring the matter before the Court? But as Mr.
Sinclair did bring it before the Court, this is said to be a gross misuse
of his letter. Let anyone read this plain account of the matter in the
Quarterly of June, 1897, and he will see how untrue Mr. Paul’s
account of it is :
“ The clerk having informed the Court that as a co-trustee of
St. Kilda church property he had received a letter from the Eev. A.
Paul, dated the Ist inst., intimating his intention to “ take out a
passage to London on the 10th inst.,” the following deliverance was
unanimously agreed to : “ The clerk, who is also one of the trustees
of the St. Kilda Free Presbyterian property, having read and laid
upon the table of the Governing Court a communication from the
Eev. Arthur Paul, minister of the St. Kilda Free Presbyterian
congregation, in which he states that he intends to take a passage to
London on the 10th inst., the Governing Court declare that
they are prepared to overlook the irregularity of the method
of conveying this intimation, and to grant leave of absence to
the Eev. Arthur Paul for a definite period, providing that arrange-
ments satisfactory to the Governing Court are made for the supply of
the pulpit during his absence. At the same time they give due notice
to the Eev. Arthur Paul that in the event of his leaving the colony
without making such arrangements for the supply of his pulpit as will
be satisfactory to the Governing Court, they may be compelled to find
that he has ceased to officiate as minister of the St. Kilda congregation,
and to declare the charge vacant, or take such other steps as will
conserve the rights of the Governing Court, the discipline of the-


Church, and the interests of the congregation.” The moderator was
instructed to send by telegram to Mr. Paul the substance of this
resolution, and the clerk to send a complete copy of it under registered
cover, along with the message previously prepared, by next post.
The day after, a telegram was read by the moderator which he
had received from the Eev. A. Paul as follows: “Wish confer here
with you personally about supplies, come soon.” The Court agreed
to adjourn that the moderator might have an opportunity to interview
Mr. Paul, and give different committees time to meet to prepare their
reports. The same evening the Court again convened, and the
moderator reported that he had visited Mr. Paul as requested by him,
who desired that he should act as interim moderator during his
absence, which was not likely to be less than of a year’s duration, and
stated certain proposals made by him regarding supply of his pulpit,
including pecuniary allowances. The following motion was then
passed, wi£h which all the members agreed, a copy of it to be sent to
Mr. Paul: ‘ That the Eev. Arthur Paul, minister of the Free
Presbyterian congregation at St. Kilda, be granted, according to his
request, conveyed through the moderator, leave of absence for
twelve months, in order that, under medical advice, he may visit the
old country, and that the Eev. W. McDonald be interim moderator,
with instructions to visit the congregation at least once a quarter and
to report to the Governing Court. But this is not to be held as
condoning any former action of Mr. Paul regarding the Court.’ The
moderator was requested to seek from Mr. Paul certain papers and
documents held by him when he held the office of representative with
the Government, necessary for facilitating work in the Titles Office.”
To this I may add the fact that Mr. Sinclair had nothing to do
with the writing of the motions, except perhaps one sentence in the
second one. It may be observed that I did not regard the notice to
Mr. Sinclair as an application for leave of absence. But it certainly
was a notice that Mr. Paul was going to leave the colony for twelve
months coming to us in a very irregular manner. The first resolution
was an offer to Mr. Paul of leave of absence, and a warning of the
consequences that might follow if he, ignoring our jurisdiction over
him, went away without it. I wrote the first motion, with a view of
allowing Mr. Paul to take his holiday in a peaceful manner. I
succeeded in getting it carried unanimously, after some; hesitation by
Mr. Sinclair, and still more by his elder, Mr. Sach. If Mr, Paul
thought leave of absence unnecessary, why did he not ignore this
letter or return it unopened, as he did so many others. The truth is
he saw we had the whip-hand over him, and that if he went home to
the old country for twelve months without leave of absence from the
Synod, we could carry out the warning. He then sent the telegram
requesting the moderator to see him. So far from having ill-will to
him the Synod adjourned to give the moderator time to go to
St, Kilda. When the moderator returned he had a message from
Mr. Paul, All the arrangements made for service during the absence
were made known to Mr. McDonald, and through him to us. After
hearing all that Mr. Paul had told the moderator, the second motion
was passed. The order of events was as follows :—l. Mr. Paul, in a
round-about way let the Synod know he wished to go to the old
country. 2. The Synod offered, on certain conditions, leave of absence
for twelve months. 3. Mr. Paul, complying with the conditions,


agreed to the acceptance of this leave of absence. 4. The Synod then
agreed to the arrangements of Mr. Paul and granted the leave of
absence. And, now, after complying with the conditions, and, on his
part, accepting the arrangements, he has the meanness to call it a
bogus leave of absence. (iNote 10.) He should have said that before
he accepted it. Mr. Paul is very wrathful because the second motion
ends with the statement “ that this is not to be held as condoning any
former action of Mr. Paul regarding the Court.” But, this was
necessary, if we were not to stultify ourselves completely. No one
can say, but that considering the way Mr. Paul has insulted the Synod,
we have treated him with the greatest patience. Our action in
smoothing the way for his getting leaving of absence, after his extra-
ordinary treatment of us at St. Kilda, was surely kindness that he
could hardly expect. But, we had to guard against the idea that we
were overlooking all the past and forgetting the censure so recently
passed upon him. In fact, I personally got into a good deal of trouble
from outside friends for the part 1 had in this. It was held that I
should have insisted on Mr. Sinclair being the interim moderator of
St. Kilda, and not Mr. McDonald, and that we should have insisted on
Mr. Paul apologising for the St. Kilda business before he was allowed
to leave. I made the arrangements and got the Synod to agree to and
carry out what I thought would be best for Mr. Paul himself, as well
as for the Church. If he had been an ordinary man, he would have
appreciated the kindness. But instead, he regards all we have done
as an evidence of ill-will. One thing is certain, by accepting the leave
of absence, he has acknowledged our jurisdiction over him in the
clearest manner. He cannot deny it now without stultifying himself.
CONCLUSION.
I have finished. I think I have shown clearly that Mr. Paul alone is
to blame for his present position; and that there has been no ill-will
to him in all that we have done. There is no room for anyone to cry
shame on any treatment he received from us. If Mr. Sinclair had
acted as Mr. Paul has done, and he were still our leader, the treat-
ment would have been very different. (Note 11.) Notwithstanding all
he has done, Mr. Paul thinks “ his fidelity to Free Church interests
should remain unimpeached.” But that is an impossible claim. He
may still believe in Free Church principles, but all the more he
believes in Free Church principles, all the more is his neglect of Free
Church interests to be condemned. If Mr, Paul had so many superior
qualifications for the management of the business of the Synod, all the
more is he to bo condemned for leaving the management in our hands.
But one of the most extraordinary statements Mr. Paul has made runs
as follows: “At the same time I did nothing which even the Sinclair
ill-will can twist into shape of an active or avowed opposition. The
worst I have done has been confined to strictly letting them alone,”


But Mr. Paul should remember that apostolic qualifications imply
apostolic duties. What would he thought of a general who abandoned
his army in the day of battle ? Would he not be court-martialed, and
shot P It would be no excuse that he did not go to the enemy. But
Mr. Paul’s conduct was a positive hindrance to our progress, and
damaging to our influence in many ways. This can be proved, if
necessary.
I think I have fairly dealt with every point worthy of notice in
Mr. Paul's pamphlet. I have sought to write without any ill-will to
one, whose treatment of me, was first extremely kind ; but who, after
inducting me into the charge of the Wimmera, left me in the midst of
a difficult position, for which he was mainly responsible, to sink or
swim as I pleased. Personally, I have no hope of the breach between
Mr. Paul and the Synod being healed. I have no expectation of even
speaking to him again. But if this reply should have the effect of
expelling the nonsensical ideas concerning his brethren that now
afflict his mind, it will not have been written in vain.
NOTES.
1. This word has a connection with Mr. Paul’s G-reek motto. He evidently
intends it to be understood in two senses. I.—The policy of
Mr. Sinclair. 2. —A claim to be as good a Free Churchman as
anybody. The pamphlet and the reply will make plain to all readers
the truthfulness of Mr. Paul’s claim.
2. It was Mr. McDonald who presided at the induction of Mr. Sinclair.
The congregation at Geelong resent very bitterly the statement that
they were influenced in their choice of Mr. Sinclair by Mr. Paul. In the
Presbyter of April, 1881, Mr. Paul states that it was the visit of
Mr. Sinclair to Melbourne, when Mr. McDonald was ordained, and
the Synod re-constructed, that led Mr. Mclntyre to form a high
opinion of him, and speak of him as a desirable successor. Mr. Paul’s
article concludes with this statement: “It is well known that
Mr. Mclntyre used to mention the names of two or three ministers
whom he wished to succeed him in the charge of the Geelong con-
gregation, and of these Mr. Sinclair was always named first. It is
not a little remarkable that Providence should have gradually
opened up the way and brought about a fulfilment of Mr. Mclntyre’s
desire.”
3. The Code of Discipline says: “ Dissents are allowed in all Courts of
the Church for exoneration of conscience.”
4. The following statement from “ Hill’s Practice,” will show the
Presbyterial ideal with regard to the responsibility of the members
•of a Court when absent from a meeting: “Nor has any member,


although he was absent from the pro-re-nata meeting, a right to
object to what was done there, or to complain of it to the superior
Court on the minutes being read at the ensuing ordinary meeting.
Having got due notice of the pro-re-nata meeting, and of the business
for which it was called, it was his business to attend if he was
interested in the matter. Absence deprives him, in that as in other
cases, of his opportunity of dissenting from the judgment of the
Court, or complaining of it.”
Where no Kirk-Session has been formed in connection with a station,
sealing ordinances can be dispensed in it only through express
appointment by the Presbytery, unless the congregation have been
regularly placed under the authority of a neighbouring Kirk-
Session.” —Forbes. Page 54.
At Durham Lead, at the first communion, there were only 6 added to
the roll. The other communicants had certificates.
At Charlton, at the first communion, there were 6 who had
certificates, and 8 received by examination.
At the second communion at Drysdale oul} r 12 sat at the table.
Most of these were old communicants.
Since writing the above I have been informed that the real cause of
Mr. Paul’s alienation was the holding the sacrament at Durham
Lead before elders were ordained. But how could elders be chosen
and ordained before there was a roll of members for the district.
This is to put the cart before the horse.
" Every Assembly has power to send forth from them of their own
number, one or more visitors to see how all things are ruled in the
bounds of their visitation,”— Second Book of Discipline. Chap. 7.
“Parishes are visited by Presbyteries, either occasionally, or
pro-re-nata, according to the weight of the emergent which doth
require the visitation, or ordinarily, and in course.” — Paedovan,
Book 1, Title 13.
“ Presbyterial visitation is thus the law of the Church, but the
manner of conducting it is left, in a great measure, to Presbyteries
themselves.” — Foebes, Page 110.
“ Apart from any general system of Presbyterial visitation, it is
competent, and may sometimes be extremely desirable, for a
Presbytery to appoint a special visitation for a particular congrega-
tion, when circumstances calling for such visitation have been forced
upon their notice.”— Moncbief, Page 59.
"The Presbytery, by its own authority, appoints its meetings in
any Church within its bounds.” — Code of Pbesbtteeian Chubch
or New South Walks.


“ So long as there is but one Presbytery, its functions may be
exercised under the name of a Synod.”— Code of Discipline, Febe
Peesbyteeian Chuech of Yictoeia, Page 5.
“ He ordered the doors to be locked, so that when the ministers
returned they were compelled to hold their Synod in the open
church-yard.”— Me. Ceie’s Histoey, Yol. 1, Page 48.
During a visit to Sandringham, on the 22nd of February, 1888, when I
last spoke to him, Mr. Paul told me that he believed in Congregational
Presbyterianism. I understood him to mean by that, the congregation
being practically free from the jurisdiction of the presbytery. His
action since, and his contention in the pamphlet, show that I was
right. The parity of the clergy, and the unity of the Church in the
sense “that a small part is subject to a larger, and a larger to the
whole,” are two of the fundamental principles of Presbyterianism.
It is curious to find Mr. Paul denying them both.
“Ho pastor may leave his flock without licence of the Provincial or
National Assembly.”— Second Book of Discipline, Chap. 4.
Among the causes of deposition stated by the General Assembly
of 1852, are —“ Absence from his Kirk, and neglect of his office for
forty days together in a year, without a lawful impediment allowed
by the next General Assembly.”
“Ministers are not allowed to absent themselves from their con-
gregations for a longer period than six weeks, without the sanction of
the Presbytery.”— Boxes of Peesbytbeian Chuech of Yictoeia.
Page 7.
The following extracts from a certain Peocbss will show what I mean.
It is understood to have been drawn up by Mr. Paul himself :
“ That whereas the wilful intercepting and defeating by any minister
of this Church of the just authority of the Courts of this Church in
the acts thereof for the due spiritual oversight of the congregations adhering
thereto; as also, 2—Wilful, total and continued neglect of a material part of
the ministerial office by any minister of this Church ; as also, 3—Contumacy
against an express injunction of the Governing Court of this Church, made
with a view to remedy such neglect as aforesaid, are offences contrary to the
solemn obligations assumed by every minister of this Church at his
induction, and calling for such censure or other j udicial sentence as may be.
found adequate
Whereas a resolution of the Governing Court of this Church was made on
the second day of May last, whereby certain members of the said Court, that
is to say, Messrs Paul (of St. Kilda) and Sinclair (of Geelong), were
appointed to visit the congregation in the Wimmera, of which you are
minister, for the purpose of preaching in the district as they might have
opportunity, and you the said , being minister of
the congregation, were required to afford all due facilities for their doing so ;
you have neglected to correspond by letter with, and refused to answer
correspondence by letter from, the said members of this Court, with a view


to carry out such visitation, whereby you have neglected to afford all due
facilities, as aforesaid, and have intercepted and defeated the just authority
of the Courts of this Church, as aforesaid
Signed at Branxholme in name, and presence, and by appointment of the
Provisional Court of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, this first
day of August, one thousand eight hundred and eighty three.
Arthur Paul, Clerk, P.C.”
APPENDIX: BY ME. SINCLAIR.
There needed not to have been the enquiry in the Titles Office which has
given heinous offence to Mr. Paul, if he had been approachable in the ordinary
way. Questions that owed their existence to his causeless self-isolation from all
intercourse with his brethren had to be answered. The co-trustee whom he
blames so greatly required to know what was the extent of his own responsibility,
as well as to be able to state how the property stood. Ordinary courtesy, which
Mr. Paul used to say “ costs nothing,” would have prevented the wrong
impressions which were current even outside the Synod and the Church. When
the Synod was locked out of the St. Kilda Church, such hostile assertions were
made on behalf of the minister as to involve defiance ; and the Synod was
treated as if they had no interest in the place. Besides, “ a separate deed” was
spoken of as affecting a portion of the property.
Enquiry was therefore made in the Titles Office. In the course of this
a “ charge ” on the rent-producing houses was seen, by which the revenue was
secured to Mr. Paul and his family for 21 years in 1882, the amount mentioned
being £3OO per anmcm, or less, if the rents, after deducting costs for repairs,
etc., should not produce that sum. How the minister can in face of this impute
to another minister and elder of the church a design to starve him out, without
anything to justify it, is very strange. No other minister of the Church is so
secure, humanly speaking, from starvation. As the enquiry proceeded, it was
observed that this portion of the property had not been brought under the
Successory Trusts Act and the Model Deed with the church and manse in 1883.
I then sought the aid of a solicitor whose clerk after some time found a memo,
which showed that the excepted portion was registered under the same trusts
about two years later, in September, 1885, which was so far satisfactory.
Two pieces of the land having been sold, before the last two co-trustees
were appointed, for £1,155, and £135 respectively, the solicitor advised that
I should as a co-trustee, be informed as to the expenditure, investment, and
credit balance of these sums. Knowing that there was no use my seeking the
information personally, I agreed that if it should be sought for, he should
write for it to Mr. Paul. After some weeks a reply was received which the
solicitor was not satisfied with, and he wrote again, but received no answer.
I presume this is what Mr. Paul refers to as my employing “ a leash of
Geelong lawyers to hunt him down.”
On page 9 of his pamphlet, Mr. Paul says regarding his retirement from
the office of “representative” with the Government: “I retired upon that
status, of a Free Presbyterian Minister, which I had before Mr. Sinclair or his
friends were heard of in Victoria, and which I never owed to or held in sub-
ordination to any of them.” Mr. Paul held the office as a member of the
former Synod, which the present Synod is identical with to all interests and
purposes. But the following extract from the records of the provisional
court of the present Synod, in Mr. Paul’s own handwriting, he being the clerk,


contradicts liis contention. It is dated 27th November, 1878. The meeting
was held at St. Kilda; and the members present'were, Messrs Arthur Paul of
St. Kilda, and William McDonald of Hamilton, ministers, and Messrs R.
Campbell of St. Kilda and John Boyd of Geelong, elders.—“ The Successory
Trusts Act recently passed by the Legislature was brought under notice of
the Court by the clerk. After deliberation it was agreed that the clerk should
make application to be registered as head of the Free Presbyterian denom-
ination under the superintendence of this Court by the style of Correspondent
and Representative as heretofore in use.”
On page 6 Mr Paul makes an unhappy reference to the omission of the
“Fencing of the Table” at the Communion:in the South Australian Free
Presbyterian Church. The fact is, that some ministers are of the opinion
that the “fencing” should be before the “tokens” are distributed, and they
practically do it in their preparatory services. It would be well if no
Church had less solemn preparation and less heart-searching addresses than
the S.A. Free Church, which Mr. Paul was wont for a long time to praise for
for having provided him with two loyal coadjutors.
E. J, Hall & Sons, Printers, Etrie Street, Geelong.


