

61 o
a<ro
HOWITT AND FISON.
BY J. G. FRAZER.
Anthropology in general, and Australian anthropology
in particular, has lately suffered two very heavy losses
by the deaths of the Rev. Lorimer Fison and Dr. A. W.
Howitt, two old friends and colleagues, who passed away
at an interval of a few months, —Mr. Fison dying in
December, 1907, and Dr. Howitt in March, 1908. To
their insight, enthusiasm, and industry we owe the first
exact and comprehensive study of the social organisation
of the Australian tribes ; and the facts which they brought
to light, together with the explanations which they gave
of them, have not only contributed to a better under-
standing of the Australian aborigines, but have shed much
light on the early history of institutions in general, and
especially of marriage.
V
Lorimer Fison was born on November 9th, 1832, in the
picturesqne village of Barningham in Suffolk. 1 His father
was a prosperous landowner there till the repeal of the
Corn Laws diminished the value of hjs property. With
the help of a steward he farmed his own land and also
some adjoining land, which belonged to Gonville and
Caius College, Cambridge. The father was a man of
great integrity and nobility of character with a kind
heart and a genial manner, all of which his son inherited
1 For the facts of Mr. Fison’s life I am indebted mainly to his sister, Mrs.
Potts (14 Brookside, Cambridge), and his daughter, Miss Fison (Essendon,
Victoria, Australia). In addition to her own reminiscences Mrs. Potts has
kindly given me access to some of her brother’s letters, from which I have
extracted some of the facts mentioned in the text.


from him to the full. As there was neither "a great
landowner in the neighbourhood, nor a resident rector,
Mr. Fison ruled supreme in the little village, using his
power both wisely and kindly. A man of deep piety,
he was a friend of the Quaker, Joseph John Gurney,
after whom he named one of his two sons. His sym-
pathies were with that old school of Quakers in Norwich
and also with the early Wesleyans, but he brought up
his family in the Evangelical school of the Church of
England. There is a beautiful window to his memory
in the old village church. His wife was a daughter of
the Rev. John Reynolds, whose translations of Fenelon,
Massillon, and Bourdaloue were well known in their day.
Educated by her father, Mrs. Fison inherited from him
his love of languages and his literary taste. She assisted
in her sons’ education, preparing the Virgil lesson over
night with the holiday tutor whom she had engaged
for the boys, and striking out all passages which she did
not wish them to read. To her Lorimer owed much of
his fine character. She was something of a Roman
mother, and believed that the strong instinct of hero-
worship in human nature should be fostered in children
from their earliest years. Accordingly, while her children
were gathered round the board at their simple meals, she,
sitting at the head of the table and looking stately and
beautiful, would tell them stories of men, who with
heaven’s help had worked for the good of mankind. The
seed dropped on receptive soil and bore fruit, though
perhaps not always of the sort which the worthy lady
desired ; for Lorimer and his brother Joseph fought over
their favourite heroes even in the nursery. The books
she gave them to read were mostly the old English
classics expurgated by her father’s careful pen. The
Faerie Queen was a living reality to the boys, and
Lorimer personated its heroes with dauntless bravery.
On the other hand, the virtuous hero of The Pilgrim's
VOL. xx. k


Pf'ogress was less to his taste ; indeed it is to be feared
that he found the foul fiend Apollyon the most attractive
character in that edifying work; for, fired with emulation,
he would “straddle quite over the whole breadth of the
way,” so far at least as his little legs allowed him to do so,
and for lack of a flaming dart to hurl at Christian he would
snatch a large gravy spoon from the nursery table and roar
out in a terrible voice, “ Here will I spill thy soul.” When
a righteous retribution overtook the counterfeit Apollyon
for this or other escapades, his small brother and sister
would stand one on either side of the sufferer and exhort
him to fortitude, saying: “Be a Spartan, Lorry, be a
Spartan! ” And a Spartan, agreeably blent with the
character of Apollyon, Lorry proved to be, for not a
muscle of his little white face would twitch till the punish-
ment was over. In the intervals between these heroic
deeds and sufferings Lorry scoured the country round.
There was not a stack of corn or a tall tree in the
neighbourhood on the top of which he had not perched ;
not a pond into which he had not waded to explore its
living inhabitants. The old groom was kind to the
children ; but the steward frowned when Lorry and his
young sister would gallop past with a clatter of hoofs
at daybreak, mounted on forbidden horses, to ride five
miles to the nearest post town for the joy of placing
the post-bag before their father at breakfast.
In time these youthful delights came to an end.
Lorimer and Joseph were sent to school at Sheffield,
where they had the benefit of an able staff of Cambridge
masters. After leaving school Lorimer read for a year
in Cambridge with Mr. Potts of Trinity College, whose
edition of Euclid is well known. He entered the Univer-
sity in 1855, being enrolled as a student of Gonville and
Caius College. But the spirit of adventure was too
strong in him to brook the tame routine of a student’s
life, and after keeping only two terms, the Michaelmas


term of 1855 and the Lent term of 1856, he left the
University without taking a degree, and sailed for
Australia to dig for gold. He was at the diggings when
the news of his father’s death reached him unexpectedly.
It affected him deeply. In his distress he was taken to a
mission meeting held in the open air, and there, under the
double impression of sorrow and of the solemn words he
heard, he fell to the ground and underwent one of those
sudden conversions of which we read in religious history.
Accordingly he left the gold-diggings in or about 1861,
and repaired to the University of Melbourne, where the
terms which he had kept at Cambridge were allowed to
count, though even then he did not proceed to a degree.
At Melbourne he joined the Wesleyan communion, and,,
hearing that missionaries were wanted in Fiji, he offered
himself for the service. The offer was accepted ; he was
ordained a minister, and sailed for Fiji in 1863. He had
previously married a lady of the Wesleyan Church, who
survives him, together with a family of two sons and four
daughters.
Mr. Fison laboured as a missionary in Fiji from 1863
to 1871, and again from 1875 to 1884. During the
first of these periods he was appointed to the mission
stations of Vivva, Lakemba, and Rewa ; his name and that
of his devoted wife are still household words there. After-
wards he acted as Principal of the Training Institution for
natives in Navuloa, and his lectures were highly esteemed
and treasured in memory by his students long after he
had left Fiji. His frank, manly, cheery nature, ready
sympathy, quick intelligence, and sound common-sense
won him the love and confidence of natives and Europeans
alike. Governors such as Sir William MacGregor and
Sir J. B. Thurston treated him as a friend ; Government
officials in every department of the service regarded him
as a safe and trustworthy guide in all matters affecting
the relations of the Government with the natives; and


merchants and planters, some of whom at the outset had
not been very friendly to the mission, greeted him affec-
tionately and welcomed him to their homes, when his big
burly form appeared in Levuka ; for he was a man of
genial manners and a ready wit, sometimes flavoured with
a touch of sarcasm. The natives loved him because they
knew that he loved them ; and while he faithfully reproved
them for their faults, he was lenient to all mistakes which
sprang from ignorance or errors of judgment. A few
kindly words, blent with a judicious touch of ridicule and
an appeal to common-sense, were often more effectual
than a stern reproof or the rigid exercise of Church
discipline would have been. This account of Mr. Fison’s
missionary work in Fiji I have borrowed mainly from an
obituary notice by his old and intimate friend, the ex-
perienced South Sea missionary. Dr. George Brown, who
says of him : “ Dth Fison and I were close friends for
many years, and during those years I had the privilege
of sharing in his joys and of knowing more of his trials
and difficulties perhaps than any other man. He never
* wore his heart upon his sleeve,’ and so his life often
appeared to others to be easier and more free from trouble
than it really was. He always kept a brave face to the
world, and many even of his intimate friends never knew
how hard a battle he had sometimes to fight. ... I
knew him in the Mission field, and on board ship, in his
home at Essendon, about which I cannot trust myself to
write, and in my own home. I have met him in counsel,
and in our own Conferences ; have shared his joys and
have been the confidant of his troubles and sorrows, and
I always found him to be a devoted Christian, a man with
4 child-like heart in his relationship to God, a wise coun-
sellor, a true and loyal friend, and one of the best
missionaries whom God has ever given to our church.” 2
2 “ Lorimer Figon,” by the Rev. George Brown, D.D., Australasian
Methodist Missionary Review, Sydney, February 4, 1908, pp. I, 3.


Among the features in Mr. Fison’s character which
commanded the respect of all who knew him were his
transparent honesty, his readiness to acknowledge, indeed
to proclaim on the housetops, any mistake which he had
made, and, moreover, his absolute disinterestedness. When
he lived as a missionary in Fiji he was repeatedly offered
land by the natives, and he might easily have made large
profits by accepting their offers and selling the land again
to settlers. But he steadily refused to enrich himself by
means which he regarded as injurious to the natives and
inconsistent with his sacred profession. Once, as he was
walking with a chief on the shore, the chief pressed him
to accept land. Mr. Fison stopped, measured six feet or
perhaps a little more (for he was a tall man) on the sand,
and said; "If I die in Fiji, you may give me so much
land. I will not take more.” 8 So he lived and died poor,
but honoured.
Mr. Fison’s intimate acquaintance with Fijian custom
was of public service. When the Lands Commission was
about to sit, he delivered a lecture at Levuka on the
native system of land tenure in Fiji. The substance of
it was published in the Journal of the Anthropological
Institute , 4 and soon after by the British Government in
a Blue Book. It was also translated into German, and
published in one of the German official books at the time
when the claims of German landowners in Fiji were under
consideration. Many years later the Governor of Fiji,
then Sir Henry M. Jackson, K.C.M.G., esteemed the
treatise so highly that he caused it to be reprinted from
Mr. Fison’s manuscript in a fuller form at the Govern-
ment Press; and in a despatch of July 31st, 1903, Mr.
3 Mr. Fison’s opinion and practice in this matter were shared by the great
majority of his fellow-missionaries in Fiji. Only three out of forty-three
bought land. See Jourtial of the Anthropological Institute, x. (1881), p. 352
note.
4 “ Land Tenure in Fiji,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, x. (1881),
PP- 332-35 2 -


Chamberlain, then Secretary of State for the Colonies,
wrote to the Governor: “ I have read this valuable treatise
with much interest. I entirely approve of your action in
causing - it to be reprinted by the Government Press, and
I consider that the colony owes Dr. Fison a debt of
gratitude for his kindness in recopying the original
manuscript.”
When the distinguished American ethnologist, Lewis
H. Morgan, was collecting materials for his great work,
Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human
Family , he circulated a paper of questions very widely,
and through the agency of Professor Goldwin Smith one
■of these papers reached Mr. Fison in Fiji. In answer to
the questions he contributed a full and accurate account
of the Fijian and Tongan systems of consanguinity and
affinity to Morgan’s famous book. The value and import-
ance of this contribution were fully acknowledged by
Morgan. 5 It speaks highly for Mr. Fison’s scientific in-
sight that he clearly perceived the far-reaching scope of
Morgan’s enquiries, and that accordingly, on his return to
New South Wales in 1871, he set himself to investigate the
systems of marriage and relationship of the Australian
aborigines. In order to procure information on the subject
he wrote to the chief Australian papers, inviting the
•co-operation of those who knew the natives. Some of his
letters were published in The Australasian , and attracted
the attention of Mr. A. W. Howitt, whose explorations
both in Central and in South-Eastern Australia had
brought him into close contact with the aborigines.
Hence the two men met and formed a deep and loyal
friendship, which only ended with their lives. They now
entered jointly into a comprehensive investigation of the
social organisation of the Australian tribes, prosecuting
S L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human
Family, p. 568 (Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge , vol. xvii., Washing-
ton, 1871).


their enquiries as far as possible through personal inter-
course with the natives, but also partly by correspondence;
for they printed and circulated widely through the prin-
cipal Australian settlements a list of questions touching
the tribal organisation and systems of consanguinity and
affinity of the aborigines, /yheyfjfhus accumulated a large
body of facts illustrating many pirases of savage life, and
exhibiting some of the fundamental institutions of the
Australian tribes. The results of these enquiries, carried
on for some years, were published jointly by the two
friends in their well-known work Kaniilaroi and Kurnai
{Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane, 1880), so
named after the two tribes, one in New South Wales, the
other in Victoria, to which the authors had paid special
attention. This important work, for which Lewis H.
Morgan wrote an appreciative preface, 6 unquestionably
laid the foundations of a scientific knowledge of the
Australian aborigines, and its value in setting forth the
wonderful social system, seemingly complex, confused, and
casual, yet really clear, logical, and purposeful, of these
savages, can hardly be overestimated. Viewed both in
itself and in the light of the subsequent researches to
which it gave birth, especially those of Spencer and Gillen
in Central Australia, Kamilaroi and Kurnai is a document
of primary importance in the archives of anthropology.
Not that all its theories have stood the test of time.
Mr. Fison himself, with admirable candour, announced
publicly from his presidential chair at a meeting of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
that an elaborate theory which he had propounded in that
book was “not worth a rush.” As the words in which
he did so are not only highly characteristic of the man,
8 Mr. Fison had previously contributed information to L. H. Morgan’s last
book, Ancient Society (London, 1877), pp. 51, 403, etc. From one of
Morgan’s references to him {op. cit ., p. 403, note x), it appears that Mr.
Fison had been at one time resident at Sydney.
151
Howitt a,7id Fison.


but contain a warning
anthropologists, especially
savages at a safe distance, and have never
of permanent importance to
to those of them\who study
one of them in their lives, though they may possibly
have watched their images /lancing silently in q cine-
matograph or heard the echo of their voices chanting
and whooping out of a phonograph, I will quote the passage
entire for their benefit. Mr. Fison said: “In these investiga-
tions two things mainly are required—first, a patient con-
tinuance in the collecting of facts; and, secondly, the faculty
of seeing in them what is seen by the natives themselves.
We must ever remember that our mind-world is very
different from theirs. It is not filled with the same images;
it is not governed by the same laws. It is to theirs as the
England of the present day is to the England of who shall
say how many ages ago ? The climate, the coast line, the
watersheds, the flora, the fauna—in short, nearly all the
aspects of nature —are changed. It is to all intents and
purposes another land. As to the former of these two
requisites, one’s natural tendency, especially in the begin-
ning of the work, is to form a theory as soon as one has
got hold of a fact; and, as to the latter, wc are too apt to
look at the facts in savagery from the mental standpoint
of the civilised man. Both of these are extremely mis-
chievous. They lead investigators into fatal mistakes, and
bring upon them much painful experience; for the pang
attending the extraction of an aching double tooth is
sweetest bliss when compared with the tearing up by the
roots of a cherished theory. I speak feelingly here, because
I can hold myself up as an awful warning against theory-
making. To take one instance only. In Kamilaroi and
Kurnai, the joint work of Mr. A. W. Ho.vitt and myself,
there is a long chapter containing a most beautiful theory
of the Kurnai system, which I worked o it with infinite
pains. It accounts for that system so cc mpletely and so
satisfactorily that the Kurnai ought to be ashamed of
152
and Fison
Howitt


themselves for having been perverse enough to arrive at
their system by a different road, which further inquiry
showed us most conclusively that they did. Students of
anthropology who have read our work, and who still sur-
vive, will please accept this intimation that the theory
aforesaid is not worth a rush.” 7
It is to be hoped that this warning will be laid to heart
by all who view savages through a telescope, whether from
a club or a college window. If our glass be a good one
and we apply our eye to the end of it steadily, undistracted
by the sights and sounds about us, we shall see and hear
strange things, things very unlike those which may be seen
and heard either in Pall Mall and Piccadilly or in the
grassy courts and echoing cloisters of an ancient university-
town. We shall not see the rush of cabs, omnibuses, and
motors, nor be stunned by their long continuous roar; we
shall not see the ivy-mantled walls lapped by the sluggish
stream, the old gardens dreaming in the moonlight of
the generations that are gone; we shall not hear the
drowsy murmur of fountains plashing in summer days or
the tinkle of the chapel bell calling to prayer, when the
shadows lengthen across the greensward and in the west
the stars begin to sparkle above the fading gold of evening.
If we are really intent on knowing the truth, we must
strive to dismiss or disregard these nearer, these familiar
sights and sounds, whether harsh and ugly or beautiful
and sweet, and to fix our thoughts on the strange and
distant scene; and thus by long and patient effort we may
come to see in the magic mirror of the mind a true
7 Report of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science t
Hobart, Tasmania, January S, 1892, Section G. Anthropology, Address by the
President , the Rev. Lorimer Fison, M.A., Queen’s College, University of
Melbourne, pp . 9 sq. With reference to Kamilaroi and Kurnai , Mr. Fison
adds in a note that “it is only bare justice to Mr. Howitt to note that nearly
all the labour of collecting the Australian facts fell to his share, and that he did
this work after the manner in which he does all other work undertaken by him.
No higher praise could possibly be expressed.”


reflection of a life which differs immeasurably from our
own. Yet this reflection or picture must itself be pieced
together by the imagination ; for imagination, the power
of inward vision, is as necessary to science as to poetry,
whether our aim is to understand our fellow-men, to un-
ravel the tangled skein of matter, or to explore the starry
depths of space. Only we must remember that, if imagi-
nation is a necessary, it is not a perfect or infallible
instrument of science: it is apt to take its colours from
the eye that uses it, to tremble with every vibration that
pulses along the nerves of the observer. These things
cannot but trouble and distort the images which print
themselves on our brain; yet they are inevitable, since we
cannot get outside of ourselves and contemplate the world
from the standpoint of a purely abstract intelligence. All
we can do is to make allowance as far as possible for our
individual upbringing, character, and surroundings, to cal-
culate as exactly as we can the personal equation, and to
correct our impressions accordingly. If we have done this,
and if we are, like Mr. Fison, always ready to pull to pieces
the old mental image, at whatever cost, and to build it up
again on better evidence, then we have done all that is
humanly possible to attain to the truth. When all is done,
we may still be in error, but the error will be pardonable.
While Mr. Fison was pursuing his enquiries among the
Australian tribes from 1871 to 1875, he was also engaged
in ministerial work in New South Wales and Victoria.
Returning to Fiji in 1875, 8 he resumed his observations of
8 When Mr. Fison left Australia in 1875 to return to Fiji, the Wesleyan
Conference of Australia passed unanimously the following resolution: “In
view of the Rev. L. Fison’s receiving an appointment in Fiji from the Mission-
ary Committee, this Conference takes the present opportunity of expressing
its regret that his state of health is depriving the colonial work of so valuable
a minister and pastor. It assures him of its confidence and affection, and of
its admiration of his exposure and denunciation of the so-called Labour Traffic
in the South Sea Islands, and it commends him and his family to the care of
Almighty God.”


native Fijian life, and contributed to the Journal of the
Anthropological Institute a series of valuable papers dealing
with burial customs, land tenure, riddles, rites of initiation,
and the classificatory system of relationship. 9 Many years
afterwards Mr. Fison published a volume of Fijian stories
with an introduction and notes illustrating some aspects
of the native life and manners. 10
From Fiji Mr. Fison returned to Victoria in 18S4. Next
year he resumed his ministerial duties, and continued to
discharge them until 1888, when ill-health obliged him
finally to resign them. In the same year (1888) he built,
partly with borrowed capital, a house at Essendon, near
Melbourne, where he resided with his wife and four un-
married daughters to the end of his life. The house was
built for a school, and his daughters, accomplished and
industrious ladies, taught pupils in it until new rules
adopted by the State of Victoria rendered the house, in
which Mr. Fison had sunk some of his small saving's,
o ?
unsuitable for the purpose. Meantime Mr. Fison laboured
hard at journalism. From 1888 to within about three
years of his death he edited The Spectator , a Melbourne
paper published in connection with the Wesleyan Church.
To a weekly paper, The Australasian , he contributed a
series of articles on “The Testimony of Fijian Words,” the
substance of some of which he appears to have afterwards
embodied in the introduction to his Tales from Old Fiji.
He was one of the first Fellows of Queen’s College in the
University of Melbourne, and for some years he acted as
Secretary to the College Council. Indeed, he had been
9 “Notes on Fijian Burial Customs Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
x. (1881), pp. 137-149; “Land Tenure in Fiji,” ibid. pp. 332-352; “On
Fijian Riddles,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xi. (1882), pp. 406-
410; “The Nanga, or Sacred Stone Enclosure of Wainimala, Fiji,” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, xiv. {1885), PP- M'S* 5 “The Classificatory
System of Relationship, "Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxiv. (1895),
pp. 360-371.
10 Tales from Old Fiji , London, 1904.


instrumental with others in founding the College. From
an American university he received an honorary degree
of Master of Arts in recognition of his services to anthro-
pology. 11 In January, 1892, he presided over the Anthro-
pological Section of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science at Hobart Town in Tasmania,
and greatly enjoyed the fortnight’s rest and the hospi-
talities he met with from the Governor, Sir Arthur
Havelock (whom he had known in Fiji), the members of
the Tasmanian Club, and others. It was the first holiday
he Fad had for more than seven years, and even this he
was only enabled to take through the liberality of a friend.
Another pleasant break in his laborious life came in 1894,
when he visited England once more, and attended the
meeting of the British Association at Oxford as one of
the representatives of Australian science. At the meeting
he read a paper on the classificatory system of relation-
ship, and made the acquaintance of a number of eminent
men, including Max Muller and Professor E. B. Tylor.
During this his last visit to England, Mr. Fison went to
Chichester to see his good friend the Rev. Dr. R. H. Cod-
rington, formerly a missionary of the Church of England
to Melanesia, and one of the highest authorities on the
language and customs of the Melanesians. He also came
to Cambridge for a few days, when I had the privilege
of making his personal acquaintance. His frank, manly,,
genial nature won me at once, and w r e were friends to the
end of his honoured and useful life. He wrote me many
letters in the clear, crisp, graphic style which made all
his letters a pleasure to read.
Returning to Australia he settled down again to the
routine of journalism at his desk. How hard he worked
to support his family may be partially gathered from one
11 This is mentioned by Mr. Fison in a letter Written from Oxford, 18th
October, 1894. He does not mention the name of the university which
bestowed on him this well-earned honour.


of those charming letters which down to the last he wrote
to the sister who shared the dear memories of the happy
youthful days at Barningham in Suffolk. In the same
letter in which he tells his sister of the commendation
bestowed by Mr. Chamberlain upon his treatise on the
Fijian land system, 12 Mr. Fison writes thus: “There is
no particular news ; and even if there were, I have no
time to tell it. I never was so hard wrought in my life
as I have been of late. Sluicing on the diggings was hard
■enough, for you had to keep the sluice boxes full while
the water was running; but it was over for the day when
-sundown came. My present work has no sundown.”
When Mr. Fison wrote thus he had nearly completed his
seventy-first year. Not long afterwards his health, which
under the pressure of hard work and domestic anxieties
had been failing for some time, broke down completely.
An affection of the heart necessitated absolute repose, and
for the few remaining years of his life Mr. Fison was in
body, though never in mind or spirit, a shattered invalid.
Happily the country whom he had served so well and so
loyally did not forget him in his poverty and old age. In
the spring of 1905, at Mr. Balfour’s recommendation, His
Majesty the King was graciously pleased to recognise Mr.
Fison’s services to his country and to science by granting
him a pension of £l5O a year. So there was light at the
evening-tide of a long and strenuous day. 13
Though he could no longer work at the things he loved
most, his interest in them never flagged to the end, and I
still received from time to time letters written in his now
tremulous hand, which proved that the keen intelligence
12 See above, p.
13 Perhaps without a breach of confidence I may be allowed to quote a frag-
ment of one of Mr. Fison’s letters which has been placed in my hands by his
sister : “ . . . looking than she was in her youth. She has been a good wife
to me, and I thank God for her every day of my life. If we only had a small
competence, we should toddle down the rest of the decline hand in hand with
gladsome hearts.” The beginning of the first sentence is lost.


was not blunted nor the warm heart grown cold. There
was even an apparent slight recovery in his health. About
a week before his death he and his beloved wife, herself an
invalid for many years, were well enough to leave the
house and attend a public gathering, where friends crowded
round them and congratulated them on their appearing
once more in their midst. But it was the last flicker of
the expiring taper. Perhaps the excitement, combined
with the great heat of the weather, for it was now the
height of the torrid Australian summer, proved too much
for his strength. He was taken suddenly ill, and lingered
between life and death for some days, surrounded by his
family and remaining conscious and calm. Sundown, the
sundown for which in the gathering shadows he had
longed, came at last on Sunday, December the 29th, 1907,
when the labourer entered into his eternal rest.
Alfred William Howitt was born at Nottingham in
England in 1830. 14 His parents were William and Mary
Howitt, the well-known and popular writers. The father,
a native of the delightful little village of Heanor in Derby-
shire, engaged in the business of an apothecary at Notting-
ham, but finally devoted himself to literature, pouring out
a long series of volumes. Soon after his marriage Mr..
Howitt and his wife made a tour on foot to Scotland, a
rare, almost unprecedented, undertaking in those days.
In 1840, when Alfred was ten years old, the parents went
14 For most of the facts in the following sketch of Dr. Howitt’s life I am
indebted to an obituary notice of him by his friend and disciple, Professor W.
Baldwin Spencer, which appeared in The Victorian Naturalist, vol. xxiv.
No. 12, April, 1908. I have also made some use of an obituary notice
published in the Australian paper, The Argus, Monday, March 9th, 1908,
p. 7. My notice of Dr. Howitt’s explorations in Central Australia is taken
mainly from his own reminiscences, as these have been graphically recorded
by him in the address which he delivered as President of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science at Adelaide in 1907. The
account of his last illness and death is derived from letters written to me
by his daughter Miss Mary E. B. Howitt.


to Heidelberg for the education of their children, and
remained about two years in Germany. Afterwards Alfred
studied at University College, London. In June, 1852,.
Mr. Howitt, accompanied by his two sons, Alfred and
Charlton, sailed for Australia, ostensibly to visit his
brother, Dr, Godfrey Howitt, then settled as a medical
man in Melbourne, but perhaps also to see for themselves
the new Land of Gold and to partake of its fabulous
riches. They reached Melbourne after a three months’
voyage, and purchasing a cart and horses journeyed up
country to the Ovens gold diggings. After about twa
years of toilsome digging and wandering in what was then
a wild country, William Howitt with his son, Charlton,
returned to England in 1854, leaving his other son, Alfred,,
then twenty-four years of age, behind him at Melbourne.
Young Howitt was now not merely an accomplished bush-
man, but had begun to turn his keen powers of observation
to higher account by studying nature. At first he farmed
land at Caulfield, near Melbourne, which belonged to his
uncle, Dr. Godfrey Howitt. But the humdrum life of a
farmer was not to his taste, and he betook himself to the
more adventurous pursuit of cattle-droving. On one of the
journeys which he made to the Murray River for the pur-
pose of bringing down herds of cattle to Melbourne, he
chanced to fall in with Lorimer Fison. They met and
parted, little thinking how closely associated they were to
be in after life.
This was the great era of exploration in Australia.
The vast unknown regions of the continent stirred the
imagination and raised the hopes of the colonists.
Explorer after explorer set out and vanished into the
far interior, some of them to return no more. Young
Howitt bore his share in these arduous enterprises.
It changed that the explorer Warburton had visited the
dreary region of Central Australia about Lake Eyre in an
unusually fine season, when water and grass abounded, and


accordingly he reported on it in glowing terms. His dis-
coveries excited great interest in Victoria: a committee
was formed in Melbourne to open up the country ; and in
September, 1859, Mr. Howitt, now well known as an able,
careful, and fearless bushman, was sent from Adelaide at
the head of a small party to spy out what, seen at a
distance, appeared to the longing eyes of Australian
shepherds and herdsmen a land flowing, or rather about to
flow, with milk and honey. The result of Howitt’s ex-
pedition was to dispel this pastoral dream. He looked for
a Paradise, and found a desert. Coming from the forest-
clad and snow-capped mountains of Victoria, with their
abundant rains and luxuriant vegetation, he found himself
in another world. In the distance barren ranges of naked
brown rocks and precipices loomed weirdly through the
desert haze; and a nearer approach revealed the profound
ravines by which these desolate mountains were cleft from
side to side. At their feet stretched either wastes of sand
across which wind-driven columns of dust stalked like the
jinn of the Arabian Nights, or plains so stony that riding
at night the explorers could follow their leader by the
sparks of fire which his horse’s hoofs struck out of the
stones at every step in the darkness. By day the atmo-
sphere was at times so clear that the travellers could
hardly tell whether objects seen through it were near or
far; at other times the mirage worked such fantastic
effects on the landscape that they felt as if transported to
an enchanted land. “It was an interesting experience in
a wonderful country,” says Dr. Howitt dryly, in conclusion,
“but it was not the kind of country that was wanted.” 15
After his return from this exploring expedition, Mr.
Howitt took a post as manager of the Mount Napier
cattle station, near Hamilton. But in iB6O he was again
15 Report of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Adelaide, 1907, Inaugural Address by A. W. Howitt, C.M.G., D.Sc., F.G.S.,
President , pp. 9-11 (separate reprint).


despatched by the Victorian Government on the task of
exploration. This time he went with a party of picked
miners to prospect for gold in the rugged, mountainous,
trackless, and then almost unknown region of Gippsland,
in south-eastern Victoria, where in winter the snow lies for
months on the peaks and tablelands, and where in the
dense jungle of the valleys the trees grow to heights scarcely
equalled on earth. The mission was successful ; goldfields
were opened on the Crooked, Dargo, and Wentworth
Rivers. It was during this expedition that Mr. Howitt
first became keenly interested in the eucalyptus trees, to
which in after life he paid much attention, acquiring an
intimate knowledge of the subject both from the practical
and the scientific point of view.
In the year iB6O an ill-fated expedition, equipped at
lavish cost and led by Burke and Wills, had started from
Melbourne amid the enthusiasm of the citizens to traverse
Australia from south to north. When month after month
passed and no word came of the explorers, great uneasi-
ness was felt in Victoria, and on June 18th, 1861, it was
decided to send out a search party to their relief. Of this
party Mr. Howitt was appointed leader. He started on
July 14th, and journeyed north to Menindie on the
Darling River, then the last outpost of civilisation, if
indeed civilisation can be said to be represented by a
public-house, a shop, a lock-up, and a knot of bearded
men in cabbage-tree hats, who, so far as they did not
pass their leisure hours in the contemplative seclusion of
the lock-up, devoted them to smoking and lounging in
the public-house, discussing the latest “brush with the
niggers,” and criticising the stores offered for the use of
explorers, particularly the dried beef, which they smelt
and tasted with the air of connoisseurs. Leaving these
representatives of the higher culture behind, Mr. Howitt
and his small party, with their horses and camels, struck
westward into the desert. He has described his experi-
VOL. xx. L


ences briefly but graphically. 16 He tells us how, when
they came to a river or creek, the camels stubbornly
refused to take to the water, but were circumvented by
human intelligence; for having persuaded them to sit down
on the bank and then to get up again, Mr. Howitt and
his companions suddenly precipitated themselves upon the
brutes in an unguarded moment when they were off their
balance in the act of rising, and so toppled them bodily
into the stream, and hauled them across. After flounder-
ing through the water, the camels waded in the deep mud
on the other side, drawing their hoofs out of it one after
the other with a loud plop like the sound of drawing a
gigantic cork out of a Brobdingnagian bottle. Day after
day, over ground paved with sharp splinters of flinty stone,
through deep dry gorges in the desolate hills, lined with
half-dead mulga scrub and studded with great boulders,
the explorers and their beasts slowly picked their way,
footsore and weary under the burning sun, till coming out
on the edge of a bluff they suddenly beheld the great
sandy desert of the Cooper’s Creek country spread out
below and beyond them. Far as the eye could see the
sandhills stretched away, ridge beyond ridge, to the horizon,
until their outlines were lost in the haze of distance. As
he gazed on this dreary landscape from the height, a very
different scene, which he had beheld a year before in
the Gippsland highlands, rose up before the mind of the
explorer. Then, as he ascended a mountain summit on
the Dargo River, a wonderful far-reaching prospect had
burst upon him. For many miles the snowy plains
stretched northwards to where, on the horizon, the chain-
of the Bogong Mountains rose, lustrous in their white
mantle of snow, resplendently pure under the cloudless
deep blue of the winter sky in the Australian Alps.
Descending from these heights, Mr. Howitt and his men
16 In his Inaugural Address to the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Adelaide, 1907, pp. 20 sqq.


pursued their way, now with labour and difficulty over the
most stony wilderness imaginable, now with comparative
ease over sandhills or earthy plains, cracked and fissured
for want of water in all directions, sometimes bare and
brown, sometimes cumbered with the dry stalks of withered
plants, which rose higher than a horse and showed how,,
after heavy rains, the face of these arid deserts would
Change as by magic into a teeming jungle of vegetation.
Thus they journeyed till one day, riding alone, Mr. Howitt
perceived some native huts on the further side of a dry
waddy, and in the foreground a black man and woman
gathering sticks. The woman at once made off towards
the huts, but the man stood his ground and gesticulated
in great excitement to Mr. Howitt, until on the approach
of the traveller he also took to his heels. To regain his
party Mr. Howitt rode along the bank of the waddy, and
met his native riders, one of whom shouted to him : “ Find
em whitefella; two fella dead boy and one fella livo.”
Hastening to the native camp, Mr. Howitt found the last
survivor of the missing explorers, John King, sitting in
one of the huts. He was a melancholy object, hardly to
be distinguished as a civilised man by the tatters that
still hung on his weak, emaciated frame. At first he was
too much overcome by emotion to speak distinctly; but
in time he recovered sufficiently to tell his tale of suffer-
ing and disaster. It was the 25th of September when the
rescuers and the rescued turned their faces homeward
on November 28th, 1861, they all reached Melbourne in
safety.
A few days later the intrepid and indefatigable explorer
started again for the deserts of the far interior to explore
the region of Cooper’s Creek and to bring back the bones
of the men who had fallen martyrs to science, that they
might be buried with public honours in the city. This
task also Mr. Howitt accomplished successfully. He
brought back the remains of Burke and Wills to Mel-


bourne on December 28th, 1862. For these services Mr.
Howitt was appointed Police Magistrate and Warden of
the Goldfields in Gippsland, a post which he filled with
conspicuous success during twenty-six years of incessant
work from 1863 to 1889.
it was during the expedition of 1862, when he was no
longer under the necessity of pushing on from day to day
lest he should come too late to rescue the survivors, that
Mr. Howitt found leisure to study the natives with whom
he came into contact; and it was then that he gained his
first insight into the social organisation of the Dieri tribe,
who roamed the wilderness of Cooper’s Creek and Lake
Eyre With the help of a native interpreter of the Nar-
rinyeri tribe Mr. Howitt before long was able to make
himself understood sufficiently for ordinary purposes. On
this expedition also he saw for himself the wonderful
transformation which after heavy rains converts the Central
Australian desert into a jungle. Where an earlier explorer
had beheld nothing but a dark brown wilderness without
a blade of grass, Mr. Howitt rode for many days through
a land of lakes, lagoons, and water-channels, with wide
stretches of plains covered by a rank growth of tall plants,
higher than a man on horseback, looking like vast beds
of white hollyhocks in full bloom, and his horses revelled
in the luxuriant herbage. So sharp was the line of
demarcation between the dry and the watered land that
on a steep bank, at the point to which the flood had risen,
the traveller stood with the hind feet of his horse in the
desert and his front feet on the teeming vegetation.
The district of Gippsland which was committed to Mr.
Howitt’s care extended from Wilson’s Promontory to
Cape Howe. It was then a wild, almost unexplored
country, and every year Mr. Howitt travelled thousands
of miles through it on horseback ; and as he rode among
the mountains and through the great forests he learned to
study minutely both the rocks and the trees. His capacity
164
Homitt and Fison.


for work was extraordinary; much of his reading was done
in the saddle. The botanical and geological observations
which he made on these journeys bore fruit in a series of
memoirs which he contributed to the publications of his
official Department, the Royal Society of Victoria, the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
and occasionally to the Quarterly Journal of Geological
Science. Among these memoirs may be particularly men-
tioned his treatise, “ The Eucalypti of Gippsland,” which
appeared in the Transactions of the Royal Society of
Victoria for 1889.
Still more important for his life-work was the acquaint-
ance which on these journeys he made with the native
inhabitants, the Kurnai of Gippsland. He gained their
confidence, and, being regarded by them as a fully initiated
member of the tribe, was able to acquire an intimate
knowledge of their old customs and beliefs before they had
wholly passed into oblivion ; for, though the Kurnai had
long been at peace with the whites, they were even then
fast dying out. Thus, when on his return from Fiji in
1871 Mr. Fison appealed through the newspapers for
information on the Australian aborigines, Mr. Howitt was
well qualified by his knowledge both of the Central and of
the South-eastern tribes, the Died as well as the Kurnai,
to respond to the appeal. He did so, and, as we have
seen, the two men became fast friends and colleagues in
the work of investigation, laying together the foundations
of Australian ethnology. In these researches the observa-
tion and collection of facts fell mainly to the share of Mr.
Howitt, his colleague’s professional duties and situation
leaving him fewer opportunities of personal contact with,
the natives. On the other hand, the theoretical interpre-
tation of the facts was at first largely the work of Mr.
Fison, though in later years Mr. Howitt distinguished
himself certainly not less in this department of anthro-
pology. After the two friends had published in Kamilaroi


and Kurnai (Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane,
1880) the joint results of their enquiries and reflections,
Mr. Howitt pursued his investigations for the most part
alone ; indeed, even before the publication of that book,
Mr. Fison had returned to Fiji. Some of the results of
these investigations were given to the world in a long
series of valuable memoirs on the Australian tribes, which
appeared for the most part in The Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute of Great Britain and Ireland from the
year 1883 to the year 1907. They opened with a joint
paper by Messrs. Fison and Howitt, called “From Mother-
Right to Father-Right,” and they closed with one by Dr.
Howitt on “ Australian Group-Relationships.” In this
series an early one, entitled “Notes on the Australian
Class Systems,” read in the author’s absence before the
Anthropological Institute in London on December 12th,
1882, 17 is second to none in importance for its clear
enunciation of the principles underlying the seemingly
complex marriage system of the Australian aborigines.
Strangely enough, when many years later he came to
write his great work The Native Tribes of South-East
Australia , Dr. Howitt had forgotten his own enunciation
of these important principles; for it was only after a
conversation with me at my house in Cambridge, in the
summer of 1904, that he inserted a statement of them
in his book, which was then going through the press.
With characteristic candour he accepted the principles
as true and assigned the discovery of them to me. 18 It
was not till January 2nd, 1908, that I detected our joint
mistake; for on that day, reading again Dr. Howitt’s
old paper “Notes on the Australian Class Systems,” I
found that in it he had clearly and concisely stated the
principles in question many years before I had ever given
a thought to the subject. As I had certainly studied
17 Journal of the Anthropological Institute , xii. (1883), pp. 496-510.
18 The Native Tribes of South-East Australia , pp. 284-286.


and cited that paper 19 long before, I make no doubt that
I had learned the principles from it, though like the
author of the paper I had forgotten the source of my
information, I at once wrote to Dr. Howitt to do him
the justice which he had failed to do himself. 20 Though
I did not knoto it, there was no time to be lost, for
when I was writing he had already been struck down
by mortal sickness. Happily my letter reached him in
life, and he sent me through his daughter a last message,
a kind and generous message, in reply.
Another paper which deserves to be specially mentioned
is a later one, entitled “Further Notes on the Australian
Glass System,” 21 in which Mr. Howitt acutely pointed out
how among the Australian savages a certain social advance
has been made in the better watered and more fertile
districts, particularly on the coast, while the more archaic
forms of society linger in the dry and desert interior, from
which he inferred that in Australia the first steps towards
civilisation have been conditioned by a heavier rainfall and
a consequent greater abundance of food. This important
principle was afterwards fully recognised and clearly stated
by him in The Native Tribes of South-East Australia.
Indeed he justly attached so much weight to it that he
wished to illustrate it in his book by a map of the rainfall
in Australia, which would show how in that continent
progress in culture varies directly with the rainfall. For
that purpose he applied to the meteorological authorities
in London, but for lack of the necessary data, if I
remember aright, the project was abandoned. Amongst
his anthropological papers published elsewhere may be
10T /eXXFi Ft
19 In my Toteinism , published in 1887. /
20 At the same time I wrote to the same effect /Man, and my letter was
published in that journal, February, 1908, pp. 'zi sq. I believe I wrote
at the same time an identical letter to The Athenaeum , but on a cursory
search through a file of that periodical I have not been able to find the letter.
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xviii. (1889), pp. 31-68.


mentioned his paper, “ Australian Group-Relationships,”
published in the Annual Report of the Smithsonian
Institute for 1883; another “On the Organisation of
Australian Tribes,” in the Transactions of the Royal
Society of Victoria for 1889; and some papers published
in Folk-Lore for the years 1906 and 1907.
In 1889 Mr. Howitt became Secretary for Mines in
Victoria, and in 1896 he was appointed Audit Commis-
sioner. Besides these public duties he sat on other
Government commissions and boards of enquiry, for which
his wide experience, ripe knowledge, and sound judgment
pre-eminently fitted him. Yet we cannot but regret that
he devoted so much time and energy to business, which
others perhaps might have performed as efficiently, to
the neglect of scientific researches, for which few were
so well qualified as he. However, he continued to give his
leisure hours to study, and looked forward to the time
when he should be able to dedicate the rest of his life,
without distraction, to his favourite pursuits. The longed-
for time came, or seemed to come, at last when he retired
from the public service of Victoria in 1901. His retirement
was unnoticed by the public and his official colleagues,
who perhaps were hardly aware of the honour they had
enjoyed in being associated with such a man. He now
settled down to the quiet life of a student in his picturesque
home at Metung, on the shore of the Gippsland Lakes.
Gippsland is a pleasant and a beautiful country, with a
climate in the lowlands like that of Italy. The orange
grows well there; the mountains are high and snow-
capped for months together; the rivers wind through deep
glens thickly mantled in living green; the gum-trees in
the forest are the tallest trees in the world ; and the great
tree-ferns give to the woods an aspect of tropical luxuri-
ance. It is Australia Felix, the Happy Land of the South.
But Mr. Howitt’s seclusion in this earthly Paradise was not
to be undisturbed. The old serpent, in the guise of public


business, stole into his Eden. He was invited and con-
sented to act as chairman of a Royal Commission on the
coalfields of Victoria, and soon after he had discharged
this function he was appointed a member of the Com-
mission to which was entrusted the onerous and difficult
task of choosing a site for the future federal capital of
Australia. These duties involved much travelling, as well
as much critical weighing of evidence, but in spite of all
distractions he made steady progress with the revision
and completion of his life-long researches in Australian
ethnology. By the summer of 1904 the work was so far
advanced that he came to England with his daughter, Miss
Mary E. B. Howitt, to see his book through the press. It
was then that I had the privilege of making his personal
acquaintance. I hastened to greet him in London soon
after his arrival, and learned to esteem as a man one
whom I had long respected as an anthropologist. Later
in the summer, in the month of August, he and his
daughter did me the honour of staying for some days in my
house at Cambridge to attend the meeting of the British
Association. He read a paper “On Group Marriage in
Australian Tribes” at the meeting, and the University
of Cambridge showed its high appreciation of his services
to science by conferring the honorary degree of Doctor
of Science upon him. I shall always cherish the memory
of his visit and of the conversations we had on the
topics in which we both took a deep interest. Later in
the autumn he left England for Australia, spending some
time happily in Italy by the way, and there meeting
once more a sister whom he had not seen for more than
fifty years. Before the end of the same year (1904) the
book by which he will always be chiefly remembered was
published under the title of The Native Tribes of South-
East Australia. The value and importance of the work
are too well known to call for any detailed appreciation
or eulogium. It must always remain an anthropological


classic and the standard authority on the subject with
which it deals.
Much as he had enjoyed his travels in Europe and his
visit, after so many years, to the scenes of his youth, he
was glad to return to his Australian home ; and he now
threw himself with the energy and enthusiasm of youth
into his botanical and petrological studies, which thd com-
position of his great book on the Australian natives had
compelled him for a time to intermit. He cherished the
hope of writing a comprehensive work on the eucalyptus
trees of Victoria, and another on the rocks of Gippsland,
which no man knew so well as he. But these hopes
were not destined to be fulfilled. During the last years
-of his life he was much concerned by certain misappre-
hensions and misrepresentations, as he conceived them to
be, of facts relating to the Australian aborigines to which
currency had been given both in Australia and Europe,
and he took great pains to correct these misapprehensions
and to give wide publicity to his corrections. These things
absorbed some of his time, and in 1907 he was called on
to preside over the meeting of the Australasian Association
for the Advancement of Science at Adelaide. In his
Presidential Address he dealt with his reminiscences of
exploration in Central Australia, particularly his expedi-
tions to rescue the lost explorers and to bring back their
remains. In previous years he had presided over the
Ethnological and Geographical Sections of the Association,
and had been awarded the first Mueller medal for his
many distinguished contributions to Australian science.
In the previous year (1906) a Companionship of the Order
of St. Michael and St, George (C.M.G.), had been con-
ferred upon him in recognition of his services to the
State as well as to learning.
So, full of years and honours, he returned to his home
at Metung in January, 1907. The even tenour of his
studious life was pleasantly diversified by one or two


visits to Melbourne and by an expedition into the
mountains of the Omeo district to complete his obser-
vations on the rocks. The seventy-eight years of his
long life sat very lightly on him; indeed so youthful
was he in mind, so keen in intellect, so exuberant in
energy that his friends anticipated with confidence for
him yet many years of useful activity. But it was not
to be. On the last day of the year, 1907, only two days
after the death of his old friend Mr. Fison, he was
suddenly struck down by hemorrhage of the stomach.
At first the doctors held out every hope of a complete
recovery, but they scon saw that the case was beyond
their power and that Dr. Howitt’s days were numbered.
In order that he might be nearer to medical aid, they
moved him from his own house at Metung to his son’s
house at Bairnsdale. For seventy years of an active and
adventurous life Dr. Howitt had never been confined to
his bed for a single day; but, when the last sickness
came, no one could have been more patient and uncom-
plaining, and he received with steadfast courage the
announcement of the doctors that they could do nothing
for him. The remaining weeks of his life were passed
almost constantly in the sleep of weakness and exhaustion,
but with very little acute pain. His thoughts to the last
were occupied with his work; his last conscious effort
was to dictate from his death-bed a message to anthro-
pologists impressing on them the importance of caution
in accepting information drawn from the Australian tribes
in their present state of decay. The message, after a
delay caused by miscarriage in the post, was published
in the Revue des Mtudes Ethnographiques et Sociologiques
for December, 1908. On March the 7th, 1908, Dr. Howitt
passed away. His beloved wife, to whose memory he
dedicated his great book, had died six years before him.
She was a daughter of Judge Boothby of Adelaide and
left him with two sons and three daughters, one of


whom, Miss Mary E. B. Howitt, was his faithful helper
in his anthropological labours, and nursed him to the
end.
In personal appearance, and to some extent also in
manner, no two men could well differ more widely than
the fast friends, Fison and Howitt. Fison was a big burly
man, powerfully and heavily built, with a jolly good-
humoured face, a bluff almost jovial manner, tender-
hearted but bubbling over with humour, on which the
remembrance of his clerical profession, as well as his
deep, absolutely unaffected piety, perhaps imposed a
certain restraint. Howitt was a small man, with a spare
but well-knit frame, light, active, and inured to exposure
and fatigue. His features were keen and finely cut, with
deep-set eyes and a penetrating look. It was a hawk’s
face; and his brisk alert manner and quick movements
added to the resemblance. I remember that, when he
stayed in my house at Cambridge, he used not to walk
but to run upstairs like a boy, though he was then in
his seventy-fifth year. When the two old men met for the
last time, “ Howitt,” said Fison, “do you never feel the
infirmities of old age?” “What are they?” he answered.
While habitually graver than his friend, Howitt was by
no means devoid of dry humour, and could tell old
stories of the bush with admirable point and zest. On
the subject which perhaps occupied their thoughts more
than any other, the social organisation of the Australian
tribes, the two men were in fundamental agreement. On
questions much deeper and more perplexing their views
differed widely, but the difference never affected their
friendship, as indeed such differences need never affect
the friendship of honest men alike animated, as these
two unquestionably were, by a single-hearted disinterested
devotion to truth. They loved each other like brothers
in life, and they were not long divided in death. Such
were Fison and Howitt as I knew them in their writings


and in the flesh. lam proud to have known two such
men, and to have numbered them among my friends.
In the history of the science of man the names of
Howitt and Fison will be inseparably associated. It will
be for others in future, better informed and perhaps more
impartial than I am, to pronounce a final judgment on the
value of their work as a whole. Here I will single out
only what appears to me to be their most important con-
tribution to knowledge—that is, the light which they have
thrown on the systems of marriage and relationship pre-
valent among the Australian aborigines. These systems
are of extraordinary interest not merely in themselves, but
in their bearing on the history of marriage in general.
For the systems agree fundamentally with those practised
hy races in many other parts of the world ; and,
though they present peculiarities which have not been
discovered elsewhere, these peculiarities themselves appear
to be only special developments of the general principles
which underlie all the systems in question. Perhaps the
most striking feature of the Australian systems is their
apparent complexity combined with a logical, almost
mathematical precision and regularity. Enquirers have
long been divided on the question whether this feature is
the result of accident or design ; whether the Australian
aborigines have stumbled on their systems by chance, or
have gradually evolved them by conscious reflection and
deliberate effort. Most of those who know these savages
only by reading about them in books appear to be of
opinion that their social systems, for all their appearance
of complexity combined with exactness and regularity,
are the result of accident, that they grew up through a
fortuitous train of circumstances without any prevision or
purpose on the part of those who practise them. On the
other hand, most of those who are best acquainted with
the Australian aborigines, not through books but through
personal intercourse, appear to be of opinion that their


social systems are the fruit of design, and that they were
deliberately devised to ensure the results which they
unquestionably achieve. This latter was the opinion of
Fison and Howitt, and it is the opinion of their distin-
guished friends and disciples, Spencer and Gillen,
In the broadest outline, omitting details and minor
differences, an aboriginal Australian tribe is divided into
two, four, or eight exogamous classes; that is, it consists
of two, four, or eight divisions with a rqle that no man
may marry a woman of his own division, but may only
take a wife from a single one of the other divisions. Thus,
if the tribe is divided into two exogamous classes, a man
is forbidden to choose his wife from among, roughly speak-
ing, one-half of all the women of the tribe; if the tribe is
divided into four exogamous classes, then three-fourths
of the women are forbidden to him ; and if the tribe is
divided into eight exogamous classes, then no less than
seven-eighths of the women of the tribe are forbidden to
him. So strictly are these rules enforced that in the old
days breaches of them were commonly punished by put-
ting both the culprits to death.
With regard to descent, when a tribe is divided into two
exogamous classes, the children are always born into the
class either of their father or of their mother, the custom
in this respect varying in different tribes; for in some
tribes the children always belong to their father’s class*
and in others they always belong to their mother’s. When
a tribe is divided into four or eight exogamous classes, the
children are born into the class neither of their father nor
of their mother, but always into another class, which is,
however, determined for them without variation by the
particular classes to which their parents belong.
It will hardly be denied that these systems, particularly
the rule of the four-class or eight-class organisation, that
children can never belong to the class either of their
father or of their mother, have at least a superficial appear-


ance of being artificial; and the inference that they must
have been deliberately devised, not created by a series of
accidents, that they are a product of reason, not of chance,
is confirmed by a closer examination. For it can easily be
shown that the effect of dividing a tribe into two exoga-
mous classes is to prevent the marriage of brothers with
sisters ; that the effect of dividing a tribe into four exoga-
mous classes, with the characteristic rule of descent, is to
prevent the marriage of parents with children ; 22 and that
the effect of dividing a tribe into eight exogamous classes,
with the characteristic rule of descent, is to prevent a
man’s children from marrying his sister’s children—that is,
its effect is to prevent the marriage of some, though not
all, of those whom we call cousins. As all the
marriages which these rules actually bar are abhorred by
the Australian aborigines, it is natural to infer that the
effect which the rules produce is the effect which they
were designed to produce ; in other words, that the rules,
which have certainly the appearance of being artificial, are
really so, having been devised to accomplish the very
object which in point of fact they do very successfully
achieve. If this inference is sound, the deliberate institu-
tion of the Australian marriage system may be taken as
proved.
The objections raised to this view by those who know
the Australian natives only or mainly through books
resolve themselves, roughly speaking, into two. First,
they deny that the Australian savages are capable of
thinking out a marriage system at once so complex and
so regular. But this objection is outweighed by the testi-
mony of those who best know the Australian aborigines
22 That the division into two and four exogamous classes, with the peculiar
rule of descent in the four-class system, not only produced these effects but
was intended to produce them, was clearly stated by Dr. Howitt in his
paper “Notes on the Australian Class Systems,” Journal of the Anthro-
pological Institute, xii. (1883), pp. 496 sqq. See above, p. .
175
Howitt and Fison.


personally, such as Dr. Howitt and Messrs. Spencer and
Gillen, 23 in whose opinion the natives are quite capable
both of conceiving and of executing the system in question.
That the natives understand their complex system per-
fectly, and work it smoothly and regularly, is certain.
Why, then, should they not have originated it ? Would
they be more likely to understand and work it, as they do,
without any serious hitch, if they had drifted into it by
accident than if they had thought it out for themselves?
The other objection often brought against the theory of
the deliberate institution of the Australian marriage system
is that if the system was designed to prevent the marriage
of brothers with sisters, of parents with children, and of a
man’s children with his sister’s children, it greatly over-
shoots the mark by simultaneously barring the marriage
of many other persons who stand in none of these rela-
tionships to each other. This objection implies a total
misconception of the Australian system of relationships.
For, according to the classificatory system of relationship,
which is universally prevalent among the Australian
aborigines, the terms father, mother, brother, sister, son,
.and daughter are employed in a far wider signification
than with us, so as to include many persons who are no
blood relations at all to the speaker. The system sorts
out the whole community into classes or groups, which
are variously designated by these terms ; the relationship
which it recognises between members of a class or group
is social, not consanguineous; and though each class or
23 A. W. Howitt, “ Notes on the Australian Class Systems f Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xii. (1883), pp. 499 sqq. ; id.. The Native Tribes of
South-East Australia, pp. 89 sq., 140, 143; Spencer and Gillen, Native
Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 12-15, 69 ; id. , Northern Tribes of Central
Australia, pp. 123 sq. ; id., “Some Remarks on Totemism as applied to the
Australian Tribes,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxviii. (1899),
p. 278; Baldwin Spencer, '‘Totemism in Australia,” in Transactions of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Dunedin, 1904,
pp. 419 sq.


group includes the blood relations whom we designate
by the corresponding terms, it includes many more, and
for social purposes a man does not distinguish between
the members of a group who are related to him by blood
from those members of the group who are not so related
to him. Each man has thus many “ fathers ” who never
begat him, and many “mothers” who never bore him ; he
calls many men and women his “ brothers ” and “ sisters ”
with whom he has not a drop of blood in common ; and he
bestows the names of “sons” and “daughters” on many
boys and girls, many men and women, who are not his
offspring.
Now “if we assume, as we have every right to do, that
the founders of exogamy in Australia recognised the
classificatory system of relationship, and the classificatory
system of relationship only, we shall at once perceive that
what they intended to prevent was not merely the marriage
of a man with his sister, his mother, or his daughter in the
physical sense in which we use these terms; their aim was
to prevent his marriage with his sister, his mother, and his
daughter in the classificatory sense of these terms ; that is,
they intended to place bars to marriage not between indi-
viduals merely but between the whole groups of persons
who designated cheir group not their individual relation-
ship, their social not their consanguineous ties, by the
names of father and mother, brother and sister, and son
and daughter. In this intention the founders of exogamy
succeeded perfectly. In the completest form of the system,
the division of the tribe into eight exogamous classes, they
barred the marriage of group brothers with group sisters,
of group fathers with group daughters, of group mothers
with group sons, and of the sons of group brothers with the
daughters of group sisters. Thus the dichotomy of an
Australian tribe in its completest form, namely, in the
eight-class organisation, was not a clumsy expedient which
overshot its mark by separating from each other many
VOL. xx. m


persons whom the authors of it had no intention of separat-
ing; it was a device admirably adapted to effect just what
its inventors intended, neither more nor lessT’^-
j ßut while there are strong grounds for thinking that the
system of exogamy has been deliberately devised and
instituted for the purpose of effecting just what it does
effect, it would doubtless be a mistake to suppose that its
most complex form, the eight-class system, was struck out
at a single blow. All the evidence and probability are in
favour of the view that the system originated in a simple
division of the community into two exogamous classes
only; that, when this was found insufficient to bar
marriages which the natives regarded as objectionable,
each of the two classes was again subdivided into two,
making four exogamous classes in all; and, finally, that,
when four exogamous classes still proved to be insufficient
for the purpose, each of them was again subdivided into
two, making eight exogamous classes in all. Thus from a
simple beginning the Australians appeared to have ad-
vanced step by step to the complex system of eight
exogamous classes, the process being one of successive
bisections or dichotomies. The first bisection, as I have
said, prevented the marriage of brothers with sisters ; the
second bisection, combined with the characteristic rule of
descent, prevented the marriage of parents with children;
and the third bisection, combined with the characteristic
rule of descent, prevented the marriage of a man’s children
with the children of his sister; in other words, it prevented
the marriage of some, but not all, of those whom we call
first cousins/
But if tl/e system was devised to prevent the marriage of
brothers with sisters, of parents with children, and of a
man’s children with his sister’s children, it seems to follow
24 1 quote this passage from a forthcoming work of mine, Totemism and
Exogamy , to which I would refer my readers for a fuller explanation and
discussion of a somewhat intricate subject.
178
Ho'Witt and Fison.


that such marriages were common before the system was
instituted to check them; in short, it implies that exogamy
was a deliberate prohibition of a former unrestricted
practice of incest, which allowed the nearest relations to
have sexual intercourse with each other. This implica-
tion is confirmed, as Messrs, Howitt, Spencer, and Gillen
have shewn for the tribes of Central Australia, by
customs which can be reasonably interpreted only as a
system of group marriage or as survivals of a still
wider practice of sexual communism. And, as the
custom of exogamy combined with the classificatory
system of relationship is not confined to Australia, but is
found among many races in many parts of the world, it
becomes probable that a large part, if not the whole of the
human race, have at one time, not necessarily the earliestT
in their history permitted the practice of incest, that is, of
the closest interbreeding, and that, having perceived or
imagined the practice to be injurious, they deliberately for-
bade and took effective measures to prevent it.
That is the great generalisation reached by L. H.
Morgan from his discovery of the classificatory system of
relationship. It is perhaps the most remarkable achieve-
ment of Fison and Howitt first, and of their disciples
Spencer and Gillen afterwards, that their researches among
the Australian tribes have not only lent powerful support
to the conclusions of the American ethnologist, but have
given us an insight into the machinery by which the great
social reform was effected. The machinery was, indeed,
simple; it consisted merely in the bisection, whether single
or repeated, of the whole community into two exogamous
classes. In Australia the application of this machinery to
effect this purpose is seen more clearly than in any other
part of the world, because in many Australian tribes the
bisection has been repeated oftener than anywhere else, or,
rather, oftener than it is known to have been repeated
elsewhere; for it is possible that among other races of


men similar secondary and tertiary subdivisions have
occurred, though they seem now to have vanished without
leaving a trace. The oldest social stratification, so to
say, of mankind is better preserved among the Australian
aborigines than among any other people of whom we have
knowledge. To have obtained an accurate record of that
stratification before it finally disappeared, as it must very
soon do, is an achievement of the highest importance for
the understanding of human history; and we owe the pos-
session of that record, now safely deposited in the archives
of science, mainly to the exertions and the influence of
Howitt and Fison.
J. G. Frazer.
180
Howitt and Fison .
