

ANOTHER PROTEST AGAINST SIR
SIR ARTHUR GORDON’S MEN-
DACITY AND MISREPRE-
SENTATION.
The Leading Article from the “ FIJI TIMES ” of
10th October, 1883.
Judging from tlie evidences which are
to be met with on every hand, there
would appear to he something posi-
tively diabolical in the malignity with
which Sir Arthur Gordon still pursues
the unfortunate colonists in Fiji. Not
content with the injury he contrived to
inflict upon their interests while pre-
sent with them, he devotes his absence
to traducing their characters and black-
ing their reputation, in the evident
hope that his own will gather fresh
lustre from the contrast. Plainly
the impression he is striving to create is
that the regeneration of Fiji, morally,
socially, and politically is entirely due
to himself ; that the task he claims
successfully to have carried out was a
modern labor of Hercules ; that the
foulness of the mythical Augean
stable was but faintly typical of the
Fijian reality, and that as with a
demi-god’s strength of noble purpose
he has purged and purified it, he is
justly entitled to almost divine honors
for his heroic achievement. It can
easily be seen that the more depraved
the state of society, the greater the
credit due to its regenerator ; that the
more stupendous the difficulties, the
greater the merit of surmounting them,
and therefore the systematic defama-
tion of the colonists in Fiji simply
means the more eulogistic exaltation
of the hon. Sir Arthur Hamilton Gor-
don.
One of the latest evidences of this
persistency in defamation was recently
referred to by the London correspon-
dent of a colonial contemporary who
says: —“ By publishing and circulating
the valedictory address of the late Go-
vernor of Fiji, the Colonial Office has
enabled Sir Arthur Gordon to pay off
a long standing grudge against the
European population of Suva and
Levuka. Never were men painted in
blacker colors than the planters and
property holders of these Pacific Isles.
‘ We always thought ’ says the “ Man-
chester Guardian ” ‘ that amongst all
our Colonial Possessions, Fiji stood
out prominently for the good feeling
subsisting between the white settlers
and the natives. Sir Arthur Gordon,
however, asserts the former are pos-
sessed of a fierce, arrogant, and domi-
neering spirit. On his first arrival in
Fiji, Sir Arthur was actually congra-
tulated by one man on the number of
natives the measles had swept off.
Another confidentially consulted him
in all seriousness as to whether it was
lawful for him to shoot natives who
trespassed on his property, or what he
assumed to be such.’ The above are
only samples of the extraordinary
statements in this precious pamphlet
which being issued ‘ by the authority
of the Colonial Office ’ naturally car-
ries considerable weight, and is be-
lieved by the public to be a dear


unprejudiced statement of facts.”
When the valedictory address above
referred to was first published in the
columns of this journal, we took ex-
ception to its gross exaggerations, its
palpable mis-statements and its defi-
nite divergence from the truth. The
article appeared in the same issue as
that containing the address notwith-
standing that Sir Arthur had mannou-
vred very cleverly to obtain the publi-
cation of the latter in such a manner as
would have prevented it being accom-
panied by editorial comment. In
this, however, he was out-manoeuvred,
and side by side with the address ap-
peared the article which traversed its
arguments, exposed its fallacies, and
refuted its calumnies. This rendered
the issue utterly useless for Sir
Arthur’s purposes, since he could not
circulate the slanders contained in the
address without publishing the edi-
torial vindication of those he had
aspersed. Hence the necessity for
republishing the address by itself
under the auspices of the Colonial
Office, by which the two-fold object is
attained :—The dissemination of Sir
Arthur’s libels on the colonists of
Fiji, and the politic suppression of
their complete refutation.
Fortunately for Sir Arthur, and
most unfortunately for Fiji, in writing
and speaking to Englishmen at home
he is addressing himself to those who
are utterly ignorant of matters Fijian.
They have therefore no alternative
but to receive his statements as facts
and to accept at his own valuation the
eminent services he claims to have
rendered the state in his capacity of
Governor of Fiji. Here, he would
have the English people believe, that
he found an utter state of confusion,
rendered the worse confounded by the
moral and social depravity of men
owning no law, impatient of all res-
traint. and “ possessed of a fierce,
arrogant and domineering spirit.”
As typical of the general character he
cites two cases, in one of which, ac-
cording to his statement, he was con-
gratulated by a resident upon the
number men the measles had swept
off, and in the other, on the same
veracious authority, a resident is re-
presented as enquiring as to his right
to shoot trespassing natives. Into
such a state of things and amongst
such a people he leaves it to be in-
ferred that he was required to intro-
duce harmony and order, and accord-
ing to the measure of his self asserted
success are the people expected to
laud and magnify this saviour and
regenerator of his fellows.
Now what are the facts ? Those
who visited Fiji at a time when its
European population had attained to
its highest numerical strength, which
was at a date previous to the establish-
ment of any form of Government, are
unanimous in declaring that its pecu-
liar characteristic was the order loving
instincts of its European population.
This consisted of from 3,000 to 3,500
persons who had been attracted hither
from all parts of the world, principally
from the Australian colonies, and
though there was neither law or autho-
rity to exercise any restraining influ-
ence over them, there was an absolute
immunity from even petty offences,
much less from crimes of graver cha-
racter. The troubles which ensued
later on, and which required the arm
of authority to suppress, were of purely
political origin, and sprang from the
attempt to establish a form of Govern-
ment objectionable to a great number
of the Europeans. Still the Govern-
ment was formed, and its laws were
administered for three years. Then
followed the Cession and the carrying
on of the administration under the ad
interim Government, with the former
British Consul as his Honor the Ad-
ministrator. A twelvemonth later Sir
Arthur Gordon assumed the reins of
office, not to initiate a system of ad-
ministration, but to carry on, to im-
prove, and perfect that which had been
established ready to his hand. In
his first address to the people he
now traduces, he said:—“You are
pretty well aware that the fame of Fiji
has not always been of the best ; nor
has it always borne a good name with
the world. I wish to. say publicly
that I think these charges are unjust.
My own short experience has proved
to me that much which has been said
about the country is undeserved.”


From amongst the men he now repre-
sents as “ fierce, arrogant, and domi-
neering,” he selected his Legislative
Councillors, his magistrates, and the
working heads of his departments. It
is true that since then the school boy
and political dependent element from
home has been largely introduced into
the civil service, but it is the old resi-
dents who yet hold foremost rank as
capable men, and it is the few old
magistrates yet remaining who redeem
that branch of the service from crass
ignorance and boyish incapacity.
With respeut to the planters, Sir
Arthur in speaking on the labor ques-
tion has said The Governor is
thoroughly confident that as a general
rule, and with but very few exceptions,
the treatment of Polynesian Immi-
grants in Fiji by their employers is
kind, considerate and equitable, and
those who assert that the hesitation of
the natives in the Western groups to
come to Fiji arises from ill-treatment
met with by them in this colony (and
that such is the case has been asserted
by high authority) are altogether in
error.” Then where, we ask, is the
evidence to be looked for of the
‘■fierce, arrogant, and domineering
spirit,” with which these colonists are
now credited ? Is it to be supposed that
those who are “ kind, considerate and
equitable ” to Polynesians become the
reverse in character where Fiiians are
concerned ? So singular an accusation
should be accompanied by some evid-
ence to support it; yet where is it ?
Are we to accept the congratulation,
said to have been tendered by some
person unknown upon the lamentable
destruction of the natives by the
measles, or the asserted enquiry by
some person, equally unknown, as to
the justifiable shooting of trespassing
natives as evidence in the case ? If
so, then granting the truth of that
which is generally looked upon as an
absolute fabrication, what does it
prove ? To put its worst construction
on it, that two men were heartless
scoundrels, and not that the whole
community sympathised with them.
Yet this has been the falsehood insinu-
ated, and the colonists of Fiji indig-
nantly hurl it bach in the teeth of their
calumniator. It was well for the na-
tives that to the feeble Government
effort to stay the plague of measles
amongst them, was added the vigorous
efforts of the planters in whose neigh-
borhood they lived. Well for them
that the Europeans hesitated not to
expend time and substance in succour-
ing them in their distress, or the tale
of mortality would not have stopped
at 30,000. But this matter never at-
tracted Sir Arthur’s official notice, and
it better suited his purpose to mis-
represent the Europeans as a people
against whose “ fierce, arrogant and
domineering spirit ” the Fijians found
in him a heaven-sent friend and cham-
pion.
Sir Arthur’s valedictory address not-
withstanding, the “ Manchester Guar-
dian” is quite right as to the perfect
good feeling subsisting between the
natives and the white settlers in Fiji.
Whoso dares assert the contrary states
that which is distinctly untrue, and is
challenged to produce evidence to sup-
port the charge. It is quite true that
the very reverse of a good feeling, in
fact a very cordially reciprocated anti-
pathy, existed between the colonists
and Sir Arthur Gordon, and this may
possibly in his eyes comprehend all
other social and political delinquencies.
In such case Fiji must be content to
accept condemnation with New Bruns-
wick, Trinidad, Mauritius and New
Zealand, in all of which dependencies
of the Empire this blatant mock phi-
lanthropist has earned for himself the
same unenviable notoriety, and has
succeeded in giving cause for the
same hearty detestation. Upon
Fiji, however, the Gordon blight fell
with peculiarly crushing effect, and as
its author is of the class who never
forgive those they have injured, the
colonists must still hear as best they
can his unrelenting malignity.
G. L. Griffiths, Printer, Levwka.
