

The Commonwealth
Note Issue.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY SOCIETY OF
COMMERCE ON 26TH MAY, 1911,
BY
W. NEILL, ESQ., F.C.P.A.
ADELAIDE;
W K. THOMAS & Co., PRINTERS, GRENFELL STREET
1911.


The Commonwealth
Note Issue.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY SOCIETY OF
COMMERCE ON 26th MAY, 1911,
BY
W. NEILL, ESQ., F.C.P.A.
ADELAIDE;
W. K. Thomas & Co., printers, Grenfell Street
1911,


The Commonwealth Note Issue .
A Lecture delivered before the Univetsity Society of Commerce
on 26th May. /?//, by IV. NEILL , Esg. t F.C.P.A.
The Australian Notes Act was assented to on the
16th September, 1910, and is now in partial operation, as
notes are in circulation in the Commonwealth. On Ist
July next the Act will be in full operation, as from that
date the issue of bank notes or state notes will be forbid-
den. By notes, of course, are meant promissory notes,
payable to bearer on demand, which are intended to cir-
culate as money, and which, after they are paid, may be
issued again—in this respect differing from ordinary pro-
missory notes. It will perhaps occur to you that all pub-
lic discussion of the question should have preceded the
Act, and that it can be of little practical value now that
the proposal has become law. This would be true if it
were the case that our laws were fixed and unalterable,
but as you know such is not the case. We never know
as to any given question when our legislation has reached
finality. Take for example the law relating to Licensed
Victuallers. Hardly ever does a new South Australian Par-
liament meet without that law being put into the melting
pot to emerge with one or more amendments, or with
some entirely new features. perhaps the most
notable instance, but all our laws, locally enacted, are
to some extent liable to a similar process. As to those
which we deem faulty we may always cherish the hope
of improvement; as to those which we think good, a vigi-
lant watch is necessary lest they become maimed by the
assault of some professed reformer who would have us
believe that every reform spells progress—as if the re-
form of the human face by removing the nose would ne-
cessarily be a betterment of things.
It is never too late to endeavour to establish or to
preserve a sound public opinion on any question —and the


question of its paper currency is one which vitally con-
cerns the welfare of any country; and while we will, I
think, admit that the Australian Notes Act in the form in
which it became law is a more reasonable and a sounder
measure than at one time it seemed likely to be, we should
not forget the dangerous theories that were put forward
by some members of Parliament, and that possibly might
command a majority in time to come. We may laugh at
the American who years ago was reported to have said
that he would never vote for imposing more taxes so
long as they could make any amount of money by send-
ing a cartload of paper to the engraver. Yet that wag
has some serious followers in positions of authority in
Australia to-day, and although the pages of history are
strewn with the records of national disasters brought
about by the issue of inconvertible notes, there are pub-
lic men now who appear to dream of a time when all our
money will be in that form. Not many months ago a
Parliamentary Committee sat in New Zealand to
take evidence and report on the dual question of a State
Bank and a State paper currency. The finding was —
1. That a state bank is not advisable.
2. That in view of the note tax no advantage is to
be gained by the issue of state notes.
What I specially want to draw attention to in the
report is the advice given by some of the witnesses. One
gentleman, who is described as an author, recommended
“inconvertible legal tender notes, unsupported by a gold
basis.” Another witness advised the issue of four classes
of state notes, viz:—
Land notes, redeemable in land,
Mercantile notes, redeemable in goods,
Gold notes, redeemable in gold,
Public Works notes, issued to pay for public works
and to be gradually redeemed out of the profits
of the same.
In the face of such utterances it becomes necessary
to emphasise the elementary principles which must al-
_ways govern any sound system of note currency. First,
then, I ask you to remember two of the principal func-
tions of money in general. What is money? For our pur


poses this evening it is enough to remind you that money
is something which serves as a medium of exchange, and
also as a measure of values. A medium of exchange—that
is a go-between for those who wish to part with goods
or services, and those who wish to acquire these things.
It must therefore be something universally exchangeable;
that is, acceptable to all persons and exchangeable at all
times and in all places; that for which, in the last resort,
if he have enough of it, a man can always depend upon
getting the necessaries of life, Now to do this it must
have value in itself. If it is to be acceptable, if it is to
be depended upon as a means to secure value at all times,
it must have value. No man will willingly part with his
goods or his services for something which has no value.
This, then, is one of the prime essentials of money. It
must be something which has inherent value. Our stan-
dard British money, gold of course, fulfils this require-
ment.
There is another reason also why money must have
inherent value. It has to serve as the standard measure
of the value of other things. Now there must always be
/some common feature between any measure and the
thing which it measures. A yardstick is fitted to be a
measure of length. Why? Because it has length. A
pound weight could not be a measure of weight unless
it had weight itself. Similarly money can be a measure
of value when and only when it has value. You might
select something else to serve as money in place of gold,
provided it be something which has value in it. But gold
has been found to be in many respects the most suitable,
and having adopted it we have to bear in mind that it is
money, and nothing else is except in a secondary sense.
Our silver and bronze coins are only token money. They
are meant for fractional payments. The silver in twenty
shillings is not worth half a sovereign. But the twenty
shillings are rated at a pound because they can be ex-
changed for a sovereign, and no one is bound to take sil-
ver in payment over forty shillings in amount. As W. W.
Carlile, in his “Evolution of Modern Money,” says:—“The
only thing that can justify the use of token money as a
medium of exchange is its convertibility into standard


money.” This remark applies to our silver, our bronze,
and .our notes. They all in differing degree are token
money. Gold in full degree is real or standard money.
Let us now consider so-called paper money. A slip
of paper has in itself no appreciable value. How, then,
can it be money? The simple truth is that it is not and
never can be money in the primary and essential meaning
of that word. But it may be made to serve the purposes
of money; it may become token money by having placed
on it a reliable promise or guarantee by virtue of which
it can be exchanged for real money at any time at the
will of the person holding it. Now, that is the essential
point which I beg you to carry away with you to-night.
Whenever you find yourself launched on a sea of discus-
sion with a confused set of cross currents started athwart
your course it is well to have a good sheet anchor. Such
an anchor in relation to this subject I have found to be
the demonstrable truth that paper is not money, and that
it cannot be a proper substitute for money unless it is
convertible into money. Hence a paper currency can be
sound only if it have gold at the back of it, and be ex-
changeable for gold on demand.
“Gold at the back of it?” How much? A lecturer
in Melbourne last year claimed that “notes require a
cover in gold of pound for pound.” That is to say that if
there be £IOO,OOO notes in circulation the issuer should
hold 100,000 sovereigns against them. Not so. I ven-
ture to say that reason and experience are both against
such a dictum. It is an idea which, if carried out to the
full, would require a Life assurance company to hold
cash to the amount of all the life policies it has out be-
cause all the policy holders might die in one night. As to
notes all that is necessary in the way of gold reserve is
that gold should be available for notes when wanted.
But it is no more possible for all the notes in a country
to come in for payment in one day than it is possible
for all the people in the country to ride in one train at.
one time, although they all have an equal right to ride
in that train. The note circulation is very much like the
water in our Port Adelaide harbour. Part of it is a fixed
quantity; part of it is tidal and variable. There is a cer


tain level which we call low water mark. The water be-
low that line is always there year in year out; the water
above that mark ebbs and flows and varies in quantity.
So over a term of years including bad times and panics you
will find a minimum line below which the note circula-
tion never falls. That is to say there is always a certain
amount of notes, for which gold is not im-
mediately wanted. Above that amount the notes
come in and go out in varying amount from
day to day. Here in South Australia from November
to March the outflow is greater than the inflow; in the
winter months the amount in circulation falls. That mini-
mum line of which I have spoken is not the same in all
countries. It is affected by the nature of the business and
the race characteristics of the people of the particular
country. But in any country long experience points to
a line somewhere below which even under most adverse
circumstances the note circulation never falls, and all
that safety demands is, first, that a gold reserve should
be kept in hand equal to all the notes above that line,
with some additional amount to provide for contingen-
cies, and, second, that against the rest of the notes good
securities should be held of the most readily realizable
kind.
Well now let us ask again the question, How much
gold should there be at the back of our Australian notes?
Ever since I was led to study this subject I have held a
reserve of one third to be sufficient. For every £3,000 of
notes £I,OOO gold. That is the proportion which for years
the Queensland Treasury has held against the state notes
issued there. The Imperial Bank of Germany is required
to hold a per cent, gold reserve. In
the Netherlands the required proportion is 40 per cent.
In Mexico the reserve has to be 50 per cent., and you will
probably agree with me that in that country a 50 per
cent, reserve is more necessary than 25 per cent, would
be in, say, England. In Canada the Dominion Govern-
ment is not required to hold more than 15 per cent, in
gold against its notes up to a total of $30,000,000, all
above that having to be represented by gold in full. Re-
serves generally in Canada, however, are lower than


would be deemed satisfactory in Australia, and there is
some justification for it in the nearness of Montreal to
the great financial centres of New York and London
whence they are able, when required, to replenish their
reserves. But there is the fact that the Dominion Govern-
ment is only bound to hold 15 per cent, against the notes
issued. The gold reserve required to be held by the Com-
monwealth Government against notes has been fixed in
the Act as 25 per cent, up to a total of £7,000,000, and
pound for pound above that. Against the other 75 per
cent, of notes the Treasury is bound to hold bank de-
posit receipts or securities of the United Kingdom, or of
the Commonwealth, or of a State. This latter provision
appears to me to meet all requirements. This 25 per cent,
reserve has been adversely criticized in some quarters. It
is less than the per cent, usually favoured,
but it is more than the Canadian 15 per cent.
The Australian and Canadian systems compare thus:
Canada. —Gold reserve—a minimum of 15 per cent.
against notes out up to a total of
|30,000,000 (say £6,250,000).
Australia.—A similar minimum reserve of 25 per
cent, against notes out up to a total of
£7,000,000 sterling.
In each case against all notes issued over the limit
named a full gold reserve has to be held. Thus in Aus-
tralia if the circulation rose to £10,000,000 the reserve re-
quired by the Act would be:—
Notes in Gold
Circulation. Reserve.
25 per cent, on .. £7,000,000 equals £1,750,000
100 per cent, on .. 3,000,000 equals 3,000,000
£10,000,000 £4,750,000
that is, 47£ per cent.
If the provisions of the Act are carried out I see no
reason for nervousness about the position. lam the
more confirmed in that view on reading the report of a
recent utterance in Sydney by Mr. Russell French, the
head of the largest and oldest bank in Australia. Mr
French said:—


‘‘While I would have preferred to see a provision of
one third backing in coin, yet taking everything into con-
sideration and believing that in practice at least one third
will be kept in hand, I do not anticipate any difficulties.
While with regard to any further issues (i.e. over
£7,000,000) the Statute provides that there shall be a
sovereign behind every note issued. This is a great safe-
guard, and we must hope that nothing will induce the
Federal Parliament to depart from the sound principle
thereby given effect to.”
That closing remark of Mr. French, “we must hope
that nothing will induce, etc.,” touches the weak point
in all Government note issues. However good the initial
system, and however thorough the safeguards provided,
there is always the political element looming above the
horizon, and the danger of interference on the part of fu-
ture needy Treasurers and needy Parliaments. This point
was emphasised in a very able paper by Mr. Henry Dar-
win of this State, which gained an “All Australia” prize
four years ago. I am glad to be able to quote Mr. Dar-
win’s words. He called to mind the fact that in the past
the “political custody of reserves had proved disastrous;”
that there had been such things as Government misuse
of trust funds euphonized into “temporary appropria-
tion,” and he went on to give us two very sage reminders.
These are his words: —“Popular authority which has
power to make safeguards has power to unmake them”
—and “Political necessities must always threaten the se
curity of funds which are subjectT:o political control.”
It is this consideration which compels many thought-
ful men to oppose state note issues of any kind. And with
regard to Australia they ask, What good reason has there
been for making the change? The existing bank note
issues satisfactorily served all the requirements of the
public and furnished a comfortable item of revenue to the
State Governments in the tax of 2 per cent, on the amount
in circulation. It is my deliberate conviction that the note
currency of Australia as provided by the banks is equal
in convenience and in strength to any in the world. It
possesses in fullest degree the three desiderata which are
necessary for a good system. These are:—


(a) Security,
(b) Immediate convertibility,
(c) Elasticity of amount.
Let us take these points in their reverse order.
(c) Elasticity. The notes are issued only when called
for, and only to the extent called for. There can be no
such thing as an over issue. They go out as the result ot
actual transactions, and as soon as their purpose is served
they come back and are redeemed. The circulation is
clastic, it expands and contracts in response to the de-
mands of the business of the people. It is the want of
this quality which is the crying defect of the United
States’ system, and which had something to do with the
financial difficulties of that country three years ago.
(b) Immediate Convertibility. Not only could gold
be obtained for the notes, but it could be obtained almost
anywhere. Certainly at any one of the 1922 banking of-
fices which are to be found throughout Australia. For
this country in proportion to its population has a larger
number of bank offices than any other country. Compare
this with the provision made for redemption of Common-
wealth notes, which are payable only at one place in ali
Australia, viz., the Commonwealth Treasury at the seal
of Government for the time being.
(a) Security. To satisfy a noteholder and to entitle
his note to the name of money there must be absolute
certainly that the note will be paid. And in this respect
I contend that the strength of the Australian banknote is
absolutely impregnable. Not that I agree with the Mel-
bourne lecturer in his argument in respect to the banks as
a whole holding about seven sovereigns for every note
out. Their sovereigns are not held as a v reserve against
notes except in a minor degree. They are held mainly
against their deposits, the liability on which is 30 times
as great as the liability on the notes. If the banks were
to earmark their coin reserves so much against notes
and so much against deposits, the amount against notes
would certainly not be pound for pound. Seeing that the
banks have to pay a 2 per cent, tax on the notes which are
out it w T ould be folly on their part to keep idle a sovereign


for every note. Better never issue the note. Let the
sovereign go out instead, and save the tax.
No, the strength of the Australian bank notes lies in
this: —that by State law and subject to any Crown claims
they are a first charge on all the assets of the bank. They
are on the footing of preferential debentures, taking pre-
cedence of all creditors and all shareholders. Taking the
figures of 30th June last year it meant that the £3,750,000
of banknotes held by the Australian public were secured
by the first pull on over £150,000,000 of bank assets, in-
cluding £30,000,000 of coin and bullion. Could anything
in this world be more amply secured than that?
I repeat, therefore, that the three important requi-
sites of notes —elasticity, ready convertibility, and se-
curity —are possessed by Australian banknotes to a de-
gree not excelled by the notes of any country or any bank.
The new Commonwealth circulation possess two of these
qualities in full degree, viz: elasticity and security. The
third, convertibility, they posses in restricted measure.
Hence as a whole they are inferior to the banknotes.
Why, then, are the banknotes being displaced in favour
of Commonwealth notes? I prefer not to attempt to
answer that question. I will try to sketch the effects of
the change, and leave my hearers to do their own sur-
mising as to why the change is made.
But just here I would like to say that there is one
fairly strong argument in favour of Government notes to
which I have not seen any prominence given. It is this.
The coining of money is admittedly a prerogative of the
Crown. Herbert Spencer disputed it, and suggested that
our coins might as well be supplied by contract by Bir-
mingham metal workers. But he has no following in that
opinion. There are several reasons into which I need
not enter here why the coinage should be in the hands of
the Crown. Now if it be the prerogative of the Crown to
supply our real money, should it not also be the preroga-
tive of the Crown to provide our token money, our paper
substitutes for money? There is certainly something in
the argument. The days have long gone by when
crowned heads stole from the people by tampering
with the coinage; and in our day we may be sure


that the coin of any civilized country is what
it professes to be. Is there not therefore some reason
for cherishing a hope that if Governments undertake the
issue of notes, the leaders will come to realize their re-
sponsibility for the protection of the purity of the sys-
tem? It may prove so, but only in so far as the people
themselves are instructed and enlightened on the subject.
So far it is an experiment; some think a risky experi-
ment. Any way Australia is .about to become the only
civilized country in the world in which banks are forbid-
den to issue notes. There is no other, for in Canada, to
which reference is so often made, the Dominion Govern-
ment and the banks issue notes side by side, the only
difference being that the banks may not issue notes for
amounts under five dollars. In that respect Australia
has not followed the example of Canada.
But I was going to try to point out the results of
the change. They will be:—
1. As regards the banks: —(a) a curtailing of the
resources of the banks. The banks will have to pay out
nearly £4,000,000 in gold to redeem outstanding notes.
Beside that on a low estimate they will nepd another
£2,000,000 of gold to provide till money, whether it be by
the purchase of Commonwealth notes for the purpose, or
by simply using sovereigns instead of notes. Hitherto
they have been able to stock their tills with their own
notes ready for issue.
(b) a saving to the banks of the note tax, which in
this small State amounts to about £IO,OOO a year. Also
the saving of all the expense of notes and the working of
note departments—no inconsiderable item.
2. As regards the States: —a loss to the States of
the note tax. In Queensland it means the cessation of the
issue of State notes.
3. As regards the public: —a curtailment of the re-
sources of trade and commerce. Present day commerce
w T ould be impossible without banks, and a reduction of
the banks’ resources cannot be without some effect on
the facilities extended to the manufacturing and trading
community.
4. As regards the Commonwealth Government: —
There will be a considerable gain to the Government.


There is no doubt that the gain to the Commonwealth
Government will be very much greater than the amount
lost to the States in the note tax. For one thing, the
amount of Commonwealth notes in circulation will be Tar-
greater than has been the amount of banknotes in circula-
tion. Not because they will be more popular, but in this
way—the banknote circulation is the amount of banknotes
outside the banks held by the public. The notes awaiting
issue inside the banks, in their tills or otherwise held, do
not count. A bank's note is not a liability until the
bank parts with it, and it passes into the hands of the
public, when it becomes part of the currency of the
country. But assuming that the banks will supply
themselves with Commonwealth notes and freely issue
them, the Commonwealth circulation will be the amount
of Commonwealth notes in the hands of the public, plus
the Commonwealth notes held by the banks—a very much
larger total than that which the banknote circulation
reached.
The profit to the Commonwealth Government will
arise thus. Assuming a circulation of £7,000,000, and it is
likely to be more, the Government will have received
£7,000,000 in gold. Of this the Act requires 25 per cent.,
or £1,750,000 to be kept in hand. The balance, £5,250,000,
is required by the Act to be placed to a trust account
and invested in bank deposit or British or Australian Go-
vernment securities. At present the Commonwealth
authorities favour the latter form of investment. An
average return of per cent, interest on £5,250,000 means
an annual revenue of £170,625, less cost of notes, salary
of note staff, and expenses of department. And this can
never be increased, because on the circulation over
£7,000,000 there is no profit—a sovereign has to be
held for every note.
It is well to point out that this item of revenue is
likely on the other hand to be a diminishing quantity.
Even allowing for a steady growth of population in Aus-
tralia, the amount of note circulation may be expected to
shrink. With the extension of banking facilities through-
out a country, the people come to use notes in a less and


less degree. Let me give you two striking proofs of this,
one English and one South Australian.
What is known as the Lank Act in England was
passed two-thirds of a century ago. Its provisions deal
more than anything else with questions of notes, because
note issuing was deemed to be, and in a way really was at
that time, the most important line of a bank’s business.
The Bank of England then had a note circulation of
£28,000,000, while its deposits amounted to only
£13,000,00. Since then 67 years have gone by; years
marked by a considerable increase of population, by an
enormous development of business; years in which the de-
posits in the Bank of England have increased fourfold,
and the deposits in other banks in larger proportion; ami
yet the note circulation of the Bank of England is no
more than it was in 1844, i.e., £28,000,000 or thereabouts,
while the small circulation of outside banks is much less.
The same trend of things has been experienced in
South Australia. I have in my possession the South Aus-
tralian banking statistics for the March quarter 1882 —
29 years ago. At that time the banknote circulation was
£572,000, and bank deposits £5,000,000. The figures for
March of this year are—notes £582,000, deposits
£11,000,000. Let me put it in another way. Since 1882 in
South Australia while the population has increased by
50 per cent., and bank deposits by 120 per cent., note cir-
culation is practically the same in amount. Any hope,
therefore, that the Commonwealth revenue from notes
will increase with the growth of population is doomed to
disappointment.
Regarding the main features of the new law the Aci:
has in it some very salutary provisions. All money com-
ing into the Treasury from the issue of notes is declared
to be trust money within the meaning of the Audit Acts,
and it may be used in three ways only, viz.:—
1. For the required gold reserve of at least one-fourth
of the amount of notes out up to £7,000,000, and of pound
for pound over that.
2. It may be deposited in any bank.
3. It may be invested in securities of the United
Kingdom, the Commonwealth, or a State.


It cannot, therefore, be legally used to help out the
revenue or for any Government expenditure.
The Treasurer has a special power under this Act to
sell anywhere Treasury Bills bearing interest at not over
4 per cent.; this is no doubt intended to provide an open
door when notes are coming in heavily for redemption,
and it may not be desirable to sell the securities held nor
to deplete the gold reserve. But the proceeds of these
Treasury Bills may be used solely for the redemption of
notes. t ■
Notes are declared to be legal tender throughout the
Commonwealth and its dependencies. They are to be of
the denominations of 10/, £l, £5, £lO, and any multiple of
£lO. The Treasurer is bound to publish on the last Wed-
nesday in every month an official statement of the
amount of notes in circulation and the amount of
gold held against them. Heavy penalties are im-
posed for the crimes of forging notes; and of know-
ingly uttering forged notes; also for having forged notes
in one’s possession without lawful excuse; also for de-
facing or disfiguring notes; also for the making or having
of any engraving, photograph or print resembling a note;
also for placing on or attaching to any note an advertise-
ment; so that we may expect the notes to be kept clear of
any extraneous matter other than —dirt.
One most unjust clause was intended to be embodied
in the Act, but wiser counsels succeeded in keeping it
out. That was a provision compelling every bank to keep
at every one of its offices, some of them thousands of miles
away, a supply of Commonwealth notes. The banks were
first to be deprived of the right to issue their own notes;
then they were to be compelled at their own expense to
send gold to Melbourne from far and near, to be ex-
changed for notes, to incur the risk and cost of having
these notes sent to them, and to continue to hold a certain
supply of them whether they wanted them or not; surely
this is evidence of a want of common fairness on the part
of some advocates of the measure, who fortunately proved
to be in a minority.
The distinct flaw in the Act is that the notes are con
vertible only at Melbourne or other seat of Government.


Seeing that Australia is a federation of States, some of
them long distances apart, the least that should have been
provided in this respect was that the notes should have
been made convertible in the capital city of each State.
There are occasions when a noteholder must get his notes
changed into gold, as, for instance, when he is leaving
Australia, or has to send his money abroad. Why should
a noteholder in Melbourne be able to convert his notes
without expense and a noteholder in Perth or Brisbane
not have the same privilege? It may be said “there are
the banks.” Yes, but if the bank in any place has already
as many notes as it wants, why should it add to its stock
to relieve an outsider? Some one has to bear the cost of
sending those notes to Melbourne, and directly or indi
rectly getting gold back. The position may often end in
the worried noteholder submitting to a discount in order
to get his money, in which event the notes would be de-
preciated. This defect in the scheme is much to be re-
gretted, as otherwise the Act appears to be well thought
out, and its various provisions such as to command re-
spect. Certainly I find nothing in the Act to give any
ground for the fear that was publicly expressed before the
measure became law, viz. that it would result in a “paper
money smash before which land booms and bank sus-
pensions will pale into insignificence.” So long as the
Act as it stands is honestly administered our minds may
be quite easy about it; and if only the convertibility were
extended from Melbourne to every other capital city, the
Act would then appear to me to be almost above criticism.
I have already said that the question of its paper cur-
rency is of vital importance to the people of any country.
In England towards the close of the reign of James I.
there was experienced a time of distress which Shaw, in
his “History of Currency,” has described as the “acutest
currency crisis in English history.” Its cause was simply
the want of currency. Coined money had been largely
exported, and the days of paper currency had not yet
come. Notes there were none, cheques were almost un-
known. Wages could not be paid, goods could not be
bought. Shaw calls it a time of “dumb agony of wide-
spread ruin.” In our time we are exempt from crises


of that particular sort. A paper currency is
largely provided by our system of cheques on
bank accounts, and even notes are losing much
of their importance. Still they are needed, and
having them it is all-important that they rest on a sure
basis. Far better, I say, to have no note system at all
than have a system of inconvertible notes which are
bound to depreciate in value, to cause loss to the holders,
and to force gold out of the country. The man in the
street says, “Why should they depreciate and force gold
out?” You mention Gresham’s law to him, and he asks,
“Who was Gresham, and what has his law to do with us?”
Well, Gresham did not make the law; no one made it.
There are some laws which are inherent in the nature of
things, and this is one of them. No one ever made a law
that if a child fall into the fire it shall be burned. But
it always happens so. No one ever made a law that incon-
vertible notes shall depreciate, but they always do.
There have been governments who have made laws that
their inconvertible legal tender notes should not depre-
ciate. But strange to say the notes depreciated all the
same. The pesky things seemed to prefer to obey the un-
written law that goes by the name of Gresham rather
than the law of the statute book. It was no more futile
for Canute to place his chair on the sea shore and for-
bid the progress of the incoming tide than it is for any
government to enact that inconvertible paper money shall
not depreciate below its face value, and that it shall not
have the effect of forcing gold out of the country. If
this were the occasion and time allowed, it would be no
hard task to explain why this law comes to operate in
the way it does. But I must forbear. It was the ex-
perience in a small measure in England a hundred years
ago when the convertibility of Bank of England notes
was suspended for a time and the £5 note fell in ex-
changeable value to £4 4/. It was the experience in Japan
40 years ago when the experiment was tried. The
Japanese Consul-General informed a Sydney audience a
few years ago that the results were disastrous, and specie
was leaving the country daily. It was the experience in
a more pronounced degree in the Transvaal Republic,


in France, and in the United States, and it has been the
experience in a still more alarming degree in the Central
American and South American Republics. I have not
exhausted this part of the subject, but I have said enough,
1 hope, to make it clear that you cannot insist too strongly
upon the necessity of maintaining in full measure the ab-
solute convertibility of every piece of paper that goes out
to the public in the guise of money.
Our Australian Note Act does secure the converti-
bility of notes, but unfortunately it has treated Australia
as one State instead of six, and made the notes conver-
tible in one place instead of six places.
The Act has its good points. Let us as loyal citizens
recognize these good points, and give the law our support.
But let us press for its amendment in the direction of ex-
tending the convertibility of the notes to each and every
State. And above and beyond all else let us beware of
attempts to break down any of the safeguards which have
been established in the Act or to introduce the delusive
expedients of men who imagine that a piece of paper can
be money.
MIHTIO BY W. K. THOMAS * CO., ADILAtOK*




