

r{£?T'M v : \ •
Cdite- PAHS
Boa i o
on
• Congregational
Church Polity.
By REV. A. GOSMAN,
• •
Augustine Cong r eg a - ?' i qna l
Church, Hawthorn.
I if
MELBOURNE
STILLWELL AND CO.. PRINTERS,
195 A COLLINS STREET




F I 002_2_
Catrcjrism on Congregational
Church ipolitn.
REV. A. GOSMAN,
AUGUSTINE CONGREGATION AE CHURCH,
HAWTHORN.
The Church: Its Definition.
Question I. —What is meant by the word Church
in the New Testament ?
Answer, —The word Church has three distinct
meanings in the New Testament: —
(i) The entire body of Christ’s Redeemed
people.—Matthew xvi, 18; Ephesians i,
22, 23.
(2) The visible Church on earth at any
particular time. —Matthew xviii, 17 ;
I Corinthians xii, 28.
(3) A particular Church or assembly of
believers in any one place.—Acts xi,
22 ; Romans xvi, 4 ; Galatians i, 2.


Question ll.—ln what sense do Congregational-
ists use the word Church ?
Answer. —Congregationalists use the word
Church in its individual or local sense, believing
it to be “an assembly of faithful men in which
case it signifies any organised body of believers,
meeting statedly for divine worship, instruction in
righteousness, the observance of ordinances, and
the carrying on of Christian work.
Question lll.—What are the conditions of
Membership in Congregational Churches?
Answer.— The conditions of Membership in
Congregational Churches are a credible profession
of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as the Son of
God and the Saviour of the world, and the
maintenance of a Christian character becoming
the Gospel.
Doctrinal Standards,
Question IV.—Have Congregational Churches
any authorised Creeds, or Doctrinal
Standards?
Answer. —Congregational Churches do not
demand, either from their Ministers, Officers, or


Members, subscription to any Creed or Doctrinal
Standard, such as the Thirty-nine Articles of the
Church of England, or the Confession of Faith
of the Presbyterian Church. They profess to
accept the Bible as the, only authorised standard
of Christian faith and practice.
The Schedule of Doctrine in Trust Deeds is
inserted for the protection of the property.
The Government of Congregational
Churches.
Question V.—What is meant by the Government
of the Church ?
Answer. —The Government of the Church con-
sists in its subjection to the will of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is its head ; and in the framing
of such laws and regulations as are in harmony
with His revealed will. The interpretation of His
will gives rise to forms of Church Government.
Question Vl.—Are there more forms of Church
Government than one ?


Answer. —There are at least four different forms
Church Government in the visible Church ;
(i) Papal Government, which places supreme
ecclesiastical authority in the Pope
when he speaks in his official capacity,
and then his decisions are claimed to
be infallible.'
(2) Episcopal Government, which puts su-
preme authority into the hands of the
Bishops and Archbishops. In the case of
the Church of England, the authority of
the supreme rulers of the Church is limi-
ted by its legal connection with the State.
{3) Presbyterial Government is by Kirk
Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and
General Assemblies, which are elective
and representative bodies. The su-
preme authority is invested in General
Assemblies. In the Wesleyan De-
nomination, supreme control lies with
General Conferences.
(4) Congregational Government places su-
preme control in the respective
Churches, without appeal, save to
the entire body of the enrolled mem-
bership.


Question Vll.—Why do Congregationalists
prefer this mode of Church Government ?
Answer. —Congregationalists prefer this mode
of Church Government because they believe it to
be in harmony with New Testament teaching and
practice; because it is pre-eminently fitted to
nurture and develop the spiritual life, while pre-
serving the liberties of the Christian people.
Question VIII. —What means do Congrega-
tionalists adopt to ascertain the mind of
Christ, in the absence of definite instruction ?
Answer. —Their custom is to hold, at stated
intervals,' meetings of the members of the Church,
and to summon special meetings when considered
expedient. Matters affecting the interests of the
Church are then freely discussed, and if necessary,
voted upon. It is competent for the minority on
a division to demand a ballot of the entire member-
ship, unless the meeting has been truly represen-
tative. The voice of the majority is accepted for
the time being as the will of Christ.
. Question IX.—What is the nature of the business
generally transacted at the stated meetings
of Congregational Churches ?


Answer. —These meetings are constituted by
prayer for the presence and guidance of the Lord
Jesus, and the indwelling and illumination of the
Holy Spirit. The business transacted includes
the reception of members, granting transfers to
those who have removed to other localities,
receiving financial reports, and reports from
affiliated societies, discussing motions of which
notice had been given ; and all such questions as
come legitimately within the scope and function
of a Christian Church.
In the absence of business, or at its close, it is
customary for some Churches to resolve the meet-
ing into one of spiritual communion and Christian
fellowship.
The Duties of Church Members.
Question X. — What are the duties of Church
Members in Congregational Churches ?
Answer. —The duties of Church Members are —
a faithful and regular attendance on the services
and ordinances of the Church, as far as that is
consistent with other duties ; contributing freely
and cheerfully of their means to its funds, and


to those outside objects it has resolved to aid ;
engaging in some form of service in the Master’s
cause, and in maintaining a Christian attitude to
every member of the household of faith.
The Ordinances of the Church.
Question XL —Has Christ instituted any rites
or ceremonies in His Church ?
Answer. —There are two ordinances which Christ
has instituted, and commanded His followers to
observe, namely, Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.
Question XII. —What do Congregationalists
believe and teach concerning Baptism ?
Ans7ver. —That it is the application of water in
any convenient form to those who make an intelli-
gent and credible profession of their faith in Jesus
Christ —that it is the outward sign of assuming the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
and also, that Baptism may be extended to all
young persons, including infants, whose Christian
training in the ranks of discipleship is satisfactorily
provided for. Its significance lies in symbolically


representing the necessity of inward cleansing;
of repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ; and of outward identification with
Christ and His people.—Matthew xxviii, 19, 20
(Revised Version).
Question XIII. —What differences of opinion
prevail in the Christian Church on the
question of Baptism ?
Answer. —ln addition to the opinions generally
held by Congregationalists, there are four different
aspects in which the ordinance is viewed ; two as
regards its mode, and two as regards its subjects.
As regards its mode, we have first, those who
teach that Baptism, when duly administered, is
the channel or instrument of regeneration ; and
secondly , the position held by Baptists, who are
Congregational in Church polity, and who main-
tain that immersion in water is the only valid
mode of Christian baptism.
As regards its subjects, we have first, those who
believe that Baptism is not to be administered
save to candidates who give an intelligent reason
for the faith that is in them, and of their personal
decision to live a Christian life —a position for the
most part held by Baptists ; and secondly, that in


addition to Baptism, on a personal profession of
faith, the infants of such as are members of the
yisible Church, are to be baptised; which is the
teaching of the Shorter Catechism.
Question XIV. —What is the Lord’s Supper ?
Answer. —The Lord’s Supper is an ordinance
instituted by Christ, to be observed by His followers
till He come.—l Corinthians xi, 25.
It consists in breaking bread and drinking wine
for the following purposes :
(1) Keeping the Lord in remembrance. —
I Corinthians xi, 26.
(2) Commemorating His death. —I Corinthi-
ans xi, 26.
(3) Symbolically representing the sacrificial
character of His sufferings and death. —
Luke xxii, 19, 20.
(4) Reminding believers of their dependence
upon Him for spiritual nourishment;
the necessity of partaking by faith of
His body and blood ; and of publicly
manifesting their union with Him and
the visible Church on earth.—Mat-
thew xxvi, 27 ; John vi, 33, 56 ; Acts
xx, 7 ; I Corinthians x, 16.


The Offices of the Church.
Question XV. —Has Christ ordained any offices
in His Church ?
Answer. —Christ by His own action instituted
the Ministry of the Word ; first, by calling and
qualifying the Apostles for that office; and
secondly, by sending out the seventy on a
preaching mission. The Church of the Apostles
created the diaconate ; and these two offices, under
different names with the multiplication of Church
functions, have existed in the Church from its
institution until now.
Question XVI.—In what form does the Christian
Ministry exist in Congregational Churches?
Answer. —The Congregational Churches reject
all distinctions of clerical rank. They believe the
Ministry to be a body of men called of God by
His Holy Spirit to the work of the Ministry by
reason of their talents, education, and piety; by
their acceptance, on its invitation, of the pastorate
of any duly constituted Church, or by their appoint-
ment to any of the functions of the Christian


Ministry by any recognised Society existing for
carrying on the work of Christ in the world.
Question XVII. —What are the functions of the
Christian Ministry?
Anstver. —(i) There is first that of the Christian
Pastor, whose duty it is to feed the flock of Christ,
to visit the sick, and comfort the mourners, to
train his people in piety, and lead their public
devotions, and to act as the executive head of the
Church of which he is the overseer or bishop.
(2) That of the Evangelist, whose duty it is
to carry the Gospel to the outside
world.
(3) That of the Missionary, whose duty it is
to carry the Gospel to the heathen.
(4) That of the Professor in any Theological
College, whose duty it is ter educate
young men for the work of the Christian
Ministry.
These are functions of the Ministry, gird not
separate offices. Where practicable, two or more
may be undertaken by the same person.


Question XVIII.— What are the duties of
Deacons in Congregational Churches?
Answer. —To the Deacons are committed the
temporal affairs of the Church which calls them to
office. In the absence of Elders, they are associ-
ated with the Pastor in spiritual matters. With
the Pastor they form an executive committee,
subject to the final approval of the Church which
appoints them.
Question XlX.— Are there any other offices in
the Church besides those of Pastor and
' Deacon ?
Answer .■ —While these appear to be of perma-
nent and perpetual obligation, and are justified by
the very necessities of the case, Christ has left His
Church free to create such offices and affiliated
Societies as the condition of the Church and the
circumstances of the time demand, but subject to
His will, and the conservation of Christian liberty.
In accordance with this conviction, Congregational
Churches believe they are at liberty to call to
office Lay Preachers, Sunday School Teachers,
Tract Distributors, Home Visitors, Choirs and
Leaders of Psalmody, and Societies with specific
functions, for the more efficient work of the Church,
and the extension of the Kingdom of Heaven.


Relation of Congregational
Churches to Each Other.
Question XX.—What is the Relation of Congre-
gational Churches to each other ?
Answer. —Congregational Churches in counties,
provinces, and nations, almost invariably form
Associations or Unions for Home Missionary
purposes, the Education of Candidates for the
Ministry, the Discussion of Questions bearing on
Education, Morals and Religion, and for such
other objects as lie beyond the scope of the local
Churches. International Councils represent the
Congregationalism of Christendom ; but no Associa-
tion, Union, or Council has any control or authority
over the constituent Churches, and is supreme only
within the limits of its own jurisdiction.
The Relation of Congregational
Churches to Other Denomina-
tions.
Question XXL —What is the Relation of
Congregational Churches to Other De-
nominations ?
Answer. —Cordial recognition of them as
Branches of the visible Church of Christ, in so


far as they are subject to Him, and seek to know
and do His will; co-operation with theln in all
Christian work, and a frank readiness to extend
the right hand of fellowship to all who are willing
to receive it on equal terms.
The Relation of Congregational
Churches to the State.
Question XXII. —What is the Relation of
Congregational Churches to the State?
Answer. —Their relation is that of absolute
independence within their own sphere. They
believe it is not the function of the State to
determine religious belief, or prescribe religious
ceremonies. They object to all disabilities on
citizens on religious grounds, and to every aspect
of legislation that endangers the principle of
religious liberty. They teach submission to all
righteous laws, and obedience to magistrates, but
civil distinctions are not recognised within Congre-
gational Churches.
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195 a Collins-st., Melbourne.


- '/* ' ■ ■


