

JUSTICE -
PERSECUTION
GOVERNOR JUDGE ALTGELD’S
REVERSAL IN 1893 OF
CONVICTION IN 1887 OF THE
CHICAGO MARTYRS
FULL TEXT of Official
Report of GOVERNOR
after EXHAUSTIVE “ENQUIRY”
Published by H. £ Langridge, 123 Drummond Street,
Carlton, Victoria.
Printed by FRASER & JENKINSON, 345 Queen St,, Melb.




JUSTICE OR
PERSECUTION
GOVERNOR JUDGE ALTGELD’S
REVERSAL IN 1893 OF
CONVICTION IN 1887 OF THE
CHICAGO MARTYRS
FULL TEXT OF OFFICIAL REPORT OF
GOVERNOR AFTER EXHAUSTIVE
“ ENQUIRY ”
Published by H. E. Langridge, 123 Drummond St.,. Carlton, Victoria.
Printed by FRASER & JENKINSON, 345 Queen St., Melbourne.


FOREWORD.
Is not History repeating itself ? The following is arc
Illinois Governor’s published “ judgment,” himself a
Judge, reversing a conviction of eight working class
leaders for alleged murder, three only of whom had
been reprieved.
Governor Altgeld was anything but a working class
advocate, as is clearly shown by his expressed unwil-
lingness to bestow any clemency had the convicted men
been found by him to be guilty, though they were mis-
guided reformers rather than cold-blooded murderers.
He was compelled to hold the State “ enquiry ” owing
to the six years of persistent agitation of “several
thousand merchants, bankers, judges, lawyers,,
and prominent citizens.” His -reversal was only on
the overwhelming evidence and the facts.
The “ magazine article,” by the trial judge, before
the “ enquiry,” referred to in the Governor’s “ judg-
ment,” appeared in the Century Magazine, April, 1893,,
page 803, commented on in the Arena, 1893, page 544,,
by M. M. Trumbull—both no doubt obtainable at Free
Public Libraries in all large cities.
The words printed' in larger type are those of the
Governor himself, and those in smaller type his quota-
tions of reports, affidavits, etc. The headlines are
added by way of convenient index.
So frequent and universal are persecutions of labor
agitators and so unready are the public to give the
slightest hearing to reflections on the conduct of Courts
of Justice, or on the Police, that the following admis-
sions by a Capitalist Judge Governor should always be
purchasable everywhere in the cheap form here pro-
vided, especially at times and places where & protest
against some partisan class prosecution is tha topic of
the day—justice or persecution.


Gov. John P. Altgeld’s
Statement.
On the night of May 4, 1886, a public meeting was.
held on Haymarket Square in Chicago. There were
from 800 to 1400 people present, nearly all being
labouring men. There had been trouble, growing
out of an effort to introduce the eight-hour day,
resulting in some collisions with the police, in one
of which several labouring people were killed, and
this meeting was called as a protest against alleged
police brutality.
The meeting was orderly, and was attended by
the mayor, who remained until the crowd began to*
disperse and then went away. As soon as Captain
John Bonfield, of the police department, learned
that the mayor had gone he took a detachment of
police and hurried to the meeting for the purpose-
of dispersing the few that remained, and as the-
police approached the place of the meeting a bomb
was thrown by some unknown person, which ex-
ploded and wounded many and killed several police-
men. among the latter being one Mathias Degan.
A number of people were arrested, and after a time-
August Spies, Albert R. Parsons, Louis Lingg,
Michael Schwab, Samuel Fielden, George Engle,
Adolph Fischer, and Oscar Neebe were indicted for'
the murder of Degan. The prosecution could not
discover who had thrown the bomb, and could not
bring the really guilty man to justice, and, as some
of the men indicted were not at the Haymarket
meeting, and had nothing to do with it, the prose-
cution was forced to proceed on the theory that


the men indicted were guilty of murder because it
was claimed they had at various times in the past
uttered and printed incendiary and seditious lan-
guage, practically advising the killing of policemen,
of Pinkerton men and others acting in that capacity,
and that they were, therefore, responsible for the
-murder of Mathias Degan. The public was greatly
-excited, and after a prolonged trial all of the defen-
dants were found guilty. Oscar Neebe was. sen-
tenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment, and all of
the other defendants were sentenced to be hanged.
The case was carried to the Supreme Court, and
was there affirmed in the fall of 1887. Soon there-
after Lingg committed suicide. The sentence of
Fielden and Schwab was commuted to imprison-
ment for life, and Parsons, Fischer, Engle, and Spies
were hanged, and the petitioners now ask to have
Neebe, Fielden, and Schwab set at liberty.
BASIS FOR APPEAL OF PARDON.
The several thousand merchants, bankers, judges,
lawyers, and other prominent citizens of Chicago
who have by petition, by letter, and. in other ways
urged executive clemency, mostly base their appeal
on the ground that, assuming the prisoners to be
guilty, they have been punished enough, but a num-
ber of them who have examined the case more care-
fully and are more familiar with the record and
with the facts disclosed by the papers on file base
their appeal on entirely different grounds. They
assert:—
1. That the jury which tried the case was a packed
jury selected to convict.
2. That, according to the law as laid down by the
Supreme Court, both prior to and again since the
trial of this case, the jurors, according to their own
answers were not competent jurors, and the trial
was therefore not a legal trial.


3. That the defendants were not proved to be
guilty of the crime charged in the indictment.
4. That as to the defendant Neebe the State’s
attorney had declared at the close of the evidence
that there was no case against him, and yet he has
been kept in prison all these years.
5. That the trial judge was either so prejudiced
against the defendants or else so determined to win
the applause of a certain class in the community
that he could not and did not grant a fair trial.
Upon the question of having been punished
enough I will simply say that if the defendants had
a fair trial—and nothing has developed since to
show that they are not guilty of the crime charged
in the indictment —then there ought to be no execu-
tive interference, for no punishment under our laws
could then be too severe. Government must defend
itself; life and property must be, protected and law
and order must be maintained; murder must be
punished, and if the defendants are guilty of mur-
der, either committed with their own hands or
someone else acting on their advice, then if they
have had a fair trial there should be in this case no
executive interference. The soil of America is not
adapted for the growth of anarchy. While our
institutions are not free from injustice, they are
Still the best that have yet been devised, -and, there-
fore, must be maintained.
WAS THE JURY PACKED?
The record of the trial shows that the jury in this
case was not drawn in the manner that juries usually
are drawn; that is, instead of having a number of
names drawn out of a box that contained many
hundred names, as the law contemplates shall be
done in order to insure a fair jury and give neither
side the advantage, the trial judge appointed one
Henry L. Ryce as a special bailiff to go out and


summon such men as, he (Ryce) might select to act
as jurors. While this practice has been sustained
in cases in which it did not appear that either side
has been prejudiced thereby, it is always a dangerous
practice, for it gives the bailiff absolute power to
select a jury that will be favourable, to one side or
the other. Counsel for the State, irt their printed
brief, say that Ryce was appointed on motion of
defendants, while it appears that counsel for defen-
dants were in favour of having someone appointed,
the record has this entry:—
,e Mr. Grinnell suggested Mr. Ryce as special
bailiff, and he was accepted and appointed.” But
it makes no difference on whose motion he was
appointed if he did not select a fair jury. It is
shown that he boasted while securing jurors that
he was managing this case; that these fellows would
hang as certain as death; that he was calling such
men as the defendants would have to challenge
peremptorily and waste their challenges on, and that
when their challenges were exhausted they would
have to take such men as the prosecution wanted.
It appears from the record of the trial that the
defendants were obliged to exhaust all of their
peremptory challenges, and they had to take a jury,
almost every member of which stated frankly that
he was prejudiced against them. On page 133 of
volume I. of the record it appears that when the
panel was about two-thirds full, counsel for the
defendants called the attention of the court to the
fact that Ryce was summoning only prejudiced men,
as shown by their examinations; further, that he
was confining himself to particular classes, i.e..
clerks, merchants, manufacturers, etc. Counsel for
defendants then moved the court to stop this, and
direct Ryce to summon the jurors from the body of
the people—that is, from the community at large,
and not from particular classes; but the court re-
fused to take any notice of the matter.


ABOUT BAILIFF RYCE.
For the purpose of still further showing- the mis-
conduct of Bailiff Ryce reference is made to the
affidavit of Otis S. Favor. Mr, Favor is one of the
most reputable and honourable business men of
Chicago; he was himself summoned by Ryce as a
juror, but was so prejudiced against the defendants
that he had to be excused, and he abstained from
making any affidavit before sentence because the
State’s attorney had requested him not to make it,
although he stood ready to go into court and tell
what he knew if the court wished him to do so, and
he naturally supposed he would be sent for. But
after the Supreme Court had passed on the case
and some of the defendants were about to be hanged
he felt that an injustice was being done, and he
made the following affidavit;—
State of Illinois, Cook County, ss:—Otis S. Favor, being
duly sworn, on oath says that he is a citizen of the United
States and of the State of Illinois, residing in Chicago,
and a merchant doing business at 6 and 8 Wabash-avcnuc,
in the City of Chicago, in said county. That he is very
well acquainted with Henry L Ryce, of Cook County, Illi-
nois, who acted as a special bailiff in summoning jurors
in the case of the People, etc., vs. Spies ct al., indicted
for murder, tried in the criminal court of Cook County
in the summer of 1886. That affiant was himself sum-
moned by said Ryce for a juror in said cause, but was
challenged and excused therein becaus.e of his prejudice.
That on several occasions in conversation between affiant
and said Ryce touching the summoning of the jurors by
said Ryce, and while said Ryce was so acting as special
bailiff as aforesaid, said Ryce said to this affiant and to
other persons in affiant’s presence, in substance and effect
as follows, to wit: “I (meaning said Ryce) am managing
this case (meaning this case against Spies ct al,), and
know what I am about. Those fellows (meaning the
defendants, Spies, ct al.) are going to be hanged as
certain as death, lam calling such men as the defendants
will have to challenge peremptorily and waste their time
and challenges. Then they will have to take such men
as the prosecution wants.” That affiant has been very
reluctant to make any affidavit in this case, having no


sympathy with anarchy or relationship to or personal
interest in the defendants or any of them, and not being
a socialist, communist, or anarchist; but affiant has an
interest as a citizen in the due administration of the law,
and that no injustice should be done under judicial
procedure, and believes that jurors should not be selected
with reference to their known views or prejudice. Affiant
further says that his personal relations with said Ryce
were at that time and for many years theretofore had been
most friendly and even intimate, and that affiant is not
prompted by any ill-will toward anyone in making this
affidavit, but solely by a sense of duty and a conviction
of what is due to justice.
Affiant further says that about the beginning of October,
1886, when the motion for a new trial was being' argued
in said cases before Judge Gary, and when, as he was
informed, application was made before Judge Gary for
leave to examine affiant in open court touching the mat-
ters above stated, this affiant went upon request from
State’s Attorney Grinnell to his office during the noon
recess of the court, and there held an interview With said
Grinnell, Mr. Ingham, and said Ryce, in the presence of
several other persons, including some police officers,
where affiant repeated substantially the matters above
stated, and the said Ryce did not deny affiant’s state-
ments, and affiant said that he would have to testify there-
to if summoned as a witness, but had refused to make an
affidavit thereto, and affiant was then and there asked
and urged to persist in his refusal and to make no affi-
davit. And affiant further saith not.
OTIS S. FAVOR.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 7th day of
November, A.D. 1887.
JULIUS STERN,
Notary Public in and for said County.
So far as is shown no one connected with the
State’s attorney’s office has ever denied the state-
ments of Mr. Favor as to what took place in that
office, although his affidavit was made in November,
1887.
EXAMINATION OF JURORS.
As to Bailiff Ryce it appears that he has made an
affidavit, in which he denies That he made the state-
ments sworn to by Mr. Favor, but, unfortunately


ior him, the record of the trial is against him, for
it shows conclusively that he summoned only the
class of men mentioned in Mr. Favor’s affidavit.
According to the record 891 men were examined as
to their qualifications as jurors, and most of them
were either employers or men who had been pointed
out to the bailiff by their employers. The following,
taken from the original record of the trial, are fair
specimens of the answers of nearly all the jurors,
except that in the following cases the court suc-
ceeded in getting the jurors to say that they believed
they could try the case fairly notwithstanding their
prejudice:—
William Neil, a manufacturer, was examined at length;
stated that he had heard and read about the Haymarket
trouble, and believed enough of what he had heard and
read to form an opinion as to the guilt of the defendants,
which he still entertained; that he had expressed said
opinion, and then he added: “ It would take pretty strong
evidence to remove the impression that I now have. I
could not dismiss it from my mind; could not lay it
altogether aside during the trial. I believe my present
opinion, based upon what I have heard and read, would
accompany me through the trial and would influence me
in determining and getting at a verdict.”
He was challenged by the defendants on the ground
of being prejudiced, but the court then got him to say
that he believed he could give a fair verdict on whatever
evidence he should hear, and whereupon the challenge was
overruled.
H. F. Chandler, in the stationery business with Skeen,
Stuart and Co., said: “I was pointed out to the deputy
sheriff by my employer to be summoned as a juror.” He
then stated that he had read and talked about the Hay-
market trouble, and had formed and frequently expressed
an opinion as to the guilt of the defendants, and that he
believed the statements he had read and heard. He was
asked:
Q. Is that a decided opinion as to the guilt of the
defendants?
A. It is a decided opinion; yes, sir.
Q. Your mind is pretty well made up now as to their
guilt or innocence?
A. Yes, sir.


Q. Would it be hard to change your opinion?
A. It might be hard; I cannot say. I don’t know
whether it would be hard or not.
He was challenged by the defendants on the ground
of being prejudiced; then the court took him in hand and
examined him at some length and got him to state that
he believed he could try the case fairly. Then the chal-
lenge was overruled.
F. L. Wilson—Am a manufacturer. I am prejudiced,
and have formed an expressed opinion; that opinion would
influence me in rendering a verdict.
Fie was challenged for cause, but was then examined by
the court.
Q. Are you conscious in your own mind of any wish or
desire that there should be evidence produced in this
trial which should prove some of these men, or any of
them, to be guilty?
A. Well, I think I have.
Being further pressed by the court, he said that the
only feeling he had against the defendants was based upon
having taken it for granted that what he read about them
was, in the main, true; that he believed that sitting as a
juror the effect of the evidence, either for or against the
defendants, would be increased or diminished by what he
heard or read about the case. Then, on being still further
pressed by the court, he finally said; “Well, I feel that
I hope that the guilty one will be discovered and punished,
not necessarily these men.”
Q. Are you conscious of any other wish or desire about
the matter than that the actual truth may be discovered?
A. I don’t think .1 am.
Thereupon the challenge was overruled.
George N. Borter, grocer, testified that he had formed
and expressed an opinion as to the guilt of the defendants,
and that this opinion, he thought, would bias his judg-
ment; he would try to go by the evidence, but that what
he had read would have a great deal to do with his ver-
dict; his mind, he said, was certainly biased now, and that
it would take a great deal of evidence to change it. He
was challenged for cause by the defendants; was then
exatjpned by the court, and said:
I think what I have heard and read before I came into
court would have some influence with me, but the court
finally got him to say he believed he could fairly and im-
partially try the case and render a verdict according to
law and evidence, and that he would try to do so. There-
upon the court overruled the challenge for cause. Then


he was asked some more questions by the defendants’
counsel, and among other things said:
“ Why, we have talked about it there a great many
times, and I have always expressed my opinion. I be-
lieve what I have read in the papers; I believe that the
parties are guilty. I would try to go by the evidence,
but in this case it would be awful hard work for me to do
it.”
He was challenged a second time on the ground, of be-
ing prejudiced; was then again taken in hand by the
court, and examined at length, and finally again said he
believed he could try the case fairly on the evidence, when
the challenge for cause was overruled for the second
time.
H. N. Smith, hardware merchant, stated among other
things that he was prejudiced, and had quite‘a decided
opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the defendants,
that he had expressed his opinion, and still entertained it,
and candidly stated he was afraid he would listen a little
more attentively to the testimony which concurred with
his opinion than the testimony on the other side; that
some of the policemen injured were personal friends of
his. He was asked these questions:
Q. That is, you would be willing to have your opinion
strengthened, and hate very much to have it dissolved?
A. I would.
Q. Under these circumstances do you think that you
could render a fair and impartial verdict?
A. I don’t think I could.
Q. You think you would be prejudiced?
A. I think I would be, because my feelings are very
bitter.
Q. Would your prejudice in any way influence you in
coming at an opinion, in arriving at a verdict?
A. I think it would.
He was challenged on the ground of being prejudiced;
was interrogated at length by the court, and was brought
to say he believed he could try the case fairly on the
evidence produced in court. Then the challenge was
overruled.
Leonard Gould, wholesale grocer, was examined at
length; said he had a decided prejudice against the de-
fendants, Among other things he, said: “I really don’t
know that I could do the case justice; if I was to sit on
the case I should just give my undivided attention to the
evidence, and calculate to be governed by that.” He was
challenged for cause and the challenge overruled. He was


then asked the question over again, whether he could
render an impartial verdict based upon the evidence alone
that would be produced in court, and answered: “Well,
I answered that as far as I could answer it.”
Q. You say you don’t know that you can answer that
either yes or no?
A. No, I don’t think that I can.
Thereupon the court proceeded to examine him, en-
deavouring to get him to state that he believed he could
try the case fairly upon the evidence that was produced
in court, part of the examination being as follows:
Q. Now, do you believe that you can—that you have
sufficiently reflected upon it—so as to examine your own
mind, that you can fairly and impartially determine the
guilt or innocence of the defendants?
A. That, is a difficult question for me to answer.
Q. Well, make up your mind as to whether you can
render, fairly and impartially render, a verdict in accord-
ance_ with the law and evidence. Most men in business
possibly have not gone through a metaphysical examina-
tion, so as to be prepared to answer a question of this
kind.
A. Judge, I don’t believe I can answer that question.
Q. Can you answer whether you believe you know?
A. If I had to do that I should do the best I could.
Q. The question is whether you believe you could or
not? I suppose, Mr. Gould, that you know the law is that
no man is to be convicted of any offence with which he
is charged unless the evidence proves that he is guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt.
A. That is true.
Q. The evidence heard in this case in court?
A. Yes,
Q. Do you believe that you can render a verdict in
accordance with the law?
A. Well, I don’t know that I could.
Q. Do you believe that you can’t—if you don’t know
of any reason why you cannot, do you believe that you
can’t.
A. I cannot answer that question.
Q. Have you a belief one way or other as to whether
you can or cannot? Not whether you are going to do it,
but do you believe you cannot? That is the only thing.
You are not required to state what is going to happen
next week or week after, but what do you believe about
yourself, whether you can or can’t?
A. I am about where I was when I started.
Some more questions were asked, and Mr. Gould
answered:


Well. I think I have gone just as far as I can in reply
to that question.
Q. This question, naked and simple of itself, is, Do you
believe that you can fairly and impartially render a verdict
in the case in accordance with the law and evidence?
A. I believe I could.
Having finally badgered the juror into giving this last
answer the court desisted. The defendants’ counsel
asked;
Do you believe that you can do so uninfluenced by any
prejudice or opinion which you now have?
A. You bring it at a point that I object to, and I do not
feel competent to answer.
Thereupon the juror was challenged a second time for
cause, and the challenge was overruled.
James H. Walker, dry goods merchant, stated that he
had formed and expressed an opinion as to the guilt of the
defendants; that he was prejudiced, and stated that his
prejudice would handicap him.
Q. Considering all prejudice and all opinions that you
have, if the testimony was equally balanced wpuld you
decide one way or the other in accordance with that
opinion or your prejudice?
A. If the testimony was equally balanced I should hold
my present opinion, sir.
Q. Assuming that your present opinion is that you be-
lieve the defendants guilty, would you believe your pre-
sent opinion would warrant you in convicting them?
A. I presume it would.
Q. Well, you believe it would; that is your present
belief, is it?
A. Yes, sir.
He wds challenged on the ground of prejudice.
The court then examined him at length, and finally
asked:
Q. Do you believe that you can sit here and fairly and
impartially make up your mind, from the evidence,
whether that evidence proves that they are guilty beyond
a reasonable doubt, or not?
A. I think I could, but I should believe that I was a
little handicapped in my judgment, sir.
Thereupon the court, in the presence of the jurors not
yet examined, remarked:
Well, that is a sufficient qualification for a juror in the
case; of course, the more a man feels that he is handi-
capped the more he will be guarded against it.


W. B. Allen, wholesale rubber business, stated among
other things:
Q. I will ask you whether what you have formed from
what you have read and heard is a slight impression, or
an opinion, or a conviction?
A. It is a decided conviction.
Q. You have made up your mind as to whether these
men are guilty or innocent?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. It would be difficult to change that conviction, or
impossible, perhaps?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. It would be impossible to change your conviction?
A. It would be hard to change my conviction.
He was challenged for cause by defendants. Then he
was.examined by the court at length, and finally brought
to the point of saying that he could try the case fairly
and impartially, and would do so. Then the challenge
for cause was overruled. •
H. L. Anderson was examined at length, and stated
that he had formed and expressed an opinion, still held
it, was prejudiced, but that he could lay aside his preju-
dices and grant a fair trial upon the evidence. On being
further examined he said that some of the policemen in-
jured were friends of his, and he had talked with them
fully. He had formed an unqualified opinion as to the
guilt or innocence of the defendants, which he regarded
as deepseated, a firm conviction that these defendants,
or some of them, were guilty. He was challenged on the
ground of prejudice, but the challenge was overruled.
M. D. flavin, in the marble business. He had read and-
talked about the Haymarket trouble, and had formed and
expressed an opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the
defendants, which he still held, and which was very
strong; further, that one of the officers killed at the Hay-
market was a relative of his, although the relationship
was distant, but on account of this relationship his feel-
lings were perhaps different from what they would have
been, and occasioned a very strong opinion as to the
guilt of the defendants, and that he had stated to others
that he believed what he had heard and read about the
matter. He was challenged on the ground of prejudice,
and then stated, in answer to a question from the prosecu-
tion, that he believed that he could give a fair and impar-
tial verdict, when the challenge was overruled.
Rush Harrison, in the silk department of Edson Keith
and Co., was examined at length; stated that he had a


deep-rooted convictiona s to the guilt or innocence of the
defendants. He said:
“ It would have considerable weight with me if selected
as a juror. It is pretty deep-rooted, that opinion is, and
it would take a large preponderance of evidence to remove
it; it would require the preponderance of evidence to re-
move the opinion I now possess. I feel like every other
good citizen does. I feel that these men are guilty: we
don’t know which; we have formed this opinion by gene-
ral reports from the newspapers. Now, with that feeling,
it would take some very positive evidence to make me
think these men were not guilty if I should acquit them:
that is what I mean. I should act entirely upon the testi-
mony: I would do as near as the main evidence would
permit me to do. Probably I would take the testimony
alone.”
Q. But you say that it would take positive evidence of
their innocence before you could consent to return them
not guilty?
A. Yes, I would want some strong evidence.
Q. Well, if that strong evidence of their innocence was
not introduced, then you want to convict them, of course?
A. Certainly.
He was then challenged on the ground of being preju-
diced, when the judge proceeded to interrogate him, ( and
finally got him to say that he believed he could try the
case fairly on the evidence alone; then the challenge
was over-ruled.
J. R. Adams, importer, testified that he was prejudiced;
had formed and expressed opinions, and still held them.
He was challenged on this ground, when the court pro-
ceeded to examine him at length, and finally asked him
this question:
Q. Do you believe that your convictions as to what
the evidence proved,‘or failed to prove, will be. at all
affected by what anybody at all said or wrote about that
matter before?
A. I believe they would.
The court, in the hearing of other jurors not yet
examined, exclaimed: “It is incomprehensible to me.”
This juror was excused.
B. L. Ames, dealer in hats and caps, stated that he was
prejudiced; had formed and expressed his opinions; still
held them. He was challenged on these grounds. Then
the court examined him at length; tried to force him to
say that he could try the case fairly without regard to
his prejudice, but he persisted in saying in answer to the
15
EXAMINATION OF JURORS.


court’s questions that he did not believe that he could
sit as a juror, listen to the evidence, and from that alone
make up his mind as to the guilt or innocence of the de-
fendants. Thereupon the court, in the presence of other
jurors not yet examined, lectured him, as follows;
Why not? What is to prevent your listening to the
evidence, and acting alone upon it? Why can’t you listen
to the evidence, and make up your mind on it?
But the juror still insisted that he could not do it, and
was discharged.
H. D. Bogardus, flour merchant, stated that he had
read and talked about the Haymarket trouble; had formed
and expressed an. opinion; still held it as to the guilt or
innocence of the defendants; that he was prejudiced; that
this prejudice would certainly influence his verdict If se-
lected as a juror. I don’t believe that I could give them
a fair trial upon the proof, for it would require very
strong proof to overcome my prejudice. I hardly think
that you could bring proof enough to change my opinion.
He was challenged on the ground of prejudice.
Then the court took him in hand, and after a lengthy
examination got him to say: “ I think I can fairly and
impartially render a verdict in this case in accordance
with the law and the evidence.”
Then the challenge was overruled.
Counsel for defendants then asked the juror further
questions,'and he replied:
I say it would require pretty strong testimony to over-
come my opinion at the present time; still, I think I
could act independent of my opinion. I would stand by
my opinion, however, and I think the preponderance of
proof would have to be strong to change my opinion. I
think the defendants are responsible for what occurred
at the Haymarket meeting. The preponderance of evi r
dence would have to be in favour of the defendants’ inno-
cence with me.
Then the challenge for cause was renewed, when the
court remarked, in the presence of jurors not yet examined:
“ Every fairly intelligent and honest man when he comes
to investigate the question originally for himself, upon
authentic sources of information, will, in fact, make his
opinion from the authentic source, instead of hearsay
that he heard before.”
The court then proceeded to again examine the juror,
and as the juror persisted in saying that he did not be-
lieve he could give the defendants a fair trial, was finally
discharged.


These examinations are fair specimens of all of
them, and show conclusively that Bailiff Ryce car-
ried out the threat that Mr. Favor swears to. Nearly
every juror called stated that he had read and talked
about the matter and believed what he had heard
and read, and had formed and expressed an opinion,
and still held it, as to the guilt or innocence of the
defendants; that he was prejudiced against them;
that that prejudice was deep-rooted, and that it
would require evidence to remove that prejudice.
A great many said they had been pointed out to
the bailiff by their employers to be summoned as
jurors. Many stated frankly that they believed the
defendants to be guilty, and would convict them
unless their opinions were overcome by strong
proofs, and almost every one after having made
these statements was examined by the court in a
manner to force him to say that he would try the
case fairly upon the evidence produced in court,
and whenever he was brought to this point he was
then held to be a competent juror, and the defen-
dants were obliged to exhaust their challenges on
men who declared in open court that they were
prejudiced and believed the defendants to be guilty.
TWELVE MEN WHO TRIED THE CASE.
The twelve jurors whom the defendants were
finally forced to accept, after their challenges were
exhausted, were of the same general character as
the others, and a number of them stated candidly
that they were so prejudiced that they could not
try the case fairly, but each, when examined by the
court, was finally induced to say that' he believed
he could try the case fairly upon the evidence that
was produced in court alone. For example:—
Theodore Denker, one of the twelve: “Am shipping-
clerk for Henry W. King and Co. I have read and talked
about the Haymarket tragedy, and have formed and ex-
pressed an opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the


defendants of the crime charged in the indictment. I
believe what I read and heard, and still entertain that
opinion.”
Q. Is that opinion such as to prevent you from render-
ing an impartial verdict in the case, sitting as a juror
under the testimony and the law?
A. I think it is.
He was challenged for cause on ground of prejudice.
Then the State’s attorney and the court examined him,
and finally got him to say that he believed he could try
the case fairly upon the law and the evidence, and the
challenge was overruled. He was then asked further
questions by the defendants’ counsel, and said:
“ I have formed an opinion as to the guilt of the de-
fendants, and have expressed it. We conversed about
the matter in the business house, and I expressed my
opinion there; expressed my opinion quite frequently. My
mind was made up from what I read, and did not hesitate
to speak about it.”
Q. Would you feel yourself any way governed or bound
in listening to the testimony, and determining it upon
the pre-judgment of the case that you had expressed to
others before?
A. Well, that is a pretty hard question to answer.
He then stated to the court that he had not expressed
an opinion as to the truth of reports he had read, and
finally stated that he believed he could try the case fairly
on the evidence.
John B. Greiner, another one of the tAvelve:
Am a clerk for the North-western Railroad. I have
heard and read about the killing of Began at the Hay-
market on May 4th, last, and have formed, an opinion as
to the guilt or innocence of the defendants now on trial
for that crime. It is evident that the defendants are con-
nected with that affair from their being here.
Q. You regard that as evidence?
A. Well, I don’t know exactly. Of course, I would
expect that it connected them, or they would not be here.
Q. So, then, the opinion that you now have has refer-
ence to the guilt or innocence of some of these men, or
all of them?
A. Certainly.
Q. Now, is that opinion one that would influence your
verdict if you should be elected as a juror to try the
case?
A. I certainly think it would affect it to some extent;
I don’t see how it could be otherwise.
He further stated that there had not been a strike in


the freight department of the North-western road which
affected the department he was in. After some further
examination he stated that he thought he could try the
case fairly on the evidence, and was then held to be com-
petent.
G. W. Adams, also one of the twelve:
Am travelling salesman; have been an employer of
painters. I read and talked about the Haymarket trouble,
and formed an opinion as to the nature and character of
the crime committed there. I conversed frequently with
my friends about the matter.
Q. Did you form an opinion at the time that the de-
fendants were connected with or responsible for the com-
mission of that crime?
A. I thought some of them were interested in it, yes.
Q. And you still think so? '
A. Yes.
Q. Nothing has transpired in the interval to change
your mind at all, suppose? ,
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You say some of them; that is, in the newspaper
accounts that you read, the names of some of the de-
fendants were referred to?
A. Yes, sir.
After further examinations he testified that he thought
he could try the case fairly on the evidence.
H. T. Sanford, another one of the twelve, clerk for the
North-western Railroad, in the freight auditor's office.
Q. Have you an opinion as to the guilt or innocence of
the defendants of the murder of Mathias J. Degan?
A. I have. t
Q. From all that you have heard and that you have
read, have you an opinion as to the guilt or innocence of
the defendants of the throwing of that bomb?
A. Yes, sir. I have.
Q. Have you a prejudice against Socialists and com-
munists?
A. Yes, sir, a decided prejudice.
Q. Do you believe that that prejudice would influence
your verdict in this case?
A. Well, as I know so little about it, it is a hard ques-
tion to answer. I have an opinion in my own mind that
the defendants encouraged the throwing of that bomb.
Challenged for cause t on account of prejudice.
On further examination, stated he believed he could
try the case fairly upon the evidence, and the challenge
for cause was overruled.


Upon the whole, therefore, considering the facts
brought to light since the trial, as well as the record
of the trial and the answers of the jurors as given
therein, it is clearly shown that, while the counsel
for defendants agreed to it, Ryce was appointed
special bailiff at the suggestion of the State’s
attorney and that he did summon a prejudiced jury,
which he believed would hang the defendants, and,
further, that the fact that Ryce was summoning only
that kind of men was brought to the attention of
the court before the panel was full and it was asked
to stop it, but refused to pay any attention to the
matter and permitted Ryce to go on and then
forced the defendants to go to trial before this jury.
While no collusion is proved between the judge
and State’s attorney, it is clearly shown that after
the verdict and while the motion for a new trial was
pending a charge was filed in court that Ryce had
packed the jury and that the attorney for the State
got Mr. Favor to refuse to make an affidavit bear-
ing on this point, which the defendants could use,
and then the court refused to take any notice of it
unless the affidavit was obtained, although it was
informed that Mr. Favor would not make an affi-
davit, but stood ready to come into court and make
a full statement if the court desired him to' do so.
These facts alone would call for executive inter-
ference, especially as Mr. Favor’s affidavit was not
before the .Supreme Court at the time it considered
the case.
SUPREME COURT ON JUROR’S
COMPETENCY.
2. The second point urged seems to me to be
equally conclusive. In the case of the People vs.
Coughlin, known as the Cronin case, recently
decided, the Supreme Court, in a remarkably able
and comprehensive review of the law on this sub-
ject, says, among other things:—


“ The holding of this and other courts is substantially
uniform, that where it is once clearly shown that there
exists in the mind of the juror at the time he is called Jo
the jury box a fixed and positive opinion as to the merits
of the case, or as to the guilt or innocence of the de-
fendant he is called to try, his statement that, notwith-
standing such opinion, he can render a fair and impartial
verdict according to the law and evidence, has little, if
any, tendency to establish his impartiality. This is so,
because a juror who has sworn to have in his mind a
fixed and positive opinion as to the guilt or innocence of
the accused, is not impartial, as a matter of fact. . . .
“ It is difficult to see how, after a juror has avowed; a
fixed and settled opinion as to the prisoner’s guilt, a
court can be legally satisfied of the truth of his answer
that he can render a fair and impartial verdict, or find
therefrom that he has the qualification of impartiality, as
required by the constitution. . . ,
“ Under such circumstances it is idle to inquire of the
jurors whether they can return just, and impartial ver-
dicts. The more clear and positive were their impres-
sions of guilt, the more certain they may be that they
can act impartially in condemning the guilty party. They
go into the box in a state of mind that is well calculated
to give a colour of guilt to all the evidence, and if the
accused escapes conviction it will not be because the
evidence has not established guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt, but because an accused party condemned in ad-
vance, and called upon to exculpate himself before a pre-
judiced tribunal, has succeeded in doing so. . . .
“ To try a cause by such a jury is to authorise men,
who state that they will lean in their finding against one
of the parties, unjustly to determine the rights of others,
and it would be no difficult task to predict, even before
the evidence was heard, the verdict that would be ren-
dered. Nor can it be said that instructions from the
court would correct the bias of the jurors who swear they
incline in favour of one of the litigants. . . .
“ Bontecou (one of the jurors in the Cronin case), it
is true, was brought to make answer that he could render
a fair and impartial verdict in accordance with the law
and the evidence, but that result was reached only after
a singularly argumentative and persuasive cross-examina-
tion by the court, in which the right of every person ac-
cused of crime to an impartial trial and to the presump-
tion of innocence untLLprovcd guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt, and the duty of every citizen when summoned as
a juror to lay aside all opinions and prejudices and ac-
cord the accused such trial, was set forth and descanted


upon at length, and in which the intimation was very
clearly made that a juror who could not do this was
recreant to his duty as a man and a citizen. Under pres-
sure of this sort of cross-examination Bontecou seems to
have been finally brought to make answer in such way
as to profess an ability to sit as an impartial juror, and
on his so answering he was pronounced competent, and
the challenge as to him was overruled. Whatever may
be the weight ordinarily due to statements of this charac-
ter by jurors, their value as evidence is in no small degree
impaired in this case by the. mode in which they were,
in a certain sense, forced from the mouth of the juror.
The theory seemed to be that if a juror could in any way
be brought to answer that he could sit as an impartial
juror, that declaration of itself rendered him competent.
Such a view, if it was entertained, was a total miscon-
cepton of the law. . . .
“ It requires no profound knowledge of human nature
to know that with ordinary men opinions and prejudices
are not amenable to the power of the will, however
honest the intention of the party may be to put them
aside. They are likely to remain in the minds of the
juror in spite of all his efforts to get rid of them, warp-
ing and giving direction to his judgment, colouring the
facts, as they are developed by the evidence, and exerting
an influence, more or less potent, though it be uncon-
sciously to the juror himself, on the final result of his
deliberations. To compel a person accused of a crime
to be tried by a juror who has prejudiced his case is not
to give him a fair trial. Nor should a defendant be com-
pelled to rely, as his security for the impartiality of the
jurors by whom he is to be tried, upon the restraining
and controlling influence upon the juror’s mind of his
oath to render a true verdict according to the law and
the evidence. His impartiality should appear before he
is permitted to take the oath. If he is not impartial then
his oath cannot be relied upon to make him so. In the
terse and expressive language of Lord Coke, already
quoted, the juror should " stand indifferent as he stands
unsworn.’ ”
INCOMPETENT BECAUSE NOT IMPARTIAL.
Applying the law as here laid down in the Cronin
case to the answers of the jurors above given in
the present case, it is very apparent that most of
the jurors were incompetent because they were not
impartial. For nearly all of them candidly stated.


that they were prejudiced against the defendants
and believed them guilty before hearing the evi-
dence, and the mere fact that the judge succeeded
by a singularly suggestive examination in getting
them to state that they believed they could try the
case fairly on the evidence did not make them com-
petent.
It is true that this case was before the Supreme
Court, and that court allowed the verdict to stand,
and it is also true that in the opinion of the majority
of the court in the Cronin case an effort is made to
distinguish that case from this one, but it is evident
that the court did not have the record of this case
before it when it tried to make the distinction, and
the opinion of the minority of the court in the
Cronin case expressly refers to this case as being
exactly like that one, so far as relates to the com-
petency of the jurors. The answers of the jurors
were almost identical and the examinations were
the same. The very things which the Supreme
Court held to be fatal errors in the Cronin case
constituted the entire fabric of this case so far as
relates to the competency of the jury. In fact, the
trial judge in the Cronin case was guided by the rule
laid down in this case, yet the Supreme Court re-
versed the Cronin case because two of the jurors
were held to be incompetent, each having testified
that he had read and talked about the case and had
formed and expressed an opinion as to the guilt of
the defendants; that he was -prejudiced; that he
believed what he had read, and that his prejudice
might influence his verdict; that his prejudice
amounted to a conviction on the subject of the guilt
or innocence of the defendants, but each finally°said
that he could and would try the case fairly on the
evidence alone, etc.
A careful comparison of the examination of these
two jurors with that of many of the jurors in this
case shows that a number of the jurors in this case


expressed themselves, if anything, more strongly
against the defendants than those two did, and, what
is still more, one of those summoned, M. D. Flavin,
in this case testified, not only that he had read and
talked about the case and had formed and expressed
an opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the defen-
dants, that he was bitterly prejudiced, but, further,
that he was related to one of the men who was
killed and that for that reason he felt more strongly
against the defendants than he otherwise might, yet
he was held to be competent on his mere statement
that he believed he could try the case fairly on the
evidence.
No matter what the defendants were charged with
they were entitled to a fair trial, and no greater
danger could .possibly threaten our institutions than
to have the courts of justice run wild or give way
to popular clamour, and when the trial judge in
the case ruled that a relative of one of the men who
was killed was a competent juror, and this after
the man had candidly stated that he was deeply pre-
judiced and that his relationship caused him to feel
more strongly than he otherwise might, and when
in scores of instances he ruled that men who can-
didly declared that they believed the defendants to
be guilty; that this was a deep conviction and would
influence their verdict, and that it would require
strong evidence to convince them that the defen-
dants were innocent, when in all the instances‘the
trial judge ruled that these men were competent
jurors simply because they had, under his adroit
manipulation, been led to say that they believed
•they could try the case fairly on the evidence; then
the proceeding lost all semblance to a fair trial.
DOES THE PROOF SHOW GUILT?
3. The State has never discovered who it was that
threw the bomb which killed the policemen, and the
evidence does not show any connection whatever


between the defendants and the man who did throw
it. The trial judge in overruling the motion for a
new hearing, and again, recently in a magazine
article (“Century,” April, ’93, p. 801), used this
language: —
The conviction has not gone on the ground that they
did not have actually any personal participation in the
particular act which caused the death of Began, but the
conviction proceeds upon the ground that they had
generally, by speech and print, advised large classes of
the people, not particular individuals, but large classes,
to commit murder, and had left the commission, the time
and place when to the individual will and whim, or
caprice, or whatever it may be, of each individual man
who listened to their advice, and that in consequence of
that advice, in pursuance of that advice and influenced
by that advice somebody not known did throw the bomb
that caused Degan’s death. Now, if this is not a correct
principle of the law, then the defendants are entitled to
a new trial. This case is without precedent; there is no
example in the law books of a case of this sort.
The judge certainly told the truth when he stated
that this case was without a precedent, and that no
example could be found in the law books to sustain
the law as above laid down. For, in all centuries
during which Government has been maintained,
among men, and crime has been punished, no judge
in a civilised country had ever laid down such a rule
before. The petitioners claim that it was laid down
in this case simply because the prosecution, not
having discovered the real criminal, would other-
wise not have been able to convict anybody; that
this course was then taken to appease the fury of
the public, and that the judgment was allowed to
stand for the same reason. I will not discuss this.
But, taking the law as above laid down, it was
necessary under it to prove, and that beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the person committing the
violent deed had at least heard or read the advice
given to the masses, for until he either heard or
read it he did not receive it, and if he did not re-


ceive it he did not commit the violent act in pur-
suance of that advice, and it is here that the case
for the State fails, with all his apparent eagerness,
to force conviction in court and his efforts in defend-
ing his course since the trial, the judge speaking-
on this point in his magazine article, makes this
statement: —“ It is probably true that Rudolph
Schnaubelt threw the bomb,” which statement is
a mere surmise, and is all that is known about it,
and is certainly not sufficient to convict eight men
on. In fact, until the State proves from whose
hands the bomb came it is impossible to show any
connection between the man who threw it and these
defendants.
It is further shown that the mass of matter con-
tained in the record and quoted at length in the
judge’s magazine article (“ Century, ” April, ’93,
p. 801, etc.), showing the use of seditious
and incendiary language amounts to but little
when its source is considered; the two papers in
which articles appeared at intervals during years
w r ere obscure little sheets having scarcely any cir-
culation, and the articles themselves were written
at times of great public excitement, when an ele-
ment in the community claimed to have been out-
raged; and the same is true of the speeches made
by the defendants and others; the apparently sedi-
tious utterances were such as are always heard
when men imagine that they have been wronged or
are excited or partially intoxicated; and the talk of
a gigantic anarchistic conspiracy is not believed by
the then chief of police, as will be shown hereafter,
and it is not entitled to serious notice, in view of
the fact that, while Chicago had nearly a million
inhabitants, the meetings held on the lake front on
Sunday during the summer by these agitators rarely
had fifty people present, and most of these went
from mere curiosity, while the meetings held in-
doors during the winter were still smaller. The
26
TRIAL JUDGE’S “ARTICLE.”


meetings held from time to time by the masses of
the labouring people must not be confounded with
the meetings above named, although in times of
excitement and trouble much violent talk was in-
dulged in by irresponsible parties, which was for-
gotten when the excitement was over.
Again, it is shown here that the bomb was in all
probability thrown by someone seeking personal
revenge; that a course had been pursued by the
authorities which would naturally cause this; that
for a number of years prior to the Haymarket affair
there had been labour troubles and in several cases
a number of labouring people guilty of no offence
had been shot down in cold blood by Pinkerton men,
and none of the murderers were brought to justice.
The evidence taken at coroner’s inquests, and pre-
sented here shows that in at least two cases men
were fired on and killed when they were running
away and there was consequently no occasion to
shoot, yet nobody was punished; that in Chicago
there had been a number of strikes in which some
of the police not only took sides against the men,
but without any authority of law invaded and broke
up peaceable meetings, and in scores of cases
brutally clubbed people who were guilty of no
offence whatever. Reference is made to the opinion
of the late Judge McAllister in the case of the Har-
monia Association of Joiners against Brennan et ah,
reported in the Chicago “Legal News”: —
judge McAllister’s opinion.
Among other Jthings, Judge McAllister says:
" The facts established by a large number of witnesses,
and without any opposing evidence, are, that this society,
having leased Turner Hall on West. Twelfth-street for
the purpose, held a meeting in the forenoon of said day
in said hall, composed of from 200 to 300 individuals,
most of whom were journeymen cabinet makers engaged
in the several branches, of the manufacture of furniture
in Chicago, but some of those in attendance were the
proprietors in that business or delegates sent by them.


The object of the meeting was to obtain a conference of
the journeymen with such proprietors or their authorised
delegates with the view of endeavouring to secure an in-
crease of the price or the diminution of the hours of
labour. The attendants were wholly unarmed and
orderly, and while the people were sitting quietly with
their backs toward the entrance hall, with a few persons
on the stage in front of them, and all engaged merely in
the business for which they had assembled, a force of
from fifteen to twenty policemen cajne suddenly into the
hall, having a policeman’s club in one hand and a revol-
ver in the other, and making no pause to determine the
actual character of the meeting, they immediately shouted:
'Get out of here, you ,’ and began beating
the_ people with their clubs, some of them actually firing
their revolvers. One young man was shot through the
back of the head and killed. But to complete the atrocity
of the affair on the part of the officers engaged in it,
when the people hastened to make their escape from the
assembly room, they found policemen stationed on either
side of the stairway leading from the hall down to the
street, who applied their clubs to them as they passed,
seemingly with all the violence practicable under the
circumstances.
“Jacob Beirsdorf, who was a manufacturer of furniture
employing some 200 men, had been invited to the meet-
ing, and came; but as he was about to enter the place
where it was held an inoffensive old man, doing nothing
unlawful, was stricken to the ground at his feet by a
policeman’s club.
These general facts were established by an over-
whelming mass of testimony, and, for the purpose of the
questions in the case, it is needless to go further into
the detail.
“ The chief political right of the citizen in our govern-
ment, based upon the popular will as regulated by law,
is the right of suffrage, but to that right two others are
auxiliary and of almost equal importance:
“ 1. The right of free speech and of a free press.
2. The right of the people to assembly in a peaceable
manner to consult for the common good.
“ These are among the fundamental principles of
government, and guaranteed by our constitution. Sec-
tion 17, Article 11., of the bill of rights, declares:
“ The people have a right to assemble in a peaceable
manner to consult for the common good, to make known
their opinions to their representatives, and apply for
redress for grievances.


“ Jurists do not regard these declarations of the bill
of rights as creating or conferring the rights, but as
guarantees against their deprivation or infringement by
any of the powers or agencies of the government. The
rights themselves are regarded as the natural inalienable
rights belonging to every individual, or as political, and
based upon or arising from principles inherent in the very
nature of a system of fjee government.
“ The right of the people to assemble in a peaceable
manner to consult for the common good being a con-
stitutional right, it can be exercised and enjoyed within
the scope and spirit of that provision of the constitution,
independently of every other power of the State govern-
ment.
“ Judge-Cooley, in his excellent work on ‘ Torts,’ speak-
ing (p. 296) of remedies for the invasion of political
rights, says:
“ When a meeting for any lawful purpose is actually
called and held one who goes there with the purpose to
disturb and break it up, and commits disorder to that end,
is a trespasser upon the rights of those who, for the time,
have the control of the place of meeting. If several
unite in the disorder it may be a criminal riot.”
So much for Judge McAllister.-
Now it is shown that no attention was paid to
the judge’s decision; that peaceable meetings were
invaded *and broken up and inoffensive people were
clubbed; that in 1885 there was a strike at the
McCormick Reaper factory on account of a reduc-
tion of wages, and some Pinkerton men, while on
their way there, were hooted at by some people on
the street, when they fired into the crowd and
fatally wounded several people who had taken no
part in any disturbance; that four of the Pinkerton
men were indicted for this murder by the grand
jury, but that the prosecuting officers apparently
took no interest in the case and allowed it to be
continued a number of times, until the witnesses
were worn out, and in the end the murderers went
free; that after this there was a strike on the West
Division Street Railway and that some of the police,
under the leadership of Captain John Bonfield, in-
dulged in a brutality never equalled before; that


even small merchants standing on their own door-
steps, and having no interest in the strike, were
clubbed, then hustled into patrol waggons and
thrown into prison on no charge, and not even
booked; that a petition, signed by about 1000 of
the leading citizens living on and near West Madi-
son-street, was sent to the mayor and city council,
praying for the dismissal of Bonfield from the force,
but that on account of his political influence he was
retained. Let me say here that the charge of
brutality does not apply to all of the policemen of
Chicago. There are many able, honest, and con-
scientious officers who do their duty quietly,
thoroughly, and humanely.
INSTANCES OF POLICE BRUTALITY AND
CRIME.
As a specimen of the rgany papers filed in this
connection I will give the following, the first being
from the officers of a corporation that is one of the
largest employers in Chicago:—
Office People’s Gas Light & Coke Co., Chicago, No-
vember 21st, 1885. To the Chairman of the Committee,.
Chicago Trades and Labour Assembly. Sir, —In response
to the request of your committee for information as to
the treatment received by certain employees of this com-
pany at the hands of Captain Bonfield and by his orders
during the strike of the Western Division Railway Com-
pany’s employees in July last, you are advised as follows:
On that day of the strike, in which there was ap-
parently an arresting of persons who hap-
pened to be up on Madison-street, whether connected
with the disturbance of peace, or engaged in legitimate
business, a number of employees of this company were at
work upon said street near Hoyne-avenue, opening a
trench for the laying of gas pipes.
The tool box of the employees was at the south-east
corner of Hoyne and Madison streets. As the men
assembled for labour shortly before 7 a.m., they took
their shovels and tools from the tool box, arranged
themselves along the trench preparatory to going to work
when the hour of seven should arrive. About this time.


and a little before, the men began to work, a crowd of
men, not employees of the company, came surging down
the street from the west, and seizing such shovels and
other tools of the men as lay upon the ground and about
the box, threw more or less of the loose dirt, which had
before been taken from the trench, upon the track of the
railway company. About this time Captain Bonfield and
his forces appeared upon the scene, and began apparently
an indiscriminate arrest of persons. Among others ar-
rested were the following employees of this company:—
Edward Kane, Mike W. Kirwin, Dan Diamond, James
Hussey, Dennis Murvay, Patrick Brown, and Pat Franey.
No one of these persons had any connection with the
strike, or were guilty of obstructing the cars of the rail-
way company, or of any disturbance upon the street. Mr.
Kirwin had just arrived at the tool box, and had not yet
taken his shovel preparatory to going to work, when he
was arrested while standing by the box, and without re-
sistance, was put upon a street car as a prisoner. When
upon the car he called to a friend among the workmen,
saying, “Take carp of my shovel.” Thereupon Bonfield
struck him a violent blow with a club upon his head, in-
flicting a serious wound, laying open his scalp, and say-
ing as he did so, “ I will shovel you,” or words to that
effect. Another of the said employees, Edward Kane,
was also arrested by the tool box, two of the police seiz-
ing him, one by each arm, and as he was being put upon
the car a third man, said by Kane and others to be Bon-
field, struck him with a club upon the head, severely
cutting his head. Both of these men, with blood stream-
ing from.the cuts upon their heads, respectively, as also
all the others above named, were hustled off to the police
station, and locked up. The men were not “booked” as
they were locked up, and their friends had great difficulty
m finding them, so that bail might be offered, and they
released. After they were found communication with
them was denied for some time by Bonfield’s order, as
was said, and for several hours they were kept in con-
finement in the lock-up upon Desplaines-street as crimi-
nals, when their friends were desirous of getting them
out. Subsequently they were all brought up for trial
before Justice White. Upon the hearing the city was
represented by its attorney, Bonfield himself being pre-
sent, and from the testimony it appeared that all these
men had been arrested under the circumstances afore-
said, and without the least cause, and that Kane and Kir-
win had been cruelly assaulted and beaten without the
least justification therefor, and, of course, they were all
discharged.


The officers of this company, who are cognisant of the
outrages perpetrated upon these men, feel that the party
by whom the same were committed ought not to remain;
in a responsible position upon the police force.
People’s Gas Light and Coke Company,
By C. K. G. Billings, V.P.
Chicago, Nov. 19, 1885. Robert Ellis, 974 West Madi-
son-street:—l kept a market at 974 West Madison-street.
I was in my place of business waiting on customers and
stepped to the door to get a measure of vegetables. The
first thing I knew, as I stood on the step in front of my
store, I received a blow over the shoulders with a club,
and was seized and thrown off the sidewalk into a ditch
being dug there. I had my back to the person who struck
me, but on regaining my feet I saw that it was Bonfield
who had assaulted me. Two or three officers then came
up. I told them not to hit me again. They said go and
get in the car, and I told them I couldn’t leave my place
of business, as I was all alone there. They asked Bon-
field, and he said: “Take him right along.’’ They then
shoved me into the car and took me down the street to'
a patrol waggon, in which I was taken to the Lake-street
station. I was locked up there from this time, about
eight o’clock in the morning till eight o’clock in the
evening, and then taken to the Desplaines-street station.
I was held there a short time and then gave bail for
my appearance, and got back to my place of business
about nine o’clock that night. Subsequently when I
appeared in court I was discharged. It was about eight
o’clock in the morning, July 3, 1885, when T Was taken
from my place of business.
ROBERT ELLIS.
Chicago, Nov. 19, 1885.—1 was standing in my door
about seven o’clock in the morning of July 3, 1885. I
saw a man standing on the edge of the sidewalk. He
wasn’t doing anything at all. Bonfield came up to him,
and, without a word being said by either, Bonfield hit
him over the head with his club and knocked him down.
He also hit him twice after he had fallen. I was standing
about six feet from them when the assault occurred. I
don’t know the man that was clubbed—never saw him
before nor since.
W. W. WYMAN.
1004 West Madison-street.
Chicago, Nov. 20, 1885.—0 n the morning of July 3,
1885, about seven o’clock, as I was standing on the south-


*east corner of Madison-street and Western-avenue, I
saw Bonfield walk up to a man on the opposite corner,
who was apparently looking on at what was going on in
the street. Bonfield hit him over the head with his club
and knocked him down. Some men who were near him
helped him over to the drug store on the corner where
I was standing. His face was covered with blood from
the wound on his head made by Bonficld’s club, and he
appeared to be badly hurt. A few moments later, as I
was standing in the .same place, almost touching elbows
jwith another man, Bonfield came up facing us, and said
to us, “ Stand back,” at the same time' striking the other
man over the head with his club. I stepped back, and
turned around to look for the other man; saw him a few
feet away with the blood running down over his face,
apparently badly hurt from the effects of the blow or
blows he had received from Bonfield. There was no riot
or disorderly conduct there at this time, except what
Bonfield made himself by clubbing innocent people who
were taking no part in the strike. If they had been there
for the purpose of rioting they would surely have resisted
Bonfield’s brutality.
I affirm that the above statement is a true and correct
statement of facts.
JESSE CLOUD.
998 Monroe-street.
Chicago, Nov. 19, 1885.—0 n the morning of July 3,
1885, I was driving up Madison-street, just coming from
Johnson’s bakery on Fifth-avenue. When I got to the
corner of Market and Madison streets I met the cars
coming over the bridge. On looking out of my waggon
I saw Bonfield by the side of a car. He snatched me
from my waggon and struck me on the head, cutting it
open, and put me in a car, leaving my waggon unpro-
tected, loaded with bakery goods, all of which were
stolen, except a few loaves of bread. I was then taken
to the Desplaines-street station and locked up for about
ten hours. I was then bound over for riot in $5OO bail
and released. During the time I was there I received no
attention of any kind, though my head was seriously cut.
Julius Goldzier, my lawyer, went to Bonfield with me
before the case was called in court, and told him I had
done nothing, and Bonfield said, " Scratch his name off,”
and I was released.
I swear to the truth of the above.
H. J. NICHOLS.
47 Flournoy-street.


The following is from Captain Schaack, a very promi-
nent police official:—
Department of Police, City of Chicago. Chicago, 111.,
May 4, 1893. G. E. Detwiler, Editor Rights of Labour.
Dear Sir, —In reply to your communication of April 13, I
will say that in July, 1885, in the street car strike on the
west side, I held the office of lieutenant on the force.
I was detailed with a company of officers early in the
morning in the vicinity of the car barns, I believe on
Western-avenue and a little north of Madison-street. My
orders were to see that the new men on the cars were not
molested when coming out of the barn.
. One man came out and passed my lines about fifty
feet. I saw one of the men, either driver or conductor,
leave the car at a standstill. I ran up near to the car,
when I saw on the south-east corner of the street Bon-
field strike a man on the head with his club. He hit the
man twice, and I saw the man fall to the ground.
Afterwards I was put on a train of cars, protecting the
rear. Bonfield had charge of the front. I saw many
people getting clubbed in the front of the train, but I
held my men in the rear and gave orders not to strike
anyone except they were struck first. Not any of my
officers hurt a person on that day or at any time.
Many people were arrested, all appearing. From what
I saw in the afternoon and the next day. no officer could
state what they were arrested for. The officers professed
ignorance of having any evidence, but “ someone told them
to take him in,” meaning to lock him up. On that after-
noon, about four o’clock, I met Bonfield, and he addressed
me in the following words, in great anger:—“lf some of
you goody-goody fellows had used your clubs more freely
in the forenoon you would not need to use lead this after-
noon!” I told him that I did not see any use for club-
bing people, and I would club no person to please anyone,
meaning Bonfield, and that if lead had to be used, I
thought my officers could give lead and take it also. I
will say that affair was brutal and uncalled for.
MICHAEL J. SCHAACK.
227 North State-street.
Again, it fs shown that various ; attempts were
made to bring to justice the men who wore the uni r
form of the law while, violating it, but all'to no
avail; that the labouring people found the prisons
always open to receive them, but the courts of jus-
tice were practically closed to them; that the prose-


cuting officers vied with each other in hunting them
down, but were deaf to their appeals; that in the
spring of 1886 there were more labour disturbances
in the city, and particularly at the McCormick fac-
tory ; that under the leadership of Captain Bonfield
the brutalities of the previous year were even ex-
ceeded. Some affidavits and other evidence is
offered on this point which I cannot give for want
of space. It appears that this was the year of the
eight-hour agitation, and efforts were made to
secure an eight-hour day about May 1, and that a
number of labouring men standing, not on the
street, but on a vacant lot, were quietly discussing
the situation in regard to the movement when sud-
denly a large body of police under orders from Bon-
field charged on them and began to club them; that
some of the men, angered at the unprovoked assault,
at first resisted, but were soon dispersed; that some
of the police fired on the men while they were run-
ning and wounded a large number who were already
100 feet or more away and were running as fast as
they could; that at least four of the number so shot
down died; that this was wanton and unprovoked
murder, but there was not even so much as an
investigation.
Now,, while some men may tamely submit to being
clubbed and seeing their brothers shot down, there
are some who will resent it, and will nurture a spirit
of hatred, and seek revenge for themselves, and the
occurrences that preceded the Haymarket tragedy
indicate that the bomb was thrown by some one who,
instead of acting on the advice of anybody, was seek-
ing simply personal revenge for having been clubbed,
and that Captain Bonfield is the man who is really
responsible for the death of the police officers. It is
also shown that the character of the Haymarket
meeting sustains this view; that the evidence proves
there were only 800 to 1000 people present, and that
It was a peaceable and orderly meeting; that the


mayor of the city was present and saw nothing out
of the way, and that.he remained until the crowd be-
gan to disperse, the meeting being practically over,
and the crowd engaged in dispersing when he left;
that had the police remained away for twenty
minutes more there would have been nobody left
there, but as soon as Bonfield learned that the mayor
had left he could not resist the temptation to have
some more people clubbed, and went up with a de-
tachment of police to disperse the meeting, and then
on the appearance of the police the bomb was thrown
by some unknown person, and several innocent and
faithful officers, who were simply an un-
called for order of their superior, were killed ;• all of
these facts tend to show the improbability of the
theory of the prosecution that the bomb was thrown
as the result of a conspiracy on the part of the de-
fendants to commit murder. If the theory of the
prosecution were correct there would have been
many bombs thrown, and the fact that only one was
thrown shows that it was an act of personal revenge.
It is further shown here that much of the evidence
given at the trial was a pure fabrication; that some
of the prominent police officials in their zeal not
only terrorised ignorant men by throwing them into
prison and threatening them with torture if they re-
fused to swear to anything desired, but that they
offered money and employment to those who would
consent to do this. Further, that they deliberately
planned to have fictitious conspiracies formed in
order that they might get the glory of discovering
them. In addition to the evidence in the record of
some witnesses who swore that they had been paid
small sums of money, etc., several documents are
here referred to.
First, an interview with Captain Ebersold, pub-
lished in the Chicago “ Daily News,” May 10th,
1889. Ebersold was Chief of Police of Chicago at
the time of the Haymarket troubles, and for a long


time before and thereafter, so that he was in a posi-
tion to know what was going on, and his utterances
upon this point are therefore important. Among
other things he says:
“ It was my policy to quiet matters down as soon as
possible after the 4th of May. The general unsettled
state of things was an injury to Chicago.
“ On the other hand, Captain Schaack wanted to keep
things stirring. He wanted bombs to be found here, there,
all around, everywhere. I thought people would lie down
and sleep better if they were not afraid that their homes
would be blown to pieces any minute. But this man,
Schaack, this little boy who must glory or his heart would
be broken, wanted none of that policy. Now, here is
something the public does not know. After we got the
anarchist societies broken up Schaack wanted to send out
men to again organise new societies right away. You
see what this would do. He wanted to keep the thing
boiling, keep himself prominent before the public. Well,
I sat down on that; I didn’t*like it.
“ After I heard all that I began to think there was per-
haps not so much to all this anarchist business as they
claimed, and I believe I was right. Schaack thinks he
knew all about those anarchists. Why, I knew more at
that time than he knows to-day about them. I was follow-
ing them closely. As soon as Schaack began to get some
notoriety, however, he was spoiled.”
This is a most important statement, when a chief
of police, who has been watching the anarchists
closely, says that he was convinced that there was
not so much in all that anarchist business as was
claimed, and that a police captain wanted to send
out men to have other conspiracies formed, in order
to get the credit of discovering them, and keep the
public excited. It throws a flood of light on the
whole situation ,and destroys the force of much of
the testimony introduced at the trial.
For if there had been any such extensive con-
spiracy as the prosecution claims, the police would
soon have discovered it. No chief of police could
discover a determination on the part of an individual,
or even of a number of separate individuals, to have


personal revenge for having been maltreated, nor
could any chief discover a determination by any such
individual to kill the next policeman who might
assault him. Consequently, the fact that the police
did not discover any conspiracy before the Haymar-
ket affair shows almost exclusively that no such ex-
tensive combination could have existed.
CREATING EVIDENCE AND TERRORISING
WITNESSES.
As further bearing on the question of creating evi-
dence, reference is made to tho following affidavits: —
STATE OF ILLINOIS, I Qc
County of Cook. (
Jacob Mikolanda, being first duly sworn, on oath states
that he took no part in the so-called May troubles of 1886;
that on or about the Bth day of May, 1886, two police
officers, without a warrant or without assigning any
reasons therefor, took this affiant from a salodn, where he
was conducting himself peacefully, and obliged him to
accompany them to his. house; that the same officers
entered his house without a search warrant and ransacked
the same, not even permitting the baby’s crib with its
sleeping occupant to escape their unlawful and fruitless
search; that in about a month after this occurrence this
affiant was summoned by Officer Perceny to accompany
him to the police station, as Lieutenant Shepard wished
to speak to him; that there, without a warrant, this affiant
was thrown into gaol; that he was thereupon shown some
photographs, and asked if he knew the persons, and on
answering in the affirmative as to some of the pictures he
was again thrown into prison; that he was then trans-
ferred from one police station to another for several days;
that he was importuned by a police captain and assistant
State’s attorney to turn State’s witness, being promised
therefor money, the goodwill and protection of the police,
their political influence in securing a position, and his
entire freedom; that on answering that he knew nothing
to which he could testify he was thrown back into gaol;
that his preliminary hearing was repeatedly continued for
want of prosecution, each continuance obliging this affiant


to remain longer in gaol; that eventually this affiant was
dismissed for want of prosecution.
JACOB MIKOLANDA.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 14th day of
April, A.D. 1893.
CHARLES B. PAVLICEK,
Notary Public.
County of Cook. ( cc
STATE OF ILLINOIS, (
Vaclav Djmek,. being first duly sworn, on oath states
that he knows of no cause for his.arrest on the 7th day of
May, A.D. 1886; that he took no part in the troubles of
the preceding days; that, without a warrant for his arrest,
or .without a search warrant for his premises, the police
entered his house on the night of the 7th day of May, 1886;
that on being requested to show by what authority they
entered, the police heaped abuse upon this affiant and his
wife; that the police then proceeded to ransack the house,
roused this affiant’s little children out of bed, pulled the
same to pieces, carried away this affiant’s papers and
pillow-slips, because the same were red; that on the way
to the police station, though this affiant offered no resis-
tance whatever and went at the command of the officer
peacefully, this affiant was choked, covered with revolvers,
and otherwise inhumanly treated by the police officers;
that for many days this affiant was gaoled and refused a
preliminary hearing; that during said time he was
threatened, and promised immunity by the police if he
would turn State’s witness; that the police clerk and
Officer Johnson repeatedly promised this affiant his free-
dom and considerable money if he would turn State’s wit-
ness; that on his protestations that he knew nothing to
which he could testify, this affiant was abused and ill-
treated; that while he was gaoled this affiant was kicked,
clubbed, beaten, and scratched, had curses and abuses
heaped upon him, and was threatened with hanging by
the police; that this affiant’s wife was abused by the police
when she sought permission to see this affiant.
VACLAV DJMEK.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 14th day of
April, A.D. 1893.
CHARLES B. PAVLICEK,
Notary Public.


I will simply say in conclusion on this branch of
the case that the facts tend to show that the bomb
was thrown as an act of personal revenge, and that
the prosecution has never discovered who threw it,
and the evidence utterly fails to show that the man
who did throw it ever heard or read a word coming
from the defendants; consequently it fails to show
that he acted on any advice given by them. And if
he did not act on or hear any advice coming from the
defendants, either in speeches or through the press,
then there was no case against them, even under the
law as laid down by Judge Gary.
FIELDEN AND SCHWABE (REPRIEVED).
At the trial a number of detectives and members
of the police force swore that the defendant, Fielden,
at the Haymarket meeting, made threats to kill, urg-
ing his hearers to do their duty, as he would do his,
just as the policemen were coming up, and one
policeman swears that Fielden drew a revolver, and
fired at the police while he was standing on the wag-
gon, and before the bomb was thrown, while some
of the others testified that he first climbed down off
the waggon, and fired while standing by a wheel. On
the other hand, it was proven by a number of wit-
nesses, and by facts and circumstances, that this evi-
dence must be absolutely untrue. A number of
newspaper reporters, who testified on the part of
the Statei, said that they were standing near Fielden,
much nearer than the police were, and heard all that
was said and. saw what was done; that they had
been sent there for that purpose, and that Fielden did
not make any such threats as the police swore to, and
that he did not use a revolver. A number of other
men who were near, too, and some of them on the
waggon on which Fielden stood at the time, swear
to the same thing. Fielden himself swears that he
did not make any such threats as the police swore to,
and, further, that he never had or used a revolver in


his life. But if there were any doubt about the fact
that the evidence charging Fielden with having used
a revolver is unworthy of credit, it is removed by
judge Gary and State’s Attorney Grinnell on No-
vember Bth, 1887, when the question of commuting
the death sentence as to Fielden was before the
Governor. Judge Gary wrote a long letter in regard
to the case in which, in speaking of Fielden, he,
among other things, says:
There is in the nature and private character of the man
a love of justice, an impatience at undeserved sufferings.
. _. . In his own private life he was the honest, indus-
trious, and peaceful labouring man. In what he said in
court before sentence he was respectful and decorous.
His language and conduct since have been irreproachable.
As there is no evidence that he knew of any preparation to
do the specific act of throwing the bomb that killed Degan,
he does not understand even now that general advice to
large masses to do violence makes him responsible for
the violence done by reason of that advice. ... In
short, he was more a misguided enthusiast than a criminal
conscious of the horrible nature and effect of his teachings
and of his responsibility therefor.
The State’s Attorney appended on the foregoing a
letter, beginning as follows :
"While indorsing and approving the foregoing state-
ment by Judge Gary, I wish to add thereto the suggestion
. . . that Schwab’s conduct during the trial and when
addressing the court before sentence, like Fielden’s, was
decorous, respectful to the law, and commendable. . . .
It is my further desire to say that I believe that Schwab
was the pliant, weak tool of a stronger will and more
designing person. Schwab seems to be friendless.”
. If what Judge Gary says about Fielden is true; if
Fielden has a natural love of justice, and in his pri-
vate life was the honest, industrious, peaceable,
labouring man, then Fielden’s testimony is entitled
to credit, and when he says that he did not do the
things the police charge him with doing, and that he
never had or used a revolver in his life, it is probably
true, especially as he is corroborated by a number
of credible and disinterested witnesses.
41
FIELDEN AND SCHWAB.


Again, if Fielden did the things the police charged
him with doing, if he fired on them as they swear,
then he was not a mere misguided enthusiast, who
was to be held only for the consequences of his
teachings, and if either Judge Gary or State’s Attor-
ney Grinnell had placed any reliance on the evidence
of the police on this point they would have written
a different kind of a letter to the then executive.
In the fall of 1887 a number of the most prominent
business men of Chicago met to consult whether or
not to ask clemency for any of the con-
demned men. Mr. Grinnell was present, and made
a speech, in which, in referring to this evidence,
he said that he had serious doubts whether Fielden
had a revolver on that occasion, or whether, indeed,
Fielden ever had one.
Yet, in arguing the case, before the Supreme
Court the previous spring, much stress was placed by
the State on the evidence relating to what Fielden
did at the Haymarket meeting, and that court was
misled into attaching great importance to it.
It is now clear that there is no case made out
against Fielden for anything that he did on that
night, and, as heretofore shown, in order to hold him
and the other defendants for the consequences and
effects of having given pernicious and criminal ad-
vice to large masses to commit violence, whether
orally in speeches or in print, it must be shown that
the person committing the violence had read or
heard the advice, for until he read or heard it he did
not receive, and if he never received the advice it can-
not be said that he acted on it.
OSCAR NEEBE (15 YEARS).
At the conclusion of the evidence for the State,
Carter H. Harrison, then Mayor of Chicago, and E.
S. Winston, then corporation counsel for Chicago,
were in the court room, and had a conversation with
Mr. Grinnell, the State’s Attorney, in regards to the


evidence against Neebe, in which conversation, ac-
cording to Mr. Harrison and Mr. Winston, the
State’s Attorney said that he did not think he had a
case against Neebe, and that he wanted to dismiss
as to him, but was dissuaded from doing so by his
associate attorneys, who feared that such a step
might influence the jury in favour of the other de-
fendants.
Mr. Harrison, in a letter, among .other things,
says:
“ I was present in the court-room when the State closed
its case. The attorney for Neebe moved his discharge on
the ground that there was no evidence to hold him on.
The State’s attorney, Julius S. Grinncll, and Fred S.
Winston, corporation counsel for the city, and myself were
in earnest conversation when the motion was made. Mr.
Grinnell stated to us that he did not think there was suffi-
cient testimony to convict Neebe. I thereupon earnestly
advised him, as the representative of the State, to dismiss
the case as to Neebe, and, if I remember rightly, he was
seriously thinking of doing so, but on consultation with
his assistants and on their advice he determined not to
do. so, lest it would have an injurious effect on the case as
against the other prisoners. ... I took the position
that such discharge, being clearly justified by the testi-
mony, would not prejudice the case as to the others.”
Mr. Winston adds the following to Mr. Harrison’s
letter:
“ March 21, 1889.—1 concur in the statement of Mr.
Harrison. I never believed there was sufficient evidence
to convict Mr. Neebe, and so stated during the trial.
“F. S. WINSTON.”
In January, 1890, Mr. Grinnell wrote a letter to
Governor Fifer, denying that he had ever made any
such statement as that mentioned by Mr. Harrison
and Mr. Winston; also that he did believe Neebe
guilty; that Mr. Harrison suggested the dismissal
of the case as to Neebe, and, further, that he would
not have been surprised if Mr. Harrison had made a
similar suggestion as to others, and then he says:
I said to Mr. Harrison at the time substantially that
I was afraid that the jury might not think the testi-


mony presented in the case sufficient to convict
Neebe, but that it was their province to pass upon it.
Now, if the statement of Messrs. Harrison and
Winston is true, then Mr. Grinnell should not have,
allowed Neebe to be sent to the penitentiary; and
even if we assume that both Mr. Harrison and Wins-
ton are mistaken, and that Mr. Grinnell simply used
the language he now says he used, then the case must
have seemed very weak to him. If, with a jury pre-
judiced to start with, a judge pressing for convic-
tion, and amid the almost irresistible fury with which
the trial was conducted, he still was afraid the jury
might not think the testimony in the case, sufficient
to convict Neebe, then that testimony must have
seemed very weak to him, no matter what he might
now protest about it.
When the motion to dismiss the case as to Neebe
was made, defendants’ counsel asked that the jury
might be permitted to retire while the motion was
being argued,, but the court refused to permit this,
and kept the jury present where it could hear all that
the court had to say, then when the argument on the
motion was begun by defendants’ counsel the court
did not wait to hear from the attorneys from the
Sfate, but at once proceeded to argue the points it-
self with the attorneys for the defendants, so that
while the attorneys for the State made no argument
on the motion, twenty-five pages of the record are
filled with the colloquy or sparring that took place
between the court and the counsel for the defendants,
the court in the presence of the jury making insinua-
tions as to what inference might be drawn by the
jury from the fact that Neebe owned a little stock
in a paper called the “ Arbeiter Zeitung,” and had
been seen there, although he took no part in the
management until after the Haymarket troubles, it
appearing that the " Arbeiter Zeitung” had pub-
lished some very seditious articles, with which, how-
ever, Neebe had nothing to do. Finally, one of the


counsel for the defendants said: “ I expected that
the representative of the State might say something,
hut as your honor saves them the trouble, you will
excuse me if I reply briefly to the suggestions you
have made.” Some other remarks were made toy the
court, seriously affecting the whole case, and preju-
dicial to the defendants, and then, referring to Neetoe,
the court said:
“ Whether he had anything to do with the dissemina-
tion of advice to commit murder is, I think, a debatable
■question which the jury ought to pass on.”
Finally the motion was overruled. Now, with all
of the eagerness shown by ■ the court to convict
Neebe, it must have regarded the evidence against
him as very weak, otherwise it would not have made
this admission, for if it was a debatable question
whether the evidence tended to show guilt, then that
evidence must have been far from being conclusive
upon the question as to whether he was actually
guilty; this being so, the verdict should not have
been allowed to stand, (because the law requires that
a man shall be proved to be guilty beyond a reason-
able doubt before he can be convicted of a criminal
■offence. I have examined all of the evidence against
Neetoe with care, and it utterly fails to prove even a
shade of a case against him. Some of the other de-
fendants were guilty of using seditious language,
but even this cannot be said of Neebe.
JUDGE’S MALICIOUS FEROCITY AND
VENOM.
It is further charged with much bitterness by
those who speak for the prisoners that the record of
the case shows that the judge conducted the trial
with malicious ferocity, and forced eight men to be
tried together; that in cross-examining the State’s
witness he confined counsel for the defence to the
specific pqints touched on by the State, while in


the cross-examination of the defendants’ witnesses
he permitted the State’s attorney to go into all man-
ner of subjects, entirely foreign to the matters on
which the witnesses were examined in chief; also
that every ruling throughout the long trial on any
contested point was in favour of the .State; and, fur-
ther, that page after page on the record contains in-
sinuating remarks of the judge, made in the hear-
ing of the jury, and with the evident intent of bring-
ing the jury to his way of thinking; that these
speeches, coming from the court, were much more
damaging than any speeches from the State’s attor-
ney could possibly have been; that the State’s attor-
ney often took his cue from the judge’s remarks;,
that the judge’s magazine article, recently published,,
although written nearly six years after the trial, is
yet full of venom; that, pretending to simply review
the case, he had to drag into his article a letter
written by an excited woman tp a newspaper after
the trial was over, and which, therefore, had nothing
whatever to do with the case, and was put into the
article simply to create a prejudice against the
woman, as well as against the dead and the living,
and that, not content with this, he in the same article
makes an insinuating attack on one of the lawyers
for the defence, not for anything done at' the trial,,
but because more than a year after the trial, when
some of the defendants had been hanged, ,he ven-
turd to express a few kind, if erroneous, sentiments
over the graves of his clients, whom he at least be-
lieved to be innocent. It is urged that such ferocity
or subserviency is without a parallel in all history,-
that even Jeffries in .England contented himself with
hanging his victims, and did not stop to berate them
after they were dead.
These charges are of a personal character, and
while they seem to be sustained by the record of the-
trial and the papers before me, and tend to show that
the trial was not fair, I do not care to discuss this-
46
JUDGE JEFFRIES OUTDONE.


feature of the case any farther, because it is not
necessary.
THE “ PARDON ” ABSOLUTE
I am convinced that it is clearly my duty to act
in this case for the reasons already given, and I,
therefore, grant an absolute pardon to Samuel
Fielden, Oscar Neebe, and Michael Schwab this 26th
day of June, 1893.
JOHN P. ALTGELD,
Governor of Illinois.
THE END
47
HANGED MEN EXCULPATED.


