

ST. ANDREW'S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
Cecil Street, Williamstown
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE YEARS
1923-1953
CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS
September 1953


ST. ANDREW'S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
Cecil Street, Williamstown
THIRTY YEARS have passed since the History of the Presbyter-
ian Church at Williamstown was last brought up-to-date and this
short account of the years 1923-1953 completes the first
century of the existence of this Branch of the Christian Church
The Session at this time in the Church’s History consisted
of Rev. Thos. Brown, M.A. (Minister of the Charge) and Messrs.
C. F. Geer, D. H. Murray, S. Thorburn, J, M. Scott, A. Morrison
and J. W. Smith (Session Clerk.) Mr. J. M. Scott was Repre-
sentative Elder to the Presbytery and General Assembly and held
that position for many years. In 1923, Messrs. J. Crow and J.
Faichney were ordained and inducted as additional Elders. At
this time the Communion Season was held three times a year.
Rarely a Communion passed without the addition of some new
names to the Roll.
1924 saw the introduction of the Duplex Envelope System of
giving which was intended to replace the pew-rent system. The
two systems operated side by side in our congregation and still
do so.
Hitherto the Church had not been given a name, but in 1925,
following a ballot of the Congregation, the name ,! St. Andrew’s”
was adopted by a large majority. The same year also saw the
establishment of a Boy Scouts Company and a Mission Band in
connection with the Sunday School.
The question of dancing in Church property appears to have
been a live issue at the time for we find a record of several
Session discussions of the matter resulting, after discussion
with the young people, in a motion disallowing dancing.
The Rev. Thomas Brown was inducted as Moderator of the
General Assembly of Victoria in May 1926 and served the Church
with distinction during his year of office. The honour was a
fitting crown to his long ministry in the Church.
It appears that about this time the question of disposing of
the present Manse (erected in 1BSB) was a live issue for there
is a record of a resolution of the Congregation authorising the
sale of the Manse which, however, was subsequently rescinded.
Many folk still connected with the Church will remember the
Spiritual Mission conducted in the Church during August-Septem-
ber 1927 by Rev. D. W. Smith, who is still active although on
the retired list. The Mission resulted in the addition of 20
names to the Roll of Communicants and in blessing to the whole
Congregation•
The Rev. Thos. Brown tendered his resignation from the
Charge which took effect from 6th November, 1°27, after a
ministry of llj years. The same year also saw the resignation
from the Session and Sunday School of Mr. C. F. Geer on account
of his removal from the District. He was Session Clerk from
1910 to 1917 and Superintendent of.the Sunday School from 1903
to 1927.


Mr. J, Faichney succeeded Mr. Geer as Superintendent of the
Sunday 'School in 1927 and held that office, with a break of
several years, until 1945.
About this time steps were taken by the Board of Management
to renovate the Church property. The Church had been the
recipient of a generous legacy from the Estate of Mrs.
Bannantyne, a member of many years’ standing, and with the
funds thus made available renovation of the Church and other
buildings and the Manse and grounds was undertaken. An exten-
sion ol the Soldiers ’ Memorial Hall was amongst the works
carried out and this was named and is still known as "The
Bannantyne Memorial Room." It was devoted to the work of the
Girls r Bible Classes. £270 was spent in renovations to the
Manse, principally in re-papering walls and re-painting wood-
work. The Church organ was overhauled, new cushions and
carpets placed in the pulpit and new lights (the gift of Mr.
J. M. Scott) were installed.
After a short vacancy in the pastorate, the Rev. James
Walker, M.A.,8.D., who had been minister of St. Paul ’s,Brisbane
Queensland, was inducted as Minister of the Charge in May I°2s /
and then began a period of intense activity in the Church and
amongst the numerous organisations connected with it. The
records abound in references to the meetings and doings of the
Fellowship Association, Sunday school, Tennis Club, Football
Club, Literary Society, Girls» Guild, Young Men’s Bible Class,
Cradle Roll, Choir, P.W.M.U., Korean Mission, Dorcas Society
Cricket Club, Order of the Burning Bush, Presbyterian Girls’
Association, Young Women’s Bible Class, Boy Scouts, Young
People’s Recreation Club, Mission Band, Girl Guides and other
groups.
Ihe records also abound in reference to assistance given to
worthy causes, e.g., the Kildonan Home, the Babies’ Home. St.
Andrew’s Hospital (which was in the course of building,) the
Korean Mission and the A.I.M. We find references to the
formation, of a Youth Council (to co-ordinate youth activities,)
to Youth Rallies, and to the young people taking part in the
services, of the Sanctuar^r.
It is strange, however, that with great numbers of young
people associated with the Congregation, and intense activity
it is this time that we first find in the Minutes of the 5
Kirk Session a reference to a shortage of teachers in the
.Sunday School - a condition which became chronic in later years.
In 1931 the Kirk Session had the pleasure of recommending
acceptance of the appointment of Mr. (now Reverend) Norman
Faichney for admission as a candidate for the Ministry. They
also approved the formation of a local Branch of the Girls’
Order of the Covenant.
Towards the^ end of 1931 Professor J. T. Warren, who had
the office of organist from 191$ and had given splendid
service as organist and choirmaster, presented his resignation
on account ol ill-health. He was succeeded in the office by


Mr. E. T. Prentice who filled the position until 1°36. Mr.
Warren died in 1936.
This also was a period of great doings abroad and at home.
The League of Nations and the World Disarmament Conferences, as
well as the Economic Depression in which the country was
plunged, were much in the minds of Minister and Congregation
and influenced much of the preaching and teaching and general
activity. It was also a period when some of our members,
(notably Messrs. J. T, Gray, S. Thorburn and J. Crow) took a
prominent part in municipal politics.
In September 1932 the Congregation was privileged to have
as their guest speaker, Rev. A. Wylie Blue oi Belfast, Ireland,
who’ had been preacher at Scots’ Church, Sydney, and on his way
home called to see Rev. James Walker, his old friend and fellow
student. Another notable visitor was Rev. J. Noble Mackenzie
of Korea.
The year 1932 also saw the election of Messrs. A. T. Jones
and A. H. Paton to the Session and the formation of a Men’s
Society.
The economic depression had severely affected church life
generally and the Presbyterian Elders’ Association was active
in pressing for a ’’Forward Movement” to counteract the adverse
influences. Our Session decided to hold a Spiritual Mission
and this was conducted by Rev. D, W. Smith of Prahran (who had
conducted the 192? Mission.) Much good resulted.
Since music was introduced into the Services (as recorded in
the History of the first Fifty Years) it has come to play a
large part in the worship and a choir has for many years been a
feature of St. Andrew’s. Mr. P. W. Hutchinson conducted the
choir from 1933 to 193$ with great success.
During 1933 it was found that the existing arrangement of
Choir Stalls was.too cramped to be fully effective and steps
were taken to alleviate the situation to some extent by bring-
ing the front of the stalls forward into the body of the Church.
This was also the year of the 30th Anniversary of the Church
when a full week of celebration was held and many folk formerly
connected with the church attended one or more functions.
Descendants of the Rev. William Henderson and Rev. John Clark
were present forming a link with the past. During this
celebration the matter of completing the Tower at the front of
the Church (left uncompleted at the time of erection) was
mooted. A fund was opened and the Tower was erected to its
present height the following year at a cost of £650 approximate-
ly, and dedicated and opened on ?th July, 1934, by Rev. John
Sinclair, assisted by Rev. James Walker. Mr. T, T. Law
presented the brass tablet which marks the dedication of the
Tower.
1934 was the year of the Centenary of the Settlement of
Victoria and was celebrated in Williamstown by a visit from Rev.
Norman S. Miller of Brisbane, acting for Rev. Professor


Macgregor of Trinity Coliege, Glasgow, who was unfortunately
unable to attend as had been arranged. There was also a
demonstration by Combined Sunday Schools in the Town Hall*
Mr. J. W. Smith had been Clerk of the Kirk Session since
April 1918 when he superseded Mr. W. E. Love. In November 1935
Mr. Smith was granted leave of absence on account of ill-health.
It was hoped that he might be able to resume after a period of
rest, but unhappily that was not the case and in March 1937, Mr,
Smith was compelled to tender his resignation which was
accepted with regret, and Mr. A. H. Paton, the acting oession
Clerk, was appointed in his place. Mr. Smith continued as an
active member of Session for five more years but
was forced to live in retirement for the remainder of his liie.
He died in 1950,
On 12th July, 1936, a beautiful window in stained glass
entitled "The Charity of Dorcas" was dedicated to the Glory of
God and the memory of Miss Catherine Paxton. The window was
presented by surviving members of the Paxton family.
The Church was further beautified by the laying of carpet
runners in the aisles, replacing the coir matting which hither-
to had served. The cost was £75•
Another interesting note from the year 1936 was an announce-
ment that one of our lads, Rev. Graham Nathan, had been
appointed to the Charge of Orbost.
Mr. E. T. Prentice resigned the office of organist after
having acted for 4 years, "in conjunction with Mr. Hutchinson,
choir master, he had been responsible for the rendering of much-
fine music in connection with the services of the Sanctuary.
He was succeeded by Mr. George Wong who held the position until
1941.
A further election of members of the Kirk Session was con-
ducted in 1937 when Messrs. E. A. Anderson, C. M.^ Lonsdale and
A. A. Stewart were elected and duly ordained and inducted. In
the same year Mr. Anderson superseded Mr. J. Faichney as Super-
intendent* of the Sunday School, Mr. Faichney having been
compelled for health reasons to relinquish the position. Mr.
Faichney however resumed for some time at a later stage and
carried on the work until 1945.
The year 1937 was a tragic year for many folk. It saw a
very severe epidemic of infantile paralysis necessitating the
closing of part of the Sunday School for several months.
St. Andrew 1 s families did not entirely escape.
It was also the year of the Centenary of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria/ On l?th October 1937 the services were con-
ducted bv Rev. T. Gray Robertson, 8.A.,8.D., of Elsternwick and
by Rev. Doctor Roderick Macleod from the Church of Scotland.
Our people were associated with other Centenary Celebrations,
particularly members of the Choir who joined in forming the
great Centenary Choir which is still operating under the name
of the Presbyterian Oratorio Society. On 2Gth November of that


year we were favoured by a visit by Rev• Yaksin Lee, an
ordained Minister of the Korean Presbyterian Church visiting
Melbourne for the Centenary Celebrations. The writer well
remembers Mr. Lee’s impassioned plea that the Church of
Victoria, having so far sponsored the Church of Korea, would
not fail to continue its support.
During this year the question of installing heating in the
Church was raised and an electrical heating system was
installed early in 1935, at a cost of £124.
The year also saw the ordination of Rev. N. Faichney as a
Minister of the Church.
Mr. j, M. Scott, Senior, who had acted as representative
Elder to Presbytery and General Assembly for 2$ years, found
himself unable to continue because of advancing years, and he
was succeeded in the office by Mr. J, Faichney.
The year 1939 saw the outbreak of World War II and this
tremendous upheaval clouds and overshadows all activities
during the next six years although it was some time before any
severe impact on our congregation was felt. Activities went on
for some time as usual, but who of those present will forget,
while life lasts, the service held in the church to mourn the
fall of France early in 1940!
On 12th November a further stained glass window was unveiled
in the church. This was the gift of Mr. and Mrs. T, Henderson
in memory of their parents who, in an earlier generation, were
members of many years’ standing.
A depressing note was struck when the Young Men’s Fellowship
were approached with the request that they assist in filling
vacancies in the Sunday School staff. The reply was that it
was the opinion of members that teachers should be selected
from those of more mature years.
In 1941 Mr. L. Hunter succeeded Mr. Wong as organist and the
musical side continued as of the same high standard which had
been set by his predecessors.
It is noted that in October 1941 Miss N. Paxton retired from
the Directorship of the Kindergarten Department, a position
which she had held for many years. This calls to mind all
associated with the establishment of the Kindergarten and the
Cradle Roll and the faithful work carried on for many years by
all those associated with these Departments.
Early in 1942 the present system of Quarterly Communion
Services replaced the earlier system of three celebrations a
year. A reflex of the impact of the War on the nation was
observed in the temporary change in the time of the Evening
Service from 7 p.m. to 4.15 p.m. on account of the lighting
restrictions. The change was however unsatisfactory and lasted
two weeks only. Thereafter our people came to worship not-
withstanding the blackout.


During 1943 the young people again raised the issue of
dancing in the church halls. The question was
considered by the Session, but it was felt that the earlier
decision not to allow dancing should be adhered to.
There was now another change of organist. Mr. L. Hunter
left the district after giving some years of fine service not
only as Organist but also as a leader amongst the He
was succeeded after an interval by Miss S. Plant, who still
fills the position most competently. She was assisted by Mr.
J. D. McArthur as Conductor until 1945, and afterwards by Mr.
R. M. Gamley. Good choral and congregational singing and
special musical services, including the performances of the
well-loved Cantatas "Olivet to Calvary" and "The Crucifixion,"
have been special features of our church experience,
1943 also saw meetings held in Williamstown amongst some of
the Protestant bodies to discuss Church Union. Our congregation
was well represented and a Combined Church Council was formed.
Some combined services were held - including 8 a.m, Men’s
Communions held principally in the North Williamstown Presby-
terian Church,
The end of 1943 saw the close of Mr, Walker’s ministry in
Williamstown, after a term of 15 years active labour in the
cause of our Lord and Master, Advancing years and Mrs.
Walker’s frail health compelled him to tender his resignation.
He was given a farewell social and the congregation parted with
him with very sincere regret. Mr. Walker continued to serve
the Church of Victoria as visiting preacher to vacant charges
for a number of years after his retirement from the active
ministry,
Rev. R. P. Simons, the Minister of the Benalla Charge,
succeeded Mr. Walker at Williamstown after a short vacancy, he
being inducted in July 1944. He carried on the work faithfully
for the next eight years. One of the first tasks was to
strengthen the ranks of the Kirk Session which had been
depleted by death, infirmity and removal to other districts.
Early in 1945 six new Elders, namely, Messrs. A. Barrett, A.
Campbell, J. M. Elliott, J. D. McArthur, A, J. McConville and
D. H, Macleod, were ordained and inducted.
Owing to the War some of the activities of the church folk
had been allowed to lapse. Most of the young men had served
valiantly in Army, Navy and Air Force; the young women in the
Auxiliary Services, and older men in the Home Guard Civil
Defence, or in administrative positions in the Services.
Fifteen of our lads paid the Supreme Sacrifice, others endured
privations as prisoners of war, and others again had narrow
escapes and plenty of adventure. However, with the end of the
war in Europe, we find them trickling back and particularly
V.P. Day, which was celebrated with thanksgiving and
great rejoicing. was still, however, plenty for the
congregation to do with following up the returned personnel and
in arranging for packing and despatching food parcels for


suffering Britain. A Brass Tablet to the memory of The Fallen
was unveiled in the Church in October 1949.
For some years past the condition of the church property had
caused considerable concern. As early as 1936 the Board had
been considering the state of the Manse, and in 1939 the upper
balcony was removed because of its dangerous condition. Then
some years later trouble was experienced with some of the
arches - some of the masonry giving way - and repair was
necessary there. Just before Mr, Simons* arrival £250 was
spent on repairs and alterations. Prior to Mr. Walker T s retire-
ment the congregation adopted a scheme of weekly giving in
order to create a Fund for Repair of other buildings on the
property, and when this Fund closed in 1946, after 3 years *
activity, £&00 had been raised and the opportunity was taken to
repair and recondition the whole of the exterior of the wooden
buildings.
Further revival after the war followed in 1946 when Tennis
Club, Girls* Fellowship and Men*s Society were reformed, a
Boys f Club was functioning and a Junior Choir established in
connection with the Sunday School. The same year also saw
action taken in connection with the Church*s Extension and
Development Scheme. A Committee was formed to supervise the
contacting of all Presbyterians in our Parish - many of whom
had, over the years, lost contact with the Church - in an
endeavour to re-establish their Church connection. This
Committee worked steadily for a number of years but with only
moderate success.
A sign of the change in the times is seen in the fact that
in 1947 the Session were finally persuaded to lift the ban on
dancing in the Church property and periodical dances became and
are now a regular feature under Session Supervision and are
thoroughly enjoyed by the participants.
About this time further attention to Church property became
necessary. The organ which had been installed in Issl was show-
ing signs of old age in its action although speaking as tune-
fully as ever, and a Fund was opened to provide for its
ultimate repair. This Fund - called the **D. H. Murray Organ
Fund" in recognition of the long connection of Mr. D, H. Murray
with the church, the choir and the organ - is slowly accumulat-
ing and it is hoped that replacement of the action may ultimate-
ly be possible. Also the residence occupied by the Church
Officer became very unsound and not worth repairing. Arrange-
ments were therefore made for the erection of a new cottage.
This was authorised by the Congregation in June 1947, commenced
in August 1945, and finished early in 1950, at a cost of £1,346.
The cost would have been much greater if it had not been for
the tremendous amount of voluntary work contributed by active
members of the Congregation to whom hearty thanks is due.
It is here desired to recall the conclusion in 194$ of 42
years faithful service on the part of Mr. George Linklater as


Manager, Secretary to the Board and Secretary of the Duplex
Envelope System. Failing health compelled his retirement
the regret of the whole congregation •
The"same year saw the conclusion of the service of Mr. J.
Faichney as representative of the Session in the
Melbourne West*: He succeeded the late Mr J. 1«. .
and filled the position for ton years. He was sucoteoea oyiu .
A J. McConville as representative to the Presbytery, but Mr.
Faichney agreed to continue temporarily as representative to
the Assembly.
TVip> following- vear 1°49 records the deaths within a few .
tta. Bro„ and j.«.
Walker, after years of retirement during which they served toe
Church as relieving preachers so long as they were abl .
Another development was the decision of the Session to
authorise the occasional screening of religious films on Sunday
evenings. Several such films have been screened in the Church
in the intervening years.
In June I°so the Session Clerk, Mr. A. Paton, found it
necessary to'tender his resignation after 15 years devoted
service 7 He was succeeded in the office by the present Clerk,
Mr. D. H, Macleod.
Another change in active service occurred the following year
when death put an end to the long period of service of Mrs. J.
G. Hansen as Cradle Roll Supervisor. She undertook this work
in the days of the First World War and carried it on oontinu
ously until 1951. In her later years she was assisted by Miss
H. Cameron who has now taken over the task completely.
Reverend R. P. Simons carried on his ministry until
September 1952 when he tendered his resignation in order to
accept a Call to the Murchison Charge. The Session and
Congregation accepted the resignation with regret.
The most prominent topic during the last year or so was the
question of the Manse. For some time trouble had been
experienced with penetration of water from roof and walls an
extensive rehabilitation became necessary. The Gongregation
was sharply divided on the ouestion of whether to disposee of
the building or renovate it and some warmth entered into tn
discussions. Finally a decision to renovate the property ; was
adopted and is being carried into effect while this resume is
being compiled.
Before closing this history it may be desirable to record
those who have served the Church as members of Board of
Management in the last twenty years. In 1533 the Board con-
sisted of Messrs. 0. Beattie, J. Lang, J. C. Lang, J. T * Gray,
R. McKinley, J. M. Scott, Jnr., Capt. Philip, Capt. A. Campbell,
Messrs. C. M. Lonsdale, D. H. Macleod, Andrew Stewart and J.R.
Faichney. In 193 L Mr. A. A. Stewart was appointed and the next
year Sergeant W. Spottiswoode, Messrs. J. Tennant and A.
Hutchinson were added. In 1937 Messrs. L. C. Caithness, H. S.


Macleod and W. Nankervis were added to fill various vacancies.
Messrs. 0. Wallace and A. Inglis were appointed in 1939, Messrs,
J. M. Elliott and A. Sinclair in 1941 and in 1943 Mr. G.
Linklater, who had previously served a long time as Board
member and Secretary of the Board, was re-appointed. Messrs,
Ron Anderson and A. McConville took seats in 1944. The follow-
ing year (1944) was a land mark in the history for ladies
appeared on the Board for the first time, Misses Young, Mumford,
Melrose and McGregor being elected in addition to Mr. McKey,
New members in 1946 were Messrs. F. R. Salt, R. Templeton, A.
Grant and J, Thomas. The following year Messrs, L, Baglin and
G. Wain and Miss P. Hall were elected and in 194# Miss J.
Ferguson took a seat. 1949 saw the election of Messrs. C.
Homewood, G. McConville and W. H. Owens. Mr. N. Macleod was a
new member in 1950 and in 1953 Messrs. H. Willian and F. L.
Conradi were made members, Mr. G, Linklater was Secretary to
the Board until early 1925, followed by Mr. J. T. Gray until
1930, Mr. 0. Beattie until 1933, and Mr. C. M. Lonsdale until
1942, when the present Secretary, Mr. A. J. McConville, took
office. Mr. A. T, Jones was Treasurer until 1932, and he was
succeeded by Mr. D. H. Macleod (1932-1942), J. M. Elliott (1942-
1946) and F, R. Salt (1946 until the present time.)
In closing this history of the past thirtv years which, when
read in conjunction with the earlier histories, records a full
100 years of Christian activity in Williamstown, it is perhaps
desirable to say that it is a matter of regret that a History
should appear to be merely a narration, more or less dis-
jointed, of particular events of greater or lesser significance.
It would be much more desirable that it should be able to
record Spiritual Progress and Growth in Grace. But who can
record, beyond its outward manifestations, a thing which is
principally of the mind and of the spirit. It is also
uniortunate that considerations of time and space preclude us
from entering upon a discussion of the histories of organisa-
tions connected with the church which have long ana honourable
histories of their own. P.W.M.U., Dorcas Society, Sunday
School and Literary Society are examples.
With these considerations in mind, let this account close
with two passages transcribed from earlier documents. The
first is from the "Monthly Record” of March 1946, written on
the occasion of the 93rd Anniversary - "The Williamstown
Congregation has a long and honourable history. Many splendid
men and women have given faithful,and distinguished service in
association with St, Andrew T s Church and its organisation,
while many young men and women, trained and led into the
service of the Master here, have later removed to other parts
to use their talents for the Master there. The backward look
will stir up sacred memories and call forth feelings of thank-
fulness for all that God has done here for His people, through
the agency of His Church."


The second is taken from the History of the first Seventy
Years of the Congregation - T, lf we were to begin to particular-
ise, mentioning the names of all who have done notable service
in carrying on the work of the Church, the list would indeed be
a long one. Right thankful are we that the Congregation has
never lacked hearty and efficient workers and that many such
are with us to-day. Remembering the goodness of God to us in
the past, we take courage to go forward, remembering that our
fathers T God is the God'of their children, and that He will
never fail those who put their trust in Him.”


