

Australsian White Cross League.
PATRONS
' i M " loellciiuy f he flfmernor Utmerai,
aniulg of Linlitbg'Q’iV.
" '4oe the Archbishop cf Sydney.
1 Bight' Ituvarsiid Modem tor of Prefthyinrinn Ohproh of
Australia.
Tho Pragaiime of f'liy 4'U8tralaajfiiU MCiotKoolist OomAreae®,
OBJECTS,
PBO'MQriH0-
I.- Purity among Man and Bays.
II. ~A Chlratroas ttespsct for Womaohooa.
Ill,—Th.e Preservation of ska Young from Pontftinitiatton.
tV,—A Higher Tons af Public Opinion,
Tin Society empfessliys okltMilogy Wn<1l»l tm Siitis-
ileus; If tloei not Impoee new ooei.
rue AHITI CROSS oeyOATlONS,"
! ’ i t\ vK all girls ami women witi ,,■* , 1
, ia 'f » t .pcouect tiiejn f>rom wy ,
ti -t* iLuo
? r lUMrVOU!* CO putt doWB &M •io'dei c* ' * n
>j .iveo'em
i 'i o lui tile law of purfty &e c< s v n , i
\ig r a,o uii women,
i J.» ° itl’v an? Ca spne&d- theae? pnn#iples
\r' or anik na> and co i>rj ! and &alp
1 ofehera
5, In tap posBifele means co fulfil &ha
' Kt-ep ISfiTraESpP $in?e* '*


PURITY SERI Hi No. IV.
THE TRAINING
OF
CHILDREN IN PURITY
A Booklet for Parents
BY
RICHARD ARTHUR, M.A., M.D.
Price: One Penny.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. PROPY., LTD.,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane,
and London.




THE
TRAINING OF CHILDREN
IN PURITY
All parents worthy of the name recognise
that they have a great responsibility in their
children. On the parents rest, to a great
extent, not only the physical well-being and
happiness of their offspring, but also their
moral welfare. The moral training of children
cannot be left to the day or Sunday •school
teacher, but must be carried out first and fore-
most in the home.
Of course there are many parents who appear
to believe that their responsibility ends with
the care of their children’s bodies —with their
proper feeding and blothing. ■ This being done,
they think they have'fulfilled their whole duty,
and simply allow the children to grow up
without attempting in ahjr way to train them,
and this results in life-long injury to the


children. On the other hand, all thoughtful
and conscientious persons recognise that the
moulding of their children’s characters lies to a
great extent in their hands. They therefore
strive to inculcate in them the virtues of
truthfulness, honesty, obedience, and reverence,
and they find that, to attain this, years of
patient watchfulness and teaching are needed.
All who have had to deal with the young,
would reject the idea that children naturally
possess these desirable qualities, and that there-
fore there is no necessity for moral training and
discipline.
Very strangely, however, there is one ex-
ception made by even the wisest of parents in
this rule for the training of children. There is
one virtue—the virtue of Purity, or the right
principles regarding all the relations connected
with the reproduction of life—which is almost
entirely ignored in the moral education of
children. It seems as if parents tacitly assumed
that this virtue was innate in their children,
and so the strenuous instruction and warning
by which the other virtues are fostered were
uncalled for in this case. But a moment’s
thought will show that purity is as much a
matter of training and education as any other
moral quality, and that the neglect of such
training leads inevitably to the most serious
evils.


In this booklet an attempt will be made to
prove that the foolish and unwarranted re-
ticence on the part of parents in connection
with all matters relating to sex is the cause of
much of the impurity both of childhood and
of adult life, and also to point out how
children may be trained in purity as they are
now in honesty and obedience.
Let us, then, examine the facts we have to
deal with. First of all, we know that God has
ordained a certain way by which life, both in
mankind and in the higher animals, isreproduoed.
To a man and a woman has been given the
mysterious power of fashioning another being,
with all its capacities for good and evil, for
enjoyment and suffering.
It is difficult to understand why this wonder-
ful God given power should be regarded so
often with a feeling akin to shame, but the fact
remains that this is the case; and sUoh a
feeling leads to a policy of concealment and
evasion, from which spring so many of the evils of
impurity. Enough emphasis cannot be laid on
this point, for the cause of impurity in children
and young people is continually b' ing sought
for anywhere but in the negligence and
cowardice of the parents. It is true it may be
urged that it has always been the custom, even
among the most conscientious, to keep this
knowledge from children as long as possible


And also that parents would find it extremely
difficult to speak upon these matters.
One may grant that this speaking is difficult,
but it is certainly not impossible. Unfortunately,
deceit is the easier way, and therefore it is
generally followed without counting the cost.
To prove this, let the mother reading this
booklet reply to the question : “ What answer
have you given, or do you intend to give,
when you are asked by your seven or eight-year-
old boy, ‘ Where do little babies come from 1 ' ”
Unless you are an exceptional mother, I fear,
the answer has been, or will be, “ Oh, the doctor
brings them in his bag," or “An angel gives
them as a present.” And the mother con-
gratulates herself that in this way she has put
ofi what she calls an awkward question. But a
little thought will show that there could not be
a more foolish or harmful answer. The child is
struck by the fact o£ a new arrival in the world,
and comes most naturally to his mother,
seeking to satisfy what is quite a legitimate
curiosity.
It would point to a strange blindness and
lack of observation in the young mind if it did
not notice this strange and unusual event. But
all the satisfaction the child usually gets is one
of the answers I have quoted ; or he is told
impatiently to go away, as he is not old enough
to understand these things.


Now, is the end gained sufficient to justify
this deliberate falsehood or evasion 1 There are
generally two results. The child is silenced for
a time; but he also learns that there is some-
thing shameful and secret about the whole
matter, and his natural curiosity is turned into
a morbid one. And let us not deceive ourselves
by thinking that he will find any difficulty in
acquiring knowledge, or that it is possible to
maintain the ignorance which we believe to be
so desirable. Repulsed by his mother, it
follows inevitably that the child is instructed in
these matters by some school companion, or by
a servant, neither of whom have any scruples
about his so-called “ innocence,” and who
impart the knowledge to him in a prurient and
objectionable manner. In fact, the seeds of an
impure way of regarding these sex matters are
sown in the child’s mind, and this often persists
all through life,
If the opportunity afforded by the child’s
curiosity is neglected at the time it may never
come again. Afterwards, if the mother feels
called upon to speak it will probably be too late.
If the child ceases entirely from questioning, it
does not prove that his mind is not occupied by
these matters. In reality, it points rather to
the fact that he is on the way to knowledge,
gathering it here and there in an imperfect and
prurient form, and his silence only shows that


an insuperable barrier is being raised between
him and his mother, and that she is the last
person from whom he will seek information in
the future
And so the confidence which ought to exist
between mother and child on so important a
subject is lost for ever.
Let us ask ourselves : “Is there not a better
way than this ? Oannot the child be told the
truth, and nothing but the truth, in this as in
other matters 1 ”
Most assuredly he can. It must be looked
upon as the mother’s most binding duty and
precious privilege to teach her child these
important and solemn laws of our being. And
no one else can undertake the responsibility.
As this question about the origin of life will
come almost inevitably to every mother who
has children, she must prepare herself to meet
it, and be ready to state without hesitation,
and in all seriousness and simplicity, the
wonderful bond that exists between mother and
child. It will be well to make the matter a
personal one, for this brings it home more
forcibly to the child.
Some writers on this subject suggest that the
wisest way to approach it is by giving children
instruction in the reproductive processes in
plants. They think that if these processes in
flowers are pointed out the way is thereby


paved to the understanding of the similar
process in the human race. Others, again,
would use the familiar domestic incident of
the advent of chickens or kittens as an object
lesson, hoping . that the child will arrive by
analogy at the explanation of the mystery of
its own being.
I am inclined to think, however, that this
indirect method of instruction is needless, and
may fail to achieve its object, and to believe
that the best thing to do is for the mother to
explain plainly and frankly to the child the
bond which exists between them. He should
be told that, since he is old enough, it is his
right to know the truth; but that only between
him and his mother should there be conversation
about these things.
Then the mother should go on to explain the
sacred and tender relationship between them—
how at one time his life was enclosed in hers,
and he was nourished and developed by her
life's blood, and how at last, when all was
prepared that he could live his own life, he
came into the world at the cost of much
'suffering and danger to his mother.
This is all that need be told; but the mother
should avail herself of the opportunity to give
urgent warning against discussing this subject
with anyone but herself. The child should be
shown that this matter is too serious and holy


to be talked about flippantly and jestingly, and
that he must discourage any attempts his
companions might make to speak about it.
This solution of the difficulty is so simple and
natural that it is almost impossible to realise
why mothers have had recourse to falsehood
and evasion when so much was to be gained by
telling the truth. The gain consists in the
child learning to think about this subject in a
natural and pure, instead of a prurient,
manner, and, once his curiosity is satisfied, in
ceasing to think or speak much about it at all.
And, most important of all, the mother has
gained the child’s confidence, and he will
come to her hereafter in difficulties of a similar
nature.
There need be no fear that such teaching will
cause impure thoughts in the child’s mind. On
the contrary, it will probably be found that the
knowledge of this wonderful and intimate
relationship will produce in the child a feeling
of love and reverence for his mother which
hardly anything else could create.
On this foundation of right knowledge, and
on this only, is it possible to rear in the future
a life of purity in thought and conduct. And
let no mother delude herself by thinking that
general religious .and scriptural teaching will
be sufficient to keep the child from falling into
impure habits of thought and acta, I have


known many instances where implicit reliance
on this teaching has resulted in very lamentable
consequences.
We have to recognise clearly that instruction
must come first and then moral teaching. It
cannot be emphasised too strongly that, though
it may be possible to deceive the child for the
moment, the truth, in a garbled and impure
form, will come to him sooner or later, and with
it the knowledge that he has been deceived.
Consider gravely how this must shake to their
depth the child’s confidence and faith in his
mother. This, to my mind, is a calamity
altogether beyond remedy.
It is to be hoped that all mothers will ponder
over these things, and prepare themselves for
the great responsibility thrown upon them.
There are some other matters connected with
the training of children at this period of their
lives which all mothers must give earnest heed
to. These matters are dealt with so excellently
by Miss Ellice Hopkins in the booklet “ On the
Early Training of Girls and Boys '' that I take
the liberty of quoting largely from it.
This booklet is addressed chiefly to women of
the working class, but it contains advice suitable
for mothers in every rank of society.
Miss Hopkins jays : “ I wish to help women
to meet some of their difficulties in bringing up
their children in modesty and decency and, self


respect, reverencing their body as the temple of
the Holy Ghost. I fear that there is a great
deal more filthy, indecent play among our girls
and boys than we have any idea of, and that a
great many children do not know that it is
wrong. I believe it chiefly springs from boys
"and girls being herded together at night; and
if ever you catch a boy of yours being rude to a
girl, or acting in any way indecently to her, or
using nasty words, administer a sharp whipping
at once. Never pass it over, as you care for
your child’s soul.”
Miss Hopkins emphasises the following
points:—
“ I.—Extreme care about sleeping arrange-
ments That girls and boys should not
sleep in the same room, or girls in any
room with men,
“ll.—Personal decency; That girls and
boys should not be bathed before one
another j and that when girls got old
enough to manage the buttons and
strings, they should be put into under-
garments that button or tie up about the
waist.
“lll.—That the children be taught to obey
implicitly.


"IV,—That the boys should be brought up
to take care of the girls, and to «knock
under ’ to them, instead of the reverse,
being taught the true use of strength,
which is to serve and protect the weak,
not to oppress and overmaster them,”
Want of space forbids me to quote more, but
I would urge every mother to obtain a copy of
this invaluable booklet.
I have dwelt at length on what is necessary
for the training of the young for the reason that
I believe right instruction to be the basis of the
virtue of purity, and that if it is neglected all
subsequent efforts will be greatly handicapped.
It now remains to consider what needs to be
done for the older boy and girl. We must
realise that with the age of puberty an entirely
new stage of life begins, and with it arise new
needs and new dangers.
But while the teaching has to be the same at
the earlier age for both sexes, now the boys and
girls require to be dealt with on different lines;
and so it will be well to discuss these
separately.
We may begin with the question of the
training of boys, as they are more exposed to
dangers and temptations than their sisters are.
Firstly, then, the instruction and warning of
the school-boy may be carried out by either the


father or the mother, If the mother has been
frank and honest with the boy when younger,
she will have no difficulty in speaking further
on these matters.
The forma of impurity to which the school-
boy is commonly exposed are two—the evils of
indecent talk tyrd of self-abuse.
The former evil can be explained as the
needless and prurient conversation about
subjects which, if spoken of at all, should be
treated with seriousness and reverence.
This conversation is very common in schools,
for the reason, I have above stated, that it is
generally only from older companions that boys
learn of the facts regarding the reproduction of
life, and lads of a prurient bent of mind often
take pleasure in imparting disgusting infor-
mation to those younger than themselves. In
this matter to be forewarned is to be forearmed.
Before the boy goes to school he should' be
fortified against this contamination. Show him
how degrading it is, and get him to promise
neither to defile his lips with this foulness, nor
to listen to any talk on the subject, about
which his mother has taught him all ho needs
to know. Once he sees the wrongfulnesa and
degradation of unclean speech he will shrink
from it, and hatred of it will become a life-long
habit.


Of the second evil—that of self-ahuse—it is
not necessary to say much. Still, all parents
must be alive to the possibility of its occurrence,
and must maintain a vigilant watchfulness.
Should a young child display any tendency to
objectionable habits the wisest plan is to con-
sult a doctor, as this vice in the young is
sometimes brought about by the existence of
some local irritation. In some cases in boys
the operation of circumcision is needed to set
matters right.
When the boy first goes to a public school
either the father or the mother should speak
very plainly to him, and warn him of the
disastrous effects of this practice. All who
have means of knowing how widely-spread this
vice is in our schools, urge this upon parents as
the only right course, for if it is neglected it
may mean a ruined life to their son and endless
remorse to themselves. There is no weight in
the argument that such a course may draw the
boy’s attention to a matter he might otherwise
have been totally ignorant of. My observation
convinces me that boys usually fall into this
vice in perfect ignorance of its injurious results,
and that they abandon it immediately they
learn, by some means or other, the barm they
are doing to their minds and bodies.
If this is the case, I cannot believe that boys
who have been warned beforehand, and are


filled with a wholesome fear of such a vice, will
ever be tempted to it.
On the other hand, we can never be certain
that a boy, however carefully he may be watched
over, will not be initiated into this practice by
some school companion, and do himself much
injury before he discovers the fact. I am
afraid that this argument is used mostly as a
cloak for the foolish reluctance of the parent to
address the boy on the subject.
When the lad leaves school, and goes out
into the world, further advice and warning are
needed. The special temptation of youth—the
temptation to fornication—will beset him on
every side, and it is cruel to allow him to face
this alluring peril without having been pre-
pared for it.
It is necessary to realise that at puberty there
comes a new and wonderful physical change—•
the de'velopment of the sex instinct—and this
instinct becomes stronger and stronger every
year till manhood is attained.
This sex instinct, which seeks blindly and
impetuously its gratification, needs the most
careful guidance and strenuous restraint if it is
not to urge its possessor to physical and moral
disaster. Only by definite knowledge of the
physiological laws relating to sex, and of the
evils that follow their violation, can the lad


entering life be properly equipped for the battle
before him.
To the lad becoming conscious of now and
strange emotions within him, it must be ex-
plained what they signify, He should be told
that the instinct is a natural one, just as hunger
and thirst are, but that the precocious exercise
of it is ruinous to the body, and that its grati-
fication, even in later life, except under certain
conditions, is a social and moral offence. Let
him understand clearly that all medical
authorities agree that nothing but perfect
health of both body and mind comes from
unbroken chastity.
On the other hand, he should learn plainly
that there are loathsome diseases resulting
from impurity, the acquisition of which may
blast completely the whole of his future life. It
is simply criminal to let any lad run this awful
risk without a single word being said to him
about it.
Take the case of a young lad who goes from
home to follow some calling in a large city. He
may have been brought up amid Christian
influences, and his parents hope that these will
be sufficient to safeguard him against all
temptations. 'The furthest extent of any
warning against impurity he receives, is to
be told never to do anything he would be
ashamed for his parents to know, He becomes


his own master, and can spend his spare time
as he chooses. He finds himself surrounded in
his office or warehouse by lads and men whose
language and acts are impure, and who impress
upon him that this is a mark of manliness.
They tell him it is necessary for his health to
indulge in sin, and they offer to make the way
easy for him. Add to this the instinct within
him clamouring for satisfaction, and the
temptations of the streets by night, and it will
be a miracle if such lad be kept from falling.
And, if he does go astray, he may on the first
occasion acquire foul disease which vvi I lurk in
his system till he dies, and bring suffering and
misery not only on himself, but on his future
wife and children.
In order, then, for the lad to be guarded
against these possibilities of moral downfall and
physical disaster, it is necessary that he should
receive ins*ruction and warning in a form which
he cannot possibly fail to understand.
The father is the proper person to undertake
this duty, as it falls to the mother to deal with
the younger children. He must not only
point out the dangers which impurity entails,
but must tell his son how men, through want
of self-restraint, bring life-long injury and
shame on women, and in doing this lose all
their true manliness and nobility of character.
He must show him how cowardly and degrading


to manhood this sin is, for the woman, who is
the weaker, has to bear all the consequences.
Lot the lad realise that, instead of insulting or
injuring women, he is called upon to be their
guardian and protector against all wrong—not
only the wrong which they might suffer from
other men, but that also which he himself
might be temped to inflict upon them.
And let him be asked to take the beautiful
“ White Cross ” pledge, and enrol himself
among the chivalry of the nineteenth century-
the knights who shrink from nothing more than
from the cowardice of impurity.
The lad who goes out into the world de-
termined, with God’s help, to carry out the
‘ White Cross " principles, will develop into a
pure and noble-minded man, from whom every
woman, however unfortunate or degraded, shall
receive courtesy and reverend treatment.
To thus inspire young men with a high ideal
of purity will do more good than all the rescue
work in the world. This last is a very neces-
sary Christian work, but if the other were done
there would be few women to rescue, for the
man is nearly always the active agent in this
sin, and forces the woman into it unwillingly.
Of course, the exception must be made of those
poor creatures who live by the hire of their
bodies ; but we must remember that they once


were pure, and were probably led astray against
iheir will.
Teach, then, our lads to be pure, and we may
know that we are thus best promoting the
cause of purity.
It may be said in passing that every lad
should be warned against the’ quack doctors
who live by trading on the fears of young
men. These men do a great deal of harm by
their scandalous pamphlets and advertise
ments. Tell the lad that if he requires
to consult a doctor he should go to some
well known and respectable medical man.
I would advise that if any father, however
anxious he might be to do so, should find an
insuperable difficulty in speaking to bis son on
this subject he should obtain one of the
booklets which have been written for the pur-
pose of instructing lads on this very matter,
and place it in bis son’s bands, requesting him
to read it carefully and think it over.*
We come now to the other side of the ques-
tion—the training of girls. Here, again, there
is often the greatest carelessness and want of
thought on the part of mothers, resulting in all
sorts of miserable and disastrous consequences.
('Among others, “ Purity ami Impurity,” a booklet
fur lads of fifteen years and upwards. Price 3d.


Women shrink from talking to their daughters
about sex matters because they think that doing
so would deprive them of what they call their
innocence. They even, in some oases, hesitate
to speak to them about the natural function
which is established at the time of puberty, and
the sudden and unexpected onset of this
function comes to the girl as a great shook, and
often drives her to do things which are pro-
ductive of serious ill-health.
A mother should always warn her daughter
beforehand of the oncoming of this function,
and, while advising her on the subject, should
take the opportunity of giving her some alight
explanation of what it means. She can be told
that it marks the commencement of her life as
a woman, and is therefore perfectly natural,
and need cause her no alarm. She may be told
also that it means that in the future she may
be called on to fulfil the holy and wonderful
duty of motherhood, and that she must keep
her body clean and pure,
A little later the mother must give further
advice and warning. This is especially neces-
sary for girls who are forced to go out into the
world to earn their own livelihood. The young
girls who leave the shelter of their home to
come to a city as domestic servants or shop-
assistants are often exposed to the gravest
temptations and dangers. They may be good


and pare girls, who have been carefully shielded
against any knowledge of the wickedness in the
world. But this very ignorance is what often
leads to their undoing. They either have un-
restrained liberty to do what they like, or they
are under mistresses who take no interest what-
ever in their well-being. Such girls have often
no friends to visit in (heir leisure moments,
and consequently they spend the time walking
about the streets. Now it is unfortunately
true that there are men to be found who are
always on the watch for a means of easily and
safely gratifying their lust whatever may be
the cost to the woman, and if a young, ignorant
girl meet one of these, she is in the greatest
danger. She may fall through very ignorance,
or she may be tempted through vanity, or
saddest of all, through an appeal to her affec-
tions. And then, almost before she has time
to think, she finds herself ruined, deserted,
about, perhaps, to become the mother of an
unwelcome child. This is one of the most
pitiful tragedies of life, and yet it is occurring
every day; in fact, is so common, that it
causes little wonder or indignation. And I
am convinced that it happens often because the
mother has refrained from giving a few words
of warning to her daughter before she left
home.


Women must have impressed upon them
this fact: that if they do not guard their girls
against these dangers, by speaking plainly and
truthfully to them, the responsibility of their
daughters going astray -will rest upon their
shoulders. Let every mother realise how
terrible would be the thought; had I but
spoken a few words, my daughter would now
be happy, respected, looking forward to a joyful
future, while for want of these, she is an
outcast and miserable—an object of scorn to
all who know of her disgrace.
We may protest that it is unchristian to
treat the fallen woman thus, and so it is. But
it is better to prevent the opportunity for this
uncharitable condemnation, than to expend
our time and strength in protesting against it.
Let mothers then put away all false deli-
cacy, and apeak openly to their daughters.
Let them tell them that they must respect
their own bodies, and that they must never
allow anyone to touch them, or in any way to
take liberties with them, since this may lead
to loss of virtue and undeaired motherhood.
Girls who quit the shelter of home, should
also be warned against making the acquaint-
anceship of strangers on the streets, for much
harm often arises from these chance meetings.
On the other hand, we must realise that it
would be useless, and also foolish, to try and


keep the two sexes apart. When a girl leaves
home, the endeavour should be made to intro-
duce her to a few families where she can spend
her evenings in innocent recreation, and meet
with companions of her own and the other sex.
It is certain, too, that this information would
be of the greatest value to a girl when she
entered into the married state. This is a diffi-
cult subject to touch upon, but at least it may
be said that some of the misunderstanding and
unhappiness which arises after marriage would
often be prevented were mothers to help their
daughters with some advice given with all
delicacy and reserve.
There are many other subjects of much
importance, but they cannot be dealt with in a
booklet of this size. My aim has been to draw
the attention of parents to these matters, and
to get them to think seriously over them., Some
may wonder why I have said so little about
religious influences. It is not that I under-
estimate their power, bub that I believe they
need to be reinforced by definite teaching.
And the teaching must come first, and the
application of religion to it afterwards. It is
useless to warn against any particular sin,
unless it is known what the sin is. Let the
sinfulness of wrongdoing be denounced, but
explain first in what the wrong-doing consists,


As a medical man, one has exceptional
opportunities for becoming acquainted ■with the
results of impurity, and can, therefore, speak
with a certain authority. And it is heart-
rending to realise how much of this has been
due, not to inherent vioiousoess or deliberate
choice of wrong-doing, but to sheer helpless
ignorance. I have seen lads and young men
utterly broken down in health, and enfeebled
in mind, from self-abuse. I have seen others—
mere boys some of them—infected with foul
and persistent disease through one lapse into
impurity. I have heard the tales'of young
men who had been kept in a state of despair
for years, and robbed of their hard-earned
wages by quacks, when there was practically
nothing the matter with them. I have come
across girls of 14 or 15 suffering from the
diseases of impurity, or about to become
mothers. And some of these young men have
been earnest Christians themselves, and the
sons of Christian parents. They have included
clergymen’s sons, and clergymen themselves.
I have listened to parents congratulating them-
selves that impurity had never gained a footing
in their household, and yet I knew at the time
that the very reverse was the case. *
And often there has rung in my ears
the pathetic cry, “If I had only known ;’’ “ If
my father or mother had only spoken to me I ”


It is this lament of “ what might have
been ” that has compelled me to write this
booklet.
Surely the parents who read this will realise
the folly and harmfulness of using evasion and
deceit towards children and young people with
regard to sex matters, and the importance of
definite instruction and warning. If they can
be roused to a sense of their responsibility in
these matters, we may hope to see a new gene-
ration trained to hatred of every form of im-
purity, and rejoicing in whatsoever things are
pure and of good report.
Every father and every mother can strive for
this great consummation by fulfilling their
duty in this respect to their children, ensuring
at least that they shall have their faces set
towards a high ideal of Purity.


WiLi-UM Brooks & 00., Ltd.,
ritiNTßiia,
17 OiSTLBKHAQII BTHHBT, SYDNIIY.


White Cross Plublication
a. d.
I. What Is the White Cross League.
Suho-p B'i? r u ■ ■)- I
11. Purity and Imparity - for itids 15
jHjiis . ,o*\ A rtiviir - 0 I
111. The Choice Purity and
Impurity -for men , Ih, Aieii'mr - D 1
IV. The Training-o< Children in Purity
—fur pa route,; l>r Arthu/e ‘ 0 I
V. True Manliness- —for man, J, £ M. 0 1
“• The Power of Womanhood 1 or '
Mothers St Sons,*’ Slhm Napkins I 0
*• The Story of Lite, " ELlim Flophim - 0 0-
k The Vestibule of Cllrl gide,
/■ * ! l, M.Bj/mr, S.A, 0 |
•‘The tin y i errple” J". B.
M </t' 'i » ■ fl |
nroRC<E a company
Prorilatatv, I .tutted.
Melbourne S»»IP<S, -4 del aide lirisHane, and
Lamst


