

Proceeds of the sale of cedar, bricks, &c
122
15
5
Less expenses
77
10
0
£44
5
5
[Rather
45
6
5]
Dr.
Paid Lee, gallery
120
0
0
ST. SAVIOUR'S, GOULBURN.
Bishopthorpe, Goulburn,
26th July 1886.
To Messrs. Monkley, Barber, Conolly, and Hollis.
In closing this correspondence I willingly give
further explanations on some of the poiuts in your
communication of the 21st. But I will confine
myself, as I endeavoured to do before, to a statement
of facts. You will pardon me if I omit to notice
minor suppositions or insinuations.
1. With regard to the appointment of a trustee as
a churchwarden of St. Saviour’s Church, Goulburn,
"for the past ten years continuously,” I can only
repeat the remark that this is a fact. The Bishop’s
act is simply a ministerial one ; the law enacts that
"it shall and may be lawful for the Bishop to
appoint a trustee to serve as a churchwarden.” He
accordingly selects a trustee, makes out his appoint-
ment in writing, sends the document to the gentle-
man selected, and thus completes his task. There
is no room here for any insinuation about a
"private appointment,” which is altogether in-
appropriate.
2. On the subject of the method of inducting an
incumbent, it will suffice to mention that no other
was in vogue in the diocese at the time than that
which was observed in " the Church of St. Saviour’s,
Goulturn,” on the 20th of August 1876, as described
in my previous letter. Most of the incumbents in
the diocese have been inducted in the same
way.
3. The recommendation of a public meeting, over
which I presided in January 1873, that the building,
which it was proposed to erect for a Church of Eng-
land day school and other congregational purposes,
should be used for the accommodation of the congre-
gation of St. Saviour until the Dew cathedral was
ready for occupation, and all similar early recom-
mendations, are of course to be construed in the
light of subsequent events. The primary intention
of using the building for a day school was absolutely
and completely abandoned in 1875, during my ab-
sence, when by legitimate proceedings it was fitted up
as a church. Soon after my return from England
in 1876 I appointed the Incumbent and forbade
the use of the building, which had been set apart
for public worship, for any other object than for
divine service and religious purposes in connection
with the Church of England.
4. My assertion that " the proceeds of the sale of the
old fabric had been expended upon” the church (and
not upon the cathedral) is strictly correct. But au
explanation is required respecting the receipt, to
which I am glad you have drawn my attention. The
trustees sold the building ; and a memorandum, from
a statement drawn up by one of them in 1875, now
lies before me, showing how much they derived from
the sale, and how they appropriated the money :
Or. £ s. d.
Balance due to Bank, 16th December 1875.. 171 16 6
In a printed report of the churchwardens’ accounts,
submitted to the vestry at Easter 1884, and signed
by A. M. Betts, S. H. Belcher, and W. Conolly as
churchwardens, will be found this entry : —"Special
collections St. Saviour’s cathedral, £100.”
But when this sum was forwarded to me in March
1884, it was described by the sender, through a mere
oversight, as a refund of money from the sale of the
old church ; and this description was naturally
copied into my receipt; for I had no personal know-
ledge of the matter. Hence the mistake. The pro-
ceeds of the "sale” therefore (£45 5/5) were as-
suredly expended upon the " Church of St. Saviour”
and not upon the cathedral.
5. If according to your reasoning you can allege that
the supposed expenditure upon the cathedral of the
money realised from the old fabric, is "an argument
in proof of your assertion that the new cathedral is
primarily your parish church,” in the limited sense
for which you plead, then I presume that on the
other side it may be alleged that the actual ex-
penditure of such money upon the other building is
so far an argument in proof of a corresponding
assertion that that building is " primarily your parish
church.”
6. It is well known that at least £30,000
have been expended altogether upon the cathedral.
Of this large amount it is doubtful whether those
who signed the recent memorial contributed in the
aggregate more than £4OO or £5OO. In truth the
building has been erected by the liberality of friends
of the church, in the diocese at large and in the
colony, and even in England. The treasurer of the
building fund uniformly testifies, in complete accord
with my own personal knowledge, that all the money
which he received as treasurer was given for a
cathedral, and not for a mere parochial church.
7. The synod of the diocese, which is legally con-
stituted, and possesses power to make ordinances
which shall be binding upon the members of the
church within the diocese, fully discussed the
question of the true character of the cathedral build-
ing. When " the cathedral ordinance ” was under
consideration in August 1884, a proposition was
submitted to the synod, "that the incumbent of St.
Saviour’s parish for the time being shall have the
right to occupy the pulpit of the said cathedral once
every Sunday,” &c. This was objected to by many
on the ground, among other reasons, that it con-
tradicted a previous clause, and would virtually
deprive the Bishop of his inherent rights in his own
cathedral ; and would confer upon an incumbent
the power (unknown in any cathedral of the Church
of England) of claiming as his right, under all
circumstances, to occupy the pulpit of the cathedral
once every Sunday, whatever other arrangement the
Bishop and the chapter might have deemed desirable
for the good of the church. At the same time
another proposition was before the synod, viz., that
" the incumbent might have the privilege reserved
to him of preaching once a Sunday in the cathedral,”
&c. The president of the synod stated that he
Printed by W. E. Eiley and Co. Limited, Auburn-street, Goulburn.
considered that this private "arrangement, which
the incumbent of St. Saviour’s parish had previously
signed, would be preferable. This was read [see
below, agreement of Ist April 1884] ; and the
President said that he was prepared to sign any
further document which might be considered neces-
sary to carry the agreement into effect.” " The
incumbent declined this proposal, and preferred to
adhere to the clause ” containing the first pro-
position. This rejection by the incumbent of the
the Bishop’s offer involved at the same time the
repudiation of his own signed agreement. Upon
this the synod, having fully heard both sides, pro-
ceeded to vote, and, by a most decisive majority
(39 to 7), rejected the incumbent’s extraordinary
claim. They likewise rejected another motion,
subsequently submitted, that the words in the
cathedral ordinance, " parish church of the city of
Goulburn,” should be held to mean " the parish
church of St. Saviour’s parish.”
The cathedral was thus by an "ordinance” of the
synod, decreed to be and to remain the " Cathedral
Church of Goulburn, and to be used as the parish
church of the city of Goulburn and of the whole
diocese ; ” to have its sittings free (which they arc) ;
and to be governed and managed by the Bishop,
Chapter, and Council. The ordinance also "acknow-
ledged and confirmed the right of the Bishop to
use the Cathedral Church as he may at any time
see fit.”
8 I now close this correspondence by adducing
documents which will serve to give information on
important subjects.
(a.) The Glebe. —Agreement of sth December
1883.
Ail agreement made this fifth day of December one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-three between the Venerable
Alfred Teed Puddicombe of Goulburn licensed clergyman of
the parish of Saint Saviour’s Goulburn of the one part and
Francis Robert Lewis Rossi the Honorable James Chisholm
Andrew Faithfull Gibson Augustine Matthew Betts and
Alexander .Mackellar trustees of Saint Saviour’s Glebe lands
of the other part.
Whereas the said trustees are desirous of letting upon
building leases portions of the said Glebe lands and they have
applied to the said licensed clergyman for his consent to such
leasing in terms of the Act 8 William IY No. 5 And whereas
the said trustees hold upon trust certain moneys paid to them
by the commissioner for railways as compensation for portion
of the said Glebe lands taken for railway purposes Now this
agreement witnesseth as follows: —The said Alfred Teed
Puddicombe as such licensed clergyman as aforesaid hereby
consents to the said trustees entering upon Saint Saviour’s
Glebe lands and making leases of such portions thereof and
upon such terms as they may think fit reserving for the
licensed clergyman of Saint Saviour’s parish for the time being
a one-fifth part of the said glebe in such position as the said
trustees with the approval of the Bishop may deem advisable
The said trustees shall give to the said licensed clergyman in
terms of the said act a bond securing to the clergyman who
shall next be licensed to officiate in the said parish of Saint
Saviour’s and also to the present officiating clergyman the
payment of the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds annually
The said trustees hereby undertake and agree to apply to
parliament for a private act authorising the payment from the
glebe revenues of an additional one hundred and fifty pounds
(making three hundred pounds in all) annually to the clergy-
man who for the time being shall officiate as licensed clergyman
of Saint Saviour’s parish The said Alfred Teed Puddicombe as
such licensed clergyman as aforesaid hereby releases the said
trustees from all claims which he has or may be considered to
have against them up to this date in respect of the annual
income of the said Glebe lands or trust moneys held in con-
nection therewith and all accumulations of interest And it is
now agreed between the said licensed clergyman and the said
trustees that all accumulations of interest shall be added to and
form part of the principal moneys now invested by the said
trustees.
The said Alfred Teed Puddicombe as such licensed clergyman
as aforesaid agrees for himself and his successors (so far as he
can or lawfully may) that he and they shall not nor will at any
time hereafter claim or demand from the said trustees or their
successors any further or additional sum than the sum of three
hundred pounds so to be paid as aforesaid when the arrange-
ment now made receives legislative sanction.
All the said parties hereto undertake to use their best endea-
vours to obtain an act of parliament embodying the above terms
and conditions.
As witness the hands and seals of the said parties.
ALFKED T. PUDDICOMBE. (1.5.)
Signed sealed and delivered by the said Alfred Teed Puddicombe
in the presence of —
W. E. Dwyer Articled Clerk, Goulburn.
F. K. L. ROSSI Captain, (1.5.)
By the said Francis Robert Lewis Rossi in the presence of—
Robert Saunders.
JAMES CHISHOLM (1.5.)
By the said .Tames Chisholm in the presence of —
Thomas Mo Iver.
ANDREW F. GIBSON (1.5.)
By the said Andrew Faithfull Gibson in the presence of—
A. W. Bollen Goulburn
A. M. BETTS (1.5.)
Signed sealed and delivered by the said Augustine Matthew Betts
in the presence of
A. W. Bullen.
ALEX. MACKELLAK. (1.5.)
And by the said Alexander Mackellar in the presence of
A. W. Bullen.
( h .) The Cathedral— Agreement, Ist April 1884.
Ist April 1884.
The Incumbent of St. Saviour’s Parish withdraws his
application and claim to he made Dean of St. Saviour’s Cathe-
dral, Goulburn, on the understanding that the said Incumbent
may have the privilege reserved to him of preaching once a
Sunday in the cathedral and be allowed to perform such surplice
duties within the cathedral as he may be requested so to per-
form by any parishioner or parishioners. If this is conceded by
the Bishop the Incumbent will not oppose the passing of the
Cathedral Bill through parliament.
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.
Signed in the presence of—
A. Mackellar, I. Shepherd, W. C. Harris.
9. It may beremarKed, in connection with theformor
of these papers ( viz., the agreement of the sth
December 1883, signed under seal), that the trustees
some time ago gave a bond, as required by law. By
this, "security was given for payment to the clergy-
men, who shall next be licensed to officiate in such
church, and also to the officiating clergyman if any,
so consenting as aforesaid, of the sum of £l5O
annually,” and the bishop has given "his consent
in writing.” Clergymen, in similar circumstamces
in the Sydney diocese, receive the annual £l5O
stipulated by the act. But, in the case of St.
Saviours’, Goulburn, it was arranged that a special
act of parliament should be applied for, as explained
in the above agreement, to authorise the payment of
an additional sum of £l5O a year to the incumbent—
an arrangement which would place him in a more
advantageous position than that of any similar in-
cumbent in Sydney.
The agreement of the Ist April 1884 is the one
which the Bishop in synod offered to confirm in a
legal manner. It was the rejection of this offer that
led the synod to the decisive vote mentioned above.
I have the honor to be your obedient servant,
M. GOULBURN.
