









HANDBOOK
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES
NEW SOUTH WALES
BEING
A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR JUSTICES OF THE PEACE IN HOLDING
INQUIRIES RESPECTING DEATHS
AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR QUEENSLAND
CORONER AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Parramatta
LITTLE AND COMPANY, THE ARGUS OFFICE
[copyright]


.
'
■


HANDBOOK
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES
NEW SOUTH WALES
BEING
A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR JUSTICES OF THE PEACE IN HOLDING
INQUIRIES RESPECTING DEATHS
FOURTH EDITION
R. H. MATHEWS
CORONER AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA
AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR QUEENSLAND
Parramatta
LITTLE AND COMPANY, THE ARGUS OFFICE
[copyright]


.
.


P 06437
4 AUG 1938
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.
It is now fourteen years since the first edition of this
“Handbook to Magisterial Inquiries” appeared in 1888,
and the rapid sale which it met with called for the publication
of a second edition in 1890. A third edition was published
in 1896, but this is now also out of print. It has therefore
become necessary to publish the present new and revised
edition, to which a large amount of valuable information
has been added, comprising all the additional instructions
which have been issued from time to time by the Depart-
ment of the Attorney General and of Justice in regard to
the holding of Magisterial Inquiries, since the publication
of the former editions of this work.
The want of a reliable Text Book, simply and intelligibly
arranged, in which the law and practice relating to Magis-
terial Inquiries respecting deaths is fully and lucidly laid
down, has long been felt and complained of by Justices of
the Peace throughout the State ; and it is hoped that this
Handbook , being a complete practical Guide to the holding
of these Inquiries, from their first initiation, through all
their stages, to the final transmission of the proceedings to
the Department of the Attorney General and of Justice,
will supply the means of learning at a glance the whole
form of procedure, and enable Justices of the Peace, when
called upon to act, to discharge the important duties
devolving upon them with facility and efficiency.
§K>


PREFACE.
The comprehensive instructions given in the articles on the
Mode of Taking the Depositions , and the Examination of Witnesses,
will be found of great service to Justices of the Peace when
officiating on the Bench at Police Courts, to Coroners, to
Clerks of Petty Sessions, to Solicitors, and others whose
duty it is to examine Witnesses, or to take down the
evidence given by them in any Court.
To members of the Police Force, who are always required
to be in attendance to get up the case for the Magistrate ;
to transmit reports of all inquests and inquiries to their
superior officers; to furnish reports and declarations re-
specting persons dying intestate; and to make arrangements
for the burial of paupers, this book will be found a simple
and compendious guide to the performance of these duties
in a correct and satisfactory manner. And to such of the
Police as are desirous of qualifying themselves to discharge
the functions of Acting Clerks of Petty Sessions when called
upon to do so, the articles on the examination of witnesses
and writing down their depositions, already referred to, will
be found invaluable.
The Author respectfully asks for a continuance of the
liberal patronage of Magistrates and Members of the Police
Force throughout the State hitherto accorded to this Text
Book, which contains the complete practice and procedure
in connection with Magisterial Inquiries, revised up to the
present date.
R. H. MATHEWS.
Carcuron, Parramatta,
gth December, 1902.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
General Instructions Respecting Magisterial Inquiries.
AUTHORITY FOR MAGISTRATES HOLDING INQUIRIES.
PAGE.
Inquiries may be held by Justices of the Peace 1
Inquiries should not be held where any suspicion of foul play .. .. 1
Inquiries should not be held unnecessarily .. .. .. .. .. 3
Post-mortem examinations, when and how made .. .. .. .. 5
Analysis or assay of contents of stomach (see also p. 22) .. .. .. 6
Magistrates cannot hold inquiries respecting fires .. .. .. .. 6
DUTY OF MAGISTRATES WHEN A DEATH IS REPORTED TO THEM.
When an inquiry should be held .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Police report death to the nearest Magistrate 7
Interpreter procured when necessary .. .. .. .. ~ 7
Police to get up the case at inquiry 8
Inquiry may be dispensed with 8
Publicans bound to receive dead bodies .. .. .. ... 8
Accidents on Government railways .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Deaths in gaols and lunatic asylums.. .. .. .. .. .. 9
MODE OF TAKING THE DEPOSITIONS.
Form of caption for depositions .. .. .. .. ..10
Corrections, &c., should be initialled .. .. .. ~ ..10
Documents produced in evidence—how marked .. ... .. .. n
Cross-examination—how taken down .. .. .. .. ..11
Re-examination—how taken down ...... 12
ne-examination —now taken down .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
Form of jurat .. ” ’’ 12
Re-calling witnesses—how taken down .. .. .. .. .. 12
Deposition of Interpreter ** " .*! 12
Adjournment of inquiry—how noted., .. .. .. .. ..13
Resumption of inquiry after adjournment—how noted .. .. ..13
Conclusion of inquiry—how noted .. ~ ~ .. .. .. 14


OATHS OF WITNESSES AND INTERPRETERS.
PAGE.
Power to administer oath to witness .. .. .. .. .. 14
Witness to be sworn before examination .. .. .. .. 14
Mode of administering the oath .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
1. Christians .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
2. Jews .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
3. Mohammedans .. .. .. .. .. .. ..15
4. Parsees .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
5. Roman Catholics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
6. Quakers or Moravians ~ .. .... .. .. 15
7. Gentoos .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
8. Chinese .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
9. Interpreter’s oath, where witness does not speak English .. 16
10. Affirmation instead of oath .. .. .. .. .. 16
il. Declaration instead of oath .. .. ~ .. .. 17
ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE AND COMPETENCY OF WITNESSES.
Admissibility of evidence .. .. .. .. .. .. ..17
Competency of witnesses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
CHAPTER 11.
Procedure in Holding Magisterial Inquiries.
OPENING THE INQUIRY.
Magistrate proceeds to place appointed for inquiry .. .. .. 18
Constable has the witnesses, &c., in attendance .. .. .. .. 18
Not necessary that body should be viewed .. .. .. .. .. 18
EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES.
Witnesses examined in relative order .. .. .. .. .. 19
Examination in chief .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
When cross-examination allowed .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Purpose'of re-examination .. .. .. .. .. ..19
Purpose of recalling witnesses.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Foreign witnesses examined through interpreter .. .. .. .. 20
Medical witness, when and how examined .. .. .. .. 20
Procedure if medical witness disobeys summons .. .. .. .. 21
Persons found dead .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Describe deceased if unknown .. .. 22
Inquiry may be adjourned .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Magistrate records his finding .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Copy of finding should be kept .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
DUTIES OF POLICE AT INQUIRIES.
Bodies should be removed to nearest public house.. .. .. .. 24
Death should be reported to Magistrate or Coroner .. .. .. 25
Police should get up case for Magistrate .. .. .. .. 25
Report to Inspector General of Police, Form 10 .. .. .. .. 25
Report to Agent of Curator of Intestate Estates, Form 11.. .. .. 26


FORMS OF MAGISTRATES’ FINDING.
PAGE.
1. Death from apoplexy .. .. .. ~ .. .. ..26
2. Death by hanging .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
3. Death by cutting throat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
4. Congestion of the lungs, accelerated by intemperance .. .. 27
5. Death from excessive drinking ~ .. .. .. .. .. 27
6. Death by gun-shot wound . .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
7. Death from sunstroke .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
8. Death resulting from a fall .. .. .. .. .. ..27
9. Death from burns .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Death from scalds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
10. Death from poisoning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
11. Found drowned, cause of death unknown ~ .. .. ..27
12. Drowned whilst bathing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
13. Suicide by drowning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
14. Death from disease of the hea,rt .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Death from starvation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
15. Found dead, cause unknown .. .. .. .. .. ..27
16. Where part of body found .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
17. Death by being accidentally overlain by mother .. .. .. 28
18. Death by accident on the railway or tramway.. .. .. ..28
19. Where skeleton is found .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
RECAPITULATION OF PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS.
General synopsis of instructions for holding inquiry .. .. .. 28
Memoranda of questions to ask witnesses .. .. .. .. .. 29
CHAPTER 111.
Peocedure after Conclusion of Inquiry.
MISCELLANEOUS DIRECTIONS.
Burial of body in ordinary cases .. .. «. .. .. .. 31
Burial of deceased paupers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Particulars to be furnished .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
Deaths caused by intemperance .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
Information to be sent to District Registrar .. .. .. .. 33
Deaths of foreigners reported to Consul .. .. .. ~ .. 33
Death of intestates reported to Curator .. .. .. .. 33
Report by Police to Inspector-General .. .. .. -. 34
Declaration respecting unknown persons .. .. .. .. .. 34
Obtaining funeral expenses from societies .. .. .. .34
PREPARATION AND RENDERING OF ACCOUNTS.
Accounts should be rendered in proper form .. .. .. .. 35
Fees to Magistrates for holding inquiries .. .. .. .. .. 35
Fees to medical witnesses .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Fees to interpreters, with specimen of account .. .. .. .. 37
Fees to publicans, where body received on premises, with specimen of
account ~ ~ ~ ~ .. ~ ~ ~ 37


PAGE.
Rewards for taking up bodies found drowned, with specimen .. .. 38
Stationery and Postage account with specimen .. .. .. .. 38
Fees for the burial of paupers, with specimen 38
Witnesses’ expenses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
General remarks respecting preparation of accounts .. .. .. 40
To whom medical witnesses accounts are forwarded .. .. .. 40
To whom accounts for burial of paupers forwarded, where no inquiry
held 40
To whom all other accounts are forwarded .. .. .. .. .. 40
Accounts to be rendered in duplicate .. .. .. .. .. 41
Mode of rendering account when the Magistrate pays the parties himself 41
TRANSMISSION OF PROCEEDINGS.
Proceedings should be forwarded without delay .. 41
Letter to accompany proceedings .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Proceedings to be fastened together .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Directions for numbering the pages, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Postage and registration must be paid for .. .. .. .. .. 42
Proceedings forwarded under registered cover .. .. .. .. 42
FORMS USED AT MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES.
Preliminary remarks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43
Form 1. —Magistrate’s Letter to Accompany Proceedings.. .. .. 43
2. Caption for Proceedings at Magisterial Inquiries .. .. 44
3. —Report by Police to Magistrate .. .. .. .. .. 44
4. —Certificate of Magistrate’s Finding .. .. .. .. 45
s.—Magistrate’s Certificate for the Burial of the Body .. .. 45
6 —Magistrate’s Certificate dispensing with Inquiry .. .. 45
7. Summons for Attendance of Medical Witness 46
B.—Death Register (G 245) .. .. .. .. .. ..46
9. —Justice’s Information of Death .. • .. .. .. .. 46
10.— Report by Police to the Inspector-General .. .. .. 48
11.—Declaration of Death and Intestacy 49


PRACTICAL GUIDE
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES
CHAPTEK I.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS RESPECTING
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES.
Authority for Justices of the Peace Holding Magis-
terial Inquiries as to Causes of Death.
Inquiries may be held by Justices of the Peace. —ln this State
no special Statute has been passed authorising the holding of
Magisterial Inquiries into the cause of the death of any person,
or regulating the procedure thereat, but an implied authority
is given by the Medical Witnesses Act, i Vic., No. 3, to which
practical effect is given by a notice which appeared in the
Government Gazette , No. 22, page 300, of 18th March, 1845.
This notice is dated 15th March, 1845, and after defining the
limits within which Coroners should exercise their jurisdiction,
states as follows : —“ In police districts in which there may be
no Coroners, the inquiries into the causes of any sudden deaths
which may happen within the same, are to be conducted by
the Police Magistrate, if there be one, or if not, by any Justice
of the Peace of the district, under the powers granted by the
Act of the Governor and Council, 1 Victoria, No. 3.”
Inquiry should not he held where there is any suspicion of foul
play. —Magisterial inquiries should only be instituted where
there is no Coroner, or during a vacancy of that office ; or
where the local Coroner is absent, or is unable from any cause
to hold an inquest; or in cases where the body is so much
decomposed, or has lain so long that no information could be
gained by an inspection of it ; and should be confined to those
cases in which the tacts and circumstances plainly indicate that


the death was accidental, or due to natural causes ; and that
no suspicion of criminality or negligence attaches to anyone.
In many cases of infanticide, however, where there is no
clue to the guilty person, and therefore nothing to be gained
by holding an inquest instead of an inquiry—and also in cases
of homicide by misadventure—it is quite competent for a
Magistrate to hold an inquiry in the absence of the Coroner,
or by request of that officer.
Whenever, in the opinion of a Magistrate, it is expedient to
institute an inquiry into the cause of any death, he should
carefully consider whether the circumstances of the case do
not rather render the laying of an information for “ murder ”
or “ manslaughter ” the more desirable course to pursue, so
that the guilty party may be at once arrested, and the pro-
ceedings assume their proper judicial shape in the only
effectual form which would render them available for ultimate
usefulness.
In what cases Inquiries should he held. —The object of holding
a Magisterial Inquiry is to ascertain the cause of death, free
from doubt or suspicion, so that the public may be satisfied
that such deaths occurred in the common course of nature,
and not by some unlawful violence, foul play, or culpable
neglect. It is, therefore, the custom to hold inquiries in all
cases of persons meeting their death by violence or accident—
persons found dead—dying suddenly, or in any place of con-
finement—or persons committing suicide—for the purpose of
ascertaining whether deceased came to his death by the
wrongful action of any other person, or not.
Magistrates ought not in any case to obtrude themselves
into private families for the purpose of instituting inquiries,
but should wait until the case is reported to them by the
Police, to whom it is the duty of those in whose houses violent
or sudden deaths occur, to make immediate communication,
whilst the body is fresh, and, if possible, whilst it remains in
the same situation as when the person died. But under what-
ever circumstances an inquiry may be considered necessary,
the authority vested in the Magistrate in this behalf ought to
be exercised within the limits of a sound discretion.
In what cases the inquiry should he terminated. —Whenever, at
any stage of the inquiry, the evidence discloses facts which
point to the conclusion that any person is guilty of wrongfully
causing the death under consideration, the Magistrate should
terminate the inquiry as soon as possible; but before doing so,
he should take sufficient evidence to enable him to form an
opinion as to the cause of death. He will then record his


“ finding ” in the usual form, —adding thereto a direction to
the Police to lay an information against the suspected person,
charging him with murder, or manslaughter, in order that
such person may be brought up on summons, or warrant, at
the Police Court, in the usual way. The whole case is then
commenced afresh before the Justices, at the Police Court,
according to the usual rules of procedure in charges of
indictable offences, and all the witnesses are examined de novo,
in the presence of the accused, who has the opportunity
afforded him of cross-examining them, if he wishes to do so,
or of calling any witnesses he may think desirable for his
defence. If, after full investigation, the Justices think a prima
facie case is made out against the accused, they will commit
him for trial ; otherwise, he will be discharged.
It sometimes happens that the person who caused the death
is present in the custody of the Police, and in such cases
there need be no hurry in closing the inquiry. The object of
terminating the proceedings where there is any suspicion of
foul play on the part of any person not present, is to give the
Police an opportunity of arresting the guilty party before he
can get timely warning of the evidence available against him
and so elude justice by absconding—by tampering with the
witnesses—or by any other means.
Inquiries should not be held unnecessarily . —lt is important to
keep down the expenses of Magisterial inquiries to a limit
provided by Parliament, and to confine such inquiries, as far
as may be practicable, to cases of suspicious death, or of deaths
so sudden as to create a reasonable ground for investigating
the cause; and with this object in view, it is desirable in all
cases for the Magistrate to consult with the Police, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether any clear ground exists for
suspecting that death might have been caused by some foul
means, before the Government is put to the expenses incidental
to such inquiries.
It would be very harassing to families, as well as costly to
the Government, if Magisterial inquiries were held in cases
where no reasonable doubt existed that death was the result of
natural causes, even though it may have been unexpected and
somewhat sudden. Dying suddenly is not to be understood as
applying to persons who may die of fevers, or other epidemics ;
and the absence of a doctor in attendance before death is not in
itself a sufficient reason for holding an inquiry, unless there
are some suspicious circumstances of neglect or maltreatment
in the case. If inquiries were considered necessary in all such
cases, the cost would be very much in excess of the
Parliamentary provision for the purpose.


Whilst urging the necessity for restricting the number of
inquiries, the Minister for Justice does not desire to be under-
stood as controlling the exercise of the Magistrate’s discretion
in respect to cases in which an inquiry may appear to him to
be essential to the ends of justice.
Cannot impannel a Jury , or commit for Trial. —A Magistrate
has no power to summon or impannel a Jury for the purpose
of holding an inquiry—that power being conferred only upon
Coroners —but must conduct the proceedings himself; at the
conclusion of which he formally records his opinion—usually
called the Magistrate’s “ Finding ” —as to the cause of death.
Owing to these inquiries being instituted without formal in-
formations, and being held before the arrest of any suspected
person, or, in his absence, there is no power vested in the
Magistrate to commit any such person for trial, although the
evidence may disclose a strong case of suspicion against him.
And it is important to bear in mind that no depositions taken
at Magisterial inquiries, of witnesses who may subsequently
die, can be read as evidence at any trial, either on behalf of
the Crown or of the prisoner.
No power to compel attendance cf Witnesses. —With the excep-
tion of a medical witness, who may be summoned under the
Act 1 Vic., No. 3, the Magistrate has no authority to summon
any witnesses to attend at these inquiries, and therefore there
are no means of compelling unwilling witnesses to be present
thereat. The usual way of obtaining evidence is for the
Constable who has charge of the case to request all persons
who know anything of the death to attend at the time and place
appointed for holding the inquiry.
Sunday. —A Magisterial inquiry should not be held on a
Sunday.
One Inquiry held on several bodies. —One Magisterial inquiry
may be held touching the death of several persons, who have
been injured by the same cause and died at the same time ;
but only one fee is payable to the Magistrate for the whole in-
quiry, no matter how many persons may have met their death.
Expenses of Inquiry. —A Justice of the Peace, holding a
Magisterial inquiry, has authority to sanction the payment of
certain necessary fees to witnesses—medical witnesses—
interpreters publicans—rewards for taking up bodies of
persons found drowned—and for the burial of paupers.
Any legally qualified medical practitioner may be summoned. —The
Justice of the Peace holding the inquiry is authorised by the
Statute i Vic., No. 3, to issue his summons for the attendance


as a witness of some legally qualified medical practitioner in
actual practice, who may reside in or near the locality, if the
deceased was not attended by one, at or immediately before his
death ; and in cases where the deceased was so attended by one
or more such practitioners, the Magistrate may at his discretion
summon any one, or all of them, to give evidence as to the
cause of death ( Form 7). By a circular issued by the
Government it is directed that the expense of medical
testimony should not be incurred, except in cases in which the
Magistrate shall have been satisfied that a skilled and scientific
examination of the body is absolutely necessary, or that it is
important to ascertain the history of deceased’s case and
treatment.
Post mortem examination may be ordered. —Should the Justice be
of opinion that an external examination of the body is not
sufficient, owing to the suspicious or unusual circumstances of
the case, he may, at any time before the termination of the
inquiry, direct any legally qualified medical practitioner to
perform a post-mortem examination of the body of deceased,
either with or without an analysis of the contents of the
stomach or intestines.
Whenever the cause of death has not been satisfactorily
explained by the practitioner examined in the first instance,
the Justice may summon any other legally qualified medical prac-
titioner, and direct him to perform a post-mortem examination
with or without an analysis, whether such an examination shall
have been previously performed or not; and may, if necessary,
adjourn the inquiry for the purpose.
Post-mortem examinations, when and how made. —The fullest
care should be exercised by Magistrates in order to avoid the
performance of post-mortem examinations unnecessarily. Such
examinations are necessary only as far as there is need to
ascertain the precise cause of death. It is not always requisite
to determine the cause of death with that minute accuracy
which can be attained only by making an autopsy of the body.
In every case, however, where there is any ground for think-
ing that a person may be placed on his trial for causing or
contributing to the death of the deceased, a careful post-mortem
examination of the body should be made, without exception, so
as to prevent the possibility of a miscarriage of justice on
account of any uncertainty as to the cause of death.
The medical practitioner conducting the post-mortem should
open and examine the head, chest and abdomen. It is neces-
sary that evidence as to the state of the organs in each of the
cavities mentioned should be given before a claim for a fee for
making a. post-mortem can be entertained. The Magistrate con-


ducting the Inquiry should therefore take care that a medical
practitioner who has made a post-mortem examination in the
manner described, shall give full evidence of the result of such
examination. Evidence as to a part of such examination only
will not be accepted ; the doctor must state that he opened
the head, chest and abdomen.
Penalty for Medical Witness disobeying summons. —The Act
referred to, i Vic., No. 3, does not empower the Justice to
compel the attendance of a legally qualified medical practitioner,
but section 5 provides that if such witness be duly summoned
to give evidence, or if ordered in writing to perform a post
mortem examination, and he does not obey such summons or
order, without a reasonable excuse, he shall be liable to a fine
of not less than £3, nor more than £ 2O, to be recovered in a
summary way before any two Justices of the Peace.
Any Medical Witness may he examined. —The Magistrate has
power to examine as a medical witness any person he thinks
fit other than a legally qualified medical practitioner ; but this
should be done only where a properly qualified medical man
is not available.
Analysis or Assay. —Whenever there may be reasonable
ground for suspecting death to have been caused by poison, or
by improper medical treatment, and in the opinion of the
Magistrate an analysis of the stomach or other parts of the
deceased person may be necessary, the Magistrate may com-
municate in the first instance, either by telegraph or by letter
(according to the urgency of the case), with the Under-
secretary of Justice, giving an outline of the circumstances in
each case, and of the symptoms and duration of illness, etc.,
before incurring the expense of sending constables to Sydney
with the matter for analysis or assay, so that the necessary
steps may be at once taken, and the Government Analytical
Chemist duly instructed for the purpose of obtaining the
requisite information thereon. The Constable entrusted with
the matter should take care to be able to swear that he
delivered it in the same condition in which he received it.
No authority to hold Inquiries respecting fires. —A Justice of the
Peace has no authority to hold a Magisterial inquiry respect-
ing the cause of any fire, that power being conferred only upon
Coroners. The proper course to be pursued in cases where
any property has been wilfully destroyed or damaged by fire,
and there is no Coroner to hold the usual inquest, is for the
Police to proceed against the suspected person on a charge of
arson, by laying an information and taking out a summons or
warrant —according to the urgency of the case—and bringing


him before the Police Court; and then, after public examina-
tion of the witnesses against and for the accused, and in his
presence, a committal or discharge may take place, in precisely
the same way as in any other charge of felony.
Duty of Magistrates when a Death is Reported
to THEM.
When Inquiry should be held. —When the body of any deceased
person is found by the Police, or they are informed of any such
body having been found, or any death under unusual circum-
stances is notified to them, a report (Form 3) stating, if
possible, the name of the deceased, and the manner of the
death, should be made immediately to the Coroner, if there be
one, or if not, to the nearest Magistrate, in all cases of violent
and unnatural deaths casualties by which death ensues—
sudden deaths —persons found dead, whether the whole body
or only part of the skeleton be found—persons committing
suicide—persons dying in gaols, asylums, or hospitals—and
prisoners executed in gaol.
Arrangements for holding the Inquiry. —On receipt of the report
referred to whether verbally, or in the form of a letter or a
telegram—from a Police Officer, the Magistrate, if he is satis-
fied that there are no suspicious circumstances connected with
the case, and that a Magisterial inquiry would be sufficient to
elicit the cause of death, thereupon arranges with the Police
as to the place where, and time when, such inquiry will be
held, having due regard to the convenience of the witnesses,
and all persons concerned.
If the death happened on a railway line, and no Coroner is
available to conduct an inquest, the Magistrate will then send
notice to the Officer of the Railway Department, in accord-
ance with the directions given under the sub-heading of
Accidents on Government Railways. [But see “ Note,” p. 9.]
If it be thought necessary that a medical man should be
called in to view the body, or make a post-mortem examination,
the Magistrate should issue his summons [Form 7) for such
medical man if there are reasons for supposing that he will not
attend without a summons, in order that the Constable may
have him in attendance, with the other witnesses, when the
inquiry commences, preference being given to the Government
Medical Officer of the district, who lives nearest to the place
of holding the inquiry.
The Constable then communicates these arrangements to
all persons who will be required to give evidence in the case,
and requests them to be present; and if he learns that any
material witnesses cannot speak English, he should endeavour


to find some competent person to act as interpreter, and have
him in attendance, with the witnesses, at the place appointed
for holding the inquiry.
It is not imperative that the inquiry should be held at the
place where the body was found, or the death occurred ; the
body may be removed, in a cart or-otherwise, to the nearest
convenient place for holding an inquiry ; or, if the Magistrate
does not consider a view of the body necessary, it need not be
removed, and the inquiry can be held at any place which will
be convenient for the attendance of the witnesses and others.
The Police Officer who reports the death to the Magistrate,
must consider himself as the person whose special duty it is to
get up the case at the inquiry, by having the witnesses, ex-
hibits, interpreter, &c., ready at the time and place appointed.
Inquiry may be dispensed with. —lf, however, the Magistrate is
satisfied, from the information given to him by the Police when
reporting the death, that there is no necessity for holding a
Magisterial Inquiry, he may dispense with it, and grant a
certificate for the burial of the body, to the effect of Form 6.
Publicans bound to receive dead bodies. —The bodies of persons
found dead are usually removed by the Police to the nearest
public-house, or to the house of some of the deceased’s friends,
if any. By section 86 of the Licensing Act of 1882, power is
given to hold inquests in public-houses, where the house is not
situated within one mile from any dead-house or police-station ;
and the publican is bound, under a penalty not exceeding £5,
to receive a dead body into some secure place upon his
premises, if it be brought there for the purpose of an inquest
being held upon it; but he is not bound to receive a dead body
in an offensive state of decomposition, or the body of a person
reputed to have died of an infectious disease. For every body
so received, the publican is entitled to receive the sum of thirty
shillings. In the section just quoted, the word “ inquest,”
and not “Coroner’s inquest,” is used, and it is thought the
Government would be willing to pay the prescribed fee to the
publican in cases of Magisterial inquiries, and that the publi-
can would be bound to receive the dead body upon his
premises; because, when the Police bring the body there,
they do not know whether an inquest, or a Magisterial inquiry,
will be held thereon. In the case of a person dying suddenly
in a public-house, the publican will not be entitled to receive
the sum mentioned, or any other gratuity.
Accidents on Government Railways. —Whenever loss of life
occurs by reason of any accident on a line of Government
Railway, or on the premises of any railway station, and no


Coroner is available to hold an inquest, the Magistrate con-
ducting the inquiry should send notice to the nearest Traffic
Manager, Station Master, or other railway official, of the time
and place of holding such inquiry, in order that the Traffic
Manager, or his representative, may have an opportunity of
being present thereat, and of examining and cross-examining
any witnesses he may think proper. And for the purpose of
allowing sufficient time for the attendance of such official, the
Magistrate may, if he consider it necessary, adjourn the
inquiry to a time and place to be stated in the notice referred
to, after having taken sufficient evidence to identify the body,
and issuing his certificate for its interment.
Deaths in Gaols and Asylums. —When holding Magisterial
inquiries respecting deaths in Gaols or Lunatic Asylums, and
the circumstances of the case raise any question as to
negligence or impropriety in the treatment of the prisoner, or
inmate, the independent evidence of some medical man wholly
unconnected with such Gaol or Asylum should be taken, in
addition to that of the regular medical officer, as a guarantee
and a safeguard against the testimony of interested parties,
however respectable, connected with such institutions.
Note. — In cases of deaths resulting from accidents
on a Railway—or deaths occurring in Gaols and Lunatic
Asylums—the local Coronor generally holds an inquest;
or, in case of his absence, a Coroner from another district
may be instructed to undertake the duty; but as cases
may arise where Justices of the Peace may be called upon to
hold inquiries, it has been thought desirable to refer to the
matter in this work.
Interested persons may be allowed to examine witnesses. —ln
cases where fatal accidents occur in saw or other mills, in
house-building, in the erection of bridges, or in any large
establishments where a number of men are employed, and in
reference to which the public or employes may think there is,
perhaps, some blame or negligence on the part of the employer,
it is usual to allow such employer, or any person interested in the
result of the proceedings, to be present at the inquiry to cross-
examine the witnesses, in order that he may have an oppor-
tunity of correcting any wrong impression which may have
arisen respecting the cause of the accident, and of setting him-
self right with the public ; or he may himself give evidence if
he so desires, but in such case it would be the Magistrate’s
duty to caution him that he is not compellable to answer any
questions, or to make any disclosures, tending to criminate
himself; or, further, he may be allowed to call and examine


any witnesses he wishes as to the cause of the accident, such
witnesses being subject to examination afterwards by the
Magistrate if he thinks proper.
Where any such person decides to give evidence himself, or
to call any other persons as witnesses, the proper time for him
to do so is at the conclusion of the evidence called by the
Constable.
Mode of Taking the Depositions.
Form and caption of depositions. —The depositions should be
preceded with a heading, or caption, as it is called, to the effect
of Form 2, on half a sheet of foolscap paper. The first witness’
deposition should then commence on a fresh half-sheet of
paper, giving his name in full, occupation, and place of
residence. When a witness’ evidence extends over more than
one page, the first word on each succeeding page should be
repeated at the foot of the page preceding it.
The continuation of the depositions should be written on
half-sheets of foolscap paper, with the pages numbered in
regular order ; the examination of each witness commencing
on a fresh half-sheet, preceded by the words :—“ J. 8., having
been sworn, states : ” Here will commence his evidence, as
follows :
“I am a sawyer and reside at Tulloona. I recognise the
deceased, the subject of this inquiry. His name was John
Smith, and his age about 36 years. He was a native of Tam-
worth, in this State, and was unmarried [or, he was married,
and leaves a wife and family of four children, or as the case may
be.] He was a carpenter by trade, and was last employed by
Mr. T. Jones, of Boggabilla.”
When a child gives evidence, his or her age should be stated
in the deposition.
The depositions, and all the proceedings connected with the
inquiry, should be written in a distinct and legible hand, on
one side only of the paper, leaving about a quarter of the width
of the sheet as a margin Although erasures and interlinea-
tions should be avoided as much as possible in writing down
depositions, yet it is sometimes necessary to strike out words
and expressions, and to substitute or interline others in lieu of
them ; but all such erasures, interlineations, or other correc-
tions, from whatever cause they may be made, should be
made, should be initialled by the Magistrate on the margin
opposite to where they occur. But no alteration of any kind
should be made in a witness’ deposition after he has signed it,
or has made his mark.


How the evidence should he taken down. —The statement of every
witness should invariably be taken down in the first person,
and as nearly as possible in the precise words and expressions
spoken by the witness, omitting all that is irrelevant, sup-
position or hearsay. Ambiguous phraseology should be
avoided in writing down the evidence ; and if it be found
necessary to alter the witness’ words in order to show the fair
and obvious purport of his statement, he should be asked if
the alteration expresses his meaning.
All depositions should be as concise as the nature of the
case will permit, and needless prolixity is not desired ; but the
facts should be stated with reasonable minuteness, in words
most commonly used and generally understood, and in such
sequence as to give a connected account of what took place.
Every relevant circumstance detailed by the witness should
be taken down with care and accuracy, particularly as regards
time, place, and persons ; and whenever these or any other
matters appear to be loosely or ambiguously spoken of, the
attention of the witness should be called to these points, not
by leading questions, but by such as may tend to elicit the
desired information from the witness in his own words.
In taking the depositions of witnesses who are unaccustomed
to giving evidence, great care is necessary, in order to avoid
writing down a variety of matters altogether irrelevant ; and
it is difficult to make such witnesses state only what they saw
or did, and to suppress that which they only heard or surmised.
A witness of this description will go on for a considerable time
in telling a story as if he had been present and seen it all; but
presently it turns out that it was only communicated to him
by someone else. Depositions are sometimes taken very care-
lessly in this respect, mixing up facts with hearsay and surmise,
and also containing ambiguous and irrelevant sentences.
Documents produced in evidence.- -When documents are pro-
duced in evidence, they should either be introduced in extenso
into the depositions, or their purport stated, as their impor-
tance may seem to require, and should then be initialled by the
Magistrate, and lettered in consecutive order, thus :—“ Exhibit
A,” “ Exhibit B,” &c., followed by the Magistrate’s initials. A
note should also be made on the margin of that part of the
deposition where such document is quoted, or referred to
thus :- “ See Exhibit A.” All exhibits should be attached to
the depositions with which they are connected.
Cross-examination . —When a person is allowed to cross-
examine a witness at the end of the examination-in-chief, any
relevant evidence so elicted should be written down imme-


diately following, as a part of the deposition already taken, and
such evidence must be distinguished from the examination-in-
chief, which may be done in this way : “ Cross-examined by
Mr. John Smith : ”
[Here give the evidence.]
Re-examination. —lf the witness be re-examined, such ad-
ditional evidence should be distinguished from the cross-
examination in the following manner:—“ Re-examined by the
Magistrate: ”
[Here give the re-examination.]
Form of Jurat in ordinary cases. —When the witness’ deposi-
tion is finally completed, read to him, and corrected, if neces-
sary, it must be signed by him with his name or mark, and the
following jurat added and signed by the Magistrate :—“ Taken
and sworn [affirmed or declared], at Bourke, this 10th day of
September, 1902, before me, A. 8., J.P. [This jurat must be
added to each witness’ deposition after he signs it.]
Recalling witnesses —lf a witness be recalled, it should be
noted on the proceedings in the same order as if he were a new
witness, except that he need not be again sworn. The additi-
onal evidence will be taken down on a fresh half-sheet of paper,
and the heading will be as follows :—“ A. 8., recalled, states : ”
[Here give his additional evidence.] The witness will then
sign it as before, and the Magistrate will add and sign a jurat
in the usual way.
Deposition op Interpreter. —ln cases in which an interpreter
has been employed in interpreting the evidence given by the
witnesses, it should be shown on the face of the depositions,
not only that the witnesses were examined through an inter-
preter, but also that the interpreter was sworn as such. This
is accomplished by taking from the interpreter a short deposi-
tion embodying the usual enterpreter's oath, in precisely the
same manner as the other depositions are taken. The follow-
is the prescribed form of deposition in such cases, which must
be made by the interpreter before he is permitted to act:
C.D. on oath states:—“ I will truly and faithfully interpret
the evidence about to be given, and all other matters and
things touching the present inquiry as to the cause of death of
J.S., and the French language into the English language, and
the English language into the French language, according to the
best of my skill and ability, so help me God.”
This is signed by the interpreter, and the Magistrate adds
the ordinary jurat given at p. 12.


When the witness is examined through the medium of an
interpreter, such witness’ deposition may commence as follows :
“ Eugene Grandjean, by the interpretation of Jacques de Baun,
was sworn and deposed [Here give the witness’ evidence].
Constable's deposition of service of Summons on Medical Witness. —
The deposition of a constable who serves a summons on a
medical witness, who disobeys it, may be in the following form :
“John Dunn, on oath, states: —lam a Constable in the
New South Wales Police Force, stationed at Menindie. On
the 18th day of June, instant, I served a duplicate of the
summons produced on 0.P., by delivering it to him personally
[or, by leaving it with Q.R., to whom I read and explained it,
at the usual place of abode of the said O.P.]. It is under the
hand and seal of a Magistrate of this State, and is returnable
to-day. He has been called three times, and does not appear.’’
This deposition will be signed, and a jurat added in the
usual manner. The copy of the summons referred to should
be attached to the deposition by a tape and sealing wax, and
the Magistrate should endorse on such copy these words :
“ This is the copy of the summons referred to in the deposition
of John Dunn, hereto annexed,” and adding his signature.
Adjournment. The date and place to which the Inquiry may
be adjourned, with the causes rendering such adjournment
necessary, should be entered in the deposition, at the end of
the deposition already taken, in the following manner:
“ Inquiry adjourned to the Plough Inn, Branxton, for the
purpose of obtaining further evidence [or, as the case may be]
until Monday, the 9th May, 1903, at 10 o’clock, a.m. A.8.,J.P.”
Resumption. —When the inquiry is resumed, the following
caption, on a fresh half-sheet of paper, should precede the ex-
amination of the witnesses : —“ The Magisterial Inquiry,
respecting the cause of death of J. S. [or, a man unknown]
was resumed on the 9th May, 1903, at the Plough Inn,
Branxton, to which time and place the Inquiry had been duly
adjourned.
“ Thomas Bull, having been sworn [or , having made an
affimation, or, having made a declaration], states : —” [Here
will follow his deposition in the usual manner.]
Conclusion. —When the inquiry is concluded, the certificate of
the Magistrate's finding ( Form 4) should be written on a
fresh half-sheet of foolscap paper, and the following entry
made at the end of it: —“ Inquiry closed. Branxton, May gth,
1903.”


Oaths of Witnesses and Interpreters.
Power to administer Oath to Witnesses. —lt may be laid down
as a general rule, that wherever Justices of the Peace are
authorised by Act of Parliament to hear and determine, or to
examine witnesses, they have, incidentally, a power to take
the examinations on oath.
Witness to be sworn before the examination. —Before the exam-
ination of a witness is taken, he should be duly sworn to
speak the truth. And, as the mode of administering the oath
varies, according to the peculiar religious belief professed by
the witness, the Magistrate should always satisfy himself upon
this point, either by questions put to the witness or other
persons. It need scarcely be observed that the object in view
in putting the witness under the solemn obligation of an oath
is not only to impress him with the moral and religious duty
of speaking the truth, but to render him liable, in case he
should give false testimony, to the punishment awarded by law
to a person who commits perjury. If, therefore, a Magistrate
should be wilfully deceived by a witness as to his religious
belief, and the witness should thus be improperly sworn, and
so as not to bind his conscience, it will not the less prevent
his being convicted of perjury, in case he should be proved to
have given false testimony.
Mode of Administering the Oath. —The particular form of
ceremony of administering an oath is quite distinct rrom
the substance of the oath itself. The form of oaths under
which God is invoked as a witness, or as an avenger of
perjury, is to be accommodated to the religious persuasion
which the swearer entertains of God, it being vain to compel
a man to swear by a God in whom he does not believe,
and whom he therefore does not reverence. (Puffend, b. 4,
c. 2, s 4). According to several decisions and enactments, the
mode of swearing witnesses of different religious persuasions
may be as follows :
Christians, how sworn. —A. Christian is sworn upon the four
Gospels or Books of the Holy Evangelists, and the following
form of oath is usually adopted, being repeated to the
witness after he has taken the Testament in his right hand :
A ,8., the evidence that you shall give to this inquiry
touching the death of C.D., shall be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth. So help you God.
The witness then kisses the Testament, and the oath is com-
plete. It is not necessary, in imposing the oath, to use the
exact form of words here given ; any other words of similar
import will be sufficient for the purpose.


2. Jews. —A Jew is sworn upon the Pentateuch, with his
head covered, the language of the oath being changed from
“ So help you God ” to “ So help you Jehovah ” (2 Hale, P.C.,
279; Omichund v. Barker, Willes, 543).
3. Mohammedans. —A Mohammedan is sworn on the Koran.
The form in Morgan s case (1 Leach, 54), was as follows :
The witness first placed his right hand flat upon the book, put
the other hand to his forehead, and brought the top of his fore-
head down to the book and touched it with his head. He then
looked for some time upon it, and being asked what effect that
ceremony was to produce, he answered that he was bound by
it to speak the truth. (Roscoe’s Cr. Ev.) In a recent case, a
different course was followed. The officer of the Court asked
the witness what form of oath was binding on his conscience,
who replied, the oath in the usual words, provided he was
sworn on the Koran, and he was sworn accordingly. (Best’s
Ev., 6th Ed., 233.)
4. Parsees. —A Parsee swears in a similar mode to the
Mohammedans, except that, instead of the Koran, he swears
on the Prayer Book used by the Parsees.
5. Roman Catholics. Roman Catholics sometimes express a
wish to be sworn on the Douay version of the Bible, which
should always be acceded to, but this formality is unnecessary,
unless desired by the witness conscientiously.
6. Quakers or Moravians. —Quakers, Moravians, and Separatists
are permitied to make a solemn declaration or affirmation,
instead of taking an oath. (See 3& 4 Will. IV., c. 49, adopted
in this State by 8 Will. IV., No. 2 ) The following is the
form of declaration :
I, A .8., being one of the people called Quakers [or one of
the persuasion of the people called Separatists, or of the United
Brethren called Moravians, as the case may be], do solemnly
sincerely, and truly declare and affirm that the evidence, &>c.
7. Gentoos. —The deposition of a Gentoo has been received
who touched with his hand the foot of a Brahmin ( Omichund v.
Barker, 1 Atk. 21). But if the party swearing be himself a
priest, then he touches the Brahmin’s hand. In some parts of
India the natives are sworn on a portion of the water of the
Ganges. (Best’s Ev. 6th Ed. 233).
8. Chinese. The following is given in a recent case as the
form of swearing 'a Chinese witness (Roscoe’s Cr. Ev.): —On
entering the box, the witness immediately knelt down, and a


china saucer having been placed in his hand, he struck it
against the brass rail in front of the box and broke it. The
Crier of the Court then, by direction of the interpreter,
administered the oath in these words, which were translated
by the interpreter into the Chinese language ( Enirehman's case,
1 Car. & M., 248):
You shall tell the truth, and the whole truth; the saucer
is cracked, and if you do not tell the truth, your soul will be
cracked like the saucer.
Other forms - as the extinguishing a lighted lucifer, or of
cutting off the head of a cock—are also used in this State ;
because particular sects of Chinese recognise these forms as
binding on the conscience.
9. Interpreter's Oath where witness does not speak English.—
Foreigners, as well as other witnesses who do not speak the
English language, should be sworn through the medium of
another person duly qualified to interpret them, the interpreter
being first sworn faithfully to interpret the witness. The in-
terpreter’s oath may be in the following form :
You shall truly and faithfully interpret the evidence about to
be given, and all other matters and things touching the present
inquiry, and the [French, or as the case may be] language
into the English language, and the English language into the
[French, &c.] language, according to the best of your skill
and ability. So help you God.
[See form of interpreter’s deposition given at page 12.]
io. Affirmation instead of Oath in certain cases where persons are
unwilling to be sworn.— By the ioth section of the Common Law
Procedure Act., 20 Vic., No. 31, it is enacted, that if any
person called as a witness, or required or desired to make an
affidavit or deposition, shall refuse or be unwilling, from
alleged conscientious motives, to be sworn, it shall be lawful
for the Court or Judge, or other presiding officer, or person
qualified to take affidavits or depositions, upon being satisfied
of the sincerity of such objection, to permit such person, instead
of being Sworn, to make his or her solemn affirmation in the
words following, viz :
I, A. 8., do solemnly, sincerely, and truly affirm and declare
that the taking of any oath is, according to my religious belief,
unlawful; and Ido also solemnly, sincerely, and truly affirm
and declare that the evidence, &c.
Which solemn affirmation shall be of the same force and effect
as if such person had taken an oath in the usual form, and the


like provisions shall apply also to every person required to be
sworn as a Juror.
11. Declaration instead of Oath.— Whenever any person
called as a witness before any Justice, objects to take an oath, or
is reasonably objected to as incompetent to take an oath, or
appears to the Justice to be incompetent to take an oath, he
may make the following declaration instead of being sworn :
/ solemnly declare that the evidence now about to be given by
me shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
Admissibility of Evidence, and Competency of
Witnesses.
Admissibility of evidence. —Justices, when holding Magisterial
inquiries, ought, as far as they can, apply and be governed by
the general rules of law regulating the admissibility or exclu-
sion of evidence ; but they may, with propriety, listen to state-
ments not strictly admissible in evidence for the purpose of
arriving at what is admissible to establish the facts of the case.
The chief test of the admissibility of evidence at these in-
quiries, is its relevancy ; and if care be taken to prevent leading
questions, except in cross-examination, and to repudiate
answers founded on hearsay and surmise, the Magistrate will
have no difficulty in this respect; but if he be in doubt as to
whether any evidence is admissible or not, the better and
safer course is to take it down.
Competency of witnesses. —No person is competent to give evi-
dence on oath unless he believes in a Supreme Being who will
punish him, either in the present or future life, for perjury ; but
by the 343rd section of 46 Vic., No. 17, and the 3rd section of
40 Vic., No. 8, if a witness objects to take an oath, or is
reasonably objected to as incompetent to take an oath, he can
make a declaration or promise : so that, practically, all persons
universally are competent as witnesses, with the exception of
persons who have not the use of reason, as idiots, lunatics, and
very young children ; but the evidence of witnesses at any age
is admissible, if it appear that they have sufficient discretion,
and understand the moral obligation of an oath ; so, likewise,
a lunatic is competent during a lucid interval.
No witness is compellable to answer any questions, or make
any disclosures, tending to criminate himself.


CHAPTER 11.
PROCEDURE IN HOLDING MAGISTERIAL
INQUIRIES.
Opening the Inquiry.
When the time arrives at which the inquiry is to be held,
the Magistrate proceeds to the place appointed, where he
meets the Constable, who attends with all the witnesses, an
interpreter, if necessary, and any exhibits, such as the instru-
ment by which death is supposed to have been caused — as a
razor, pistol, poison, &c., papers or other property found on
searching the body, or anything else which may tend to explain
the cause of death, or to facilitate identification, if the deceased
be an unknown person.
The Magistrate should have with him a sufficient supply of
foolscap paper for taking the depositions, pen, ink, blotting-
paper, a bible for administering the oaths to the witnesses, and
this Handbook.
It is not essential to the validity of an inquiry that the
Magistrate should view the body, but it is thought desirable
that he should do so when practicable, as material evidence as
to the cause of death may thereby be gained If the body has
lain so long that there remains nothing but the skeleton, or is
so decomposed that an inspection of it would be of no service,
such view may be dispensed with. v
It is usual to allow any person interested in the result of the
proceedings to be present and cross examine the witnesses,
but the room or place in which a Magisterial inquiry is held is
not an open Court, and no person has a vight to be present, or
to examine witnesses, except the officers of the Railway
Department (see Duty of Magistrates when a Death is reported to
to them, p. 7), and can only do either by permission of the
Magistrate; but as publicity generally assists the investiga-
tion of truth and the detection of guilt, the power of exclusion
ought not to be enforced, unless the ends of justice appear to
require it.
Representatives of the Press are generally allowed to be
present, on the understanding that they will not publish the
particulars until the conclusion of the inquiry, if so required by
the Magistrate.
The next step in the proceedings is to examine the witnesses,
whose evidence is either taken secretly or in public, as the
Magistrate may consider expedient.


Examination of Witnesses.
Witnesses examined in relative order. —The witnesses should
be called in separately to give their evidence, and should be
examined in succession in such relative order as may best
serve to give a connected account of everything relating to the
case, and form a regular chain of evidence. The evidence of
each witness should be taken formally in every case, for until
the inquiry is terminated it is impossible to say what may be
the result.
Examination-in-chief. —As each witness appears, and before
his name or testimony is taken down, he should be sworn
according to some of the forms given under the heading of
•Oaths of Witnesses and Interpreters, p. 14. After the witness has
been sworn, or has made an affirmation or declaration in the
prescribed manner, the Magistrate will proceed to examine the
witness and elicit from him in regular order an account not
only of all the facts within his own personal knowledge
respecting the cause of death of the deceased, but all material
circumstances affecting it, rejecting all hearsay and extraneous
statements.
Instead of the Magistrate himself conducting the examina-
tion of the witnesses, this duty is frequently performed by the
Constable in attendance, who, from his previous knowledge of
the facts of the case, knows the substance of the information
which each witness will be able to give, and he questions them
accordingly. If any papers or other exhibits are produced by
the witness, they will be received by the Magistrate, and
lettered in consecutive order. See Mode of Taking the Deposi-
tions, p. ii.
Cross-examination. —ln cases where an officer of the Railway
Department, or any other person interested in the result of the
proceedings, has attended for the purpose of cross-examining
the witnesses, such cross-examination should take place im-
mediately after the examination-in-chief.
Re-examination. —When the cross-examination is finished, the
witness may be re-examined by the Magistrate, for the purpose
of explaining anything he may have said in his cross-examina-
tion.
Depositions read to and signed by the Witnesses. —When the
evidence of each witness is complete, containing both his
examination and cross-examination, it should be read over to
him, when any corrections or additions may be made at the
witness’ request, but all erasures and interlineations should be
initialled on the margin by the Magistrate. The witness then


signs his deposition, but if he cannot write, the Magistrate, or
the Constable in attendance, may write his name for him, and
get him to make his mark between his Christian and surname,
the Constable signing as a witness to the mark. The Magis-
trate then writes and signs the usual jurat, which should be
added to each separate witness’ deposition.
Witnesses may be re-called. —A witness who has already given
his evidence may be re-called at any stage of the inquiry, in
order that he may be asked any further questions which may
be thought necessary, or to explain anything he has pre-
viously stated, and as he was sworn in the first instance it will
not be necessary to swear him again. When a witness is
recalled, he may be examined, cross-examined and re-examined
in the same manner as if he were a new witness. He must
also sign his additional evidence, and the Magistrate adds a
jurat as before.
Foreign witnesses examined through Interpreter. —lf any of the
witnesses are foreigners, and do not speak the English
language, the oath, affirmation, or declaration, should be ad-
ministered to them through an interpreter, who should first be
sworn to truly and faithfully interpret the evidence of the
witness. (See Oaths of Witnesses and Interpreters , p. 14.) The
caption given under the sub-head of Deposition of Interpreter
(p. 12) should precede the witness' evidence, and when his
examination is finished, it should be translated to him by the
interpreter, and corrected, if necessary, after which he signs it,
and the usual jurat is added.
Medical witnesses. —ln cases of death from accident, where
the physical injuries are such as to leave no doubt as to the
cause of death, and there are no grounds for suspecting foul
play or criminal negligence, medical evidence will not, as a
rule, be required. For example, a man is seen to fall from a
loaded dray, one of the wheels of which passes over him; he
is taken up in a state of collapse and dies before medical
assistance can be obtained. In some cases the cause of death
is in its nature obvious, e.g., gun shot, cut throat, etc.
In all cases where medical evidence is necessary, the
Government Medical Officer should be sent for who lives
nearest to the place where the Inquiry is to be held. But if a
legally qualified medical practitioner of good repute happens
to live very much nearer to the place of the Inquiry than even
the nearest Government Medical Officer, then, with a view to
economy, the legally qualified doctor on the spot may be
engaged. It is to be understood, however, that the last-
mentioned arrangement is permitted only for purposes of


economy. In important cases efficiency must not be sacrificed
to economy, and it may be prudent, in such cases, to bring a
Government Medical Officer from a distance, rather than
employ a local practitioner.
The medical witness, if one be thought necessary, is allowed
to be present during the examination of all the other witnesses,
to enable him more fully to arrive at his conclusions as to the
cause of death, especially where no post-mortem examination has
been made ; and his testimony is usually the last taken, but it
may, of course, be taken at any stage of the inquiry.
See also remarks under the head of Post-mortem examinations,
when and how made, pp. 5-6.
Some Coroners and Magistrates having, in order to save
time, allowed medical witnesses to write their own depositions,
the Attorney-General called attention to the practice as being
illegal, and that it should be discontinued. The depositions of
medical witnesses should be written down by the Magistrate
himself in the same manner as those of other witnesses.
In some instances, medical witnesses when giving evidence
at inquiries—where more than one such witness has been
examined —have deposed that, having read the evidence, they
concur in the medical testimony already given in the case.
The Attorney-General does not consider such evidence satis-
factory or sufficient; and, therefore, in all cases where more
than one medical witness is examined, each witness should
give his own professional opinion, independent of any other
medical testimony that may previously have been given at the
inquiry.
Where Medical Witness disobeys Summons. —Should a medical
witness not appear in answer to the summons ( Form 7), the
deposition of the Constable, on oath, must be taken of the
service of the summons; to render which effectual the Magis-
trate should, in issuing the summons, make out a copy of it,
to be compared with the original by the Constable who is to
serve it; for it is necessary that the service of the summons
should be both made and deposed to by the Constable to whom
it is delivered. (See Mode of Taking the Depositions, p. 13).
The Magistrate holding the inquiry has no power to fine a
medical witness for non-attendance; but, on proof of the
service of the summons and the disobedience of the witness,
he is liable to a penalty provided by section 5 of 1 Vic., No. 37,
which may be sued for and recovered as therein provided. The
Constable’s deposition of the service of the summons should be
attached to, and forwarded with, the other depositions in the
case.


In practice, however, it is seldom necessary to summon a
medical witness ; the Constable, by direction of the Magistrate,
verbally requests him to attend with the other witnesses.
Other Witnesses. If any person interested in the result of an
inquiry wishes to call any witnesses, or to give evidence him-
self, he may do so at the conclusion of the examination of the
witnesses called by the Constable. See pp. 9-10.
Persons found Dead. —lt has been observed that in connection
with Magisterial Inquiries held upon bodies of persons found
dead, the evidence tendered does not satisfactorily disclose the
cause of death, and the result of the inquiry is inconclusive.
This is particularly noticeable when bodies are found in rivers
or creeks, etc., and the only medical testimony given is to the
effect that, while the appearance of the body is consistent with
that of death by drowning, it cannot be positively said, owing
to the decomposed state of the organs, that death arose from
that cause. In such cases the inquiry should be of a searching
character ; for although the outward examination of a body
may perhaps be sufficient for the purpose of detecting signs
of external violence, it would be of practically no value in the
event of death having been caused by poison.
It is therefore directed that in cases where dead bodies are
found, and the cause of death is not established with reason-
able certainty by the evidence obtainable, the stomach of the
deceased should, if practicable, be secured, and submitted to
medical examination. When possible, this examination should
be made by a local medical practitioner, so that the inconveni-
ence and expense of sending the stomach and its contents to
Sydney for the purpose may be avoided. See also Analysis
or Assay, p. 6.
Describe Deceased, if unknown. —Where the deceased is un-
known, the Magistrate should endeavour to obtain the
following particulars from the witnesses, in order to facilitate
identification of the body, namely : Height—colour of hair—
colour of eyes —apparent age—complexion—whether bald,
wore whiskers or moustache —dress—stout or light build
distinctive or natural marks on body. Any papers, trinkets,
&c., found on the body should be described, or any other
means of identity. See also remarks under heading Unknown
Persons, p. 34.
Information to be obtained from the Witnesses. —During the ex-
amination of the witnesses, the Magistrate should endeavour
to elicit from them the following information, viz. : —The
particulars required for filling up the Death Register (p. 32)
—whether intemperance was the direct or indirect cause of


death (p. 321 —whether deceased died intestate and possessed of
property, leaving no next of kin in the State (p. 33) —whether
deceased was a pauper at the time of his death, having no
friends able or willing to bury him (p. 31) —if deceased was a
foreigner, to what state or country did he belong (p. 33) —and
the necessary particulars for the District Registrar (p. 33). By
referring to the Memoranda at page 29, the Magistrate will be
enabled to see at a glance the information required under the
several heads mentioned in this paragraph.
Inquivy may he adjourned. —If, during the inquiry, it appear
that there are absent persons who can give material evidence,
dr that it will be necessary to direct a surgeon to perform a
post-mortem examination, or for the attendance of an interpreter
or to obtain an analysis of the contents of the stomach, or for
any other reason that the Magistrate may deem sufficient, he
may adjourn the inquiry till a later hour of the same day, or
to another day, at the same or any other place, and the fol-
lowing form of words may be used by the Magistrate or
Constable in the hearing of those present :
‘‘ This inquiry is now adjourned [to the Commercial Hotel,
Wilcannia] until Tuesday next , the 26th instant, at 10 o'clock.
In most cases, the witnesses who have already given their
evidence will not be required again, and their claims for pay-
ment, if any, should be noted. See Witnesses' expenses , under
the head of “ Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.”
Where a witness is injured so much as not to be able to
attend an inquiry, the Magistrate may adjourn the inquiry to
the place where such injured witness lies, for the purpose of
taking his evidence.
The inquiry may be adjourned from time to time, as often
as may be requisite, to obtain all necessary information
respecting the cause of death under investigation, and an
entry of every adjournment and resumption should be made
upon the depositions as directed in the article on the Mode
op Taking the Depositions , p. 13.
An adjournment should be made for as short a time as is
consistent with the nature of the case, and the difficulty of
bringing the evidence forward. In the use of this power of
adjournment, great discretion is necessary, because undue or
frequent adjournment is the cause of inconvenience and
complaint, and the Magistrate should not practise it except
upon absolutely real necessity.
Resumption of Inquiry after Adjournment. —At the time and
place mentioned in the adjournment, the Constable again
meets the Magistrate with such additional witnesses as may be


thought necessary, and the inquiry is resumed. The evidence
of the further witnesses is then taken in the same way and
with the like formalities as were observed at the first exam-
ination, preceded by a fresh caption. See Mode of Taking the
Depositions, under the sub-head of Resumption, p. 13.
Magistrate's Finding. —At the conclusion of the examination
of all the witnesses the Magistrate formally draws up his
opinion respecting the cause of death (called the Magistrate’s
Finding), which he openly declares to those present, and
attaches it to the depositions. If the case be a difficult one,
and the Magistrate wishes to have time to consider his
Finding, he may adjourn the inquiry for that purpose.
The Certificate of the Magistrate's Finding (Form 4) should
state the name of the deceased, and the time, place and
manner of the death ; and in all cases of persons found dead,
or of supposed drowning, it should state whether there are any
external marks of violence on the body. If the name of the
deceased be unknown he may be described as “a certain
person unknown.”
In every case of death from violence, the finding should
show how the injuries were received—accidentally or
otherwise.
In cases where no direct evidence can be obtained respecting
the death of any deceased person found upon the sea-coast, or
in any river or other water, the body should be carefully
examined externally, and should there be no appearance of
violence or suspicion of foul play, the Finding should state that
the person was “found dead,” as it is not always practicable
in these cases to determine, even by a post-mortem examination,
whether death has been occasioned by drowning or not. See
also remarks under Persons found dead, p. 22.
A copy of the Finding should in all cases be kept, together
with the date and place of the inquiry, and the Magistrate
should allow any member of the Police force to take a copy
thereof.
Conclusion. —This brings the inquiry to a termination, and
the Magistrate then thanks the witnesses for having willingly
given their time and assistance at the investigation, and
relieves them from further attendance.
Duties of Police at Magisterial Inquiries.
[Extract from “ Rules for the Police Force, 1884.”)
When the body of any deceased person is found by the
Police, or reported to them as having been found, it should be


removed to the nearest public-house in the neighbourhood ;
but where there are two or more public-houses near to each
other, they should be used alternately.
A report stating, if possible, the names of the deceased, and
the manner of death, should be made immediately to the
Coroner, if there be one, or, if not, to the nearest Magistrate,
in all cases of violent death, casualties by which death ensues,
sudden deaths, persons found dead, persons committing
suicide, prisoners dying in any of His Majesty’s gaols or other
places of confinement, prisoners executed in gaols, and in all
cases where death is suspected to have occurred from foul
play ; and such a report, together with the result of the
Coroner’s Inquest or Magisterial Inquiry, should be made to
the Inspector-General, on a Form which is supplied to them
for that purpose. See Form 10.
The appearance of such body, the position in which it was
found, and the probable length of time dead, should be noted ;
and it should then be carefully searched, and anything found
thereon should be kept in the custody of the Police, and
produced at the inquest or inquiry.
If the Police are unable to secure the attendance of a
Coroner, they should forthwith report the matter to the
nearest Magistrate, or take other necessary steps so that an
inquiry may be held as soon as possible.
A Constable should remain in charge of the body until an
inquest or inquiry has been held thereon.
Summonses should be personally served upon the witnesses
or persons who may have found the body, or know any circum-
stances connected with the death of the deceased, and also
upon the medical man who first saw the body, and any other
medical man who can give evidence touching the death. If no
medical man can be procured to examine the body, the Con-
stable must make the best examination he can himself.
The Constable should produce at the inquest or inquiry any
papers or other property found on searching the body of the
deceased, and any weapon or instrument found that might be
supposed to have been the means of death—such as a knife,
razor, pistol, or any bottle, or paper, &c., containing poison.
If the wound consists of a cut, the length, breadth, and
depth should be ascertained as far as possible, together with
its exact appearances. If firearms appear to have been the
cause of the death, it is desirable to find the bullet or any other
matter which may have entered the body ; but a medical man
should generally make any examination of the body that may
be necessary for the purpose, and in all cases, before the body


or any weapon or other article which could in any way be con-
nected with the case is moved, or the position of the body
altered, care should be taken that every particular is noted
in writing.
Should there be wounds or other marks of violence on the
body, it is of importance to ascertain and get possession of the
instrument (if any) with which such wounds or marks have
been inflicted.
The Police should not take upon themselves to bury the
body without an order from the Coroner or a Magistrate, un-
less it is impracticable to obtain one.
Upon inquiries into deaths caused by violence, the Police
Officer in charge of the station at the time must consider him-
self as the person whose special duty it is to get up the case
for the Coroner or Magistrate.
Reports in the proper form are to be made respecting all in-
quests or inquiries. If the deceased died intestate, and
possessed of property, full particulars respecting the same
must be promptly transmitted to the District Agent for the
Curator of Intestate Estates, together with declaration of death
and intestacy.in the prescribed form. The cost of funeral ex-
penses will form the first charge upon the deceased’s property.
In case any new-born child or any dead body shall be found
exposed, the Constable, in case of a new-born child, and the
Coroner, or if none such, the nearest Justice, in the case of a
dead body, shall forthwith inform the District Registrar there-
of, and of the place where such child or dead body was found ;
and where an Inquest or Magisterial Inquiry shall be held on
any dead body, the Coroner or Magistrate (as the case may be)
shall notify to the District Registrar the verdict of the jury or
the opinion of such Magistrate, with all other particulars re-
quired to be registered concerning the death.
Forms of Magistrates’ Findings.
For the purpose of assisting the Magistrate in formally
writing out his finding, the following specimens are given, and
are numbered in such a manner that a finding, which may be’
altered to suit any particular case, can be easily picked out by
referring to the Contents of this book. Form 4 will be copied to
the words “ I find as follows,” and then add the particulars,
modified from some of the cases given below :
i. That J. S., at Byrock, in the Bourke District in the State
aforesaid, on the 22nd April, 1902, died from cardiacal
apoplexy [or, cerebral apoplexy.]


2. Or, died from asphyxia caused by strangulation, which
was the result of his own act.
3. Or, died from haemorhage from a wound in his throat in-
flicted by himself the same day.
4. Or, died of congestion of the lungs, accelerated by in-
temperance.
5. Or, died of nervous exhaustion, resulting from excessive
drinking.
6. Or, died from a gunshot wound in his chest (accidentally)
inflicted by himself the same day.
7. Or, died from congestion of the brain caused by sun-
stroke.
8. That J. S., at the Singleton Hospital, in the town of
Singleton, in the District of Patrick’s Plains, in the
State aforesaid, on the 23rd of April, 1902 [died from
the effects of injuries accidentally received by falling
from his horse (or a building, &c.) at Boggy Flat, on
the 22nd of the same month.]
9. Or, died from the effects of burns (or scalds) accidentally
received on the 19th of the said month.
10. Or, died from the effects of a certain poison, known as
concentrated acetic acid (accidentally) taken by himself
on the same day.
11. That J.S., in the waters ot the Darling River, at Menin-
die, in the District of Mitchell, in the State aforesaid,
on the 20th of May, 1902 [was found dead without any
marks of violence appearing on his body, but whether
his death was caused by drowning, or not, there is not
sufficient evidence to show.]
12. Or, died from asphyxia caused by drowning, and that
such drowning was the result of accident whilst bathing
on the same day.
13. Or, died from asphyxia caused by drowning, and that
such drowning was the result of his own act.
14. That J.S. (or a man unknown), on the Goorangoola
Road, near Bridgeman, in the District of Patrick’s
Plains, in the State aforesaid, on the Bth of May, 1902,
was found dead, without any marks of violence appear -
on his body, and that the cause of death was disease of
the heart (or starvation).
15. Or, and that there is not sufficient evidence to show the
cause of death.


16. That part of the body, namely the skull [or as the case
may be] of an adult person, name and’sex unknown, on
the bank of the Hunter River, near Bowman’s crossing-
place, in the District of Patrick’s Plains, in the State
aforesaid, on the 10th of April, 1902, was found, without
any marks of violence appearing thereon, but where,
when, or how such person came by his or her death the
evidence adduced is not sufficient to show.
17. That J.S., at Seven Hills, in the District of Parramatta,
in the State aforesaid, on the 3rd of April, 1902, died
from asphyxia, caused by being accidentally overlain by
his mother.
18. That J.S., on the Great Northern Railway line, near
Rix’s Creek platform, in the District of Patrick’s Plains,
in the State aforesaid, on the 21st of July, 1902, died
from injuries accidentally received through being struck
by a passing train.
19. That at Guildford, in the District of Parramatta, in the
State aforesaid, on the 23rd of March, 1902, the skeleton
of J.S. [or a man unknown] was found, but how he
came by his death the evidence is insufficient to show.
Recapitulation of Practical Instructions for
Holding Inquiries.
When a Magistrate is apprised by the Police of a death
respecting the cause of which he considers an inquiry
necessary, he fixes a time and place for holding it, to suit as
far as possible the convenience of all persons concerned (p. 7).
If a doctor’s evidence be thought necessary, a summons is
issued to, or the Constable is requested to communicate
verbally with, the Medical Officer for the District, or other
available medical man (pp. 5 and 7).
If the death occurred on the railway, notice should be sent
to the proper officer (pp. 8 and 9).
Should an Interpreter be required, the Constable must
■endeavour to find a competent person for this duty, and have
him in attendance (pp. 7-8).
When the time arrives at which the inquiry is to be held,
the Magistrate proceeds to the place appointed, taking with
him the requisite materials for taking down the depositions, a
Bible, and this Handbook. He then meets the Constable with
the exhibits, witnesses, &c. (p. 18).


The Magistrate may view the body, if thought desirable, or
he may dispense with such view (p. 18).
On assembling in the room where the proceedings are to be
conducted, the Constable announces that the Magisterial
inquiry is now open.
The examination of the witnesses (p. 19) is then proceeded
with, and their depositions (p. 10) taken down in accordance
with the directions given under those heads.
Persons interested in the result of the proceedings may be
present to cross-examine witnesses, or tender evidence (p. 22).
For any reason the Magistrate may deem sufficient he may
adjourn the inquiry to a future day, or to a later hour of the
same day, to the same or another place (p. 23). The inquiry
may be adjourned as often as found necessary. If the witnesses
already examined will not be again required, they should be so
informed (p. 23).
On resumption after adjournment, if any, the Constable
again declares the inquiry open, as he did in the first instance.
If the body be that of an unknown person, it ought to be
carefully described, to assist in identification (p. 22).
During the examination of the witnesses, the Magistrate
should endeavour to elicit from them the particulars
enumerated under the head of Information to be obtained from the
Witnesses (pp. 22-23.)
When all the evidence has been taken, the Magistrate draws
up his formal Finding, and delivers it in open court (p. 24.)
After the inquiry is terminated—or before if it be adjourned,
or if thought necessary to prevent infection—the Magistrate
writes out the burial certificate, and delivers it to the party
having charge of the funeral (p. 31). If the deceased be a
pauper, arrangements must be made for his interment at the
public expense.
As soon after the conclusion of the inquiry as possible, the
Magistrate should make out the accounts, and prepare the
whole of the proceedings for transmission, as directed in the
articles on Preparation and Rendering of Accounts and Transmission
of Proceedings, given in Chapter 111.
Memoranda of Information to be Obtained from
the Witnesses.
As some of the information referred to in these memoranda
need not appear in the depositions, it is convenient in practice
to have Form 9 lying at hand, in which the particulars


elicited from the witnesses can be at once inserted. As most
of the items in Form 8 are also required for Form g, they have
not been repeated under the latter head.
For Death Register—Form 8.
Name of deceased, or description of body (if not identified.)
Age, and where born.
Date and place of death.
Cause of death.
Whether or not intemperance directly or indirectly
-contributed to the cause of deceased’s death.
Value of deceased’s Property, and name and address of
nearest relative, if known.
For the District Registrar—Form 9.
Calling or occupation, and sex.
How long in the State ?
Undertaker’s name.
Christian name, surname, and occupation of father.
Christian name and maiden name of mother.
Where, at what age, and to whom was deceased married ?
Names and ages of all children living.
Names of males and females deceased.
If married more than once, the like information in regard to
each marriage.
For the Curator's Agent.
Did deceased die intestate, leaving no next of kin in the
State ? Was he a bachelor at the time of his death ?
If so, did he leave any property—what does it consist of—
where is it situated—and what is its approximate value ?
Where did deceased reside—and what are the names and
addresses of his nearest relatives (if any known) ?
For General Purposes.
If a foreigner, to what State did deceased belong ?
Was the deceased a pauper ?*
* Where the deceased is unknown, the particulars given at p. 22 should
be elicited from the witnesses.


CHAPTER 111.
PROCEDURE AFTER CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY.
Miscellaneous Directions.
Burial of the body, in ordinary cases. -If the Magistrate views
the body, or if he considers such view unnecessary, and is
satisfied that it will not be required for a post-mortem examina-
tion, or if he deems speedy interment desirable, in order to
prevent infection, he will, before the commencement of the in-
quiry, issue his certificate for the burial of the body. This can
be done by writing out a copy of Form 5 of this Handbook, and
filling in the necessary name and date. If the body has not
been ordered to be buried in the first instance, then, in the
event of an adjournment of the inquiry, the Magistrate should
make out the burial certificate and hand it to the friends of the
deceased, or to the undertaker, unless the body be required
for a post-mortem examination. But, in any case, at the con-
clusion of the inquiry, if the body has not previously been
buried, an order, in accordance with Form 5, will be given for
its interment.
Burial of deceased paupers. —lf the Magistrate has ascertained
that the deceased was a pauper, and that there are no relatives
or friends able or willing to defray the cost of his burial, in-
structions should be given to the Police to make arrange-
ments with some person in the locality for his interment at the
public expense ; but, before forwarding the accounts for these
services to the Department, the Magistrate should satisfy him-
self, by careful inquiry, through the Police or otherwise, that
the charge made in each case is strictly moderate, and the
lowest price for which the work could reasonably be performed ;
and, also, that the requisite particulars are stated on the
voucher in every instance—that is to say, the cost of the coffin,
the distance and expense of conveying the body to the place of
interment, digging grave, and the amount of grave fees (if
any). For form of certificate to be endorsed on these vouch-
ers, and the explanation to be given when the amount
charged exceeds £(2, see Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.


Circulars have at different times been issued to Magistrates
by the Department of Justice, calling attention to the excessive
charges frequently made for the burial of paupers, and point-
ing out that the remains may be interred in a shell or coffin of
the plainest description, for which service 30s or f'l would, in
most cases, seem to be sufficient remuneration.
Particulars required for Death Register. —Magistrates are also
required in every case to furnish the following information on
the Form G 245, called the “ Death Register,” supplied for
the purpose by the Government Printer (see Form 8), namely :
1. Name of deceased.
2. His (or her) age.
3. Where born.
4. Locality where death occurred.
5. Cause of death.
6. Whether post-mortem examination was held.
7. Whether or not intemperance directly or indirectly
contributed to the cause of deceased’s death.
8. Value of deceased's property, and name and
address of nearest relative, if known.
The information required in the first, fourth and fifth
columns will transpire during the ordinary process of the in-
quiry ; and the remainder should be obtained from any of the
witnesses able to supply it whilst giving their evidence.
A tabulated statement consisting of the particulars required
under the respective headings indicated on Form 8 is prepared
every year from the information thus furnished by Coroners
and Magistrates throughout the colony; respecting all inquests
and inquiries held by them in cases of deaths from the ist of
January to the 31st of December in each year ; and such state-
ment is published in the Government Gazette during the first
quarter of the ensuing year.
Deaths caused by Intemperance. —As information tending to
show the number of deaths arising directly or indirectly from in-
temperance, where inquests or Magisterial Inquiries shall have
been held, is considered valuable for statistical purposes, it is
requested that in all cases the Magistrate will append to the
proceedings of each inquiry a memorandum, stating whether
intemperance has, or has not, in his opinion, been the im-
mediate or more or less remote cause of the death in question.
The information asked for should, therefore, be elicited from
some of the witnesses during their examination, and inserted
in the proper column in Form 8.


Information for the District Registrar. —By the 28th section of
19 Victoria, No. 34. a Magistrate holding an inquiry is required
to notify to the District Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Marriages, all particulars required to be registered concerning
the death, together with the opinion of such Magistrate, as to
the cause thereof. This information should be furnished on a
form supplied for the purpose by the Registrar-General (Form
9). The Magistrate should fill in the particulars, as nearly as
he can ascertain them, under the several printed headings in
such form, and forward it to the District-Registrar by post or
otherwise (See also p. 30).
Deceased Foreigners. —When the deceased person on whom
the inquiry has been held is a foreigner, having no relatives in
the district, the Magistrate should forthwith give information
to the Consul of the State or Country to which such person
belonged, furnishing particulars of property (if any) possessed
by deceased.
Persons Dying Intestate. - In cases where the subject of the
inquiry died intestate, and possessed of property, leaving no
next of kin in the State entitled to his real and personal estate,
the Police are required to promptly transmit full particulars
respecting the same to the District Agent of the Curator of
Intestate Estates, giving the nature and probable value of his
property, and where situated, together with the names and
addresses of his nearest relatives, if any known. The form of
declaration to accompany these particulars is given in Form 11 .
If the Magistrate holding the inquiry think the matter may be
overlooked by the Police, he should himself bring the case
under the notice of the Curator’s Agent.
The cost of burial will be the first charge on the property of
deceased, and the Curator’s Agent is the only person who can
pay such expenses, by the sale of deceased’s effects; the
Magistrate has no authority to do so, even if sufficient ready
money for that purpose be found on the body. On receiving
the necessary information and declaration (Form 11) from the
Police, of the death of any person intestate, leaving any real or
personal estate liable to be collected by him, the District Agent
of the Curator of Intestate Estates is required to take posses-
sion of the property of the deceased, and as soon as a sale
thereof is effected, he may pay out of the proceeds the claims
for funeral expenses, if verified by affidavits, when not exceed-
ing £5 ; but when exceeding that sum the balance will be paid
by the Curator, if certified to as reasonable by the District
Agent. In estates where the -amount of assets is small, the
funeral expenses must hot exceed £5. Charges for refresh-
ments at the burials will not be allowed.


Report by Police to Inspector-General. - The Police are in-
structed to furnish reports respecting all inquests and inquiries
to the Inspector-General, and in order to help them to do so,
the Magistrate should allow the Police-Officer who has had'
charge of the case to take a copy of the Finding or any other
information he may require. These reports by the Police are
made on printed forms supplied them for the purpose, with
columns specifying the particulars required, and although the
Magistrate has nothing to do with filling up such reports, and
is in no way responsible for them, yet a copy of the form used
by the Police (Form 10) is given in this work, in order that
the Magistrate may see what information the Police-Officer
requires.
Unknown Persons. —ln cases where a person is unknown at
the time of holding the inquiry (p. 22), but his name is sub-
sequently ascertained, evidence of such identity should be
taken down in writing by the Magistrate, in the form of a
declaration, and forwarded to the Department of the Attorney-
General and of Justice, in order that it may be attached to the
proceedings of the inquiry.
Obtaining Funeral Expenses from Societies. —ln any Society in
which a sum of money may be insured payable on the death of
a child, for the funeral expenses of such child, the sum so in-
sured will not be paid to any person unless he produce a
certificate signed by a legally qualified medical practitioner,
stating the probable cause of death. In places distant more
than ten miles from the residence of a legally qualified medical
practitioner, the certificate referred to may be given and signed
by the Coroner of the District, or a Justice of the Peace.—37
Vic., No. 4, s. 20.
If a Magistrate should hold an inquiry in such a case, the
certificate furnished by him to the person applying for the
same, may be to the effect of Form 4, adding the following
words at the end of the finding :
“ It does not appear to me that the death of the said
J.S. has been caused by wilful neglect or any improper
conduct on the part of any person interested in obtaining
burial money from any Society.”
If no inquiry has been held, the required certificate may
consist only of the words given in inverted commas in the last
paragraph, altered to meet the requirements of the case.


Preparation and Rendering C& Accounts.
Inconvenience and delay having occasionally arisen in the
payment of accounts, through the Magistrate not being aware'
of, or not complying with, the regulations and formalities to be
observed in rendering accounts, it has been thought desirable
under this head to give full directions as to the filling up and
transmission of every account which can occur in practice. By
carefully reading these instructions a Magistrate will have no
difficulty in preparing all the accounts in connection with the
inquiry.
Forms required at Inquiries. —As,soon as the Magistrate is
requested to hold an inquir/- respecting the death of any
person, he may write to the Under Secretary, Depart-
ment of the Attorney-General and of Justice, and ask that the
following printed forms be supplied to him : -
a. Voucher for Magistrate’s fee for conducting the
Inquiry.
b. Voucher for Medical Witness’ Fee.
c. Voucher for Witnesses’ Expenses.
d. Form of Justice’s Information of Death.
e. Death Register, G 245.
/. Voucher for Burial of Paupers.
g. Voucher for fees to Interpreters, Publicans, &c
In lieu of particularising the forms in this way, it would be
sufficient to ask for “ all the printed forms necessary in con-
nection with a Magisterial Inquiry.”
Or, instead of applying for the printed forms in the first
instance, as above suggested, the Magistrate may, on com-
pletion of the Inquiry, transmit the Depositions, &c. (see p. 41),
to the Department, and attach a memorandum thereto, stating
what Vouchers and other forms he requires to enable him to
furnish the necessary information, and they will be forwarded
to him without delay. He can then fill them up as directed
in these pages, and transmit them to the proper officers, under
registered cover.
Any Magistrate who is likely to be often called upon to
hold inquiries will find it convenient to obtain from the
Department a few -copies of the necessary forms, and keep
them on hand for use as required.
Magistrates' Fees for holding inquiries. —The fee for holding
each Magisterial Inquiry is £i, and travelling expenses at the
rate of is. 6d. for every mile from the Magistrate’s usual place
of residence to the place where the inquiry is held. Only one


fee of £1 is allowed for the same inquiry, no matter how often
it is adjourned, but the Magistrate will be allowed is. 6d. per
mile for every journey he has to make for the purpose of con-
tinuing the inquiry. No mileage is allowed for the return
journey in any case. In districts where there are facilities for
travelling by railway, which can be availed of by the
Magistrate when holding an inquiry, he.will be paid gd. per
mile one way, instead of the higher rate of is. 6d. per mile,
above mentioned.
In cases where the Magistrate can avail himself of travel-
ling by railway for a part only of the journey in going to hold
an inquiry, he will be paid gd. per mile for such part, and
is. 6d. per mile for the remainder.
The travelling allowances above enumerated are expected to
cover all expenses that may be incurred by the Magistrate in
the holding of inquiries. No application for increased travel-
ling expenses will be entertained unless the circumstances of
the case are of a very special or exceptional character.
If two or more inquiries be held in the same place, on the
same day, the Magistrate will, of course, be only entitled to
one allowance of mileage. And where an inquiry is held on
the bodies of several persons who died from the same cause,
and at the same time, it will be treated as one inquiry, and
only one fee of £1 will be payable.
The account for these fees should be rendered in duplicate
on the prescribed form, supplied on application by the
Department. See also Stationery, p. 38.
Sometimes the Magistrate is paid a special fee where the
inquiry is frequently adjourned. In such case the Magistrate
should submit to the Minister an account for what he
considers a fair remuneration, and it will be dealt with on its
merits.
If the inquiry be held by a Police Magistrate, he is en-
titled to 15s. per day, in addition to the cost of hired con-
veyance, if any ; or if he use his own conveyance, then he is
paid 7d. per mile both ways.
Fees to Medical Witnesses. —A medical witness is allowed for
each inquiry one guinea for attending and giving evidence, and,
in addition thereto, two guineas for each post-mortem examination.
No mileage is chargeable where the distance is under ten
miles from the residence of the medical witness, but he is
allowed is. per mile one way for every mile beyond ten from
his residence to the place where the inquiry is held. He will
also be allowed a fee of one guinea for every day which he
actually attends at an inquiry, in cases where it has been ad-
journed ; together with travelling expenses, the same as in the


first instance, for every journey he takes to attend such inquiry.
The account should be rendered on the prescribed Form,
supplied by the Department. See p. 35.
The form, when filled up and signed by the medical witness,
should be left with the Magistrate, who will insert the name
of the doctor, and forward it for payment to the Chief Medical
Officer of the Government. One copy of this account will be
sufficient, as it is not required to be rendered in duplicate.
Where the death shall have happened in any hospital, gaol,
or public institution, no medical officer appointed with salary
to attend thereat shall be entitled to any remuneration. These
fees are, however, sometimes allowed where deceased is re-
ceived into an institution in a dying state, and expires within a
few hours after admission.
In exceptional and special cases where a medical witness
has travelled over three miles to the scene of an inquiry, the
Magistrate may represent the facts to the . Chief Medical
Officer of the Government, with a view to the witness being
specially remunerated. In every such case the Magistrate
should state the length of time the doctor was absent from his
residence, the means of conveyance employed by him, and the
actual expenses out of pocket he incurred.
Fees to Interpreter. —When it is found necessary to employ an
interpreter, the Magistrate should make the best terms he can
with any competent person. The scale of fees fixed by the
Government for Chinese interpreters is ios. per day, or ss. if
occupied for less than two hours, and it is thought that this is
a fair fee for any other class of interpreters; but as much
depends on the scarcity of interpreters, or the class of person
employed, the maximum daily fee fixed by the superior courts
is 30s. Interpreters, if residing within 10 miles of the place
of holding the enquiry, are sometimes allowed travelling
expenses of 4s. per day, and if residing more than 10 miles, of
Bs. per day, in addition to the above fees.
The account for interpreters’ fees should be rendered in
duplicate on the prescribed form, and may be stated as follows :
“ Acting as Interpreter at a Magisterial Inquiry, held by A. 8.,
J.P., respecting the death of C.D. at on 19 ,
occupied less than two hours, ss. [or, occupied more than two
hours, ios.]”
Fees to Publicans. —Every licensed publican who shall receive
a dead body upon his premises for the purpose of an inquest
or inquiry (p. 8) is entitled to a fee of 305., the account for
which should be submitted in duplicate, in the name of the
publican, on the prescribed form, to the following effect: —


“ Receiving upon my licensed premises, at Dubbo, known as
the Travellers' Rest Inn, the dead body of J.S., for the purpose
of a Magisterial Inquiry, which was subsequently held thereon
by A. 8., J.P., on 19 ,£1 10s.”
Rewards for taking up the bodies of persons found drowned. —A fee
of five shillings is allowed for each body so taken up, and
claims for these services should be rendered in duplicate, in
the name of the claimant, on the prescribed form, and may be
to the following effect: —
“ Taking up out of the Lachlan River at Oxley , the dead
body of J.S., found drowned therein, on which a Magisterial
Inquiry was subsequently held by A 8., J.P , on the
19 > SS.
Stationery —A stationery allowance of is. 3d. will be made to
the Magistrate in respect of each Inquiry held by him ; but
such allowance will not be paid to a Magistrate who is a
salaried officer of the Government, as he may obtain the
necessary stationery from the Court of Petty Sessions in the
locality where the Inquiry is held. This amount should be
included in the account rendered by the Magistrate for his
fees and travelling expenses in connection with the Inquiry.
The item may be stated as under :
“ Stationery used in Magisterial Inquiry respecting the
death of J.S., held at on 19 , is. 3d.”
The cost of postage and registration of the proceedings con-
nected with the Inquiry may also be added.
Fees for the Burial of deceased Paupers. —There is no regular
scale of charges for the burial of paupers, but the Magistrate
conducting the inquiry should take care that the Government
is not imposed upon. (See Miscellaneous Directions , pp. 31-32).
The account for these services should be rendered in duplicate
on the prescribed form, and the particulars may be stated as
follows :
“June ist, 1902. To burial of J.S Making a plain shell
coffin, 20s. ; conveying body to place of interment, ss. ; digging
grave, ss. ; and grave fees (if any).” The voucher should be
rendered in duplicate, in the name of the undertaker or person
by whom the body was buried.
In cases where an Inquiry has been held, the following
certificate should be written on the voucher, and signed by
the Magistrate, without which the claim will not be passed for
payment:—


“ I hereby certify that a Magisterial Inquiry was held by
me in this case, and that the proceedings were forwarded to
the Department of the Attorney General and of Justice on
[date] ; that the deceased was a pauper at the time of his [or
her] death, and left no relatives or friends able or willing to
defray the cost of burial expenses ; and that the charge is
strictly moderate, and the lowest price for which the services
could reasonably be performed. 1 ’
In cases where the Magistrate has thought an inquiry re-
specting the death of a pauper unnecessary, and has given a
certificate to that effect as per Form 6, merely authorising the
burial of the body, the endorsement on the voucher will be
varied as follows .
“ I hereby certify that no Magisterial Inquiry has been
held by me in this case, as I considered the same un-
necessary ; that the deceased was a pauper ” (and so on,
as in the last case).
In addition to the certificate to be written on the face of
the voucher, it will be necessary to furnish with the accounts
for the burial of paupers-in all cases where the amount
charged exceeds the maximum amount of £ 2 —a special ex-
planation of the circumstances of the case, and the reasons
for incurring the additional expenditure. This explanation
may be given in a paragraph in the letter (Form i) transmitting
the proceedings.
Witnesses' Expenses. —When expenses are claimed by wit-
nesses attending to give evidence at Magisterial Inquiries, they
should, at the conclusion of the Inquiry, submit their claims in
accordance with the following scale, to the Police, who will be
supplied with the necessary vouchers for signature, and will
forward the claims to the Department for consideration. No
expenses will be allowed if any excessive or improper charge is
attempted to be made.
(a). Witnesses will be allowed actual and necessary out-of-
pocket expenses for cost of conveyance and sustenance, whilst
going to and returning from the Inquiry.
(b). In addition to the above, witnesses who suffer a loss of
wages by reason of their attendence at a Magisterial Inquiry,
will beqpaid an allowance not exceeding six shillings per day.
(r). In addition to expenses under (a), expert witnesses are
allowed a reasonable fee.
(d). When witnesses travel by rail or steamer, first or second
class fares will be allowed them, according to their station in
life.


(e). All witnesses who travel by their own horses or vehicles
will be paid (in addition to their personal sustenance expenses
on the journey to and from the place of holding the inquiry) a
fixed rate of 6d. per mile for the distance travelled one way
only. Such allowance must cover forage and stabling ex-
penses, and include compensation for the use of their own
horses or vehicles.
General remarks respecting accounts —ln order to avoid repeti-
tion, it has been thought desirable to give under this head a
few general directions respecting the filling up of all the
foregoing forms of accounts, or vouchers, as they are commonly
called, and the names of the officers to whom they should be
submitted.
The Magistrate conducting the inquiry is responsible for the
rendering of all accounts in connection with it, and as he has
to countersign every voucher, without which it will not be
paid, it is recommended that he should fill up all the vouchers
for fees and allowances in connection with the inquiry, in order
that all the information required in the different columns, may
be given in a complete and accurate manner ; and that, when
so filled up, he should get the persons entitled to the fees to
sign the Forms in the proper places. A separate account must
be rendered by each claimant ; but if one claimant perform
several services, he may charge for them all in one account.
The Police deal with Witnesses' Expenses, p. 39.
The vouchers for fees to medical witnesses, filled up as
previously directed, should be forwarded direct to the Chief
Medical Officer of the Government, and all necessary informa-
tion should, at the same time, be furnished to that officer to
enable him to deal with such claims.
If the Magistrate have more than one Inquiry during the
month, at which a medical witness is required, he may send
all the vouchers for such witnesses to the officer mentioned, at
the close of the month.
Accounts for the burial of deceased paupers, respecting
whose death no Magisterial Inquiry has been held, when filled
up as directed, and the necessary certificate endorsed thereon,
should be forwarded direct to the Principal Under-Secretary,.
Colonial Secretary’s Department, and are chargeable against
an amount provided for the burial of destitute persons in cases
where no written evidence has been taken.
All the other accounts in connection with the inquiry,
including that for the Magistrate’s own fee, should be for-
warded direct to the Under-Secretary, Department of the
Attorney-General and of Justice. The accounts should be


rendered as early as possible after the conclusion of the inquiry,
and if any of them amount to £?. or upwards, should have a
duty stamp affixed and duly cancelled.
All vouchers for the payment of fees, with the exception of
those to medical witnesses, must be furnished in duplicate, in
order that a record of the details of the same may be kept by
the Department to which they are sent.
Sometimes the parties performing the service are persons
having no fixed place of abode—may, in fact, at the time be
travelling about the country ; this applies more particularly ta
the class of men who recover bodies of persons found drowned,
interpreters, and those who effect the burial of paupers in the
interior of the State. To such persons it would obviously be
very inconvenient to render the accounts in their own names,
and wait till they were paid by the Department. In such cases
it is recommended that the Magistrate should pay the parties
out of his own pocket, first getting them to sign the printed
authority on the voucher, filled up in his (the Magistrate’s)
name. He then writes on the face of the voucher of each
claimant whom he has so paid the following authority, request-
ing the money to be paid to his own credit in any bank he may
desire:—
“ I hereby authorize the amount of the above account
to be paid on my behalf to the Bank of New South Wales,
Bourke. A. 8., J.P.”
The Magistrate should obtain vouchers, filled up and signed
in a similar manner, from every person whom he pays. He
then forwards these accounts to the Under-Secretary, Depart-
ment of the Attorney-General and of Justice —the Principal
Under-Secretary, Colonial Secretary’s Department —or the
Medical Adviser to the Government, as the case may he, and is
paid precisely as if he had himself performed the different
services.
Transmission of Proceedings.
As soon as convenient after the termination of the inquiry,
the Magistrate should forward the proceedings, under regis-
tered cover, to the Under-Secretary, Department of the
Attorney-General and of Justice, accompanied by a letter,,
something to the effect of that given in Form 1.
When the Coroner is absent from his district, or is ill, or is
unable from any cause to hold an inquest and a Justice of the
Peace holds a Magisterial Inquiry, he should state in his letter
(Form 1), transmitting the proceedings, the reason of his
having held such inquiry.


In cases of “ deaths from natural causes,” the Magistrate is
requested to insert in such letter a paragraph explanatory of
any special features of the case, other than those appearing in
the depositions, which may have induced him to incur the
expense of an inquiry.
The Police report (Form 3) referred to at pages 7 and 25,
upon receipt of which a Magisterial inquiry is held, should be
attached to the proceedings as an exhibit to the Constable’s
deposition.
The proceedings should be fastened together with a metal
fastener, or with tape, and the pages regularly numbered,
and correctly placed. The letter above referred to (Form 1)
will be the first page, the caption (Form 2) the second
page ; then will follow the depositions in the same order as
they were written down, at the end of which should come the
“ Exhibits,” if any, in the order in which they were produced
in evidence. After the depositions (or after the Exhibits) will
follow the “ Magistrate’s Finding ( Form 4). To those who
are unaccustomed to fastening documents of this kind together,
it may be as well to state that the pages should read from the
top downwards as they lie open on the table—not from the
bottom upwards.
In the same envelope with the proceedings, but not fastened to
them, —or under a separate cover—should be forwarded the
Death Register ( Form 8), filled up with all particulars
mentioned at the head of the columns, together with all the
accounts in connection with the case (excepting accounts for
the burial of paupers where no inquiry has been held, p. 40),
and medical witnesses’ accounts (p. 40), which should be
transmitted to the officers mentioned in Preparation and Render-
ing of Accounts. The information for the District Registrar
should be forwarded direct to that officer, as stated at p. 33.
The postage on all correspondence in connection with an
Inquiry must be prepaid by the Magistrate by means of
postage stamps As inconvenience and delay have been
frequently occasioned in consequence of depositions and other
proceedings taken at Magisterial Inquiries having gone astray
in transit to the Department of the Attorney-General and of
Justice, it is now necessary that all such proceedings be trans-
mitted under registered cover.
The cost of the postage stamps, and of the registration, will
be refunded to the Magistrate, as explained under the heading
of Stationery, p. 38.


FORMS.
Under this heading it is proposed to introduce the most in-
dispensable of the Forms used in connection with Magisterial
Inquiries. Forms 1 to 4 are not printed, and have to be
written out by the party requiring them.
Forms 5 to 9, together with all Account Forms, can be ob-
tained on application to the Under-Secretary, Department of
the Attorney-General and of Justice, as already explained at
P- 35-
Forms 5 and 6, although printed, are frequently written out
by the Magistrate, when not on hand.
Forms 10 and 11 are used by the Police, whose duty it is to
provide them. See pp. 33-34.
Form i.
Magistrate's Letter to accompany Proceedings.
Sir, —I have the honour to forward herewith the depositions
taken at a Magisterial Inquiry, held by me, on the
of 19 , respecting the death of one J. S. (or a man
unknown, as the case may be), with my finding thereon ; to
which is appended the Police report, in consequence of which
I held the Inquiry.
Mr. A. 8., Coroner for the district, was ill, or, as the case may
require, and requested me to hold the Inquiry. Or, there being
no Coroner for this district [or, the Coroner being absent], I
was requested by the Police to conduct this Inquiry.
[Here may be stated any special features of the case, if any,
other than those appearing in the depositions, which the
Magistrate may consider necessary to bring under the notice
of the Department.]
The deceased was a pauper, and I found it necessary to
instruct the Police to make arrangements for his burial at the
public expense; [and if the charge for such burial exceed f'l,
the cause of the higher rate should here be explained.] ( This
paragraph will only be added if necessary .)
I also forward by this post, the usual particulars and
vouchers in connection with the Inquiry. [Or the necessary
Forms may be applied for as stated at p. 35.]
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
The Under-Secretary, Department of the Attorney-
General and of Justice, Sydney.


Form 2.
Caption for Proceedings at Magisterial Inquiries.
Magisterial Inquiry held at , in the District of ,
in the State of New South Wales, on the day of
19 , [and by adjournment at ,on the day of
19 ] before me, one of His Majesty’s Justices of the
Peace for the said State, respecting the cause of death of J.S. r
[or, a man unknown.]
Before commencing the Inquiry the body was viewed by me
[or, the body was not viewed by me, as I did not consider such
view necessary.]
[lf any one interested in the result of the Inquiry be present,
it may be stated in the following manner :—]
Sergeant X. watched the proceedings on behalf of the
Crown.
A. 8., Inspector at , appeared on behalf of the Railway
Department.
E.F. appeared on behalf of the relatives of the deceased.
The following witnesses were examined on oath, viz. :
[Here insert names of witnesses in the order in which they
were examined]
and their depositions are hereto appended.
My finding is recorded at page
Form 3.
Report by Police to Magistrate.
Police Station,
Sir, — 19
I beg to inform you that this forenoon, at Boggabilla, [about
7 miles from Goondiwindi], the body of a man named J.S. [or,
a man, whose name has not transpired] was found dead in
the waters of the Macintyre river (or, on the road from Camden
to Picton).
or, a man named J S., committed suicide by hanging himself,
(or as the case may he).
or, a man named J.S. died from injuries accidentally received
by ( give cause), on the inst.
or, a man named J.S. was killed by (giving cause of death),
or, a man named J.S. died suddenly, supposed to be caused by
{give cause shortly).
or, the remains of a human being were found.
The body now lies at
I. think an inquiry ought to be held in this case, and that


{giving name of house or hotel) would be a convenient place for
holding the same.
I have the honor to be, &c.,
( Signature af Constable.)
T. Jones, Esq., J.P.
Form 4.
Certificate of Magistrate's Finding.
I, being one of His Majesty’s Justices of
the Peace for the State of New South Wales, having held a
Magisterial Inquiry on the day of 19 ,
[*and by adjournment on the day of 19 ,]
respecting the cause of death of J. S. [or, a man unknown, or,
.a male child], do hereby certify that I find as follows :
That [here state finding. ]
Witness my hand at this day
of 19 .
* If there have been frequent adjournments, the wording may be as
follows: —“ And by adjournment on the 23rd March, 30th March, and
4th April, 19 .” Similar wording may be adopted in the Caption,
Form 2.
Form 5.
Certificate of Justice of the Peace for the Burial of the Body
SCHEDULE G.
I, Justice of the Peace of
do hereby order the burial of the body now shewn to me
as the body of
Witness my hand this day of 19 .
Justice of the Peace.
Form 6.
Certificate of Justice of the Peace dispensing with Inquest.
I, Justice of the Peace of
do hereby order the burial of the body of the undermentioned
deceased, after registration of death, as by law required, as I
am of opinion that an inquest is unnecessary.
Name and Surname „ T , -r.. , Age and , „ ..
Rank or Profession. When and Where Died. Sex. Cause of Death.
Justice of the Peace.


Form 7.
Summons for the attendance of a Medical Witness.
New South Wales, to wit.
Magisterial Inquiry at , upon the body of
By virtue of this my order, as a Justice of the Peace for the
District of , you are required to appear before me
at , on the day of one thousand nine
hundred and at of the clock in the noon, to
give evidence touching the death of
Form 9.
Form of Justice's Information of Death.
To the Registrar of the District in which the undermentioned
Death took place.
Pursuant to the Act of the Legislative Council, 19th Vic-
toria, No. 34, intituled “ An Act for Registering Buths, Deaths,


and Marriages in the Colony of New South Wales," I hereby
certify that an Inquiry held by me on the day of
19 , at on the body of
, then and there lying dead, the following particulars
were elicited, viz :
When and where Died. SHSE?. Cause of Death.
Witness my hand, this day of 19 .
J P., conducting the Inquiry.
* Further particulars, if obtainable.
Christian name and surname of Father
Occupation
Christian name and maiden surname of mother
Undertaker’s name
Birthplace of deceased
How long in New South Wales
How long resident in other States of Australia respectively
f If deceased was married ? Where married f i
At what age f i To whom f i
2 2
(See note below.)
Issue : Living, names and ages f
(In order of birth.)
~ Deceased, males
females
Names
f Note. —lf married more than once give particulars of each marriage
separately.
*A ny other matter of detail that may he valuable to Registrar.
Name of householder where deceased died
Or name and address of friend of deceased who could complete
registration
Constable in charge of the case
Town or station
J.P., conducting the Inquiry.
* As in the majority of cases, relatives or intimate friends of deceased
persons are in attendance at the time of the inquest or inquiry, it is found to
be in the public interest that the particulars asked for in these Forms should
be ascertained in accordance with section 28 of 19 Victoria, No. 34.


Form io. ~oo
Report by Police to Inspector-General.
NEW SOUTH WALES POLICE.
District Station.
Report of Inquest held at
Name of De-
ceased (or
description of
body, if not
identified). *
Probable
age.
Calling
or
Occupation.
Place
of
Death.
By whom
reported to
Police
or
, Coroner.
When.
Date
of
Death.
Date of
Report to
Coroner.
Date
of
Inquest.
Name of
Coroner or
Magistrate
before whom
held.
Property
found with
Deceased,
and how >
disposed of. O
CAL GUIDE TO
Verdict :—
Special report as follows (if necessary) : —
Police Officer.
Date.
\
* For information required respecting unknown persons, see pages 22 and 34.


Form ii.
Declaration of Death and Intestacy.
STATUTORY DECLARATION.
I, of do hereby solemnly and sincerely declare
that , late of in the State of New South
Wales, departed this life at , on or about the
day of , one thousand nine hundred and
intestate, and having at the time of his death
estate in the said State, liable to waste.
The said deceased died without leaving any widow or next
of kin resident within the said State, (a)
And I make this solemn declaration, conscientiously believ-
ing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of
the Oaths Act of 1900.
Subscribed and declared at]
this day of ( (Signature of Declarant .l
19 , before me /
J-P' )
(a) If deceased died a bachelor or spinster, state same. If deceased left a
widow or next of kin resident out of the jurisdiction of the State, insert
particulars of the same.
Note —This Declaration, together with full particulars of deceased’s
property, should be promptly transmitted to the District Agent for the
Curator of Intestate Estates. See p. 33.




00882546 0
aJ
3v 7 . f 4


