

THE PROBLEM SOLVED:
WORK "AND FOOD BEFORE
REGENERATION.
J. WATSON,
PRICE 1/6.
r


Don’t lend this book, its weight in gold
Is dross compared to what I’ve sold
To you, my brother, sister, dear,
In it thou’ll find thy path made clear.
Not buy nr" book? What, still a slave,
Content with crumbs which Dives you gave?
Look down, that grass, we are agreed,
Was sent that you your horse might feed;
And now look up, behold yon tree,
Its fruit God sent for thee and me.
But singly we can’t e’en it taste,
Why longer time on hirelings waste;
For you and I the fruit could pull,
Retire to rest on stomachs full,
Bid farcivcll to' that devil, Dives,
And succour all who for life strives.
What, stubborn still, remain a slave
Whilst travelling downward to the grave
Grow lean on Dives’ crumbs and share
Them with that mongrel over there?
So be it, Hodge, and from to-day
Don’t cavil at your paltry pay;
’Tis more than scum like you deserve,
My prayer is, Lord, from such preserve.
But stay, you may be Dives himself,
The devil who scoops in the pelf;
If that is so, a hell be thine
More hot than one which makes Hodge whine,
Death, death a thousand times, yes, death,
Than draw from Dives one’s farewell breath.


"THE PROBLEM SOLVED.”
Why I wrote the book, was, because man has an undying
right to continuous work, food and liberty, so long as
another’s rights are not interfered' with; because sectarian-
ism is hoary with age and rotten, owing to long exposure to
the laws of Nature and unbiased reason; because our en-
vironment turns every man’s hand against his neighbour.
Because reason is in full bloom, and humanitarianism has
reached its apex; because, to set the captive free, four things
must be—an income tax, work, food and talents free.
Fellow Citizens, thy unrest devours thee, thy path is strewn
with disappointments whilst thy future resembles nothing
so much as the face of a drive, in front of which stands the
miner with eyes beaming with hope that the next delve of
the pick will expose to view the glittering metal, but instead
of gold, the tearing away of one piece of mullock bnly
brings into view another piece of mullock. So it is with thy
hopes, which born at morn, are before night, like Jonah’s
gourd, numbered with the things that were. Why ? because
you depute to others the working of the mainspring of life
by which your happiness or discontent must always be re-
gulated. Therefore, be social suicides no longer, lay on one
side petty details, agree to cast to the winds dogmas that for
nauseousness equal that of pantomimic show for creating
laughter for a few days only; we are cast upon the world’s
stage by an unknown'power, with an abundance of oil and
wine, and that if we don’t eat, drink and be merry it is our
own fault. The “Problem Solved” is the outcome of years
of study, hours of sacrifice, and the burning of the midnight
oil, whilst som6 of my fellow citizens were enjoying them-
selves, sleeping the sleep of peace, or torn asunder upon the
racjf of poverty. And it is because of this enforced poverty


caused by superstition and unmitigated roguery that I solicit
your support, so that the book may be sown broad-cast,
having for its purpose the firing of the reader’s mind with
a resolve to pin his next Member of Parliament down to a
policy which will eliminate the fear of want and crush out
for ever the ignorant and damnable superstition, that there
i 3 anything separating man from man,' over and above that
created by themselves.
Yours obediently,
J. WATSON, Carlton.
To cavil at a measure is an easy thing,
But to refute it, clearest logic one must bring;
Sweep error to the wind with critic’s watchful eye,
And damn the man who’d say thou’lt be my slave or die.


CONTENTS.
Am I My Brother’s Keeper? ... 1
Our Holy Laws 16
Orthodoxy 17
To the Creator ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Nature and Humanitarianism in Harmony ... .. 21
Why Does a Man Eat? ... 22
Two Drops of Water ... ... ... ... ... 27
New South Wales on the Road to Ruin 28
The Christian’s Farewell -.. ... ... ... ... 31
The Reformer’s Dream ... ... ... ... ... 32
The Staff of Freedom 39
Hodge’s Two Masters 44
The Birth of Individualism ... ... . ... ... 45
The Idler ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Sitting by a Stream ... 56
The Universality of Orthodoxy ... 57
Labour’s Soliloquy 64
A Specimen of the Commonwealth’s Builders ... ... 64
Orthodox Snags 65
The Grand Order of Manhood 70
Cause and Effect 71
The Workers’ March 77
Nuts to Crack 78
Rock of Ages 79
“ If I Be Lifted Up ” 80
A Political Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing 84
The Dawn of Reason ... ... ... ... ... 85
Searching for Truth 94
Regeneration 99
The Two Factors 105
One Flag ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
The Australian Anthem 116


Opening the Gate 117
The Other Side of the Picture ... ... ... ... 126
The Coming Empire ... ... ... ... ... 129
Work and Wages for All ... ... ... ... ... 131
Irrigation 136
The Unionist... ... ... ... ... ... .„ 146
The Christian’s Prayer ... ... ... ... ... 151
Natural Law ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 153
Solving the Problem. I. ... ... ... , ... ... 159
Solving the Problem. 11. ... ... ... ... ... 171
Woman’s Vote ... ... ... ... 179
Income Tax 180
The Crisis 186
Why We Federated 196
The Three Stages of Man... ... ... ... ... 197
The Second Stage 198
A Christmas Obligation ... ... ... ... ...‘ 201
The Christian’s Platform ... ... ... ... ... 205
The Platform... ... ... ... ... ... .. 208
Conclusion 209


The Problem Solved.
One flag, one people ; but 0, Destiny, thou hast as many phases as
the asteroids have atoms.
“AM I MY BROTHER’S KEEPER?”
The author has no intention in these pages to place
before the reader anything in the way of statistics, or
quotations, except where it is absolutely necessary in order
to show the solid foundations on which his observations are
based', because of all the futile efforts made for the uplifting
of man, that of quoting statistics and other men’s words is
the most misleading and helpless; and in proof of this, I have
only to draw the reader’s attention to the million and one
parsons, priests and deacons who chant, “Give us this day
our daily bread,’’ and are feasting on the fat of the land,
at the same time knowing that their own flesh and blood
will go down to the grave wanting bread, because those who
could have helped them refrained from doing so.
The Daily Press spends half its time upon this work of
folly, and men like Mr. Robert Blatchford have given
statistics which, if they possessed power, would have human-
ised man ages ago, to say nothing of the millions of times,
every twenty-four hours, the soul-inspiring words of Christ
are quoted by the supposed Saint and the well-known Sinner.
And still the Juggernaut of Wealth glides smoothly on,
leaving a crushed humanity in its wake.
. The task I have taken up is, first: to show the curse
which has followed what is popularly known as “Orthodoxy” ;
second : the impossibility of' regenerating the unit by precept;
third: the absence of any redeeming feature in the life of
one who allows Dives to ride over him without retaliating
at the first possible chance. These are the obstructions
which block the way to human happiness; these are the
obstructions which I have undertaken—with the help of the
reader—to remove, by resuscitating from the archives of a
far distant past, the policy which gave to all men work and
food.
Self-preservation being the first law of nature, it follows
that that which alone will support life should be the first
thing fought for, and it should not be necessary at this


time, when knowledge covers the earth as the water the sea,
to remind the reader that it is far nobler to hasten death
i>y fighting for food, and the liberty to work for that food,
than it is to live a living death at the feet of creatures,
neither fit to live with God, nor to associate with man.
A good cook would never dream of flavouring the soup
before it boiled, neither should man talk about Reform
before all hands were at work—True Reform commences
afterwards. Setting the house in order can only be accom-
plished when men’s talents and tastes have been properly
located, but Reform such as the Individualist attempts to-
day, is akin to putting *the roof on before the foundation is
laid. The doctrine of the sweet bye-and-bye, when we shall
amble along the golden streets which Orthodoxy has made,
no doubt suits the lustful slippered drone, but it means hell
to the outcast, whilst waiting for its consummation. Con-
sequently, as Unity is strength, the author for one is pre-
pared to be welded into that lever by the nasmyth hammer
of commonsense, until it upsets the throne of Mammon, the
foundations of which were laid on the rock of selfishness, and
cemented together by the mortar of superstition in the day
when all men stood on the same level as the brute.
The appalling condition of England, the richest country
on the earth, yet boasting of having one in every forty a
pauper, should be sufficient to spur into action every one
worthy of the name of man, to fight, not for the golden harps
of imagination, but for the cessation of that hellish gnawing
at the heart, caused by the want of food, and fear of a
poverty, which turns honest men into irresponsible fiends.
Were it not for the intense poverty which surrounds us, the
fear which haunts the lives of thousands of us, I should
apologise to the reader for trespassing on his time .and
pocket. I take' up the Unemployed Problem because no one
else has taken it up on the lines foreshadowed in these pages—
no one being a believer in Unrestricted Individualism would
take it up—for it means the giving up of all control of the
masses; it means the sweeping away of that which is so dear
to the Individualist when he has got one foot firmly placed
on our social ladder, namely, the power and the pleasure of
being Able to command obedience from his fellow-man. And
as this pleasure and power has been in the hands of the monied
classes ever since the dawn of history, it follows that now—
when education and science have sharpened the ambition of
all, and all are striving to participate in this pleasure and
power—that f we are on the eve of a gigantic social upheaval.


We are told by all wise men and a. fair sprinkling of
fools that the Unemployed Problem cannot be solved, since
some men are born to rule, whilst others must be hewers of
wood; yet whilst this is perfectly true, it needs a little day-
light let into it. At one. time this was pretty well the belief
of all Christendom, but it was quite a different kind of belief
to that which claims a majority of Christendom to-day.
There was a time when Hodge would have been burnt at
the stake for denying that Smith, who held the reins of
power, did not hold them under the direct supervision of the
Creator; but that day is past until reason gives out, leaving
the door open for superstition to again come to the
front. Education, science, and the proper cultivation of
men’s talents, are fast sweeping away all superstitions which
have a tendency to clog man’s progress along a self-evident
track, into oblivion.
A careful study of the laws of nature shows them to he
working in harmony with a plan, perfected before man was
on the earth; that they are laws which take no thought of
man, and should he happen to^ get in their way so much the
worse for him. This is demonstrated in an unmistakeable
manner when flood, fire and famine sweep into eternity,
without one moment’s warning, all those who happen to be
in their way. I know it will be said in answer to this, that
God said we must be always ready; but, what sort of a
preparation can a man make upon an empty stomach, and
with a heart charged to burning with hatred and envy, and
as Cowper says, "On the dubious ways of error tossed.” If
God watches over our daily wants, is it not inconceivable,
seeing that He is a God of love, that He should entice
thousands of His creatures to locate themselves upon some
choice spot, and' having conquered it, made homes
for themselves, and were praising Him for all the
Rood things they were enjoying, that He should open
the doors of the earth and destroy them all in molten liquid ?
From this we reason, first, that God thinks nothing of what
we call death; second, that man works out his own life ac-
cording to the opportunities which cross his path.
Under the system which has ruled, and still rules, it can-
not he denied that millions of talents have been lost because
the owners never had the opportunity to cultivate
them. Here and there, one, in spite of all obstacles, has
burst upon life’s horizon, and crossed its track like a brilliant
meteor, only to disappear and have his path obliterated by
the friends of Mammon. Men who would be capable of


ruling if they only got the opportunity, are born of all classes
of society, and are found in the plague-striken slum oftener
than in the homes of kings, yet ignorance cries out, “Who
is he?”
It therefore behoves the reader to ask himself the ques-
tion, “Shall the talent in the slum be left where it is, to be
utilised in the interests of vice and crime, or shall it be
transplanted in the field of equal opportunity for the benefit
of all?”
In presenting to the reader a cure for our national dis-
ease, namely, “accumulation of wealth at the expense of
poverty,’’ I do so in the shortest way possible when the
exigency of the case is considered. The time for theorising
and argument has passed, and the day for action is at hand,
if we would escape the hell into which State Socialism would
plunge us. At this stage of our journey there is no necessity
to do more than outline briefly the remedy that will heal
our social leprosy.' Man has been portrayed under all sorts
of social conditions, the criminal tendency of unrestricted
wealth, as well as the degradation of the masses which it
produces, has been served up to us by the whole press of
civilization, and still it flourishes with as much vigour as
it did in the days of Solomon. We have had Henry George’s
scheme for nationalising the land, and many others, but as
none of these take any direct count of the unit, except under
slavish conditionl, they must be laid side by side with other
communistic fads, which are continually coming to the sur-
face, only to disappear, as unworthy of serious consideration
by a people who have sound convictions upon what life should
be, but lack the opportunity of showing how to create it.
The fact of the unit being out of work is deplored by all
writers on Social Economy, but no scheme has yet seen the
light of day, which, while absorbing the unit, would at the
same time leave the community in the enjoyment of more
freedom than it possesses to-day. And without freedom,
what is life worth ? It is because they who are far more
able than I to undertake the task of solving the problem,
and presenting it to you in a more pleasant style, have failed
to do it, that I have penned these lines, in which will be
found the germ of a Reform, at once practical, humane, and
simple. It could be brought into use within the space of
twelve months without disturbing our present social relations,
and without any legislative enactments beyond amending
laws already in operation.
The talents which make successful authors are not given


to all men, neither are the sources of an evil always discovered
by a university student ; consequently I throw my remedy
for the solving of the Unemployed Problem upon the sea of
public opinion in'the hope that it will be dealt with on its
merits, and not from the social position held by its author.
Under present conditions, one might as well expect to
see the sun stop shining, as to expect that under Unrestricted
Individualism wealth will cease to accumulate. It is also
equally true that, unless nations combine together to keep
in check the strongest aggressor of all, that it would be
but a question of time when that one State would rule the
world. Here then we have the rule applied that Unrestricted
Individualism when practised by a nation is not good for the
other nations; consequently what is found to be good for '
the welfare of weaker nations must be equally good when
applied to the inhabitants of a single State. It is also true
that if a few men were allowed unrestricted action, they could
lay Ihe foundations of a system for the accumulation of
wealth, which would, in time, purchase every foot of land in
the State, whilst the great mass of the people in the natural
order of things would become slaves. As a matter of fact,
this is taking place in our midst to-day. Certainly there are
very- many at the game, but in proportion to the total they
are few in number, and whilst these few are gathering in
the fat of the land, by giving advances for the wool as it
grows on the sheep, and negotiating bills of sale on the
produce of the land, the poor are becoming poorer, and the
backbone of the State is gradually, but surely, becoming ,
parafized. Our position to-day is that, being overburdened
with debt, over-governed or unrighteourly governed, we
are at last convinced that we have a climate which cannot
be depended upon to give us rain when we most require it;
that men who have spent the best years of their life upon
the land are still paupers, and will eventually flicker out as
old age pensioners: that during the yearly circulation of
money, large sums are withdrawn from circulation in the
shape of interest by the landlord and the usurer who, after
living on the fruits of the earth as drones of society, have
plenty left to assist the man who will put his all in a venture
which in the end only benefits the lender. Under such condi-
tions it needs no prophet to foretell the ultimate end of the
coming generation of men, unless we prove ourselves equal to
the occasion by adding a few more spokes to the wheel upon
which all our political machinery revolves. Up to the present
the term “Good-Government” would be a misnomer if applied


to any part of our national life, wliicli, although in its in-
fancy, has been marked by a prodigality bordering on mad-
ness, and it is a source of gratification that our lands were
only covered by hundreds instead of thousands when the. last
drought came suddenly upon us and found us unprepared to
meet it; for, of all the millions which the State has wasted
and which Unrestricted Individualism has appropriated, no
water conservation scheme worthy of being called national
has received one penny, and the sequel to all this is, that
many an honest man has been ruined, whilst others have
left the State. Nature, however, has now forced upon us one
of two alternatives, namely, either to carry out a national
scheme of water conservation worthy of the land we possess,
or let slipshod husbandry, briars and rabbits take possession.
The present system cannot last much longer—our State is
too large for that—neither can the State become a manu-
facturing centre until our lands are occupied by men who can
be assured, as far as water goes, of reaping a harvest.
Private enterprise, unless crystallised into one huge trust,
could never accomplish what is necessary to be done before
the land could support a numerous and contented people;
and as trusts in all parts of the world have always been a
curse to the worker, the placing of water conservation in their
hands would be against the best interests of the State. Con-
sequently, this vast work which will occupy the time of gen-
erations yet to come, must be initiated and carried out by
the State, under laws which shall deal out even justice, and
make the people prosperous and happy. To do this our
present income tax must be altered into a progressive one,
without exemptions, giving the fullest liberty for private
enterprise, and to the idler work on works which the capitalist
would not touch, so that those who now starve in our midst
might think life worth living.
The reader must always bear in mind that the Individual-
ist is opposed to taxation in any form for the purpose of
giving work to those who find themselves idle under present
social conditions. Under present conditions there is no
prosperity possible under the sun, which could absorb but
for a limited period the unemployed of a State, for, once
the floodgate of prosperity opened, the scum of other States
would throng through them. This is a phase of the Un-
employed Problem which has been entirely overlooked by
those struggling with the evil. But it would have to be
grappled with before any single State could undertake any
practical and lasting reform, having for its object the ab-


sorption of the idle unit. All readers of the Press are
familiar with its declaration, that the absorption of the
unit is an impossibility under progressive Govern-
ment, thereby showing clearly, that with all the opportuni-
ties at its command for studying the greatest of all problems,,
these opportunities have all been thrown away. True, the
Press has been but seldom wrong when heaping ridicule upon
the many forms of Socialism with which man is cursed, but
although it was its duty to expose the evil, and to have shown
a remedy which would remove the social cancer responsible
for the birth of bastard Socialism, it still continues the friend
of Mammon. The reason for this is easily understood when
one watches how the Press strives when it sees a chance of
adding to its power. It would never dream of giving out
of its abundance, only in_ the form of charity, which is no
sooner given than it returns again to the source from which it
started; for, be it remembered that, no matter how
large a- sum may be distributed, if it is done
under the cloak of, charity, it has no more power
towards uplifting those who consume it, than would
the pouring pf water on a duck’s back cause it to drown.
This the Press knows well enough, hence the eagerness with
which it speeds subscription lists along, and todies to wealth
and influence, and every worn-out platitude that a press
hireling may make use of is sown broadcast in large type.
The Press allows all sorts of abstract questions and theories,
whicn it knows full well die out almost as soon as the ink
whicli giv.es them to the world, to occupy it* columns. But,
as soon as one attempts to get in the thin , end of a wedge
which would burst up unrestricted wealth, and herald in a
period of prosperity and happiness, it is immediately con-
signed to the waste-paper basket.
But, what the Press declared to be impossible, the author
will show to be not only possible, but easy of execution.
First, the State must be living within itself if it would re-
main prosperous and become solvent; even our political hire-
lings are beginning to see this. It must be borne in mind,
that, from the criminally rich down to the men who have the
blue dome »f heaven for a roof, all live, although one per
cent, never work, and at least nine per cent, are made rogues
for the want of a living wage. Yet they all live, work or
not work, and the truth is forcibly brought home to the re-
maining ninety per cent, that the one per cent, who do not
work, yet live, and occasionally get drunk, must be acting
dishonestly towards their neighbours. So they set themselves


the task of taxing their own energies far above the amount
which would be required to give the one per cent, a living
wage and enough to keep most of the nine per cent, honest.
But, rather than do this, they select from amongst them-
selves a small army of their best men to watch how these ten
per cent, manage to live better than some of themselves,
and, as they are found 1 out, one after the other, we build
houses of entertainment for them; that this is not a stretch of
imagination, is proved by the prison cards, which tell us that
prisoners look far better when leaving than when entering.
Having fed them well, and given them time to mature their
plans, we let them out so that they may become more pro-
ficient in their profession. So here we have the bald fact that
ninety per cent, maintain one per cent., and partially another
nine per cent., and to this has to be added the keep of the
army of watchers, without any compensating advantage, if
we except the nightly tour round the house to see that the
doors are locked, the dog unloosed, and the revolver well
primed, so as to have some chance of laying the other fellow
out. Truly a most magnificent social environment, and no
one need wonder that its structure is supported by fixed
bayonets, and a Press always on the side of wealth.
Now one can hardly fail to see, that if a State can exist'
under such unholy conditions, that it must flourish if the nine
per cent, are given a living wage, and the one per cent, put
to profitable employment. The argument so often trotted
out, that these men will not work, is beg the question, for
the day has not yet dawned when all men had an opportunity
to work, and it looses all force when placed side by side with
the power of the State, for T am sure the reader will ad-
mit that when the State compels an honest citizen to close
his shop at a stated time, independent of whether he has
earned enough to pay his way, it would experience but little
difficulty in gathering up its idlers and putting them where
they could either work or starve. The fact is, the State
gives more liberty to a rogue than it does to honest people.
The State has already closed up the shop door at 6 p.m., and
it is just as easy to compel the owner to open it at 6 a.m.
The State has decreed that when a body of men unite and
register themselves Unionists that they shall take precedence
over those who are not united, preferring to be free. So it
is plain the man is out of court when he says that all men
could not be made work. Anyway, the world has yet to see
the spectacle of men dying rather than work for a living
wage and liberty. One cannot fail to see that if a State


can exist under such unholy conditions, it must flourish if
the nine per cent, were earning a living wage, and the one
per . cent, engaged in building up a profitable State asset.
This one per cent, are social lepers and as'such to a more or
less extent demoralise the State, and should be treated as
other men are treated when they break a law having for its
object the uplifting of humanity; besides a mere fraction of
the human family are inherently bad, and could easily be
kept in check if the fear of poverty were taken from them.
Then, it must be remembered that a generation would see
most of the old bands off the earth, whilst the thrice con-
victed thief would lose his opportunity of sowing in the
minds of the young the seeds of vice and idleness. The
father would he in constant employment, and would have
fobd and clothing for his offsprings, and as the laws of nature
are compelling us to put our homes in order, the present
plague-stricken slum would be a thing of the past. To accom-
plish this, it is a well-known fact that a progressive Income
Tax without exemptions would produce more than would be
required to carry out this social reform and would not pro-
duce hardship anywhere, but great blessings, even supposing
that our present surroundings could be maintained, for the
sword of vengeance which the factory-owner now holds over
the ninety and nine employed therein would have to be
sheathed if there were no unit on Monday morning clamour-
ing for admittance to be allowed to undercut the others.
This one blessing alone should be sufficient to induce every
worker to vote for the Income Tax, for the extra pay oh the
one hand, and not so much loss of time on the other, would
far outbalance the Income Tax contribution. So with the
man who now pays Income Tax, if under a Progressive Tax
he was called upon ito pay an extra pound, and the
man who at present is not taxed, if he was called
upon to pay a pound, then socially they would
stand to each other ■as at present, while both would be'
relieved from the idler, who would be creating assets! for tho
State from which would be drawn a Revenue that would pay
the interest on its loans. It would bring about a more rapid
circulation of money and would prevent it lying in the
coffers of the rich till it got mouldy for the want of using.
The “Sydney Morning Herald,” the mouthpiece for Aus-
tralian Conservatism, or wealth, writing upon Australia’s
need, says: “If three of four new goldfields were discovered
sufficiently rich to attract a. million or two of the Empire’s
sons anddaugliters, the effect would be magical; our burdens
would be halved, the unemployed would vanish like an evil


dream, and the Labor Party would be swept away.” I ask,
could foolishness, ignorance, or deliberate action for drawing
the red herring across the path of Reform, go further in the
way of offering to the people of this State a remedy for the
galloping consumption which has got so firm a grip upon our
national life 1 The "Herald” evidently believes that ’ts
readers are possessed of defective memories, and that they
have no knowledge of what took place in the early days of
Australia, when nuggets of gold were actually unearthed by
the plough, the news of which attracted tens of thousands to
our shores, thousands of whom were the scum of the world,
whose hands were dyed red with the blood of their fellow-man,
and that the same would occur again if chance should happen
to unearth the fields of gold which the "Herald” sighs for.
Why ? Because it would bring grist to the mill, and Austra-
lia would find herself fully charged with hirelings, thieves and
paupers when the collapse came, as it came before. Should
such a calamity as this overtake us the unemployed problem
would be a thousand times more difficult to solve than it is
because our national debt and our private debt—in-
terest upon which exceeds six millions per annum—would have
been enormously increased. Water conservation works would
have been constructed, either by contract, or by the State
with the best labour in the market, for the lasting benefit only
of those who would be living within the reticulation area,
whilst the old and those without influence would be pushed
aside as they are to-day, to steal, exist on charity, or die,
as they do now, for the lack of bread.
Now, if history could be drawn upon to show one instance
where the "Herald’s” happy consummation had taken place,
we might hope even under present conditions for a glimpse
jf an earthly millenium in our land, but history is silent con-
cerning this happy state, but waxes eloquent when handing
down to us the nature of the bitter fruit of despair which fol-
lowed those meteoric intervals of unusual commercial activity,
bringing together such a mixture of unsuitable material
which no State has yet succeeded in making into a profitable
asset: What chance is there then of the “Herald’s” predic-
tion coming about, even with double the number of goldfields ?
- The fact is, the "Herald” sees trouble brewing; it sees
that the time is at hand when the Australian hewers of wood
will plunge their axes into the root of .Unrestricted Individ-
ualism, and let some of the surplus juices out. It knows that
we are fast nearing the parting of the ways, and unless some
departure can be made on behalf of liberalised liberty, So-
cialism with all its attendant misery, slavery, and the cramp-


ing of man’s intellect, awaits us.~ The time has arrived when
the workers will no longer be fed on promises and spoon diet;
they have become permeated with Christian Socialism to an
extent never known before, and they will raise the Unit out
of the slough of despond in which he has hitherto been kept
by an overpowering Conservatism.
Selfish to a degree, and callous to the sufferings of man,
this so-called Christian Socialism has ruled with a rod of iron,
but the dawn of liberty breaks, and the sun of humanitarian-
ism is rising above the horizon of life, and the germ of right
will soon shoot forth, giving work to the workless, food to the
Orphan, and shelter to the widow. Labour, which should oc-
cupy the foremost place upon the earth, because of its being
the first factor upon which life depends, has, strange to say,
been kept out of this position by the action of powerful drones
who are a curse to the worker and a hindrance to the State,
for within a log cabin, surrounded Jay a few yards of earth, the
worker can bloom, bear fruit, and die the death of the right-
eous, whilst all the wealth of Sydney would but intensify the
pangs of hunger, filling the soul with wrath, till it cursed God,
and became no more. Up to the present have not the work-
ers Been fools, and altogether unworthy of occupying such a
paradise as this State could be made? To accomplish this,
worker must join with worker. Trades Unions, as at present
constituted, must be laid aside, and catalogued as relics of the
age of ignorance and revenge, and every man inside the pro-
ductive hive must be recognised as a king in his own sphere.
The trained architect is only required where luxury is con-
sidered the omega of life, whilst the bricklayer could be dis-
penseu with for the simple reason that the man who mixes
the mortar could, should circumstances arise, soon lay the
bricks, but the man who can produce the most blades of grass
by aid of the least labour, should, if he got his rights, be
crowned king of the hive, for he it is who will give meat to
the City worker, shorten his hours of labour, and make his
life worth living.
Ye opposers of a Progressive ,Income tax, why continue
drunk with the spirit of greed, here to-day, gone to-morrow,
cursed in life and forgotten in death ? That a land tax has
not a leg to stand on when placed in juxtaposition with equity,
is easily proved; for instance, A and B each have a home-
stead of equal value in every respect, but, some time during
the year, A suffers to the extent of half his crop, whilst B
rejoices in a plentiful harvest, yet both are taxed the same:
or, take the case of C and D, whose farms are equal in all
respects save one, C basks in the sunwarmed slopes pf a North-


eru aspect, whilst D shivers on the cold damp slopes of a
Southern one ; the sequel to this being that C has his fruit
sold m an early market, and obtains good prices, whilst 1),
whose crop comes in late, has to meet a glutted market and"
low prices, yet both are taxed alike. There is no need to
multiply instances; if there were, 1 could as a tiller of the
soil for over twenty years, show in a hundred ways how our
social system kills the goose with the golden egg. This is what
the reader must bear in mind when listening to the platitudes
of tiie representatives of wealth, or some would be vampire
longing to get his paws within the treasury. Concerning the
good times coming, when we look back on the black past, we
find that these hireling knaves and lustful parasites have all
through history steered the ship, often running her on the
beach of adversity, where millions of starved humanity have
left their bones to bleach. This Ship of State is on the rocks
now, and around her we see the red hot imperialistic Deakin,
doing his utmost to stay her with bayonets, a Reid, the Apos-
tle of Free Trade and Liberty (to grab all you can), and a
party of men called Workers, who are so intent upon anni-
hilating the other two parties, that they are prepared to ucs-
troy the Ship at the same time, by letting her sink in the Sea
of State Socialism, where fiends would rule, and woman be-
come a common chattel. From this inferno of ignorance, fraud
and self aggrandisement, there can be no escape. It would
be the height of folly to imagine that the citizens of New South
Wales will ever possess better politicians than they have now,
or that a Christianity based upon the belief that our daily ac-
tions are under the supervision of our Creator, will ever get
out of its present self-righteous groove. The working of a
Progressive Income Tax and the employment of all within
a State, would produce the same result as if applied to a pri-
vate family. And, by way of illustration, we will suppose
that Jones has a wife and family of six, and they live within
their income, and as is usual in most families, one of the sons
turns out to be a confirmed idler, and only works when it
pleases him to do so. Consequently, no dependence can bo
placed upon him, and the result is that he becomes a drag
upon the rest of the family, for the profit which accrues from
what he does is not sufficient to keep him during the time that
he remains idle. So to make up for this, when he is hungry
he robs the larder, pilfers tobacco, and if he sees any stray
coins within reach he quickly appropriates them to his own
use. But there comes a time when the idler’s conduct is felt
to be a burden, and he is given to understand that unless he


is prepared to do his share of the work with the others, they
will lock him up and give him a diet more in keeping with
his deserts. And as he still keeps on in his old groove, a
portion of their labour has to be diverted from profitable em-
ployment, and used for the purpose of building a secure re-
treat for the idler. To do this, they have to sell or pawn a
portion of their estate. The gaol being finished, the social
criminal is put in, and when this is done, another burden is
added to the family in the shape of providing food and looking
after the prisoner. This necessitates the withdrawal of one
of their number from the industrial hive, which, of course,
throws more work upon those who are left to keep the home,
the labourers of which have been reduced by 25 per cent., the
result being that the greater part of the time which would
otherwise be spent in pleasure, is absorbed, as well as taking
the money which, under normal conditions, would have been
put by for the rainy day. Dissatisfaction now begins to make
itself heard, because of six having to do the work of eight,
as well as find the interest for money borrowed. So a confer-
ence is held, and the decision arrived at, that as the Bible
declares no man has a right to food except he supplies himself
or has sufficient means to live without work, the prisoner be
informed that unless he is prepared to perform his share of
the work of the State voluntarily, he will be supplied with
raw material, and when he returns it as a manufactured ar-
ticle, he shall receive its market value, but that in the event
of failure, he would make his bed with the material supplied.
The putting in force of this resolution at once places the family
in its normal condition, because the one who has had charge
of the idler returns to his duties, and the idler is left to work
out his own salvation, or die because he is unworthy to live.
This is what the State must do before man will get his heaven-
born rights and God-ordained justice. There is work to be
done in this State for the conservation of water, planting of
trees, which are not indigenous, such as pines, which would
in time become of great value. Work of this description
would absorb millions of money, and take generations to ac-
complish, giving work to those which neither the State nor
private employers required for the carrying on of ordinary
everyday work. The Government of a State holding large
tracts of land in trust for its children, yet refusing them op-
portunity to try and live, is guilty of the blackest crime which
can be committed against society. It is the withholding of
what the Creator has given to enable man to live out the full
number of his days. Talk about equalisation of opportunity,


where does it come in ? On the contrary, is it not a fact that
all the forces which wealth can muster, are used for the
purpose of destroying, equal opportunity? We boast about
our freedom, but where does the freedom come in when the
pocket is empty, and man offers his strength for a mess of
pottage ? Undoubtedly, if ever there was a time in the history
of the world when man should work, and have a living wage,
that time is now. Our rulers, owing to unjust laws, are en-
abled to keep millions of acres of land locked up, whilst the
law of interest scoops in all the gold, and there is no law to
govern its redistribution save the one which demands com-
pound interest. “Bear ye one another’s burdens,” says Christ.
“Fill the collection plates with gold,” says His self-constitu-
ted teachers; but how many of them are prepared to spend
it on temples of worship, and copy St. Paul ?
“ Who wove his sermon as he stitched his tent,
Then gave his hearers what his Lord had sent.
It is well the superstition, as preached a few years ago about
man’s duty to he content in his place, has gone for ever, and
he would be a bold man that would tell his hearers to-day
that the millionaire’s palace at Potts’ Point, and the poor-
house at Parramatta, where the pioneers of the early days of
the State are now awaiting the summons of death under in-
human conditions, are the direct results of the laws of God.
To assist the reader whilst musing upon this unemployed pro-
blem, I would draw his attention to the following facts
Italy, where the worship of wealth is carried to an idolatrous
length, and where crime, poverty, and ignorance run riot, is
a hell on earth. England, with all her boasted freedom, her
streams of wealth which flow into her lap from all parts of
the world, the only country in the world in such a happy
position, is now considering a scheme, having for its object
the exclusion of the pauper, so that the cry of her own poor
for work and food may be answered ; and America, where un-
lestricted individualism has succeeded in planting a white
slavery, when only a few years ago hundreds of thousands of
the flower of her manhood laid down their lives for the pur-
pose of emancipating the blacks, is the home of the criminal
rich, as well as of the poverty stricken murderer. As for our
own land, covered as it is with virgin richness waiting to be
made.uSe of, we find it studdied here and there with gaols,
poor-houses, soup kitchens and maternity homes, because her
sons and her daughters cannot earn sufficient to live decently
and support a family, for the fear cff poverty, the nightmare of


an earthly hell, is ever before them; our streets echo with the
tramp of the unernployed, and the voice of the philanthro-
pist is heard as he deals out morsels of charity to the wornout
denizens of the slums. All this has been so frequently and
graphically described by the public Press that it would be a
work of supererogation to further comment upon it.
0 ! for the men this hellish rule to end,
Make laws that truth and equity might blend,
Give to the idler honest work, and lo !
Wejfi see the golden grain'wave to and fro.
Bear in mind tliere is nothing to lose hy bringing in this
reform, for if the .people got tired of it all that would have to
be done to herald in again the present ungodly rule, would be
to eliminate the Progressive Clause of the Act, allow the pau-
pers from other States to come in, as at present, and allow the
criminals and loafers the freedom which they at present enjoy.
At present the fight for supremacy is between Unrestricted
Individualism and National Degeneracy, and Slavery, both
of which carry the germ of National death, and if there is to
be no" attempt made to check the growth of this leaven of
evil, and if there is to be no attempt to lift the unit out
of want and uncertainty, the sooner it is known the better.
Man to-day is cast in an entirely new mould. Modern science
and education have swept away the superstition of ages; he
no longer flounders in a sea of uncertainty; he knows he is
entitled to a share of the fruits of the earth when he is pre-
pared to honestly gather them, and nothing less than this will
satisfy him. You may bind him down with the laws of your
land, and create social surroundings which will compel him
to live as a slave, but you cannot by law inspire him with a
determination to live honestly, but you can and do compel
him to be a rogue within the meaning of your law, but a
higher than yours says.that he is innocent when it is a case
of food or death by starvation. In the lower strata of
Society man is not what he appears, but what his surround-
ings compel him to be, and the reason why in this lower strata ■
there is a still lower one is because hope has taken to itself
wings and fled, leaving behind a vacuum which no Socialism
from the political hireling can fill. He is an outcast, made so
by the corrupt blood in his brains, the growth of generations,
and the diabolical laws of a liberty which gives to each one
unrestricted license to grasp all within his reach. The eagle,
the king of all birds, is guided by instinct to sacrifice itself
in the protection of its young; but man, the lord of creation,
endowed with the talent of reason, kicks his offspring into the


gutter, to become food for rats. Is it any wonder then that
the small percentage of the offspring of the outcast who sur-
vive the crucial trial of childhood are criminals from the
start ? Where does their opportunity to earn an honest living
come in ? The equality of opportunity, where is it ? Can
they take up a selection of land, or will any one give them
work and pay sufficient to keep them honest? Under normal
conditions man’s soul abhors charity. Begging may be des-
cribed as the life of a dog, and so these atoms of immortality -
turn thieves, not from choice, but because of the papgs of
hunger. Well-to-do people declare that there are those who
will not work, but surely the reader will admit that it is as
easy to make a man work by law as it is by law to say he
shall not work. The cry of the shop employees was heard
against the tyranny of their employers, so the law stepped in
and granted them a living wage, regulated their hours of
labour, and gave them wholesome surroundings.
Law, law can do anything when supported by a majority
of citizens. But this Early Closing Law, which bettered the
condition of thousands of employees, ruined hundreds, because
of its ill-digested provisions, which compelled the struggling
shopkeeper to end his day’s work at a certain hour, indepen-
dent of whether he had or had not earned sufficient to pay
his way. The employee went on his way singing, ‘‘Britons
Never Shall he Slaves,” and yet no greater infringement upon
the liberty of the subject was ever perpetrated under the
British flag. And if we legislated upon such lines till dooms-
day, instead of solving the Unemployed Problem, we should
live to find out that we had made confusion worse confounded.
Remember, reader, that—
“In spite of man’s consent or man’s decree,
A right to life is right to liberty.”
OUR HOLY LAWS.
The old, historic coach and horses four,
Which, unobstructed, through our laws now pour
In mad career, to hoodwink and humbug
The honest worker, and the trusting mug,
Shall have the brake of common sense applied
Till all that are therein are crucified.
Watch how it thunders past, with rogues within,
Their face aglow with something strong as gin ;
Truth work, and wages, these shall form the brake,
And justice, it shall make those devils quake.
Their dust and ashes, these shall form a mound,
Where all true manhood oft shall rally round'


ORTHODOXY.
The effect of Orthodoxy on the mind of man is only what
one would expect to see. Man, it must be remembered, is a
religious animal, and therefore, must worship something;
consequently, when his mind gets filled with beliefs flowing
from a corrupt fountain, nothing but disappointment awaits
him. Hence the unrest which pervades all ranks of society
to-day. The rich are firmly seated on the grid-iron of fear,
because they see the rapid strides which anarchy and demo-
cracy are making towards their stronghold, whilst the dere-
licts of society in so-called civilized countries have, like the
snail, drawn themselves into their desolate hole to calmly
await the Angel of Death. Hope hath flown from them like
chaff before the wind, because of the non-fulfilment of
Christ’s teaching, the hypocrisy of the Church, and the
government of the land still being in the hands of rogues, and
it is only in places like Russia, where ignorance and super-
stition have hitherto held the masses in check, that one can
see or hear of any good work being done in the name of
Liberty.
Recognising the impossibility of civilized man to live with-
out a belief to govern his actions, the reader will at once per-
ceive what a gigantic task the would-be reformer takes up,
when he essays to teach his fellow-men the w T ay to go to reach
eternal life. In all ages there have been such men, and at no
time ih the world’s history, have there been so 'many teachers,
nor so many orthodox ways as there are to-day for man to
reach some other sphere, when he has to leave this one. Un-
fortunately for Orthodoxy, it has most lamentably failed to
get a clear insight into the workings of nature, and the yearn-
ings of the soul for something to satisfy its divine appetite.
Orthodoxy, clothed in its chameleon garments, has all through
the dim past, and the noon-tide blaze of the intellectual pre-
sent, travelled upon the bye-paths of superstition, specula-
tion, and greed, and never once has it got a glimpse of the
Highway which leads to where the Unit iw t found at work,
clothed in the garment of contentment. And the reason why
he is found in this condition is because his fellow-man has not
blocked him in his endeavours to cultivate his talents; he is
absolutely where a higher power than man’s intended he
should be, working out his own destiny, and becoming an
honest citizen, because the skeleton of want is no longer in his
house. Christ says: “Before a man commences to build he
sits flown and counts the cost, to see if he will be able to


finish.” But this is what Orthodoxy all along the line
has neglected to do; Orthodoxy has built without having
any reliable specifications, and without a knowledge of the
materials to be used. Had Orthodoxy remained the domi-
nant power, this ignorance concerning the nature of Hodge
would not have mattered, because what moral suasion failed
to do could easily have been accomplished by the thumb-
screw ; but education and the love of freedom have given
Hodge a new master, and have evolved him from being an
orthodox slave into a human being; consequently, he now ob-
jects to being cast into hell by a more corrupt personage than
himself, or'to be deprived of a taste of nature’s pure air,
should that opportunity occur even upon the seventh day. Most
things when entering upon the stage of decay, contract, and
ultimately disappear; such, however, is not the case with
Orthodoxy, for, paradoxical as it may appear, the more
Orthodoxy is discredited, the more it grows, for it is con-
tinually sending out branches in order to list the public
pulse. Sect after sect appears upon the horizon of life, until
to-day you count them by the thousand, and all have the
rallying cry of “Faugll-a-balah” for their motto.
Another striking phenomenon about Orthodoxy is,
that whilst all this is going on, its ipower is ever on the wane.
Notwithstanding the fact, it, like the priests of Baal, goes
through some astounding ceremonies in order to spur its God
into activity, for the purpose of showing the unclean that
He is with them. Praying for rain, and then when it does
come in the ordinary course of nature, letting it all go
home to the sea again, is a favourite pastime of the worship-
pers of Mammon. Orthodoxy still clings to the hope that it
will hold the reins of power when its Christ comes to govern.
Orthodoxy holds to this second coming of Christ as the limpet
to the rock; consequently, to remove the cob-web of super-
stition from its eyes, and to convince Hodge of the suicidal
policy of remaining quiet, it is necessary to let daylight into
the miraculous occurrences that would have to follow His
advent All students of nature know that the
regeneration of the human family from within is an impossi-
bility. Consequently, if Christ came, He would have to per-
form the miracle of regenerating man, and so fixing him up
that his offspring would have to walk in his footsteps, in
spite of all temptations coming from a chance in Tattersall’s
sweeps; He would either have to do this or take up the un-
thankful task of a reformer again, and then Christ would
only stand in the same position as some reformers of to : day.


The duty which at this point devolves upon Orthodoxy is to
show the necessity of Christ doing anything of the kind.
It is perfectly clear to the talent of reason, the choicest gift
of God, that compulsory regeneration has no part in the
Creator’s programme for man. Regeneration would, in re-
ality, be the making of all men equal, for to do less than
this would still leave Hodge a slave to Dives; for, as long as
man remains constituted as he is, and determined to make
his talents bloom to their full extent, the solving of problems
will follow each other in quick succession, the rich will re-
main rich, and the one bright star in the life of Hodge,
while standing on the bottom rung of the ladder, will be an
unfettered opportunity to rise. This is all that he will ever
receive, and all that he will be morally entitled to ask for.
To show how little the teachings of Christ affect Orthodoxy,
it is only necessary to draw .the reader’s attention to his
words, “Where two or three are gathered toe-ether in My
name, there am lin the midst of them.” Contrast this
simple doctrine with the gorgeous exhibitions of the pomp
and pride of Orthodoxy—exhibitions in which the poor
have no place. Why the very last thing wanted by Ortho-
doxy is the coming of Christ. Orthodoxy says Christ would
rule in righteousness; consequently the parson, the teacher
of worn-out platitudes, who can give no logical reason why
his track is so obscure, and grown over by the briars of incon-
sistency. No soul can travel along this track without being
torn to pieces with mistrust, unless it happens to be asleep.
Where, I ask Orthodoxy, can the soul find even the sem-
blance of rest, unless it falls back upon reason ? Reason
can find nothing in the environment of man calling for di-
vine interference. Has there ever been a time in the history
of man when Divine interference was necessary ? If so, it is
now buried in the long-forgotten past. Christ refused even
to give an opinion upon our Socialism except to say,
“Render unto Caesar the things that arc Caesar’s,” and
“Bear ye one another’s burdens,” and beyond this, had Cnnst
been twice a Creator, He would not have gone. It is true
He cursed the rich, but that is such a common occurrence
that it is hardly worth mentioning.
Orthodoxy has tried to get men to heaven upon empty
stomachs, and this one cannibalistic action, which even a well-
fed brute would leave alone, is enough to damn the whole
box and dice of those who imagine themselves to be the
children of heaven.' If the reader will cull from the thousand
and one sections of which Orthodoxy is now composed, the


cardinal features on which rests its salvation, and then draw
a little inspiration from the laws of nature, and ascertained
facts ever active in his daily life, he will find himself in such
a labyrinth of doubt as to the soundness of the foundations
upon which Orthodoxy stands, that he will flee from within
its walls, not as the hireling fleeth, but because he wishes
to find the secret of how to live.
Although the author has condemned what is called Or-
thodoxy, it must not be forgotten that all men are Orthodox;
every man, no matter wjiat form it may take, has a god;
there is one part of his nature which, for the time being,
over-rides all other actions; for instance, a freetrader will give
his vote to a religious opponent in the hope of getting some
direct benefit—the fact is the freetrader has his track marked
out, knows where he is going, has his goal in view,
and shapes his course accordingly; greed is his god, the
possibility of his religious opponent eventually swallowing
him up never enters into his calculations, and whether he is
under the rule of a spurious king, or a follower of Confuc-
ius, troubles him not in the least. Had Church Orthodoxy
walked upon the freetrader’s lines till its goal was in view,
all would have been well with us; but when it took up its
sell-imposed task, it neither knew the road to take nor what
the goal was like. So it made a track, a home, put a God in
it, terrible even to think of, and then it made a place for the
unorthodox more terrible still. The sun and the moon stand-
ing still to give light to the lustful worshippers of their God,
whilst they slew the widow and the orphan, and the bright-
est jewel in the human family becoming a murderer, are but
minor incidents in the life of their God, and are totally
eclipsed when the wholesale murders, lust of power, and other
practices of Orthodoxy are brought under review. So rotten
and so distasteful have parts of Orthodoxy become, that we
have its own officers denouncing them. The Bishop of Tas-
mania said, “The doctrine of inequality of opportunity was
devilish.” But why did not Bishop Mercer call a a
spade ? Had he said Unrestricted Individualism instead of
inequality of opportunity, the poor would have had a friend
at court. Inequality of opportunity is the offspring of indi-
vidualism, and as the Bishop has said the offspring is devilish,
the parent must naturally be of hellish origin. But, notwith-
standing all this, one crime alone is more than sufficient to
cause the unbiased reader to spue Orthodoxy out of his mouth,
viz., its looking on with comparative indifference whilst mil-
lions live a living death in poverty and shame.


TO THE CREATOR.
0, Creator, whate’er may be Thy role,
One thing is certain,' Thou hast all control
Except it be o’er that which You call man —
And, he being free, of course to earth soon ran
And made it hell, for slaves to waste away
Their manhood and their strength for sweated pay;
And that is how man shows Thou told no one
More than another how life’s race was won.
AVhat we call Bible, though a marv’lous book,
It shows its Authors drank from Nature’s brook —
Soared high on wings imagination lent.
They spoke and w r rote as passing fancies rent
Their minds asunder, so, they made a God
With contradictions idled, wielding a rod
Which brought the dust to life, filled it with strife
That left no time for mirth, and so its life
To dust soon went, and to this ceaseless round
Of life and death, and death and life, we’re bound
AVithout a ray of light except the one
In reason’s mind, which Thou alone once spun.
It shines to day as it did once before,
’Twas on the day that Christ said, “help the poor” :
Life’s Alpha and Omega this must be,
For ’tis the nearest we can get to Thee.
All being equal,* shows our race when run
Should leave world better than when twas begun.
Of Thy great Universe our earth’s a part,
And didst Thou man control we’d loth dejiart.
But man, an independent atom made,
’Tis hell when he attempts our minds to grade;
Reason rejects him and his hireling crew,
To chanoe what lies behind yon azure blue.
* Equal right to work, liberty, and food,
NATURE AND HUMANITARIANISM IN HARMONY.
As vapour from the ocean’s surface rise,
And spreads its watery shroud ’tween earth and skies,
Then gently falling on the earth that’s dry,
Bid’s drought and famine from its face to fly.
In giant strength, so shall the worker rise,
And bid defiance to the rich and wise;
Take by the hand—as rain takes hold of grass—
The. idle orphan and his unwashed class,
And bid them till the sleeping land that’s bare,
Until the golden grain its head doth rear.


WHY DOES A MAN EAT 1
Why does a man eat ITo live, why does he live ? Be-
cause starting life in a state of youthful ignorance, he finds
that all that glittered in his childhood’s days was not gold,
ana being true to that law of nature, which is fully deve-
loped in the animal kingdom, as well as in our own, namely,
curiosity, he sets himself the task of trying to dovetail to-
gether his life of childhood and youth with that which con-
fronts him as he walks along the commercial avenues of every-
day life, and although every step that he takes only plunges
him deeper into the social maze, which he finds is utterly
at variance with the precepts taught him in his youth, he
decides, if possible, to unravel the sk’ein of contradictions
which has hemmed him in on every side. During childhood
and youth he lived in an atmosphere of wonder and delight,
fed on the choicest fruits of the earth, each day bringing
with it a change which, to his infant mind, became an ever-
increasing source of joy. And then as the days rolled by, and
he began to talk, he was taught all sorts of stories concerning
what he was to be, and as he had no trouble save that which
he made himself, the world and himself agreed well together.
At this time he was gradually taught to believe that, al-
though Ijis nature was desperately wicked beyond all living
things, and that fire and brimstone was to be his everlasting
portion, he might, by a lifelong sacrifice, and obedience to the
sectarian Shibboleth set up by the particular party which
the accident of birth cast him amongst, escape as it were by
■the skin of his teeth, and ever afterwards walk the golden
streets of the new Jerusalem, and drink the sweetest of nectar
with the angels
In some heaven-lit sylvan glade,
Where flowers bloom but never fade.
why does he not become a shining light amongst his
people ? Because by this time he has journeyed’ on to man-
hood, and discovered, for the first time, that life has two
sides, and that every step had to be taken after the pros and
cons bearing upon them had been duly considered. Over
the portals of the exchange, of which he was then a meijiber,
he' read:
He who would success achieve,
Must at this end his conscience leave;
Smartness with sharpness he must weave—
Make black look white and so deceive.
And fool indeed must mortal be
Who fails to climb life’s social tree.


During tlie days of his youth he had no opportunity of getting
'behind the screen which hid from view the actions of his
ciders, hut now he finds himself clieek-by-jowl with them.
One step takes him from the land where castles are built by a
fertile imagination, and plunges him into one where the bat-
tle cry is, the devil take the hindmost, he finds the worship
of the golden calf the chief attraction of the day, and tiiat
he who contributed a little to charity, of that which had
created charity, generally stood in the front rank of fame.
The struggle to get within touch of the calf, he saw, meant
death to countless multitudes, but the scene fascinated him,
and he made up his mind to see what youth, application,
and honesty could achieve, and would see the play of life
through. He saw the path was strewn with the bones of
those who had tried and failed, but this only added zest to hia
resolve. Starting from scratch, where stood a finger post,
into which was burned the words: "All who travel here must
see that each one has sufficient work and food to take him
to the end.” This at once prevented him from becoming
an orthodox shining light. He had only a hazy notion of
what the words meant, but as they were put there by tho
founder of Christianity, he concluded that thev were to be
observed. So he set himself what proved to be an impossible
task, namely, reconciling the words with the actions of his
spiritual and social guides, for not only was ortho-
doxy preaching the doctrine that all men were to
be content with the position which it declared God
had placed them in, but- the social laws were in
direct opposition to the warning that was on the finger post,
and under such conditions he at once saw the impossibility of
a pawn, which he knew he was, upon the chessboard of life,
securing for himself, let alone his neighbour, work and food,
from the cradle to the grave. And yet, knowing this, he
scorned to take advantage of the law of unequal opportunity
which surrounded him, and which he could have made use of
owing to the social position of his friends. He had marked
out his course, which was to see if he could run through the
gauntlet of life, and remain honest. Fixing his graze upon the
actions of his spiritual guides, he found but an infinitesimal
portion of that charity, brotherly love, and trust, with which
he had been often told his own nature must overflow with
before he could hope to enter the promised land. He found
they threw the whole responsibility upon God, for man not
having at all times sufficient work, and food to eat, although
they often sighed, and sometimes in vain, for a “call” to a


richer congregation. Whilst the Press, the leading power in
the State, declared that though it was the duty of the
Government to claim all land, it was no part of the duty to
see that all its subjects had an opportunity to work. This
seemed to his simple and humantarian mind to be the reason-
ing of .devils. And so, regardless of consequences, he plunged
into the seething sea of humanity, for the purpose of seeing
whether he had a right to live, and if so, whether he could
breast the storm, remain honest, or be compelled to admit
that orthodoxy was a delusion and a snare, and his social
environment a creation of human fiends. He soon found
himself under full-sail in the active walks of life, with a
wonderful change of feeling creeping over him, for what he
saw and heard was the very opposite to that taught him
whilst at home. Instead of a helping hand, he finds himself
jostled and pushed aside by hirelings, who invariably took
the prize. But he stills perseveres and sticks to the prin-
ciples so often taught him. His goods are manufactured and
sold as genuine articles, but for some reason they don’t take
on, and this to him is a mystery, for he leaves himself but
the smallest margin of profit. So he sets out in order to find
a reason in the haunts of trade, and once there he is not long
left in doubt, for he finds deceit everywhere to be an article
of everyday use, and woven into a thousand forms for the
purpose of deluding a people ever willing to be deluded. He
found it the rule to buy cheap, even if the goods were bad.
Sharp practice was the order of the day, and to be able to
take one down was an action .to be proud of. Church and
State, high and low, were all fired with a determination to be
first, come what might. It is true he found some notable
exceptions, but not enough to guide the helm of State.
Having spent the day studying the mysteries of commercial
life, he returns home utterly disgusted with what he had
seen, and convinced that honesty would ever remain on the
bottom rung of the social ladder, unless our system was
melted down, and cast in the mould of humanitarianism. So
he looks elsewhere for the key to solve the problem of life.
He turns his attention to the laws of nature with their mar-
vellous accuracy and power to supply the wants of man, tliev
never having failed to give as much as was required, for when
one part of the earth wanted food, another part was always
ready to supply it; and he saw that had it not been for the
greed of man, the pangs of hunger need never have been felt.
Then he watches these laws as they sweep onward without
warning, tossing, crushing and destroying all that would ob-


struct them, men and women, the seemingly good, and the
known had, swept into eternity, and he is left to ponder o’er
the scene. And as he continues his search after truth, he
wends his way once more in the direction of the churches, as
though loth to leave them. But after going through them all
he finds there is no alternative but to leave them, for he sees
the fatted calf still standing upon velvet, whilst he who had
no money had the hardest of seats, and placed as far from the
pulpit as possible, so that his foul breath should not con-
taminate the perfumed air which hovered around the cush-
ioned seats of the drones of the earth. And just at this time the
past, with all its fairy castles, passes before him, and reminds
him that the sweets of childhood and youth had gone for ever,
and that their places were taken by gall and wormwood, as
brewed by a corrupt and selfish generation. His mind was
expanding, and the God of his imagination had far outstripped
the bounds set by his former teachers. He saw that heaven
and hell was in and around him, and that it depended entirely
upon the people which one they would dwell in; and if a
man would not rise to the plane which his Creator originally
fitted him for, then he would have to be content with the
husks of life. Having searched in vain the foreheads of those
who sat in high places for some mark of approval from God,
which would have shown them to be leaders of men, he turns
to the gutter of human life, and there finds in all its original
beauty that angelic loveliness which the Creator must have
bestowed upon the mother of mankind, thereby clearly show-
ing the indestructible nature of the gifts of God. And that
it matters little to what depths of poverty and crime one man
may .plunge another, the germ of life, as it left the hands of
God, ever and anon blooms upon the earth in places where
it is least expected. Having studied the laws of nature to the
best of his ability, he, with a mind free from bias, turns to
the good old book, and reads: “As the heavens are higlic’-
than the earth, so are My ways higher than thy ways.” And
thy time is any time. Then taking a panoramic view of
life, he finds that of all the talents distributed, those falling
amongst the lower ranks of life become the most fruitful and
beneficial to man. This enables him to see through the
glass of life, so he looks back upon what he has achieved.
Ho had been foremost amongst those in the ranks of Christian
abstinence, but he had never stumbled across the fourteenth
chapter of Deuteronomy, but now, when he reads that if
his soul lusted after wine its craving was to be satisfied,
the scales of superstition and self-righteousness fall from


off his eyes, and imagination lent itself to his sense of hear-
ing, and he hears good old Nehem'iah, whilst holding a cup
of sparkling wine in his hand, shouting to the multitude:
“Eat the fat and drink the sweet.’’ Then he remembers
that he has attended prayer meetings to supplicate for rain,
and, after months of waiting, during which time cattle had
died in thousands, human beings starved to death, driven
to commit suicide, and that when it did come, ruin and
death followed in its train, and whilst this was taking place
amongst the poor and helpless, the rich had gone on their
way rejoicing. But this, although once a stumbling block,
was one no longer, for, with a mind filled with love and
amazement, he saw the earth on her j’ourney, wound up
and started with all laws to govern it in their propel 1 place,
and man an independent atom, with power to create a hell
or make a heaven. So, viewing life as he finds it, its
antagonism to all other life owing to the expansion of the
spirit of greed, the criminal rich on the one hand, and the
loathsome poor on the other, he once more casts his eyes
o’er the plain to drink from nature’s fount some of her
stores which the destroying hand of Mammon could not harm.
Rising in time to see the orb of light casting its beams around,
they enable him to see nature in all its beauty. The birds*on
the wing seeking food which they had not to provide, whilst
the cattle roamed at will without a care. 1 Then he looks
towards the city, and there he beholds man, the only living
creature endowed with reason, doing his utmost to make
earth a hell. He looks for some signs of harmony, but
looks in vain; but he sees crime in a thousand forms, from
murder down to giving a negative to the question, "Am I
my brother’s keeper?’’ He sees greed to be the natural ex-
crescence of the fear of poverty, or of that tyranny born of
power, which is generated in the man when, having got a
fair start in the race for life, he tries to ride rough-shod over
all competitors. He sees it to be an endless chain of re-
volting cruelty, which shows that man is a cannibal, whether
living in the noontide blaze of civilization, or wrecking his
life upon the rocks of the body-destroying superstitition of
orthodoxy, the aims of which are something for nothing.
And,
Something for nothing is a germ, by gieed,
A food on which the drones of earth oft feed;
But cursed be he who bends his back, and bleed,
To fill the maws of such a worthless breed.
He sees the State clothed in fine linen, and King Monop-


oly seated upon a mountain of gold, the produce of thou-
sands of lives, which have gone down to the grave, wanting
bread. And, last but not least, he sees his own flesh and
blood again made into dust, before even filling its mould,
by carriage wheels made heavy owing to having to support
two legged and four legged dogs, which lay in lustful ease
within. And this last act of unrestricted wealth fills his
soul with indignation against such a revolting and ungodly
environment. And he breaks forth in the following
words:—
THE HUMANITARIAN’S FAREWELL.
TWO DROPS OF WATER, AND A GRAIN OF SAND.
Two drops of water and a grain of sand,
When placed in Nature’s all-conjuring hand,
Become what we call life —Ah, see, ’tis man,
The vilest of the vile, deny who can;
Hush! cur, behold it. is a lord of earth,
And one whom thou must serve, that’s just had birth.
“A lord,” you say, and ’tis Creation’s work.
Away vile sycophant, within him lurk ■
Passions, which all the parsons fail to quell;
Passions, which always keep our earth a hell;
Passions which rob the widow of her food:
Cursed bo thy lord, and all his hireling brood.
From drops of water and a grain of sand,
Sprang all that now hath life within our land;
How dare you then, that’s level with the brute,
Pay homage to this whelp; can’st thou refute.
Deny that Christ first classed him with the brute?
Ah, no answer —small wonder that you’re mute;
You call this life a lord, so let it be;
’Tis full of poison and of infamy.
But stay, whilst nature kindly lets thee see,
Within her fold, your lord, and little flea—
Which sucks its victim’s blood of rosy red,
Whilst covered o’er with clothes so snug in bed—
They both are grains of sand with water mixed;
What is it then creates the gulf betwixt
The flea, that is with reason dispossessed,
And man; your lord of earth, with all possessed?
One finds to compensate for this defect,
The flea hath not on weather to reflect;
Nature supplies its food; though short its day,
The whole is spent in pleasure, sleep and play;
But what of man, whom Nature’s placed on nigh,
Lord of the earth, must either work or die.
Endowed with talents, gifts direct from God;
If he would live, must cultivate the sod.
Theee talents various, like the rainbow’s hues,
Will all expand ’neath education’s dews;
Behold them growing round one parent trunk,
There-is not one in extra wisdom drunk.


Some till the earth, whilst others sow the grain,
But old and weak doth all at home remain.
This is the tribute reason has to pay
For pleasure and for peace, whilst here it stay.
Man takes his choice, God does not interfere,
Although your idle lord will not act fair;
So Hodge, with rights divine, and strength to spare
Will sweep this drone away, and take his share
Of fruit, the product of his sweated brow,
And give them to his offspring and his frau.
“ He who would be free, himself must strike the blow.”
NEW SOUTH WALES ON THE ROAD TO RUIN.
The road which unrestricted individualism has in its
own interests formed, leaves nothing to be desired in the
way of cruelty, selfishness, and brutal indifference to the
human family. It is strange when one comes to think that
this beautiful land, so young as regards her white popula-
tion, “A people who cannot yet be regarded as having got-
ten beyond the cradle age,” should be already burdened with
an intolerable debt, her best lands in the possession of a few
human vultures, whilst the cry of the orphan, the curse of
the widow, and the genuine prayers of a few, ascend daily
to God, all mingling together in an appeal to Him for deliv-
erance from the power of the God of Mammon. As I stood
meditating upon the problem of life, the apparent uselessrfess
of man, his inability to improve nature, and the pleasure
he took in being able to crush his fellow-man, I heard the
fatherless and the widow, and those who had not cried unto
those that had, but they heeded not. Then I turned to
see why the people kept silence. And I beheld that the
God of Mammon had closed up their mouth, and had set
their eyes to look upon a building afar off. Then I also
looked to see what could cause so much excitement amongst
them. And, lo! I saw it was the home of Mammon. And
I said unto them, "Why look ye all upon the home of the
God of Wealth,” and they all shouted with one voice, ''‘Be-
hold we are bound thitherward. Hath not the unseen God
been merciful unto us, and hath put it into our hearts to
go? He hath declared unto us that the-race it not to the
swift, but that chance is a pillar of strength to those wiio em-
brace it. He hath told us that he who hath shall have more. So
we have closed up our ears that we hear not, and shut our
eyes that we see not.” And I looked at them, but spoke


not a word, for at that moment the home of Mammon became
beautifully illuminated, and its god was seen to be clothed
in raiments of gold, and was beckoning them onward. So
with a light heart and eyes brimming over with hope, they
bade me farewell. So I turned my steps in the direction from
where the cry of distress was still appealing for help, and I
looked and saw the land clothed with the mantle of desola-
tion, the air full of pestilence by reason of the putrefaction of
the dead, whilst the bones which glistened in the sun was
all that was left of the once prosperous husbandman. Then I
listened again but could hear no sound, and I wondered whether
relief, after all, had .outstripped me, and seeing no one about
and the door being shut, I opened it and walked in. Then I
discovered why the cry of distress had ceased, for despair had
overtaken them, hope had taken to itself wings and fled, it
was supposed for ever, from what was once its happy home.
Then I, with words, for they were all the food I had to give,
cheered them with the glad tidings of woman’s enfranchise-
ment, and that, she, the queen of Creation, the goddess of
sympathy, and man’s hope in the hour of affliction, had been
entrusted with the task of righting the wrongs which man had
heaped upon man since the first dawn of civilization; and
that the day was rapidly approaching when she would no
longer allow her offspring, which had been reared with all the
love and tenderness known to woman, to become the victim of
tyrants whose rule had brought them to want; she would
drive the hireling from his paths of sloth and crime, and the
demon of wealth from his blood-made throne. And, having
filled again their hearts with hope, I prepared for my ue-
parture from what was once the ha,ppy home of man. And,
as I journeyed on, I passed by the house of Mammon, and as
the doors and windows were open, I looked in, expecting to
see the god of wealth and to hear the gleeful sounds of mirth
from its many guests; but with the exception of one room, the
house was empty, and in that room sat one man, the one
who had won the race against all comers, and, by winning,
became for the hour the protector of the god' of Mammon.
He had gained the summit of p ( ower and fame, but at what
cost ? for I saw that he was guarded by the strong arm of the
law, so that no harm should befall him; but with all these
precautions, the avenger of those whose criea for help had
remained unheeded, sometimes succeeded in baffling all the
guards, and avenged their wrongs with the blood of the tyrant
as as he sat on his throne. As I passed down the road from
this house of evil, I was struck with amazement at the num-
ber of human wrecks which lined it. Murderers, men and


women who had committed suicide rather than live a living
death, and those who had Ijeen starved to death, whilst
clinging to the skirts 'of genteel gentility, these had been used
as stepping stones by their more adroit companions; these had
all met their death because they hugged the delusion that
they were moulded in superior clay, and, therefore, were not
to be called upon to mingle with the common herd. Then I
returned again to the home from which hope once fled,
and behold it was full of women, attracted thither
by the unearthly silence which reigned where but a
short time before had been all life and activity. They had
taken food and raiment with them, and the inmates were
again clothed, and in their right mind. So, after having
described what I had seen whilst travelling in an opposite
direction to which they were that perished bv the way, the
women resolved that at the next election, this road to ruin
should be made less attractive, whilst the busy haunts of
industry should be enlivened by songs of joy from men, from
whom the sting of poverty had been drawn. It was also un-
animously agreed that having heard the representative of
wealth declare the riches of the State were beyond calcula-
tion, that those now living should enjoy a portion of it, and
in order to give effect to this resolution it was resolved that
the millions of money stored within the house standing at
the end of the road to ruin should be taxed under the inci-
dence of a progressive income tax, without exemptions, and
that the proceeds should be used for the purpose of finding
work for those who were not required in other walks of life.
It having at last dawned upon a hitherto benighted mind
that men who were out of work, and living on charity when
not able to thieve, were a direct tax upon those who were at
work, without them receiving any corresponding benefit; and
that it would be a relief to all, and an everlasting benefit to
the State if the idler was at work, making provision for the
storage of water, which often came when it was not wanted,
and stayed away when heartily prayed for. And we call God
to witness, that we will not rest, so long as the laws of our
land are such as will make our offspring what our host was,
but a short time ago. This brought the Women’s Conference
to 'a. close, and as they left the abode from which want and
rags "had disappeared to complete details for the coming fight
beween poverty and riches, one of the many hirelings
which are always to be seen floating upon the sea of oppor-
tunity, and who had been for some considerable time hovering
about, approached me for the purpose of ascertaining what


his chances would be, were he to espouse the new cause, the
aim of which he plainly saw, i
had already in two or three ins
ings to instruct woman upon
the polling booth, but now he
possible to make a free man of
individualism, *s it would be t
to overturn Mars; and having •
bond, the breaking of which s’
puted to carry on the Woman’s Campaig:
Lifting of all. He
sloth, and is now to be seen fighting with the words work,
wages, and liberty for all, emblazoned on his shield. And so
woman wins the prize for stopping her country from going any
further along the road to ruin, until all its subjects are in the
one boat, some in the cabin, some in the steerage, and some
amidships, but none starving, nor none so rich but what iney
know how rich they are.
So breaks the dawn upon the human hive.
From whence the young and strong go forth to strive —
With sharpened wit and talents, to contrive
A policy that would keep all alive.
Cast to the wind the demons want and fear,
And see that each and all their burden bear,
Making life’s journey what ’twas meant to be—
A journey paved with fruit from Freedom’s tree.
THE CHRISTIAN’S FAREWELL TO UNRESTRICTED
INDIVIDUALISM.
Tyrant,, farewell! thy sun is setting fast;
My sacrifice to thee, how soon the last
Will come, when thou will eat thy last repast
Mixed with the orphans’ blood and tears, their last.
Drain thy last goblet dry of sweated wine,
And bid farewell to an accursed line;
Thy victims, now past count, since Moses slew
Thy minion rather than bow down to thee.
Who made thee ruler of the human race?
Clothed thee with power? come, my question face;
Plunged it in deepest depths of vice and crime,
Thou’rt the antithesis of things sublime.
Who, but old Satan, ever at thy side;
He made thee what thou art, a hell-born bride.
Short lived the pleasure now indeed thy own;
’Tis like the glistening dew of early morn,
Thou’ll find it vanish whilst within thy grasp,
Leaving remorse, regrets, for thee to clasp.
These are the fruits of thy matured tree,
The poisoned juice of which alone sets free.


Begat in hell, cast loose upon our earth,
Cursed be the day that dawned upon thy birth,
Too well hast thou obeyed thy master’s, voice:
He could not, had he tried, improved his choice;
Thy garment wove by Satan’s subtle mind,
An easy task was yours, poor Hodge to blind.
Bible in hand in ages that are past,
Thou held him bound in superstition’s grasp;
Ruled with a rod of iron and sent to hell
All those who at thy bidding would rebel.
The cause of this is easy to be found;
Thy greed’s insatiable wherever found;
No limit can be placed upon thy thirst,
And governed as we are. thou must be first.
Whilst starved humanity, with felon’s knife,
Will watch and wait to take thy useless life;
Count well the cost, this evening of thy day,
Would’st thou be wise thou wilt not long delay ;
Hodge meets thee armed and ready for the fray.
The battle is to death, thou must be slain,
All men are equal, what is thy refrain?
What; speechless 1 thou hast none, shorn of thy robe,
Blasted thou stand like the oak by the road,
Shorn of its leaves a fit emblem of thee;
Oblivion’s the place for all such as thee,
Diseased at heart, a cumberer of the ground.
*Tis well thou’rt to oblivion’s regions bound
Thy stay prolonged ’twould add but to the strife,
And lightning speed would give the well-aimed knife.
List, hark! the hills break forth with joy to sing,
And forest glades their echo back doth fling;
Dost hear the woodman’s voice at yonder tree?
Hark to his glad refrain, “behold, I’m free.”
Equality of chance, he’ll not lack this;
Thy lucre he'd have none, it- brings not bliss,
Esteem of men the highest honor sought,
Content to serve but never to bo bought;
Again, farewell, and to thy years of spoil
Take one last look, for thou’rt bound for the soil.
THE REFORMER’S DREAM, AND WHAT HE SAW
In dreams my soul with lightning roams
Across yon azure blue,
Searching for those celestial homes,
Where man to man is true.
Regions where wasting is unknown,
And where there’s no decay;
Where immortality ig sown,
And lives in endless day.
Such is the home, my soul at night
(When freed from mortal clay)
Seeks in its flight, past orbs of light
To everlasting day. •


It speeds along, but finds no end,
The blue dome’s everywhere;
And day, and night, they both doth lend
Their presence to things there.
And there came a time during one of these midnight rambles
through space, that I alighted at a place more beautiful and
enchanting than any I had ever seen. It happened to be
summer time, and the weather was all that a soul could wish
for. The inhabitants were engaged in diverse occupations,
occupations in proportion to the number required, and to
their individual fitness, but there were no two butchers’ carts
running from Struggle Town to Cheap Alley, two miles dis-
tant, to serve numbers one and two, who lived in the same'
apology for a street. This was a phase of slavery that they
knew nothing about. Absolute harmony existed between the
different grades of society, and it was universally acknow-
ledged that what each one possessed, they were entitled to.
But what attracted my attention as being something remark-
able was that, although this social harmony existed, those
who had advanced well ihto years were not at work where
great strength was required, and that, when sixty years had
been reached, compulsory work ceased altogether. I found
out, as I moved amongst the people, that young and inex-
perienced men were not allowed to practice in what their
elders called experimental legislation. I found that all legis-
lation was watched over by men who had borne the heat and
burden of the day, and had proved themselves to be above
mediocrity in the art of governing, and were, therefore, com-
petent to give the best advice, and to formulate laws based
upon the best foundation of all, that of experience. It was
explained to me that the State was mapped out into single
electorates, and that each member was paid by his constitu-
ents, which amounted to about sixpence per year for each
voter, and as the minimum quantity of voters was sixteen
thousand, the member was assured of a salary of four hundred
pounds per annum. And for this sacrifice of sixpence per
annum, one-third of the electors could compel their member
to resign, but although such was the law, no member had
been fool enough to invoke it. Under such controlling forces
as these, these people had grown happy and contented in their
respective walks of life. In their social environment was to
be found the rich man’s palace, and all other social condi-
tions down to the cottager; But it ended there, for every
home had to stand the test of inspection. Around the cot-
'ge well-fed children played, and the wife sang songs of joy,
"Ist the husband was at work reaping the golden grain.


Having secured a guide, I went through the city, and found
it both beautiful and clean, but was surprised to find 1 it so
small in area. The storehouses were immense structures, and
doing business under conditions which gave no room for
sweating, so I asked the reason, and why the small shopkeeper
was conspicuous by his absence, when my guide informed me
that it was wholly owing to the making of laws which did
not harass the people by keeping them on the tiptoe of expec-
tation of being thrown out of employment. Consequently,
there was but little need for the small shopkeeper, such as
existed in other States, where men, after bearing their burden
through life, had to end their days as slaves to an unsym-
pathetic public. The savings from permanent employment,
and an assured retiring allowance, had shut those dens of
slavery up. The general management of the State was placed
entirely in the hands of those who were noted for their up-
rightness of character. All slums such as once disfigured the
city had disappeared, owing to a law which made it a criminal
offence to be idle, without honest means of support. Begging
was not allowed; the thrice convicted thief was accommodated,
with a permanent home, and the money required to pay for
services rendered to the prisoner was deducted from his
wages; but there was no interference with the actions of the
subject till the subject’s actions interfered with the rights of
others; consequently, Jones drank his shilling, Smith bet
with his, and Robinson, who scorned to either drink or bet,
allowed his wife to drink afternoon tea in the school for scan-
dal. Upon making inquiries about the shopkeeper, and what
protection the new socialism gave him, I was told that, owing
to the law which swept idleness away, it left man without
excuse for not paying his debts. This enabled the manufac-
turer to charge less for his goods, and the retailer to sleep
the sleep of peace, because the law gave him the opportunity
to enforce payment immediately upon proof of debt. This
law only applied to wage-earners, the bankrupt being dealt
with under just and humane methods. My guide was very
particular when speaking of the human side of humanity. He
said that so far as human nature went, it had not undergone
.any change; the honest man and the rogue were, as usual,
both reared in the one home and the desire to become rich
and great was strong as ever, and this, coupled with the
rapid circulation of money, and every man at work, gave
the State its wonderful prosperity. There was nothing ap-
proaching Utopianism, my guide said, about the place; the
laws of nature had been copied, and the foundation upon


which the constitution was built was work, or die. Having
completed our walk through this city of content, my guide
took me into the country for the purpose of showing me the
outcome of the law which provided work for all. He explain-
ed that’ whilst this law was being agitated for, that the
Press, without exception, hurled anathema upon anathema
upon it, quoted the Bible after the manner of the devil, drew
vivid pictures of the professional loafer sharing with the hard
worked mechanic his loaf of bread, till the worker was con-
verted to the belief that the Press had some selfish end in
view. So when the elections came round, reformers filled
the air with the soul-inspiring cry of work for all. Then it
was that the capitalistic Press preached ruin; dipping their
pens into the gall and wormwood of baffled' greed, it pre-
dicted a reign of socialism that would level all down to the
ranks of the clodhopper, and as my guide finished speaking, he
swept the horizon with his hand, exclaiming: How false their
prophecy, and how utterly unfit to act as guides outside of
their domain, you can see for yourself. Certainly the scene
was one never to be forgotten, for no matter what point of
the compass one looked to, signs of peace and prosperity met
the eye. My guide waxed eloquent whilst descanting upon
the foresight and wisdom of the worker, for insisting that
the best experience which the State had to offer should be
utilised for the purpose of making reform a blessing to all.
For the purpose of accomplishing this reform, every
man in the State was taxed, and this simple but just act
galvanised them into a political activity never known before.
The State’s prosperity was gauged by the amount of content-
ment to be found in the cottage, instead of the amount of
taxation the people could bear without causing them to rebel
against their oppressors. The law, which insisted that all
should work, had removed the half-starved idler from the
sweater’s den, the professional loafer from the street, and had
got them housed upon a beautiful stretch of country, bounded
by hills, which sent back the echo of the songs of joy which
left the cottage home when the day was past, for although
a community of people, who were once the dregs of a so-
called Christianity, and a brake upon the wheels of progress,
you can see, said the guide, they are fast becoming the hub
upon which the wheel will perpetually revolve. Their even-
ings, instead of being taken up by robbing their neighbours,
were passed in the lecture hall, the dance, and the billiard
room. See, said the guide, what science has done for the
worker; it has given him all the machinery that he requires;


the machine does the work, and the worker guides it. Close
to where we were standing hundreds of men were employed
throwing a breastwork across a stream for the purpose of im-
pounding its waters. My guide said that there was work
to he done in the State that would require centuries to com-
plete, as it would only he carried on to suit the needs of the
State. That it would only he done by those who, for the time
being, were not wanted by the State for its legitimate work,
nor yet by the private employer. The law recognises that
outside of these two employers, if absolute freedom of the
Unit was to hold sway, there must always be a percentage of
men out of work, and to prevent them from becoming crimi-
nals, the fathers of thieves, and to be supported by those in
work, the law decided that they should be employed construct-
ing works, from which an ever-flowing revenue would be. re-
ceived. There were large tracts of land absolutely barren,
that as soon as water was available would be leased to those
now working, every inducement being offered them to save a
portion of their wages. Success, I was assured, was certain;
there was an abundance of water, but it too often fell where
it was not wanted, and valuable though it was, under our
old environment, the State let it glide away to its home again
and again. Having travelled some distance, we came to what
my guide called a forest in miniature, composed of pines,
many of them not indigenous to the State, and which were
going to be transfered to where the impounded waters would
convert them into a magnificent asset, from which future
generations would draw their supplies, and help them to carry
the burden of debt, which rogues and fools left as a legacy.' 1
Whilst watching the men at work, I noticed that the men
were working under different rules. Some had an overseer,
who directed operations, whilst others worked as they thought
fit, and when I enquired the reason, was told that those who
did a fair day’s work had the privilege of working by the
day, whilst those who did not were given contract work, and
failing at that were placed in gaol, where compulsory condi-
tions could be enforced, without much expense to the State.
Having expressed a wish to' see the house of correction,
•which was capable of achieving such a desired end, I was taken
through it, and oh! what a place it was; it was desolation
run wild; its walls were sufficiently high to dispense with
the sentry; its gates too strong to be opened; the cells were
large, and their contents consisted of large stones, and a
hammer to break'them with. In the outside wall of each
cell there was an opening, into which an iron mesh was fixed,


through which the prisoner had to pass the stone which
went down a shoot into trucks without any further labour.
The prisoner having done his task, received his pay, less his
cost, and was then taken to his quarters for the night, where
he received everything that his pay could procure, and was
treated as a man should be whilst in confinement. The prison
was entirely self-supporting, and all a prisoner had to do was
work or starve, which my guide assured me was the golden
rule of the new Christianity, and so simple that anyone could
comply with it. Compulsion was looked upon as a relic ,of
barbarism, and an infringement of the liberty of the subject.
At the time of my visit, the gaol was almost empty; it was
explained that they had been living under their new constitu-
tion for fifty years, and that very few of the old school were
living; that conditions warranted the belief that in a few
years it would be but seldom required. In fact, said the
guide, its voluntary system is fast killing it. Under the
new Constitution, the fear of want had been obliterated;
children were no longer wasting their lives in the sweaters’
den because their fathers could not support them. Con-
sequently, there was little or no inducement to commit
crime, or to lapse into idleness, such as existed under the
old order. The records of the gaol showed that it was ten
years since the last man died rather than work. Asking
where the money came from to support it under its changed
conditions: You must understand, said my guide, that our
credit was at a low ebb. Taxation was heavy; the unem-
ployed were increasing in numbers, notwithstanding our
statistics proved we had slaughtered close upon 300,000
infants in a f little over 40 years, and abandoned ones were
almost daily picked up by, the police, so hard was it for
many to earn a crust. At last the Government, famed for
its ineptitude, considered that the time was ripe for bring-
ing in some drastic measures for the purpose of holding the
masses in subjection, and providing the ways and means
for the support of the many foundlings that the police
gathered into the bosom of the State. The Press scattered
advice, which, if acted upon, would have heralded in man’s
millennium as clouds scatter rain. Bachelors were to be
taxed, and the married men were to have bonuses thrust upon
them as the olive branches appeared. All families num-
bering more than two should travel free; no single men
should get employment till married ones were disposed of;
and in this way ignorance, selfishness and greed held
forth. The columns of the Press were always open for


cranks of this stamp. But not one word bearing upon the
problem of all problems came from them. What was
falsely called equality of opportunity was still to reign
supreme. And here the guide gave an illustration of
what this meant. The Government had one vacancy, for
which there were two applicants, both of whom were mar-
ried. Both households were reduced to starvation point,
and so it happened that when the two returned home—
listen ye, who preach that a sparrow falleth not to the
ground,' without God noticing it—the one who received the
appointment bent his knees and thanked God. The other
went home, took a long last look at those whom the State
refused a footing, and killed himself. There was, it said, no
opening for him, and he would have to wait. Is it really
necessary to tell the reader that in neither animal, vegetable,
nor human life can this waiting be taken advantage of except
under the law of deterioration, and that even & wheel will
refuse to revolve without being oiled. And yet man, the
master of all, must starve and die in the midst x>f millions
of acres of idle land, and locked up money more than suffi-
cient for all; but these were no use to him. The State held
the land, and his neighbour the money. The State would
not employ him; the capitalist would have him, only on
his own terms. So rather than become a criminal,
He’d shake earth’s dust from off his feet,
And bid its hell farewell;
/He’d ask his God for food and meat,
And home in which to dwell.
The hireling in his robe of fraud,
The vampire in his home,
He’d paint them both, so that his Lord
Could see why he left home.
This had the effect of arousing the masses into action, for
they saw clearly that they might at any time be called upon
to choose between starvation, slavery, or suicide, and it
was at pnce resolved that all men should have the oppor-
tunity to work. So a progressive income tax, without exemp-
tions, became the law of the land. And gold, which had
been withdrawn from circulation, and allowed to grow mouldy
for the want of using, was again placed in the commercial
channels, of the State. And as it flowed, the desert began to
bloom, because it had been enriched by water, that had been
impounded by men who had once been rogues and vagabonds.


Then nature called, and I awoke,
Again I was on earth,
And hunger all my strength bespoke—
It left no time for mirth.
I got inside my well-worn clothes,
Outside my porridge sour,
And ambled off, to where my foes
In leisure killed life’s hour.
’Twas then I thought of home and child,
A starved but patient wife;
When losing balance, soon grew wild,
Then took a useless life.
The deed was done, and hell received
Another drone from earth;
And so the law, which I’d aggrieved
Was meas’ring my neck’s girth.
But white men, twelve, who ne’er had knelt
At Baal’s golden feet,
Cried out, and mark, ’twas what they felt
They’d me and freedom meet.
Sq. ’gain my brother, rise and eat
That which now goes to waste;
Rise ofi thy knees, from Mammon’s feet,
And God’s free gifts now taste.
THE STAFF OF FREEDOM IN THE HANDS OF
HODGE.
It is, of course, impossible to name a time when Hodge
will arise in the morning without having the skeleton of want
dogging his footsteps; but recognising that his mind is at
last on fire, and that he is swearing vengeance against his
enemy, the god of wealth, owing to his having his divine
rights made plain to him by the Christian Socialist, it fol-
lows, as the night the day, that there can be no peace until
Hodge gets them or dies in the attempt. It all depends
upon how the attempt is made. Hodge has been flogged,
starved, torn to pieces by the orthodox rack; he has. been
kept in such brutal ignorance, that when he did turn upon
his oppressor, he turned the wrong way. Strikes, destruc-
tion of property, and murder was not exactly the way to
thrust conviction down the throats of those that Orthodoxy
taught was theirs by divine right. Consequently, Hodge to-
day, though nominally' free, is as securely locked in the


arms of Unrestricted Individualism as ever he was. Had he
fought for the emancipation of the Unit, as he has fought for
vengeance upon Dives, victory would have crowned his
efforts.
The reader will observe that preference to Unionists,
shorter hours of labour, and the restriction of apprentices,
have taken the place of Hodge’s first trinity of weapons
for the purpose of achieving the end in view, viz., the anni-
hilation of wealth, but it would be a difficult question to
answer which of the two trinities of evil would work the
most harm to society. It is sad to think that to-day, Hodge,
knowing by heart the Socialism of Christ, his right to work,
and to a living share of the fruits thereof, should have so
lamentably failed to rise to the occasion. He has altogether
failed to grasp the issue in dispute; he has little or no con-
ception of what is due to himself, or of what is due to his
fellow-man. The course which Hodge, with a bull-rush mad-
ness, mapped out when he took up the gauntlet thrown down
by Mammon, must end in confusion, or, if fought to the bitter
end, in chaos. Hodge, notwithstanding the fact that his poverty
is as acute as ever, still continues his suicidal policy of at-
tempting to occupy the seat of honour, which his opponent
at present occupies. Hodge apparently has yet to learn that
his friend, the humanitarian, would, had he to choose between
our present system and Nationalized Slavery—for that is what
it is when stripped for battle—would vote for things remain-
ing as they are. The humanitarian most decidedly objects
to preference to Unionists, and who shall and who shall not
be allowed to be a carpenter.
Hodge has yet to learn that robbing Peter to pay Paul
ruins Peter, and benefits! no one but the robber; therefore,
creating an aristocracy of labour would place Hodge in Dives’
chair without any benefit falling to the derelict at large.
Should Hodge fail to take warning from the no uncertain
sound which rolls through the political camps to-day, and miss
the golden opportunity of setting his sails to catch the winds
of humanitarianism which are ever at his command, the
forces of Unrestricted Individualism will crush him, and re-
duce him to a state of hopeless bondage, which is
a state he has never yet occupied. Hitherto, hope
has been always with him, but if he loses in this, his
own battle, he loses all. The magnificent heritage bestowed
upon us by our Creator in the shape of talents, is now being
unlocked by education and application. The consequence is,
the elements are being harnessed to do the work instead of


Hodge. Wealth is now accumulating in the hands of a few
at a rate, and commanding a power that no Hodge can de-
prive it of, except it be by what Christians call Civil War,
in the event of which, Hodge would probably be put where
he would make the grass to have a darker sheen for the rich
man to enjoy.
There is, however, one way, and only one way, by which
Hodge can get all that he is entitled to, and, at the same time,
turn his present enemy into a friend. To-day Hodge is very
forcibly reminded that the hill of fame is a very slippery one
to climb, and that he has lately experienced some very nasty
falls, and unless he is careful he will again find himself at
• the bottom, as far as political power is concerned. If he is
wise, he will, to regain the ground lost, and to prevent him-
self from sliding still lower, wait where he is whilst he calls
the Unit to assist. Hodge will have this by enacting that
all shall have work, whilst there is a foot of land to till or a
grain of wheat to grind. Then he will see that man shall
either work or starve, and will complete his policy by an
equitable Income Tax, without exemptions, from which he
will provide the wherewithal to pay the Unit. Hodge will
see, that by placing these measures on the Statutes of the
State, he will compel Dives to contribute out of his abundance
to the payment of the work done by the Unit, and compel the
Unit to support himself, instead of, as now, Hodge doing it
for him. When Hodge has set his humanitarian ball rolling
in this direction, he will find Orthodoxy, the Criminal Rich,
and until success can be seen to be near, the Daily Press, en-
gaged trying to stop it; but, as Hodge will have numbers to
counteract the effect of this unholy Trinity, he will find suc-
cess assured as soon as he takes the Unit under his wing.
This is the one bitter pill that wealth dreads, for it knows
that it will have to be swallowed when the first contact of
Hodge and the derelict of society takes place. Then, and
not till then, will the withering curse of Orthodoxy make
room for the humanitarian life, as portrayed by Christ,
when He said, “Bear ye one another’s burdens.” One
moment’s consideration of this phase of our socialism ought
to convince Hodge of "the folly of attempting to do any good
to the human family, as a whole, upon present lines. Legis-
lation, so far as it has gone, has proved itself utterly
incapable of touching the ever-growing cancer of Idleness.
Unrestricted Individualism has failed; labour has demon-
strated to the world that it has no remedy for the disease,
save that of Nationalised" Slavery. The Bible says, “No


man liveth to himself,” and what is true of man is equally
true of nations. The world has advanced too far now for
any part of it to live within itself, for if the Single Taxer’s
dream and Hodge’s dream for the nationalising of all things
were fulfilled to-morrow, we should still have the rich, the
poor, and the derelict amongst us.
The one cardinal point in the social economy of civi-
lised life upon which Hodge must keep his eyes, is that the
inequalities of wealth will always be in proportion to the
varied talents in man, for the man who possesses a talent,
application, and ambition, must command the respect of
his fellow-citizens, and rise to the topmost rung of the social
ladder; and why should he not ? He has harnessed the
elements to Hodge’s plough, and turned hard work into a
recreation. But it must not be forgotten that while genius
stands upon the topmost rung of fame owing to his skill,
and Hodge enjoys shorter hours of labour, the derelict can
only claim the star-bespangled dome for a roof, and the bare
ground for a bed. There is, of course, a possibility of
Hodge, with such hirelings to assist him as a Deakin or a
Lyne, securing a victory over all opponents for his ill-
digested and revenge-suggested scheme for the nationalis-
ing of all things living and dead. But commonsense, as
soon as Hodge will consent to embrace it, will convince him
that his victory would be short lived. Civilization, as re-
gards liberty, has placed man on the plane that he stood
upon when, in his-barbaric grandeur of paint and feathers,'
he roamed at will over his native hills in search of food,
untrammelled by the fear of man. Civilization has taught
man to regard liberty as the most ipriceless of all things
within his reach. Our every-day life proves that up to the
present a majority of men consider life a thing not worth
fighting for, believing it to be as full of dregs as a patent
medicine is with deceit, but it is quite the reverse when
the life of liberty is at stake; then it is not a question of
numbers, for all men rise as one to defend her. Conse-
quently, supposing Hodge should, at some remote period
of time, see his vile and brutalising Socialism bear fruit,
one can easily imagine that all lovers of liberty would as
soon as possible free themselves from its fatal embrace.
Unrestricted Individualism, baneful as are its effects upon
many, would carry with it an element of chance, even to
men in honest walks of life, but there can be nothing of
this under Nationalised Socialism, for the only avenue where
the element of chance would have an opportunity of pro-


menading would be in the field of roguery, which would,
without'doubt, extend from Dan to Beersheba.
Nevertheless, it is not sufficient to know that Hodge
will never get the lover of liberty to assist him to make laws
so that his own offspring will be debarred from entering
into a walk of life which he favours, and for which his tal-
ents fit him. The plan of campaign, as drawn up by Hodge,
“Preference to Unionists,” for the destruction of wealth,
shows conclusively that he has failed to see where a victory
would lead him. Hodge, who to-day has had all the benefit
arising out of centuries of teaching by Christianised men, is
under the impression that the Alpha and Omega of life lies in
the nationalising of all things. But time, and man’s actions,
past and present, show what a rotten foundation Hodge is
prepared to build upon. History, and none more than the
immediate present, shows that all religions, like everything
else, flourish for a while, and then decay. Christianity, the
Morning Star of Life, is no exception to the general rule,
for there is hardly a shred of its once beautiful garment left
amongst us; but in its place we have a thousand shoddy-made
garments, the product of a vile and selfish nature. So it
would he with Hodge’s rule-of-thumb method of dealing with
the complex natures of the human family. The present
Christianised good intentions of Hodge would, when another
Hodge arose who knew them not, develop into tyranny, as
has been the case before. Therefore, there is but one course
for Hodge to steer; he must look neither to the right nor the
left, to the past nor to the future, but drive right in
amongst the gifts of God, and demand' his share of work, so
that he may feel, taste and enjoy them; he must no longer
be hocussed by the platitudes of the hireling concerning the
sweet bye-and-bye when the lion and the lamb of Orthodoxy
shall lie down together, for by that time his slavery shall
have ended, and he will be spoken of as one of the fools of
the past. If Hodge, instead of attempting to hedge the mind
of man in by statutes, so that it could neither, ebb nor flow
only at his dictation, would recognise the fact that there can
be no standing still whilst civilization lasts, instead of placing
obstacles in the way of freedom, he would put forth all his
strength towards removing the few which at present hold his
neighbour in the jaws of a living death. It may seem to some
a waste of .breath to say, that if a man would live he must
eat, and yet Bruce Smith, who sits at the feet of Mammon,
says Jones must wait till Dives calls him. But it is a waste,
and a criminal waste of breath, when Smith says Jones would


not work even if given the opportunity, for as a matter of
fact he never had an opportunity, and until he -has, it
is only the ignorant and the rogue who would dare to malign
him. Smith is a fool, a rogue, and a waster of man’s
strength, when he says, "I will support a system which will
prevent Jones from getting work,” knowing that Jones will
have to thieve, or remain a parasite to suck the teats of a
Sentimental Ilumanitarianism. It may be taken for granted
that the end of a first generation under a Nationalised Social?
ism would see the few remaining ashes of a once pure Christ-
ianity consigned to the grave, and the creed of chance and
opportunity, regardless of consequences, flourishing as the
green bay tree. Man is not a rogue from choice, nor yet.
because of opportunity, otherwise there would be more dis-
honest people than there are. Man is a rogue, first, because
he sees the skeleton of want ever in his cupboard; second,
because competition holds him in the vice of competence and
attraction, and when these fail him, his is the felon’s doom,
or the parasitic existence in the poor-house. And this is the
doctrine that Bruce Smith, the great exemplifer of class dis-
tinctions, has the audacity to preach to a people, many of
whom lack the common necessaries of life. From this it will
be seen that Hodge, instead of bringing ruin home to Bruce
Smith by endeavouring to nationalise him, would,-in reality,
drive him out of the country, and by so doing, lose his
exceptional abilities, instead of taxing his and all other in-
comes until the derelict was lifted up out of the gutter. Up
to the present, Hodge has never sought his assistance, and
until he does, commonsense will tell him that wealth must
win every time, and in one form or another will keep his
hide hot with the whip of oppression.
HODGE’S TWO MASTERS—A DUAL SOLILOQUY.
Regenerate old Hodge, the parson cries,
Let’s flay his hide again, still cries old Dives,
Our social life’s now in a pretty pass,
’Tis time that he was trained to eat the grass.
We’ll read to him Nebuchadnezzar’s dream..
Extol the green clad pasture, and the stream.
Teach him to respect deputed power,.
And that the brute than him’s but little low’r.


THE BIRTH OF INDIVIDUALISM.
The solution for solving the unemployed problem, as
every one now ought to know, lies at the foot of our social
ladder, and not at the top, where Parson and the hireling
would like to see it, and where they say it is. It follows, as
night the day, that long after man’s advent upon the
earth, communism pure and simple was the order of the
day, and that it was not till the morning of the day when
necessity rose in the midst of the camp, and said the ground
must be made to yield its fruit, that individualism was born,
then it was that the law of diversity forced itself upon the
notice of the human family, and each one ransacked his
storehouse to see what it contained, and as the people multi-
plied and spread over the country, so knowledge, if not wis-
dom, began to increase, and it is very easy to imagine how
divisions in their ranks began to grow. One has only to
follow the wanderings of a party breaking away from their
home to make one for themselves, to see how they came into
existence. The party having arrived at a river, which ap-
peared to be an obstacle too great to overcome, one can see
the party setting down to discuss the situation, and to invent
some means of getting across, and by the same rule, that in
the multitude of counsellors there is wisdom, so in a number
of diversified talents there is knowledge. Having completed
details for crossing the river, the next step was to divide
the labor. In doing this necessary work, care would be taken
to see that he who had the bridge in his brain was not sent
to cut the tree down; and, when the first stroke of the axe
was made, it, at the same time, heralded in the birth of a
new socialism, namely, the division of men into separate
walks of life. Communism may still have reigned, but, all
the same, the rift in the social lute was there. From this,
onward, as the dawn of history proves, divisions increased in
importance, lust and power, till one mind, the mind of the
builder of the bridge, reigned supreme, After the lapse of years,
the curtain rises upon the third stage of the human family,
and exposes to view the builder of the bridge seated upon a
throne, from whence his despotic power is felt far and wide.
He is surrounded bv satellites and place hunters, each of whom
would take the builder’s life if it could be done with safety.
The remaining portion of his subjects are out in the field
making bricks without straw, or providing this builder of
individualism with food and drink, so that his lust may be
satisfied. The four thousand years which have passed since


the curtain was drawn aside, and exposed the individualistic
builder to an ignorant and superstitious people, have been
washed by the blood of millions, notwithstanding the pro-
fessional belief of nations, that a God of love ruled over them.
The Jew, the Heathen, and the Christian, have all vied wicn
one another, to see which, in the name of their particular god,
could kill the most. And now, when we are living in the last
days of these four thousand years, made long by reason of the
suffering which man has passed through, and can look back
and see when the first builder of our hellish environment
passed out of sight, a man who knew not God, neither had
the instinct of humanitarianism developed in his heart, and
was, therefore, a law unto himself, 'we find our environment
as intolerable as it was to the Israelites under Pharaoh,' and
for this reason, we know what life could be, and should be— *
the Israelites did not. For two thousand years we have been
in possession of a heaven-born social policy, a policy which, if
acted upon, would place a king safely upon his throne, lift
the Unit out of the gutter, and herald in a time of work and
food for all. Instead of this, it seems as though the spirit
of the first builder, after passing all these years in some
sphere more cruel than ours, had again come to life to weld
the shackles of Dives more firmly upon the worker. Chris-
tianity, starvation, crime, education, and death, have no more
influence with the god of Mammon than a slave had with
Pharaoh. The Jews made haste to multiply, because they
hoped the next son would turn out to be the saviour of men;
but, to-day, we are asked to increase our numbers so that
Dives may have an abundance of food for his cannon. Chris-
tianity under individualism had, so far as actual power was
concerned, run.its course many years ago, but the wheels of
time move slowly; education was blocked by all available
means, whilst superstition has had to die a natural death.
But its life’s blood is now ebbing fast, and what is more to
the point, our one-sided Christianity knows it. It is going
down the hill of death unhonored and unmourned, whilst the
finger of scorn is being pointed at it, because, during its long
reign, it will be remembered chiefly because of the seeds of
bigotry, self-aggrandisement, and cast, which it has sown. It
is to be regretted that the power now rising for the purpose
of deposing Orthodoxy and Wealth, should be so blind to the
actual workings of human nature, as not to see that no matter
how' pure its motives may be, it cannot hand them down for
posterity to make use of; consequently, Nationalised Socialism
carries with it its own destruction. If our so-called Chris-


tianity, education and precept had had the power to wield
the olive branch of peace, the Unit would have been clothed
and in his right mind long ago. But human nature, which
has always governed, has proved itself to be too powerful for
these three social factors. Had these factors been like the
one opposed to them, unadulterated, all would have been
well. We know that the guiding principle of mere nature is
to secure and keep all that it can lay its hands on. What the
consequence may be to others is of small moment to the
animalised man; consequently, no one who studies human
nature expects to get anything from it but what it is forced
to give. But when it comes to education and Christianity,
two corporations which have dived deep down into the work-
ings of our environment, the worker was justified in be-
lieving that something good would follow their efforts, but
all these two corporations have given him is precept upon
precept, with example nowhere; consequently, the worker
has no alternative but to strike out for himself, and, in doing
this, he is absolutely assured of one thing, and that is, power
to do so lies at his feet. The ballot box will prove his friend
whenever he likes to put it to serious use. Before making
use of the ballot box, it will be necessary for the worker to
clearly-point out what his objective' is, so that there may be
no doubts about it. All rulers and would-be rulers have an
objective; Unrestricted Individualism’s is, as everyone knows,
the accumulation of wealth without responsibility. It will
give you freedom to do everything but break its laws: you
may look on whilst it breaks divine laws, and appropriates to
its own special use the fruits of natural law, and if you are
not satisfied you can lie down and die. Such is the objective
of the system under which we live, and it is as powerless to
lift the Unit out of the gutter as it is to stop the sun from
shining. The objective of labor is Nationalised Socialism,
and when the reader thoroughly understands what it means,
if he is a lover of freedom he will shrink from it, as he would
shrink from a poisonous reptile. History has proved for all
time that it would be the act of a madman to trust one’s
liberty to even religious organisations; what would it be then,
if a community entrusted their freedom to an avowed band
of adventurers? Trades unions stand aghast at their own
audacity. They, begin to realise where Nationalized Socialism
leads to, and so they have harked back, and now say that their
objective is the nationalising of monopolies; but this is only
to deceive, because all who care to think know that with all
systems there must be finality, and that once State socialism
got fairly underweigh, all things would soon be under its


control. The objective of the Christians’ socialism is work,
and a living wage for all. This is the foundation of the
socialism laid down by. Christ, and cannot be improved upon.
Under this system it is decreed that all shall be assisted, and
that he who would not work should not eat. This sentence
passed by God upon the idler, and the command given by
Christ to those who hold the keys of wealth, are so plain and
so just that it passes the understanding to conceive how one
ignores the first, and treats with contempt the second. It is
plain enough'to be seen that if man carried out the sentence
passed by God upon the idler, that he who carried it out would
either have to kill the idler, or find him work, and this is just
where wealth finds itself upon the horns of a troublesome
dilemma. It dare not kill, because that would bring about its
own destruction, and it will not give the idler work, because
that would be solving the Unemployed Problem, and, at the
same time, deprive men like Bruce Smith of cheap labor.
So Wealth takes a middle course, thinking, no doubt, that it
will escape the sword of justice, when it gets into the Bishop
of London’s Paradise, by giving the idler absolute liberty to
exist as best he can; and so he thrives for a time by thieving,
begging, and an occasional plate of soup from a charity that
thinketh no evil, and should he, through carelessness, or acci-
dent, fall into the arms of the law, the whole community is at
once taxed to support him. It may be taken for granted
that when Christ gave the command He was not thinking of
the born idler over whose head hung the sentence of death,
but that He had in His eye those whoin-the law of supply and
demand kicks from pillar to post, for these men are living
witnesses to the diabolical treatment meted out to them by
the system under which we live. Prom this, it will be seen
that nothing but disappointment awaits him who waits for
the regeneration of man; and that now, owing to the spread
of knowledge, it becomes a crime to cast life upon the earth
before seeing that the road is clear for it to make a living.
The day has gone, and it is altogether too late to indulge in
this game of grab; there are altogether too many blanks.
Talk about gambling, Unrestricted Individualism is the
greatest gambling institution the world has, or will ever see.
It is not only the largest, but it is the most corrupt; the share-
holders in Tattersall’s all stand upon an equal tooting;
but, in our socialism, the cry continually arises to heaven,
God help the poor. But the Bible and the laws of nature
plainly tell us that His work is done, that He has cast us
adrift upon the ocean of time fully equipped, and competent
to work out our own salvation. Christ said, “Take no thought


for the morrow, sufficient for the day is the evil thereof”;
and this, although a stumbling block to many, is one of the
simplest riddles in the Bible, for if we would allow one
another to work, the social machinery would revolve so
smoothly that there would always be more; than sufficient for
all. It now remains to be seen whether the worker will prove
himself to be equal to the occasion. If he is equal, he will
stand upon a platform superior to the platform of any other
form of life; but at present, he has to remember that a bird
remains a bird, a grain of wheat remains wheat, and that
man, instead of keeping the form once given him, has, owing
to villainies, lust, greed and idleness descended so low in the
scale of life, that he is sometimes mistaken for the brute. He
has the wisdom of the serpent, the ferocity of the bulldog,
and the cunning of the fox; traits which go to show that
human nature, if left to itself, would soon sink to the level
of the heathen.
THE IDLER.
One often hears the words “Oh! he would not work
even if he got the opportunity, he is a born idler,” and,
because here and there amongst the great mass of mankind
an idler is to be found, it is deemed to be quite sufficient
to bar any scheme, having for its object the lifting of the
unemployed into practical politics.
There can be no two opinions upon this. One hears
it in all walks of life, neither can it be 3oubted but that
untold misery has to be borne by the honest worker, for
the simple reason that it is impossible to separate under
our present system the willing worker, from the unwilling
one; consequently the author proposes to bring into life
an entirely new social environment for the casual worker
and the professional loafer. He proposes to put to the
test, and prove beyond a doubt, if the words, Oh! he won’t
even work if h'e gets the opportunity, are based upon any-
thing more substantial than that lying jade’s quicksand,
“they say.’’ In framing a measure dealing with the un-
employed and pauper immigration, care would be taken
to see that it was framed upon true humanitarian lines,
that is, that each country shall have the right of saying who
shall and who shall not enter its territory. Without this


power, a State would be liable to be overrun with the scum
of other -States as soon as it became the most prosperous,
although its prosperity might be wholly owing to some ab-
normal occurrence; consequently, the law dealing with im-
migration would prohibit anyone entering whilst in the con-
dition of a pauper, or for seeking work unless by the consent
of the State. It would be the height of folly for the people to
tax themselves for the purpose of giving work to their own
idle, if the door of the State was to be left open for the idle
of other States to walk through. ■ The State having given
protection to its citizens in the way of preventing an influx
of undesirables, would issue a proclamation, setting forth
that upon a certam date, every adult male without honest
means of support would be called upon to work, and that
they would have to do so, or starve in prison. The reader
already knows that this is part of his belief, and would like
to see it acted upon, a belief powerless in itself, but possessing
supreme power when used collectively for the purpose of
putting in force the first law of nature, self-preservation. This
proclamation would give the men who it is said will not work,
an opportunity to clear out to more congenial pastures, and
this in itself would make the solving of the unemployed pro-
blem much easier, because no one for a moment could suppose
that a born idler would stay in New South Wales and under-
take regular work, to suit the whims of cranks who work for
a living, when, in a few hours, he could shake the dust of
such an inhospitable land from off his feet, and enter one
which would act more kindly to him, and respect his undying
faith in the art of living without work; neither can it be
imagined that a Victorian loafer, after spending years in
that paradise of labour, would have any particular desire to
help in turning our desert into a vineyard. It is to be re-
membered that this art of living without work is an excres-
cence of civilization. In the vegetable kingdom, when a
plant leaves off work, it dies, so it is in the animal kingdom;
but in man’s kingdom, where the gospel of Christ is supposed
to influence the course of events, we find that, at its two ex-
treme ends, to leave off work means the enjoyment of life,
without its responsibilities, whilst the unmitigated fools occu-
pying the central zone wear their lives out whilst trying to
support the whole social structure. No wonder that history
and our everyday life shows their folly in attempting such an
impossible task with credit to themselves. It may be taken
for granted that every man found in New South Wales after


the expiration of'the notice would be willing to work under
the conditions imposed till he could better himself. His
name, age, and what he could do would be registered, so that
any employer of labour could find him when wanted, and any
man thrown out of work on the Saturday would be able to
register himself on the Monday morning and go to wor±>.. No
compulsion would be used in the way of notice, and when one
wanted to leave to take up other work he would be paid off
at once. It is often advanced as a reason for not giving the
idler work that there are so many of them unfit to work, such
as is proposed, but on the land there is work that all can do.
Under the new system it would be compulsory for each one
to be registered in one of the municipalities of the State, and
be compelled to hold an elector’s right, so that if necessary
a man could be traced, no matter what part of the State he
would be in. This would prevent a man coming into the
State and saying lie was a citizen, when in reality he might
be only an interloper. Man is often called an idler when
he has no claim to the title. Thousands of men with wives
and families walk about idle, because of being compelled
to do so, and if the reader will only study our social life,
he will quickly see that he has no moral right to call any man
an idler. Some men are idle because they cannot help it;
others because they are refused a living wage, whilst others
again who, having lost all hope, don’t care how the remain-
ing part of life goes by, so they remain parasites upon their
fellow-beings, with millions of acres of fertile land, water
to water it with, and an abundance of money upon which
they could, with moral right, levy a tax to support the Unit
whilst subduing the forest. Our rulers declare the task to he
beyond their ability. How such men have the audacity
to govern a State is one of the riddles qf life, which are
harder to solve than how to support life. No wonder a State,
under the rule. of such hirelings, taxes prosperity, or that
the man without hope becomes an idler. If a State, for its
own safety and well-being, makes provision for keeping out
a person who has been convicted in another State, and served
a sentence which the law o'f an eye for an eye demanded,
thereby making him a free man again, to be logical, it should
also prevent the man whom it knows to be a loafer and an
unconvicted thief; especially should this course be followed,
seeing that it is not satisfied in prohibiting the convicted thief,
for it enacts that should a master of a vessel allow such a


person to land, he shall be liable to a fine of One Hundred
Pounds, or six months’ imprisonment. Here the reader will
see the Attorney-General proposing legislation which would
make a criminal of an honest man. This legislation, it will
be seen, is aimed at keeping out the man who has been
convicted, but there are thousands of men in the pauper ranks
of life who, although having escaped conviction, are as much
a menace to the well-being of the State as is the convicted
thief. It goes without that an idle man having
no honest means of support, cannot remain honest. You may
preach to him about honesty being the best policy, but when
a hungry man finds himself among thieves, it generally
happens that he becomes one himself, and every man who
refuses to legislate in the direction of giving his neighbour
the opportunity to work is by far the worst thief of the
two. Senator Lodge, a member of the United States Sen-
ate’s committee on immigration, says, “There are many public
questions which affect the welfare of the United States, but
there is none that go so deep, or in which the future is so
much involved as it is in this tide of unrestricted, unsifted
foreign immigration.” At the present time the United States
has drastic legislation bearing upon this pauper immigra-
tion, and the day is quickly coming when they will, for their
own safety, have to shut it out. To assist the reader in
coming to a decision as to what his action should be to-
wards the idler, independent of what the Bible may say,
or the laws of nature may demonstrate, the author brings
under his notice the third annual report of the association
for assisting discharged prisoners. The following is taken
from ,a mass of interesting matter: —“The fewness of the re-
convictions during the year was a matter that called for
special attention; only 14 out of 231 assisted returned to
gaol.” This irrefragable evidence sweeps to the four winds of
heaven the libel with which this chapter begins, for if 217
out of a total of 231 prisoners were prepared to work under
the withering blast of unrestricted individualism such as
ours is, rather than again enter the prison from which the
sunlight of liberty is excluded, what, it is fair to ask, would
have been the percentage could work have been obtained
at a living wage instead of having to crawl and beg for it
under sweating conditions ? This report shows beyond a
doubt that man is not a rogue from choice, but from neces-
sity. The reader knows that thousands find their way to gaol
time after time, but how else, I ask, are they to live ? No
one will employ them. The eye of the law is ever upon


tliem, so they spend their time when out of gaol robbing
their neighbours, and living upon vice. Then another con-
viction follows. From this it will be seen that the idler
lives part of his time by robbing a section of the people,
which generally amounts to more than a dozen years of
income tax would, and for the remainder of the time, the
whole State is called upon to supply his wants. In the
face of this, will the reader deny that the State has not
a moral duty, and an equitable duty, to perform to those
of its subjects who are everlastingly being penalised by
its human scum, and that it owes itself the duty of always
providing for these helpless parasites out of funds contributed
by the whole of its citizens, and see that it was recouped
for the outlay ? 'Were the author compelled to be an idler,
and was told by those who were preventing him from work,
and who possessed the power to give liim work, and yet re-
fused to give it, by saying he would have to wait his time,
as Bruce Smith insinuated, he would do his best to place
him somewhere, where he could do but little harm, for it
must by this time be obvious to the reader that it is high time
some of the drones of the earth entered upon their second term
of probation in the Bishop of London’s Paradise—men
who are satiated with lustful audacity, and holding almost
despotic power because of the apathy of the unthinking por-
tion of the community. There is nothing in life that will
unhinge the mind of an honest man so quickly as enforced
idleness, because as soon as he becomes idle, his life begins to
aimlessly slip away. Each day finds him a day older, a day
poorer, and with a day for providing for old age gone for ever.
Will the reader analyse this, and see what it means to the
victim, and what an inhuman fiend a man must be, when he
says there must always be the . enforced idler ? There are
three classes of idlers. First, we have the wealthy drones,
whose journey through life can only be likened to that of the
butterfly. These idlers neither toil, nor do they spin,
and, therefore, are not necessary to the well-being of the
State; but notwithstanding this self-evident fact, would they
but return, without compulsion, some of the honey sucked
from the fruits of blood, sweat, poverty, and ignorance,
they would have no stronger supporter than the author.
Wealth, in the form of money or its equivalent, there must
always be, just as there will always be wealth in talents: for
the man who possesses a talent that will make two blades
of grass grow where but one grew before, must, under
healthy conditions, always come out on top; and so it must


be with all other talents. There will always be the rich
and the poor, and it is at this point that .the humanitarian
and £he criminal rich part company. The lustful drone knows
that he can only eat of the fatted calf so long as he can keep
his heel upon the orthodox bigot, whilst the humanitarian
knows that there can be no rest till the Unit rises in his
strength, works, and eats of the fruit which his Creator has
commanded him to eat. The second class of idler is he who
is honest in his endeavours to obtain work, but the Jaw of
supply and demand stands before him, and blocks his way.
This law is regulated by industrial conditions, not only in
his own country, but in other parts of the world, over which
he has no control. These conditions are what makes Bel-
lamy’s dream inoperative. Bellamy’s dream requires one of
two conditions: It must have the world for its base, or it
must have its own State fenced in against the rest of the
world; whilst the weak spot in Henry George’s scheme
is that it takes no notice of the Unit, but depends entirely
upon the changed conditions, such as his land tax would
produce. But Wealth does not depend upon the absence of
land taxation. Land is only valuable to the extent to which
its iproduce will realise in the open market, and we are all
aware of the fact that, with the limited quantity of land under
cultivation, there is plenty of food, and that there is nothing
wrong with the supply, but the way it is distributed. The
accumulation of wealth depends upon unrestricted opportun-
ity to hold all that which comes to its maw. Such details
as taxation and labour, Wealth will always be able to pass on
to the other fellow. It is the progressive income tax which
places a limit upon it, and lifts the half-starved worker
from his pallet of straw. The third-class idler is he who will
not work so long as he can beg and steal; therefore he for-
feits his right to liberty. Consequently the law should look
upon him as an habitual criminal, and treat him as such. The
bitterness of feeling shown at all gatherings, social and poli-
tical, upon this burning question of the hour, shows clearly
that the majority of citizens are prepared to support a
scheme containing the elements of success for the uplifting
of the idler. The author stands amazed at the simple task
of proving that when labour, wealth, and water are acting
in concert, that success must follow. Life is possible first,
because the sun never ceases to shine; and by the same rule,
enforced poverty would be unknown, if wealth was never
allowed to rest; it should be like the sun, ever on the
move, giving life, prosperity, and happiness to all who choose


to embrace them. There is no need any longer to wonder
at the rascality which governs so many of the lives of those
who rule over us, for does not Orthodoxy admit that evolu-
tion is not incompatible with a belief in Christianity ? The
wonder is that we, as intelligent and evolutionised ape£,
should meekly allow a physically weak and less number of our
still aniitialised family to ride in velvet-lined saddles upon
the backs of the majority, whilst they, the majority, delve
and toil from the cradle to the grave, gathering in the fruits
of the earth to pay for the drunken banqueting, orgies of
vampires, which the world would be well rid'of. What is
the reason for this iniquity thriving under the very noses’ of
thousands of religious teachers, and where the church bells
are ever calling upon man to remember that he does not live
by bread alone; and why is it that men, women and children,
in the heyday of youth, drop out of the family, as yellow
leaves in Autumn fall from tjie stately poplar ? And the
answer comes rolling down 'through history—Because modern
Christianity is a fraud. Let the reader’s imagination take
him to that Sunday School Anniversary, numbering thousands
of innocent children, all dressed in holiday attire, every race
wearing the smile of pleasure, with them sufficient for the
day is the evil thereof. Then let him lift the veil, and peep
into the future, and there he sees them cast upon a pitiless
world, many of them already in the cauldron, out of which
arises the lowest scum of the earth. He sees them jostling
each other, cheating and murdering one another—for what?
—a crust of bread; and yet man, the king of Creation, after
having reached the topmost rung of our social ladder by
standing on the heads of these derelicts, whom time and
chance passed by, trembles like an aspen leaf at the bare
mention of the words, “work and food for all.” And this
is the bitter fruit we offer to millions of our flesh and blood,
after they have passed through years of anxious training by
loving parents, the Sunday School, and the Parson, whilst
descanting upon the beautiful words of Christ, “Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,” and yet the first
thing which struck these derelicts after being cast upon their
own resources was the rotten shams practised upon them by
their elders. They now see for the first time Father pitted
against Son, the Teacher against the Pupil, and the Parson
waiting for a “call” from a richer congregation, even as a
bride .watches for the bridegroom. God calls, he says, and
I answer, and so he shelves Christ’s promise anent the poor,
and hurries off to where the fatted calf awaits dissectiorf. The


idler is without friends, has no power, save a vote which he
generally sells to his enemy, because it is only hirelings that
buy votes. The rich will have nothing to do with him, ex-
cept as a scavenger; therefore there is but one power, that
possessed by the worker, that can lift him out of the gutter.
That it would prove to be of advantage to the worker admits
of no doubt, because he knows not the day when the law of
supply and demand, supplemented by science, may also make
a pauper of him. Giving the idler work is entirely in the
hands of the worker, and it is almost beyond imagination to
imagine that with a full knowledge of his power, and the
justness of his cause, he will no longer than is necessary,
bare his back for the tyrant’s whip to scourge.
SITTING BY A STREAM.
I once was sitting’ by a stream
Watching the fish at play,
Soliloquising on a theme —
The theme was work and play.
My soul, it travelled o’er the earth,
Spanned it from pole to pole;
I wondered why it was I’d birth,
And what should be my role.
I listened to the Parson bold
Each Sunday in the year:
He said if I would join his fold
That I’d have naught to fear.
Get faith, ho cried, and then all want
With lightning speed will go;
Get sprinkled o’er at God’s pure font
And then to heaven you’ll go.
I pondered o’er his words by day,
And then, at night, I tried
To make them tally with the fray
That I saw was world wide.
Amongst the ranks of men I searched
For faith on which to ride;
But Parson, Priest, they were besmirched,
And truth, it was defied.
I found their ranks were honeycombed
With hate, deceit, and pride;
That nowhere had the gospel bloomed
For which Christ lived and died.
Instead of this, drunk with despair
My fellow-man I found;
He said it was his daily fare,
But still his faith was sound.
And this is what I said to him:
Rise, fool, and work and eat.
In pleasure then thou oft shall swim,
And sound sleep shalt thee greet;


Thou fool, in idleness to stay
•When God doth bid thee toil;
Improve thy talent while ’tis day,
And cultivate the soil.
And then I told him that he had
His only talent hid.
That Parson, Priest, and State were bad,
And then adieu I bid.
Adieu, he cried, I’ll not forget
The lesson learnt to-day;
I’ll sharp old Reason’s talent,
I’ll work, I’ll eat, and play.
THE UNIVERSALITY OF ORTHODOXY.
Before making any comment upon what is considered
by millions to be the only shred of truth that man may safely
cling to, it is necessary that the word orthodox should he
given its proper place in our social economy. Hitherto, the
word orthodox has only been applied to those who believe
in the Bible, from cover to cover, and as, interpreted by the
leading religious sects of the day; hut the time has come for
the evolution of belief in this particular qnd exclusive do-
main of thought. Clearly the man who has a settled belief
that immortality is a delusion, is as orthodox as the man
who believes hell’s fire to be the future food of the sinner.
Consequently, the words, the curse of Orthodoxy, apply as
much to the one as the other. Both preach what, if univer-
sally followed, would bring about the destruction of the
British Empire in the same way as other empires have been
numbered with the things that were. The safety valve, which
we have at present, is the le#ven of humahitarianism, found
at work between these two factors of destruction which
keep the human family frizzling in the pan of civilised can-
nibalism, and there qualifying for the fires of the future.
Natural law, an unbiased conscience, the composition of the
earth, the distribution of its fruit, and the burden laid upon
man that he must work before he can become civilised, all
give the lie direct to the orthodox infidel and the sectarian
bigot. ’Tis strange that these two factors, so far asunder
in their beliefs, should form a basis for a system more base
than either to build upon. Yet such is the case. Unres-
tricted Individualism, the evil of all evils, would vanish in
a night if man would only think for himself, and accept


the Orthodoxy as laid down by God, namely, live and let
live, unadorned by surplice, dips, or precedence. As time
rolls on, it becomes abundantly clear that this shred of
Church Orthodoxy is fast wearing away. Old and hell-born
doctrines are daily losing themselves in the sea of modern
thought, which teaches, and would practice it, if it could;
the brotherhood of man. Daily one hears ignorance crying
out to the would-be reformer, ■ and saying, "Oh, you are no
better than others; practice what you preach.” To expose
this ignorance to the reader, it is only necessary to follow
the fortunes of the reformer who would tempt Providence
by committing such a foolhardy action. For instance, the
reformer starts for home with his day’s pay of seven shillings
in his pocket, but before he gets home he meets six of his
mates, all of whom he knows to be in want of food, and being
stirred with the orthodoxy of God, he in one act relieves
the cravings of hunger in his mates, and creates it in those
of his own household. This is a phase of life that no man
should have to face, because six-sevenths of the day’s pay
was absolutely wasted. The State loses because it receives
no benefit for the money spent, whilst the household and
its surroundings suffer till the end of life. There would be
some virtue in the transaction if the men continued to
occupy the same plane of life, but they do not. The six
shillings are not sufficient to keep their strength up. Wear
and tear of clothes continues, and soon form a bar to work,
except that which would have the same effect as no work,
namely, intermittent and underpaid. It has to be borne
in mind that, although the humanitarian stands between
these two fire-brands, each representing a system of ortho-
doxy, and reducing to a minimum the evil which either would
do, if given the opportunity, natural law gives no guaran-
tee that his offspring will take- up the work when he, the
humanitarian, gives it up. Solomon was conversant with this
law, and it grieved him to the heart to think that what his
genius had achieved might be destroyed, owing to his son
being a fool. Has not the honest freethinker good grounds
for his belief'to feed upon? Has he not as much claim on
the word orthodox, as the man who wears the mitre ? Let’
the reader-consider for a moment the nature of the fountain
from whence he draws his inspiration. There is, first, his
own utter insignificance. He knows his body has been inter-
mingled with thousands of other bodies before taking its pre-
sent form, and that in a short time it will be scattered by the
wind, first to make food, and then as time rolls on, to con-


sume food. He sees that the universe could be peopled from
our earth, under church orthodoxy, and then be ready to
accept a repeat order. And as he continues his search for evi-
dence to prove his case, he suddenly finds himself in the
centre of a hot bed of sectarianism, and witnesses a religious
battle over the question as to whether the child should he
sprinkled, or the man dipped. But the question of all ques-
tions, namely, how the child is to grow into a man, worthy
of being dipped, is never discussed in a way which would
supply an answer. Consequently, the freethinker has no alter-
native but to curse the church, and take what God
or die in the attempt.. Having shown what the word ortho-
dox covers, and where it leads, the author would draw the
reader’s attention to the work already accomplished by it. For
the simple reason that, like the weather, it is ever on the move,
the consummate ease with which Orthodoxy adapts itself to its
ever changing environment in which it finds itself hopelessly
bound, shows how worthless are its pretensions to be a guide
and a lamp to the earnest seeker after truth. Orthodoxy,
which once ruled with a rod of iron, made and unmade kings,
and claimed to rule direct from God, now has the sense to see
that its power weakens as time rolls on -and education in-
creases, and being afraid of being left in the lurch by reason,
now proclaims from the pulpit that there is no Sunday in the
sense that it laid down in the days that are past. The Bishop
of London says some of us have made a terrible mistake mak-
ing it a day of gloom. Speaking of games and recreations gen-
erally—“clearly it is not a sin to indulge in them’’—coupling
this statement with the incident mentioned in the Gospels
concerning the ass being pulled out of the ditch, and in Roman
Catholicism we have the first orthodox Sabbath swept clean
away, and Christ’s statement that the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath, is seen seated upon the
summit of truth, a beacon to show that God is a God of free-
dom, and not of a corrupt priest-hood. The Bishop of Lon-
don says we enter Paradise five minutes after death, in ex-
actly the same state as we leave here. So from the Bishop’s
ex-cathedra knowledge, we know that he will add to the
glories of Paradise by presenting it with a body blown out
with fatness, drawil by Bruce Smith’s suction pump from
the starved specimens of humanity, whose compulsory aban-
doned offspring we duily gather into the paupers’ fold,
there to live a living death till their time comes round to
wander about hell, or in some of the vestibules of Paradise,
patiently waiting to be instructed how to do the trick in


the name of God, so successfully practised by the Bishop
whilst living in that hell of poverty and lust, cultured Lon-
don. It is consoling to know that the Bishop actually be-
lieves that he will grow in grace, when he has Christ by
his side, and that he will be able to pluck up sufficient
strength to refuse the temptations of Mammon, under which
he now basks in lustful ease. The Bishop, whilst descant-
ing upon the work carried on in Paradise, never hinted at
the motley groups which his bastard orthodoxy daily sends
there in ever-increasing numbers, neither has he thrown any
light u,pon the question as to how earth’s starved ones are
again made robust. And in the absence of this, the only
conclusion that an unbiased mind can arrive at, is that
the condemnation of the rich, as mentioned by Christ, will
overtake ■ the Bishop, and that he will be found at the
plough, whilst his once earthly victims, who were gathered
off doorsteps, will crack the whip of justice across his back.
The Bishop says, I love to think of those dear ones whom I
have lost, growing in grace, and expanding in character, as
though there was any necessity for Smith to go to Paradise
to find out that Jones had a right to live. What a crime
it is against the human family that anyone should be allowed
to talk such abominable nonsense whilst occupying the posi-
tion of spiritual guide to a King, within whose realm the
sword of peace hath no place. Surely the Bishop must be
far advanced in senile decay! According to his own belief,
Christ came to earth that the Bishop might have no excuse
for lack of what he calls grace, but what Christ’s teachings
designates humanitarianism. And yet, whilst surrounded
on the one hand by all the pleasures of life, and on the
other hand with all that tends to make earth a hell, he has the
audacity to £ay that Christ will meet him in Paradise. For
what 1 To accomplish in person what his word—for which
he suffered death—failed to do on earth. Surely Hodge
will soon see that it is time his own reasoning powers had
a show. Leaving the Anglican Bishop on his way to Para-
dise, we find ourselves confronted with the startling state-
ment that within the British Empire there are 400,000,U00,
and that only 50,000,000 of them are Christians. Com-
menting upon these figures, Cardinal Moran said he trusted
the' time would soon come when the position would be re-
versed; and he alluded to the time of Gregory the Great,
who stated that when he went to Rome, there were about
a dozen Catholics, but when he was dying, statistics showed
that there were about that number of heretics left. From


this it will be seen that if the Cardinal’s wish is going to
bear fruit, judging by the progress Christianity has made,
something stronger, or more in unison with the public taste,
will have to be dished up. Otherwise, Gregory’s achieve-
ment will never be repeated. There have been times when
it was quite easy to make Orthodox out of the Unorthodox,
but not now. The th'umb-screw and the Squire’s frown are
no longer in evidence. Now, the why and the wherefore, and
above all, the stamp of Christianity has to be seen upon
the actions of the would-be guide. Work and a living wage
must be upon his certificate before those who follow Christ
will listen to him. Talk of 50,000,000 Christians! Bruce
Smith is one of that number. But is he a Christian or a
parasite, with cunning sufficient to draw the very life blood
out of Hodge, Hodge all the time believing Smith to be
a heaven-born ruler ? If the reader is curious about the
number of Christians in the British Empire, let him ask
the hrst ten men he meets if they will vote for all men to
have work and a living wage, if they are worthy of it. This
is the only sure test which can be applied to one who calls
himself a Christian. Had the Cardinal been all truth upon
that occasion, he would have said that, according to the
calculations of Mother Church, there were not more than
20,000,000 Christians. According to the Cardinal, there
can be no Christians outside of his Church, because if he
believed otherwise, his attitude towards them is such that
it would preclude him from the Christian fold. All that
is required to make a Christian after the order of Roman
Catholicism is to embrace its doctrines, abstain from servile
work, and go to Mass. ■ The rest of the day man may spend
how he likes, so long as what he does does not clash with
the law of God. And here the question naturally arises,
what is the law of God upon this particular part of man’s
actions? Christ said, if a man’s ass fall into the ditch on
the Sabbath Day, he will pull him out; but for what pur-
pose will he pull him out ? because of his belief in human-
itarianism only ? Certainly not, If Christ had meant noth-
ing more than that, His opponents would at once have taken
Him upon the wings of imagination, and have shown Him
living creatures upon twice one thousand hills, in the last'
stages of life, owing to the drastic workings of Hisi own
laws. Clearly it was profit that Christ meant. Conse-
quently, when Bishop Reville, of Sandhurst, Victoria, says
a Christian must abstain from servile work, what does he
mean, because from a Christian’s standpoint no honest


worK is servile ? Is Mammon justified in keeping part of
Bishop Reville’s flock engaged doing work on Sunday, pump-
ing water from the mine, so that on the stroke of twelve
the miners may descend to their work? Are the men justi-
fied, after leaving church, to spend the intervening time
changing their clothes and getting-ready,, so that Mammon
might receive its full pound of flesh? And is the far-
mer to be cursed by the orthodox hypocrite because during
the week the elements were against him, but came up smil-
ing on the Sunday morn, to laugh over the destruction of
his crop ? Is he not to put his corn in a safe place on the
Sabbath Day, so as to have something to eat when the chill-
ing blasts of winter roar through the crevices of his log-
made home? According to Orthodoxy, the author is not
a Christian; he does not go to church, confess, nor even
trouble about whether it is Saturday or Sunday. His reason
has outstripped a man made conscience, and accepted one
formed by the workings of natural law. Like St. Paul, all
days are the same. Reason tells him that he is living in
the Seventh' day of Creation—a day filled with the fruits
of the earth, and he that will work and eat may rise and
do so. There is nothing uncertain about this law. Where
the uncertainty comes in is the fear that the worker will
still continue to lick the hand that smites him. Orthodoxy
shows in a thousand ways that if is a creation of man.
Watch it in its greed for power, joining forces with nation-
alised socialism, a system as far as the poles asunder
from true Christianity. Nationalised socialism stands so
higii upon the mountain peaks of the future that he who
runs may read what its end will be. There can be but one
ending to a nation of slaves, governed, as they would have
to be, with a rod of iron, wielded by a practically irres-
ponsible power, assisted by thousands of overseers and mana-
gers, all fired with the consuming fire of self-aggrandisement.
Toadyism would be rampant', neophytism triumphant, the
whole system being capped by an aristocracy of labour,
such as one now sees in a mild form in the ranks of Trades
Unionism. And this is the system that Orthodoxy is em-
bracing after two thousand years of fighting up to its neck
in blood what it chooses to call the powers of darkness. Dr.
Fordyce, one of Sydney’s greatest lecturers upon the past,
present, and future, said there were three forces working
against the hope of immortality, the worst of all being the
intense devotion to the affairs of this life, brought about,
he might have said; owing to the omnipresence of the skele-


ton of the. fear of want, which is a creation of the God of
Mammon, and has passed through—owing to education and
science—a process of evolution, till it has become, in the
counting-house, as well as in the hovel, a Nemesis which
makes rogues and cowards of us all. Therefore, • sweep to
the four winds of heaven this damnable creation of greed
and lust, and the ignorance which meets the student at
every turn concerning the workings of the laws of nature,
and their potency to make, or mar, happiness. Then
Hodge will rise on the wings of the morning a free and
contented man. Dr. Fordyce’s greatest obstacle to a belief
in immortality will have vanished, and Mr. J. H. Carruthers’
prophecy will be as a dream that is told. Speaking at the
Henry George Anniversary, Mr. Carruthers said, “The task
before you is the same as will be before others, twenty,
fifty, and a hundred years hence.” Fancy a man, supposed
to be in his right mind, talking such utter rot, and then
fancy Jones living in the noon-tide blaze of humanitarian-
ism, going without butter to .his bread, so that his son’s
son’s son, who would be the party living when Mr. Carru-
thers’ hundred years expired, should have the embargo re-
moved, which Mr. Carruthers, Bruce Smith, and others
now lay upon him. Distance, under certain conditions,
may lend enchantment to the view, but not in this case.
Nature cries out for food, and to deny it for the problema-
tical chance of Jones’ son’s son’s son getting three square
meals a day, off, say, Bruce Smith’s successors, would mean
that madness had gone mad. The fruit to be gathered by
Dives and Jones, should Mr. Carruthers’ prophecy become
a reality.
In twenty years’ time he’d still hold forth
Haranguing an angry crowd,
Tickling their ears with well assumed wrath
And shouting, yes, ever so loud.
In fifty years’ time, from pole to pole
Carruthers’ name shall resound,
And how he did the workers befool
Shall all this nioe earth travel round.
Then when the hundred years shall expire,
Reformers begin to give out,
Mammon will still be the champion sire,
And Hodge, in the cold, will be out.
Reader, such is Mammon’s plan of campaign, and if the
Church and the State refuse the olive branch which is offered


to them in these pages, then there is no alternative for a
man but to make progress, how, when, and where he can.
For, if life is to be carried on, from the cradle to the grave,
under present gambling conditions, the honest worker has
less chance of drawing a prize than the holder of a single
ticket would have in the biggest sweep Tattersall’s will
ever float.
LABOUR’S SOLILOQUY ON WHAT IS LIFE.
O, Life ! glorious life unknown and unseen,
Thou fillest space, and all things on thee lean.
What is it that which says, thou art immortal.
Where is thine abode, and where its portal?
To know thou art from, and to, everlasting,
Is not enough, man, he would see and bring
Thee, life, into the light of his little life.
To find the source of all inhuman strife.
Thou art no cruel monster —why, then, dost hide?
Must man in ignorance forever bide
Groping in the dark, like moles,, which never see?
Though blessed with reason, and knowing he’s of thee.
Thou great unseen, thou who hastes to make a home
With man, till thou escorts him to the tomb.
Man, a mixture of evil and all that's good,
Thou leavest him alone, but all tby works
Point out to him all that’s good, for therein lurks
His happiness; but what of that, when man.
Reeking with evil, and possessed with power, can
Strike down his kin? Host thou his unseen life
Collect, so that in some other far-off sphere
’Twill blossom as it once did blossom here?
And he that strikes him, does he just waste away,
And simply help enrich the earth’s cold clay?
Waiting thine answer, 0,. Life, man will not rest
Till, with the food thou’ve sent, he’s always blest.
He will take it justly, that is, if he can;
If not, he’ll take it how, and when, he can.
A SPECIMEN OF- THE COMMONWEALTH’S BUILDERS.
He pays twice over for his clothes,
His cab fare in advance;
And when he fights not with his foes,
With champagne breaks a lance.


ORTHODOX SNAGS IN THE PATHWAY OF LIFE.
Snags, in the pathway of life, were placed in position
by men who were cradled in the lap of ignorance, reared
in an atmosphere of social self-aggrandisement, living in an
environment which usury had created, and arrogated to
themselves the duties which the Creator would have had
to have bestowed upon some of his subjects, if he had not
granted to us freedom of action. The consequence is that
no matter which way a man may happen to turn, whilst in
this pathway, which has scattered over it innumerable sec-
tarian snags, he is bound to come to grief. The pivot on
whicn Roman Catholicism turns is known by the name of
“Behold I change not.” Its lever is the end, ‘‘which jus-
tifies the means,” whilst its fulcrum is an unquestioned belief,
by its members, in its dogmas. The great power which it
undoubtedly wields is kept active, and can always be de-
pended upon in a crisis when its supremacy is threatened.
Its machinery never gets out of gear, and it works as
smoothly, silent, and as effectual as the electric current upon
a wire rope. This is wholly owing to its motto, ‘‘Behold, I
change not.” Roman Catholicism knows well enough that
if it only took out of its cast-iron constitution its nether
mill-stone, which was licked into shape, and placed in position
for the purpose of grinding into dust all heretics, at a time
when almost the whole human family were composed of re-
ligious fanatics, that its foundations would crumble into dust,
and its superstructure topple over, and be irretrievably lost
in the bog of a recognised uncertainty. It is said that a wise
man will change his mind, but a fool never; and it matters
not how fierce the discoveries of science, nor the ascertained
facts of natural law may beat upon its citadel, it dare not
budge, because the least acknowledgment on its part of error
would speedily bring about its destruction. The snag placed
in position by the Anglican tyrant, differs but little from
its great rival for supremacy. And would, if it had as much
faith in its future as has its rival, be as equally aggresive,
but it differs in one important point, that is, it does not place
in the forefront of its policy co-equal powers with the founder
of Christianity, and it is hopelessly divided upon the inter-
pretation of some parts of the Bible, and being so, runs the
risk of being swept into oblivion in the near future by the
unfolding of the laws of nature, and the spread of knowledge,
owing to the natural expansion of man’s talents, under civi-


lization and the law of liberty. Such an environment as
this would (place our Creator upon a plane in harmony with
the Bible, where God says, “My ways are not thy way's,” and
no sane man can come to any other conclusion but that death
ends all. Or that, to drag the Creator down to our degrad-
ing, torturing, sacrificing, and refined cannibalistic environ-
ment is a crime which could only be adequately dealt with'
by a power which would forever separate it from a human-
itarianism, such as dominated the life of the Baroness Burdett-
Coutts. For to imagine that He who rides upon the storm,
could be edified by a Parson, belonging to a fast decaying
and self-styled orthodoxy, turning his face to the East, and
his back to those who support him, is to place our Creator
upon a pantomimic stage, where ignorance and roguery con-
tribute to the enjoyment of fools. The sheet anchor of Ang-
licanism has always been its undying faith in God’s every-
day supervision of our little Pedlingtonian affairs, and the
latest exemplification of this faith was a statement by the
Rev. E. A. Colvin" Rector, Dulwich Hill, that he was credu-
lous enough to believe that God had a hand in the Federal
Elections, and that a majority thought as he thought. What
a wonderful object lesson we have here. It is not so long
ago that to have believed otherwise, would have brought
punishment to the unbeliever. The fact that the Rector be-
lieves that to-day a majority thinks as he does, says but
little for his church, nor of God’s opinion of it. For if God
had a hand in the elections, then He is undoubtedly upon
the side of Roman Catholicism, Socialism, or upon the side
of both, and is anxious to see the Australian making bricks
without straw, as his chosen people once had to do. There
is even a certain amount of backing to be got out of the
election to support this theory, for it is quite evident that
there were no large number of electors voted, who live out-
side the circle of partisanship, self-interest, or bigoted sec-
tarianism. From this it will be seen that it will be an ad-
vantage to Anglicanism if it has no more to do with the
Rector’s belief, but concentrate its energies upon facts which
commonsense and science daily places before it. Roman Cath-
olicism builds upon the certainty of man becoming so indiffe-
rent about a future state, that he will also become indifferent
as to who. rules him in this, which will be simply playing
into its hands, which, being ever activd and ready to strike
when the moment arrived, would experience but little diffi-
culty in grasping the reins of power. But the Anglicans have
forever laid aside the weapons of torture, and in a rapidly


approaching atmosphere of tolerance, await the second com-
ing of Christ. It bows to the inevitable, for it recognises
that it is being absorbed by free-thinking sections
of its own offshoots, the snags of whom are being
ridiculed out of existence by a commonsense, which
is doing the best it can for humanity at, large, and
waiting for the hand which drew the veil across our vision,
and which hides the future from us, to again draw it aside,
and expose to view the plane of life, which we, being freed
from the curse of a corrupt orthodoxy, would have lived
Whether humanitarianism will ever wrest from the grip of
Mammon the power to rule, will depend entirely upon what
the world has not yet seen, namely, a leader, strong in organ-
isation, possessing a tongue that can lead to heaven, depict
the hell where Unrestricted Individualism at last comes to a
full stop. A man, leavened with a leaven of its principles,
and determined to see them carried out. Then the lover of
liberty and the oppressed would rise on the wings of success,
and place in the ballot box an overwhelming vote in favour
of work for all. Man, fool that he is, is under the insane
delusion that greatness is measured by the number of rungs
in the social ladder that he can place between him and his
brother, but when he has climbed to its apex, finds that three
out of every four have their hands raised against him, and
that they look upon him as a person to he kicked, he quickly
realises that his bed is a bed of thorns compared to that
Upon which the humanitarian sleeps the sleep of
peace. It ought, by this time, to be plain to the
‘worker that he must he up and doing, clearing these
unsocial snags out of his path, so as to he ready
to sing, ‘‘All hail, when Mr. Right comes along.”
The position taken up by Roman Catholicism becomes incom-
prehensible, when one takes into account the Bible story con-
cerning the Creator’s dealings with man. At the very thresh-
old of man’s entry into the world we are told that he was
made perfect and then, that he was too vile to live, the
sequel to which was that God drowned almost the entire
human family, and the supposition is that nothing hut what
was good was saved. And yet, Noah, the best of the lot,
got drunk upon the first occasion that offered. Then, at the
dawn of history, we again find the world dominated by
heathens. But at this time God chose a single family, the
offspring of which were to go forth conquering, and to con-
quer. But this family, as soon as they were strong enough
to take the field, the Creator found that if they were not to


be wiped out by natural law, it was absolutely necessary that
an operation should be performed upon all males. So the
reader will see that, although man was only made perfect
upon the sixth day of the week, he had got but a very little
way on his seventh day journey before this perfection had
to be mutilated. And though this was the second time that
the creator had altered his plans for the purpose of making
them dovetail with man’s actions, in the course of time, the
Creator saw that if another covenant was not made with man,
man would, under the law of degeneration, sink below the
level of the brute. And so Christ came upon the scene, and
gave to the world a simple, soul-inspiring, and humanitarian
policy, a policy that even an unlettered Hodge could under-
stand, because it was a policy of work, a living wage, and
liberty of conscience, one that would lift the Unit out of the
gutter, and make the orphans’ heart rejoice, if those, whom
Christ said were '‘whited sepulchres,” would only do what
their position in life demanded of them. Seeing then, that
God has changed his laws, as regards his dealings with man,
what could be more natural, seeing that Christ had said all
that could be said upon man’s duty to God, and to himself,
then that he should leave us alone to the end of the chapter.
Christ had applied the match of investigation to our talents,
and with the exception of one dark period bf time, during
which poor old Galileo had to eat the dirt of a bigoted ignor-
ance, our talents have gone on evolving, and being evolved,
till to-day man stands upon a pinnacle of knowledge never
known before. Man can harness the elements to his car, and
make them do his work, and if the words "the poor ye have
always with you,” are correctly interpreted, then all that
can be said about them is, that they do not applv to our
time, for under adult suffrage and science, the people do not
walk the earth that could consume the food which these two
factors could produce. And yet, work by all, and for all,
has not been commenced, whilst science is still in its infancy.
As for growth, why even the pigeon of the desert will, under
man’s hand, become transformed in shape, colour, and nature.
The wild ■sloe will become the golden drop, and the crab will
be evolved into the beautiful apples, such as once tempted
"Eve.” But Roman Catholicism, though born in darkness,
but now living in the noontide blaze of a civilised and edu-
cated environment, refuses to advance, and reap the mental
and physical fruit, grown under the direction of the Founder
of Christianity. The golden rule, as laid down by Christ,
has no influence with "Mother Church.” One is justified


in thinking that when time had proved Galileo to be in the
right, and his oppressors in the wrong, the Church would have
bowed to the dictates of an enlightened and unbiased con-
science, and embraced with a whole souled candour, other
known facts which a cultured intellect had brought to light.
The snag, which, in our daily walk of life, causes the greatest
amount of unrest, is undoubtedly sectarianism in politics.
Gazing at this snag, the onlooker is lost in admiration over its
fair proportions. It takes up the whole width of the walk,
and there appears to be no getting either round it or over
it. Its front show's a solid and smooth surface, being green
on one side, yellow on the other, with the middle composed
of pure white. To the gazer, who stands looking at the ob-
stacle in a dazed and half-hypnotised condition, it assumes
a repellant attitude towards him, in its magnificent and un-
approachable purity, and as he still continues to look upon
it, he can just discern a movement, as it all but impercep-
tibly draws its skirts of pure merino more closely around it-
self, so as to escape pollution at the hands of the bold onlooker.
An'd just at this time he recovers from his intoxication, into
whicn Ke had been plunged by the splendour of the picture
before him. His vision is quickened, and what a moment
before were naught but microscopical atoms, and therefore
invisible, loom in sight; the glass-like smoothness of the snag
gradually becoming rough, deep and narrow crevices appeared
down which a dark red fluid trickled till it reached the ground,
which was covered with grass, having a sheen of unnatural
brightness, owing to its roots being moistened with the ruddy
fluid. Then looking upwards to see where the fluid source
was situated, he beheld a press, into which creatures in form
like unto himself were being hurled, and the thumbscrew of
oppression brought to bear upon them till they ceased trying
to destroy the snag, or till death claimed their manhood. So
riveted to the spot was the watcher, being fascinated by the
scene before him, that he waited to see the end, which was
not long in making its appearance, for the centre of the
picture disappeared, being swallowed up by the yellow. Then
it was that the fight began between the yellow and the green
for the supremacy, and just when the battle was raging,
which was to end the struggle for ever, there happened what
a few years ago would have been looked upon as a miracle


wrought by God, namely, a majority on both sides laid down
arms, pushed the snag into the chasm, waiting with open
mouth alongside the road to receive the vanquished, planted
a flag-pole in its place, and ran to the flag of human-
itarianism, upon which was inscribed in letters of gold, “This
is the road to freedom.”
THE GRAND ORDER OF MANHOOD.
After two thousand years of strife, the bitterest that the
mind was capable of manufacturing, man has arrived at a
stage in his journey through life that he never before
dreamt of. So successful has been Priestcraft, and State-
craft, in deluding the whole human family, that the blos-
soming of the .talent of reason, and thereby exposing to
view the plane of life upon which all men should stand, has
fallen like a shroud upon the usurpers of Christ’s position,
and as a rainbow of perennial beauty upon the meek of the
earth. And in order that this rainbow may take on some-
thing more substantial than a shadow, and become a thing
of beauty and a joy for ever, a preliminary meeting to take
into consideration the formation of the above order, which
is intended to embrace all the electors of New South Wales,
will be held, as soon as there has been enrolled a sufficient num-
ber of members to allow of a committee being chosen, capa-
ble, and willing to draft a constitution upon the humanitar-
ian lines of work, and a living wage for all. Nothing im-
pure, such as Sectarianism, Freetrade, or Protection will be
allowed to intrude their Argus eyes of superstition and selfish-
ness within its borders. The rich and poor will benefit, the
one being relieved of the fear of poverty, the other from
the depredations of poverty. The unused land, the waste
material, thrown off by the law of supply and demand, and
if necessary, every available drop of water shall be stored,
so that those whom we bring into the world shall not be
cast upon the garbage heap of poverty, for vermin to eat.
Reader, the question is, have you sufficient backbone to
sign the bond? Remember
We all will soon be dead, and in the sand,
So let all live, whilst we are in this land;
Earth's hell for him who this request denies—
His be the fate of one who starves and dies.
J. Watson,
Sec. pro. tern-


CAUSE AND EFFECT; OR THE CURSE OF
ORTHODOXY.
The time is rapidly approaching when the question—What
is the nature of the cause, which has, all through history,
sown discord among civilised nations, over and above every
other cause —will have to take its proper place in the economy
of our daily life. To say the cause has its origin in the hea-
vens is to stamp,our Creator as a tyrant, such as the world
has not yet seen. So tyrannical, bloody, and man-destroying
has been the effect, that the whole human family has at
last been lashed into activity, the many into opposition, the
few into a more active support of it.
Opposition, sedition, superstition, unbelief, and ortho-
doxy are struggling side by side for supremacy. Human olood,
in support of the cause, flows like water, whilst the widow,
the workless, and the orphan live a living death, their wasted
bodies being almost as bloodless as that which covers tne
bones of the petrified mummy. Orthodoxy puts into the
moutii of God the words, “As the heavens are higher than
the earth, so are my ways higher than man’s ways.” Since
the dawn of civilisation there have always been here one, and
there one, whose lives, if copied, would make a paradise of'
earth. Such being the case, as recorded in history, and ex-
emplified in our own day by such men as the late Dr. Bar-
nado, what would man have been had God ruled over us after
tlie manner Orthodoxy would have us believe? “All men
being equal,” would God have supervised the deformity of
one, the blindness and insanity of others, made rich the
sides of the sleeping volcano, enticed His innocent subjects to
them for the purpose of destroying them by cruel methods that
only a fiend would think of, and complete His work by
authorising His ambassadors to consign to hell the unhap-
tised infant, and to tear its unfortunate parents to pieces
on the orthodox rack because they refused to join in psalms of
praise over such diabolical practices and doctrines. Clearly we
must look elsewhere for the cause which creates the inequalities
which are ever present in our daily life, inequalities which
are becoming more and more the rule, whilst in the purely
animal world they are the exception. The cause which creates
the criminal rich, and is responsible for the poverty and
slavery which kills, must, in tne interest of liberty, be traced
to its source. Now, there are but two sources from which it
would be possible for the cause to rise, namely, God and man.


As for the cause being a creation of God’s, a moment’s study
of the unerring accuracy of the universe, the soul’s craving
after the beautiful, the willingness of nature to supply all
our wants, if we will only accept her proffered assistance, and
the lightning rapidity of man’s change from a peaceful sub-
ject into a fiend incarnate, when vested in a little brief
authority, all go to show that they are not of Him, who de-
clared His rule to be one of love.
Failing to find even a trace of God’s supervising hand
in man’s actions, we are forced to analyse, our own for the
purpose of finding out the cause which compels Jones to wear
out his life in slavery, poverty, and dirt, and allows Smith
to flit hither and thither in lustful And, as naturally
as the needle points to the pole, so does man’s mind dive
into, not only his own creed, but into that of his neighbour
to find it Out. He reads history for the puropse of finding
out what had been the actions of men in the past, men who
had to grope along in comparative darkness, and he compares
them with the actions of men to-day, who are living in the
full blaze of a divine constitution, as laid down by Christ;
and in a moment he sees where the cause which has made
earth a hell, has its birth. He sees that the greed of the
builders of our political socialism, and the lust for power in
the ranks of Orthodoxy has been, and are,* the perennial
streams from which flow all the abominations which go to
make our earth a hell. History teems with the villainies of
these two corporations, whose goals are as far asunder as the
poles, and are each aiming at absolute rulershiD.
Man discovers, as he dissects each sect in turn, that the
noontide blaze of our civilization has had'no mellowing effect
upon these two malignant forces, whose works work evil con-
tinually, for they are found to be active, and as imbued
with the same hellish desire for sweat and blood, as when
each in turn threw its victims to the beasts of prey. The
bare fact that civilization debars man from indulging in the
cannibalistic feast, in no way exonerates him from being called
a man-eater, for he does what is a thousand times worse; he
lives upon the gradually decaying strength of his victim, and
when all is_ squeezed out that can be squeezed out, and the
victim still lingers, he is allowed to wear out his few remain-
ing days within the white-washed walls of a charity cold as
the silent tomb.
Our Social rulers, with an audacity born of contempt for
the masses, still deny them work, except at the caprice of
wealth, and by so doing, consign to a living death all those


who fail to lay hold of the skirts of Mammon, whilst Ortho-
doxy, with a wave of its magic wand, sweeps into everlasting
fire the unbaptised infant of a few weeks’ growth. What
further evidence does the unbiased mind require, to convince
him that Orthodoxy is the excrescence of a bigoted and self-
righteous section of the human family. The reader already
knows that Orthodoxy tears itself to pieces over a word, the'
correct interpretation of which it is as ignorant of as the
speechless and unoffending babe consigned to the care of the
orthodox created devil. Man finds Orthodoxy at eventide
clothed in sheep’s clothing, begging for the widow’s mite to
enable it to gorge its own lustful carcase, and before the cock
has crowed in the morning, has found it in the felon’s cell,
and he has looked in vain for a depth of villainy to which
Orthodoxy has not descended. Analysing the Orthodox man
to-day, he is found to be composed of a mass of contradic-
tions. As regards the Bible, he is a from cover to cover super-
stitionist, and yet when the Bible calls upon him to execute
its commands, he shunts the responsibility on to his political
co-partner in the race of self-aggrandisement. He objects
to having anything to do with politics. Politics, he says,
are too full of iniquity to find a place in his sacred calling.
Politics are for the body, a worthless thing, until luck or
roguery clothes ifi in purple and fine linen. He declares his
stores of Orthodox accumulations are for the soul, and so he
warns Hodge, who has to sit under the hedge to shade him
from the burning sun, or winter’s chilling blast, whilst he
eats his mess of pottage, to be content lest at the last moment
he finds himself on the way to hell. Having delivered this
homily, this Orthodox man, whose motto is in reality, “Don’t
do as I do, but as I tell you,” goes and gives his vote to a
supporter of. the god of wealth, because Hodge must he kept
where poverty most thrives. And, although his everyday life
teaches him that his offsprings’ liberty will not equal his own,
he, either from indifference, or from being too ignorant to
read the signs which confront him, gives his vote to the man
whose sole aim is to keep him in poverty and dirt. The mas-
terly essays written by highly-educated and humane men upon
man’s duty to man, and to himself, are left to grow mouldy
upon the shelves of our national and free libraries. The
consequence is/ Hodge remains politically ignorant, religiously
superstitious, and a hindrance to his own emancipation from
being a slave to the drones of the earth.
Whilst social parasites by all and any kind of commer-
cial dealings are striving to enter this caste, Socialism, where


or spins, but sweats his brother’s offspring
blame of all this indifference so painfully
dge, must, of course, be laid at the feet of
lodoxy takes Hodge in hand when his mind
tty, and long before reason begins to bloom,
i with the reality of hell, and of its being
dace of the liar, and the oppressor. Ortho-
ent while descanting upon the evils arising
of the unorthodox and the Sabbath-breaker,
O'from 'tilevictions of
■‘N. bu Christ c
.but>’h£n Christ calls upon the orthodox man to do unto
others as he would wish to be done unto, he deliberately
turns his back to his master, and calls upon Hodge to eat
the crumbs which fall from his table. The orthodox man
has clapped his hands in glee over the burning of his brother
because he would not help to make all men of one creed,'and
would do it again if opportunity occurred, for so dogmatic
is Sectarianism, that it would count it a service to God if it
could wipe all other sects out of existence. Orthodoxy proves
beyond all doubt that man, no matter what may be his posi-
tion, cannot be trusted, and that creeds, like Acts of Par-
liament, are made in the interests of the lustful rich for the
aggrandisement of itself, and to keep Hodge between the
plough-tails. It is true that Orthodoxy does not actually
countenance Hodge lying by the roadside and dying for the
want of help ; but it is also true that the mess of pottage
given only prolongs a living death, and it is the nearest ap-
proach to passing him by on the other side that our so-called
Christianity dare countenance. Our daily life teems with
incidents which go to prove that the influence of greed and
power is as willing to-day as it was in the days of Pharaoh to
compel Hodge to make bricks without straw. There is no
need to go into the ranks of the political hirelings to prove
this. Orthodoxy, bold and brazen as a wanton, supplies all
that is required,.when it pays its understrappers £SO a year,
and its Bishop £IO,OOO.
It appears that Moses was the originator of laws, out of
which has grown the accursed system of Unrestricted Indi-
vidualism, under which we now exist. One of the laws, in one
act, made the perfect man imperfect, and that, reader remem-
ber, happened just after God had said that He was well pleased.
Moses, we are told, was a man of God, and yet he wrote the
fourteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, and it is safe to say that
nothing on earth, from the Orthodox point, has wrought
so much mischief as this permission once given by Moses to
a cruel tribe of religious fanatics and adventurers—not that


wine is not good, but because Mammon has poisoned it. In-
vino-veritas will stand all the assaults that a bastard Ortho-
doxy can make upon it. Small wonder then that Orthodoxy,
arising from such a foul source of superstition, cunning
and greed, should, owing to its education and experience,
have so built its house that Hodge, wallowing in the mire
of ignorance, has always considered it a forlorn hope
to lay siege to it. But now, seeing that Ortho-
doxy has failed, and failed ignominously, to keep
step with the ever-expanding talents of humanitarian-
ism, it must, with the unbaptised infant, be consigned
to that region of warmth, the hell of the bigot.
It is not against reason to suppose that if Orthodoxy had
never seen the light of day, that man, guided by education,
natural law, the grandeur of the universe, and his own help-
lessness to contribute anything towards eternity but a well-
spent life, would long ere this have evolved a social environ-
ment from which he would have been loath to depart. Ortho-
doxy cries aloud for the observance of its own little Sabbath;
it would have man on his marrow bones or else in hell. And
yet Christ said the Sabbath was made for man, whilst St. Paul
said, ‘‘Let every man be persuaded in his own mind.” Had
Orthodoxy had the sense to set its sails to catch the breeze,
caused by the evolution of the mind of man, it still might have
•sat in the seat of honour, and led man along the lines which
the talent of humanitarianism is now taking him. But it chose
to believe that it was called by God to sit in the chair of ease,
and command Hodge to administer to its wants. Therefore,
Hodge has now no alternative but to ‘‘spew it out of his
mouth.” And this is the reason why to-day churches are
principally used by well-to-do people to show themselves off,
whilst pleasure resorts send up to heaven peals of .praise, owing
to their patrons enjoying a short respite from the sweater’s
den.
Man’s knowledge concerning the composition of the
earth’s crust, natural law, and his flights into space, have
made a man of him, and he no longer sees his Maker cabined
in the pigeon-hole of the sectarian bigot. Man’s refusal to
be any longer under the power of Orthodoxy is the reason for
its rapid decay, and for the position taKen up by the great
mass of liberty-loving people, namely, that of letting it drnt,
witiiout being openly unkind, into that oblivion from which
it should never have emerged. There are millions of men and
women who subscribe liberally to Orthodoxy, who never dream
of practising it. The orthodox man has all through the Christ-


ian dispensation bound the ignorant and the superstitious with
a chain of fear. He has sought out the heathen, and con-
verted him to his own particular Shibboleth, and then he -has
gone on his way rejoicing, but only to meet Christ, who salutes
him in the following manner:—“Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye compass sea and land to make
one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the child of hell than yourselves.” Christ says, a tree is
known by its fruit, consequently man to-day must be known
and judged by the fruit which his spiritual administrations
and liis secular law brings forth. History proves that the
longer Orthodoxy lives, the more successful does it become in
setting man against man. Sects are continually springing
into life after the manner of Jonah’s gourd, but unlike the
gourd they remain to make earth more a hell than it was
before; consequently, in matters of belief man resembles noth-
ing so much as the grains of sand on the ocean shore, for he
no longer believes in man, nor with man. Orthodoxy has all
along the line taught Hodge to be content with his gruel, and
now, when the spirit of , humanitarianism is abroad, and
Christ-like, inviting him to come up higher, Orthodoxy gath-
ers up its skirts for fear of contamination, and weds itself
afresh to the God of Mammon, thereby proving itself to be
the source from which springs the few rich and the many
poor.
Christ’s contribution to the law of environment, “Woe
unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye compass
sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye
make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves,”
goes to show for all time the momentous issues that arise
from a man’s actions, when they are carried sufficiently far
to bear fruit. Prom Christ’s words we get a clear insight
into what environment accomplishes, when it leads in a wrong
direction. Keeping Christ’s words in view, it is not difficult
to realise why it is, that after two thousand years of Church
rule, we still live in hell. The inference left for us to draw
from the fact that the gutters on each side of the road which
Orthodoxy has made, are always at the flood with blood
from its victims, is that the opposite would be the case when
our social surroundings make for the betterment of man. By
Christ, the only authority under heaven, we are told that
environment is a living and progressive factor in the life of
man, and that a convert to Orthodoxy means another convert
to a living hell. This shows that the day in which action
could have been taken is already two thousand years in length,


and yet it has not produced the man. But education and the
love of liberty will not be long before they produce him, who
with clarion voice, will shake the castle of Unrestricted Indi-
vidualism and the rotten bulwarks of a spurious orthodoxy to
pieces'. The notice to-Uives to disgorge, is on the wall, and
will remain there until the Unit is lifted out of the gutter.
The opportunity which the preacher who lives on the sweat of
others now has of lifting his brother out of the mire, will
soon pass to the humanitarian, and then the curse of the
world, Orthodoxy, as now understood, will pass away as a
dream, and be known no more.
THE WORKERS’ MARCH.
Tune : Marching to Georgia.
1,. Bring the good old kit along, we’ll fill it with our tools;
Better let them rust a bit than wear them out for fools:
Sitting as the drones which suck the honey culled from flowers,
Gathered from Nature’s fairy bowers.
Chorus —
fjo strike, my boys, this day shall see us free;
It is the last we’ll longer victims be
To these parasites that are gay, and all too limpet like,
So we will treat them to a strike.
2. So just bring the boss along, before We leave this place;
We’ll give him one more lectuie, its theme the human race.
Say it as it should be said, by men, who would be free
And units of one family.
3. Then we scattered nails and bolts, o’er all the workhouse floor;
Raised the temper of old Smith, who swore he’d keep us poor.
The tyrant fled before us, he’d never seen the like,.
Whilst we were marching out on strike.
4. You should have seen him then, as he skipped about the floor;
Nails of couise ran in his feet, which made them very sore.
’Twas then he did repent, he’d not met us by the way
With just another groat per day.
5. We’ve now got what we wanted; the hireling and his crew
Have gone the way of rubbish, and all things now are new:
We all have work and freedom, wS 're with the favoured few,
Scaling the giddy heights of fame.
6. So now the strike is over, we’re all onoe more at work;
Old Smith he gets his interest,, he works, too, like a Turk,
His sons roll up their sleeves, they’re as busy as the bees
Sweeping away all human lees.
2. Yet wo never want to see the inside of Smith’s house,
Feast off his mahogany, partaking of his grouse;
Enjoyment we can find, with our kinsmen and our wine,
Whilst we are floating down with time.
r Chorus—
Hurrah, hurrah! no more we want to strike;
Hurrah! Smith says,, he’s never seen the like.
’Tis the golden rule of Christ, that we have crystallised,
A fact that Dives has realised.


NUTS FOR ORTHODOXY TO CRACK.
“lt doth not yet appear what we shall be,” why, because
man has no talent, with which to pierce the future, and for
the same reason he will be held blameless for having failed
to grasp the truth of the words, “Cursed is the ground for
thy sake,” and the sense of the words, “Thorns and thistles
shall it bring forth,” because, for thousands of years man has
been trying to bring order out of the chaos in which these
words are enveloped, but has failed to bridge the chasm; con-
quently, we arrive at the commonsense conclusion that they
were placed there by an unauthorised mind, for the following
reasons: A, because on the third day the minerals had been
placed in position, and the surface sown with seed; the mine-
rals to remain till civilization, on behalf of man, wanted
them ; and reason, after having explored the bowels of
the earth, has no option in the matter, for it finds that the
Balmain coal measures were placed in position cycles of time
before Eve is said to have taken the apple, their marvellous
position being at onpe grasped by the student of nature, as
being such as a creator would choose, bearing in mind that
He had decreed that man should work before eating, and that
he should not become civilised before the coal was used. B,
for the Creator to say long after the sixth day had passed, and
after Adam had commenced to do battle with the weeds, that
because Adam had offended Him, that He would curse the
ground, and make man sweat, when He had already sown the
seed, and made provision for extracting the sweat, would have
been to foist a delusion upon Adam, which his successors
were bound to see through. C, because no one but an incom-
petent builder could have made the fatal mistake when laying
the foundation of a social structure, intended to stand till the
end of time, of placing therein materials which would crumble
into dust as soon as the blast of an educated and unbiased
reason bore down upon it. The bald and vague statements,
the vain vapourings, and the interminable platitudes trotted
out by Orthodoxy, concerning the mysterious ways of God,
in His dealings with men, and so leavened with the leaven of
superstition, ignorance, and self-righteousness, that were it
not for the work done by the Church in looking after its own,
and the State made derelicts of society, it would now be much
further on the road to oblivion than what it is. What, for in-
stance, is there mysterious about the following, and reader,
bear in mind that the following is the Alpha and the Omega


of forty-nine men’s lives out of fifty, and that the teacher is
one of the laws of nature, and a vastly different one to the
slippered platitudinarian so often met with. Man’s stomach
tells him that he cannot live without food.- His reason, that
man has failed on Scriptural lines to produce evidence why
Hodge should wait for permission to work and eat. His eyes
convince him that nature will supply him with all that he
may require. His sense of taste, and the beautiful, lure him
on to obtain the best, and the Bible supplies the key to open
nature’s stores, by telling Hodge to work, eat and drink, for
to-morrow he’ll die. If man can commit murder, as in the case
of war, before death actually stares him in the face, and
be held blameless both by God and his brother, shall not
Hodge, though cursed by Dives, he honoured by his Maker,
because of his willingness to support the life which has been
given him, even if he should, whilst sweeping out of his way
obstacles which would obstruct his path, kill some of the
drones which Christ as good as said were a curse to the
earth ? The last nut, one out of many, which I will ask
Orthodoxy to crack is, is it not time to sing—
Yes, this Old Theology
Down in hades soon must be,.
For its flag is torn to rags,
Cov’ring up its exposed snags.
Old Theology must go,
Rough hath been ibs path all thro’;
Wreck on wreck its log doth show,
Now itself must go below.
HYMN TO THE ROCK OF AGES.
Whilst I’m in this world below,
Where Thy blood for me didst flow,
May lin Thy footsteps tread '
Though in manger be my bed,
Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Mine the task to follow Thee.
What will all this world to me
Count when I must from it flee!
When I’ve had my little say,
Scourged the orphan day by day,
Rock of Ages, wilt thou bide
Such vile creatures by Thy side?
Was’t for this that Thou wert born,
Hell let loose to see the thorn;
Letting out Thy blood that Dives


Might o’er look their helpless lives,
Rock of Ages, crowned with thorns,
Wtren’t thou cleft for these forlorns?
Rock of Ages, dost Thou know
Blood like Thine still qnward flow;
Mortals, Lord, who fain would sing
Glory to our Lord and King,
Live on crumbs at Dives’s feet
Fearing they’ll disturb his sleep?
Rock of Ages, power and might,
Crucified for truth and right;
These poor orphans, brothers Thine,
Now’ll assert their rights divine,
Fighting for what Dives would hide,
Rock of Ages, be their guide I
‘‘AND I, IF I BE LIFTED UP, WILL DRAW ALL MEN
UNTO ME.”
Why Orthodoxy has not complied with this simple request
must, in the first place, be put down to the natural depravity
of human nature; and second, because it does not understand
what the lifting up really means. Orthodoxy thinks that if it
continually keeps Christ dangling from the cross, that that
is the Alpha and Omega of Christ’s charge to man. They
never for one moment think that the principal part of the
charge makes it incumbent upon the Church to leave no stone
unturned in their endeavours to lighten the burdens of the
poor, and that, when engaged in this humanitarian work, they
were' to take neither purse nor scrip, because the workman
would be worthy of his hire. The fact that Christ worked and
lived amongst the poor has had but little effect upon Ortho-
doxy, which, as soon as it got upon its feet, merged into a
conservative institution, such as we are familiar with’to-day.
It established forms and ceremonies altogether at variance
with Christ’s methods. Christ eat and drank with the poor,
and cursed the rich because of their lack of sympathy. Had
Christ lived, the unemployed problem would have had to have
been solved; but He died at the hands of those who now
crucify the poor; and as all His disciples, including the
learned St. Paul, were saturated with the ceremonial dogmas
of their nation, they were soon driven into the caves of the


earth. In order that the reader may thoroughly understand
St. Pahl’s grasp on the teachings of Christ, it is only neces-
sary to quote him once. Let every soul, says St. Paul, be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no authority but
from God. It is easy to imagine that if St. Paul lived to-day,
he would say, “Throw off the accursed yoke of Church and
State, and rise, work, eat, drink, and be merry.” He would,
with good old King Nehemiah, say, “Eat the fat, and drink
the sweet.” St. Paul lived at a time when all men were
steeped in ignorance, hence he told the down trodden poor
that there was nothing for it but to obey. Paul had given up
his faith, and had embraced Christianity, as he understood it,
but as his knowledge was of the crudest kind, a lot of what
he did would not pass muster to-day, and it is not to be
wondered at that dissensions arose, sides taken, and that greed
and ambition took possession of the Christian camp. How
Orthodoxy has flourished since the man said, “I am of Paul,”
may be gathered from the amount of .property which it owns,
and the millions of money required to keep it in working
order. Looking back upon the two thousand years that have
gone since Christ uttered those imperishable words, “Bear
ye one another’s burdens,” the thousands of millions of men
who have come and gone, the millions slaughtered, that those
who remained might be induced to worship the God of Ortho-
doxy, the hundreds of millions walking the earth to-day, lost
in its inextricable maze, and the reputed number of Christ-
ians 50,000,000, one-tenth of whom are classed as its accredited
teachers, the reader has no alternative but to come to the
conclusion that Christianity, from the death of Christ to the
present day, has been the greatest fraud and imposture that
the world has known. Had Orthodoxy built upon the Rock
of Ages, and insisted upon all men having the opportunity to
work, the world would have embraced it. But instead of
doing this, and obeying one of the chief commands of Christ,
Orthodoxy, owing to the negative position which it assumed,
gave to him who had, and robbed the poor of their God-given
rights. Since then Mammon has floated down the stream of
time, rocked in the cradle of lust and ease. Owing to the
attitude taken up by Orthodoxy, regarding its numbers and
its claim for good works, it is necessary to remind it that there
are diversities of natures, as well as there is of talents, and
that if there had been no churches, we should still have nad
the Christian at heart amongst us; there are some natures
which cannot nor will not go wrong. You may pull them
asunder upon the Orthodox rack, and burn them at the stake,


but they will remain Christians to the last. So that, when
these are reckoned with, and their leaven, which is found in
all parts of the world, Orthodoxy is seen to be one of the
principal hindrances to our social advancement. One natural-
ly expects that the first act of an accredited agent of the Crea-
tor would be to see that all His subjects had work and food,
considering that tliey find themselves here without their con-
sent, not knowing where they came from, nor where tney
are going, their knowledge being limited to knowing that a
fire is burning within, which food alone can satisfy, and that
unless food is constantly being put into the furnace of the
body, degeneration, starvation, and death soon makes an end
of what the law of supply and demand calls waste materials.
And in these two words, the reader gets Unrestricted Indi-
vidualism’s true estimate of the unemployed —waste material.
And whether it is starved to death by the cold hand of charity,
or sacrifices itself upon the altar of death, it is all one to
Mammon, for it knows the supply to be one unlimited in
quantity. Strange as it may appear, Orthodoxy is hopelessly
split up into sections over every social question save one. It
tears itself to pieces over the marriage tie, and the
pleasant wine cup, but when it is a question of
money, it becomes as importunate as the widow of
Bible fame. Another marvellous characteristic of
Orthodoxy is the peons of praise which ever and anon
fall from its throne concerning the good times our successors
will have when the regeneration of man becomes an accom-
plished fact. Shakespeare says there is a Divinity which shapes
our ends, rough hew them how we may, and it is this Divinity
which exercises the mind of man so much to-day, for whilst
the existence of a Supreme Power is beyond a doubt, man
has no opportunity of finding out what form this power takes;
consequently, he is thrown back upon ascertained facts, facts
whicn we glean from natural law, and the conduct of men
whom Orthodoxy informs us were placed in positions of power
for tile purpose of pointing out to men the way to heaven,
and to govern the earth. Pirst, then, we gather from natural
law that this Divinity takes no notice of what we know, as
life and death, fire and flood at times devour all that stands
in their way ; from this action one can appreciate the words
of Christ, when He says, “Your time is any time.” Coming
to the unseen power standing behind the rulers of men, one
has his doubts "aroused as to its nature. Looking at the uni-
verse above him, man is filled with amazement and admira-
tion, and this feeling'follows him as he ponders over its vast-


ness, and the phenomena which hedges him in on every side,
and it is only when he is rudely awakened out of his reverie'
by the hand of man, that his doubts about the nature of the
power behind the throne take definite shape. Turning his
eyes to the earth, he sees more waste land under his feet than
he can ever make use of. He sees Nature sending down water,
which, for the want of using, returns again to the ocean, and
although Nature invites him to rise, work and eat, he has to
ignore the invitation, lie down upon the grass, wait till
Mammon calls him. What a glorious opportunity Orthodoxy
missed of lifting up Christ and the poor whom He came to
save. There is nothing wonderful about man having doubts
concerning the Unseen Power behind the throne, and in order
to make this clear to the reader, his attention is directed to
his own home, the Commonwealth, which ever since its birth
has been tossed either in the lap of Imperialism by Deakin, in
the lap of Individualism by Reid, or in the lap of Nationali-
sed Socialism by Watson. And no matter how one might at-
tempt to find the Unseen Hand, by no stretch of imagination
could one imagine that it was behind this earth-worshipping
trinity. And yet Orthodoxy takes each one by the hand,
so that it matters not which comes to the top. Orthodoxy
wins, whilst the worker is roasted, and. his fat sold, so that
funds may be forthcoming to provide wine for the midnight
carousal. It is strange, but true, the social magnet works
only on the side of wealth. Let the God of Mammon be in
danger, and at once the eagles of wealth surround
its throne to defend it. But if Wealth flays the
back of Labour, Labour will cringe, crawl, and even
die for the hand that smites. Labour is made up of an in-
numerable number of non-magnetic atoms. Sometimes, some
of them when under great excitement are brought together
something after the manner that a whirlwind gathers leaves,
but their force is soon spent. First, because they are the
weakest; second, because of traitors in the camp. Wealth
having the power to dismiss the dissatisfied worker, is a ter-
rible weapon to flourish over a man who has a wife and family
depending upon his daily wage. This want of cohesion
amongst the workers would not matter so much if it affected
only themselves, but we live under a law which allows no one
to live to himself. This law, which, under a Christian or a
humanitarian socialism, would prove itself to be above price,
has, under our accursed system, become one of our worst
sources of evil. No man liveth to himself, and yet knowing
this, worker will not combine with worker, for tfce purpose


of securing a fair share of the fruits of their toil. It is in
consequence of this pigheadedness that millions of men socially
above the worker are kept simmering in the sea of unrest, or
are being dragged down to the workers’ level. Even to-day,
after all the light that has been thrown across the worker’s
path, he is either being driven or led. Some are hound for
the Freetraders’ shambles, and some to the Protectionists’
shambles. It matters but little which, for all are bound to
the sweaters' hell. It is one of the greatest social mysteries
of modern times how the worker shows his contempt for wis-
dom. He will not learn, but day by day he will place stone
upon stone, so that his hated tyrant may lock up his wealth,
and day by day he returns home in the form of a bended
bow, to eat and sleep, so that he may have strength to com-
plete his task on the morrow. At present he is being hurried
along to the parting of the ways, and when there he will
have the choice of three roads. He can keep straight on as
at present, turn to the left into Labour’s Paradise, national-
ised slavery, or wheel round to the right, and dwell in the sun-
shine of freedom, as outlined in The Problem Solved.
A POLITICAL WOLF IN SHEEP’S CLOTHING.
Hail, Josepfy. Premier of the Premier State,
Thine hour glass empties, leave it not too late;
Hell’s mouth still opens for its daily prey,
In error, Sir, you may just stray its way.
Crown thy declining years with work for all,
Or leave at once the State’s chief fattening stall;
Thou can’st not now be happy, for you know
Thousands will vote to put you down below.
’Tis there upon the world’s great garbage heap,
All that are worthless take their long last sleep.
Those on thy side, e'en now, they would rejoice
If but a man would rise and drown thy voice;
But hitherto, e’en mediocrity
Hath not approached, chameleon though thou be.


THE DAWN OF REASON.
AFTER BEING BAPTISED IN THE STREAM CALLED
CHRISTIANITY.
Reader, the signs of the times lead us to hope that the
will of God, which we may well suppose to be the dream of
angels, and which we know to be the objective of the human-
itarian, has at last a chance of bursting the bonds of super-
stition and ignorance, which for thousands of years have held
it in subjection.' The long dreary night of a spurious ortho-
doxy is at last disappearing in a mist before the rising sun.
The dawn of freedom is breaking, and soon the sun or an
enlightened conscience will give the worker an opportunity to
come to a decision upon the question of all questions, “Is man
his brother’s keeper?” He will be able to see beyond the
shadow of a doubt that Unrestricted Individualism, under
its present and exceptionally bad conditions, only tends to
widen the gulf between the different sections of his race. He
will see that it makes no difference who has the command of
wealth, whether it be a church member, or a king amongst
bookmakers, for under either, history and our every-day life
proves the gulf to be an unbridgeable one. True, some of the
employers of labour, after amassing fortunes beyond what
they ever dreamed of possessing, have scattered large sums
along poverty’s ever-widening roadway, but it must never be
forgotten that the money so scattered was the fruit of labour,
greatly underpaid. Labour, be it remembered, that never
lived to see its distribution, for worn out by incessant toil long
ere the allotted span was reached, they passed away, only
to make room for more victims, whilst the man who reaped
the fruit grown by sweat and blood fared sumptuously every
day, being classed as one of the gods of earth. But now, man
has passed his word that society shall undergo a change, hav-
ing satisfied himself that the rich grow richer, and the workers
grow poorer, that the signs are not wanting that go to
show that the worker’s boasted freedom and his much-cherish-
ed democracy are becoming more and more a delusion and a
snare. Solomon says “Time and chance happeneth to all,”
but he forgot to say how many codes of morality and immor-
ality his all-embracing but ignorant assertion covered. We
have abundant evidence to prove that the man who has time
and chance thrust upon him need have no fear of any out-
side competitor. Solomon was woefully astray' for, all


through history, merit has often, owing to influence, had to
make its bed in the gutter. So will it ever be. Hence the
necessity for a law giving work to all. Trades unions, it must
be remembered, had their birth owing to the inhuman methods
adopted by the employer of labour. This being the case,
one would have thought that the time could never arrive
when Unions would go and do likewise, but we find they have
gone one better. Employers were never known to make laws
to harass themselves, and at a certain period of life to anni-
hilate one.another, but this is just what Unions have done.
They claim the right of saying who shall, and how many
shall learn a trade, and except in a general way, which means
nothing, they don’t care what becomes of those left outside
their gates. Unionism has nowj after a brief existence, de-
generated into a form of tyranny worse than that it set out to
crush. We Eave only to look at results in our own State to
prove this. Since Labour began to guide the ship of State,
millions of money have been wasted in the vain attempt to
lift the masses into a higher plane of life, with the result
that our burdens have been increased, until every fourth shil-
ling goes into the money lenders’ pocket, whilst tens of thou-
sands of pounds are paid annually to men to make laws which,
if justice reigned, would go to keep some of them in gaol,
and, intolerable as this is, the reader must remember there
is no finality to it, for the burden increases year by year, the
fool keeps on supplying, and the rogue spending it. So that
it requires no prophet to predict not alone what we are leav-
ing posterity, but even what some of us will reap. One
hears the ignorant and foolish question asked, “What has
posterity done that it should be considered!” Well, it is
owing to the faith that the money-lender has, that there is an
Australian future, that induces him to lend us money, and
he takes all possible care that the money he lends is
not in due proportion to the security, or beyond what
can be demanded at the point of the British bay-
onet. Thus it will be seen that we put posterity
in pawn by borrowing millions of money upon .perishable as-
sets, exploit the whole of the State’s primary industries, and
leave the land in a worse state than we found it. We boast
of what we are doing for our children. Why, the very food
that the infant of to-day consumes it will have to pay for
in days to come. We are not out of our own industry rear-
ing our families. We are living on the goose of golden egg
fame, namely, borrowed money, and the ever-vanishing riches
of the virgin soil. These are the channels through which


comes the money, which enables us to pay hirelings and in-
competents three hundred pounds a year to make laws, out
of which finality can only be reached after appealing till
there is nothing left to appeal to. Consequently, the time
has arrived for taking the power of appeal out of the hands
of hirelings, and appeal to that sense of humanity, which,
in a greater or lesser degree, is to be found in every member
of the human family.
The task of giving work to every male unit, and making
every unit work, is so simple a problem to solve that the
reason why it has not been solved, except where the laws of
the land make slavery lawful, must be laid at the door of
those who know better, but who are too saturated with lust
to give a brother a lift over the social stile. They have
preached Unrestricted Individualism to suit their own greed,
and to give their ambition scope to secure power which would
enable them to live on the sweat of the less fortunate unit.
Give a man work, and by so doing, you draw the teeth of that
demon of all demons, and king of terrors, Poverty. Reader,
we have, if we are going to give wisdom a place, passed
through the night steeped in ignorance, but the day dawn
breaks, the sun of equity and right is sending its beams
along our highways. Science is harnessing the hitherto
hidden forces of nature to our industrial car. We
find that nature teems with everything that we require to
make life worth living, whilst -the only task which a fixed law
imposes on us, before we can enjoy all that nature is pre-
pared to give, is that we must work before we can get them,
and in order that man may make his work as light and agree-
able as possible, she has sown the necessary talents amongst
us with a free and impartial hand. Sometimes they are found
with kings (of course kings are the exception), but more
frequently from the plague-stricken slum. Let us then, as
the dawn breaks into day, broaden our views of life, cease
being a dog in the manger, a parasite upon the helpless, and
a curse to life. Let us make our educational system so that
talents, which, if used, would be a benefit to all, shall no
longer be strangled for the purpose of letting a few grasp what
is the heritage of all. ’ The reformer is not the only one who
sees the dawn breaking, for the representative of Mammon
is abroad, and he sees his own house is in danger of being
destroyed. So, with one hand he pats the charity .organisa-
tions on the back, waxes eloquent over the grand work done
by the Prison Gate Brigade, and, with the other hand, dips
his pen into the slime of hypocrisy, and clamours for the


repeal of the Income Tax. He wants to die a millionaire, and
so begrudges the few pounds which the tax takes from him.
He has mounted the commercial ladder of wealth, become a
law unto himself, levies blackmail to the tune of one hundred
per cent, over and above what his neighbour can well afford
to do the work for. The charge, of course, would not matter
if there was a progressive income tax for the purpose of again
distributing the hard-earned shilling of the slave. And
yet thousands of workers buy this monopolistic paper, well
knowing that it spends its time forging shackles, which they
will have to wear whilst it is gathering in the dollars. For-
tunately, reason is at last showing signs of life after its long
rest in the cradle of superstition and ignorance, and it is
not at all likely that it will again fall under the influence
of a bastard orthodoxy. Reason sees that human nature will
remain human until evolution gives the wheel of life another
turn, and therefore will not follow in the footsteps of Or-
thodoxy by trying to alter it, but will make its laws dove-
tail into it. Consequently, man, under the rule of human-
itarianism, which is reason under another name, will have
the utmost individual liberty that his talents are capable of
securing for him, and, if Smith, under the everchanging
conditions of life, evolves a destiny which will command obed-
ience, then reason will not say him nay; but, if, to the
detriment of Jones, Smith carries all before him, reason will
not, as individualism does to-day, stand by and see Jones
starve whilst Smith holds a surplus coin, or the State a foot
of land that can be cultivated. You, reader, expect sym-
pathy from your Creator, you, who deny sympathy; for al-
though possessing youth, health, and strength yet live upon
the sweat of yon pale-faced maiden, who lives a living death
in your foul aired garret. Remember, reason has God and
the laws of nature on its side, and if you will not willingly
fall into step with these factors, then you will have to be
made do so. For the age of Christianised reason has come
to stay; its sun is above the horizon of life, to show the
worker how to unite with worker, and place upon the Sta-
tutes of their country the law of work for all. Next to the
mystery of no beginning and no ending, the mystery of Jones
measuring his length on the footpath of life to allow Smith
to walk on him, ranks next in order of merit. It has to be
borne in mind that Jones and Smith were born in the one
hovel, and when old enough were kicked out, not only to earn
their own living, but to assist in keeping their loving par-
ents. They were both dubbed guttersnipes by the Press;


both lived on Charity, and this gave them the opportunity
to develop the talent of cunning, and, as this was the only
talent brought into play, they advanced by leaps and bounds
in what had become their calling in life, viz., taking what
did not belong to them. In the course of time, Smith made
a great haul, and not having lost all that was human in his
composition, reason suggested that then was the time to turn
over another page. Smith did so, became a successful man
in business, also a church member, gave to charities, which
at this time Jones was only too glad to take advantage of.
Jones’ lines had fallen everywhere but upon pleasant places,
so, whilst Smith began to find himself sought after, Jones
made his bed in the long green grass. At this time, Smith
began to see visions, and to dream of greatness; his business
increased at such a rate that success absolutely obscured any
little tiddleywinking tricks that for old times sake he could
not help practising. He had reached a rung in the social
ladder upon which he could stand and defy those with whom
he was once hail fellow well met. At this time he was a
pillar of the church, and, although he had been fined heavily,
as others had been before him, for selling lead instead of tea,
he still continued to dispense charity with a lavish hand, for
which the church canonised him, and royalty shook hands
with him, declaring him to be a saviour of men. Even
Jones, his old mate and brother thief, would stand, cap in
hand, waiting for the crumbs which fell from Smith’s table,
and yet, with more than enough, Smith, a rogue to the back-
bone, allowed Jones to enter the white-washed walls of a
callous charity; whilst, saturated with lust, a friend of kings
and a pillar of the church, he put the iron heel of oppression
upon the man who took Jones’ place in the sweaters’ den,
and compelled him also to become a thief, not from choice
like himself, but because he was refused a living wage.
The Press has usurped the power once held by the pul-
pit, but where is Freedom, with its password equal oppor-
tunity for all, and the lion of wealth holding out its paw
of friendship to the lamb of poverty? Has Society gained
by the transfer ? or is the worker’s task made lighter when
all things are accounted for, including education, and the
achievements of science ? Not at all! The tarred rope is
easier to handle than thje stoker’s shovel, the flail than feed-
ing the threshing machine, whilst the rapid evolutions of the
manufacturers’ machine turn youth into old age without
having enjoyed the summer of life. Slavery, under the pul-
pit, had the sun of superstition and ignorance—that there


was better on before, and that the workers’ troubles were
only for a season, and given him so that he might be made
ready for the glorious change which Orthodoxy assured him
was waiting for those who stood, hat in hand, before the
Jhurch and the Squire —streaming down upon it. But, to-
day, under the Press, the talent of reason has burst the bonds
that once held it in subjection, till it has become as restless
for relief as the angry ocean, and that importunate
widow of Bible fame. Nothing so much resembles the
workers’ pathway through life as a surveyor’s line. The
way, like the line, has length without breadth, a long, nar-
row unmacadamised streak, reaching from the cradle to the
grave, and fenced on both sides to keep out trespassers. The
worker, as he tramps along, sees the land highly cultivated,
and laden with the fruits of the earth, and, although hungry
and tired, he dare not satisfy either of these two cravings
of an outraged nature. The road he is on has neither shelter
nor food; its uneven nature wears out his boots, while the
briars by the way make rags of his clothes. But it happens
that just as his last crust is eaten, and his strength
giving out, a parasite, a hireling in human form, stops him
and says, “Hi! go‘in there (pointing to an open gate), the
lord of the manor wants coals for his fire that he may warm
himself, and make his brandy hot. His table is waiting
to be decorated with the fruit which hangs on yonder tree;
so, when thou hast won the coals from the bowels of the fearth
and harvested the fruit, his lordship will give thee what he
thinks is right.’’ The worker, upon whose face no smile of
comfort has shone, did as he was bidden, for his thoughts
were of his offspring clothed in rags, crying for bread, and of
his wife at the washtub, making clean the garments, owned
by a butterfly of society, whose life is saturated in
lust, and he became filled with a determination to work,
fight or die. But, taken as a whole, the boast was an idle
one, for he never lived;. but, by the aid of intermittent work,
he simply existed till he could exist no longer. Having
delved for coal and harvested the fruit, the law of supply
and demand stepped in, and gave him notice to quit, and,
as he was jogging along the road upon which no one could
say him nay, a carriage, drawn by horses, ridden by pos-
tillions, came dashing out of a gate of the fence. Inside that
carriage sat a bloated Bishop. He had sat too long over
his toast and egg, and was late*. The church hells had stop-
ped ringing, and the faithful were awaiting his lordship. He
tvas going to lay his holy hands upon the innocents, one or


more of whom, as sure as the sun shone, would early in life
take to the track that he, the tramp, then stood on. Could
presumption, audacity, and love of power, as exemplified in
the Bishop’s actions, travel any further down the social
road to ruin without meeting death before his time, unless
the dawn of reason triumphs over the God of Mammon by
singeing the wings of him who owns the land on each side
of the road 1 As the tramp was soliloquising upon the scene,
a Bible student, who was looking forward to the day when
he too would wear a mitre, spoke to him, and gave him what
he considered heavenly advice, told him that his troubles
were but for the moment, and that there were good days
coming. Four thousand years have passed since first this
oft told tale was heard, and yet there is now no more sign
of the end than there was at the beginning. But, Reason
has now thrown its beams along the whole length of the road,
and shows its surface to be strewn with the bones of those
whom the law of supply and demand had no use for. The
Press still retains the power to lead to Hell or point the
way to Heaven, and, as it chooses to do the former, Reason
has no alternative but to step in and do the latter.
Another blind alley, 'which for centuries has been choked
by the growth of self-righteousness, but now illumined by
Reason, is that the reformer is wasting his time in order that
he may benefit the idler at the expense of his self-supporting
brother. Nothing, however, is further from the reformer’s
mind than this ill-digested delusion. As a matter of fact,
the born idler is seldom in the reformer’s thoughts, and when
he is, it is only to regret that the law of the land does not
make an end of him by giving him the choice of working
either in or out of gaol. Because, until this is done, Reason
will not have completed the task which its Creator com-
mitted to its care. The reformer takes up his task solely
for the benefit of him who will work under fair conditions,
and to relieve Society, as a whole, of that incubus, born out
of individualistic corruption, the idler and thief. These two
parasites are altogether too insignificant and unworthy of
legislation, but for the havoc made by them upon law-abid-
ing citizens, because, though they neither toil nor spin, they
live, and if the State gave pound for pound, they could have
the benefit of these men’s labour. That is, by begging and
stealing, every idler costs the citizens at least one pound per
week, without their receiving one groat in return. Add to
this another pound, and fifty pounds’ worth of water might
be impounded, and earthworks constructed that would last


for ever. Strange as it may appear, it is the honest worker
who suffers most. His motto is “Excelsior,” but when the
end comes, it is too often desolation. The law of supply
and demand has been too much for him, but what has been
to him a skeleton of fear and want has been the very opposite
to the idler and the representative of wealth. It has enabled
the rich to grow richer, because of the abundance of labour,
whilst the idler has gone on his way rejoicing, knowing that
his tale about slack times would be swallowed in globo. No
wonder that the cry “Reason! where art thou?” is heard
from Dan to Beersheba. Reason has sat in judgment upon
our environment, and it’s verdict is that any fair-minded
man could, with confidence, take his Bible under his arm,
face the judgment seat of God, and successfully defend him-
self against any charge which might be brought against him.
The reformer no longer sees through a glass, darkly, for by
the aid of reason he has discovered a truth which has lain
dormant for thousands of years, owing to the successful
manipulation of facts by Church and State. Consequently,
the man whom the reformer would assist is he who, having
put his hand to the plough, has no wish to relinquish his
hold till old age or a competence looms in sight.
Reason takes the stand. First: That man, being alive,
has a right\to live. Second: That without food he cannot
live. Third: Thai without work he cannot remain honest.
Fourth: That there is waste money, which, if circulated,
would give work to all upon land owned by the State. Fifth:
That, if a progressive system of income taxation was made
the law of the land, more than sufficient funds would be
raised without inflicting hardship upon any one unit living
in the State. Sixth: That the man who is in work; and
assists to make a law which will debar his brother from work
until the law of supply and demand, which was conceived
by greed and put into force by the drones of the earth, calls
upon him to clean up the filth created by themselves, is the
criminal, against whom the laws of the land should, with
the recognised Divine laws, join issue and deal with from
a humanitarian standpoint. Seventh: That only fools are
now successfully fed upon the garbage which falls from the
lips of clerical nonentities and political mountebanks.
Eighth: That, whilst unrestricted individualism lasts, man
would be ah' unmitigated fool not to take a chance when he
saw one. Ninth: That the employer of labour, who takes
his customers down, acts wisely by keeping a fund for the
purpose of making good what he knows his employees rob


him of, because his own nature has leavened all who come
in contact with him. Tenth: That, with work for all, the
great incentive to crime, fear of poverty, would be elimina 1 -
ted from our daily life. Eleventh: That the aim of human
nature is to excel in all things, consequently, its first duty
is to excel in the God-given task of lifting itself out of the
mire into which ignorance, greed, and vice once plunged
it. Twelfth: That the time to do this is to-day, so that the
reader may know from actual experience what freedom really
is. Thirteenth: That the reason why the dawn of Reason
has so suddenly given place to noonday splendour of in-
tellect is because the more modern Christianity is preached
and education increases, the more adroit becomes the smart
man of business in obliterating his tracks, which otherwise
would lead to gaol. Fourteenth: That the words in the
Bible, which say “All men are equal,” are proved by
science and man’s everchanging nature to be absolutely true,
because we find all along the line of history the offspring
of the orator and statesman degenerating till Nature wipes
them all out, and commences afresh at the foot of the
social ladder, and it is in consequence of this everchanging yet
ever-recurring natural law, under which man is a law unto
himself, that we find the offspring of the saints of the' earth
becoming a fiend in human form, and the son of a drunkard
a temperance lecturer. Fifteenth: That, that being our
position, the man who will not make use of his social bay-
onet, his elector’s right, is unfit to associate with men seized
of the consequences which must follow in the wake of
him who exists in the lap of charity, and dies a well-earned
death, owing to his ineptitude. Sixteenth: As no man can
do anything by himself, and as the evils herein depicted can-
not be refuted, the author invites the Reader to make one
to help herald in the blessings which must follow the ad-
vent of the Unit at work.
Reason now dawns. Behold! its beams
Strike o’er the human sea,
Imparting life to all its streams
Down through Eternity.
I thank thee, Lord, for Reason’s b'irth,
And its continued life;
’Twill help to clear from our fair earth
This cursed industrial strife. '
’Twill help to knit, w ith threads of love,
Our brotherhood again;
Prepare us for that home above,
When here no more we reign.


SEARCHING FOR TRUTH.
The task which the author has set himself is the solv-
ing of the unemployed problem, and at the sapie time leave
the Unit in the enjoyment of more freedom than he at pre-
sent enjoys. This question, solving the problem, has to-day
for the first time in the history of Christianity entered into
our every-day life, and become the burning question of the
hour. Up to a very recent date, the idea was laughed to
scorn that a Britisher would consign the words, “Britons
never shall be slaves,” into the domain of worn out creeds.
But so rapid has been the march of man’s yearnings after
social freedom, that he has never halted for the purpose of
finding out where, his steps were taking him. But now, in
the twinkling of an eye, he finds himself on the edge of a
social precipice, and that if he continues his march he will
be plunged into a socialism of slavery. He finds that after
years of fighting against the rich man, the only fruit forth-
coming is in the form of an aristocracy of labour, bent upon
destroying our present social conditions, and creating one
to suit themselves, and under which the Unit would forfeit
his liberty, private enterprise be swept away, whilst the
talents of the man of genius would be confined in the cast-
iron and demoralising laws of communism, out of which
would grow civil wars, and a dictatorship. To the man
and woman who can look upon our present public life and
socialism’s aim with indifference, this book can be nothing
more than waste paper, and-its author a fool. But from
those who are not satisfied, all I ask is a ver-
dict, based upon modern historical facts, our increasing
rich, our compulsory made poor, our omnipresent commer-
cial dishonesty, unjust system of income taxation, unionism
unmasked, and the impossibility of bridging the chasm
which now .separates the criminal rich from the starving
poor, by any method at present in vogue. Neither is it pos-
sible to find a remedy apart from that which this book
offers, always providing that the Unit is left in the enjoy-
ment of that liberty which his own nature thirsts for. The
author, for years, has studied the different phases of our
public life, and has, to the best of his ability, portrayed
life as it exists with us to-day, and what the future of man
will be supposing that he continues upon his present course.
At present his social environment is built upon a sandy
foundation, so rftuch so, that there is not one spot upon


which he can put his foot and say, “I am safe.” The
inequalities of our socialism are so pronounced that not a
day passes without some of us being buried beneath its
ruins; and yet, should one happen to be bold enough to at-
tempt to get out of this blood-stained track, he is called
a faddist, but it becomes clear to one who goes beneath
the surface of mere assertion, that a large proportion of
mankind fails to discriminate betweeq what a fad is, and
what a trained mind is capable of accomplishing. It would
be a fad, if Jones, hearing that his neighbour had died from
eating fish of a particular brand, resolves not to eat any
more of it. But to tell Smith that he was a faddist, because
he had been planning for years how to throw a bridge across
Port Jackson, would lay oneself open to be called an igno-
ramus. I claim to stand in connection with the solving of
the unemployed problem, as Smith does to the bridge. At
present, men having large interests at stake, and having
capital, the accumulations of generations invested in
industrial undertakings, do not know the day some social-
istic political power, backed by a sectarian, and would-be
dominant party, and clothed in the garments of ignorance,
and greed, may destroy it all, and reduce its owners to mere
cogs in the tyrannical machinery which they have set in
motion. There is no useful end to be gained by winking
at the position, this Union machinery is going and working
with ever-increasing power, and unless the rich and the
lovers of freedom in all walks of life are cemented together
in the common bond of humanity, two generations from
now will see this grand country in the hands of unionised
power-, such as a Napoleon would have envied. Unionism
has no. parallel in history; Toryism protects its own fold
when it is possible to do so from annihilation, but Unionism
would crush those in its own walk of life, friend and foe
go down together like puriy trees before the cyclonic blasts
of Nature. Soon after I began to x study our social atmos-
phere, I became convinced there was something wrong which
our present methods could not right. But it took years of
watching before I could see the real nature of the cancer,
which was working so much evil in our national life. But
the day N came when I saw unrestricted individualism was
the cause of all the trouble, and that it would have to be
swept away before there would be any chance of the Unit
being lifted out of his squalid surroundings, and freed from
the mesh which an unnatural excrescence had thrown over
him. And years before Sir John Gorst presided over those


360 delegates, assembled to discuss the unemployed problem,
and to advise the shutting of the alien pauper out, I saw
that that was the first step towards solving the problem, the
Second one, work for all, and the third, a progressive income
tax without exemptions. Such being my belief I have
considered it my duty to show my fellow citizens a new
track, whereby we may reach our goal by a more humane
path than the one we have been travelling upon. I found
in my travels that untold damage had been done owing to
the free and easy methods adopted by our rulers to suit some
of the competitors in the race for life'. Some of those who
had been on the track for years, and had got in sight of
the goal, were allowed without any handicap, being placed
upon them to keep going, whilst he who had just arrived
at manhood was placed on scratch. Being curious to see
what tl}e result would be, I watched the new-comer, brim-
ming over with youth and health. To me, the race was a
foregone conclusion, but he started well, and one of those
who, by this time had reached the goal, was so enamoured
at his pluck, that he offered to pace him, by lending him
some money, principle and interest to be a first charge upon
his sweat and blood. This pleased the new beginner im-
mensely, and fired his imagination, and already he saw vistas
of beauty looming up in the near future. Everything after
this went along merrily, till the eve of the harvest. . At this
time he had counted his chickens and found them all there,
but during the night he was awakened by the crash of
thunder, and the howling tempest, accompanied by the fire
fiend, sweeping everything before it. And the dawn of day
found him a ruined man. Nature had bumped against
him in the race for life, and had won. Although daunted,
he again faces the starter, but with empty pockets, for
what the fire missed, the money-lender gathered in. Being
no longer in a position to start himself, he offers his strength
to the employers of labour, but there was no room for him.
Why there was no room is explained in this book. What
became of him the records of the coroner’s court show. Now,
the sole aim of the author is to so remodel our social life that
when one citizen gets thrown off the track, there shall be a
friend at court to give him another start. This is a socialism
that no one worthy of the name of man would cavil at, for
it gives to every Unit freedom of action to engage in any
walk of life that he may choose. Whatever some people may
think, there can be no doubt but that we now see the dawn


of the day when the State will have to answer the question
“Am I the Unit’s keeper?” in the affirmative. Man is
selfish by nature, but he is not naturally a rogue, unless you
put the skeleton of the fear of want in his cupboard; then
he is all things that a fiend out of hell could be. During
m y. march through life two or three incidents have crossed
uiy path, which may be quoted in connection with the pro-
blem under review. Straws show the direction of the wind,
and incidents in a.man’s life tend to form his belief. Just
before leaving England I can remember my sister saying,
“And he was at the class meeting last night.” This remark
was made about a man who did not live lar away from our
. house, and who, after he had done praying to God to. keep
himself and family from starving, went home, got his gun,
and with a companion went out poaching, in order to get
something to eat. Unfortunately for themselves, they fell
in with game-keepers, who were the worse for liquor, and
a desperate fight took place. The man of prayer had his
arms broken, and his companion was riddled with shot.
And whilst cursing the tyranny of the rich, they were both
lodged in gaol. Are these men to be blamed for trying to
keep body and soul together ? Nay, they made use of the only
opportunity at hand to supplement the dole of less than
twelve shillings per week. I was brought up in the faith
of the Methodists, which, for years, held me in its sectarian
jaws, and although it never satisfied the cravings ol my
nature, I could not shake it off, because I had nothing else
to 'put in its place, and to have done such a thing without
having a substitute would have been tantamount to com-
mitting reason to the grave, and allowing brute instinct to
have its way. Never a great reader, so far as mere book-
worinism is concerned, I seldom went beyond the newspaper
to gain evidence bearing upon our every-day life, the words
and actions of our rulers and guides have been quite sufficient
for my intelligence to digest. The greatness which men in
the past achieved has had no charm for me. The fruit gath-
ered from their actions has alone attracted my attention,
for I saw that they had entered into, and leavened the na-
tures of our rulers to the extent of keeping earth as much
a hell as ever it was. In those days I attended church
regularly, but, notwithstanding this, indifference to forms
and church dogmas, grew like a hot-house plant, and landed
me upon the field of investigation; and this action, so far
as Orthodoxy was concerned, damned me for ever. I tried


to clothe the words, “Bear ye one another’s'burdens” in a
religious mantle, but I soon found that theory too cramped
to fit in with the work of the Architect of the Universe. So
there was nothing left for me to do but put my own con-
struction upon the words, which was that they applied to
the whole human family during its journey through life, and
that they were a message from God to man, letting him
work, eat, and drink. And with this belief leavening my
whole nature, I shook off sectarianism, and upon the wings
of freedom rose to a higher plane of life than I had hitherto
attained, and from whence I obtained a panoramic view of
the workings of God, in nature, and His attitude towards
man, which is so transparently exemplified in the actions of
the rich, towards those who, until now, could not help them-
selves. I saw man an independent atom, endowed with rea-
soning powers equal to anything that would confront him
in his walk through life. But I never saw even a glimmer
of light to lead me for one moment to think that outside
of the laws of nature, God interfered with our actions. And
now, after years of watching and waiting for Orthodoxy, or
one of the world’s brilliant orators —whom the public de-
lighteth to honour —to sweep away the cobwebs of supersti-
tion which still hold so many of my fellow citizens in its
poisonous embrace, I have been convinced that the social
orator is a parasite amongst parasites, and that unless com-
pelled, he will never attempt to lift the Unit up. As for
the Orthodox man, he is so imbued with the superstition that
when he has what he calls preached Christ, patted the poor
on the back, and doled out a little charity to the derelict,
he has done his duty. Consequently, it is useless waiting
for a social evolution to be born within its fold. And it
would be equal to blasphemy to associate our life’s his-
tory with our Creator. Let the reader take a brief glimpse
of our ( short, but eventful career, which was commenced,
free of debt, and where are we now ? And what have we
got that a recognised mediocrity could not have supplied?
Our so-called great men have disappeared, and the hirelings
and vampires alone remain. And they would have us be-
lieve that they hold the heavens up. In my search after
truth, I found that outside law there was no safety for man.
That unrestricted individualism was outside law, and being
outside, was the mother of all the evils which now con-
front us. I found that after twelve hours without food,
man began to decay. I found that the Creator planted man
upon the earth, surrounded him with food, gave him intelli-


gence sufficient to enable him to provide an everlasting sup-
ply, and then left him in charge of all creation. But,
owing to the rank hypocrisy of the church, and the cun-
ning of the hireling, he, who has had ten talents, has held
the great mass of mankind in the jaws of superstition, which
can only last, so long as the worker chooses to be a fool.
MR. J. H. CARRUTHERS ON THE REGENERATION
OF MAN.
Talking upon social matters, and Labour Socialism m
particular, said “Before they could reach that stage there
was regenerating, educational, and religious work to be done.
They had to let the work of regeneration proceed.” Now,
when a man of Mr. J. H. Carruthers’ stamp harangues the
multitude upon such a grand theme as regeneration, one is
forced to hold one’s breath whilst asking the question, where
are we? Let the reader for a moment consider the charac-
ters of the two Joseph’s, who stand at the two extreme ends
of our boasted civilization, as portrayed in the Bible and
the Sydney Press, and he will be at once convinced that the
hand of regeneration so far as it refers to the actions of
Premiers, ■ has been put back cycles of time since Joseph
the first took over the economic side of Egyptian politics.
The reader will understand that I make no charge against
Mr. J. H. C-, for he may be in the unfortunate predica-
ment' that I once was in, namely, saturated with the ungodly
dogmas of Orthodoxy, or like what many others undoubtedly
are, creatures of environment. It is his method of admin j
istering our social economy that I and others object to; that
it is wrong our unemployed and the thousands of half-starved
children, “gutter snipes,” our respectable press delights to
dub them, which parade our streets in search of scraps of
food, abundantly testify. At the dawn of civilization we
have the wise, tolerant, and forgiving humanitarian, Joseph
the first, who was translated from a state of slavery to the
pinnacle of power, and became Prime Minister to a haughty
Pagan ruler, a ruler who treated his subjects as mere beasts
of burden. And yet, amidst such surroundings as these we
see Joseph in nature, like unto his God. The very air which
he breathed was contaminated by fumes arising from the


Pagan’s altar* And although standing upon the very thresh-
old of civilization, he remained a true exemplar of what a
man should be, and could be. Some will say he Was under
Divine guidance, and could not do wrong, but to admit any
such theory as this, would be to accuse God of deliberately
laying the foundation stone upon which it may be said the
Jewish nation was built, knowing that after a comparatively
short period, made memorable by unparalleled bloody wars,
he would bring about its destruction by a Pagan hero. Again,
Joseph the first’s policy was work and food for all, a policy
which was undoubtedly shaped by the humanitarian talent
of reason, which, taking into account the time at which
he lived, shows conclusively to an unbiassed mind that *n
Joseph, regeneration had been fully. developed. Now, if we
take the orthodox Christian at his word, that God was be-
hind Joseph’s policy of work and food for all, it follows in
natural sequence that the powers of darkness must be behind
Joseph the second’s policy, because it only providbs for the
interests of the criminal rich, the fawning pariah, and a small
section of those whose reasoning powers have lifted them
beyond the plane of mediocrity. Passing over a period of
about four thousand years, all of which were washed with
the blood of millions of victims to the God of Mammon, we
arrive at a place called Hyde, where Joseph the second held
forth upon the question of all questions, Social Environment.
Now, Joseph knows, so far as it is possible to know, that
man’s nature is a fixed quantity, and that his talents vary
as the days of the year vary, but that he always gets back
to the old starting post. “ ’Tis true, pity ’tis, ’tis true.”
It is sad to think that two thousand years of impregnation’
of Christ’s Divine teachings, wholesale murder by our Christ-
ian rulers, and the callous indifference shown by those in
authority in our own day towards our half-starved brethren,
should all but be lost upon him. The fact that to-day there
are more curses from the oppressed than prayers from those
who believe all is right, ascending to the throne of God, dis-
turbs not the even tenor of his way. Joseph, the second,
reigns as Premier, as did Joseph the first, and well had it
been for us if our Joseph had emulated such an exemplar
of what was right when he put his hands to the plough. Re-
generating power of 3 high order we might be pardoned for
thinking would have sprung out of these unparalleled teach-
ings, have thawed the savage nature within, and galvan-
ised into life the springs of humanitarianism, which at pre-
sent are frozen over, apparently by greed, and incompetent


administrative ability. The first Joseph had a coat of many
colours; the second Joseph is not only politically chameleon
hued, hut he has as many sides as a well-cut diamond, and
if they don’t in the midday life of our environment
for our country’s good, they certainly possess the serpent’s
magnetic power of lulling their unthinking victims into ai
state of confidence. Joseph the second, the Creighton
amongst Creightons, says, before the stage is reached, where
every man will get his dinner, there is regenerating, edu-
cational, and religious work to be done. Here, Reader, you
have the motto of the hireling in all its nakedness. This is
the identical platform that Jacob stood upon when he rohbed
his brother of his father’s blessing. Jacob, wfth a \yorld be-
fore him, and which was only waiting for a genius to con-
quer it, had no charm for him, it required more self denial
than his nature could muster. He cared but little about
his brother’s welfare. It was self first, self to the end. And
as it was with Jacob, so it is with Joseph the second. Living
in a land flowing with milk and honey, subdivided by mag-
nificent water-ways containing areas that can be converted
into inland seas, the waters of which would clothe the desert
in perpetual green ; a land, in places requiring a day’s march
for Jones, before he could see his next door neighbour; a
.land, which possesses financial institutions, which have in
their vaults, close upon £40,000,000, rusting for the want of
using £40,000,000, the fruit of usury; a land where thou-
sands cannot live except by fraud—vide reports from royal
commissions, and yet Joseph the second says we must wait
for the gradual coming of the gentle zephyrs of regeneration,
but from which quarter of the universe we are to Took for
them, he does not say; nor how much more powerful they
would have to be to convert Joseph over and above the God-
inspired efforts made by Christ to convert mankind till the
end of time. Joseph the second deposes not; Joseph the
white-headed boy of St. George, and the enfranchised woman’s
darling, now that Australia’s noblest son has got out of the
wet, says that he sits at the feet of the wise to learn wis-
dom, and his actions show that he has not sat in vain, for
there can be no two opinions upon his ability to equal his
two trainers, Mr. G. H. Reid and Bruce Smith.. The first,
with all his great gifts, is as unstable as water, whilst Bruce
Smith’s words stamp him as a man utterly unfit to have a
voice in the framing of laws, intended for a free people, for
he would consider the worker well paid if he got but little
else than food and clothing for making bricks without straw.


Christ says, “He who oppresseth the poor is already dam.
ned.” Here, Reader, we have laid bare the fact that
Joseph’s supporters are not Christians, for the simple reason
that as chief ruler, he, through the laws of the land, op.
presseth the poor. That the laws of the land are not based
upon the golden rule, the laws of nature, commonsense, nor
the fire within ever asking to be fed, is so painfully exem-
plified in our environment that the author wonders with the
wonder of amazement and the anger which sinneth pot, at
the audacity and temerity of one lump of organic matter,
which is, Scripturally speaking, damned, foisting itself ow-
ing to unequal opportunity, and unjust laws, upon a > people,
whose righteous wrath bursts not into active hostility, because
A. they love peace, B. are so saturated with superstition as
to their rightful position, that they, although unwillingly,
bear those burdens, which Christ said, whited sepulchres
imposed upon' them. After Joseph the first, disappeared
there arose a ruler who knew him not, nor cared for his
humane administrative virtues, and so to more quickly ag-
grandise himself, and to weld the shackles of slavery firmly
upon his subjects, he compelled them to make bricks without
straw. Joseph and his worthy satellite have shown the elec-
tors of New South Wales that the four thousand years which
separate the two Josephs have in no way weakened the pol-
icy of Pharoah, the first plank of which was might is right..
Joseph, in the Sydney Town Hall, said wiser men than him-
self had failed to solve the unemployed problem, and Bruce
Smith says there must always be unemployed. Now, Reader,
understand once for all that wisdom only occupies second
place in the solving of the problem, and that commonsense,
even when living below mediocrity, occupies first place. Wis-
dom is all right, but the time has arrived for Josenh, the
second, to understand that Jones is about to enter into his
inheritance, as is shown in God’s last will to man. Talk
about regeneration; let the reader ask himself the question,
how can a hungry man bend the knee and thank God for
His goodness, whilst Dives lives in lustful ease ? Regenera-
tion, one may search history for evidence of it, but the
search would be a waste of time, and never in the world’s
history has such convincing proof been given of the absence
of regenerating power in man as our everyday life furnishes.
No man living stands higher as an exponent of God’s will
than did Joseph, the first, but what ruler now wears his
mantle? To hear our Joseph talk, a stranger would think
that he was an authority upon the theme. The reader has


often read in the Press the metaphor, such and such a thing
is in the air; but whoever heard of regenerating power float-
ing above us, and watering our natures,with its dews? Or
who can count the length of time for it to act before it would
soften the heart of a son, who, from infancy, had breathed
the soul-destroying atmosphere of a political life, where the
father’s whole energies were employed upon the task of win-
ning the battle, regardless of consequences? Even without
history to guide him, man would be a fool to expect a life-
giving spring of regeneration to thrust itself through such
a quagmire of animalised depravity. Man’s life has its coun-
terpart in the tides, which rise and fall. So it is with man
who waits for regeneration to fall from the clouds. And it
is an everyday occurrence for the son of a good man to be-
come a profligate, and the son of a drunkard an apostle of
temperance. The Israelites, to a man, had work and food
found them, but a Britisher, who is undergoing Joseph the
second’s gradual process of regeneration, has not only to live
without work, but must live within the four corners of the
laws of the land. Solomon was the wisest man known, and
he taught that to take bread to satisfy hunger, was no crime.
But then Joseph, the second, was not born. The moral to
be gained from Joseph’s highly strung and cultured nature
failing to assimilate some of the aephyrs of regeneration
found floating in our social atmosphere, is that the sooner
the worker ceases to put his trust in him, the better it will
be for himself and posterity. Por if what we know to-day
concerning that portion of the family, which believes that
might is right, is not sufficient to make a bearer of another’s
burden of Joseph, nothing but the direct and personally
observed interference by God Himself would make a man of
him. And then he would be a compulsory made man, which,
so far as man’s experience of God’s ways go, he has no inten-
tion of doing. Now, worker, is your time, the end of the
world, so far as you are concerned, comes at your death.
Therefore, make one honest effort for freedom, work, and a
living wage, and destroy once and for ever the skeleton of
the fear of want, which has had uninterrupted possession of
your cupboard during the long, dreary years of oppression,
starvation, and death, that have passed away between Joseph,
the first, and Joseph, the second, he who burst upon our view
at the birth of the nineteenth century, rose to power upon
the most unique trinity of factors that ever blended together
three factors, and each one .belonging to a separate law,
namely, a declining birthrate, enhanced value of rabbit skins,


and three successful harvests, owing to a good supply of
water, and the terrible accounts of starvation and death, ow-
ing to previous dry seasons, which prevented those who would
otherwise have cast in their lot with us. The dry seasons
and the birthrate stopped the flooding of the labour market;
rabbits took away the idler from our homes, and from the
unexpected rains, Joseph was enabled, assisted by a little
underground engineering to announce a surplus, and it was
upon these unreliable factors that he rode to victory, blos-
somed into an oracle, became an authority upon the movements
of the law of regeneration, and is still vain enough to believe
that his star will not set before he has had the opportunity'
of kneeling before his King. Christ, speaking to the Phari-
sees upon what they deemed to be the regeneration of the
heathen, said, “Ye compass sea and land to make one prose-
lyte, and when he is made he is twofold more the child of
hell than yourselves.” Here, Reader, Christ showed regene-
ration in a perfect state, or, in other words, Christ showed
that what they called regeneration was nothing more nor
less than degeneration, and we see the same thing to-day.
Where-is the Tasmanian now, and what’s the Fijian since
we vaccinated him with the thousand and one tenets of our
crowning Christianity ? God, previous to Christ, had sup-
plied man with sufficient fructifying power to keep regene-
ration in full bloom till the end of time, but love of power,
greed, and an insane belief by some that they were made of
superior clay, caused regeneration as Christ preached it, to
wither and die. Since then man has given irrefutable evi-
dence that the only form of - regeneration that will bring
man to his knees, and compel him to disgorge some of his
ill-got gains to be used in developing his country, and to
guarantee work and a living wage, is an Act of Parliament,
giving equality of opportunity. In concluding this altogether
too brief a chapter, I would remind Joseph that God was
either romancing when he said that man should either work
or starve, or that Joseph’s policy has been evolved by a sub-
tle, but un-Christian mind, and that as the germ of life, out
of which springs the giant oak, lies hid in the little acorn,
so regenerative power in embryo, lies encased in the heart
of man, and that there are two forces which can galvanise
it. into life. Love, whieh is ever active in the man who is
willing to be his brother’s helper, and righteous wrath in the
heart of the oppressed, against the oppressor, who, clothed
in a little brief authority, now exposes to public view that
the actions of Joseph the second, are not the actions which
make for the regeneration of man.


the two factors on which hangs the HAP-
PINESS OE MAN.
In drawing the attention of the reader to the means by
which the problem could he solved, under humane condi-
tions, and remain solved as long as civilization lasted, the
author suggests that he should, in the first place, seek for
inspiration from the laws of nature, which govern the dis-
tribution of water over the face of the earth. The value
of a precedent is sometimes shown in the law courts, when
the judge gets between the horns of a dilemma, owing to
the want of a precedent to guide him. In these laws the
reader will find a precedent, which will assist him in coming
to a decision. He will find that water is a fixed quantity
operated upon by the law of evaporation, and that tbe value
of the water to the agriculturist is gauged by the rapidity of
its journeys from the sea, and home again. Then he will
find that other laws, working, at times, in the most erratic
manner, pour the water down in such excessive quantities
that the greater part, instead of doing good, does incal-
culable harm, sweeping away man with as little concern as
it does the fallen leaves of Autumn. He will find that, no
matter how far in some parts of the State this distribution
may fall short of the actual requirements of man, it is -all
that nature will ever do for him, and that, if he must have
more, he must convey it from where the natural law places
it to .where it will be of benefit to him.
Having satisfied himself with regard to the distribution
of water, he will apply himself to the distribution of wealth,
and will find that the only difference between these two
factors, water and wealth,' is that water is a fixed quantity,
while wealth is an unknown quantity, and must ever remain
such. He will find that if man is to occupy the position,
which civilization shows him he' is entitled to, both factors
must be worked under precisely the same conditions; for,
just as shower, following shower, in quick succession,
the farmer abundant crops, so does the rapid circulation of
wealth tend to prosperity.
The distribution of talents amongst men is carried out by
laws which govern men, just the same as is the distribution
of water, but whilst the distributing of talents is irregular
and apparently unjust, there are two other laws which, if
man would take heed to, remove the objections against this
partial adjustment of man’s talents; for instance, Smith,


the possessor of ten talents, is no better off than Hodge with
one talent, until the two agree to work together. Then it
is that both are benefited; Smith scores on his ten talents,
Hodge on his one. Smith designs and makes the plough,
and Hodge uses it. And the tastes of Smith and Hodge have
been so nicely adjusted by the natural law that Hodge is as
happy in following the plough as Smith is in making it.
But, unfortunately, outside of Smith and Hodge, there
is a barren waste which wealth never reaches, except in suffi-
cient quantities to keep these toad-stools of the human family
constantly sending forth their poisonous properties, which
has the effect of keeping Smith and Hodge in a state of
fermented, unrest.
The reader will find, running parallel with the law of
evaporation, the law of interest, or, as it is more familiarly
known, usury. This law prevents the barren waste of the
family being reached just as effectually as the laws of nature
prevent the desert becoming an oasis; and, just as nature
has deprived man ,of the use of the desert, until he waters
it, so should Smith be deprived of the waster, until his cheeks
shine with perfect health. Smith, to supply his lust and
greed for power, has made use of these human toad-stools,
sweating them to death by the million, in his haste to get
rich. But he has never attempted to graft the life-saving
mushroom unto the poisonous stem of the toad-stool of his
own flesh'and blood.
So utterly indifferent is Smith to the dangers of this
malarial field, that he often succumbs to its venom.
The reader will, it is hoped, see that if there is any
virtue in all the indignation poured forth from pulpit and
platform, concerning the waste portions of the human field,
that it is his duty to at once construct channels, along which'
the overflowing cash, from Smith’s stores of wealth, and
Hodge’s shall flow, until the Smith-made toad-stool shall
cease to be a blotch upon his administration.
It must not be lost sight of that, if wealth, like water,
were a fixed quantity, then it would be as easy to convelrt
the idler into a worker, by the aid of Smith’s surplus cash,
without injuring Smith, as it would be to take the flood
wafers from the gorge, and store them in the desert. Why
the State is cursed with unemployed is because there is no
proper system of circulation. We have the water and the
money, but we are too lazy to do the one, too much of a
rogue to do the other. Yes, "Tell it not in Gath.” that,
father than do these things, we will work our sons and daugh-


ters by a system, under which it will be impossible for them
to marry. The brass still sounds, the cymbals tinkle, and
man dances to the tunes played by Dives, just as if there had
been no history, no awakening of the intellect, and no craving
of the mind after a God-given freedom.
It would be bad enough if this battle between the wor-
shippers of wealth and the barren waste of life could be
fought out between them, but the curse is and it is the
greatest curse that we have to contend with —that Ilodgct
has to pay for it all; so from the cradle to the grave he is
on the gridiron of taxation to find food to feed the cunning
knave, and the outcast, from whom hope hath fled.
So galling is Hodge’s position at times, owing to this
unequal burden, which he has to bear, that ever and anon,
the political quack is now found printing his future in the
roseate hues of a glowing sunset, lest he too should throw
up the sponge, and become a drone.
Truly, man, is by nature a composite animal, and re-
cognising that his selfishness always comes out on top, the
one thing left for the reader to do is to see that each con-
tributes his share towards the up-keep of all, taking no heed
to the small percentage of human scum, that will, under
the best system of government, always be found trying to
evade its rightful responsibilities, for it is so infinitesimal
when compared to the number of honest men who suffer,
that a citizen would have to be a rogue at heart, if he al-
lowed this scum to influence him to the extent of casting
his vote in favour of unrestricted individualism.
Keeping in view the plagues of fire, and sword,
which man has passed through during his fight for the uni-
versal distribution of work, food, and liberty, and the in-
crease of knowledge which has followed, the strongest indict-
ment against the possibility of the present system ever lift-
ing up the Unit, is to be found in the criminal actions of
the best men the Commonwealth could find to give it a con-
stitution based on commonsense and equity, and the devlish
natures of the men who hold the position of its judges,
shielding themselves against paying their just dues of taxa-
tion, because ignorance, roguery, or both combined failed
to do what many street-sweepers could have done.
This action of the Federal Court, criminal in its inci-
dence, because others will have to pay, shows a political
morality, utterly opposed to a people seeking good govern-
ment. It shows that civilization, instead of purifying the
social atmosphere, is an incentive to spur man on to evade


j. VIJiU i'
his responsibilities, scatters to the four winds of heaven the
belief in the regeneration of man, and tells the waster in the
most forcible language, that he must either fight or die.
An ambassador coming from Mars, to investigate the
phenomena of life on earth, would find everything wrapped
in profound mystery, but as far as man’s stay was concerned,
he would be able to give at least one reason why the sun shone,
because he would see that it was sunshine, or the death of man.
He would find the twinkling stars in their beautiful setting of
blue, transporting man far beyond their limits, into the un-
fathomable space of the v universe, and there leaving him
lost in wonder at his own insignificance.
And whilst analysing man’s actions, he would find him
to be a living fraud, a liar to the backbone, a destroyer of
the purity of his own race, and a supporter of the purity of
the beast, because it brought grist to the mill. He would
find that the two factors which governed man’s actions were
how much work could be done, and how little coin of the
realm would pay for it. He. would find that the more man
became stuffed with lore, the more surely was the chasm
kept in its place, which separates Dives from his slaves. He
would find the taxes of the honest worker used, so that,
sometimes “wantons” walked on velvet from the street to
the platform, and all in honour of the hell-bound system
under which we live. He would find man a creature that all
other creatures held in deadly fear, and which, from the
flea to the crocodile, devour him when opportunity offers,
with a gusto, which shows that to them at least, life was
worth living, and in striking contrast to Dives’s starved hu-
manity, who die, rather than do what a hellish orthodoxy
calls thieving.
The ambassador, during his search after reasons for the
why and wherefore of man being upon the earth, would find
himself confronted with the greatest mystery of all. It
would be useless for him to explore the animal kingdom for
a spark of inspiration to guide him, because he would only
find that they lived in harmony whilst there was food suffi-
cient for their wants, which is a condition of things unheard
of in the realm of man, where reason soars even as the eagles
soar, with nothing to guide them but instinct. He would
find man in the possession of all but creative power, and yet
living under a system of civilized cannibalism, so degrading,
and so opposed to his limited reason, that he would go home
and report that they had nothing to learn from man, except
it was the art of selfishness, which they had practised,


till it had become the very embodiment of perfection. He
would report the absence of all system such as they worked
under, namely, assisting nature in the distribution of water,
and securing to the body politic, that healthy tone which
can only be secured by the universal distribution of the fruits
of the earth, after all had been given the opportunity of
producing them. The gorgeousness of the lustful drone
would amaze him, the squalor of the worker would appal
him, and he would be lost in wonder as to the why ana the
wherefore of such selfish creatures being allowed to occupy
what is undoubtedly a pleasant place to live in.
SOLVING THE PROBLEM.
ONE FLAG, ONE PEOPLE, ONE DESTINY.
So rings the jingo’s Tocsin. The theme without a doubt
is sublime and if its supporters would only carry it out as
closely as it is possible to do it, the people would, with joy,
sing Amen to it; but, unfortunately, by the great mass of
mankind in all ages, and under all systems of government,
they have only too painfully recognised the fact that whilst
it has always been one flag, -it has been many peoples, -and
many destines. It is strange that to-day when we are faced
with the self-evident fact that there can be no one people,
that this senseless theme should find a place at all social, or
rather unsocial gatherings, when State policy is being dis-
cussed. One flag, one people, one destiny. If it ever had
birth, certainly received its death blow, when the mixing
of races took place. And it is to be noted that this mixing of
races keeps step with the advance of civilization and commer-
cialism. The Pauline theory that God has appointed the
bounds of man’s habitation, finds no place in the world’s
social economy to-day. And when one of the hirelings of
wealth talks of one people, he is only pouring jingoistic yeast
into a sentimental enthusiasm, which his pleasing manner, or
his rich oratory has brought forth. We who are a long way
ahead of some nations in education, and humanitarianism
can see that a country, peopled by one particular brand, is
cursed with a religious superstition, which a State contain-
ing many people has left far behind. That is, speaking nation-
ally, there are, of course, many in England, the home of all


the peoples of the earth, who still cling to the fetich that its
king is a God-ordained one; but they are in a hopeless min-
ority, and not equal in strength to some of her aliens, who
exercise their power in marking out her path amongst the
other nations of the earth. The reader can see from the
place on which he now stands, and upon which civilization
and rubbing shoulders with his alien brother placed him,
that if the glorious liberty which he enjoys, although so
short of what it might be, had not been seen and heard of
by the Russian slave, that he would to-day, instead of making
infernal machines to hoist his Tzar into some other sphere,
in abject fear and superstition, have lain down and allowed
the Tzar to have made a door-mat of him. Therefore, there
can be no question but that the man who drivels about one
flag, one people, and one destiny, has an axe to grind. He (
finds it getting blunt, owing to its coming so often in con-
tact with the hardened nut of an enlightened conscience.
He finds himself continually on the war path, and can no
longer afford to sleep the sleep of peace. The demon of
want is on his track, and he has grown desperate because hope
deferred has made his heart sick. Consequently, Hodge has
taken up his own cause, hence the jingle of Mammon’s Toc-
sin, one flag, one people, one destiny. One flag at a time,
of course, that must always be, and until Australia unfurls
the flag of humanitarianism, the grand old flag of England
is the best to live under, but that must not be allowed to
float in its present form one moment longer than is neces-
sary to add to it the emblem of the Unit at work. Human-
itarianism demands it; civilizations demands it; whilst the
laws of nature says it must be done before the assassin goes
to sleep. There is nothing that sharpens the wits of man
so much as hunger. Hunger brings to the front the tal-
ents of caution, confidence, and secrecy, and it is needless
to say that its worth is one continued round of success.
Hunger is kept hovering between heaven and earth by the
aid of charity by day, and by vice and crime at night. As
for destiny, people’s destinies, under our accursed system,
■are only equalled by the stars of heaven for numbers. God
is the creator of destiny. He has fixed laws for the purpose
of producing life, but He has left the perfecting of life en-
tirely in the hands of man. Animals of instinct come and go
without any conditions being imposed upon them for the
purpose of producing their own food, and man could likewise
live and die under the same conditions, but he would always
have to remain under the control of natural production, and


as Nature’s duty begins and ends in propagating species, only,
it follows that man would simply remain, and exist like the
heasts of the field upon what he could pick up. It has heen
said that 'Nature is wasteful, hut this is altogether a mis-
taken idea, because all that is - required of her is the where
withal to sustain life, not to increase it. Science proves that
for every human being horn, there are thousands of life
germs destroyed by the operation of natural law; and.even
of those horn she claims a large percentage, because the sys-
tem under which we live deprives them of that food by
which alone they could grow into manhood. Man’s destiny,
if he would rise above the level of the brute, is inexorably
hedged in by unalterable and never-ending conditions. First,
he must work to increase, improve, and finally bring to per-
fection what Nature holds in store for him, and in order
that there shall be no cessation from work, Nature has so
ordered that the life of food necessary for the civilization of
man shall be short. God says that if a man will not work,
neither shall he eat, and his laws do their part in seeing that
this verdict is not set on one side. Hence, we find that
man’s destiny, if taken advantage of to its fullest extent,
is to work and enioy the fruits of his labour. This is a vastly
different destiny to that marked out by the unrestricted in-
dividualist. It is impossible for the human family to rise
to the God created destiny, so long as even one member of
the family is debarred from finding work when he wants it.
Whatever the future may have in store for man, it may be
taken for granted that it will have no excuse for him, who,
because dressed in a little brief authority, refused his brother
work. Unbiassed reason has no desire to deprive genius of the
fruits of its labour. It is fhe criminal use to which genius
puts its surplus fruit, that the unfortunate ones object to,
because that is what makes the villain, the murderer, and
the Anarchist. God does not ask man to make bricks without
straw, neither can he be worthy of the name of man unless
lie unceasingly labours to dethrone the God of. Mammon.
Talk about destines, who can count them? Is it not a fact
that the great mass of humanity have their destiny marked
out for them, by the hirelings of the earth? Country first,
and himself last forms no part of the worker’s creed, for he
knows not the moment that he may have to go to some such
jingo as Bruce Smith, cap in hand, cringing attitude and hum-
ble voice, to ask permission to crack a yard of metal for two
shillings. But take the fear of want away, wake from its
long sleep the desert, and crown its surface with the golden


grain, and then you will have one flag, one people, one des-
tiny. Give man the opportunity to work, deprive him of all
excuse for being idle, then let him take his choice, the field
or the gaol, and ho will either complete his destiny by com-
mitting suicide, or become an honest citizen. Let the reader
for one moment leave his own little Pedlington, where he
reigns supreme, and on the wings of history, take flight to
where the words were first made use of. The words, one
flag, one people, one destiny, are thousands of years old,
but to listen to the advocates of the individualist, one would
think they were but of yesterday. But old as they are, they
have never yet galvanised a people into that life of human-
ifarianisin, under which it would alone become possible to
have one destiny. Had not the Jews one flag; were they
not in reality one people, and had they not one destiny in
view, but now where is their flag ? What are the people ?
What their destiny ? The Jews, in their day of .power, had
more opportunities for carrying their flag to victory than
any other nation ever had or will have. Cultured cun-
ning, ever growing in power, owing to the expected appear-
ance of their Messiah, there was only one thing that pre-
vented them from carrying their flag to the ends of the
earth, thereby making one people, and giving them one des-
tiny. And that one thing is with us to-day in all its ugli-
ness, and is known by the name of.greed. Christianity, with,
its huge army of Kings, Bishops, and Pawns, which went
out to shear it of its evil proportions, have not only comd
back shorn, but have also become permeated with its hel-
lish’ leaven. Nothing in life proves the unalterable nature
of man more than our actions of to-dav. Here we have the
birth and death of a nation, the life of which may be reck-
oned at two thousand years, a nation saturated from head
to foot with the belief that the Creator was in dailv contact
with them, that He was going to see that they did possess
the land, and that His Own Son,through them, should come
and show them a new way to heaven. And yet, with all
these, to them heavenly promises, greed took possession of
them, body and soul, and brought about what it has often
brought about since, their destruction. And yet, with all this
before our eyes; the policy of putting the curb on this hell-
born cub is denounced by those who have robbed the weak,
till they have become almost too weak to fight. The Jews
were a cruel and lustful race, and one can imagine how their
lustful eyes shone after the battle, which we are asked to
believe, the sun and moon stood still for the purpose of giv-


'ing them light to finish their hloody work'. It is easy for
one who, like the author, has seen the return of soldiers to
their tents after the battle is over, too excited even to wash
the blood of their victims off their hands before devouring
their evening meal. Eating is a word that hath no place at
such a time. The author remembers the night of the day
on which the fight at Te Papa took place with the Maories,
who, under one flag, as one people, fought for a destiny of
freedom. Many of the author’s mates, natives of Victoria,
were mere boys. I had just turned seventeen, and yet one
boasted of how he bayoneted his victim; others how they cut
off fingers for the rings which were upon them, and tore
the ear ornaments off. Talk about men being civilized and
regenerated, see men under fire for the first time, and you
see fiends. Listen to them after the fight is over, and watch
with what gusto they replenish the inner man, and you will
be apt to exclaim these men are men, but they should
have been wolves. And this is the kind of animated dust,
for which we are asked to believe the sun and moon stood
still, and what the Jews were when in the zenith of their
power, we are. But greed is beginning to feel that it has
reached the length of its tether. And so it begins to plead
for its hide. Let us, it says, have one flag; be one people;
let each have the chance to make and keep all they can lay
their hands on, and let our destiny be country first, knowing
that its own destiny is an ever unsatisfied lust, unquestioned
power and idleness, whilst the destiny of the poor fools who
are hypnotised, cajoled, and treated to a daily prod of the
bayonet of hunger, retreat to their homes to listen to their
offspring, asking for bread. And you, Header, knowing
this, call yourself a man, and yet allow the author to eat
the bread of servitude. You a man, and stand godfather to
the diabolical system under which we live, knowing that your
offspring’s chance of escaping from it is all but an impossible
one. Be a man, and hoist the flag of opportunity to all,
so that you may be able to look ahead and see your son’s
pathway freed from the God of Mammon. The author,
rather than have for companion a creature who is so lost to
shame as to hang to the skirts of Mammon, would prefer an
intelligent dog, for then he at least would have sympathy
at his side, and a help-mate whilst tilling the soil, listening
to the song of the birds, the rippling brook, and admiring the
magnificent fireworks of heaven. The dog would hunt for game.
We should be under one flag; one in the bonds of sympathy,
whilst marching along the road of destiny side by side. Well


might the Psalmist exclaim: 0 God! what is man that thou
art mindful of him ? Nature presents him with a clean slate
every morning and every night, obliterates anything he mav
place thereon. The thousands or millions of years that he
has been upon the earth has not been sufficient for him to
write his name in imperishable characters. He has neither
discovered the germ of regeneration, or removed the doubt
as to whether there is one. But there is one thing of which
his investigations into this facinating branch of science has
absolutely assured him, namely, that the most saintly of hu-
man beings may, and sometimes do, give birth to an unmiti-
gated scoundrel, who, having under the law of unrestricted
individualism, obtained one penny more than his neighbour,
deems it a sufficient reason for him placing his heel of super-
iority upon him. And then the world stands aghast, be-
cause the first chance his victim gets, he throws a bomb at the
tyrant. Had the thrower of the deadly missile been allowed
to compete in the race for life, and had his pathway been
cleared of the curse which is responsible for it being paved
with the bones of the starved ones of his home, he would
never had occasion for sending the tyrant to give an account
of his stewardship. For standing upon the lowest rung of
the ladder, he would Have weighed his chances of mounting
higher, and in the meantime acting a commonsense part,
have taken St. Paul’s advice, and been content with his posi-
tion, until the time came, as it undoubtedly would, for him
to occupy another rung. The author has stood upon several
rungs of the social ladder, and now looking back upon the
past, has no hesitation in saying that with the fear of want
eliminated from life, there would be as much, if not more,
happiness for those standirig upon the lower rungs than
for those at the top. In order to give the hirelings who cry
one flag, one people, and one destiny, all the kudos that they
are entitled to, the author would bring under the reade'r’s
notice their actions, by which alone they must be judged.
At the present time there are three flags flying inside our
Federal House of Legislature, whilst one at the masthead
floats outside. Nominally, the master of the three that are
inside, one of these, resembling Joseph’s coat of many colours,
is owned by Deakin, the cultured trimmer; one by Wat-
son, who boasts that it shall, in the near future, say to Jones,
Go, and he will go; Smith, clean the Dictator’s boots, and he
will clean them. Probably the reader is one of the Uriah
Heap sort, and is quite willing to be kicked. Probably he
is not; and If not, it is high time he began to put his harness


on, lest nationalised slavery puts it beyond his power to do
so. The third and last is owned by G. H. Reid, the great
Yes! No! who, when for the first time faced the genuine di-
plomatic diplomacy, was found to be lacking that acumen
which would have prevented his State falling into the hands
of his enemies. It is the best known flag; it is dyed the
deepest red that human blood can dye, and is known as the
flag of the Unrestricted Individualist. It is utterly indiffe-
rent as to who bosses the show, so long as it does not become
Nationalised. ■ Nationalisation, of course, would burn it,
and allow the four winds of heaven to scatter its ashes; but
it is quite at home under the highly Christianised and Repub-
licanised environment of New South Wales, or the tyrannic
rule of Holy Russia. The question which the reader is asked
to digest is, with such a trio of vampires pulling the Com-
monwealth’s vitals asunder, what chance has it of escaping
the death which has overtaken nations that once lived by
greed ? Cruelly indifferent, as these men are, or incompe-
tent to grasp the nature of the sufferings of the masses, there
would still be a silver lining to the cloud, which oppresses
them, if the future held nothing worse in store. But such
is not the case. Systems grow, until they fall to pieces, owing
to lust and villainy; besides time is > only a mirage thrown
on the screen by hirelings, in order that the worker may still
hope on. Again, time means the increase of population.
Population brings increase of power to the wealthy few; it
increases taxation, wealth and poverty. It establishes neo-
phytism firmly upon its throne of illfame, creates trusts, and
managers of the sweater’s den, which in turn, evolves the
embezzler and the suicide. Surely, in this contract the reader
will see that there is something more than one flag, one
people, and one destiny. Anent this destiny of man, has it
ever struck the reader that all the cattle have to do is to
rise and eat, that grass remains grass, and the acorn an acorn,
but that the beautiful apples and the lucious plums, which
we so much admire and relish, are the outcome of the genius
of man. If the reader is a native of Australia, then the
chances are that he has never gathered a sloe, nor a bitter
crab, and cannot, therefore, fully appreciate the enormous
change that has taken place, just as he cannot, if his soul
has never been moved by the spirit of humanitarianism, ap-
preciate the pleasure which the late Hon. Richard Seddon
enjoyed, owing to him becoming a humanist. Contrast him
with the miserable apology for a man, who, steeped in ig-
norance regarding the now ascertained workings of the laws


of Nature, owing to unequal opportunity coming his way,
usurps a position which he is in no way qualified to fill, and
so hides himself behind an old worn out platitude, such as
one flag, one people, one destiny. .When man is born he
stands in exactly the same position as the sloe and the crab;
he is wild, and shows anger as soon as he is born, but he never
breaks forth into song except his passions are being attended
to, and it is only when the mother, whose soul is filled with
love for the improvement of her offspring, soothes its savage
breast with nourishment and care, that it develops into a
rational beings In the same way as the sloe and the crab,
under the care of the orchardist, become things of beauty,
and articles of diet, which places them amongst the foremost
foods which contribute to man’s never-to-be-satisfied long-
ing for that which is best. And yet the howlers of one flag,
one people, one destiny, with the stubbornness of the donkey,
from which' science tells them, they are not far removed,
compel the helpless to make bricks without straw, the slaving
seamstress for a beggardly pittance, has to do their bidding.
And this, Header, is the destiny of man, and will be his
destiny till unrestricted individualism is known no more.
THE AUSTRALIAN ANTHEM.
Australia, young in years,
Thy workers all in tears;
Thy orphans o’er thee roam
Beneath yon starry dome
Backing a home.
Thy rivers run to waste,
Yet thou’rt forbid -a taste;
When will the man arise
AVho’s able, good and wise
To rule thy land?
When will he rise and shield
Thy workers who now yield
To tyrants their best blood,
Helping to swell the flood
Of thy lone band?
Poor souls, wlio have no share
In land, thou hast to spare;
Why lags he yet behind?
Canst thou the man, not find
To save thy land?


Search well, ’tis not too late
For thee to find a mate
Who’ll on thy bosom place
A humane, manly race
To till thy land.
Raise high thy standard then;
Watch well tho hireling when,
In fawning attitude,
He, on thee, would intrude
To seize thy land.
You’ll know your man by speech,
You’ve but to hear him preach;
A living wage and prog,
Die like a common dog,
Or, till thy land.
’Tis thus that thy distress
And howling wilderness
He’ll put beneath his feet,
And all thy subjects greet
With well tilled land.
OPENING THE GATE, THROUGH WHICH THE
WORKER PASSES INTO UNRESTRICTED INDI-
VIDUALISM’S INDUSTRIAL HELL.
If the daily Press of the world could be scanned by one
individual, not a day would be passed without him finding
some part of the world’s industrial life described as a hell,
where men made fiends could be seen wearing their lives
out for a pittance, just sufficient to maintain strength enough
to perform their work, until younger and stronger men hover-
ing on the brink of poverty, and made desperate by the
thoughts of home, would be ready and willing to displace
them by accepting from Mammon a still lower remuneration,
a remuneration insufficient for the body, but ample enough
to kill that hope, which is supposed to live for ever in the
human breast; a remuneration that warns them that the time
will soon roll round, when it will be their turn to be cast
into the rubbish heap of worn-out humanity. Our social life
teems with evidence that our earth, with the return of day,
is becoming more and more a worker’s hell, directly owing to»
the advance of science, education, and competition. And


yet, to the reformer this is no unexpected result,, for he has
analysed our system and failed to find in it the leaven of
humanity. The result could not be otherwise. Education,
to our social life, is what warmth and moisture is to vegetable
life. It must grow, and as the law of usury is universal,
and the wages paid to the great majority of workers grossly
inadequate for the purpose, that is allowing them to live as
men should live, who perform all work in connection with the
primary industries, upon the success of which depends the
existence of the whole human family. It follows in the
natural order of things that under such conditions, the worker
is always in the position of a beggar. Whilst the employer,
getting as he always does, a profit on the article made, and
a percentage off the workers’ wages, is always travelling upon
the road which leads to wealth and power. The employer
is enabled to do this, because of the Unit standing idle at the
factory door. The honest profit made by the employer on the
manufactured article, and the dishonest appropriation of a
part of the employee’s wages enables him to grow in wealth
day by day, adding brick to brick, and power to power, till
hell, and all, as it is where his slaves work, he can, with im-
punity close the gate and leave them in a worse hell than the
one from which they have been shut out. It is a self-evident
fact that all commercial enterprise must be in the hands of
wealth, and wealth, all through history, has been
proved to be a tyrant, and that it will continue
to tyrannise over the worker as long as our sys-
tem lasts, may be taken for granted. The doc-
trine preached by parson and politician that it is better on
before is now laughed to scorn, because the worker finds his
hell grows hotter as time rolls on. And this, notwithstanding
the fact that some of the best men have filled the pulpit,
and the cabinet chair that the world could produce, have
made laws, amended them, wiped them off the Statutes, and
put what they considered better ones in their place, and all
this has been done with the honest intention of making the
worker’s path through life more easy, and yet after all tMs loss
of time, expenditure of money and labour, our charity organi-
sations prove that confusion has been left worse confounded;
and if their testimony is not sufficient, how comes it about
that adulteration has entered'into every article of commerce
that can be adulterated over and above what it was before
science took a hand in our industrial life, produced mach-
inery, made the automatic man, and sent flesh and blood into
the street to beg, thieve, or die. A neat specimen of our


Legislature’s ability to reform is seen in the Early Closing
Act, which is about as diabolical an act as could be framed,
always bearing in mind what it aimed at, and it shows for
all time that an act of reform under our present system means
that to lift Jones, Smith must go down under this embodi-
ment of wisdom, the employee got shorter hours, and on
paper, increased pay. But the struggling shop-keeper, an-
xious to pay his way, if he had not done this by six o’clock,
was, in a roundabout way, told to go to hell, become an em-
ployee, enter the sweaters’ den, or let his bones dangle in
mid air after satisfying a revenge born out of the bloody
treatment meted out to him. Anent the Arbitration Act,
the fruit of labours’ political tree of life—Labour, with it
in hand, went forth to shear, and returned shorn. Union-
ism demanded two pounds per week, and on pay-day signed
for the two pounds, then received an envelope with thirty
shillings inside, but marked two pounds on the outside. Does
not this show how lamentably labour’s education has been
neglected, when it imagined that with the Arbitration Act,
they were going to square the social circle. Labour went forth
to secure lucre, and nothing else, the lifting of the Unit never
entered into their calculations, and it cared not a fig whether
it did a fair day’s work or not. They expected the Arbi-
tration Act would have given them independence, as though
such a thing under the fierce light of justice could hold its
own. True and inexhaustible wealth consists of health and
strength, guided in their actions by unbiassed reason. Health
and strength must always take precedence of all other forms
of wealth, because health and strength have been the creators
of all wealth, and the brick made by man stands almost in the
same position to him, as he does to his Creator, for the
brick knows just as much about its maker as the maker of
the brick knows about the personality of the architect and
maker of the earth. Where the superiority of man over the
brick comes in, is when he knows that his Creator has put
food on the earth for him, so that he may live, and, if he
feels inclined to improve his position, he has only to exercise
his talents to be able to produce the food which his cultivated
taste will crave for. Man has been given the power to create
out of the apparently worthless portions of the earth, that
which will satisfy his senses. He can harness the elements
to his car, and on the wings of morning enjoy himself. And
yet, notwithstanding all this, the worker refuses the offer
of his Creator, the Voice of Nature, and the call of reason, to


rise at once, and leave the unsocial hell, owned by Mammon.
So the reader will see that the worker, whilst possessing
power over the clay to make it into a brick for himself, hut
when it is made, hands it over to an inhuman parasite, who,
by making use of religious fables, so plays upon his ignorant
and superstitious nature, that he actually makes him believe
that unless he bends the knee to his superiors, when he dies,
he will make his bed midst fire and brimstone. And it is
this man-made diabolical doctrine which has' permeated the
lives of such a vast number of workers, that has hitherto pre-
vented them walking out of our industrial hell, which lust and
knowledge compelled the workers to build. But now, thanks
to the spread of Sectarianism, the workers are beginning to
think for themselves. Sectarianism has been of such prolific
growth that it has put on Nature’s mantle, and grown wild,
possessing as many isims as Nature does weeds, and they are
exactly on all-fours with the weeds, that is, some are harm-
less, and like the violet under the hedge-row bloom and die,
whilst under the protection of more vigorous organisations,
whilst others, like -the hemlock, poison all who come in
contact with them. In the teeth of such obstacles as these,
which are as old as history, the reformer has a task unequalled
in the annals of life, and had it not been for the spread of
Sectarianism, a task that would have been above the power
of man to accomplish. But Sectarianism sent 'the talent of
reason on its journey through our environment, with the re-
sult that Orthodoxy, the creator of hell on earth, and the
hell to come, crumbles into dust. Reason reasoned, and rea-
soned rightly, that if a system had been established on the
lines of humanitarianism, the power which brought our social
hell into existence would never have been born. By their
fruits, says Scripture, “Ye shall know them,” and as the
fruit gathered from the tree of Mammon consists of rags,
poverty, ignorance, superstition and death, it follows that the
designer was a fiend in human form, and that the man who,
through the ballot-box, rofuses to assist in uprooting it, is an
enemy in the camp. You want proof; here it is, taken from
the Sydney “Daily Telegraph,” no later than the 13th of
August, 1906, after twenty-five years of preaching from plat-
form, Senate, and pulpit, on behalf of the worker. But
the following extract shows that Mammon • still defies them:
Sweating m Victoria; some deplorable instances; driving a
dray 12 hours a day for 12s. 6d. a week, without board or
lodging; bank clerks, with ten years’ service from 255. to


-275. 6d.; invoice clerks, from 10s. to XI per week; and this
is a sample of a long list issued by tke Trades Hall Council.
Comment upon tke success which has attended unrestricted
individualism’s march during the noon-day splendour of civi-
lization and sectarianism would be a work of supereroga-
tion. And this is the description of that part of hell in
which these workers slaved, but the reader must not think
that this testimony, bad as it is, comes from the lowest depths
of our industrial hell, for there is a cellar below this that
words fail to paint, and yet dynamite won’t move the worker,
because he is afraid lest his efforts should fail, as all others
have failed, and then Ee would sink to a still lower depth
of social degradation. Like Lord Raleigh, he fain would
rise, but he fears a fall. Do you blame him; not at all.
There can be no sheep going through a gap business. A
majority of workers must rise as one, and fill the ballot-box
with papers, marked work for all. It is necessary that this
bid for freedom be done at once, otherwise the ranks of labour
will be swelled far beyond their present proportions, and its
power to strike taken away by an ever-increasing poverty.
Already wealth is on the war path to bring out. more workers
to compete with the already underpaid. The would-be re-
former who tries to alter this inhuman environment which
has so often been described as hellish, by Parson, Priest,
and the l humanitarian, must open the door, and
show the imprisoned worker how to get out. The
'task of opening the door of this earthly hell, which
can be seen, felt, and is loathed, not only by
those who are in it, but by millions who know not the day
that the law of supply and demand may sweep them into it
is easily opened. Where the trouble commences is when
the reformer tries to convince the slaves that they have God’s
approval, the laws of Nature, educated and unbiassed reason
urging them on to walk out. You may take a horse to water,
but you cannot make it drink; neither will the worker walk
out of hell till unbiassed reason takes the place of ignorance,
and before this can be accomplished some cherished beliefs
will have to be removed, and foremost amongst these stand
out in bold relief our Seventh Day, which, on investigation,
will be found to be founded upon error, a deliberate attempt
by Mammon to hold the worker in subjection, or created
by that religious, unexplainable something, which held the
savage in its grip, and made him bow down to rites, which
now fails to satisfy the mind. Now, that reason has burst


its bonds and sails freely upon the ocean of life, with its
objective plainly in view, it is satisfied that the grouping to-
gether of the seven days of Creation, as recognised and
taught by Orthodoxy, seemed simple and plain enough at
the time it was done, but in the light of. history and the
demand which civilization makes upon man, shows without
a shadow of a doubt that the Seventh Day, which made up
the creation week, was not made out of the 24 hours imme-
diately following the first six cycles of time. In the first
place it amounts to absurdly running mad, to suppose that
God, after the millions of years which He divided into six
cycles of time, should complete the week between the.rising
and the setting of the sun. Secondly, the week, so ended,
would have compared with nothing so much as a dog with
a close-cropped tail. Thirdly, man could never have evolved
out of chaos that which his talents have evolved, had he not
been allowed to boil his kettle on the Seventh Day. Christ
recognised this truth, and in one sentence, “The Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath,” swept the man
made rite away. During the six days God had been per-
fecting the'laws which were to govern us, and locating the
minerals, vide the Balmain coal deposits, so that man should
have to work when he began to subdue the earth. And from
an enlightened reason’s standpoint, the greatest of all mys-
teries, which hems us in on every side, is the mysterious
something, which forces Jones, before he has done what he
should do, thousands of feet down the Balmain shaft, where
the air, if not mixed with that from the surface, is so poison-
ous that it would kill him,, had he a thousand lives. This
mystery would be easily explained if Jones’s objective was
one of assured competence, when he had done his share of
life's work. But he has none, and it is even betting whether
he will die of starvation, become a man-made fiend, and
dangle in mid-air, or end his days within the white-washed
walls of pauperism. No wonder that some minds over bal-
ance and seek death rather than dwell in a hell, from which
they can not escape. What an array of these Mammon-
made suicides there will be at the last day to confront Dives.
To think that Jones has tilled the soil, produced the choic-
est fruits of nature, built our cities, and even been taxed
to pay for superior, education, so that his employer’s talent
for cruelty might expand, and become so refined, that Jones
would take his. greed as a matter of course, although the
only one on earth debarred from participating in its un-


mixed pleasures. In order that
prevail, God made man’s compc
be exactly alike, no equality Ip
sires. One man’s meat was rcj
hence we find that to get a a
should
mo two should
tlity of de-
najrk poison;
talent, every
social section of the people would' have' to >he ranaaAked to
get what was required before ha^njony. could
he established. And it is because the- voice jof section
of the family has not been heard in our Halls
that ignorance and poverty, clothed in rags, is found from
Dan to "Beersheba, to be an intolerable nuisance. This is a
state of things that no creative manager would, or could
tolerate. Therefore, it becomes a self-evident fact that man
was fully equipped for his journey through the Seventh Cycle
of time during the sixth day. And to suppose that the
Creator, after twenty-four hours of our reckoning should, to
paraphrase the words of Wellington, ‘‘Up and at them.”
watching that Adam did not wink, nor Eve laugh, discloses in
the light of history and every-day events, a lack of know-
ledge, wisdom, and commonsense, which cannot but be des-
tructive to the worker, and the world at large. Having
shoyn in the pages of this book how to open the gates of
the workers’ hell, how, and by what right he has to walk
out, it fs necessary to group some of these rights together, so
that the worker may the more easily digest them. At pre-
sent, he stands upon the grid-iron of fear; he cringes and
crawls before his emnlover, accepts the mess of pottage given
him, schemes, and does everything but what a man should do.
This practice is universal, contemptible, and debasing; but
all "things considered, absolutely necessary. Therefore, before
he can become a man amongst men, he must walk out of his
industrial hell, demand a living wage, and permanent work,
both of which the ballot-box will give when it is approached
in the right wav. The worker must walk out because ‘‘no
man liveth to himself.” And does it not appeal to the
reader’s sense of justice that if Jones, Smith, and Robinson
hold a State between them, and Jones comes to grief, it
follows that Smith and Robinson, for the time being, hold »t
between them, that Smith and Robinson, although not pos-
sessing one ounce of humanitarianism, will be showing the
highest and most subtle form of dinlomacv if they give Jones
work, because it would minimise the chances of one or both
being done to death, after they had starved Jones, and con-
verted him into a man-made fiend. Another imnortant reason


why Jones should be permanently employed is, he would
always be at hand to do the menial work, and till the ground,
and by so doing keep himself, and increase the prosperity
of the State, instead of intermittent work for a wage not
sufficient to keep him honest, therefore compelling him to
become a thief, reducing their profits and militating against
the prosperity of the State. Working on these lines, and
from purely selfish motives, Smith and Robinson increase in
wealth and power. The last reason which the author gives,
although the calendar is full of them, why the worker should
walk out, is that, though* Smith and Robinson divide the
State between them, after Jones failed to compromise, the
equal division did not long remain. For Smith having the
talents of lust and ease more fully developed than Robinson,
soon .began to let his part take care of itself, and as they
still lived under the system of unrestricted individualism, it
was not long before Smith made the acquaintance of the
bankruptcy court, with the result that Robinson reigned su-
preme. Thus the saying, “No man liveth to himself” tras
exemplified, for Smith having come under the power of Rob-
inson, whose monev-loving talent was always uppermost, not
only lost his freedom, but was the cause of Jones losing what
was left of his, for from henceforth Robinson rules as dicta-
tor, which, under our present system, is the last office held
by Mammon before its ineptitude, and the enslaved masses,
gives the invader his opportunity. The only time that it
is possible for the worker to walk out is on election day, when
a majority of votes polled are polled in the name of freedom.
For the man who, by the aid of strikes, attempts to walk
out of hell, only sinks lower in the pit of poverty. He strikes
with his pockets full, and imagines his millennium is at
hand, hut Mammon sits down to smoke the pipe of indiffe-
rence, till his pockets get empty. Therefore, it will be seen
that a strike places the worker in the position that he first
occupied; that is, he started life as a pauper, and leaving
miracles out, will die one. To say because Nature, guided
by a wisdom which aimed at peopling the earth during its
life-supporting period, with a people, whose individual lines
would he so short as to be beyond the possibility of being
marked upon the chart of time, that Smith, being the first-
born, should lay claim to it, is such a damnable proposition
that the wonder is how such a devlish audacity dare raise its
head, where reason roams, and the word equity is found
emblazoned on the portals of our courts of justice. And fol-


lowing this wonder comes the historical fact that, after
Jones, the first, second, and third, had been born, whose
united sterngth far outdid that of Smith’s, that Jones, first
and second, to the disadvantage of Jones number three,
should, after the manner of vertebraless animals, lie on
the ground and let Smith use them for a bridge over the
rough places of the earth, and to prevent him staining his
hands with anything connected with toil. Whilst Jones, one
and two, viler than the beasts of the field, because the beasts
instinct being superior to the Jones’ reason, look after their
young, or die in the attempt, till such time as they can for-
age for themselves, cringe to Smith, like well-whipped curs,
and yet, under the cloak of hypocrisy and darkness, plunder
Jones, number three, of all he is worth. Under such condi-
tions, is Jones, number three, going to remain honest, because
Jones, number one, who belongs to the advance guard of
social purists, tells him that he will go to hell, if he is
not honest. Will he stand, cap in hand, and get covered
with mud, as it leaves the hoofs of the horses, behind which
Smith sits in lustful ease, or will he make use of his God-
given talent, and smite the parasite with a sense of his respon-
sibility. There is no alternative if Smith is allowed to hold
on, but for Jones, number three, to die, as a creature too
vile to be called a man. Consequently, the truth of the
following lines and the actions suggested therein must be
acted upon. For
More or less we’re in one fold,
More or less we scatter gold,
More or less we’ll help each one,
Crowns of glory thus are won.
Life is short, we’re here one day
Yet we each the other slay,
Fighting for a mouldy crust,
Killing Jones with hunger’s thrust.
There’s enough of what’s called prog,
Why should Jones die like a dog?
He’s a rogue, who’d have it so.
He's a fool consents thereto.
Up, thou poltroon, and at them,
All their worthless bodies hem
In the net of toil, and spin.
Then thou’ll keep them free from sin.


Generate, their hide-hound soul,
’Fore eternal ages roll;
When on brimstone they’d be fed,
And in hell would make their bed.
Place, O Lord, within their breast,
Something human, for the rest;
Let not earth, be always hell.
Such as Jones,.- knows but too well.
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE PICTURE.
“Lady Jersey has achieved considerable fame as an
author, her ‘Commonwealth Ode’ being, perhaps, the fin-
est composition of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere.”—
Sydney “Daily Telegraph.”
Reader, Lady Jersey is also the author of the "Empire
Ode,” which declares that the King of the British Empire
holds his position direct from God, a belief so servile, so
blasphemous, so at variance with ascertained facts, that
the wonder of wonders is the temerity possessed by the rul-
ers of our State daring to have it taught and sung in public.
The author’s blood rises in righteous wrath against any con-
fession, which links the Creator’s actions with those, who,
having been evolved from ignorance, superstition and literal
cannibalism into a life of culture and educational attain-
ments never before known, still ci.ng to a fetich, which can
find no room in a mind which has been elected to the throne
cleared of the thorns arid thistles of a bastard or-
thodoxy —a fetich, which has turned the savage cannibal into
one so refined, so outwardly genteel, and so subtle in its) ways,
'that its victims’ blood is sucked, by whom, he knows not, there
is no “whom” about it; his enemy is Argus-eyed; it has a
thousand mouths to fill; his enemy is a corportation, a cabal
composed of those who have grabbed the wealth of the world,
and backed, so Lady Jersey says, "by the guiding hand of
God.”
Lady Jersey’s sojourn on this earth has been that of
the butterfly; her time has been .passed sucking the sweets
of life, and in this particular department of animalized
economy she has not risen above the brute, the only differ-
ence being that whilst the animal of instinct is provided
with food by the laws of God, Lady Jersey’s is produced by


the sweat of the brow falling from her. fellow-man, who,
if he had only as much sense as the little ant which eats
his sugar, would let Lady Jersey provide for herself. Lady
Jersey's has been one continual round of fro he, fun and rest.
She Knows nothing about the horrors of the plague-stricken
slum, except it be in the shape of rents earned by lust- She
knows notning about the slavery of the mine, nor of the
short-lived lives of those who contribute to her pleasure, by
being roasted at the furnace, or poisoned by the fumes aris-
ing from the substance from which cosmetics are made,
wmch make her face to shine under the glare of the mid-
day sun until the ignorant cry out, n What a beauty!”
Truly her lines are cast in pleasant places, not by God, but
by a law made by wolves in sheep’s clothing. Lady Jersey’s
environment is the cause of almost all our troubles; under
it thrones are supported by fixed bayonets. It is the cause
of assassination and suicide. Virtue sells itself to it. It
builds ipoor-houses and distributes charity boxes until they
become a daily nuisance. All this has taken place whilst
Jones, bound by a system over which he has no control, has
been driven hither and thither. In order to sustain life,
he has allowed himself to be driven into the bowels of the
earth, where the pure air of heaven refuses to go, he has
worked, sweated and fainted whilst breathing the foul gasses
of the earth, he has) gone through all this to enable him
to get the common necessaries of life, and to allow Lady
Jersey to enjoy the exquisite pleasure of sitting in a room
well warmed by the coal which his compulsory labour has
produced; and whilst she sat, reading the flimsy novel or
watching the snow as it fell, his own children have beein
fighting their way through the frozen flakes to school—for
what—to sing ‘‘God’ Save the King.” Jones, after flying
from this hell, fled to another—the hell under the ground
where is found the metal which makes Lady Jersey’s ap-
parel to shine under the glare of the midnight carousals
of the drones of the earth. Jones has put two days into
one; he has worked for sweated wages; one eight hours,
and then he has put in another eight hours working under
co-operativism on his own account, and whilst thinking of
the half-starved, but loved ones at home, he has been buoyed
up with the hope that the next delve of the pick would
bring to light the glittering gold that would lift him out
of the fear of want —gold that would lift out of the hell
created by those with whom Lady Jersey spends her life;
but the next delve of the pick brought lorth nothing but


lirt, and so there .comes a time when Nature says to Jones,
'lou’ve worked, and you’ve lost; henceforth thou art irre-
vocably bound to the juggernaut of wealth.” But Nature
in this instance was wrong, for the fire of manhood still
burned within him, and so he sat down uppn his wood-
bottomed chair to soliloquise upon his fate, and at last a
gleam of light pierces his soul; imagination' lends its wings,
and then he sees the world as it should be, as it could be,
and what he will help to make it. So he heaves a sigh for
the past, sheds a tear in memory of the innocent blood
spilled to keep Mammon on its throne. His heart becomes
light, being fired by an inspiration from the hand of God,
namely, ‘‘lf a man will not work, neither shall he eat.”
Then .his soul gets a bird’s-eye view of the plains of
India, where millions of his brothers and sisters leave their
bones every year; but sickening and disheartening as this
sight is, it is a paradise compared to the sight which awaits
him when he turns Eis eyes upon the home of his youth.
The millions of India had died as a matter of course; they
were mere waste material that wealth did not require, and
being born in poverty, ignorance and superstition, they laid
down and died, believing the gods willed it. But it is not
so with those whom his eyes see for the first time wallow-
ing in the mire of oppression; his eyes drink in all the hor-
rors which he sees daily mingling with our daily life. For
the first time he gets a glimpse of life as it is in reality.
Jones sees his own offspring sweltering in the sweater’s
den. .The sweater has given her the privilege of working
for him for nothing, and if she proves herself exceedingly
quick, he will retain her at a pittance that would starve a
dog; but if she does not rise above mediocrity at the work
she will have to make room for another at the same price.
Jones sees his wife leaving the breakfast things unwashed,
so that she may be the first at the bargain counter, which
his daughter has helped to load with goods that have run
together with the proverbial hot needle, and burnt the thread.
He sees his wife running to catch the train, but though she
ran hard, she just missed it, and the prize upon which she
had set her heart upon was lost for ever—her offspring had
made it—because, listen Reader, it was the last one she ever
made, for before another sale came round the sweated one,
off whom the sweater lived, had passed away; she, upon
whose cheeks the bloom of youth never sat, had been sac-
rificed in order that Lady Jersey’s idol might have all he
wanted. And yaft she had been trained in a Christian


home, fondled upon a loving mother’s knees, and taught
to believe that God would watch over her. But every-
thing that Jones now sees gives the lie direct to this dia-
bolical perversion of the truth. Instead of this being the
case, he sees that the worker is being reared in the interest
of Mammon. If he is wanted, well and good, he must
exist as best he can, and the few pence he saved whilst in
work must take him over his idle time. This has proved
to be the best system that human fiends can devise for
keeping the poor. If he is not wanted, like the slave of
India, he .passes out of sight almost as bloodless as a mummy.
Listen to the echo of his last words as they roll by on their
way to the throne of God: “No work;' no food; this is why
I die. Midst mountains of corn, rivers of wine and oil,
forests of fruit, banks full of gold, my, neighbour eaten up
with worms, because he has eaten and drank too much,
millions worth of water running to waste, millions of acres
awaiting to be tilled, yet O God, I die for want of work
and food.”
And is this to be the end of Jones’ unobstructed view
into the environment which has taken from him one of the
blessings of his life ? Are the rich drones of the earth whom
God has already damned to be blessed by the continual
increase of the slave, so that wealth may have its pick,
keep those who will lick the tyrant’s hand, and let the re-
mainder, like the leaves of Autumn, return again to dust?
No, the die is cast. Jones is at last satisfied that he is in
a hell which he has allowed Dives to build, and out of which
he will get, or die in the attempt. He will put on the har-
ness of right, take hold of the‘staff of freedom, and lay the
foundations of an Empire, in which the bloom of youth,
and the graces of womanhood shall bloom and remain things
of beauty and joys for ever; and so he breaks forth into
song, his theme being, “The Coming Empire.’’
THE COMING EMPIRE.
Give me the Empire built by men
Who on God’s word rely;
Bold, honest, upright, true, and then
The whole world I’ll defy.
Tis blind belief that we’re controlled
By His almighty hand;
And that it’s stretched so to his fold
’Twill draw wealth’s mighty band.


Give me an Empire where man’s greed
And slothfulness is checked;
A land where manhood always lead
To see no lives are wrecked
Upon the blood-built throne of D.ives,
Which blocks our life’s highway
Arid sweeps from earth the weakest lives
When they should be at play.
An Empire built with honest toil.
An Empire free from debt;
Where age no more its hands shall soil,
Nor widow ever fret.
An Empire built with the belief
That man is free as air;
A land not washed with tears of grief—
Naught less than this is fair.
The curse which rules our Empire,
And binds immortal souls;
That sets our Nation’s heart on fire
As old Sol round it rolls.
’Tis blind belief in God’s control
Of man’s obdurate hoart;
Though bad it be at least his soul
In heaven will have its part.
Accept, 0 Lord, my firm resolve,
Thy word to keep in view;
To fight life’s battles and evolve
The life Thou only knew.
For time, the solver of Thy will,
Hath spread this flame of light;
Thy laws, once fixed, obey Thee still
And urge me on to fight.
My mind’s on fire, Thy word’s my guide,
For fighting lustful Dives;
Until I’ve plucked from those who lied
My brothers’, sisters’ lives
From pole to pole our Empire then
Shall spread Thy beams of light;
Show nations how to live, and when
To take what s theirs by right.
An Empire, Lord, that soon would place
Its Standard on Thy throne;
Give food and work to all our race,
Not leaving one alone.
An Empire where the milk of peace,
And honey should be found;
Where songs of praise would never cease
Nor man again be bound.


WORK AND WAGES FOR ALL.
That portion of the social problem which deals with the
question of work, and a living wage for all, is undoubtedly
the most difficult and unsatisfying that we have to deal
with. Giving employment to all is a very easy task in a
country like New South Wales, where millions of acres of
land lies idle, and water runs to waste, leaving nothing to
be considered but management, and management worthy of
the name is seldom born, but attained after a hard appren-
ticeship. Consequently, watchfulness would have to he the
watchword during its inception, lest through incompetence,
or the determination of its enemies, the scheme should be
killed before having a chance to arrive at maturity. But
when it comes to the question of a living wage to all, one
is at once surrounded by economic quicksands, that if not
guarded against, would soon swallow up the would-be re-
former, and his scheme for the betterment of man. It
becomes quite evident from the bald and vague statement,
“A living wage for all,” made by such well-intentioned
men as Bishop Barlow, that they have never dived very
deep into the fathomless abyss of political economy. When
Christ gave the parable of the capitalist, who paid every
man a penny, independent of the time worked, it was to
show for all time, that the worker was entitled to a wage
that would keep him from poverty. It would have been
an easy matter at the time of Christ for the Jews to have
given work and wages, the struggle for existence, as we
know it, was unknown to the Jews, they had nothing to fear
from being swamped by alien labour, if a bridge had to
be built, or a few extra bushels of grain had to be garnered.
But to-day all the world is in touch, and it has only to be
announced that a certain part of it is more prosperous than
another, before the vampires of the earth are on the march
to gather in its short-lived prosperity. Consequently, it
becomes as plain as the sun at noon-day that a sweeping
change in our environment must take place before work
and wages can be given to all. A living wage is a quan-
tity that can never enter a free socialism, or be adjusted
by an Act of Parliament, because of the many adverse
factors which confront it, and which cannot be brushed
aside. Work for all is the first step taken by a people who
have made up their minds to live above the level of the
brute creation, because of having being convinced that till
all are at work, it is impossible to tell who is who, and that


the leaving of one man out might mean the discarding of
material that would have made a man amongst men, and
the throwing it into a channel from which naught but
evil could flow. And to no other agency but this of in-
equality of opportunity can be charged the paucity of tal-
ents blooming in our very day life. It is not that we have
not the talents that civilization lacks leaders, but because
in the past, superstition and ignorance held the masses in its
cast-iron jaws of error, and in the present because the strug-
gle for existence, and the fear of poverty has become so
acute that Jones has neither time nor power to act effec-
tually, and Smith, who could act, dare not, for fear of
being dragged into the maelstrom of want and degradation.
The fact must always be borne in mind that giving work
to all is not reform in any sensd. It is simply obeying a
decree made by God, when he made man, and altogether
overrides any law that man, dressed in a little brief author-
ity, chooses to make- It is only commonsense to suppose
that Hodge, when he comes face to face with two laws, one
made by his Creator, and the other by the lustful drone
living next door, if he had to choose between the two that
he will make short work of his neighbour. The author is
lost in amazement over the audacity of one grain of ani-
mated sand dominating another grain of sand, and the other’s
abject servility, when the audacity is practised beyond what
is required for the advance of civilization, peace, and the
safety of the State. If a man will not work, there is, of
course, a speedy exit from our earth, that is, if the worker
will be as true to himself as the laws of Nature are to the
idler. Where the man who loves liberty, and is willing to
work, comes in, is when, for the social advancement of all,
liberty is given to each Unit to make the best use of his
talents. And it follows, as a matter of course, that as no two
men are endowed alike, one must be at the top of the social
ladder, and another at the bottom, but though there must
be one at the bottom of the ladder, all other things being
equal, and living under equality of opportunity, there would
be mo obstacle, save that of competitive equality, to debar
him from rising to the topmost rung. It is at this stage of
humanity’s environment that the question of a living wage
comes to- the surface. Having resolved that there shaH be
work for all, it follows: First, that the wages paid shall not
be sufficient to entice men from other work, otherwise our
social equilibrium would be at once upset, and the whole busi-
ness end in chaos. Where the benefit to the man at work


would come in, would be the absence of the idler from the
factory door on the Monday morning, and having the State’s
assurance that during a slack time he should have employ-
ment upon its national works, carried on, A for the em-
ployment of the idler, B for the storage of water, for the
benefit of the whole State. From this it will be seen that
a living wage at the starting of our changed socialism would
have to be regulated by the wages that farm labourers could
command, because the farmer is not his own master; for he
has two masters, over whom he has no control, namely, the
law of supply and demand, and his agent. To these two
have to be added three auxiliaries, foreign tariffs, foreign
wages, and his own custom house. All these factors have
to be reckoned with when the attempt is made to fix a mini-
mum wage. The situation has to be faced, not from the
standpoint of what it should be, but as it exists with us
to-day. Having allowed ourselves to .be hypnotised by silly
fables, the creations of a corrupt orthodoxy, an unknown
time must necessarily elapse, after all men are at work, before
a wage equivalent to the value of the work done could be
given. From this it will be seen that when one speaks about
a living wage, he speaks of that over which he has but little
control. But whether the wage be little or much, no man
has any right, save that given by a corrupt Statute, to say
to his brother, you shall not work except with my permis-
sion. Consequently, it must be patent to any unbiassed mind
that, after the way the laws of Nature act upon man when
he wants food, and cannot get it by working for it (pauper-
ising work not under consideration), that his Maker will
not condemn him, if he removes the obstacle from his path,
for this is the only way that man can comply with the decree
of God, or the cravings of nature, which is the same thing.
The Bible says-, “Commit no murder,’’ but the question for
the reader to chew is where does the law of self-preservation
end, and the law of murder commence? All man’s sur-
roundings point conclusively to tlie fact that he must work
to live, or degenerate into an accursed parasite. Reducing
our State’s family to ten, so that a child can understand its
position in the State, we find that our rulers, most of
whom obtain their positions by questionable methods and
premeditated fraud, have under their control all unsold land
and the Customs, whilst Dives, represented by that enemy
of the worker, Bruce Smith, owns the commanding portion
of the private wealth, whilst Hodge and his co-workers who.
are morally weak, but superstitiously strong, occupy the


position of tenants at will. But, in process of time the in-
evitable happens. Truth will come out. Hodge gets pos-
session of a Bible, turns it the right way up, and reads:
“The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” “If a man
will not work, neither shall he eat,” and “No man can serve
two masters.” When Hodge stumbled across these words he
had been out of work for months, and his home lacked bread,
so he immediately interviews the Premier and Bruce Smith,
and demands both work and wages, but these two worthies
inform him that there is no opening, but to show their hu-
manitarianism, and ’ their desire to prevent death from
straightout starvation, offer him work cracking stones, so
that his end may come about gradually, and as it were by
natural causes. Hodge, of course, refuses their offer, and,
letting his eyes rest upon the landscape before him, consist-
ing of unoccupied ground upon which he could live in peace,
and the only obstacles in the way being the above-named bar-
nacles, Hodge brushes them aside at the ballot-box, as
he does other reptiles that cross his path. Is this mur-
der, or conforming to the decree of God, and the law of self-
preservation ? God calls certain persons dogs, and Hodge is
quite willing to wait and see to what class he is assigned.
This brushing aside of drones takes place every day, and in
places like Russia, Hodge has no alternative but to kill, but
with us we have unlimited access to the ballot-box, where,
by the scratch of a pen, unrestricted individualism can be
shorn of its ill-got gains. And to educate the reader till he
stands upon the plane where the Unit is at work is the sole
aim of the author. It is at this point that evolution takes a
hand in the social advancement of the people, independent of
foreign tariffs, or foreign wages, because the State, having
in force an Alien Restriction Act, and an Act making beg-
ging a crime, the whole strength of the State would be em-
ployed producing wealth, or at work on works which would'
ultimately produce wealth. And under these conditions the
time would be sure to arrive when there would not only be
an increase in wages, but a reduction in the hours of labour.
Upon this question there can be but one opinion, for the
surplus labour daily thrown upon the market, owing to the
inventive genius of man, must be used up by the State, or
Malthusianism will become a written, or an unwritten law.
Invention has made our present environment all but intol-
erable, and it is only necessary to take one illustration to
prove that the fear of poverty is no mirage on the worker’s
horizon. To-day the fear of poverty has swept into oblivion


all traces of the orthodox superstition, that man should bei
content with the position in which he finds himself; that is
the reason why thousands of workers, rather than be pushed
out, knowing that they would have to face poverty and an
unsympathetic public, sign. for wages which they never re-
ceive. Every would-bo public man rants and raves about
equality of opportunity, but it goes without saying that
they know nothing about the road upon which a State must
travel, before it can give equality of opportunity. True, New
South Wales has just taken the first step along this road,
by giving free education; but as she refuses to take the
second step, the first step is more than useless to young
Hodge, whose talents have just begun to expand, for when
he leaves school, leaves equality of opportunity behind. He
has no money to strike out for himself. The State don’t
want him, and he finds the private factory full. Conse-
quently, on the very threshold of life, he finds every man’s
hand turned against him. And yet, the psalm-singing hy-
pocrite and the lustful drone expect him to lead an un-
blemished life. When everything had been put into proper
working order, a return flowing into the Treasury from com-
pleted national works, and a steady stream of settlers with
money coming amongst us, would be the time to commence
reform, because the fear of poverty would have passed away,
and prosperity for the willing worker would have taken its
place. That living must eventually be cheap in New South
Wales, no one having a knowledge of its climate and what
qan be achieved by irrigation has a doubt. Finally, the State
has no moral right, nor permission from the laws which
govern life, to ask the question will the work that the idler
asks for pay 1 Because, whilst the idler has strength enough
left to ask for work, it follows that some outside source is
supplying the food, and as there are only two sources from
which it can come, it follows that the idler either lives by
direct dishonesty, or that he lives upon charity, thereby
causing a direct loss to the State and the honest citizen.
The State having decided, because it dare not, at least
openly do otherwise, for fear of the result which would be
sure to follow —that man has a right to live, its first duty
would be to see that each Unit worked for the support of
his life, and that his wages would be regulated by the state
of the labour market in his own land. And failing this step


being taken by the State, the duty would devolve upon the
great mass of workers to remove from power, irrespective
of what might happen, those parasites .whom Nature en-
dowed with talents, that if their owners had only used them
for humanitarian purposes would have freed our land
from compulsory unemployment and universal unrest.
IRRIGATION.
The State, having resolved that every man within its
borders should have the opportunity given him to work, for
which he would receive a 'living wage, so that he should not
be allowed to quit this world with the charge against his fel-
low-man, that he was denied the opportunity of sustaining
the life which his Creator was responsible for, and
for which he had supplied sufficient food, the next
question to be decided would be the nature of the
work to be done. It is not necessary for man
to rise above mediocrity to perceive that only one idle
hand in a State is a clog on that State’s prosperity. What
then are the consequences when the idlers are counted by
the thousand ? Is it not a fact that they are engaged in the
suicidal work of dragging thousands more into the bye-ways
of poverty and crime ? Some men, receiving three pounds
per week, believe they are living in an earthly paradise, but
they are as ignorant of the pleasures which three pounds per
week would purchase under a humane and constructive
government, as the child not born. And when the law is
passed, as passed it will be, giving work to all, will there be
any statesmanship, any credit, or merit, in the transaction ?
The men will simply obey the voic f e of Nature, which calls
upon them to give their talents to the world at large. And
so, just as the potter takes a lump of clay, of which he has
plenty, and turns it to use, so tne man capable of ruling
takes the idler, land and water, and with the fruit pro-
duced by these ingredients, fills his barn. But there is
nothing miraculous about this. The brain which evolved the
linotype towered far above that which has to find work for
his brother, without wrecking the social machine. Free Hodge
from human parasites, and he must progress. The fact of
him being a member of the State’s national assurance


fund, and its benefit fund, keeps his pathway clear, and
there would be nothing to prevent him living up to the high
standard of life, as laid down by Christ, when he said, “Take
no thought for the morrow.” Life would have become so
natural; work would be the fulcrum upon which it would
focus all its energies, knowing that the fatted calf roamed
upon the hill, corn waved in the valley, and that the im-
pounded waters would keep the once desolate places clothed
in perpetual green. Man being upon the earth only for a
few days, apart from the self-evident pleasure he may draw
from Nature’s springs of plenty, has a duty laid upon him
by natural law and the law of social environment to make
the best use of them he can. Farmers are well acquainted
with the truism that one year’s seeding means seven years’
weeding. So, in man’s kingdom one enforced idler will be-
come such a source of danger that the last will not pass away
till his offspring hangs lifeless upon the scaffold.. In order
to set the reader’s mind at rest, anent my qualifications to
spea*. with authority upon work and irrigation in particular,
I would assure him that I have been a miner, a mine mana-
ger, a reporter upon mines, and that as an orchardist, I was
over twenty years upon the land. Such time, owing to other
things being equal, wag spent in practising intense cultiva-
tion, both with fruit and vegetables! So much so, as regards
fruit, that I had some trees photographed, from which nine
bushels of apples were taken from each tree, and not one
apple was seven feet from the ground. Of course, these re-
sults were the outcome of irrigation, and a fair supply of
manure, without which energy and brains become so much
waste material, and man a slave whilst on the land. I
have taken five hundred pounds’ worth of fruit and vege-
tables off an acre in one year, but I never thought of saving
any till it was too late. All my spare cash went into the
mines. It was a gamble in scrip, and when the end to that
came, I found myself faced with forces equally as destructive
to my social position. These forces, which had been slowly
growing and multiplying, were many, but the three worst
consisted of habitually slovenly neighbours, from whose,
ground unto mine came millions of weed seed§, the Codlin
moth, and the evergreen Chinaman made his appearance. As
these three destructive factors could have been kept within
bounds, or eradicated out of man’s life by the State, but were
not, the author, rather than be a slave in an unnatural
environment, threw up the industrial sponge, and accepted
a life more in harmony with that of the dog, namely, a para-


site. Under the altered conditions, I could still have held
on, but to compete with a Chinaman who worked night and
day, Sunday included, and who had the psalm-singer on the
Monday morning for a customer, was more than the British
blood, which ran in his veins, could stand. Consequently,
he gave his physical body a rest, and brought his much-ne-
glected mental one to the surface. Man, it is said, shall not
live by bread alone. The author, at least, does not, for
part of his food, as the reader will find in these pages, comes
from the world that is to be. My cabbages were chocked
owing to my neighbours’ dirty habits, but Orthodoxy will
find that it has something to do before it will be able to ex-
plain away what my mental nature has dug out of the sub-
soil of its own pastures. Sublety will have to take the place
of force, and platitude that of argument. It will have to
be apparently as harmless as the young ivy, but possessing
the persistency of the unseen root of the English thistle,
supplemented by the passiveness of the man who
never thinks for himself. Irrigation has gone beyond the
experimental stage, and the belief has become universal that
the land cannot be induced to give of its substance without
the aid of artificial watering. And for the moment, putting
water in the same category as machinery, it has been proved
to be the greatest labour-saving factor known to man. And
further, there is no labour which man can do that will give
him such interest as will the storing of water for the purpose
of using it judiciously. I say judiciously advisedly, because
to carry on in a careless and wholesale fashion in the ab-
sence of proper drainage tends to make plant life water sick.
Millions of people must have noticed this in plants, when
growing close to drains where their roots would be always
in contact with water And to irrigate to the best advan-
tage time must be given for the ground to become almost
dry before being watered again. Having regard for the liberty
of the subject, and the State’s social prosperity, it follows that
the State would use its surplus labour upon works which
would not clash with any existing industry, but would go
direct to its own unused lands, and there create an asset,
which would grow in value as time rolled on. The pros-
perity of the State would increase as acre after acre was
brought into direct contact with water, and the revenue of
our railways would soon show a surplus owing to the car-
riage of produce produced by water which now runs to
waste. Consequently, the surplus labour of the State would
be employed constructing dams, canals, ground for State


forests, and for leasing purposes, when water became avail-
able, so that the fruits of labour might be saved. Under-
ground drainage is of great value, as those who have tried
it can testify, and as the work would have all the perman-
ency given to it possible, stones and saplings would be dis-
carded for the earthenware pipe, the manufacture of which
would create a large amount of labour, and would, at the
same time, be an object lesson for private enterprise to
copy. Comparatively speaking, few people have any idea
of the influence which underground drainage has upon plant
life. In the case of land that is not drained, the sun bakes
the soil to a far greater extent than it does where it has
been trenched. The sun rapidly draws the moisture, and
by so doing prevents it going down, which it would do if
there was ventilation, so that atmospheric pressure could be
brought into play. Then the roots would strike downwards,
and become a source of strength to the plant, instead of
keeping near the surface, as they do, on untrenched land,
when there is a scarcity of moisture. Dry seasons are of
such frequent occurrence that they paralyse the energies of
those on the land, and prevent others from risking their all
in farming. That a'humane duty is laid upon the rulers
of the State to store every possible drop of water goes with-
out saying, and as the quantity available will never equal
the quantity that will in the future be required, it follows
that the distribution of water upon economic grounds is the
first factor to grapple with after the water has been stored.
The land suitable for agriculture, and which can be irrigated
by open channels is so vast that the water, if all stored,
could only water a fraction of it, it follows that the strictest
economy will have to be practised if the State is to get all
that it is possible to get out of this best of all of Nature’s
gifts. And it is owing to this scarcity of water that I bring
under the reader’s notice the immense possibilities which
will await the man of small capital when the State has made
provision ’ for storing its waters. The watering of land by
the aid of sprinklers has not, up to the present, gone beyond
the lawn, but the time has now arrived when the watering of
land for a living by the aid of sprinklers must, for several
reasons, become the main factor in the small farmer’s life.
By the aid of sprinklers any ground can be watered. Of
course, it is more expensive at the start, but the advantages
gained, which consist of less water, less attention, a more
even distribution, the possibility of watering the side of a
hill, the land of which is far better for many crops than the


valleys, far and away outweigh the question of first cost,
for it gives the farmer a piece of ground from which he can
gather a crop, no matter how severe the season might be. It
is under this system that I achieved the position of being
the most successful orchardist in Hobart, and there are hun-
dreds of thousands of acres in this State having a slope such
as mine had, and which could be watered by pipes, but not
by open channels. Bush fires, for generations yet to come,
will remain a terror to the farmer; but under this system
every farmer might have his homestead surrounded by pad-
docks laid down in English grass, and kept green in the height
of summer by the aid of sprinklers. The reader may laugh
at the Author’s proposition to water the surface of tens of
thousands of acres by such a method, but it has to be borne
in mind that there would be thousands of contented settlers to
do the watering. That it is easy to accomplish, economical,
and would make life on the land a pleasure, I havd proved.
I had five acres irrigated in this way for four reasons. A,
because open channels were impossible; B, to ' (economise
water; C, to get the distribution as even as science could
regulate; D, to prevent running the ground together, which
would have compelled me to fallow it. City people are prone
to imagine that any material will make a farmer, but-after
twenty years of work upon the land I am satisfied that it re-
quires the very best of manhood to grapple with the many
problems which cross the farmer’s path. The farmer’s life
from start to finish is one of worry and anxiety. Storms,
drought, fire, insects, weeds, and markets which, lure the
weather, are ever changing, owing to the actions of rings
and trusts, which are ever scheming to fleece him, all these
he has to face; whilst a carpenter, whose chief trouble lies
in scheming to see how little he can do in eight hours, and
how much he can demand for it, has the audacity to preach
land taxation. By all means tax land, and when you have
taxed the present holders off it, then compel these parasites
to occupy. This is the policy they should have to face, and
then the man on the land would get the treatment he de-
serves. Having decided that land monopoly shall not gain
a footing, our policy would be to see the land inhabited by a
free and contented people. It will be easily understood that
it would be impossible for private- enterprise to embark upon
water conservation, upon a scale the objective of which would
be to conserve all that it' was possible to conserve. Has it
never dawned upon the reader’s mind that he is defying
the Command of God, and Killing the instinct of humanity


within himself, and making his fellow-man a rogue when he
gives his consent to a system of government which locks
every unused acre of land up from his neighbour, although
he has a birthright interest in it. What does man bring
life into the world for, to be a shuttle-cock for the rich vam-
pires of the earth, to kick from pillar to post, or to leave the
world better than he found it? Are John Stuart Mill, and
other writers of political economy from the conservative side,
to be recognised as guides to the end of time, no evolution
from the age of greed in which they lived; do the men of
to-day, who parrot-like, quote Mill, imagine that our present
system, which holds nineteen men in slavery for the twen-
tieth to do what he likes with, is going to hold sway for ever ?
Superstition, ignorance,, and sectarianism are too far advan-
ced upon the road which leads to oblivion, for such a dam-
nable system to much longer clog the wheels of progress.
Under the genial and soul-inspiring environment of educa-
tion, Nature is showering her hitherto locked up secrets’ upon
us with a lavish hand. Consequently, man is moulding the
elements into instruments of usefulness for the purpose of
doing his work. Science has demonstrated beyond all doubt
that man need be a slave no longer, the supervision of mach-
inery which will henceforth do the work, which for a highly-
civilized people, becomes a necessity, will be little more than
recreation for his body, but will accomplish wonders as an
object leason for his talents to still further expand in a
world that hath no known limits. Science has made enor-
mous strides in all walks of life, save one, and that one, the
one upon which depends the very existence of the human
race. Under the system of unrestricted individualism, man
has heaped up riches till he can sit in lustful ease, count the
stars, and end his life as a parasite upon Hodge, who, born in
poverty, and reared in the vile atmosphere of Superstition,
earns a precarious existence Under conditions as galling as
the first tillers of the soil were familiar with. This one walk
of life which science has all but left alone, has, owing to
labour-saving machinery, now been pushed into the fore-
front of our everyday life. Men all the world over are seek-
ing work, seeking bread; yes, and facing death, rather than
live a living death. That is why the fiat has gone forth that
under some kind of social reconstruction, wealth shall be
made to give out of its abundance till a road is made upon
which the Unit can travel without either the sweater or the
skeleton of want dogging his footsteps. Why, even in Eng-
land, with its dense population and small acreage, there is


sufficient waste land held by a few rich men to give employ-
ment to all her starving thousands, what then shall be said
of New South Wales, where there are more square miles of
idle land than there are inhabitants, minerals that will last
beyond where our imagination can carry us, coal till science
will be able to do without it, and water running to waste,
that, if used scientifically, would keep its surface as green as
the Shamrock ? And yet, we are leavened with the leaven of
a spurious orthodoxy, greed and pride, that w T e will suffer
any system of taxation, allow disgraceful legislation to dis-
figure our Statutes; hoist well known but unconvicted rogues
into positions of honour, live daily in dread of either being
pushed into the insolvent court, or getting the sack, in nightly
dread of been either robbed or killed, going mad with ex-
citement, whilst chasing one another for a copper on behalf
of charity, thinking by so doing we are paving our way to
heaven; and winding up the hell-born tragedy and lustful
farce by a fancy dress ball, so that the half-starved laier may
have his lease of life extended by devouring some of the
crurtibs left. All this we will do, rather than comply with
the Command of God, the voice of conscience, and the re-
quirements of Nature. Why, because by so doing, we re-
tain our position, whilst keeping the idler as a quantity that
can always be measured. And it is for this inhuman reason
that he who hath, places his foot upon his weaker brother,
and says, “Stay thou there till I need thee.’’ And Jones,
owing to being hypnotised by Parsons preaching one thing
and practising another, has allowed the heel of Mammon
to remain on his neck. But now he wants continuous work
and a living wage, and there is but one source from which
these requirements can flow, namely, the land. The land,
being a known quantity, and man possessed with reasoning
powers sufficient for his day, to gauge its productive powers,
under his guiding hand, need never go to bed hungry,
except owing to his own lack of application, for having his
Creator’s decree, that he who would eat, must first work,
can, with a clear conscience, sweep into oblivion any ob-
stacle which he finds blocking his way. The millions of
pounds which will be required in the course of time, and
the large areas that will be required for storage purposes,
can only be provided for by the State, which will also have
to see that the work is done by its surplus labour. We have
ample evidence from Nature that we shall never be success-
ful upon the land till we store our waste water, and that
many years must pass before we shall be able to store more


than sufficient for a comparatively small area of our mag-
nificent estate. Consequently, one sees that the problem of
water distribution upon the most economical lines is the
one which the State must set itself the task of solving in the
immediate future. The sooner it can be shown that land can
be profitably irrigated by pipes, the sooner will we he in a
position to defy droughts, make our settlers a prosperous
and contented people, and encourage those to our shores who
would have the money to take up land as soon as it was
known the State could supply water. Water conservation
in this State will eventually be made into a great asset, from
whicn enormous revenues, direct and indirect, will be gath-
ered in by the State. We should hear no more about our
railways not paying their way, nor of the wharf labourer
being idle for want of ships to fill. It would inspire into
private enterprise, confidence, without which no country can
ever hope to prosper. And when the reader considers that
the whole of these sources of wealth can be tapped by the
idlers on our streets, if placed under honest and competent
supervision, surely it ought not to take us long to come to
a decision, having for its object the solving of the unem-
ployed problem. It must also be borne in mind that pre-
paring the land for cultivation, and storing wgter would not
be the only work required to be done. Work, as is well
known, makes work, and once the people rise equal to the
possibilities in front of them, the manufacture of pipes, would
at once become one of our principal industries, and the labour
which would be required for quarrying and other purposes in
connection therewith would absorb hundreds of men. The de-
mand for pipes would be unlimited once this system of irriga-
tion was properly underweigh, and the men so employed would,
in reality, be preparing for the conservation of water, just as
mucn as those would be who were engaged building reservoirs.
The author wants the reader to understand this, so that he
may see that all the present unemployed would not be en-
gaged upon what w£ call the land. Waste of water is one
of the principal things that this State must guard against,
and now is the time to commence when the unemployed
problem is, owing to its small proportions, easy of solving;
our debt not too heavy, if kept where it is; whilst our col-
lective earnings are more than sufficient from which to draw
a progressive income tax, without exemptions. Recognising
the objective of the reformer, the State would he within ita
rights by passing on the initial cost of what will be an ever-
lasting and profitable asset, but, as we have millions of money


lying idle, the direct increment from borrowed money, it
would be criminal on ou,r part to further tax those who are
to follow. Just consider for one moment what an enormous
strain would be lifted from thousands of our fellow creatures
if the fear of want was eliminated from their lives, and the
relief of mind that would come to all, if it was to know that
the nrst beggar, or more properly speaking,' parasite, met
with, would be quickly removed to other spheres of action.
It is now an established fact that adverse seasons are the
rule with us, and we need no further proof, for men who
have been on the land all their lives now find themselves
securely bound to the god of wealth. And if this is the
position of men who have had all the benefit arising from
the use of virgin soil, and an immunity from weeds in com-
parison to what the trouble will be in the future, where,
I ask, lies the profit for a man on the land, outside of the
bankrupt court, unless irrigation under the most economical
system becomes one of the chief factors in his industrial life ?
The reader must not lose sight of the fact, namely, that this
work of storing water must be done by the surplus labour ’of
the State, for if national irrigation works are to be carried
on as are all other State works, then we may construct
waterways till we have no water to .put in them, and having
spent borrowed money till we could borrow no more, then
our last state would be worse than the 'first. You want
proof, scan the history of America, the home of liberty, and
all things that* are great, save humanitarianism, count the
wealth of her millionaires, her revenge made assassins, her
poverty, and up to the present her unapproached political
dishonesty, and remember that during the brief time that
has elapsed since America commenced irrigating her land,
she has spent almost as much as the whole of our public
debt. Now, if there ever was a time under Unrestricted In-
dividualism, when the general prosperity of a country could
have been demonstrated, surely we should have seen it in
America to-day, where scores of millions have been spent
for the purpose of improving the conditions of the poor, in-
stead of this we find that a few have scooped the pool, wnilst
the workers are more helpless than ever, because of their
number being swelled by thousands of paupers. True, the
pauper cannot get in now, but the damage is done, and it
is the reader’s place to see that the pauper does not double
bank him here. Money has become absolute in the ruling
of America, and from her present position nothing can save
her but a great awakening to the fact by the workers that


they must all unite, independent of creed, unionism, or
blacklegs, and crush its power, if liberty is to be anything
more than a name. And what has taken place in America
is also making rapid progress in our midst, for if our public
men are not corrupt, then they are too incompetent to be
placed in positions of trust. Hodge, having ascertained what
pressure of water he would have, would lay down his pipes
out of reach of the plough, and placing the standards so that
all the ground would be watered. As soon as the crop was
off, the ground would be watered, so that all seed which would
germinate should do so. The standards would then be re-
moved, and the land turned up to fallow. Then, when the
ground had been prepared, and the crop sown, the standards
would be replaced, and a crop, so far as water was con-
cerned, relied upon. The great mistake made by' farmers
has been in their endeavour to farm quantity, instead of
concentrating their energies upon quality. They have farmed
one hundred acres, and have had to let the crop take its
chance. Had they cropped but twenty acres, and watered
them, they would have obtained better results, whilst the
labour and expense incurred on the eighty would have been
of great help towards the cost of irrigating the twenty, which,
when accomplished, would convert the hitherto clod-hopper
into a gentleman farmer. It has to be remembered that
many of the unemployed which the State would have under
its care would, in time, become settlers when the land was
ready for occupation. It is made perfectly clear in the New
South Wales association’s report for assisting discharged
prisoners that all man requires to make him honest is to have
the nightmare of uncertainty removed from his life. The
report shows that out of 231, only 14 returned to gaol, and
that out of 659, only 79 returned, and when one fairly takes
into consideration our present surroundings, it may be taken
for granted that had these men been put to work outside
of competitive conditions, not more than one per cent, would
have returned to his wallowing in the mire. In the face of
this report, who will be -bold enough,, and uncharitable
enough, to say that man won’t work, even if he had the op-
portunity ? It is the uncertainty which hedges man in, and
prevents him from getting constant work, that makes him
a rogue and vagabond, and enables trusts and rings to
flourish.


THE UNIONIST IN A NUDE STATE.
There is an old proverb, which says, when rogues fall
out, honest men get their rights, but the actions of our public
men unmistakably show that nothing can be further from
the truth. Our rulers are divided in opinions and beliefs
in quantity like grains of sand, and in quality equal the
plague-laden filth of our outwardly beautiful city. These
opinions and beliefs keep their owners in an active state of
hostility towa'rds one another, at once favourable to them-
selves, but destructive to the best interests of the State. And
out of these needy, and even seedy units, we have now evolved
two political parties, and in their ranks are to be found all
the forces which determine, the nature of our environment.
Up to quite recent times the dominant force had always been
composed of those who cling to unrestricted individualism,
or might is right. The other force, which has espoused the
cause of Socialism (although every man outside the hermit’s
hut is a Socialist), but only a section of Australians belong
to the liberty destroying and unsacrificing section under
review. This Socialism has been evolved, owing to the ty-
ranny of its opponents towards the workers, and the goal
towards which this Socialism directs its steps is the nation-
alising of all things, including man himself. Reader, im-
agine if you can, the condition of a people whose every action
would be controlled by Act of Parliament, the nature and
quantity of food they would eat, and their sitting down and
their rising up, regulated by -regulations similar to those
governing martial law and under the guiding hand of an ig-
norant and despotic hireling. Does the reader want telling
that under such conditions as these, genius that could span
the heavens would have to again return to dust without
fulfilling its mission ? Cannbt the reader see that such con-
ditions would stem the stream of evolution now running its
natural course, and having for its object the aggrandisement
of man, and the utilisation of nature to make his path more
easy, and more in unison with the teachings of Christianity.
Socialism, now even in its infancy, when above everything
else it should have shown its best face to the public, it
comes out like an enraged lion after its lost cubs. Unionists
not only would starve a non-unionist into his grave, but
would eat one another. Such are the actions of men seek-
ing our confidence. What would they be, did they gain 't,
may be imagined, but not described. Socialism, with hup-


dreds of years of history to guide it, quickly decided upon a
plan of campaign. Socialism found our destiny controlled
by two distinct parties, which, for all the patriotism they
displayed, may be dubbed the “ins and outs.” With the
cunning of the serpent, and the gentleness of the dove, Soc-
ialism was found in concrete form, sometimes with the ins,
and sometimes with the outs, and to its credit be it said,
it disarmed all suspicion of its purpose till it had obtained
a firm hold of the body politic. Our great orators of the
Deakin and G. H. Reid stamp, individualists to the core,
wooed Socialism, and were proud of the union. The conse-
quence was it ruled without responsibility, and wrecked the
well-laid schemes of the “ins and outs.” What these schemes
for the future aggrandisement of Mammon provided for may
be gathered from what the Government said concerning the
actions of the Socialists. Sir G. Turner said that, in order
to hold the reins of power, they had to eat Socialistic “dirt”
till they could eat it no longer. But why did they eat dirt,
men who had been hail-fellow-well-met with the King, to
bow down to a mob ? Mob is the name always given to
workers by the Conservative Press when referring to them.
The answer, of course, is lust for power and greed for the
dollar was more than the cultured natures of these vampires
could withstand. Of course, had the god of greed and am-
bition stood aside, individualism, for the time being, could
have remained in power. But individualism is Nature be-
fore the pruning knife of evolution has had a chance to
lop olf its wild shoots; consequently, Nature, as exemplified in
our everyday life, is hell. Instead of doing this, and taking
on the role of patriots, the outs allowed the ins to be
smothered in Socialistic dirt; and yet, after a few months
of political thimble-rigging, during which two ministers
came to grief, Alfred Deakin, the Demosthenes of the Com-
monwealth, turned traitor, became a place-hunter and allied
himself with those who had once helped to kick him out of
office. And this, reader, is what our rulers call regeneration,
and cry, “All hail, Deakin, we still follow thee!” Mr. J.
C. Watson, the Socialist leader, whom Mr. Deakin, the Im-
perialist, has again embraced, says we don’t expect to see
complete Socialism in our day; that much-to-be-desired ren-
dezvous can only be reached by those who are still unborn;
and he might have said, without trespassing upon the do-
main of prophecy, although so enchanting to the eye of
imagination, the road which leads to this delightful land of


promise, in which everything will be socialised, has yet to
be paved with the bones of starved humanity to-day and to-
morrow. And in the face of this, Mr. Watson has the audac-
ity to ask his starving brothers to gloat over the fact, as he
calls it, that the annihilation of wealth draws near. Now,
when a man makes up his mind to fight, he expects, if he
wins, to reap some benefit from the encounter; but here we
have Mr. Watson, with unblushing impudence, telling the
workers, though out of work, that they must keep on fighting
till tney die. That is, though out of work, and the wife and
kids wanting bread, they must assist to keep him in office.
Had Mr. Watson been seized with the responsibility of the
position, he, would have told the workers that work was not
reform, but a Divine right, and it was for them to enjoy
the fruit of their own labour, and not to be passed on to
the future, for the dirt then on their boots to enjoy. Mr.
Watson will find that he has, as well as Orthodoxy, struck a
snag, whilst attempting hia one step at a time policy, because
even a fool can see there must come a time when the last step
would be taken, and liberty imprisoned. Mr. Watson says
his opponents have already laid the keel of his Socialistic
ship, and that Socialists shall finish it. He argues that,
having nationalised a few industries, that all should be
nationalised, as well as man himself. The reader will under-
stand that man will not become nationalised by Act of Par-
liament. There will be no necessity for any such procedure,
for having nationalised the industries, the sequence to this
would be that the worker would either have to become the
slave of the nationaliser, or, with empty pockets, quit his
home. The one step at a time policy would not be the
failure that it is, if the regeneration of man only kept step
with it, but the past and present shows that it does not.
But, on the contrary it shows that human nature is a fixed
quantity, and is regulated in' its actions by one factor, nam-
ely, education, which increases its field of operations, and
sharpens the talent of cunning, till its owner knows when
to strike. Consequently, instead of humanising actions fol-
lowing in the wake of one step at a time, greed, in all its
various forms l , has only become more intensified in the heart
of those whose surroundings assures them that they have' a
chance of climbing higher upon our social ladder. And the
putting of this chance to the test imposes upon Smith the
brutal action of putting his foot on Jones’s neck. And the
reader, before he can become a humanitarian, must be con-
vinced beyond a doubt that, until the law, giving work to all,


is -upon the Statutes of his country, Smith is not only jus-
tified, but he must put the law of self-preservation in force,
to protect himself from Jones, who is ever watching to bring
about Smith’s downfall. The fact that his action will keep
Jones frizzling in the frying pan of poverty until death takes
him or he drifts into the poor-house, can have no influence
upon him, for so rotten is the social scaffold upon which Smith
stands that if he attempts to lift Jones on to it, both sank
together into the hell that wealth has made. And this fact,
which is only one of many, shows Socialism running under
the bare poles of unequal opportunity, stripped of every
shred of that humanitarianism with which it was clothed,
when it first essayed to float upon the sea of public opin-
ion. Seeing that human nature is ever changing, yet always
the same, the folly of allowing the nationaliser to be any
longer a clog upon the welfare of the State, will become
apparent when we dig down into the heart of his objective.
It is quite clear from the Socialist’s platform that the nation-
alising of man is intended to be the last step in his long
dreary march across the trackless desert' of time- But long
before this goal is reached, the nationaliser would arrive at
an unsurmountable hill, named self-preservation. To-day
unionists clamour for the restriction of apprentices, the starv-
ing of non-unionists to death, and the scalps of the rich man.
Then to these simple demands have to bp added the feverish
desire which exists in the minds of the rising generation, to
get into the Government. Education, and a cheap Press, have
opened the eyes of the native to the fact that the plum 9 of
life are few, whilst the uncertainties of life are like the
sands upon the ocean’s shore for numbers, consequently,
next in order, comes the Civil Service, the chief attrac-
tion of which is permanent work, and too often starvation
pay. Permanency makes it an ideal existence, for the very
natural reason that work is the Alpha of life, the spring
from which flows all that is good in man, and is the only
factor that can keep the fear of want at arm’s length. It
is true that a Government employee has not a soul to call
his own, nor yet much to pay to feed the body on, but what
signifies that. He can regulate his diet accordingly, a part
of which is the insane belief that he is superior to what is
known asi a worker. The humanitarian who has a leaning
towards Socialism must bear in mind that if a policy such
as Unionism foreshadows entered into our life, the best pay-
ing concerns would be first licked up by the State, and during
this nationalising process a stage would be reached when all


the certainties of commercial life would be in. the hands of
the State, and then the industries wholly depending upon
chance, having to run the gauntlet of such enemies as fire,
flood, and drought, would have to be faced. And when this
stage on the downward road to nationalisation had been
reached, human nature, in Unionists’ robes, woven by self-
preservation, would take a hand in nation building. At this
time the Government employee would be the most powerful
factor in the State, and would be in a position to make and
unmake governments at will. Now, no man in his senses
would ever dream of these men being such fools as to travel
any further down a road, knowing that by doing so it would
deprive them of liberty, power, and reduce their wages.
Knowing what human nature is, the supposition is too ridi-
culous for a- moment’s consideration. The nationalising of
secondary industries and the distribution of goods could be
carried out, and yet leave the Unit free, but once touch
the land and the nationalising of all things would be at once
a living factor. The undeveloped talent of genius would
again follow the plough, whilst mediocrity, _by the aid of
fraud and hyprocrisy, would sit in high places'. Ths colossal
proportions of the department of inspection, which the nat-
ionalising of land would create, has never entered into the
calculations of the nationaliser, nor the power which these para-
sites would be in a position to use. It would be- a case of
God help the man whose fence was down, or had weeds
growing, when hirelings, under such men as New South
Wales has been cursed with, wanted his land for some pimp;
then the unfortunate settler would find there were other ways
of shifting him, beyond a direct notice to quit. And know-
ing all this, rather than give a few men honest employment,
thousands of men and women are one against another or-
ganising during 1092 and then upon the 1093rd day,
they, in battle array, fight like fiends to see which side shall
have the right to plunder the State, and sow a sufficient
number of the seeds of corruption to make the next election
a foregone conclusion. In summing up Unionism from its
inception to the present day, we find that its birth was a
welcome addition, and supplied a long-felt want in our social- -
ism, that it started well, and made, when all things are con-
sidered, rapid progress. Its aims were just, and its actions
harmless. Humanitarians, public men, came to its side, and
things/ were going along as merry as the marriage bell, but
in an evil hour it developed into a close corporation, ex-


eluded whomsoever it thought fit, and even crucified its own
unfinancial members, because, owing to idleness, through
lack of work, or disgust at the position taken up by Union-
ism, they failed to pay their subscriptions. As soon as it
began to feel its strength, it must snarl and bite; and now
it would devour the whole State, lock, stock, and barrel, in
perfect ignorance of what the effect would be upon its con-
stitution. And, strange as it may appear at first glance,
cultured men, lovers of liberty, have been drawn into the
mesh of this monster; they have scented the carcase, and
knowing that it cannot be devoured in their time, have, for
filthy lucre, consented to assist in keeping the State in a state
of unrest, all the while knowing the nationaliser has not a fea-
ther to fly with, when weighted down by wealth, and the
lovers of liberty. Unionism may harass wealth, but capture
it, and remain free, never. If it were possible to level up
to-day, to-morrow would find things uneven, the next rough,
and the day following, Rockfeller would stand upon the
mountain’s top, whilst the worker, shorn of manhood, and
therefore in a nude state, would be asking him if he wanted
his boots cleaned.
THE CHRISTIAN’S PRAYER TO THE HOME OF HIS
ADOPTION.
O, New South Wales, part of a mysterious and soul-
inspiring Universe, rolling from side to side, now hot, now
cold, shooting through space at a speed which our minds
cannot grasp, filled with a fire which ever and anon sweeps
us from thee, whilst thy surface is warmed by a still greater
heat which keeps thee clothed in perpetual green and ripens
the fruit which our Creator intended all should partake of.
Be it known unto thee that the would-be tillers of thy soil
and explorers of thy inner depths do at this time approach
thee for the purpose of mourning and sympathising with
thee in this thy hour of humiliation; we recognise that thou
hast been robbed of a complete journey through the mazes
of time; thou hast not known youth, for thou wert born
old. It is but small comfort to thy well wishers that thou


art one of the choice spots of the earth, for they have no
part in thee; those who now hold thee recognise them not,
and feed them not, hut with the crumbs of charity. Truly,
thou hast fallen amongst thieves from whom youth
had fled. These vampires emptied upon thy virgin soil the
scum of their own land, and some they dragged here because
they had dared to satisfy a hunger that would take no denial;
and yet, O, New South Wales, what these men took—a
rabbit—is considered within thy borders to be the greatest
curse that wealth has had to battle with. Yea they even
outstrip thy sympathisers in their diabolical attempt t'o
eat what their Creator sent them, and they actually dare to
trespass upon the domain of their evolutionised but two-
legged brother, and eat the grass which he claims as his.
The men who seized thee belonged to a callous imperialism,
and thought no more of hanging one of the poor devils under
them than they did of drinking a glass of rum; and the
matured evils, greed, idleness, and love of power at any
price, implanted upon thy fair surface have been bearing
fruit even to this day. for thy rulers still rob thee, thy
wealthy men oppress the poor, thy spiritual guides sip the
nectar of idleness whilst listening to the cry of the widow
ana orphan as it leaves thee on its journey to heaven in the
same way and from the same cause that it left the land in
which the. sword of justice at last appeared, and mowed the
bloody tyrants down. We therefore pray, 0, New South
Wales, that no such catastrophe may overtake those who will
come after us, and, in order that they may escape this evil
which overtakes every State governed as thou art, we thy
subjects now put our hands to the plough by putting our
own house in order, so that we also may partake of the milk
and honey, of which thou hast more than sufficient for our
wants; and, though we should do this, we will leave thee
richer than we found thee. It is sad but true that thy many
charms have had no mellowing influence upon the men who
have sprung out of the human cesspit which Christianised
England emptied upon thy virgin soil. Thy interests are
still being bartered for place and pay, whilst thy sons of
toil are upon the horns of a social dilemma, and no matter
how they may get off, governed as we are, they must fall
into a cauldron full of political corruption, from which the
cry of distress ever ascends. These men have marred thy
beauty, planted plague spots upon thee, and would, if they


could, devour thee within their own brief span of time. Rags
and skeletons, relics of individualism which have been handed
down from an otherwise long-forgotten past, deface thee;
but we, thy sons of toil being now assured by all the evidence
which the laws of nature, and an enlightened conscience
can bring to bear upon the destiny of man, that the Creator
has decreed that all shall have the right to partake of thy
fruit when willing to work for it, notwithstanding any law
made to the contrary by our enemies. We therefore pledge
ourselves that from this day onward we will not cease by
every legitimate means within our power to bring into active
use this humanising decree of work for all, accompanied by a
wage sufficient to let thy subjects remain honest. Then, from
thy groves and valleys shall rise songs of joy, thy hills shall
echo with the busy hum of industry,- and we will acknow-
ledge that it is good to live within thy borders.
NATURAL LAW AND COMMERCIAL USAGE.
The human family, the stock in a grocer’si shop, and the
land surface of a State may, with advantage to the reader, be
studied together, because the law of unequal proportion acts
with unrelentless vigour in all three. In the case of land,
there is an abundance; but land, by itself, is valueless, and
if left scfVercly alone by the law which produces' rain, would
not support the smallest of microbes. It is also true that
there are other laws apparently quite independent of the
law which produces rain, operating in such a way that any-
thing like an equal distribution or even sufficient to support
life in perpetuity, becomes impossible. But whilst this fact
is brought home to us with disastrous results, ending in death
and starvation to man, and the sweeping away of millions
of pounds’ worth of all kinds of wealth, other parts of the
State are deluged with too much rain, which, in its onward
course, sweeps all before it. So we are confronted with the
fact that if we would see the dry spots of our State turned
into places of beauty, which would be a joy for ever, and


occupied by a prosperous and contented people, we must
supplement tbe action of this law, which is partial in its
operation, by securing the water which it leaves at one part
of the State, and by our industry and skill convey it to
where this law refuses to take it. That we have more than
sufficient for our wants, our rivers testify, that we havd
labour, our domestic life shows with appalling effect, whilst
our accumulations of wealth show without a doubt that a
contribution from it could be given without injury to the
individual. But even were such a contingency possible, as
doing an injury to a few, the law of the greatest good to the
greatest number must prevail by the State taking precedence
over individuals. And unless this is done, an increase of
population will be an impossibility in those parts of the State,
which at present refuse at all times to sustain life l . And
further, large national works will become millstones round
the necks of those who will be called upon to bear the bur-
den, unless we set about creating some assets which in
the near future will provide the interest. Take as an illus-
tration our new railway station, when finished it will be
sufficient for what it is being built for, when we can count
ourselves by millions, but unless the country is settled by a
prosperous and free people, made so by our supplementing
laws of Nature by the aid of our helpless Units, these mil-
lions will never be counted, and our magnificent railway sta-
tion will be remembered principally owing to its annual cost.
The only alternative to an all-round tax upon wealth for
the purpose of settling people permanently upon our waste
lands, is to continue our present individualism and slavery.
For young as we are, we have parted with £60,000,000
worth of our estate, the money for which has all gone to
pay interest upon the 80 odd £1,000,0005, borrowed chiefly
from foreigners. And so heavy has become our private debt
that over 80 per cent, of the people are, to a more or letss
extent, in the hands of the usurer. If pur present environ-
ment is to continue, these 80 odd millions must be increased,
for no country could alive under unrestricted individualism,
and advance without borrowing. The supply must be kept
up by an artificial stream, otherwise, like the tumbler on
the gaming-house table, which receives a percentage out of
every round, usury would, without outside supplies, yearly
reduce the circulation of free money till it owned the lot,


whilst the masses would find their liberty slipping away as
each fresh deal came on the hoard. The reason why we
have had so much freedom is not owing to our industrial
habits and good government, hut because of our lavish and
foolhardy borrowing of money, which we shall never pay back,
for the interest at the present rate of increase will be more
than we shall be able to meet, except by sacrifice. We have
not been living upon our earnings, but upon borrowed money,
and now, when the full measure of interest has to be paid,
and the yearly incomes of those colossal financial institutions
of Sydney have been raked in, the leavings are of very little
.account, and are all but bespoken for those parasites, who
in a social sense, are some degrees higher than those who are
known as the unemployed. Allowing the citizens of a State
absolute commercial liberty, free from Socialistic interfer-
ence, and all being subject to a tax on wealth, there would
be nothing to prevent them from becoming prosperous and
happy, except their own unanimalised natures. An all-round
tax on wealth would mean that every unit between certain
ages would be an income tax contributor, or rot in gaol.
The universal and rapid circulation of money in its annual
journey through the State could not do less than increase
in bulk, just as land increases in richness, under the hands
of the skilled husbandman, assisted by Nature, letting down
the rain. From this we gather that rain and the capitalist
are the two factors which a State must make use of, to lift
the idler out of the plague-stricken»slum of poverty and
crime, and transform him into a pillar of the State. Com-
paring the human family to the land of a State, it must be
borne in mind that portions of each are absolutely worth-
less when left to themselves. Why it is so, as regards the
family, would not be hard to show, because centuries of
slum life would be sufficient to kill the virtues of a saint,
and without doubt, all that the slum has produced may be
credited to those, who in the good old Book, are called,
“whited sepulchres.” The parts of the State which the rain
refuses to moisten must remain a useless inorganic mass, so it
is with a portion of the human family: one revels in riches,
living upon the fat of the land in lustful ease, whilst another
starves, because the law of unrestricted individualism refuses
to let him participate in its wealth. Here the comparison
ends, because it is within the power of wealth to lift the


poor man out of his poverty, and to make him a useful citi-
zen. The working hive of humanity has plenty of money to
do this, and if it were collected under a law of direct taxa-
tion, and used to give the idler work, would, in the course
of time, return again through indirect ways, for no man can
work without increasing the wealth of the State, and through
the State, the individual. The rich man has everything to
gain by lifting the poor man out of the ditch, for whilst he
is in it, he lives at the public’s expense without giving any-
thing in return. Should he escape conviction after having
secured twelve months’ supplies from his rich neighbour,
so much the better for the State, for there are no gaol ex-
penses to be added to the loss of property. The difference,
so far as expense goes, is not much to the State, whether a
man lives on the State in a state of idleness, or whether he
is employed by the State at work which would not clash
with private enterprise. But there would be a large balance
to the good on the State’s side if the unit was at work shifting
dirt to make an embankment for the storage of water, to be
used for the purpose of making the desert bloom. The poor
land of a State, left to itself, remains an inoffensive quantity,
but it is not so with man; man, kept in poverty, is a constant
menace to his fellow citizens. He is a rogue, not from choice,
but from example and necessity. He is a creator of disease,
and a propagator of vice, and will remain such until unre-
stricted individualism, so far as it applies to the accumula-
tion of wealth, comes tp an end. A grocer’s .stock, so far as
variety of articles and value goes, very much resembles the
human family. His stock is composed of expensive articles,
and articles of little value. So, it is with the family, we
find units as wide as the poles asunder, in intellect and op-
portunity, but if prosperity and peace are to reign, the State
must regulate its stream of wealth, so that all shall have a
living wage. Unless this is done, man seeks to the level of
the partially-waterc'd desert, which never produces any-
thing of value. The grocer, although some of his goods carry
good profits, they are not sufficient in themselves to secure
him a living, and so he has to sell that which requires most
labour, but gives the least profit, and they occupy the same
position as the articles which carry good profits, as the poor
man does to the man of wealth. They are necessary auxil-
iaries, and cannot be done without. But the rulers of a


State won’t act as the grocer does, who keeps a complete
stock, and so is prepared for any emergency. The State
acorns to take up such a degrading position, and -proclaims
from the house-top that to do so would be to tax industry.
Might I remind the reader that there is a fortune waiting
for the man who can show that any tax is not a tax upon
industry, and so the State gives liberty to all to make the best
use of their wits and opportunities to gather in the spoils of
the earth, without a thought how others may fare. So we
find the human family under unrestricted individualism,
as regards food, stands in exactly the same position as the
lands of a State do to the law which distributes the rain,
whilst the wisdom of the grocer stands as a land-mark, upon
which are written opportunity, prosperity, and commercial
peace. Nothing the grocer can do will alter the commercial
value of his 1 goods. One pound of tea will always carry more
profit than one pound of salt. So it is with the family, the
man who can design a ship will always command a far higher
salary than the man who builds it. The designer may, other
things being equal, lift the builder up into his own social
sphere, but the mechanic will never drag the designer down
to his own surroundings. Neither will the unemployed pro-
blem be solved till the two agree to contribute to the sup-
port of the unit, who cannot’design the ship, nor help to build
it; and unless the State’s population increases, she never
will, because the Ship Carpenters’ Union is in full strength,
and they have declared that unless compelled by law, they
never will let him in.' And these are the men who went
out in the, highways of public life to lift him out of his
poverty. The human family, its right to live, and from
whence it shall draw supplies, is made plain by the Creator.
Man is'told to subdue the earth, and then to eat, drink, and
be merry, but owing to a miscarriage of justice we have
allowed man to practically repeal this Divine command, and
to replace it by a law which gives the strong man power to
crush his neighbour. Under the law of absolute freedom to
work out his own destiny, the Creator has bestowed upon man
a diversity of talents, desires, and aspirations, which, when
employed for the benefit o'f all, constructs an environment
within which he can live in peace. The law under which
we live does not operate in this way. It allows the accumu-
lations of one generation with one exception—probate duty—
to be passed on to the next, hence it follows that one is born,
and afterwards clothed in fine linen, whilst a hundred make
their appearance clothed in rags, and fed by the cold-iron


spoon of charity. To alter this state of things, and.get back
to the law of equity instituted by God, we must do with our
wealth, what the laws of Nature are going to compel us to
do with our surplus water, before we can make the desert
bloom. The distribution of wealth, man has within his own
power. So the waste of the family can be turned to profit-
able use whenever man wills it. We have now reached the
limit of freedom, so far as voting power goes, f*r beyond
adult suffrage we cannot go; but of what use is it if it is
not going to be used to give work to all ? There is neither
sense nor logic in extending the franchise, unless it is for the
purpose of lifting the Unit out of poverty. For no one but
a fool would ever think of asking a woman to decide between
freetrade and protection. Granted that adult suffrage will
be the means by which a few women will better their posi-
tions, it will only mean'that others will be'deprived of them-
Adult suffrage, instead of solving the problem of life, will
make confusion worse confounded. It has already deprived
men in the prime of life of a living, without finding another
opening for them. But the time draws nigh when the un-
employed must be given work; the idler removed from our
parks, the- beggar from our streets, and the vicious from
their haunts of vice. Were this done, not only could the
merchant live in luxury, as lie does now, but the beggar would
molest him no more. The thrice-convicted thief would he
accommodated with a permanent home, for which he would
have to work and pay for. The merchant would sleep more
soundly, being assured the sting of poverty, and the fear of
poverty had been removed from the-honest worker’s path.
These would be some of the advantages! gained by the em-
ployer, whilst advantages equally as great would fall to what
is called labour. Labour has always unduly suffered owing
to a plethora of workers;, consequently, the employer
has had all the advantage on his side, but with the removal
of the idler from the sweater’s door, labour will stand upon
a higher plane, demand a living wage, and be assured of con-
stant work. This is all that man can expect, and all that
it is fair to give him, for with equality off opportunity at
his elbow, talent at his command, and application to use ’t,
he would, were he a thousand times on scratch, mount the
social ladder without the use of either platitude or hireling.
And if he had not these, his nature and his environment
would dovetail into each other, and allow him to dwell in
peace, whilst watching libraries, instead of gaols, rearing
their spires in the air.


SOLVING THE PROBLEM.
THE MOST EXTRAORDINARYyPUENOMEN A THE
WORLD SEEk.
The citizens of New South' Wales are ;.facfe with
the social phenomena of the., hgeV' namely, the advance of
charity, an overflowing treasury, and ah ''abundant] jharvest.
From reports which have appeared x from (time; tovtinje during
the last few months, the reader is aSsur.eii financial
institutions, charity organisations, and the State Treasury
are booming along under the pressure caused by the rapid
increase of our primary industries, and that there is but
one serious rift in our social environment, namely, a decrease
in the amount of wages paid to the worker, at least, so says
Mr. Hall, the acting Statistician, and for months past our
public halls have rung again and again with the welcome news
that the land continued to flow with milk and honey. The
Press has spread the glad tidings; by a lavish expenditure of
ink, till, in spite of what is strikingly contradictory evi-
dence, a great many really good meaning and trusting souls
believe such to be the case. So to give the reader an op-
portunity to ponder over this peculiar, and it is to be hoped
short-lived phenomena, the author has, as briefly as pos-
sible, portrayed it in all its virgin freshness, so' that he
may see without the aid of the, hireling, where this social
mirage is leading him. It is strange that such glaring and
contradictory evidence, such as is found from day to day
occupying so much space in the columns of the daily Press,
should hypnotise a sufficient number of citizens into social
slumber, to prevent its iniquitous march being put an end
to.' No power since the Hawn of history—when slaves made
bricks without straw—down to our own day, when Bruce
Smith declares the worker must wait until he is wanted, has
bqen able to give the Unit work. But there are two factors
which may seriously interfere with the one rift in our fools
And rogues’ paradise, and make it worse than we have yet
known it, namely, an increasing birthrate, and immigration.
Now, notwithstanding the fact that although these two
factors have been all but stationary during the past five years,
workers increased from 60,779 to 72,175, whilst the average
wage decreased from £Bl 16s to £74 13s. Hence, if this
increase in workers, and such a tremendous decrease in wages
paid takes place under almost stagnant conditions, what


will be the condition of the -worker if he, as' Mammon fondly
hopes he will, begin to increase, like the rabbit, and the un-
suspecting foreigner becoming intoxicated with the glowing
reports that ever and anon reach him, makes up his mind
to become one of us, because it is a notorious fact that popu-
lation, under our system, does, and must always increase
the wealth of the few, at the expense of the many ? There-
fore, if the reader will only consider these two factors, and
the part they play in our everyday life, he will see that wo-
man is placed on a far higher plane of life than that of bring-
ing into this world life that must, from the cradle to the
grave, pass its time in slavery, and that the pauper immi-
grant is refused a footing till such time as his idle brother
is at work. Malthusianism, which in the Commonwealth is
only in its infancy, will grow and keep the slaves within
limits, so as to allow the worker to' command a living wage,
but so far as immigration is concerned, so long as our pre-
sent system prevails, it will depend upon two factors: A,
by inducements offered; B, to reports which may or may
not be true. The reader knows, or should know, that re-
ports, which, under certain climatic conditions would be
absolutely true concerning New South Wales, have been mis-
leading, -and in consequence have ruined thousands. So the
birth-rate and immigration will go hand in hand, according
to beliefs and circumstances, but only till reason blooms and
bears fruit, when both will be kept within bounds, and till
then wealth, by the aid of Acts of Parliament, will do its
utmost to fill the slum with slaves, and in like manner pro-
claim it far and near that Sunny New South Wales is, or
should be, the hub of alb creation. There is an old proverb,
that whom the gods wish to destroy they first make mad,
and madness, or devilish cunning must be laid at the feet of
him who boasts of our prosperity, except it be in the direc-
tion which a jibbing horse * invariably prefers; and judged
by this standard, we find but one serious rift in our social
lute. This rift, which undoubtedly shows signs of perma-
nent decay, brings to the bar of public opinion, the most
damning evidence against unrestricted individualism that can
be found, namely, the decrease in the workers’ wage, and the
employment of more youthful and underpaid hands. The
“Daily Telegraph,” the greatest power that we have for
moulding our every-day life, accounts for this in such a mat-
ter-of-course way that the average reader’s mind would never
from such a spring draw inspiration. It says there are
not a few of those manufacturing industries in which there


has been distinct retrogression, and though more hands are
employed, they have drifted into the low-paid slop-clothing
and similar trades, where a. substantial remuneration is out.
of the question. There is no doubt that the cost of living
has been raised considerably, but the wages paid to the
72,175 factory hands last year were but little more than
were paid to the 60,779 factory hands in 1900. From this
extract we gather that prosperity for the worker is forging
ahead, so far as mere work is concerned, and that prosperity
follows him who makes shoddy, shoddy meaning that which
is worthless. The reader will ask, if shoddy is worthless,
why is 1 it made, and above all, why is it bought ? The reason
why it is bought is found in the above extract. It is self-
evident that if 72,175 workers receive but little more wages
than 60,779 did. five years ago, and the cost of living con-
siderably increased, which statement, the author being a shqp-
keeper by affidavit could confirm;' that there has been a
criminal stoppage in wages, followed by a decreasing expen-
diture on the part of the worker, caused not, be it remem-
bered, by Federation, but by lust and ignorance, two factors
governing the hirelings who have had charge of it. From this
it will be seen that the worker has had no alternative but
to buy shoddy. Consequently, his sons and daughters, like
sheep to the slaughter, march down to the sweater’s den,
where the “Daily Telegraph” says a substantal remunera-
tion is out of the question. And with this one exception,
a decrease in wages, unrestricted individualism in New South
Wales shows unmistakable signs of an ever-growing pros-
perity in all her walks of life. It is easy enough to ac-
count for Jones allowing his offspring to be drawn down to
the sweater’s den, as the magnet to the pole, but when one
looks for the right to compel him to do it, he is absolutely
lost whilst trying to find it. There is no response from
within; he gets no assistance from Nature, for Nature and
God declare that all are equal. Therefore the question is
how much longer is reason going to allow ignorance to be
swayed by the political hireling, sitting as ruler, and the
mountebank who fills the pulpit. The day has not yet ar-
rived for reason to bloom in the ranksi of what is popularly
known as labour. Labour hag never yet had the leisure nor
the opportunity to analyse the environment in which he ex-
ists, and if he had, being a religious animal, he has been So.
steeped in ignorance concerning the nature of true economic
laws, the principles of the intellectual giants) which govern
Him, and the religious bigotry of Sectarianism, which grips


him in its diabolical self-made vice, these evils would have
been more than sufficient to have kept him rolling, like the
earth, from side to side. And to show that the above esti-
mate of Jones’ ability to steer the.ship of State is founded
upon the rock of fact, the reader has only to glance at the
result of the election at Cootamundra, between Mr. Holman,
the leader of State Nationalises, and Mr. Fitzpatrick, the
nominee, at least, of freedom. The gauging. of the results
which in all probability will follow the re-election of Mr.
Holman, is beyond the power of man. Mr. Holman, the
most powerful exponent for the nationalisers of all things,
is placed in a position from which he can wreck the homes
of the very men who voted for him. Here we have a striking
instance that reason has not yet bloomed within the soul of
Jones. Mr. Norton, who should have been his opponent,
and had he been fifty times as black as he was painted, should
have been returned; for at the longest he would only have
held the honour for a short time. But Mr. Holman, a giant,
amongst pigmies, ignorance, and time-servers, who shall' say
what, on the nationalisers’ road, he will not accomplish, vow-
ing to the lack of that bond of sympathy in the workers’
camp, which is seen to firmly bind the worshippers of wealth
together, it is not to be wondered at that our banks are run-
ning over with gold won, but not owned by the worker, that
our charities are increasing, millionaires are being made,
workers increasing, the sister check-by-jowl with her brother,
and both struggling for what should be done by then-
father ; laws to suit the rich and damn the worker, axe framed
from day to day by the hireling, and last, but not least,
our Premier boasts of having almost a million pounds of a
surplus. It is not too much to say that the world has never
seen such a phenomenon before, namely, charity boasting of
an increase of work, workers increasing, males 11 per cent.,
females 56| per cent., living 25 per cent, more than it was
before we federated, banks full, granaries full of corn, hun-
dreds of thousands of the people’s money growing mouldy for
the want of using, millions of pounds’ worth of water run-
ning to waste, land lying idle since the day it was made,
and God gave the command to man to rise, work, and eat;
and yet honest labour, hungry, and without hope, walk our
streets, or standing outside the walls of our State’s banquet-
ing hall, listening to the jingling of glasses, as they are being
emptied of the sparkling liquid which they have helped to
purchase, but not allowed to taste. When once you let rea-
son into the fold of public life, how simple it becomes to


dovetail the sayings of Christ into the actions of our leaders,
and purifiers of our morals. Note their actions; take a
lightning glance over the populated portions of the State on
a Sunday morning, and what is there that the reader will not
see as regards desecrating the Seventh Day, and then weigh
the evidence against running the first train into the new
station on that day, as given in the House by two social fire-
brands? These two men, one dressed in green, the other in
yellow, moving amongst political slime and hell-made sectar-
ianism, without the onlooker being able to distinguish any
wholesome social leaven, expect to shine in heaven, as old Sol
does in unlimited space; and yet, each, the other believes,
will go to hell. Had the word damnable, feeling, the author
would apologise to ( it for using it in connection with two
such sanctimonious hypocrites, who, were the author super-
stitious, would certainly believe that Nature had so manipu-
lated a few grains of sand and water so that the quintessence
of cant could be seen in its unadorned nakedness. To think
that in this twentieth century of Christianity, light and truth,
hypocrisy and a bastard orthodoxy should hold in the
jaws of hell the teeming millions of human beings who don’t
know from precept the right hand from the left. Surely,
if there was anything on earth that could raise the dead, some
giant of the past would appear and sweep such human scum
from off the earth. Let the reader’s imagination take him to
the throne of one of these social repairers, and listen to the
following words, which fell from the member ofj Parliament
and nis wife, as they were dining together on the Monday
following the opening of the new station. Jemima, my dear,
wherever did you buy this celery; its crispness is simply de-
lightful. Why, I bought it off Ting-a Ling, and its crisp-
ness is due to the fact that it is watered every day of the
week, Sunday included. How do you know this? I belong
to the Fresh Air League, so whilst you were praying for the
Seventh Day to be kept holy, I took a trip on the Illawarra
kne, and drank the pure air of heaven, whilst watching and
talking with the men at work. How nicely the words,
“Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hyprocrites! for ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he -’s
made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than your-
selves,” dovetail into the actions of these men, who, al-
though against running a train for the first time into the
new station on a Sunday, eat with a gusto the fruit grown
by Seventh Day labour, and in other ways assist in the


universality of work on the Sabbath. Thirty years ago it was
generally held that civilization did not extend to more than
ten miles of the centres of population. To-day the ten miles
have disappeared, and freedom of thought and action now
dominates the majority. Hence our Premier, the Hon. J.
H. Oarruthers, taking advantage of what unequal oppor-
tunity has put in his way, has thrown to the winds whatever
little humanitarianism he may have once possessed, and
turned his back upon the poor, who, day by day, beg for
work, to enable them to remain honest; but all to no pur-
pose, for, with callous audacity, he boasts of having nearly
one million pounds of a surplus, and that, under his rule,
the State is prospering, but it is one thing for the State to
prosper and another thing for the people to prosper. For
instance, Jones has saved fifty pounds, and is then thrown out
of work, and before he again gets work, it is all gone. Jones
may be fifty years' old, and in that case too old to again make
up for lost time. Consequently, now is the time to ask upon
what foundation does unrestricted individualism rest 1 Jones
has given all the best years of his life to live and benefit the
State; yet as soon as gray hairs mingle with his locks, and
a cheap labour, comes along, out he goes; and although he
still continues) to consume that which has been heavily taxed
by the State, the State through such vampires as Mr. J.
H. Carruthers says, I know you not, but the profit the State
made out of your fifty pounds will help pay for the wine con-
sumed at its periodical gatherings. Jones is a native of the
soil, and as such, part owner as long as he lives, or remains
on the land. It is easy enough to produce evidence on behalf
of Jones, but reason waits to be instructed by the State upon
what at present is known as might is right. Jones’ Crea-
tor says to him, “Rise, work and eat.” Nature says eat, or
I will wipe you out; and Reason says, “Take thy fill, for
to-morrow you die.” The Salvation Army, on July 16ttt,
1906, put the coping stone upon this marvellous social phe-
nomenon, “It was their annual meeting, and the report fitted
with automatical smoothness into our environment.”
It left nothing to be ■ desired by Mammon.' It
gave nothing to - reason to rejoice over. The meet-
ing was presided over by Sir Harry Rawson, who
explained the pelasure he felt in presiding over such
a splendid gathering. He hoped that in the audience there
might he many who would join its ranks in the future, and:
he could not help feeling gratified with the success that had
followed the army’s' operations. The Lord Mayor (Alder-


man Allen Taylor) said the splendid work done had his
entire sympathy; but there was not one word from these
two men, holding the highest positions in the State, anent the
permanent lifting up of the idler. Do these men want tell-
ing that when the Army (according to their showing, and
which only confirms lifts one out of the gutter, two
drop in, or that vice and poverty form the natural sequence
to increase of population. Commissioner M'Kie, the prin-
cipal of the staff in the Commonwealth, gave details of the
work done for the year just then closed, and said that never
in the history of fhe Army in any part of the whole world',
in proportion to numbers, had the Army previously helped
and succoured, clothed, and fed so many homeless, workless,
poverty-stricken men, women, and children, as during the last
year. (Loud cheers.) Then followed a record of the work
done, amongst which was the reading of the Scriptures to
35,097, and prayers to 55,830 souls, followed by the mag-
nificent harvest of 136 souls passing from death unto life.
This result, looked at from a commercial standpoint, could
not have been accomplished for less than one pound sterling,
for every soul prayed for. Nothing succeeds like success, and
where in the wide world will you find poverty putting up such
a record as this? Is it any wonder that the people of the
United Kingdom, though anxious to shake off their feet the
dust of poverty, shun our sunny land, where rabbits' hold the
pasture, and the idle human drones the coin. Let the
reader consider for a moment what a criminal waste of money
and labour is wrapped up in this work of charity. The good
being hut the veriest fraction, when compared with the evil
wrought. Give a man his breakfast, and he wants his din-
ner and tea upon the same liberal scale. Then tot up the
gains on the social side! Some one has been waylaid and
induced to give, thus three meals are lost, without even one
millionth part of their value being returned to the State.
The man is a day older; his clothes a day’s march nearer the
paper mill; his discontent increased; his regeneration made
still more improbable, whilst the gain to the State is the
birth of another criminal. Now, take a glance at the other
side of the picture! If the members of the Salvation Army
were all put where they should be, that is, in a paddock suffi-
ciently large to hold them all, they could grow more than
sufficient to feed all the paupers in the State. And if all
the able-bodied men, who lose a certain amount of time every
year, and all the paupers who could do light work, but who
now live upon charity and friends, were properly overseered,


water could be secured, which, in the near future, would he
worth millions of pounds to the State, give assurance to the
settler that he would never become bankrupt, because of a
lack of moisture, and slums, gutter snipes, ignorance, and
manufactured vice, would be kept within bounds. In the
department of labour, Mr. Hall, the acting Government Sta-
tistician, informs us that in 1900 there were 60,779 hands
employed, who received £4,974,216, an average of £Bl 16s
each, whilst in 1905 72,175 hands only received £5,191,350,
being an average of £7l 18s each. So we find that for an
additional Sum of £178,592, the employer secured no less
than an increase of 11,396 hands. From these figures there
need be no further search for evidence to prove where wealth
goes to. The added value to the manufactured articles in
1905 was £10,598,000. Out of this there was paid £5,191,350
in wages, leaving £5,407,650 to be divided between the em-
ployer and the money lender. This is why the worker lives
in a jerry-built cottage. This is why beautiful homes and
massive stores are continually on the increase. To the in-
crease of riches there can be no legal objection; 'but Reason
advances a Divine and moral claim to a fraction of these
enormous profits to assist those to whom time nor chance
ever appeared. No wonder the capitalistic Press goes into
ecstacies over the prosperity of the State. Will the worker
never learn that systems grow, that nothing can prevent their
growth, except decay, brought on by national ineptitude, or
death, brought about by wealth,and poverty reaching their
limit, when civil war begins and another nation steps in,
and claims what’s left. And the reader might as well try
to empty Port Jackgon with a bucket as try to.lift the Unit
out of the gutter by any system that the brain of man could
conceive. The Unit must be allowed to work, so that his
talent may bloom, bear fruit, when reform would follow
with the regularity of the rising sun. Modern reform proves
for ever, that to lift Smith, Jones must go down, and from
this dilemma, which is the hub upon which Unrestricted
Individualism revolves, there can be no get away, except
by the method foreshadowed in these pages. "Protection
ruins Freetrade; Freetrade ruins Protection; and under our
present system it is impossible to frame an Act of Parliament
for the betterment of Smith, without encroaching upon the
moral rights of Jones. And this, in itself, is more than suffi-
cient to condemn it. And "to look for increased wages under
it, when the average is struck, is to look for something that
will not be found. Still, progressing is undoubtedly our


counter-sign to-day, for the work of charity is in full blast.
Even Hospital Saturday outdid itself in its haste to do what
should be done by the State, for if there is one duty more
than another which should be done by the State, it is in
giving relief and comfort to those wounded in its commercial
life, and to those who are too poor to pay. When the Czar
dissolved the Douma, about two-thirds of its members issued
a manifesto, which, so far as words went, meant death or vic-
tory. The cry of these men to-day is, fellow citizens, stand up,
and if the workers of New South Wales have any manhood
left, they will stand up, for longer they lie down the longer
they are likely to, and the following evidence supports
this assertion. The late Mr. Alfred Beit left wealth some-
where between £25,000,000 and £30,000,000, gathered by
thousands of workers who toiled in the diamond fields for this
one inhuman vulture; and yet looked at from an unres-
tricted standpoint, he had as much law on his side as the
man who had nothing to leave. The Press, the pulpit, and
the politicians who have an axe to grind shout from the
house-top that the piling up of millions is immoral; but so
long as one man walks the State exempt from income tax,
man has a right, nay a duty, to perform, by making all he
can, for he knows not the day that a social upheaval may
come his way, and despoil his goods. Where the late Mr.
Beit failed to show that he was human was when he trans-
ferred the ladder upon which he had risen to wealth and
power to one individual, thereby depriving the masses from
participating in the distribution of some of the millions,
which they had won from the earth, for the paltry sum
given to charities was not worth taking notice of. The
worker having digested the fact that Mr. Otto Beit for probate
alone will have to sign a cheque for close upon £1,000,000
should be sufficient to show him the magnitude of his wealth,
the power it will command, and the amount of sweat that
he, the worker, lost whilst scraping it together. Does not
this show the madness of imagining that the regeneration of
man can ever be evolved out of such a system ? The late
Mr. Beit was the bosom friend of the late Cecil Rhodes, and
Mr. Rhodes was the friend of kings, an imperialist amongst
imperialism, and an enemy to the worker. The gifts of the
late Mr. Rhodes go to what! Higher education, and what has
higher education done for the masses, ruined them. It has
sharpened their appetites for a share in the pleasures of life,
created machinery which holds them in the sweater’s grip,
who says, do this, and it is done. So it will be seen that


instead of a mighty blessing following in the wake of edu-
cation, in the shape of a progressive income tax without ex-
emptions, and so sipreading contentment through thei land, we
have the fact as naked as the sun at noon, that every move
which science makes throws a percentage of workers out of
work, adds wealth to the few, prevents the worker from ask-
ing for what is his due, lest his master should say, get thee
hence, dog! The proposals put forward from time to time to
keep charity within bounds are unique, and show that the God
of Mammon is anything but a fool. The poor man’s tea and
sugar, his amusement ticket, his bachelorhood, his jews-harp,
for hi 3 piano is often worn out' before it reaches him, all are
suggested as being worthy of being taxed to keep charity upon
a no exemption ticket, such as is now proposed to be done
in North Sydney, namely, a charity lax. New South Wales
is still in swaddling clothes, and yet wealth is already on the
move to make a charity tax universal. Mark how soon
wealth is up in arms against a partial charity tax, but when
the poor declare for an income tax, wealth says hands off! To
show the possibility of the masses again becoming enslaved,
the author quotes the words of two great men, President
Roosevelt and Cardinal Moran, two of the world’s modern
and humanitarian reformers. The Cardinal said President
Roosevelt had laid it down that it was character that must
be attended to in their schools, character, not intellect, must
be the programme. (Cheers.) He, the Cardinal, accep-
ted the dictum in the fullest measure. He hoped the time
was not far distant when they would possess a university of
their own. It would be criminal on the part of anyone, who,
reading these words, and capable of dressing them in their
proper garb, to remain silent. Wealth and orthodoxy hold
fast to the traditions of the past, when character, good, bad,
and indifferent, was all that was to be found in the nine
hundred and ninety-nine ignorant and superstitious slaves,
who were scourged by the one who ruled because he had had
a university education. President Roosevelt and the Car-
dinal may sigh, and long to see the masses driven into the
fold, where character, and not intellect, is passed on to glory,
after spending their day in an' earthly hell, But they will
sigh' in vain. The school-master has been out, and the result
is that the talent of reason has burst the bands which a
lustful intellectuality had put round it. Imprison intel-
lect, mould character as you would a brick, by letting one
out of a thousand into the fold, where intellect roams at will,


imprison intellect, and the martyr’s fires, which our fore-
fathers caused to he kindled, only just out, and the bloody
revenge now being taken in holy Russia, because nine hun-
dred and ninety-nine have had their talents bound whilst
their characters were being formed by 'the odd one. The
time has now arrived when the question must be asked, yes,
and answered, what has civilization done to soften the heart
and humanise the man ? O, intellect, thou art man’s only
hope. It is thou, and thou only, that will mould his char-
acter. Thou, like the cyclonic blasts of Nature, movest on-
ward, sweeping to the four winds of heaven the supersti-
tions of ages', thereby clearing a track for man to walk on.
If the reader is anxious to find out the difference between
character and intellect, let him enter the inky darkness of
the coal mine, and see character exemplified in its purest
form. There, he will siee the horse reduced to a state ex-
actly akin to an automatical machine. It has no talent of
reason to be destroyed, and what spirit instinct had once
endowed it with had been crushed out by a power too strong
to fight against; consequently, it does what it is told, and
it is so -witE the man whose character hasi been moulded
by an outside, instead of an inside force. And there is as
great, and almost as impassable a gulf between character,
which has been moulded by the intellect from within, and that
moulded by a cultured, but lustful intellect from without, as
there is between the horse in the mine, which has been made
blind, owing to its environment, and the greatest achieve-
ment of unfettered intellect, wireless telegraphy. The man
whosie character has been moulded from without is as a- beast
of burden, neither more nor less, a pawn on the chess-board
of life, and a bad-one at that. Civilization has been bound-
ing along like a ship'with a fair wind, and intellect, where
it has had money for a fulcrum, has harnessed the forceg of
Nature to its car, made them do its work, explored the uni-
verse, delved into the heart of the earth, and proved for all
time that the six days of creation were so long that the mind
loses itself, looking for their beginning and ending. And now,
intellect demands the recognition of a cycle for the Seventh
Day, and will ere long get it. The evidence in support of
the assertion that God is resting, so far as concerns irian, is
irrefutable when the reader considers the untold millions of
talents given by God, but confined and lost to the world,
owing to character being formed by the lash of poverty and
helplessness. He cannot, if he is worthy of the name, but
admit that God is at rest. And seeing that the talent that


leads to hell, and points the way to heaven, is found in the
plague-stricken slum, as well as the palace, the forming of
character at the expense of intellect would be l the most dia-
bolical crime that man could be guilty of. It is his duty to
at once put a barricade across these roads of progress that
lead to national decay. What a parody on our boasted civi-
lization is to be found in the saying of these two men who
one day preach goodwill to all, and on the next lay the foun-
dation upon which the intellect of the worker is to be done
to death. In leaving this unsavoury subject, the author
would direct the reader’s attention to the fact that if this
action is again allowed to rear its head, the nine hundred
and ninety-nine slaves would have to pay for the keep of the
one whose intellect would be allowed to germinate in the rich
and lustful pasture owned by a select, but parasitical few,
many of whose intellects, after having bloomed, would be
found to equal those of him who first gave it to the world that
it was the sun, and not the earth, that turned round every
twenty-four hours. Eet the reader make no mistake. There
is an indifference abroad to-day, born out of the inequalities
of our daily life, arid nourished by the fables chanted, and
the example set by an orthodoxy that has failed to grasp the
cardinal point in a system which imposes a duty upon those
who presume to preach about it, and our empty churches
prove to the hilt that this indifference does not care who
wins the race, and all that it is anxiousi about is, for some
humanising orator to come along and make the hour instead
of waiting, and waiting in vain, for the hour to produce the
man. ' Distance, it is said, lends enchantment to the view,
but the man who can with indifference look upon a future,
sucn as these two reformers are assisting to lick into shape,
a future in which the worker would have no alternative hut
to obey, should be put in a place where example, precept,
and influence could do no harm. You may boast about your
Education Act, and your so-called liberty, but with the
increase of wealth, the increase of those cast penniless, yearly,
into the industrial frying-pan of supply and demand, your
Education Act will not be to you worth a groat. And, as for
liberty, well, without getting into gaol, you may certainly
ask for'work; but don’t forget that Dives and the State have
liberty, and make use of it, in denying you anything and
everything on earth, but the road, air, water, and the privi-
lege of travelling to some other sphere, so unutterable being
their contempt and indifference as to whether you live or
die.


SOLVING THE PROBLEM.
Whatever opinions the reader may have held regarding
what should be man’s position in life, having read and
digested the foregoing pages, he will, if blessed with an un-
biassed mind, be convinced that a change in our socialism
should be made without waiting either for the intervention
of God, or the humanitising of the human race. The reader
will become a strong advocte for a law that would anticipate
these two agencies, a law that would operate directly upon
our system by giving relief to the living, instead of the law
at present in vogue which demands a daily sacrifice from the
humanitarian, and encourages the rogue to make the best use
of the unequal opportunity thrown in his way. The reader
will see that the first step for a State to take after having
made up its mind that all men shall work, or prove them-
selves to be possessed of sufficient means of support, would be
to place upon the statutes an Alien Restriction Act, for the
purpose of regulating the influx of paupers. That this is a
perfectly legitimate action to take by a people who have made
up_ their mind to sacrifice a portion of their income, so that
all may have work and food, is at last recognised by men
standing high in the social world. At a conference of Dele-
gates held in London, to consider what was best to be done
to relieve the awful poverty existing in England, Sir John
Gorst recognised the fact, that, before any permanent good
could be done, an Alien Restriction Act was one of the first
measures required, and then it would be the duty of the Gov-
ernment and local authorities to initiate works of relief until
a general round of prosperity should flood the land. fThus, it
will be seen from this extract, that Sir John, while willing to
exclude the foreigner and adopt the parrot cry of the Aus-
tralians, and shout, “England for the English,” failed to
show that he possessed the knowledge which is necessary,
before one becomes qualified to grapple with the greatest of
all problems, namely, “Mari’s responsibility to Man.” Had
Sir John been fully -seized with what is necessary to be done,
he would have advocated an income tax without exemptions
and the employment of the Unit ; but he clings to the old
pagan belief of the Pharoahs, which is, that he who can may
scoop the pool, and that all subsequent acts in the' way of
charity are to be inscribed in the books of Heaven in letters
of gold. Sir John sees no further than the immediate relief


of his own generation by intermittent and pauperising
methods, and so leaves the solving of the problem where he
found it. And yet he is one of the great men of the day,
can bridge the distance to the farthest star, dissect an atom,
and all but tell- us how the first one began to revolve, which
ended in our earth being made. But when it comes to
the question of how to give work to all, and food to all,
although work like the heavens has no limits, food rots for
want of being eaten and land sleeps because there is no one
to work it, Sir John is silent, although surrounded by the
highest mental culture which the world' has produced, living
in a land to which all the world pays tribute, which makes it
the richest spot on earth. And yet, with all these blessings,
one in every forty roams through the land a pauper; and,
knowing these facts, our hireling politicians who are wasting
the only asset that we have, which might have remained a
permanent one, arid are adding yearly to the tribute which
we have to pay to England, say that if we will only let the
present run into the future, all will be well.
England is the home of liberty of conscience and yet
her sons and daughters die like rotten sheep owing to the
lack of food, and is the reader going to let this fair land go
the same way, his offspring a sweated and starved into
an early grave, or is he going to gird on hisi harness, conquer
the drones of the soil, and leave his off-spring free.
Nations in one sense resemble ourselves, man is horn,
flourishes for a while and then decays, but here all resem-
blance ceases, • for with man his bounds are fixed by irrevo-
cable laws of nature, and outside of those he cannot get;
but it is altogether different when, in the light of history,
we examine the lives of nations which have ceased to exist,
their becoming so polluted that to live in them
became an impossibility. Young and vigorous nations rose
and swallowed them up, because they were on the high road
to ruin, owing to unrestricted individualism falling over its
own vice-made precipice; and to-day, we can see nations
steeped in ignorance and poverty, which would have been
swallowed up before now, only for the jealousy existing con-
cerning the doctrine of the balance of power amongst the
younger nations.
Nations that were born with every promise of being
able to hold their own, have, under the withering blast of
individualism, come to an early end, and there are signs
even now which go to show that England will yet have to
eat the leek of humiliation, or adopt the doctrine of Christ’s


Christianity, and set its house in order before indifference
seizes the reins of power.
The justness of the action of a State to pass laws for
the protection of its subjects being recognised, the word
alien would, of course, apply to all outside of its borders;
and, unless there was a demand for labour, no one would be
allowed to become a citizen, except as a producer. The wis-
dom of this action will be seen by the reader when he takes
into consideration the higher plane of life which the citizens
of the State had resolved to live, namely:—That all should
be given the opportunity to work, thereby depriving them
of the excuse that they had not the chance of living hy honest
work. Having secured the State against the danger of an
influx of paupers, the next step would be to provide funds
for the payment of thosa whom neither the State’s permanent
fields of labour nor the private employer required; and,
seeing that the whole wealth of the State is held by these two
corporations, it becomes as clear as noon-day, that from these
two sources must be drawn the funds to pay the enforced
idler with. This is done by passing a progressive Income
Tax without exemptions, which converts the man who was
unemployed, and a pauper, the day before the act comes into
operation, into an honest citizen, and a contributor to the
Income Tax the following day. And this tax, which is un-
doubtedly the most honest of aH, should be used for this
purpose only. No man can, by himself, create wealth, for,
suppose that he grows two. bushels of wheat, and can only
eat one bushel, of what use is the other bushel till he finds
a consumer for it? and, if he makes a profit, then it is his
duty to pay a portion corresponding to the profit made, to-
wards making the road by which he was enabled to carry his
corn to market, and the making of the road should be given
to the man who lacks the means either to buy or to grow
the wheat.
At present, we recognise a man’s right to live, but
ignore all responsibilty of helping him to live. We want to
grow the wheat, eat the wheat, and compel the other fellow
to make the road, whilst existing upon the chaff. This is
'what unrestricted individualism is doing to-day; and it
stands aghast at the very idea that it should do any more.
It clings to the old pagan belief, that might is a divine-given
right, and so grasps at everything within its reach, regardless
of consequences, or the untold misery which its action pro-
duces.
Having provided the means to pay those who are not at
any given time required by the State, nor yet by the private


employer, and who, being without means to help themselves,
must thieve, or die, the Government would
map permanent national works, works that
could }je undertaken either by one hundred men, or by one
thousand,-, accardihg/to the state of the labour market. These
works would vconsist of artesian bores, canals, reservoirs,
/forestry, .and theypreparation of the desert for the man of
1 pieans tdjoccupy.y For the want of these works being carried
ietft, the' untold'millions of wealth which the soil is waiting
ytb' stilflost to us, and yet we starve, and flee from a
of rain, as though all hell was after us. To
sweep away this idiotic madness, it is only necessary for us
to resolve that we shall all have the opportunity to work,
and that all shall work; and here the author would remark,
that, although this compulsion seems to be the very essence
of Nationalised Socialism, it begins and ends in Christ’s one
sentence, “Bear ye all one another’s burdens”; at present
neither the lustful drone nor the idler does this, and, conse-
quently, it is all left for the willing horse to pull the show
along. But I have faith enough to believe that the People
of this State will rise equal to the occasion, and see that
all take their turn at the helm; for to this extent every
man must he prepared to go before he has any right to hope
to participate in the good things which Orthodoxy says await
us in the next world.
Man must have the opportunity given him to work
before he can ,be called a rogue, should he steal to satisfy
hunger. To say that at all times man must remain idle, is
a libel on the laws of nature, and an insult to their Creator.
The unemployed problem can never be solved whilst one man
is kept in enforced idleness, and to see that he
has the opportunity to work, is as far as any
intelligent people will go on the road to State
Socialism, because, if thc_ world is to reap the full
benefit which the talents of man can be made to give, then
man must he free, and not only free—there must he some in-
ducement held out to him before he can be expected to rack
his brain, or burn the midnight oil, and the State would be
the gainer if it offered prizes for inventions which tend to
minimise the toil of man. At present our chief aim is to
run ourselves into debt on works that we shall never live to
see productive, unless in the direction of making our indebt-
edness increase, as though this was the intention of God when
He placed us here. And if the reader has been under the
impression that this was His intention, he has only to con-
sider how one man’s work overlaps another’s, to he convinced


that He who made the Universe has no hand in our senseless
struggle for a crust of bread. What fools we must be in the
eyes of our Creator, who, having, filled the earth with food'
and drink, enough and to spare, and given us senses to enjoy
them, sees us continually engaged in robbing and killing one
another with as little compunction as though it was a fly we
were dealing with. ,
This mixture of Humanity and civilized cannibalism must
remain with us as long as money takes precedence over flesh
and blood'.
The State having decided where to start, the police, who
would have had instructions to make lists of the number of
men unemployed, including loafers and known thieves, would
band them in; and the men, under the best supervision to
he had, would be taken and set to work, either by the day,
or by contract, according to the nature of the work and the
disposition of the worker. Of course, for some time, and
perhaps till many of them died, there would' be trouble with
the professional loafer and the known thief, but, seeing that
this trouble is always with us, we could lose nothing by the
change, especially now that we have an Habitual Criminals’
Act, whilst we would gain by the amount of work done, by
the amount of thieving which would be left undone, and the
evil which they would be prevented from planting in the
hearts of those, who, other things being equal, would follow
in their footsteps. These parasites are wholly sus-
tained 1 by begging, or by theft,- and our laws will never be
based on the rock of Justice till they are compelled to work,
for which, of course, they should be paid a living wage, and
the fear of poverty taken from before their eyes; and, once
they were seized with the fact that it was work or die it
would not take them long to declare in favour of work,
knowing that begging had been made a criminal offence.
Three convictions and a permanent residence has now
all but become the law of the land, where breaking stones,
down to employment suitable for the weak will be the order
of the day. And the absence of these idlers from the back
door by day, and the back yard at night, would be a relief
and a joy to thousands who now have to pay more for the keep
of these pests, than they would have to pay under a Pro-
gressive Income Tax, to be used for the purpose of making
the idler and thief subdue the forest. There can be no
question but that the time has come, whether we realise it or
not, when we must either live within our income and remain
solvent, or go on as we have been going, and lose all. One
glanc.e at what we have parted with, what we owe, and what


our rulers are, will convince anyone capable of putting two
and two together that the end of Unrestricted Individualism
in thi9 or in, any other State means a rich and lustful aristo-
cracy, and ignorance, poverty, superstition and slavery for
the workers, as these hell-born evils exist in older countries
to-day. There can be no safety where the unemployed are,
for they are at once the yeast which keeps all labour in a
state of unrest, the joy of the sweater, and the destroyers) of
the innocent.
To guard against the possibility of outsiders coming .in to
reap some of the advantages which would .undoubtedly accrue
to all under this system, every man in the State would have
his name on the Electoral Roll, and would, also, if deemed
necessary, have to bring evidence to prove that he was a
citizen within the meaning of the law. Unrestricted Indivi-
dualism also shows that if England, with her unapproachable
wealth, has to seriously consider whether she will not have to
close her doors against the alien, we can have no hope of ever
being able to live under prosperous conditions. One illustra-
tion will be sufficient to show the absurdity of such a hope—
England and the Redfern Railway Station. England, as most
people are aware, has streams of wealth continually emptying
themselves into her lap, from all parts of the world. Conse-
quently, money to her has, to a great extent, lost its power.
SKe has more than—under her accursed system of grab—she
can use, so, as it flows in, so it flows out, only to return
swelled by the sweat of fools such as ourselves. These streams
of wealth never become choked by commercial depression,
for they are confined to the stream of interest and have their
source fixed in solid securities. So it is with the Redfern
Railway Station, which is kept constantly supplied with
trains from all parts of the State, and' where one train,
more or less, is of small consequence, and would never be
missed, whilst even one train 'might mean the salvation or
otherwise of one of its outposts. This is where we have
failed to realise the gravity of the position into which we have
run. We have sold the most valuable portions of ohr estate.
We are annually depleting our mineral wealth by millions.
We have built ourliouse at a cost of £83,000,000, the interest
on which goes to England to gorge the already over-gorged.
Can the reader not see that prosperity under such conditions
is impossible; can he not see that vice, crime, poverty, and
population keep step; that there was a time in English his-
tory when vEs entire population did not exceed the number
of its paupers to-day. England’s wealth has never been used
as a factor to lift up the worker, nor can it ever be used


for this purpose, whilst the possibility of poverty stares man
in the face. Men like Sir John Gorst recognise that it would
only hasten the downfall of any system of relief that a State
might adopt for the relief of the distressed, if all its highways
were open for the indigent of other States to travel on for the
purpose of being present at the feast of crumbs. This is the
reason why relief works are failures, and must ever remain
such.
But, whilst relief works from a humanitarian point of
view are failures, from Mammon’s standpoint they are perfec-
tion itself. Intermittent work and relief works are the two
Jokers in the hands of wealth; these are the two factors
which keep the labour market always choked, for the law
of supply and demand being beyond the power of man to regu-
late, the commercial channels become flooded with goods, and
the sequel—depression, idleness and poverty—follows. Now,
under Unrestricted Individualism, alongside this law of
supply and demand, there is another law, which like the first
law is an unwritten one: the law of supply and demand fills
the warehouse and then the owner says to his workmen, “So
far as I am concerned you must remain idle, whilst I empty
my store.’’ As soon as the law of supply and demand ha 3
secujed the dismissal of the worker, another law at once comes
in upon the scene, the natural law of hunger begins to assert
itself, and will not be denied except by sacrifice. Should the
dismissed worker belong to that numerous class, who, from
the hour of commencing life, begin to put away a portion
of their wages—at no time more than sufficient to enable them
to live a decent life, and occasionally enjoy some of the re-
creations which go to smooth some of the rough portions of
their daily life—he will at once begin to draw upon this
sacrificed wealth to satisfy his hunger; for, although idleness
has set in, and the flow of money stopped, the body must
be nourished before it feels in trim to commence the humiliat-
ing march through the streets, for the purpose of begging
permission to be allowed to work. As the days increase in
number during this enforced idleness, so does his wealth de-
crease, but at a much more rapid rate, for what took him
twelve months to store vanishes in the short space of one
month. Consequently, before he again gets work he finds
himself financially in the same position as when he started,
and carrying a tremendous burden. Part of the best years
of his life have vanished, and there is nothing left to gladden
and make easy the last stage of his life. Instead of two
mouthsi to fill he has six, and to fill these and keep respectable
so that the squire of his district may pat him on the back and


say, “Well done Jones,” entails sacrifices which make our
present Socialism a thing to be crushed out of existence at the
first possible moment. Still Jones struggles on, and ever
and anon secures the top wage in his walk of life, but when
the end comes he is no better off than when he started. Youth
at this time supplants him by working at a lower wage, or
the inventive genius of his brother has made him a waster.
From this, till the final goal is reached, there is in his com-
position a mixture of regrets at the inequalities of life, con-
victions that a well-spent life is no bar to poverty, and a
crust earned under sweating conditions, „whilst his imagina-
tion sees in the not too-distant future, a pauper’s funeral
putting the coping-stone on a Unit that no one will miss but
the god of Mammon. And yet, in the face of these everyday
occurrences, the man who enjoys life from the start to the
full extent of his miserable pay, has his every step dogged by
the canting humbugs of society, so that when his first reverse
comes, as come it must, under our accursed system, they may
be able to close their ungodly ears to his petition for work.
Both men have reached their first goal in life’s march. But
mark the difference in the roads taken to get there. Jones
has been buoyed up by sacrifices made, for a time that he
will never live to see, buoyed by the superstition of ortho-
doxy that all is for the best. He has looked forward to the
time when he would smoke the pipe of peace under his own
vine, but, like the millions more, he sees the poor-house gate
open, and ready to close upon him. Smith, on the other
hand, plucked the roses of life as they came in his way;
he had a good time while it lasted, and now that they have
gone, the mere recollection of them brings a smile to his face,
whilst curses on everything, including himself, come from
the sacrificed, because Dives smiled.
And this is what we call life, and are actually told by
Parson, Priest, and King, that it is the best that we shall
get. From an individualist’s stand, this is truth itself; no
one need tell another in our day such a self-evident fact; we
know that It is as natural for wealth and poverty to grow
under the increase of population in a Christian country as it
is for night, to follow day. Therefore, the one question to
be answered is—“ Having shown how to solve the problem,
shall we solve it?’’ If the reader says, yes, then he will
shut out the pauper till wanted. He has already deprived
the habitual criminal of his liberty, he must do likewise with
the professional loafer; he must use the land, the water,
the Unit, and convert his present Income Tax into one
without exemptions; by so doing he will give it a contjnu-


ous and rapid circulation, which, running to and from every
Unit, at once solves the problem of enforced poverty.
A crumb from the rich man’s table—A Sydney Univer-
sal Provider’s Advt.:—
“As for the unfortunate retailer, his chance is as
far off as hell is from Halifax.”
WOMAN’S VOTE.
Rise, ye enfranchised woman! rise to power;
For, since Creation’s dawn, this the first hour
That chance hath favoured thee, let it not pass.
Dost know that wealth would have thee eat the grass;
Thy offspring in the sweater’s den would keep,
And off his labor a rich harvest reap?
What wilt thou with this weapon now ’tis thine?
Wilt thou, as man hath done, tyow, cringe and whine
When good old Mammon bids thee go his way?
Or wilt thou rise, and the old tyrant slay?
Wilt let thine eye down hist’ry take a glance
That it may nerve thee to drive home thy lance?
Thy mother’s blood, thy children’s cry for bread,
'lhine own foul pallet—these thy mind bath fed.
Behold, thou’st reached the parting of the ways:
Oh which of these will you now end thy days?
Beguiled by rogues, bewildered by the press,
Small wonder if with vote you make a mess.
Dost know, that no man can the Unit rise
Except by a reform which no one tries?
Dost know, the man of greed reform would kill,
Because it would the Unit’s larder fill?
Don’t b© a fool when to the booth you go;
Don’t slaughter Jones because Smith told you to.
Voto for the man that’s pledged to work and wage,
And let thy name be writ on hist’ry’s page.
Strike out the hireling, unionist as well,
And send the individualist to hell.
Don t let- these vampires guile thee e’en one hour.
Lest thou be shorn of thy enfranchised power.
March to the booth with triumph in your mien,
And buoyant step, afraid not to be seen.
A bloodless cross, thy work would then be done,
And you, a brilliant vict’ry will have won.


INCOME TAX.
The two main objections against taxation in any form
are: First, ignorance of the nature of the demands which
civilization makes upon man, and the knowledge that one is
not getting a square deal. The universality of the truism
amongst men who can command influence, you scratch my
back, and I’ll scratch yours, has become so galling to those
who nevei; will be in a position to scratch anything more im-
portant than the workhouse door, that even if death be the
outcome of the struggle, an attempt shall be made to bring
about a system of taxation which shall cause an increase in
the distribution of the coin of the realm. On the surface,
to obtain this piuch-desired end, the Commonwealth has three
so-called economic forces at work ; two of these, the Protec-
tionist and the Socialist, are working in the dark, and can-
not even guess where their objective is situated, whilst the
third one, liberalised unrestricted individualism, although
it has the ashes of its brother’s' systems under its feet, dare
not even hint at such a termination. It is seen in the dis-
tance as plain as the sun at noon-day. The worker has not
yet awoke to the fact that systems grow, and after reaching
what may be called maturity, become either stronger or
weaker. In this respect, nations have no parallel in Nature,
for in Nature there is a limit, and then decay. But up to
the present there has not been one solitary nation born with
sufficient vitality to weather the social storms which raged
around them. Of all the nations of the earth, undoubtedly
the Jewish nation possessed a knowledge, gained under the
cruel government of the Pharoah’s, sufficient to weather
the storms which must always arise where an unrestricted
policy is the law of the land. Consequently, although the
Jewish constitution was not so elastic as what ours is, it gave
unequal opportunity, and that is all human nature when
spurred on by greed requires. The rise of the Jewish nation
was marked by one' continuous round of evolution —victory
followed victory—but these, instead of cementing the nation
in the one bond of brotherhood, created in them the lust
for power, wealth, and superiority, they yearned for great-
ness, even as snobs do to-day, and so they created a king.
Under such conditions as these there could be but one end-
ing. Their maturity grew near, and with it the parting of
the ways; its population was increasing, and getting beyond
the control of the priest-ridden Pharisees, in whom most


of the wealth wag centered, whilst poverty stalked through
the land, as it does with us to-day, and there can be but little
doubt but that the inequality of their Socialism, as it existed
when Christ appeared upon the scene, was responsible for the
birth of that worst of all social evils, Sectarianism. Christ,
full of the spirit of humanitarianism, took the situation in
at a glance. Christ saw the hitherto victorious nation going
headlong to destruction. The age of maturity had passed
without the bond of brotherhood being signed; consequently,
there was no other road left for them to travel on. Al-
though other nations have come and gone since the Jews
were scattered, the wiping-out process is nothing to what it
would be only for what is now called the balance of
power. So that now, instead of two nations fighting to a
finish, and the victor appropriating everything living or
dead, other powers, who would “one at a time” have to face
the conqueror, now combine, and stop the fight; so that,
instead of the vanquished having most of its poverty-stricken
workers killed, or taken as slaves, each nation, when the
fighting is stopped, finds itself with an empty treasury, and
its land swarming with thieves, beggars, hirelings, and a
few rich drones. Although the day, for the present at least,
for one nation to swallow up another has passed, that in no
wise improves the workers’ position. England, standing
upon the topmast rung of civilization’s ladder, Russia upon
its lowest rung, teems with riches, poverty, ignorance, super-
stition, detected and undetected crime, whilst millions of
honest workers are not fed as well as Solomon’s slaves werel.
Anu yet these human automatons on the chess-board of life,
can be manipulated by the social vampire, to yell out in and
out of season, “Britons never shall be slaves.” This would
not matter so much, but for the fact that their inactivity
gives the rich man his chance, and damns to perpetual servi-
tude the man who can see a way out of the cataclysm of pov-
erty which wealth has cast him into. As for Australia, the
home of divorce, where children know more than their par-
ents, where the multitude are composed of an uncementable
mass of sections, each trying—because their surroundings
compel them—to devour the other, where sect reviles sect,
whilst paving the road which leads to the shambles, where
the rich crucify the workers daily. It has been in a seething
state of diabolical and a retrogressive condition, and yet, you,
Reader, have the audacity to say that the Creator has a hand
in moulding our daily life, which grows worse and worse, and
requires no Christ to foretell its end. Rise, if you are not


altogether vertebraless, and place your Creator upon a plane,
which Nature, unpolluted by touch, nor the stars above could
add to its surroundings. When the day comes, for come it
must, that will see a nation of people growing stronger as
year after year rolls by, it will be found to be leavened with
the leaven of humanitarianism, and having in the centre of
its national flag, work for all. The reader must not forget
that the law which prevents man living to himself is unalter-
able, consequently, the willing worker has no alternative but
to lift the unwilling one, if he would escape the danger of
being dragged down himself.. Income tax, to be based upon
the law of equity, must, of course, reach every Unit in the
market; but before such an Act could become law, there
would have to be a law giving every one the opportunity toy-
work. This is the first step, the starting point of a non-
cannibalistic civilization, and there is no other. An income
tax without exemptions till all have the opportunity given
them to work, is an impossibility, but once given this, and
the human face will again become normal. God says if a
man will not work, neither shall he eat; but there is no
possibility of complying with this decree till the law pf the
land is found on his side, or he breaks those already in force.
The "Daily Telegraph,” writing upon the unemployed ques-
tion, said, “The State’s power to give employment and relief
is conditioned by the willingness of those who have got to tax
themselves in aid of those who have not; consequently the
limit is soon reached when the unemployed becomes at all
numerous.” Although from an individual standpoint the
“Telegraph” is logical, from the humanitarian standpoint it
is callousness (thrice distilled.) Here, Header, you have the
secret of poverty explained by one of its oppressors. Head-
ing between the lines the “Telegraph” says, wealth does not
object to a few unemployed, because they keep wages down,
but when they get too numerous, they must either go to the
soup kitchen or commit suicide, for work they shall not. Here
we have the secret explained why it is the poor are always
with us. The “Telegraph” says the solution of the problem
must be found outside of State aid, because it is a rotten
reed to lean upon. To show the reader the unreliableness
of the matter which enters the leading columns of the “Tele-
graph,” when it poses as the friend of Mammon, the author
draws his attention to the fact that the State owns all unsold
land, minerals, and rivers, that the people have to give their
rulers power to levee taxes which reach every unit, until
its income covers expenditure, and that outside of the State


there are only a few private employers, whose very existence
depends upon economic laws, both at home and abroad. And
these are the men, according to the “Telegraph,” that the
unemployed are to look to for deliverance from an earthly
hell. Income tax is objected to because it is a tax upon in-
dustry, but whoever heard of a tax, except upon unearned
increment, that was not a tax upon industry? There-
fore, we will see, how the objection squares with
actual facts. Jones starts life upon three pounds per
weeK, fifteen shillings of which goes in rent, two pounds to
keep the home, leaving five shillings to be put by for a rainy
day. It goes into the bank as a fixed deposit, and at this
point the owner loses sight of it, and from henceforth, whether
he be a'fool or a modern Demosthenes, it earns interest for
him. The bank manager, however, has to be a keen man, and
a reader of character, so that when a would-be borrower of
the accumulated shillings makes his call, the manager may be
able to take his measure. Hodge, having borrowed the shil-
lings, for which he has to pay the owners interest, and ai
share for the upkeep of the bank, proceeds to put on the out-
side of his cottage some paint to keep it frpm going to decay;
then, having risen with the dawn of day, and had seen the
sun settle in the west, 'whilst making two blades of grass
grow where only one grew before, finds at his door on the
following morning Mr. Kent Appraiser, who pats him on the
back, and tells him his place is one hundred per cent. ’ better
than when he took it, and that his taxes in future will be
regulated, not by his net income, but in proportion to the
improvements made; hence, we find that, the owner of the
five shillings, who is only a cog in the wheel'of secondary
industries, gets off scot free, the bank manager with a slight
impost, whilst Hodge, who is one of Nature’s kings, has to
have as much work done before these two worthies sip their
morning coffee, as will pay the bank its interest. Where
then is the tax on brains; does it bear with insolvency
weight upon the mechanical cog, or upon him who has all
the elements in Nature to fight? The five shillings is not
taxed; it is Hodge’s industry that’s taxed. As a matter of
fact, Jones is excessively taxed upon his two pounds fifteen
shillings, but upon the five shillings, which undoubtedly is
a legitimate asset for the taxer to levy upon, is not taxed at
all. You ask why it should be taxed ? Why ? Because
Jones, having no means at his command to make use of the
money, and owing to our unnatural environment forcing
Hodge to risk his few pounds, the best years of his life, and


borrow the five shillings at a usurious rate of interest, should
upon the common lines of justice and humanity, return a
percentage to the general revenue, out of which the funds are
drawn to make the road upon which Jones travels whilst
enjoying the fruit which his surplus five shillings gives him.
From the above it will be seen that it is brains are taxed all
the time, but not in the sense that the individualist would
have us believe, for it is the drone, the rich but brainless
imbecile, and the mechanical cog, who gets let off. Some are
freed from its touch; others escape with a slight impost.
But, notwithstanding all this, it must never be lost sight of
that under unrestricted individualism an income tax is an
immoral quantity. It makes rogues of otherwise honest men.
Unrestricted individualism means every one for himself, re-
gardless of what the consequences may be, for humanitarian-
ism, to do a permanent and national good,- can only appear
upon the scene when its acts are supported by the law of the
land. Therefore, it is an infringement of the liberty of the
subject, when the law steps in and compels Smith to help
Hodge along. The law which governs the principles of un-
restricted individualism presupposes that Smith and Hodge
started from scratch, it is ignorant of the fact that Smith
was born with the proverbial silver spoon, and Hodge with
the features of a badly-nourished child, and therefore can
take no notice of their race for life, nor concern itself about
which one wins. True, Hodge sometimes wins, and when
he does, he generally grows into a tyrant, that the gods
might fear. Clearly then, if there is any responsibility
resting upon Smith, to see that Hodge does not starve to
death by the way, surely it becomes Smith’s duty, not only
to himself, but to the State, to see that Hodge works before
being given that which the State, at the point of the bay-
onet, takes from Smith. And further, unrestricted indi-
vidualism, having created the precedent that a partial
income tax is necessary, in order to supplement the revenue),
and minimise pauperism, cuts the ground from under its
feet, for, by so doing, it acknowledges that sooner or later
its corrupt and unmanageable system must break down,
owing to the increase of riches in the hands of a few, and the
increase of the half starved, and therefore dangerous derelict.
The workers recognising this fact, and seeing no other way
out of their industrial hell, labour proposes to nationalise
everything, for so intolerable has become the law of supply
and demand, owing to the ever-increasing improvements in
machinery, and the competition of worker against worker,


that for better or worse, they are prepared to take a leap into
an industrial hell, where, though having a body to be kicked,
but a soul all their own, they would not have to rise in the
morning, and look for work with the strength which the
crumbs of charity had given them. It shows how hard the
lot of some must be, and it is beyond the imagination to
suppose that he who has tasted of the sweets of liberty will
give them up, although to some they are distributed in very
small quantities. Having once passed the law giving every-
one the opportunity to work, how easy it becomes to see the
equity of an income tax without exemptions. Under pre-
sent conditions, millions of acres sleep, because there is no
one to till them; millions of pounds’ worth of water day
by day returns to its home in the sea, without being used,
our partial income tax is only half sufficient to pay for our
charities; thousands of pounds axe paid to able-bodied men
to distribute it, whilst Hodge, who is in receipt of two pounds
per week, only works ten months in the year. This means
that his five shillings placed in the bank for a rainy day is
all consumed during the two months of enforced idleness.
Consequently, he starts the next year under the bare poles
of poverty. Now, under the law of work for all, and an
income tax without exemptions, he would, at one pound ten
shillings per week, receive twelve pounds, out of which he
would pay his hundred and four sixpences as income tax,
leaving him nine pounds eight shillings, which, with strict
economy, would enable him to leave his five shillings in the
bank to grow until gathered for the purpose of making the
journey down the hill of life absolutely smooth, whilst the
State would have for its twelve pounds, or rather nine
pounds eight shillings, an excavation in its national irri-
gation works room for water, which future generations would
use, and it would assist them to pay the interest on our
Public Debt, which we are going to hand down to them, with
a light heart, if not a clear conscience. As to the possi-
bility of bringing into force an income tax, the reader must
remember that the words, can it be done, have no place in
the question. The question reads, “Shall it be done?”
Shall we scatter to the four winds of heaven the political
vampires, who now consume our substance in riotous liv-
ing and maladministration, practise a Christianity human
m its operations, a Christianity based upon ascertained facts
and commonsense, a Christianity under which Hodge, as
Well as Dives, will be able to eat and drink every day, with-
out having to sacrifice for the morrow, a day he may never


live to see. Let it be one that will let the bloom of youth
grow to perfection on our offspring’s cheek, not wither and
die in the sweater’s den, whilst we, as whipped curs, eat
the crumbs of idleness, instead of the milk and honey which
Nature has stored up for those who are men enough to rise,
work, and eat.
Again, the author says, giving work to the Unit is
neither reform nor an evolution in our life, but a decree,
made by God, and enforced by a law of Nature, that if not
obeyed, starves its victims to death.
THE CRISIS.
Instinct, as well as reason, teaches us that when two
opposing forces meet, damage must be done to one, if not
to both, because the end aimed at from both sides being
the annihilation of the other. We see this exemplified in
ideal form between two bulldogsi in the animal kingdom,
where instinct reigns supreme. And we see it in the king-
dom where reason is supposed to hold the scales of justice
—in its most refined form, when Chritianised man, by
Cunning and fraud, devours the substance belonging to his
neighbour. During the history of man, there have been
many forces at work in the human family, and sad to Say,
.most of them engaged in the degrading and destructive
occupation of trying by craft to occupy the supreme and
dominant position of ruler. But since the day that gave
our so-called responsible Government birth, up to the pre-
sent day, one force alone has held the reins of power, nam-
ely, that in which wealth and cunning were centred. This
section of the human family has', with ease, always been
able to sweep all other sections into obscurity by the sword of
power, which, when occasion required, was used with
relentless cruelty, owing, of course, to the limited franchise
in which the worker had no part. The aim of this class
of the family has always been directed towards keeping all
other sections in a subordinate position, for the purpose of
making them hewers of wood, so that they, the wealthy,
might live a life of ease and lust. Ignorance, superstition,
and wealth worshipping, was but the natural outcome of a
partial franchise. Christ’s disciples once Said: “Who then


can be saved/’ and under the same! impulse, our disfran-
chised ancestors said, if the Parson don’t know, who does?
Man has been well called a religious animal, and there can
be no two opinions upon that point. Man will have a god
of some kind, and wealth gave the uneducated hordes of
humanity one, which if not to their liking, it certainly
suited wealth’ and orthodoxy to perfection. For'the farmer
took it out of the hide of Hodge, so that when the Parson
put the sign of the cross upon every tenth shock of corn,
he, the farmer, would still be on the winning side. This
god gave the masses three commandments; first, the. rich
and the educated were to rule; second, the Church was to
be the repository for men’s consciences; and third, the ruled
were to be content with the position in which they found
themselves. But however perfect this doctrine appeared
to its framers, it never gave universal satisfaction to those
for whom it was intended. History shows that wars with-
out number have been made by the masses for the purpose
of sweeping this superstition from the land, but up to the
present they Have only partially succeeded. We still have
the unrestricted god of wealth with us, and ever an anon
we hear it declaring that wealth and education must rule.
Christ said, “The poor ye have always with’ vou.” But
Bruce Smith, who champions wealth above all others in
New South Wales, goes a step beyond this. He says there
must always be some unemployed; but it is for the man yho
is unemployed, and those who sympathise with him, and can
see the time approaching when they, too, will be counted
as wasters, to say Amen to Bruce Smith’s sermon, or with
one stroke of the pen erase the hireling’s name from the
voting paper. The workers and lovers of freedom have al-
ways been in active opposition to the rich drones of the
earth. They have met times out of number in mortal com-
bat. The earth has been washed in innocent blood, and
millions have been hurled into eternity for no other crime
than that of wanting work, and food to eat. And notwith-
standing the great strides which man has made in the field
of science, the object of which has been the utilising of the
elements, so that the workers’ journey through life should
be made as smooth as possible. But pride, greed, tyranny,
and love for power, are to-day the same as they were when
Moses slew the Egyptain, and will remain so till the end
of time. The Commonwealth constitution has made Aus-
tralia one, but nothing more. It has had no ennobling in-
fluence upon its people. Our public men are still hire


lings, and all their actions aim at self aggrandisement. Paro-
chialism is more rampant than ever; the cost of living Has
increased, instead of decreased, as Toby Barton, Australia’s
noblest son, said it would, whilst Toby and his sons have
fastened themselves to the Commonwealth cow, by the aid
of up-to-date genius, that nothing but death can relieve of
its enemies. And so, as naturally as the sun rises and
sets the first six years of Commonwealth existence has
ended by Mammon’s chains of slavery being drawn a little
tighter around the worker. Its second Parliament Ims
ended as the first did, in class legislation and ignominy.
Its closing scenes were liberally interspersed with language
that showed the corrupt fruit propagated by Australia’s
pioneers, still reproduced itself, and was still pregnant with
power to do evil. The men whom the voter delighted to
honour have shown themselves to be parasites, and nothing
more. They jostle each other for the loaves and fishes,
created by a corrupt administration, just as the worker does
for a crust of bread, and in as selfish a manner as pigs do
to get their nose in the trough. They care not who goes
without, so long as they are satisfied. The malignant joy,
and the smile of condescension which overspreads their
features as they dole out a crust to one, and make a step-
ping stone of another, testifies to the fact that what makes the
difference between our cannibalism and the cannibalism of
the savage, is our education. We commit mur-
der in our day under such refined methods that even some
of our victims fail to see the hand which strikes, and so
lay the crime at the feet of their Creator. These unfor-
tunates, cursed with the withering blight of ignorance, in
which our legislators still keep them, continue to die, like
sheep in a drought-struck land, because their talents remain
dormant during their journey from the cradle to the grave.
Had their talents been allowed to bloom, they would have
exposed to the view of their owners what God had given
them, they would have shown them to be independent atoms,
and surrounded by all that was good, and sufficient for them
during their journey through life. ' Man having failed to
evolve a social code, which would have given him work and
food, the day has at last arrived when the two forces which'
the human family are divided into, meet, namely, those
who believe the world was made for them, and those who
believe that it, and what it contains, was made for all.
Both parties have entered the fight, with the motto, Win or


die. Such is the political position which the Commonwealth
citizen finds himself in to-day. Unrestricted individualism
has now, for the first time in its long reign of iniquity, met
a foe whose war cry is death to all such oppression as they
have had to bear from the owners of wealth. Revenge its
pass-word, annihilation of the rich its goal. That there are
good grounds for the nationalises’ appeal is self-evident;
their ever-increasing strength testifies to our social unrest.
The cry of the widow and orphan is a never-ending wail,
and yet, the nationalisers are going down a precipice at
the bottom of which they will meet with a national disas-
ter, more humiliating and more degrading than those who,
sooner or later, topple over the precipice which confronts
all unrestricted individualistic nations. Unionism, with
all the advantages which an enlightened generation has
given, has not got one step higher on the humanitarian
ladder than the lustful drones which it now seeks to sup-
plant. The uplifting of the Unit is altogether beyond their
powers of comprehension, or they are so intent upon satis-
fying their greed, revenge upon their enemies, and thetir
own aggrandisement, that they have no time to waste on the
waster. Unionism has always denounced the giving of ex-
travagant salaries whilst unionists had to be content with
barely sufficient to keep body and soul together. Having
this grievance, which undoubtedly' forms legitimate grounds
for complaint, and which would have made a solid base to
build upon, whilst formulating a policy of reform having
for its object the emancipation of the Unit. But they did
not make use pf this by making it a plank in their fighting
platform, a plank having for its object the sweeping away
of all excessive incomes until the Unit had been provided
for. Had they done this, the citizens of the Commonwealth
might have risen on the wings of imagination to the top
of the hill of hope, and gazed with longing eyesi upon labour’s
land of promise. But we'find nothing of this; but in its
place we find our labour leaders, with as much assurance,
as though to the manner born, putting on the harness of
their born enemies, and dividing the fourteen thousand
pounds between them with a gusto that would have dis-
gusted some of their unemployed union brothers, could thejy
have had a glimpse of the paradise which their leaders had
entered. We find that one plank would upset all‘the mach-
inery which men, who love liberty, have been making all
along the line of life, another plank deprives the present
holders of wealth, and gives it to the Unionist, whilst leav-


ing tlie Unit stewing in his environment of ignorance and
poverty, another aims at the destruction of private pro-
party and individual enterprise, and would crush man’s
talents to a degree never dreamt of by the individualist.
The sequel to all this would be the nationalising of the
people, and it shows to the' world the appalling ignorance
which guides some natures upon what would be best for the
safety of the State. These would-be reformers thirst for
gold to lift them out of the ranks of labour, and power to
dethrone the present rich, and plant their own offspring in
the seats of honour. How else are we to account for the
absence of a plank which would do away with large in-
comes ? Labour knew that its aims made for place and pay,
and that, the salaries which they would receive would be
out of all proportion to their requirements, and more than
their services would be worth. Had Watson’s party been
true to their own teachings, their, first slash of the pruning
knife would have been made at the root of their own ex-
travagant salaries. • The reason why this was not done is
obvious. Unionists’ ambition lies in the direction of greed.
Their leaders were well aware of the fact that without com-
bination they could never rise to the positions in life which
their talents qualified them for, and so they fomented strife
in their ranks, encouraged strikes, and by such means as
these, unions increased in numbers, and their leaders in-
creased in wealth and power by tactics which they con-
demned in others, and in this way lifted themselves grad-
ually from the humdrum of active life, and gave birth to
what they fondly hope will become an aristocracy of labour.
This position they hope to achieve by keeping in touch
with their unionist brethren sufficient to retain their con-
fidence. At present a Unionist walks the floor of an earthly
paradise whilst he is in work, but as soon as h’e is idle he
descends to a hell of his own making. He is hated by the
non-unionist, despised by all lovers of freedom, and denied
the liberty of seeking employment in the walks of other
unions. Unionism has now reached the stage of life when
it must overbalance itself, and be lost in the ruins of a
socialism the very antithesis of liberty, and an insult to a
people rejoicing in the power of adult suffrage. Unionism
aims at the destruction of the present owners of wealth, but
wealth can neither be destroyed nor evenly distributed, ex-
cept by a system of communism, into which none but fools
would care to enter. Talent must, in the very nature of


things, be always on top, command its price, and the ad-
miration of those whom it benefits. Therefore, to talk of
Socialism, which aims at nationalising the Unit, is to talk
of that which no lover of freedom will ever accept, unless
at the point of the bayonet. The First Shot. Ever since
the day that Mr. J. C. Watson accepted the May-day reso-
lutions, Socialistic thunder has rolled over the length and
breadth of the land, thunder, which for ages, has contained
the pent-up wrath of an oppressed people; wrath which now
threatens to sweep its enemy into oblivion. The first shot,
for the purpose of deciding whether unrestricted individ-
ualism or the unrestricted nationaliser was to rule, was fired
on October Bth, 1896, by Mr. J. C. Watson, when he cast
aside all subterfuge by declaring that the temporary im-
munity which the small farmer was to enjoy was of small
moment, and would be no bar to the one step at "a time
policy, which was in good working order. And just here
it is necessary to call the reader’s attention to what all stu-
dents of social environment recognise as an unalterable law,
namely, that systems grow. They grow, and undoubtedly
would, under humanitarianism, always advance, then they
decay, after a timer-as history ahd our every-day life shows,
when under a Socialism in which bayonets and gold form
the two factors which keep the workers continually upon
the tread-mill of life. But there can be no standing still,
for once the standing still stage is reached, which is ac-
complished by the lustful life of the few, and the crushing
out of the manhood of the many, the hand-writing on' the
wall appears, decay sets in. The hnimal instinct of some
foreign foe is played upon, not necessarily by the law of
self-preservation, but by that instinct which cannot look
upon weakness without striving to devour it. Accepting
this definition of the growth of systems, the reader will ex-
perience but little difficulty in looking into the not far dis-
tant future, and there beholding Mr. Watson taking his last
step upon the road which leads to the nationalising of all
things. Keeping his eye fixed with the persistence of an
earnest' seeker after truth, upon the scene before him, he
will see, not the mirage created by a biassed mind, but a
panoramic view of life, as it must be under an environment
where individuality is universally non-existent, and as it is
now exemplified in the ranks of .a body of men in our midst,
who, whilst using the wrong weapons to bring about their
deliverance from the juggernaut of wealth, hesitate l not to


call those who cannot see eye to eye with them, "the scum
of the earth.” Continuing his gaze upon the scene, which
his talent of reason keeps unfolding, he will see these Un-
ionists as bosses, like ants upon their disturbed home,
swarming over the land. And he would see the men in
wnose bodies were lying dormant talents which would make
them men amongst men, were it not that the cunning, the
liar, and the idler, ruled over them. Socialism having
marked out its road through life, there is nothing left it
but to continue its march until brought to bay by a foe
capable of destroying its power, and until this is done noth-
ing can be more certain than that the whole force which
our present unsatisfactory conditions have created, will
march triumphantly along its well-defined track, till its
citadel is reached, over the doors of which one may, even
at this distance, read: All luggage in the shape of freedom
left outside. The firing of the first shot brought the whole
army of unrestricted individualists to their feet, and the war
of words began, and long before the day of reckoning ar-
rived, all had been said that their cramped intelligence was
capable of making public, and that, except it was platitude
or repetition, did not amount to much. The unemployed
were trotted out to fill up a gap, but behind the scenes it
was each man for himself, thus giving a Splendid object
lesson to the workers, and only time can show whether they
will depend upon their own united strength, or still trust
a villainously corrupt section of the human family. The
Hon. G. H. Reid carried the flag which his predecessors
washed in the blood df their victims,, till it has been dyed,
according to the gospel of G. H. Reid, in imperishable scar-
let, and must always float at the top of Mammon’s mast.
Speaking to a "Daily Telegraph” reporter about Mr. Dea-
kin and his followers, said: "One breath of the pure air
of heaven at election time will scatter them,” and yet Mr.
Deakin’s majority was over 6,000, whilst Mr. Reid, after
many years of service, found his former friends in full re-
treat, but a still greater blow even than this was admin-
istered to his friend Mr. Gibb, for Lyne, that political para-
site, that creature of circumstances, he who sold the land
that nourished him, actually lost his opponent in the fight.
And this is the man who was going to uproot Socialism.
He was pining to secure a political victory, one that would
entitle him to a place upon the roll of fame. But, oh!
how are the mighty fallen! Mr. Reid has fought his Water-


•lbo, and lost, lost as all unrestricted individualists will in
the near future be lost, unless the dawn breaks upon the
once enforced idler at work. Although this fact stands
out in bold relief in our political atmosphere, not one can-
didate gave any sign that he understood what the remedy
was that would reduce the fermentation in our social leaven
to normal conditions. And yet not a day passes without
the daily press giving more than sufficient reasons for such
a belief. The schoolmaster has been abroad, and his teach-
ings anent man’s right to work and eat is bear-
ing fruit, the faith which practises self-preserva-
tion first and creeds second, is fast coming to
maturity outside the ranks of the well-known thief and the
man who steals, because he is not paid a living wage. And
with its maturity vanishes the hell-born doctrine, that the
worker should keep his back bared for Mammon’si lash to
play upon. For this is the plain English of the. Socialism
of Bruce Smith, when he says, 1 ‘There must always be un-
employed.” Protection, freetrade, and preferential rights
will play but a small part in the coming humanitarian en-
vironment until the whole family is provided for. There
are a thousand reasons why these policies should become
part of our national life, and there are a thousand reasons
why they should not be placed in the front rank of political
strife. But it must be remembered that neither freetrade
nor protection was responsible for the growth, unity, and
faith in what is called Socialism, although we are all Social-
ists, and without Socialism there can be no co-operation.
As -'every one now knows, Unionism had its birth in the
cesspit of poverty, which wealth dug for its slaves, and
although these labour cesspits still disfigure our homes, and
that our own flesh and blood are daily cremated in them
by the withering blast of poverty, Mr. G. H. Reid, instead
of attempting to fill them up, had the audacious imper-
tinence to head an army of parasites for the purpose of
again thrusting the worker into the cesspit from which he
has partially emerged, and where a corrupt orthodoxy says
he should live, and be content. And this damnable doc-
trine, from thousands of pulpits, is served out daily to mil-
lions of half-starved, superstitious, and ignorant people; and
yet we look on with well assumed holy horror, as infant
after infant is swept out of the gutter, the suicide dragged
from the water, or at the man-made fiend dangling in the
air. Looking back upon the past and our present unrest,


one is struck with amazement that a man with Mr. Reid’s
experience should have attempted the helpless task of set-
ting back the clock of Labour. Even supposing that Mr.
Reid had obtained a majority, it would only have added
fuel to labour’s fire, thereby causing it to burn more fierc-
ely than ever. For no matter how be may have legislated,
unless he legislated for the Unit he must have done it on
bebalf of wealth. A freetrade policy would crush' out pro-
jection, and a Protective policy would cripple the Free-
trader, but this see-saw system would not benefit the work-
ers as a body. And unless the Unit is given work by the
lovers of liberty, no one will be able to bar the triumphant
march of labour. The first battle that unrestricted indi-
vidualism fought against what it now sees is a really for-
midable enemy, almost ended in a draw. But when the age
of wealth and the age of Unionism are placed side by side,
one is able to gauge the enormous growth of unions and
their sympathisers, and to see that either by fair or foul
methods in the near future, the workers will bring about
the destruction of our present system. So obvious is this
to the author that he is lost in wonder, why the individual
does not. hold out the right hand of brotherhood to that
Unit, become a humanitarian, cut the ground from under
the Socialist’s feet, give permanent security to himself,
whilst carving out his own walk of life, and leave it as a
priceless heritage for his own offspring to enjoy. The crisis
lias only now come upon us. We are at the parting of the
ways, where there is no “fiddlers’ green,” and man must
choose one of the two roads before him. The first skirmish
has taken place, and lovers of the old order of things axe
foolish enough to believe that when the final battle is over,
the waves of our sociology, which had been lashed into
furious unrest, will again subside and leave our social shore
again in that quiescent state so pleasing to the hireling, but
which, as everyday life shows, is fraught with results to
the worker at once disastrous and overwhelming in their
poverty-stricken ineptitude. Consequently, the best thing
that could Happen to humanity would be for the lustful
drone to recognise that the present unrest amongst us will
either land us in the nationaliser’s den of slaves, or in the
field of liberty, where the orphan will bask in the sun-shine
of plenty. The unrestricted individualist, whenever
brought to book about his accumulations of wealth, and the
position which unequal opportunity gives him, quotes the


saying of Christ, “Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar’s,” and he, the individualist, shall now have a little
more of the Bible. The Bible says, “If a man will not
work, neither shall he eat.” This gives us the key to the
question, what is Caesar’s ? Clearly, if we believe in the Bible,
the laws of Nature, or even our own cramped up common-
sense, Caesar is to own nothing more than he can earn,
or what his subjects consider sufficient to maintain him in
his exalted position. Caesar has no right, either Divine or
human, to lock up all the unsold land of the State, nor to
tax the sold land, in order to administer to his own lustful
and depraved nature. And if he does, then the duty de-
volves upon the idler to brush him aside. In the opening
chapters of the Bible, man is told to subdue the earth,
and man here means every man; and instead of Caesar being
pleased at being out of the “wet,” he is angry at
ae ever-increasing discontent amongst those whom he
wishes to call his slaves. Of course, if Caesar was a hu-
manitarian, »he would see that all had work, but being
what Christ said he was, a “whited sepulchre,” a man whose
garments shone with richness, whilst his heart was as hard
as the nether mill-stone, and as black as midnight, Jones
has no alternative but to put in force the law of self-pre-
servation, especially as Christ said the fawning parasite
found clinging to Caesar would have but little chance of
escaping the region of “outer darkness.” Truly our present
environment has at last arrived at the rapids, where all
that is unclean must, in the end, meet its doom. Self-pre-
servation, as is seen when “lots” are drawn by the famine-
stricken castaways, to see who is to be the next victim, is
no respecter of persons. Neither will it be in the State
when manhood asserts itself by demanding work and food
during its stay upon the earth. No man can examine him-
self, study the laws of Nature, look upon the grandeur of
the universe, the lavish provision made for his wants, his
unconquerable love for the beautiful, his inabilitv to do
a day’s work without food, and still believe that Smith, who
was first upon the earth, owed it by a Divine right, and
was commissioned by God to give Jones, should lie success-
fully negotiate the passage of the plague-stricken slum,
whatever- he might think was necessary to keep him hanging
together, or the exigencies of the case demanded. And
yet he must either believe this, or acknowledge himself
below the brute creation, as regards greed. For the lion


will, if gorged, let what would would otherwise l)e its vic-
tim pass bye, but man, “a little lower than the angels,”
has but to see a piece of idle land to have his greedy nature
excited, and rests not till he has secured it. The march
of civilization has had no mellowing effect upon his nature,
but, as the Church is no longer strong enough for him to
shunt his responsibilities unto it with safety, he must
now bow to the inevitable, conform to the teachings of hu-
man itarianism, or become a chattel in the system of nation-
alisation.
WHY WE FEDERATED.
Como, list my voung compatriot.
For I t must have my say,
Why our five States now form a part
Of Commonwealth to-day.
Old Toby Bart., he sought the Bench,
But not of petty State;
'Hind platitudes he did entrench
For prize it was at stake.
A union of our five young States,
Tasmania thrown in,
Would mean reduction of our rates
And unity of kin.
He wrote and spoke of taxes hard,
That he would soon withdraw,
If voters him would not retard,
But let him make the law.
He drew a picture of the six,
O’Connor helped him on;
Joy would be theirs, would they but mix,
And make themselves all one.
For Barton was th© noblest son
Australia had won;
Of all the millions on her run
He was her number one.
And so the bond old Toby drew.
Which all of us made one;
But happiness, except a few,
Why not a soul had won.
And then it dawned upon the crowd,
And patriots as well,
That for themselves they’d made a shroud,
And billet for a swell.
A Federal Court came on the scene,
Where Judges three would sit.
Keeping the States all pure and clean,
Dispensing truth and wit.
Barton,, like girl who knows she s loved,
Pretended not to hear
His friends, when they him safely shoved
Prom politics quite clear,


And so he’s on the Federal Bench;
O’Connor’s there as well;
To pay their screw we must retrench,
For Barton’s such a swell.
He is a hybrid, is old Bait.,
As fair as one can paint;
For when he speaks you’d think his heart
Belonged to some great Saint.
But when ho acts, there’s hell to pay,
With taxes he’d load thee;
He’d drown the alien m the bay.
He’d make the black man flee.
He’d bind the hone6t sons of toil
To his King's juggernaut;
The rich, their hands they should not soil.
But all the poor might rot.
Such are the fruits we cull to-day
From Barton’s matchless mind;
And now he taunts' us, hear his lay,
And be no longer blind.
What eares he for your jeer and gibe.
Or venial press comment?
He has a salamander’s hide
By •Nature kindly lent.
What cares he for your blooming State,
Or e’en your golden grain,
He and his mate now live in state,
In tate they will remain.
He’s said good-bye to politics,
He’ll not with rabble mix;
He euchred Reid by crafty tricks,
And is on apex fixed.
Said, farewell friends, behold I’ve won,
And shall be known to fame;
For I’m Australia’s noblest ton,
Have I not won the name?
THE THREE STAGES OF MAN.
THE SCHOOLBOY’S DREAM.
In dreams I pierce those fleecy clouds
To try and fathom space,
But other mists my vision shrouds,
So it I cannot trace.
Fast dazzling worlds, though but a child;
I wander on through space;
Where all is peace, and angels mild
Assist me in my race.
I wander on from sphere to sphere,
I travel o’er their plains;
And 10l I find God everywhere,
For everywhere ' reigns.


Myst’ry on myst’ry meets my gaze,
As over them I roam,
Trying to penetrate the haze
And get a glimpse of home.
Why was I born on this small sphere,
Where de’ils as men abound;
Whilst up above are worlds so fair,
And good men till the ground?'
Midst sylvan glades and rippling streams
I while the hours away;
For I’m so happy in my dreams
When far from earth away.
I see the lion and the lamb,
Together sport and play;
But never hear men curse and damn
Each other day by day.
So let us make this earth a home,
Where man with men can dwell;
We need not then to pieice yon dome
To see him doing well.
THE SECOND STAGE.
The boy having become a man, enters upon the second
stage of life, when his idle dream gives place to the stern
realities of everyday life. He sees his fairy castles built
in the hey-day of youth, imagination and ignorance swept
from his view by cyclonic blast of a lustful environment,
which he is unable to withstand, and seeing that he is being
hurried on towards the arena, where man fights with man
for a crust of bread, he calls for assistance to help sweiep
the unnatural excrescence away, at the same time proclaim-
ing to his hearers the nature of the goal he has in view.
Comrades, fall in, we fight to-day
’Gainst unrestricted wealth;
We in the dust must Mammon lay
And scatter wide all pelf.
We’ve corn, and oil, and land to spare,
We lack one single thing—
’Tis charity, for we’ll not share.
The fruits our harvest bring.’
But we will pledge ourselves to-day
To help our mate along;
He shall not lag behind in pay,
But join with us in song.
’Tis now in manhood’s prime we meet,
To fight life’s battles through;


With friendly hand we’ll now him greet,
And school-days pledge renew.
He shall not in the fight be lost,
‘ Nor spend his strength in vain;
Wages arid work, whate’er it cost,
Is manhood’s glad refrain.
But tliis appeal fails to put life and action into his
hearers, so having said good-bye to the home of his youth,
taking nothing with him but his father’s blessing, he hurries
on to interview the only two employers of labour in the
State. Selecting first the private owner, he is told, in a
very few words, that he is not wanted, and that he had
better apply to the Government, and having done so, is
provided with a hammer on the' time-payment principle,
and is told to wire in and break stones at two shillings pel-
yard. TEis, he is informed, is only temporary, because*
if h’e keeps steady, works hard early and late, refrains from
luxuries, Such as butter and meat, he will be able to save
half his payment, and eventually become, if not a mil-
lionaire, at least a hewer of wood to one that is. And as
he is alone in the world, without money or friends, he has
to accept work which, at one stroke, knocks all the ambition
of youth out of. him, degrades him in the eyes of his fel-
low-men, and destroys his manhood before it has had time
to bear fruit. Owing to the few pence which he earns,
all the much-desired avenues of life are closed against him;
and, as he must have company, he must of necessity drift
into the haunts of misery and vice, which are ever ready
to receive him. Science, religion, and education, what have
they done for him, except to deprive him of equal oppor-
tunity ? It is true that if science and education had been
allowed fair play, he would not have been forced to do such
degrading work, but this would not have suited the gods
of Mammon, which/ according to their diction, must be
used solely in their interests. And so we find that, whilst
the ranks of labour are ever on the increase, the avenues
for work are, owing to science and fraud, ever on the de-
crease ; whilst the land, given by God as a heritage for
all, is inaccessible to all but those who have money to buy
it, or, what is worse, hedged round with conditions which
paupers cannot comply with. Science and education make
life more unbearable as time rolls on. They hold out the
olive branch of hope, but it is too often swallowed u,p by
despair and death. The Unit, without influence, wears out
his life breaking stones, just as lie did before science made


a machine to break them for him. And as time' rolls on,
and the days of prosperity still linger in the invisible
future, he sees the chances of his resolve bearing fruit dim-
inishing day by day, because his comrades are afraid of
drawing Sown upon their heads the wrath of Mammon.
And, as he is utterly powerless by himself, he gives up in
despair; he looks back upon a homeless past, disfigured by
degradation and crime, committed under pressure of hell-
ish tyranny imposed upon him by rulers steeped in lust and
greea. Then, turning his eyes to the future, he sees in
the distance the white-washed walla of the house of charity,
where he will be allowed to shake off his earthly coil whilst
being fed upon crumbs provided by a benevolent and Cnnst-
ian people. Here his life, which has! been a burden to
himself, a stumbling-block to many, and a nuisance to the
State, ends, without his God-given talents once seeing the
light of day. Having arrived at the third stage bf his
life, when his sun begins to set, he utters his farewell to
all in the following words:—
I’ve passed my threescore years and ten,
Ive had my little day;
And now ,1 wait the coming when
My body down I’ll lay.
’Tis then I’ll take my flight from here
A slave because of fear.
I’ve made the earth give her increase
To some Celestial sphere,
Where man is man, and not, as here,
A thousandfold and more;
And now, when I should have release,
I’m growing, growing poor.
Yes, I am old and cannot rest,
Oh 1 why am I left here;
A burden to myself at best,
I’m better dead than here.
For what could one poor Unit do’
’Midst all this pomp and show;
Where man his brother spurns, and 10,
To meet him would not know ?
We know the cattle roam at will,
And all the birds rejoice;
But man, to eat and get his fill,
’Twere madness! He’s no choice.
To hell-bound tyrants he must bend
The knee, and plead for life;
Careful, indeed, not to offend,
Though discontent be rife.
But e’en this favour cannot last
Till death doth give release;
Old age. it travels all too fast,
Then it’s not fit to fleece.


Away with him, the tyrant cries.
Let’s have a youthful one;
I’ve sucked his blood, see how be dies
Hurrah 1 again I’ve won.
FarewelL my comrades, fare thee well,
Farewell thou earth so fair;
Although to me thou’st been a hell
For man. He stole my share.
Hell and damnation be his lot,
’Midst pestilence and woe;
He robbed me of my little plot,
Why should he these forego ?
A CHRISTMAS OBLIGATION.
Ye rich of Sydney, cries the “Telegraph,”
Bring surplus cash to make the half-starved laugh;
’Tis Christmas-tide, it comes but once a year,
And ere it does return we’ll sweat what’s here.
Feed them on cake, a smile and ginger beer,
They’ll think ’tis heav’n if you and I are there;
There is that scattereth and yet increase,
I’ll see that your small dole does not decrease.
The “Daily Telegraph,” of December 16th, 1905, said;
"At the present time there is about three millions more gold
in the State than there was at the corresponding period last
year; but whilst wealth has flowed in upon the country in a
generous stream, and whilst the healthy, the energetic, and
the provident have thus had splendid opportunities of better-
ing themselves, there is always a residuum of sickness and
poverty in the most favoured countries. The obligation of
the season lies upon all who have something to spare.” The
Sydney City Mission had 550 boxes collecting funds with
which to feed its starved brethren with. “When we are,
about to celebrate the birth of the founder of Christianity ,~
it is natural that the ties of our common humanity should
make themselves felt with special force.” Now, reader,
bearing in mind that these platitudes have with monotonous
reiteration been dished up for the long-suffering, helpless and
starving millions of the earth to rejoice over, and fatten
upon, since the days of Christ, the first question that you
will want answering, that is if you claim to be above the
level of the brute, is: Where does the "Telegraph’s’’ "natural
obligation” come in? It is an admitted fact outside the with-


ering influence of orthodoxy and imperialism that the earth
and all it contains is a gift by the Creator to all who happen
to be alive at any given time. Such being the case, it follows
that if it is natural, from the “Telegraph’s” standpoint, for
one section of the family who have more than sufficient for
their wants to give out of their abundance to a less fortunate
section of the same family so that they also may rejoice dur-
ing the few and fast fleeting moments of Christmastide, it
is from the Creator’s point of view a most unnatural one.
That it is unnatural all creation teaches, and last, but not
least, reason declares with righteous wrath that the “Tele-
graph’s” method for the uplifting of man is a delusion and
a snare intended to impress upon the ignorant and super-
stitious minds of the masses how great the debt is which
they owe to those who, having first sweated them till they
have become of no further use, now pay them back with
the crumbs of charity. Civilization teaches that the natural
way for man to travel on through life is for him to work for
all he requires, and the natural way for the State to act
towards him is to see that he has the opportunity given him.
Then; if the opportunity was not taken advantage of, or
abused, it would be unnatural on the part of those who had
taken time by the forelock to give, to whom, why, those
whom God has refused to give to. To work, or die, is the
unyielding law of nature.- Civilization and work are twin
brethren and cannot be divorced. Therefore the lustful
drone and the, starved idler are parasites, and being para-
sites they keep in a state of unrest those who keep the wheels
of progress ever on tlie move. It is impossible not to see
that for Smith to feed Jones during the one-fifty-second part
of the year, and'to block up all the avenues leading to the
plane where independence thrives during the remaining fifty-
one parts, must either kill or make a rogue of him, and that
all who participate in this game of grab must in the most
natural way stand before God and common-sense as creatures
that have no .moral right to live. The fatal mistake made
by the worker is in. thinking that the man whoi is outside
the worker’s social inferno will stoop to pull him out. Outside
of unforseen misfortunes (if man was not a thief) there would
be no necessity at any time for him to give what all had the
opportunity of acquiring. Giving, under present conditions,
is a disgrace to our boasted civilization; it humiliates Jones,
and places Smith upon a pedestal of his own make. Ortho-
doxy canonises him, the press heads his benevolent actions
with large type, whilst the unthinking multitude fall down
and shout, Dives, for thee we die. And who is Dives ? Dives


is the man who, through fear of losing caste, slew the infants
and threw to the beasts of prey all who dared to offend.
Dives, in the form of Bruce Smith, said there must always be
unemployed. What a problem for the reader to soliloquise
over is the fact that Dives, being the only natural beast
of prey in the human family, that orthodoxy should take
it to its bosom, whilst Hodge, possessing a thousand times
more strength, is too frightened or too ignorant to use it.
The reader will understand that though wealth had been
flowing over our State “in a generous stream,” it in no way
interfered with the 550 boxes, for like the heavens above,
they were everywhere. One might be pardoned for think-
ing that as Nature had been so generous, those upon whom
she had smiled might also have been generous, till the 550
boxes occupied the place which was once filled by the widows’
cruse. In the article under review, we read the Russian's
struggle for liberty must be recognised as having a. soul for
good in these things evil, the germ at least of future happiness.
And yet the “Telegraph” condemns its own citizens for
honestly striving to secure, not what the Russian seeks, for
we have that, but the goal where true liberty alone is found.
The “Telegraph” knows, and no one better, that the only
difference between the unrest of the down-trodden Russian
and the befooled Australian is one of degree, and that when
education and our knowledge of what Christian liberty really
is, the Australian’s ppsition is the worst of the two. The
Australian’s weapon to-day, because of his love and fear of
law, has no point, no steel stiffens it, because he is full of
hope that he will with the next throw of the political dice
get a fair start. He has thrown orthodoxy to the winds,
and when the hireling tickles his ears of how he will slaughter
his opponent, he throws his hat in the air and imagines he
hears the dying groans of his enemy. With the Russian
beast of burden things are altogether different. He has only
just awakened to the fact that he is a man, and somewhat
superior to liis dog, but it has not yet-entered into his nature
to seek for the mess of pottage which the Australian has
made up his mind to possess. The Russian is still orthodox,
and believes that the Czar is all but divine, and generations
will have to pass before he stands upon the social plane of
the Australians to-day; and when he does, that will not
bring happiness. Education will have caused his talents to
bloom. His craving after pure liberty will have been
whetted, and his orthodoxy will have been numbered with
other relics of a barbaric past. Then, standing where the
Australian stands to-day, he will cast his eyes over this


magnificent continent and see the Australian at the goal.
He will see him starting life with his feet on the bottom
rung of the ladder of life, and as an old man stepping off the
top rung into the great unknown. Unfortunately for the
Australian, his only weapon is hope, and in this department
he is a long way behind the Russian. Neither has he a leader,
hut the time rapidly draws nigh when such reformers as
J. H. Carruthers will pass into that oblivion where all is
death. And then the “Telegraph,” true to its policy,
namely, self preservation, will clothe the new order of things
in the garment of truth. Writing about Christmas obliga-
tions, how dare any man at this time of day write upon such
a theme, for all practical purposes the Creator has placed but
one obligation on man, and that one is, to do to others what
we should wish to be done to ourselves. The able-bodied man
who submits and accepts these crumbs which the “Tele-
graph” would see distributed without doing his utmost to
overthrow such villainy is a thing to be despised. Referring
to this £3,000,000 increase, which is but a drop in the bucket
compared to what had been scooped up during the year by
financial institutions from the bread-winners of the State,
the “Telegraph” says: —“These cold figures provide indispu-
table evidence of the material well-being of the community,”
and yet, side by side with these 550 boxes, scores of agencies
were at work trying to keep the derelicts hanging together;
whilst thousands of honest workers had lost another year
of their manhood, and had to stand aside for the school-
girl and beardless youth because less expensive. Under such
conditions, does it require a prophet to tell that the lives
of these men must end in the poorhouse unless the Australian
accepts the obligation thrust upon him by his Maker, and
treats those whom the “Telegraph” reminds have an obliga-
tion imposed upon them at Christmastide, to see that the
hewer of wood has a few extra crumbs of charity scattered
along his path—in the same way as Nature would treat them
if left alone ? Nature, if not wooed by man, will let him die,
and fihis is the position that the worker must take up when
he is brought face to face with Dives, before God, or the
humanitarian will take up his cause. We read tlia't “a living
dog is better than a dead lion,” and, by the same rule, a
worker is of more value to the State than a drone, and in
proof of this it is only necessary to refer to the obvious
fact that before Jones took off his coat there was nothing for
the would-be rogue to traffic in; therefore, labour was the
creator of capital, and must ever remain so. And if the
would-be superior nonentity and the purloiner of other mens’
brains desire to see this fact exemplified beyond the bounds


of cavil, let them ask Jones to lay down his tools and watch
them rusting away, whilst the three are fighting for the last
grain of wheat. Therefore, labor being the creator of capital,
capital belongs to labor, and should be distributed in strict
accordance with the value of the Unit’s work in the open
market, under the humanising influences of equal oppor-
tunity. Then would be seen the army of numskulls, hire-
lings and educated parasites, who are under an obligation
to the State, for its long suffering owing to allowing them
to remain an incubus upon it. From this standpoint we
find that the “Telegraph’s” obligation is on the other leg,
that of the recipients of charity for allowing themselves to be
bled to death by Scriptural dogs, whited sepulchres, and
phylactered mountebanks.”
THE CHRISTIAN’S PLATFORM.
Man’s sojourn of four thousand years within the realm
of intelligent thought having shown beyond the shadow ■of
a doubt that his regeneration will remain in abeyance till
that day arrives when the wheel of evolution will lift him
to a still higher plane of national existence, it becomes his
duty ere his sun goeth down, to see that his offsprings’ path
of life is not blocked, as his own has been, by a rich and
lustful human scum, which floats upon the surface of every-
day life. The discovery of this law, which Holds man in
its iron grip, which has been in operation ever since man was
made but whiah has hitherto been successfully concealed
behind the cobwebs of a corrupt Christianity which orthodoxy
has woven, throws unreservedly upon the shoulders of the
worker the task of freeing himself from a hell-made yoke,
and plainly shows him that before he can die the death of a
man he must rise, work, and eat.
“Bear ye one another’s burdens.”
As this commandment can only be obeyed by giving every
man the opportunity to work, it follows that he who refuses
this right to his brother, whatever else he may be, he is not
a Christian. The philanthropist may give to the poor until he
himself becomes poor, and the preacher may rant and rave;
but it is only sounding brass, and the tinkling cymbal.
There can be no Christianity about these men, because this
command lies across the threshold of life, and man must


either pick it up or trample it under foot. It is only natural
to suppose that He who gave the command would supply
the necessary means for its fulfilment; this the Creator
has done, and it lies entirely with man as to their distribu-
tion. Land and water God has given in abundance, and
we can gather in the fruit as often as we put our hand to
the plough.
The platforms of the various parties have been tried,
and been found to be totally inadequate to the purpose:
Protection, Freetrade, and Socialism; these are all leaven-
ed with the leaven of greed, ambition, and unequal oppor-
tunity. To fill the chasm in our environment, which has
been ever widening since our present Socialism has held
sway, the Christian Socialist proposes to build a new plat-
form, having for its foundations equality of opportunity.
That four thousand years of history supplies us with infor-
mation, which proves that Unrestricted Individualism has
been a gigantic failure, although at times blessed with men
whose lives for goodness the future cannot hope to excel.
That unequal opportunity has given wealth in all ages
the power to rule, and that it has donei so with a rod of
iron; that no effectual step has, up to the present, been
taken to equalise unequal opportunity; that Science and
Religion, instead of assisting to remove unequal opportu-
nity from our path, have intensified the evil till it has be-
come so strong that our rulers publicly declare that the
unemployed are a, necessary factor in our everyday life.
That this statement is born of ignorance and greed is self-
evident, because no system of government has' been tried
that would give the unit work, and still leave him to carve
out his own walk in life when opportunity offered, and
until the unit is absorbed, and the system, which absorbs
him, breaks down, it cannot with truth be said that work
for all is an impossibility.
New South Wales has the world at its feet for the pur-
pose of gaining knowledge, and to increase in wisdom. It
has a population so small that it is almost possible for it
to lose itself in its own vast territory. Possessing good
land, plenty of water, and mineral wealth in abundance),
its hireling rulers declare that work cannot be found for
all. And yet in the natural order of things we know that
the time is coming when worse conditions will rule than
those that rule to-day; a time when there will be many
millions within her borders; a time when there will be as


many idlers, paupers, and rogues as there are inhabitants
to-day. Our public men declare that the reason why we
do not advance by leaps and bounds along the road which
leads to prosperity is because of the lack of people. To
show how fatally misleading this statement is, the reader
has only to study the conditions which prevail in oldep-
countries, when he will at once see that population is quite
a minor factor in so far as commercial prosperity is con-
cerned. Starting from his own sunny land, the youngest
of the nations of the earth, and making his way to Ame-
rica, he will find it rolling in wealth, poverty, and crime,
and just entering the borderland of nations, clothed in the
garment of youth, with a population not so small as to
place her prosperity in jeopardy, nor too large to makei it
necessary for the devil to take the hindmost. He will find
England standing upon the apex of civilization, wealth, and
power, and overrun with poverty and papulation, a land
where the rich grow richer and poverty increases. And
then, casting his eyes over the old nations of Europe, he
will see them in different stages of decay, and also see the
land which was once owned by nations which are no more.
And then when the reader has seen the birth, life and death
of nations, he will have failed in the collection of one tittle
of evidence that would strengthen the argument put for-
ward by our rulers that New South Wales lags behind in
the social march, because of the lack of numbers. He will
find that even wealth is not a factor in our social march,
otherwise England’s population would have bloomed, even
as does the hawthorn in the month of May, and would have
sent up to heaven an incense of praise because of its uni-
versal prosperity. The reader will find that the' cause of
poverty is not owing to population, wealth, nor the earth’s
inability to supply our wants, but to the metlidd in vogue
.for the distribution of wealth. That this method is going
to be altered in the near future, none will deny, for the
numbers in favour of Nationalised Socialism are rapidly
increasing, whilst the numbers in favour of the! blood-
stained system of Unrestricted Individualism are as rapidly
decreasing, and recognising that neither systejm can give
nationalised freedom, the author would, before it is too
late, ask his fellow-citizens to take a middle course, and
adopt a Progressive Income Tax without exemptions, and
by so doing lift the idler out of the gutter, and give him
work upon the waste lands of the State.


THE PLATFORM.
1. Work, and a living wage for all.
2. A Progressive Income Tax, without exemptions.
3. Compulsory work for all those who would other-
wise be begging or thieving.
4. All men, who at any time are not required by the
State in its ordinary walks of labour, nor yet by the private
employer, shall, on application to the State!, be given work.
5. All work undertaken for the purpose of relieving
poverty shall be upon the waste lands of the State, and shall
be national in character.
6. Anyone not being able to support himself for twelve
months without seeking employment shall enter the State
without permission.
7. The State shall not enter into competition with
its subjects. National works shall consist of the following:
Irrigation, Railways, Post and Telegraph Departments,
Lighthouses, Hospitals and Medicine.
9. The State to live within itself, and money re-
quired at any time.shall be borrowed within the State: first,
because it will serve to increase its wealth; second, because
it will assist in preventing the accumulation of criminal
wealth.
10. A Compulsory Insurance Pund.
11. Parliament to make laws, and elect an Executive
to see them carried out, thus sweeping out the incubus
known as the “Ins and Outs.”
12. Payment of members to be abolished.
13. All examinations for the Public Service to be con-
ductel In such a way as to give satisfaction and fairplay
to the examined; and any departure from this rule to be
followed by the instant dismissal of those responsible.
14. Old age pensions to be at the call of every adult.
15. Any persons not having thefr name on the roll,
and being unable to produce satisfactory evidence of citi-
zenship, shall, on conviction, be imprisoned whilst earning
sufficient to take them out of the State.
16. All private land to be taxed without taking into
consideration the improvements thereon.
17. Every man a soldier.
18. Compulsory education free from the taint of sec-
tarianism, and as all men would have the opportunity of
working, there would be no necessity for the free but pau-
perising method now in vogue.


LET US HEAR THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE
MATTER.
The most revolting spectacle to be seen in our life
of to-day is one atom of organic life, cringing like a well-
whipped cur, and pleading to be allowed to exist on the
husks of life.
An atom may, with credit to itself, honour talent and
even sacrifice oil its behalf, but to bow down to another
atom, because, owing to unjust laws, it had appropriated
a ipart of the earth to its own special use, is to do that
which must be abhorrent to the Creator, namely, the sur-
rendering of its own independence, and the placing of an
obstacle in front of other atoms.
Be just to y»ur neighbour, and then love to your Crea-
tor will become a perennial stream of joy, whilst looking
forward to the time when, in a future' state, that which
doth not now appear, will appear.
Although we cannot perceive a reason for our presence
on earth, seeing that when all things are! taken into con-
sideration, man descends to lower depths than instinct,
still the lavish provision made for our wants, comfort and
pleasure, shows beyond any reasonable doubt that death
does not end all.
That four thousand years having passed, all of which
were under the rule of the cultured few, without the hu-
man family, as a whole, receiving any benefit, the time is
now at hand for heralding in equality of opportunity. That
ambition to excel in some walk of life is a part of every
man's nature, and that he who would, owing to greed, or
superstition, say that Smith was superior to Jones, and had
a right to limit Jones’ opportunities for improving his sur-
roundings, is in a Scriptural and moral sense, a dog.
That a dog, when it becomes a nuisance, should be got
rid of, the four-legged one by cremation, the two-legged
one by relegating him to that obscurity where his victims
now await dismemberment, owing to unnatural surround-
ings.
He who declares that there is not work, wages and food
for all, and being himself in work, should be at once com-
pelled to produce his own permit or submit his own chance
to a ballot, because he who is out of work can only live by
mortgaging his future, penalising others, or taking what a
first robber chooses to give him.


If the Bible is true, and it is the only guide outside
of reason that’ we have, then he who refuses to assist his
brother to work, is to the family what mud is to the wheel.
Human nature will never alter, consequently, so long
as a Progressive Income Tax, without exemptions, remains
outside of our Socialism, Hodge, as he mounts the ladder,
must put on the garment of Dives, place his foot upon the
weak, and leave them just sufficient breath to allow the cor-
oner to return a verdict of death from natural causes.
Christ asked the question, “If a man gains the whole
world and lose his own soul, what will he benefit?” and the
author asks, “If Jones dies of starvation owing to inter-
mittent work and a sweated wage, what interest will accrue
to Jones, because, owing to his being starved, Smith lived
a life of lust and ease ? The organisation which stands most
in need of social aid is that one with a mote in its eye, and
therefore cannot see that it creates the hell in which all who
accept its charity dwell, and to the assistance of whom out
of its abundance gives in just sufficient doles to keep them
hovering upon the brink of death', generating dwarfs, and
preparing seed beds for the propagation of plague whilst
training their young in the arts of vice, crime, and indo-
lence. Were it not for a paper called “Truth,” the Sodom
and Gomorrah side, of life in Sydney would never be seen
except by'the’ actors and their adjudicators, whilst those
who think no evil, and .would live honest if they could, never
dream that such an unsocial hell is in their midst. In
framing measures for the abolition of the idler, the first
question is not, “Will it pay?” but “What form shall the
measures take?” To ask, “Will it pay?” is on a par with
the audacity of a cannibal who, rather than hunt for game,
by strength and strategy, places his victim in the soup-pot.
The question, "Will it pay?” was answered by the Creator,
when He perfected the law of evaporation, filled the earth
with food, and hedged man in with laws, so that he could
not advance without work.
Header, - the relief felt owing to having thrown off the
chains which Unrestricted Individualism and a corrupt and
ignorant Orthodoxy once threw around me, is more than a
sufficient recompense for placing this all too-cramped solu-
tion of the evil complained of before you.
Yours sincerely,
J. WATSON.
