

DOUGLAS PRICE MEMORIAL LECTURE
Ethics and Religion
in Education
Professor Meredith Atkinson
WITH BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH




h w. 5* *
f
The Place of Ethics and
Religion in Education
By
s&eTedith jltkinson, M.A. (Oxon.)
(Director of Tutorial Classes and Head of the Depart-
ment of Sociology in the University of Melbourne).
Biographical Sketch
(Compiled by A. Ralston).
1920.
A. J. Gumming, Govt. Printer, Brisbane.








Reproduction oj Douglas Price's writing:
much reduced.


INTRODUCTION.
THE First Douglas Price Memorial Lecture was
delivered in the Albert Hall, Brisbane, on
Monday, Bth March, 1920, in the presence of an
overflowing audience. The Hon. T. L. Jones, M.L.C.,
took the Chair, and the biographical sketch was
read by Mr. Heber A. Longman. Professor Meredith
Atkinson’s lecture followed.
To ensure a continuance of these lectures, the
Trustees of the Fund will welcome further subscriptions
from sympathisers. Contributions may be forwarded
to the Hon. Treasurer: Mr. A. Ralston, Box 301,
G.P.0., Brisbane.
The Trustees of the Fund are as follows: Mrs.
H, White, Hon. T. L. Jones, M.L.C., Rev. Geo. Neal,
and Messrs. Heber A. Longman, H. W. Jenkins, and
A. Ralston.


DOUGLAS'PRICE.
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.
(Compiled by A. Ralston.)
As an introduction to the first Douglas Price
Memorial Lecture, it is necessary to supply a
short biographical sketch. Some will probably
ask, who was Douglas Price? Briefly, he was
a Church of England Minister who was required
to resign from the Church and w T ho became the
leader in Brisbane of the Modernist Movement.
The good work done by him, his absolute
sincerity in all his utterances, his passionate
desire for truth, and his fine general character
so influenced the members of the Movement
that, on his death in December, 1916, it was
unanimously decided to hold an annual memorial
lecture as a fitting tribute to his memory and
an aid to the advancement of the ideals for the
establishment of which he did so much.
Douglas Price was born in May, 1874, in
Birmingham, England. His parents were mem-
bers of the Society of Friends, his father being
a Minister of the Society. Early in life, he


developed a deeply religious sentiment, and
even at the age of ten, stood up, impelled by
conscience, “although burning with shame,”
and spoke at a religious meeting.
Quakerism being too cold for him, he began
to attend Anglican and Roman churches, and at
eighteen years of age was baptized and became
an adherent of the Church of England. This,
he declared, he never regretted, although it
meant eventual crucifixion for him. At twenty-
two, he conceived the idea of taking orders in
the Church and went to the Durham University,
taking the B.A. and, later, the M.A. degree.
For five years he worked as curate to the
Rev. F. L. Donaldson, at St. Mark’s, Leicester,
and in 1903 came to Queensland to fill the dual
position of Principal of the Brisbane Theological
College and Rector of All Saints’ Church. The
free life of Australia tended to a broadening of
ideas, and he says that gradually the doctrines
of the Trinity, the Atonement, the Virgin Birth,
the Physical Resurrection, and the Deity of
Jesus slipped away; he became a mystic, holding
that all forms and words are mere trappings.
This change of ideas appeared fearlessly in his
sermons and addresses and, bit by bit, pressure
6
DOUGLAS PRICE.


was brought to bear upon him to resign his
living, but this he would not do, as he declared
his conscience was quite clear on the matter.
Finally, at the end of 1910, the Archbishop,
after making an examination of a number of
Douglas Price’s sermons, called for his resigna-
tion. In doing so, he said he found in the
sermons much that commanded his assent and
sometimes his admiration, and much more that
appealed to his deepest sympathy, but he also
found an entire absence of any positive teaching
of the great verities of the faith and incidental
allusions clearly opposed to it.
The expulsion gave rise to a remarkable
outburst on the part of the congregation of
All Saints’ and the public generally. It was
undoubtedly a blow to many to lose their
beloved rector and there were many signs of
indignation. It requires something unusual to
stir the people of a city of the size of Brisbane
to the manifestation of their interest and their
feelings. The local newspapers, probably with-
out exception, published articles; for weeks the
dailies printed many letters from correspondents,
and it was clear that, although the letters were
not entirely on one side, the Archbishop was
acting against a strong public opinion.
7
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


At a meeting of the Congregation, the hall
was crowded to the doors long before the time
of commencement. Douglas Price told the
audience that he felt no bitterness against the
Archbishop, who, unlike Nelson, had looked
through the theological telescope with the seeing
eye, and was bound to take notice of his imper-
fections, He was a Modernist. lie could not
fight, for he had nothing to fight on; he had
no logical or constitutional right.
Almost unanimously, the Congregation sup-
ported their Minister, and a petition to the
Archbishop was drawn up and presented. The
latter, in replying, said the desired reconsidera-
tion could not take place. He was more than
sorry so many good parishioners were so moved
and. grieved. As to Mr. Price, he had acted
throughout with thorough honesty and straight-
forwardness.
Much sympathy was shown for the expelled
minister, and he was extolled both by the Press
and the public.
Douglas Price left Brisbane for England in
April, 1911, and spent a few months travelling
on the Continent and in England. As was to be
expected, a strong effort was made to secure his
8
DOUGLAS PRICE.


return. He yielded to the request, and arrived
in Brisbane in December, 1911. From that time
until his death in December, 1916, he freely
devoted his heart and soul to the cause of
Modernism —“the new spirit in religion which
welcomes all the truths of science and criticism
and seeks to restate the old faith in accordance
therewith. ’ ’
Although brought up to believe every word
of the Bible to be true, Douglas Price learned
to condemn the idolatry of books as being most
harmful. He had examined the work of the
higher criticism and assimilated its results and
rejected his early—that is, the orthodox—views
of religion. The idea of a God who was merely
“man’s giant shadow hailed divine,” had
similarly been left behind. He condemned
strongly the religion which taught men to trust
to Providence; to believe that all was for the
best; to regard faith as all-important. Such
religions, he said, are merely opium for the soul.
They had been a most expensive item in
humanity’s bill, but if present comfort were the
aim of existence, the sleepy solace they had
supplied were worth double the price.
The real object of religion, Douglas Price
averred, was to foster our moral passion; to make
9
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


us conquer evil by stirring up within us deeper
enthusiasms, more fascinating ideals, and saner
hopes than those which “the world, the flesh,
and the devil” could offer, until this moral
passion for reason and right became the only
passion. Real religion was working for the
upliftment of humanity, the attainment of truth,
the honourable accomplishment of duty, and the
extension of justice, sanity, and goodwill upon
earth.
Indicating his view of God, he said: “If
love, justice, goodness, beauty, and truth be not
God, that word has no meaning for me. God
is our highest ideal; the devil is our own
stupidity and vileness. The Divine is that which
is the best in life, truest in thought, noblest in
action, the goal that all the world is seeking, the
aim, the object, the consummation of the whole.
I think of God as the spirit of the ideal, the
force that urges us on, the vision that chafes us
in our dullness, the perfection that lashes ns to
achieve. God is not less than we supposed, but
more.”
The following fine passage from a Sunday
address delivered in the year immediately pre-
ceding that in which he died, also well shows the
catholicity of his view and at the same time the
10
DOUGLAS PRICE.


beauty of his literary style:—‘‘The real Bible
of Religion is the great literature of the whole
world, all that the poets, sages, dreamers, and
scientists have uttered, all that inspires the heart,
mind, and will. And the real Church of
Religion is the Universe itself, with its countless
wonders, grotesque gargoyles, and its unutter-
ably beautiful colours and sounds. Its hymns
are the songs of all ages, and all great music is
its sacred voluntary. The real Altar of Religion
is the human heart, where noble aspirations and
pure love are offered up; and if you would find
the calendar saints, then read of the heroes and
sages of every country and of all who serve their
fellow-men. ’ ’
It is not strange to find that a man with
these views should never tire of insisting that
creeds and theories matter little compared with
strength of character and efforts after goodness;
that good men are found in every creed; that
men can live finely, though they hold the most
contradictory opinions; and that there is no real
line between our genuine religion and our daily
life.
Life seemed to him to be too big for compre-
hension, Our real life, he said, lay deeper than
the surface splashing of the intellectual waves.
11
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


We resembled creatures with three antennae
wherewith to grope about in our environment.
These were reason, will, and emotion, and he
thought the effort to probe the universe with a
single antenna was foredoomed to failure. For
him, there was sufficient evidence of survival
after death, but, as in all else, he was not
dogmatic as to this, and had no doubt that a
good life here was the best preparation for the
life to come. A valuable clue to the workings
of his mind on the question of a future life is
contained in the following passage from an
address on “Heaven and Hell ”:—“Face to face
with the great works of art, particularly with
the symphonies of the master musicians, in the
presence of the huge ideals of the soul, the
noblest acts of great men and women, the awe
and the mystery of all things, I cannot seriously
believe that our life is but a vapour which
appeareth for a time and then vanisheth into
nought. Yet, what the ultimate goal shall be,
defies both words and thoughts.”
Douglas Price held that active work for the
improvement of social ideals and institutions was
a most important part of the Modernist Move-
ment. There must be no acceptance of any cut-
and-dried scheme of morality imposed from
12
DOUGLAS PRICE.


above, otherwise there could be no improvement.
He was appalled by the stupidity, the waste, the
chaos, and the futilitv of the world, and called
7 •/ 7
in question the whole system of modern thought
and economics and social organisation. Man
had never yet been free. Whereas, formerly,
men were the slaves of superstition; now, indus-
trialism had become a veritable despot dragging
almost all into its pet. We are only sane in
spots, and the great bugbear is not selfishness
but stupidity and lack of organisation. Destitu-
tion should be done away with and decent hous-
ing made possible for all. The higher education
should be open to any who could profit by it.
Of social reformers, H. G. Wells occupied,
in his opinion, a very high place. “The only
trouble about Wells,” he said, “is that he was
born too late. Had he been available at the
creation, we might have had a more logical
world. But I always think of him as a kind of
cosmic housemaid, eternally trying to tidy up.”
War was one of the signs of sheer stupidity
in man, and on the outbreak of the late war, he
commented: ‘ ‘ Europe has for years been build-
ing up a military Frankenstein, with its millions
of men and its scores of dreadnoughts, and now
it is come alive! ’ ?
13
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


Douglas Price’s teaching was a constant
exhortation to make the most of our lives.
“You can, if you will, absorb and reflect the
glory of the ideal world. Seize upon the highest
and best; retain that as your own and live it
diligently out. A man’s real strength is the
strength that he gets for himself. Suggest fine
thoughts to yourself, and behold! you are
stronger and nobler already.”
During his five years of leadership of the
Movement, with scarcely a break, he delivered
two addresses each Sunday and, except during
the hottest months of the year, mid-week lectures
on a wide range of subjects. He had previously
been giving mid-week lectures at All Saints .
These were a special feature of his work, and
in them he not only found great pleasure, but
was perhaps more in his element than in any
other form of activity. Possessing, as he did,
a special gift for grasping the salient points of
the lives and work of great people and the
significant facts of history, and of expressing
the result in a simple and interesting form, often
lightened with humour, these lectures were much
appreciated.
He published three books— “ The Earthly
Purgatory, ’ ’ which was largely autobiographical;
14
DOUGLAS PRICE.


‘‘The Soul of Judas,” a collection of allegories;
and “One of a Crowd.” He also edited, and
for the most part wrote, “The Modernist,” a
32-page bi-monthly periodical, which corre-
sponded with “The Cygnet” of his All Saints’
days. “The Modernist,” as well as his lectures
and addresses, well revealed the great extent of
his scholarship and the depth of his thought.
Subsequently, many of his sermons were pub-
lished in “The Forerunner,” issued by the
Movement.
That Douglas Price possessed in an uncom-
mon degree intellectual ability and honesty,
sincerity of purpose, largeness of view, and
tolerance, no one, who knew him, would deny.
His was a mind which did not crystallise.
“Tempori parendum” (“we must move with
the times”) was the motto printed in “The
Modernist,” and assuredly it summed up his
whole intellectual life.
He did not exhaust his mental stores, as
many men do. His intellectual capacity and
vigour were in marked contrast to his physical
strength, which throughout life had been con-
siderably below that of the average.
Variety and freshness always characterised
his addresses. Although one had heard him week
15
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


after week for years, one never felt that one
knew just what he would say on any given sub-
ject. He was never afraid to say exactly what
he meant, but, possessing the qualities already
mentioned and never displaying any narrow
partisan spirit, he retained his audience, com-
posed though it was of men and women of
diverse views on religion and social questions.
He recognised at all times that the fight for
human improvement was an uphill one, but,
outwardly at any rate, he did not despair. He
condemned any yielding to pessimism as sheer
folly. However bad things are, we are here to
make them better. “Is not life,” he asked, “a
call to arms, a challenge to heroes, a conflict and
a strife ? The reformer must ever strive for his
ideals, otherwise evil forces may become pre-
dominant.” Taking another course, he would
remind us that man has ascended from animal
forms, shaking dullness from his mind and slowly
awakening to the vision of Divine Goodness
within, enduring hardship for his ideals, helping
others and striving upward himself.
In rounding oft this short and imperfect
sketch, let us say that he was an artist in every
department of life. His little home was enriched
by paintings and drawings executed by his own
16
DOUGLAS' PRICE.


hand; in music, he found an inexhaustible delight
and solace. i ‘ The effect of good music lasts with
me for hours, ’ ’ he said, ‘ ‘ sometimes for days in
an added exhilaration and intensity of delight. ’
Douglas Price was unmarried. With con-
genial friends he was a delightful companion,
and in certain moods he was almost whimsical.
His artistic temperament caused him to be some-
what unpractical in worldly matters. He was
intensely sensitive, feeling keenly the criticism
of those who misunderstood him. At times, he
was heavily handicapped by illness, and he knew
full well the sharpness of “the sword of pain.”
Periodically he suffered from deep depression,
and then he seemed to be an imprisoned Ariel
with no Prospero to set him free. Those who
knew him but slightly gained an impression at
such times which was by no means favourable.
But the outstanding nobility of his character
far outweighed these idiosyncracies. To young
and old who were in trouble, he was always
ready with assistance and sympathy. His charm-
ing manner with little children made him a great
favourite.
He was undoubtedly a power for good
amongst many men and women, and his memory,
his work, and his influence we would not
willingly let die.
17
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.




The Place of Ethics and Religion
in Education
Professor Meredith Atkinson, M.A. (Oxon.).
Before we can determine the appropriate
place of religion and ethics in education, we
must satisfy ourselves as to what answers we are
prepared to give to certain preliminary and
fundamental questions. What is the nature of
social evolution, and what its present trend?
Unless we can traice in it a quality that admits
of the efficacy off religion and ethics as educa-
tional forces, it ias of little use to make a begin-
ning upon our main discussion. There are many
conflicting interpretations of progress abroad,
some of which leave no room for religion or
ethics. If the neo-Darwinians, the economic
determinists, the extreme rationalists, the militar-
ists, and all the other materialists and utilitarians
are right in their analysis of human evolution
and destiny, it were waste of time to search
further in the Book of Life, for we should he on


the last page. It is beyond the scope of this
lecture to examine in any detail the various
forms of scientific pessimism which are the
negation of religion. But it is hoped that the
sociological interpretation of human evolution
here offered will, by implication, provide the
necessary answer to our question.
We must also ask ourselves: what is true
religion, what are the ethical functions of the
individual and society, and what is the aim of
education? Our task is enlarged, you will say,
beyond compass. Perhaps it will so turn out.
But we must clear our ideas, in however brief a
space, on these fundamentals, if we are to chart
our course as civilised beings searching for the
Way, the Truth, and the Life. Such I imagine
to be the manner in which men like Douglas
Price adventured upon the sea of the New
Thought. His was the spirit of the true seeker
-fearless and earnest in his pursuit of truth.
The Age of Scepticism.
The most signal feature of the generation
into which we were born was its decided
scepticism, particularly in regard to religion.
The Victorian Age was one of intellectual
turmoil, wonderful scientific discoveries, and
20
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


bold endeavours to solve the riddle of the
universe. Old established orthodoxies and
tenacious dogmas had suddenly to withstand the
onslaughts of the revolutionaries of physical
science. After fifty years of bitter controversy
we stand amid the shifting scenes of a religious
revival as decisive as it is significant.
The beginning of the 19th century saw the
world accepting the confirmation of a Divine
Order of the universe which the 18th century
offered in its doctrine of the Order of Nature.
Paley’s famous argument from design was the
child of this philosophy. Organic and inanimate
nature presented innumerable examples of the
divine architecture and ultimate beneficence of
the entire natural world. Then came the
dazzlingly rapid discoveries of physical science.
The atomic theory of Dalton, researches in
electricity and magnetism, the beginnings of
natural evolution with Lamarck in 1809, the
theory of the geological evolution of the earth
by Lyell in 1830, the German discovery in 1838
of the protoplasmic cell as the common element
of life throughout the organic world, Joule’s
great discovery of the relation between heat and
energy, the discovery of the spectrum, and,
most profound of all, the Darwinian theory of
21
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


natural selection—these are the epoch-making
events that shook the very firmament of human
thought. The effect upon theological doctrines
was immediate and far-reaching. It seemed that
the riddle of the universe could only be solved
by science, if at all, and that the argument from
Design and from a First Cause had lost all
validity. The most uncompromising of the
scientific rationalists, the German Haeckel, said.
“The development of the universe is a monistic
mechanical process, in which we discover no aim
or purpose whatever; what we call design in the
organic world is a special result of biological
agencies ; neither in the evolution of the
heavenly bodies, nor in that of the crust of our
earth, do we find any trace of controlling pur-
pose.” “All is the result of chance.” 1 * In pass-
ing, it is interesting to observe that here we have
an extreme biologist rejecting Paley’s argument
from organic architecture, while other equally
extreme biologists, like Spencer, have sinned
with Paley in basing their theory of society upon
a hopelessly strained analogy between animal
organisms and human society. Analogy is a
two-edged sword.
* For references in text see p. 65.
22
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


While some scientists fought valiantly for
the cause of religion, most were made heady by
the new wine of physical science. ‘‘ I discern in
that Matter,” said the great Professor Tyndall,
“the promise and potency of every form of
life.” 2 Any possibility of benevolence in a
controlling Mind was indignantly scouted.
Romanes painted a horrible picture of Nature
red in tooth and claw. Huxley argued that
“since thousands of times a minute, were our
ears sharp enough, we should hear sighs and
groans of pain like those heard by Dante at the
gate of hell, the world cannot be governed by
what we call benevolence.” 3
On the other side were some famous names.
Faraday, Joule, Lord Kelvin, Clerk Maxwell,
Salmon, and Pasteur were among them. Many
others changed over after faltering awhile.
Darwin himself, who was never a neo-
Darwinian,” declared that “the theory of
evolution is quite compatible with the belief in
God.” Elsewhere he affirmed, as did Huxley,
the ethical nature of man as distinguishing him
fundamentally from the lower animals. 4 At the
conclusion of “The Origin of Species” he wrote,
“There is a grandeur in this view of life, with
its several powers, having been originally
23
ETHICS, EELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into
one,”
How foolish were the intolerant dogmatisms
of the materialist scientists was proved by the
march of their own studies. The changes that
have come over the theory of matter, the
investigation of radio-activity, the enormous
strides made by chemistry are enough to suggest
how insecure were the earlier generalisations.
But far more important to our present thesis are
the advances accomplished in the spheres of
philosophy, psychology and sociology. While
the scientists, baffled by the missing link between
life and matter, have reverted to an earlier
emphasis upon the supremacy of life, the
philosophers have really done most to prepare
the way for the religious revival of to-day,
while the psychologists and sociologists have
gone far to explain the nature of the individual
mind, both of itself and as it works to produce
society. The great philosopher, M. Henri
Bergson, supplies the fullest justification for
religious and ethical education, when he shows
the difference between animal and human life.
In very truth I believe no living organism is
absolutely without the faculty of performing
actions and moving spontaneously.” And again,
24
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


“ There is behind life an impulse, an immense
impulse to climb higher and higher, to run
greater and greater risks in order to arrive at
greater and greater efficiency.” 5 “Life appears
in its entirety as an immense wave which,
starting from a centre, speeds outwards, and
which on almost the whole of its circumference
is stopped (by matter) and converted into
oscillation; at one point the obstacle has been
forced, the impulse has poured freely. It is
this freedom that the human form registers.
Everywhere but- in man consciousness has had
to come to a stand; in man alone it has kept on
its way. Man continues the vital movement
indefinitely, although he does not draw along
with him all that life carries in itself.” 6 That
is, he has not retained the animal instincts in
full. The philosopher’s distinction between
animal and human evolution is fully borne out
by the sociologist. Their thesis obviously opens
wide the door to all those educational influences
summed up in religion and ethics.
Science and the Ethical Aim.
Every philosophic and scientific discovery
of fundamental import is followed by a number
of schools of interpreters, who develop the theory
with a bias in some special direction. Two cases
25
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


in point are the theory of ‘ ‘ natural rights, ’ ’ first
clearly enunciated by Rousseau, and the theory
of “natural selection” propounded by Darwin
and Wallace. From the eighteenth century idea
of a natural order were deduced such divergent
schools as the Utopian Socialists, the economic
determinists or laissez-faire school, and the
anarchists. The explanation is that the so-called
law of nature, being of universal application,
gave ample room for almost every conceivable
interpretation of human development. Similarly,
the Darwinian theory gave rise to, or supported,
the various social philosophies of the “survival
of the fittest” schools, with their divisions into
militarists, racialists, nationalists, physical
eugenists, extreme individualists, economic deter-
minists, and class-war theorists. All these, of
course, are but varying interpretations of the
theory of the struggle for existence applied to
human beings. The organic theory of social
evolution affirms that society is an organism,
whose living cells are human individuals. This
analogy is carried to its extreme in Herbert
Spencer, who extols the ‘ ‘ beneficent private war ’ ’
constantly being waged in society as the great
progressive force eliminating the unfit and leav-
ing the fit to inherit the earth. Pestilence and
26
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


famine, infant mortality, war and competition,
slums and destitution —these are the great puri-
fiers, performing the beneficent work of nature
by exterminating all weaklings. Sentimentality,
moral idealism, and social reform are of no avail
against this active principle —they are even an
unwarrantable interference with its valuable
work.
It would be wrong to suggest that all schools
who use the organic theory are so ruthless. The
moderate eugenists and the economic determin-
ists do not advocate unmitigated struggle. Nor
would it be fair to say that they all deny the
ethical aim of society. But in this at least they
agree: that they neglect or omit the ethical
element in the human constitution. From this
it follows that such purpose as they admit into
social evolution is rather the blind purpose of
nature than that of an ethical consciousness.
This is a vital point. Valuable though the
organic analogy is, especially in emphasising the
corporate character and solidarity of social life,
it commits the sin of every analogy carried to
the extreme —it becomes a claim to virtual
identity of character. Each of these schools
takes up what is a certain and undoubted fact of
history or science, such as natural selection or
27
ETHICS, EELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


the class struggle, and reads the riddle of destiny
by its light. Now, it may be admitted at once
that both the organic in our life and nature, and
the economic in our history and interests, are
of enormous importance. Let us, for the sake
of argument, allot to them nine-tenths of the
factors in social evolution and individual per-
sonality. But the point is that the other tenth
—neglected or repudiated by the determinists —
is the really expansible part of our nature, and
is capable of completely dominating the other
nine-tenths. In short, the mind, the will—the
ethical and intellectual elements which mark off
man almost absolutely from the animals —pro-
vide endless potentialities for progress into
spiritual regions yet unconceived. Herein lies
the infinite scope for educational agencies.
Psychology has opened up for us a new and
immense field of investigation. Sociology is
steadily unfolding the nature of community.
Both are offering a complete refutation of the
false analogy between purely organic life and
human life. “A community does not act in
unity like an organism, or maintain itself like
an organism, or grow like an organism, or repro-
duce like an organism, or die like an organism.
The central difference (corporate consciousness)
28
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


renders the whole analogy vain.” Similarly,
the human individual, while his basic life is
organic, is fundamentally different from the
animal organism in his possession of mind and
will, and his realisation of the ethical aim.
The Nature of Social Evolution.
It is generally held that there was practi-
cally never a period in the evolution of mankind
when religion was absent from its individual
and social life. While this is true so long as
we are satisfied to regard religion as merely a
belief in the existence and agency of the super-
natural, it is a travesty to apply the term to
such a non-ethical, non-rational system of ideas
and practices as those of primitive man. He
was at the mercy of his environment, the slave
of usage, ceremonial, and superstition, obsessed
by the terrors and uncertainties of life, ‘Hear
of food shortage, fear of the medicine-man, fear
of an enemy’s magic, or fear of being accused
himself of practising magic, and a thousand
other fears that always hover about a twilight
of intelligence.” Little wonder that he made
gods of the stuff of his fears; that he worshipped
the overwhelming forces of nature —the towering
peaks, the rushing rivers, the fire-breathing
volcanoes, the mighty ocean, the whirlwind, the
29
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


Sun, and his daughter Fire. This was religion
without ethics —frequently identified with
atrocities and customs of the most degrading
character. In the mind of primitive man there
was no inner standard of moral judgment, and
consequently no response to anything but the
external. The lack of this inner sense kept
society static, since it had no ethical purpose
and no realisation of growth. This primitive
form of religion was therefore unworthy of the
name, until it became transformed by ethical
ideas. God only becomes possible as an idea
when His moral functions and character are
realised. It was therefore ethics and not religion
which revealed God. This is no heresy. God is
eternal, but He could not be discovered until man
had evolved a moral standard whereby the
first glimmering of the good was gained.
“ Originally religion is simply an aspect of the
undifferentiated communal life.” 7 In the dawn
of civilisation, custom, law, and religion are
indistinguishable. By long usage custom
acquires the force of law, and for the same
reason may become embodied in religion. Breach
of custom was believed to endanger the life of
the whole tribe, chiefly through provoking the
anger of the god. On the other hand, since even
30
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


early religions were an attempt to explain the
universe, they contain the beginnings of moral
speculation, but no truly moral code. Even
Homer’s Greek Heroes are not condemned for
their immorality and treachery, except in so far
as they offend against the code of custom. It
was not until the time of the later Greeks that
the ethical sense was awakened, and the revolt
against the morality of the ancient poets began.
Socrates lost his life for “impiety” during the
transition. Christ was crucified in a later age
for the same cause. The conception of Jehovah
underwent an evolution similar to that of other
deities in the earlier stages of religion, but
reached at last, through successive revelations by
the great prophets and teachers, a more perfect
ethical and spiritual expression. At first Jehovah
was the powers of nature, then a tribal deity,
then the Creator—but still of a world in which
there was one chosen people, the rest being
“Gentiles.” The price he demanded of Israel
was, ‘ ‘ Thou shalt have none other gods but me ’ ’
—more than an affirmation of mono-theism; it
was the stern proclamation of a “jealous god.”
Religious conceptions are constantly being
purified by a clearer understanding of the ethical
purpose of personality. Institutional religion is
31
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


continually tending to form a crust around the
accepted ethics of its day, until the expansive
force of a new ethic bursts it asunder. This does
not mean that religion and ethics are in essential
conflict, but rather that what is false in religion
and what is an advance in ethics are in conflict.
“The emergence of the ethical sentiment in
history is most fully revealed in the conflict of
the ethical spirit against the dogmatised ethics of
the past. The ethics of the past becomes
entrenched in religious forms and is dislodged
only after the age-long assault of new ethical
claims. For religion can never be separate from
ethics, from the social ideal.” 8
We have seen that the primitive community
lacked any real differentiation of institutions.
Religion, the family, law, custom —all are a
compound of the primitive society. As yet there
was, so to speak, no institutional division of
labour. As human societies develop, the different
-institutions become marked off from one another.
The family, originally as wide as kinship itself,
is the most distinctive demarcation which first
appears. Then comes the smaller and more
intimate, though still large, family group. The
first of these stages was purely economic and
32
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


propagative? The second develops greater com-
plexity of purpose, by engendering the emotional
life of fellowship, friendship, and ultimately
love. In this patriarchal stage we see the
beginnings of true ethical function. Certain
social and civic obligations are definitely sought.
Ideas of law and order are taught. Habits of
co-operation are engendered. It is, in short, the
dawn of the ethical family. 9 As civilisation
advances, many family functions are taken over
by the State and the church. But the delimitation
of' the functions of the family group is a
necessary condition of the enrichment of its life.
The disastrous effects of industrialism upon the
family are no contradiction to this argument, for
in a truly ethical State what is basic in family
life—namely, the emotional, moral, and social
influences—would be strengthened by the per-
formance of all external functions by the State.
The evils of commercialism have delayed, but
cannot prevent, the development of the truly
ethical form of family.
The Social Purpose.
What is true of the evolution of the family
and of religion, from crude utility to ethical
purpose, holds good for every human institution
33
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


which has a survival value. All such institu-
tions, as Professor Urwick has shown, have
different purposes at different stages of evolu-
tion. Government, law, property, punishment-
all pass through similar stages. Thus the dual
process of greater differentiation and greater
unity has always existed, for both were essential
to that “exaltation of personality” which
Eucken has aptly described as the aim of true
education. Every advance in association brings
greater distinctiveness of customs and traditions,
with an inevitable increase in the difficulty of
finding a basis of unity. The complex of interests
which thus arises in modern society—economic,
professional, caste, governmental—can only be
harmonised by the moralising of all interests, and
that is only possible through education. To-day
the temporary harmonies which a democracy pre-
cariously enjoys are but the resultants of the
forces of contending interests. Social equili-
brium will always be unstable until it becomes
the spontaneous product of the inner moral sense
of the citizens. No interests, no institutions, can
ultimately survive which have no ethical func-
tion to perform. This pronounces the doom of
such institutions as the modern wage-system,
monarchical despotism, militarism, idolatrous
34
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


religions, prostitution, unrestricted private pro-
perty, and caste privilege. Equally it promises
long life to the family, the enlightened church,
democratic government, property for use, social
co-operation, and the League of Nations. Let us
once plant within the minds of our children that
supreme ethical test of social institutions and we
shall have lit the torch of the only revolution that
can succeed —the spiritual reconstruction of
society. Modern science and modern commerce
have together created a great world of externals,
which has turned men’s minds away from the
inner principle and led them to seek a material
and social solution for a spiritual and personal
problem. True progress, as Professor Hobhouse
tells us, can only be compassed “with the true
perception that the object of social effort is the
realisation of ends to which human beings can
reasonably attach value; that is to say, the
realisation of ethical ends.” It is not that spirit
is alien to matter, but that spirit is the master-
builder, and matter but its bricks and mortar.
“The world of Fact, artistic or scientific, moral,
political, economic, is what the spirit builds
round itself, creating it out of its own substance,
while it itself in creating it grows within. . . .
Nothing is or can be alien, still less hostile to it,
35
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


for ‘in wisdom has it made them all.’” 10 It
follows that we must train the human spirit
towards the highest virtue, if we would create
the new order—the Kingdom of God upon Earth.
That sublime saying of Christ, “Seek ye first
the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you, ’ ’ is the
lodestar of both personal and social progress.
Never was the world so ripe as now for the appli-
cation of that truth. We have reached the stage
at which civilisation has become purposive, self-
directive, fore-thinking. In other words, civilisa-
tion has reached ethical adolescence. It is
exhibiting all the promise, all the danger of that
stage of growth. Religious and moral education
never had such a supreme opportunity to save
the world. If it be true, as a well-known
sociologist declares, that “society is ethically
bankrupt,” it is due to its neglect of true educa-
tion. Certainly, when we look around upon the
confusion of moral standards amongst indi-
viduals and classes, the need for a moralised
education is overwhelmingly apparent. The
ethics of the business world, under the despotism
of competition, the ethics of political life, with
its partisanship and corruption, the ethics of the
schoolboy, with his habits of “cribbing” and his
36
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


false code of ‘ ‘ good form ’ ’ —these tolerated aber-
rations from clean living are at the root of the
appalling condition of the world to-day. We
have allowed our minds to be divided into com-
partments of morality and expediency, when no
such division is rationally or ethically possible.
In every situation, however complex, there is but
one right choice, for there is but one standard of
values—the ethical. True liberty does not con-
sist in freedom to make any one of all the pos-
sible choices, but voluntarily to reject all the
wrong choices and adopt the single right one.
Bad means and good ends can run only in
parallel lines, for they never meet. Machiavelli
and Aristotle, Satan and Christ, Mammon and
God, can never be reconciled. Neither the
churches nor the schools have stood with their
backs to this uncompromising rock of Christi-
anity. The power of that religion comes from
its relation of the human personality to the
Divine, from the conception of the religious and
moral perfectibility of the individual, through
his voluntary submission to the will of God. We
have never dared to teach this doctrine in its
applications to real life. It was safer to rely
merely on the supernaturalness of religion when
controversy arose and precious interests were
37
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


threatened. As if any conception of religion
were possible which denied the spiritual reality
of human society! Herein lies the very reason
why organised Christianity has failed to save the
world: it was not related to life. Jesus Christ
waged the greatest of all fights against false
ethics, proclaiming the supreme and eternal
principle of personal responsibility and social
individuality. The Sermon on the Mount is full
of social ethics, Jesus never divided life into
watertight compartments or preached solely of
the hereafter. Sociality and individuality,
Earth and Heaven, Hod and Man, Spirit and
Matter are perfectly reconciled in His teaching.
Modern philosophy and sociology are in com-
plete accord with Christian doctrine regarding
society and the individual. The true claim for
individuality, says a well-known sociologist, is
“for such a social order as will most further the
individuality of each in its degree.” The
churches have hitherto laid the emphasis almost
solely on individuals. Now we are striving
towards a synthesis of both, by harking back to
the gospel, that well of truth undefiled.
This does not mean that individual character
is not an end in itself, as we shall see. Society also
has its own special end. But it does mean that
38
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


the ultimate oneness of all moral values must be
realised and taught, if men are to be ethical in
every one of their associations. Thus, a bad
employer and a good patriot cannot be united
in one personality; nor can an unjust steward
and a good churchman, or a fraudulent bank-
rupt and a great statesman. But we hesitate to
expose to our children at school these terrible
contradictions in our accepted social custom.
Any frank discussion of private property, politi-
cal morality, religious anomalies, or social
injustice—the very blood and bones of ethical
education —is taboo. Our children consequently
grow up with this hopeless confusion of
expediency and morality, actuality and ideal,
clouding their vision until they fall into the
non-ethical routine of working life before they
have developed “the ethical autonomy of the
social being.” While we can never hope to
attain full agreement on all moral questions,
much of the chaos would disappear if we spoke
and thought in ethical universals, instead of
hugging to our souls the parochial, class, and
professional moralities which deny the existence
of community. ‘ ‘ Our specific codes are like little
land-locked harbours whose mouths have been
silted up in the process of time, so that the
39
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


waters become stagnant. Were the entrance
deepened, the stagnant waters would share in the
universal and purifying ocean-tide.” 11 The
surest way to this purgation is to teach our
children constantly that the apparent moral
conflicts in life can be resolved into a unity by
acceptance of spiritual and ethical purpose as
the sole test of civilisation. “The State,” said
Aristotle, “came into being originating in the
bare needs of life; but it is maintained for the
sake of the good life. 7 And the virtue which
it exists to further is an unbroken unity. Specific
moral codes must be but applications and inter-
pretations of the one general code. The ethics
of the smallest community and of the individual
can only be properly and fully interpreted in
terms of the widest community, not conversely.
The actual life of the smaller society is the more
immediately important, but only because within
it virtue is much more exercised. The greater
the number and the width of the communities to
which a man belongs the higher is his social and
individual personality. On the other hand,
membership of a totally isolated community must
be ethically imperfect. “For the most certain
assertion which we can make about the ethical
stage of our life is this: that in it every relation-
ship will be fuller and richer, not emptier and
40
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


poorer, side by side with completer subordination
to the purposes of the whole society; that the
activities connected with every little circle—the
range of feeling, of thought, and of action open
to its members —-must increase concurrently with
an increase of the activities of the larger circle
to which they are all related, and that there can
be no advance towards the ethical stage which
does not bring with it a fuller individual life,
and a fuller family life, as well as a fuller social
life.” 12 The realisation of this unity of moral
purpose is impossible unless we give to religious
and ethical education the supreme place in our
system. The material sciences, in pretending to
solve the riddle of the universe have gone astray
because, knowing nothing of the most vital part
of our nature, they affirmed vast generalisations
which neglected the most salient of the data—the
human spirit. But “ Science no longer glories in
its antagonism to religion; its best votaries are
striving after some true reconciliation.” The
two are uniting on the platform of social purpose.
Science of itself has no teleology. Religion is
the great science of teleology. Whenever its
claim to be so has been repudiated, it is because
its custodians sinned sadly against the light of
new knowledge. The churches owe an immense
debt to science for purging then) of the irrational
41
ETHICS, EELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


dogmas and soul-enslaving literalism which made
religion odious to many of the most thoughtful
and sincere of men. But how sadly few church-
men accepted the modernist attitude until it was
almost commonplace. Men like Douglas Price
found it difficult to live and work in such an
atmosphere.
The Sins of the Churches.
It is probably true to say that the
neo-paganism of physical science and the
utilitarianism of last century derived as much
of its strength from the irrationalism and
intolerance of the churches as from the wonder-
ful scientific discoveries themselves. Organised
religion has always hindered as well as helped
the race. “ With the appearance of a new
religious idea a new civilisation is born, says a
folk-psychologist; religion is the only factor
capable of acting rapidly upon the character of
a people; on the other hand nothing is so
destructive as the dust of dead gods. Here we
have the service of religion to human evolution
in a nut-shell.” 13 The defects of religious
education can only be removed by its full
acceptance of the task of explaining the purpose
of the whole universe, material and spiritual,
and relating human personality truly to it. So
42
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


long as religion means no more than “other-
worldliness”-—vital though that spiritual detach-
ment undoubtedly is—so long will it fail to
establish the Kingdom of God upon Earth or
prepare for the Kingdom of God in Heaven.
William James, in his “Varieties of Religious
Experience,” came to the conclusion that there
is an unseen order and that our supreme good
lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves to it.
It is, or should be, the task of the churches to
teach us everything that can be known of the
invisible universe. This includes, of course,
man’s relation to it. But this is the last
impression one would get from the average
Sunday School, or from most sermons. Far be
it from me to belittle the good undoubtedly
achieved by them —their steadfast upholding of
the banner of right living, their fostering care
of precious human ideals, their zeal for the
individual soul’s salvation and that of humanity
at large. But against such assets we have the
encouragement of spiritual egotism, the grossest
intolerance, the defence of vested interests, the
excommunication of the great heretics of the new
thought, the stifling of the mind by dogmatic
teaching. If only to purify religious education,
ethical teaching seems to me to be absolutely
43
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


essential. Religion would never have been
cleansed of the sins of the churches without the
science and the philosophy which at first denied
all its claims. It is because the churches have
so frequently refused to carry the ethical banner
that the great moral reformers have sadly been
compelled to advance without them, or in face
of their bitter opposition. On the other hand,
ethics alone could never have lifted humanity,
for its appeal avails only when men have reached
a mental elevation at which the moral is mainly
an intellectual ideal. Moreover, the ethics of
Jesus Christ cannot be improved upon. The
church has had ever to hand the most sublime
of all moral teaching, the perfection of simplicity,
appealing to reason and emotion with the same
wondrous power. But the dead hand of
institutionalism has ever lain heavily upon
religious education. The church turned symbols
to dogmas, bottled up the stream of living water,
debased the spirit into mechanism, and prisoned
the truth in credal formulas. One ethical
reformation after another —from within and
without the church —has been followed by a new
petrefaction. The only salvation of institutions
lies in their constant redemption from the dead
letter by the living spirit. The work of the
44
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


“modernists,” like him in whose memory this
lecture is delivered, is of the utmost importance
in this regard.
Religion and Civilisation,
Though I have insisted so much on the
social outlook essential to religion, I freely accept
the seeming paradox that religion is, after all,
ultimately concerned only with values that tran-
scend all material life. “By‘religion’ ... we
shall mean the consciousness of our deepest
interests as centring in and bound up with the
icality of supra-social goods such as are sum-
marised in the trinity of truth, beauty, and
goodness. By ‘Church’ we shall mean any
organised body that claims to be the witness and
interpreter of this reality and to influence the
thoughts and actions of its members through
their belief in it.” 14 The paradox of religion
is that it transcends and at the same time in-
cludes all other moral agencies. It pervades and
dominates them all. It takes man to the summit
of a high mountain whence he may survey all
the unseen universe. “Then how can he,” asks
Plato, ‘ ‘ who has magnificence of mind and is the
spectator of all time and all existence, think
much of human life?” The religious mind does
not disregard human life, but alone accpiires the
45
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


true perspective of eternity. Only religious
education can bring men to live for unseen,
impersonal, and distant ends. The Christian
is undeterred by the prospect of failure or
success; results be never looks for. Only religion
can save mankind from the two constant dangers
of life—first, that the individual may be over-
whelmed by a sense of his insignificance and
feebleness, and, again, that society may be lost to
that “virtuous materialism” with which a cold
utilitarian ethic is satisfied. 15 Religious educa-
tion, insisting upon the supreme worth and grand
destiny of every human soul, supplants despair
by a glowing faith, and points the way to a
lofty spiritual life far above materialism. The
work of the philosopher, Eucken, is of the great-
est value in placing religion in its true relation
to civilisation. He argues that ‘ ‘ while it is neces-
sary that religion and civilisation should be
independent of one another, yet each is dependent
upon the other for its own prosperity.” 16 It
would be wrong to reduce religion to a mere
means to civilisation. Civilisation of itself
encourages in man a self-confidence, a joyous
zest in his own powers, which religious education
rightly corrects. Civilisation regards itself as
an end in itself. Religion alone can make it a
46
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


means to spiritual ends, while transcending it at
the same time. Man has largely reduced to order
the physical universe and subjected the powers
of Nature to his will. But these very victories
have diminished the force of his inner spirit,
and made religious and moral education far more
vitally necessary than ever before. Writing
during the Great War, Professor Bergson said,
“What would happen if the moral effort of
humanity should turn in its tracks at the moment
of attaining its goal, and if some diabolical con-
trivance should cause it to produce the mechani-
sation of spirit instead of the spiritualisation of
matter? There was a people predestined to try
the experiment. . . . The idea, peculiar to the
nineteenth century, of employing science in the
satisfaction of our material wants has given a
wholly unforeseen extension to the mechanical
arts, and has equipped man in less than fifty
years with more tools than he made during the
thousands of years he had lived on the earth.
Each new machine being for man a new organ—
an artificial organ which merely prolongs the
natural organs—his body has become suddenly
and prodigiously increased in size, without his
soul being able at the same time to dilate to the
dimensions of his new body.” This statement
47
ETHICS. RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


suggests the incalculable importance of educa-
tion. If we are to escape falling into the slough
of “a civilisation without a soul,” we must give
our chief attention in the future to enlarging
man’s soul to fitness for the control of his new
body. Democracy, above all, needs education,
since it is prone to the inner conflicts that arise
from suddenly released energies, and only educa-
tion can bring it harmony. For harmony, indi-
vidual and social, is essentially the product of
religious and moral education. On this condi-
tion democracy will stand or fall. Ethical
instruction alone is insufficient, for it stops short
at the commandment, “Love thy neighbour as
thyself,” whereas religion insists upon the
greater commandment, “Thou shalt love) the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind.” The severe
spiritual crisis through which the world is now
passing will not be safely ended without the
greater as well as the lesser commandment. The
yerv advances of material civilisation are oppres-
sing men more and more with a sense of theii
.own littleness and worthlessness. While the
ethical precept enjoins upon men the duty of
social service, it does not suffice to raise their
souls to a sense of their own enormous spiritual
48
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


value. Only a realisation of sonship in God’s
family can do that. But the task of religious
education has become infinitely harder, since the
reason of man demands logical explanations of
all phenomena, while he glories in the satisfac-
tion which his physical powers, in alliance with
science, give him. “Moreover,” says Eucken,
“merely by retaining its ancient form, religion
cannot possibly offer mankind that which the
latter to-day demands from it. We are yearning
for a rejuvenation of life, for original depths,
for simple truth and pure beginnings. . . .
Eeligion cannot truly advance the age unless it
leads the spiritual movement of humanity. It
cannot afford to evade the living problems of
the day; it must overcome them.” 17 And this
can be accomplished only by our linking our-
selves up with divine reality. To-day, when we
are fighting for our souls against the forces of
matter closing in upon us from every side, it is
vital to recover that invisible relationship which
puts the world of fact at our mercy. The chil-
dren of this generation have inherited a material-
ism from which they can be saved only by the
most strenuous efforts of religious educators. In
the religious upheaval of last century man almost
lost his anchorage. In the name of liberty
49
ETHICS, EELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


habits have been allowed to develop which are an
offence against the moral code, to say nothing of
religion. There is a dangerous laxity abroad,
especially in the view taken of vice and self-
indulgence and political life. Old ideals have
been severely shaken, and as yet no new ones
have proved adequate to the task of teaching
man self-mastery. Education alone can fulfil this
great need —education, that is, with the Divine
Power inspiring it.
“Yes, while on earth a thousand discords ring,
Man’s fitful uproar mingling with his toil,
Still do thy sleepless ministers move on,
Their glorious tasks in silence perfecting.”
Moral Education.
Every one of the great educators, from
Plato to Montessori, declares that the true aim
of education is moral. “The term virtue
expresses the Avhole aim of education, ’ ’ says
Herbart. He held that intellectual inquiry and
religious reverence are as natural and necessary
to man to attain the full stature of his
personality as are moral endeavour and aesthetic
pleasure. Thus, the end of education is
“primarily the winning and enriching of human
personality.” If we seek first the trinity of
50
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


truth, beauty, and virtue, social harmony “will
be added unto us.” Only education can make
possible a life fully worthy of man’s nature and
character. “The enjoyment of all the finer
creations of the human spirit is the prerogative
of the educated mind.” This does not drag
religion and morality from their pre-eminence,
but it does claim that even their value is vastly
enhanced by education. Their full splendour is
more easily attained with its assistance. And
when this education is inspired by religious and
ethical ideals, it leads men to dedicate their
personalities to voluntary service, after it has
helped them to win them. The self that we give
is a bigger thing than the self taken from us.
But without the rmoralisation of education, all
sorts of evils creep) in. Intellectualism easily
develops in the pursuit of knowledge for its own
sake, or from a mere desire to understand the
social environment. Still more commonly does
materialism arise in an atmosphere of complacent
contentment with things as they are. Worse
still, education based upon class and caste is an
ever-present danger to social unity and moral
idealism. “An education which depends upon a
particular situation in life, and is confined in
its effect to this, which does not direct itself to
51
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


man as man and promise to advance him, which
from its very foundation, and throughout all its
ramifications, is not first and foremost an educa-
tion of the essence of man’s being—such a system
does not deserve to be honoured with the name
of education. ’ 5lB The moral educators of to-day
are fully seized with the vital importance of
developing in the individual that “ethical
autonomy ’ ’ which makes true service perfect
freedom. This self-active principle is the very
beginning of spiritual life. It is more necessary
to-day than ever, because of the decline of
external authority and the rise of democracy.
The coercive powers of religion are continually
diminishing. Such forms of coercion as will
survive must show an ethical value. Thus train-
ing in moral control, through education, is the
greatest need of our age. Ordered activity is
the key-note to the new education. The child is
not trained by having knowledge poured into
him as he sits passively in an unhygienic desk.
The lesson of home life has been learned by the
pedagogue, and the child is now offered numerous
opportunities of doing active work, by himself
and with others, and so learning life in the way
nature intended. “Not that the home can ever
take the place of the school, but the occupation^
52
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


and relationships of the home environment are
not specially selected for the growth ojf the
child; the main object is something else, and
what the children can get out of them is
incidental. Hence the need of a school.” 10 If
we give reasonable satisfaction to the child’s
constant desire “to do things,” we bring him
sharply up against the difficulties as well as the
joys of life. Contrast the moral value of this
principle with that of the deadly old-fashioned
Sabbath of dangerous idleness.
In a very interesting article in the ‘ ‘ Parents ’
Review,” February, 1915, Professor W. R. Boyce
Gibson, describes the work of a great German
educator, Friedrich W. Forster, in this direction.
Forster, “While convinced that authority is the
fundamental ethical requirement, and that moral
growth pre-supposes it from beginning to end,
is equally convinced that the authority under
which character takes shape, moral authority, in
a word, is from its first appearance in the child’s
life, an authority which respects his freedom, or
co-operates with the child in helping him to
secure it.” Reverence for the child’s personality,
sympathetic co-operation with its sensitive and
heroic elements mil reduce to a minimum the
need for external authority and encourage within
53
ETHICS, EELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


him moral self-government. Such co-operation
enables the true personality to rule the lower
nature, and also to realise a spiritual fraternity
with others. It is the happy mean between
ancient repression and modern indulgence. It
does not involve arguments and discussions with
the child on moral questions—a practice which
Rousseau rightly condemned. It is through
active exercises in life that true self-discipline
and service are encouraged. That is the principle
underlying the great educational experiments in
self-government, such as the ‘ ‘ Gary Schools, ’ ’ the
“George Junior Republics,” “The Little Com-
monwealth, ’ ’ and numerous institutions in which
democratic ideals are practised. “Trust the
child” is the motto of the new moral education.
Appeals to his personality are sure to succeed,
if patience and sympathetic understanding are
used. In my own experience of a large school of
boys I have never known such an appeal to fail.
Much of what we regard as naughtiness or
obstinacy in a child is due to the fact that the
externals with which we surround him make no
appeal to his inner self. Give him the oppor-
tunity to suggest alterations in that environment,
to help to frame rules of conduct for himself and
his little community of scholars and you will
54
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


find in him a statesman and a law-giver. The
debased public opinion that too often prevails
in school life will be surely uplifted and purified
by such training in self-government. Practice is
a sounder educational method than precept.
That is what makes the average day-school far
superior to the average Sunday School in its
ethical influence upon the child. These new
methods are also true to sociological science. The
child is born with the animal nature and the
moral nature within him. By developing his
moral nature from the first we save him from
painful lapses into his lower nature, and give
him the key to good citizenship. Compulsion
may be essential at times to maintain the child
on a level of conduct that will give his higher
self a chance to win autonomy. Authority must
generally precede self-government; law comes
before liberty. But “the gymnastic of the will”
gives to teachers endless opportunities of
cultivating the inner force of self-discipline
which enriches personality and therefore society.
The child is no pagan. He instinctively loves
the beauty of Nature and responds to the call to
the good life. “Two things,” said Kant, “fill
the soul with ever new and ever deeper awe and
reverence the more often and the more stead-
fastly they are reflected upon : the starry heavens
55
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


above me and the moral law within me.” So it
is with the growing child. His aesthetic nature
expands as he senses the glory of the universe,
while his spiritual nature looks through and far
beyond that glory to the unseen order in which
ultimate reality resides. Through this experi-
ence he can be taught to range abroad in search
of truth, to learn the precious secrets of Earth
and Heaven. The moral teacher must give the
child a passion for pure science and also for
poetry. Both are handmaids of life, and lead
mind and spirit continually forth upon fresh
adventures into the wonders of the visible and
the unseen worlds. Nothing could be worse than
to discount the value of reason and science in
the sphere of morality or that of the imagination
and emotions in the sphere of science. Know-
ledge, like life, is a unity, and subserves the
ultimate spiritual end of personality. The more
that knowledge is certified by reason, the stronger
will be the faith which inspires right conduct.
Religious Education.
If we have established our thesis, it is clear
that religious education includes the ethical, and
is even more essential to achieve “the exaltation
of personality.” We have rejected the pessi-
mism of false science, which doomed man to be
56
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


the slave of Nature. Equally we have repudiated
the pessimism of false religion, which regarded
the world as external to the means of salvation,
and painted dreadful pictures of the hell which
awaited the worldings. As Bishop Gore says,
‘ ‘ the unworldliness of Christians is to make them
only more effective in the world. ? ’ Happily this
is the view towards which religious leaders have
been turning for a quarter of a century. Reason
and science are also being increasingly welcomed
in the sphere of religious education. It was
different in the nineteenth century, when Shelley
exclaimed, “I would rather go to hell with Plato
than to heaven with Paley !’ ’ Now, however, it
is being realised that no religion can live which
ignores changes in reality. On the other hand,
the very fact that civilisation has, in its growth,
unfolded new problems of the human spirit
shows the essential place of religious education.
So soon, however, as we enter upon any dis-
cussion of religious education we are in the
turmoil of sectarian controversy. But lam not
in the least concerned with such non-ethical and
therefore non-essential differences as chiefly
divide the denominations. I would point to the
present great movement towards church unity
as a proof that divisions in the past have been
57
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


based mainly upon unessential doctrines. Unity
is coming, not as the result of new spiritual
discoveries, but as a consequence of the realisa-
tion that much priceless religious energy has
been wasted upon emphasising points of doctrine
that have nothing to do with salvation. Not
one-hundredth of the religion taught by the sects
is represented by real differences in spiritual
beliefs. By all means let any denomination
establish its own schools and colleges. But they
will be true educational institutions only in so
far as their whole teaching is directed first and
last towards the completion of personality. Each
soul is the centre of its own universe. It is the
task of education to bring all souls as nearly as
possible to the same centre of the same universe.
If dogmatic teaching shifts the soul to a false
centre of gravity, it is a stumbling-block and an
offence. If, on the other hand, it places the soul,
by weighty affirmations of central spiritual prin-
ciples, more surely in the way of salvation, it
has justified itself.
In one vital matter most dogmatic religions
have been decidedly in error. I refer to their
efforts to prevent the State from undertaking
moral and religious education. The conflict of
Church and State was inevitable as the State
58
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


assumed more and more responsibility for indi-
viduals. It is an error to regard the State as
possessing purely secular functions. ‘ ‘ The State
is surely right in claiming that no one can
reverently teach the love of man, the greatness
and beauty of Nature, the ethical meaning of
history without teaching the essentials of
religion.” 20 What is often called contemptu-
ously ‘‘undenominational religion” is infinitely
better than no religion at all. Besides, that
teaching is the lowest common denominator upon
which the churches could be persuaded to agree.
Its content and efficacy could be vastly increased
with church unity and the sinking of non-
essentials. Personally, I would favour putting
the State school teacher on his honour to avoid
personal and dogmatic bias, and then give him
full franchise to teach religion, both directly and
indirectly. Nothing is worse for the child’s
judgment than to know that the greatest and
most precious of all subjects is taboo in his school.
Those of us who had the orthodox Christian
education at school must see some truth in the
words of a well-known Englishman, “ After all,
how seldom does a Christian education teach one
anything worth knowing about Christianity.”
In this regard the orthodox Sunday school has
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


much to answer for, though it is improving now.
The ineffectiveness of Sunday schools in the past
seems to be due to (1) their perpetuation of false
dogmas and failure to rationalise belief; (2)
their defective interpretation of the relation
between the natural and the supernatural; (3)
their want of any view of historic and social
evolution; and (4) their lack of pedagogic
method, particularly in the encouragement of
co-operative activities in the children. The
greatest sign of improvement is in the kinder-
gartens increasingly attached to Sunday schools.
If the same educational efficiency were attained
in every stage of the Sunday school, a revolution
in religious education would be achieved. One
absolute essential is the frank meeting of difficult
questions put by the children. Only trained
teachers can do this, and they are very scarce.
But ‘ ‘ more harm is done by the economy of truth
than by the suggestion of doubt. ’ ’ 2l When doubt
inevitably invades the mind, faith, left unforti-
fied by reason, withers amid unanswered ques-
tions. On the other hand, it must be remembered
that many more agnostics are the result of moral
cowardice than of intellectual doubt. As a wise
teacher has said, it is not the miracles of Christ,
but His standard that generally keeps men away
60
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


from His Church and its influence. This seems to
me especially true in Australia, where the heed-
less love of pleasure and material pursuits is so
often excused on the ground that religious
standards have been shot away by the guns of
rationalistic thought. Again, the failures of
religious education are by no means the fault of
the schools and churches alone. They largely
reflect the deficiencies of the home and the world.
Only too few parents now shoulder the full moral
and religious responsibility that is theirs. Their
apathy, or positively bad example, is a disastrous
counteracting influence against the good work of
school and church.
One of the first essentials in the reform of
religious education is the adoption of the view
that all education is religious. Hitherto the
teaching of the churches lias been based upon a
breach in the unity of knowledge. Church history,
like national history, has been confined within a
narrow compartment which imperilled its truth-
fulness. The Bible was taught not only as the
greatest of all books, which it is, but as the only
book that reveals God. From it were extracted
hard pellets of dogma,” in defiance of the
principles of all true education and of reason.
Instead of having the courage to say “We don’t
61
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


know,” we have closed children’s minds with
the rock of dogma. They would always respond
to the idea that man has yet much to learn about
the vital things of existence, and to the appeal
that some day they may take part in the great
adventure of discovering new truth. “For of
such is the Kingdom of God.” But once give
the child the idea that the religions life is
separate from life in general, that religious
history is something apart from human evolution,
and we develop in him compartments of conduct
that destroy all possibility of a unified per-
sonality resting in the Divine will. The uncom-
promising morality, the all-embracing love, the
tenacious faith of the Christian are all needed in
full to meet the calls of life. The Sermon on the
Mount gives clues to all the Christian virtues.
It must not be diluted by the teacher under the
oppressive sense of the world’s adherence to
expediency. True beliefs are the dynamic of
right action. “All values and meanings rest
upon beliefs.” But every possible source of
truth must be tapped to justify our convictions.
The World’s Need.
Never did the world stand in greater need of
education. All the evil forces that fought
against the light in recent years have been
62
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


immensely strengthened as a result of the Great
War. A soulless commercialism, corrupt
diplomacy, international jealousies and racial
hatreds, love of luxury and exciting pleasures—
these are the foes that the moral educator is
called upon to fight before he has fully recovered
from the thought-upheaval of the nineteenth
century. The world is madly pursuing ends
that are evil, calling them good. The sole remedy
is to cultivate the will of the individual to resist
all attractions to false gods. As Plato puts it,
“For the goods of which the many speak are not
really good; first in the catalogue is placed
health, beauty next, wealth third, and then
innumerable others, as for example to have a
keen eye or a quick ear, and in general to have
all the senses perfect; or again, to be a tyrant
and do as you like; and the final consummation
is to have acquired all these things, and when
you have acquired them to become at once
immortal. But you and I say, that while to the
just and holy all these things are the best of
possessions, to the unjust they are all, including
even health, the greatest of evils.” 22
The moral order includes all others and
interpenetrates them with its code. The hope
of the future lies in gaining for this ideal the
63
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


highest recognition in our individual and social
life. That is the work of religious and ethical
education. There is in the soul of man a potential
grandeur capable of performing miracles.
Through the mighty vicissitudes of history it has
pressed forward from the slough of savagery to
the full consciousness of its powers. It remains
to develop those powers to the full through true
education. The task is stupendous. But it is
scarcely fifty years since the new knowledge
burst upon the world, only a hundred since
modern industrial civilisation was ushered in,
and less than two thousand years since the birth
of Christ. As an American Professor has said,
in the long vista of human evolution civilisation
is less than half-an-hour old in the human day,
and the Ancient Greeks become our contem-
poraries. With courage and faith, then, we may
press forward to the truth that rewards all who
dare to test the promise of Jesus, “ Knock, and it
shall be opened unto you; seek, and ye shall
find.” We may then await with confidence the
“When that in us which thinks with that which
feels
Bhall everlastingly be reconciled,
And that which questioneth with that which
kneels. ’ ’
64
ETHICS, RELIGION, AND EDUCATION.


References in the Text.
(See index numbers throughout.)
1 HAECKEL, ‘ ‘ The Riddle of the Universe,’ 7
Chaps. XIV., XV.
2 PROF. TYNDALL, Belfast, Address to British
Association, 1874.
3 HUXLEY, “Nineteenth Century,” February,
1888.
4 RITCHIE, “Darwinism and Politics.”
5 BERGSON, Lecture at Birmingham, 1911.
6 BERGSON, “Creative Evolution.”
7 MACIVER, “Community,” p. 230.
8 MACIVER, op. cit., p. 297.
9 URWICK, ‘ ‘ Philosophy of Social Progress, ’ ’
pp. 159, ff.
10 PROF. J. A. SMITH, Oxford.
11 MACIVER, op. cit., p. 292.
12 URWICK, op. cit., p. 201.
13 TODD, “Theories of Social Progress,” p. 414.
14 HETHERINGTON AXD MUIRHEAD, “Social
Purpose, ” p. 291.
15 MacCUNN, “The Making of Character,” p. 131.
16 EIJCKEN, Collected Essays; I. “Religion and
Civilisation. ’ ’
17 EUCKEN, op. cit., p. 22.
18 EUCKEN, op. cit., p. 105.
19 PROF. DEWEY, “The School and Society,”
p. 53.
20 HETHERINGTON AND MUIRHEAD, op. cit.,
p. 313.
21 “CAMBRIDGE ESSAYS ON EDUCATION,”
W. W. Vaughan, p. 61.
22 PLATO, “The Laws,” 661.
Brisbane: A. J. Gumming, Government Printer.






-•
' *. s . 1% V -' ; '
f . . V ,
'
.1- •* w y ' -, v - j ,'-,V ' ‘,- •* <- '
\ / V *J..
,
■‘ ■'■ . ■
. ' ■ ■ . : - ■ ■; ■ ■ ■ ‘ ,
, ., ;-f i ' v r , : . /r - v . i - * ( £» V V'
< (■■ ' ,• > • < •* ' '? sty* - X ‘'; -O *,c' «*> ' ” -'r-' '" y y :
■
1 i ' s ' t -k V \ s. ' ' * <y' * " **”■■* " ~*' -- K ', .’ ' - ' ‘
r , - ’'. s v 'r-' , v. <r : « ‘ '■ v ,-' x l :
- , . -t ' " - L i ' - y ' * v *■ i .<• * I ■ ' '‘
-■ • V ’» . , • ■ ■• .
\\ • ,; .\- ' ' ' • ..- - ‘ '■ X.-< •' •• .• ■; x V Y - ( . -f . -' •'* •- ’ ■ ., • ■ ' •
■- - fS Vi •■ ,' : ■ • ■. % • , . -Jj' '■ ?'? ' •• r \~ t ' ' ' ' ~ 'V • - •
•
r- . i- ' ' ■,„./■
- v . *' ' ‘ . ; ‘ fy ■< ( • \
.
#•
J Y i"' ' -- - v . ’ .
-'• . > • 'if - ' - v .'1 ' .« v ‘-Yf'--6 ■ . •
: • :> •. ■%>■■• jf
■ -} i w
; '• ■ ; - ■
