

THE WRECK
OF
THE “STRATHMORE;”
OR,
HOW WE LIVED ON ONE OF THE CROZETTE
ISLANDS IN THE SOUTHERN SEA
FOR TWENTY-NINE WEEKS,
A True Narrative.
BY HAROLD TURNER
one of the chew.
rjtiri:
FLEETWOOD ;
H. TURNER, BOLD STREET.
IS7B.


THE WRECK
OF
THE “STRATHMORE;"
OR,
HOW WE LIVED ON ONE OF THE CROZETTE
ISLANDS IN THE SOUTHERN SEA
FOR TWENTY-NINE WEEKS.
21 Cruc Narrative.
BY HAROLD TURNER
~osr. op tupCiinw.
pjijaii KiKiiVESci:.
KI.RKTWdOII:
H. TURNER, BOLD STREET.
IS7S. 2


LONDON:
PRINTED BT W. H. AND L. COLLINGRIDOE, CITY PRESS,
128 AND 129, ALDERSOATE STREET, E.C.


THE
WRECK OF THE “STRATHMORE;”
OR,
HOW WE LIVED ON ONE OF THE CROZETTE
ISLANDS FOR TWENTY-NINE WEEKS.
BY ONE OF THE CREW.
CHAPTER I.
I was bound apprentice to a seafaring life in the
month of February, 1875, being at that time six-
teen years of age. The ship in which I was to take
my first voyage was called the “ Strathmore,” of the
Dundee Clipper Line. She was launched in
February, ’75, and proceeded the following month
from Dundee to London, where I joined her on the
sth of April. lat once made the acquaintance of
the captain of the ship, Captain Macdonald, Mr.
Eamsey, of Moray, first mate; Mr. Peters, of Ar-
broath, second mate; and Mr. Allan, third mate.
Besides the crew, which consisted of English, Scotch,
Irish, and Dutch sailors, there were three appren-
tices, namely, Edward Preston, from Barton, near
Manchester; Frank Carmichael, from Banbury; and
mj’self. The latter was one year my junior.
The ship, a splendid ironclad, 1,550 tons register,
fully realized my dreams. I shall not easily forget
the impression made on my mind the first time I


saw her. We left the Blackwall Pier on the 17th,
and proceeded to Gravesend, whither my sister and
Mrs. Hornby, a relative resident in London, accom-
panied us. Before we arrived at Gravesend, the
steward ordered us to dress for luncheon. We
speedily obeyed the order, and lunch being ended, we
toasted in a hearty manner the good ship, &c. The
captain, during his speech, spoke of our hopes, our
duties, our friends, present and absent. Mr. Bruce,
the ship’s agent, responding enthusiastically, ex-
pressed a hope that we might return safely, and that
we might again meet the dear ones of home whom
we were then leaving behind. My first meal on
board was certainly not calculated to tempt me to
eat with much appetite.
Our friends bade us farewell, and were taken off
by the tug-boat, Captain Macdonald accompanying
them, intending to remain ashore over Sunday. A'
lighter came alongside, and we took in about twenty
tons of gunpowder. The captain came aboard on
Monday, the 19th, and we sailed by that afternoon’s
tide. We took out a general cargo and forty-eight
passengers, besides the ship’s company, numbering
thirty-eight souls.
The tug left us in the Channel, with a favourable
wind blowing. The last pilot who left took our
letters. I sent one home, saying that I was very
comfortable and happy, and enjoying good health ;
but, truth to tell, I was beginning to be very sea-
sick, and had already wished myself at home again.
My mother’s words came true; for she had told me
that before we had got out of the Channel, I-should


wish myself back. I was sea-sick for more than a
fortnight. Daring that time I ate very little, as I
thought it useless to repeat the painful operation of
eating, and the more painful operation of expelling
what I had eaten.
When we got into the Channel, the watches were
picked, Frank and I being in the mate’s watch.
Till we got to the line, very little occurred to disturb
the dull monotony of the daily routine. Once, when
about a fortnight from England, a slight disturbance
arose amongst the crew, owing to some one having
broached the cargo, and a number of them getting
drunk. When crossing the line, the shaving opera-
tion was performed on all who had not hitherto
crossed. During the forenoon, an unknown voice
from the forecastle head hailed the ship. The officer
of the watch answered, and the voice commanded
•him to “ heavo-to,” as Neptune was coming on
board. The ship was accordingly “ hovo-to,” al-
though only going at about four knots. Neptune’s
herald made his appearance in the person of a sailor,
who presented a most ludicrous appearance. He was
dressed in knickerbockers ; on one leg ho had a red
stocking, and on the other a white stocking. He
wore a dress coat covered with different coloured
patches, and an old crushed silk hat. The fact that
Neptune was como’on board having been announced,
that worthy made his appearance seated at the front
of a gun carriage. He wore a largo wig and beard
made of oakum, the latter reaching to his waist.
Upon his head]he had a tin crown, and in his right
hand he held a trident. His wife, who accompanied
a 2


him, wearing long curls made of oakum, sat behind,
nursing a little passenger hoy dressed in long clothes.
The carriage was drawn by half a dozen men nearly
naked, bedaubed here and there with paint. Some
were playing music, and others were dressed as
policemen. These policemen carried staves, made of
straw and canvas, which they used very freely as
they marched round the deck and finally drew up to
Neptune’s carriage. The “ god ” having descended,
went upon the poop, where he had a conversation
with the captain. The two then went forward to the
forecastle, where were seats occupied by the ladies.
Neptune took his seat among the fair sex. The
shaving operation then commenced. Two of the
sailors would bring one of the passengers who had
not before crossed the line, and take him before
the doctor, who would administer medicine, and a
pill made of some bitter substance; the culprit would
then be taken to the barber. lam sure it was any-
thing but pleasant to be shaved. The razor consisted
of a piece of tin about eighteen inches long; the
comb and scissors were of the same material. To
make a lather, quantities of oil, soap, flour, and any
kind of dirt they could pick up were mixed together.
How very unpleasant it was to have this composition
rubbed over the face, my readers can better imagine
than 1 describe. vTho object of the shaving operation
was then made to sit on the break of the forecastle.
Here he was shaved and had his hair cut, and thisbeing
completed, two of the sailors would seize hold of his
legs and throw him backwards into a sail, which had
previously been fixed on the main deck and filled with


water. In this he was ducked by the “ bears ” till
nearly half drowned. This was repeated upon every
man who had not before crossed the line. Some of
the first class passengers paid the fine of half-a-crown;
but, notwithstanding, they were shaved and after-
wards ducked. The whole affair was concluded by
another march round the decks, and the imbibing of
extra grog, given by the captain. At night, rockets
were fired off to celebrate the day.


CHAPTER II.
A few days after crossing the lino, we had some very
heavy squalls, but I am glad to say did not come to
any harm. The captain was very kind and good-
hearted, never interfering with us, 'except we made
ourselves too conspicuous by the larks wo were con-
stantly up to. "We all liked the first mate, he was very
kind and genial, and with him we had more to do
than with the captain. We spoke several vessels off
the African coast. The last we saw was the Mel-
pomene, off the Cape ofGroodHope, on the 7th of June.
About the 9th we had beautiful weather, hut strong
head winds, which continued for some days, driving
us towards the South American coast. The 28th,
29th, and 30th were very foggy, so much so that we
were unable to take observations. During the last-
named day, I heard one of the third-class passengers
remark that we were nearing land; and when I saw
seaweed floating about, it confirmed my suspicions
that such was a fact. The captain seemed very
anxious, and ordered a sharp look-out to be kept, as
we were near some islands—l did not hear their
name. He evidently was very uneasy, as he re-
mained up till the middle watch, from twelve to four,
going below for a short time only, to get a little rest.
I went to ascertain what time it was, and found that
it was twenty minutes to four. At this time, there
were on deck the mate—whose watch it was—Prank,


a man on the look-out, one at the wheel, and myself,
the others of the crew being, below. As the mate,
Frank, and I were leaning over the rail, the former
asked me if I could hear a noise. I said I could. He
immediately went below, to call the captain. Frank
and I remained above, listening to the noise, which
we could liken more to the rumbling of machinery in
a steamboat than to anything else. Then the thought
occurred, could it he breakers ? when all at once, we
could just distinguish some large object looming
through the darkness, which, together with the fog,
were so intense that we could scarcely see half the ship’s
length. All at once, came a cry from the look-out,
“ Breakers ahead! ” The mate came running out of
the cabin, and cried out, “ Starboard fore brace ! ”
and instantly seeing his mistake, called, “ Port fore
brace.” But, alas! it was too late. The ship grated
her bottom upon the rocks, which seemed to rip her
open; and as she gave three heavy blows against the
rock, wo felt that the inevitable had come. I was
coming off the poop, when the captain came rushing
out of the cabin, saying, “ Oh, dear, what is the
matter ? What is the matter ? ” He immediately
called for all hands to the boats. Then succeeded a
general rush, some of the passengers getting into the
boats before they were swung out, the sailors pulling
them out again; some swearing, some shouting, some
praying; all this, intermingled with the screams of
the women and children and the extreme darkness of
the night, made a scene more easily to bo imagined
than described. All was confusion; each one seemed
bent upon his or her own safety, and consequently


there was much strife. There were three davits to
two boats; and owing to the quarter boats having got
jammed against the mizen shrouds, we were unable
to release either them or the lifeboats till after some
time. The ship, by this time, had began to settle
down, and tremendous waves to come over her. The
quarter boats and one lifeboat were washed away.
One of the sailors cut the gripes of the port lifeboat,
when eighteen got into her. A sea, washing over,
floated her on to the bulwarks, where she remained
till another sea came and floated her clean off the
ship. Two brothers jumped from the rigging as she
passed, the one succeeding, the other being drowned.
I had picked up a life-buoy, which I had up in the
rigging with me where I had taken refuge. I was
not to have it long; for as I sat in the mizen top, the
second mate ordered me to give it to a passenger and
his baby, saying it was better that two should be
saved than one. lat once gave it to him. Some of
us went down the mizen stay, in hopes of reaching
the fore part of the vessel. One of the sailors, on
getting to the bottom of the stay, dropped off, and
seeing the deck clear, ran along the deck a little way,
when suddenly there came a tremendous wave and
washed him overboard. About this time a Mr.
Brodrick came on deck to count his family—ten,
including himself—to ascertain if all were there, when
suddenly a huge wave came and washed them all over-
board. The sailors wished to save a Mrs. Walker,
but, in her search for her husband and child who were
in the rigging, she was washed overboard. The baby
was ultimately saved, but died on the island',the


following Christmas Day. A little Scotch boy and I
came down the mizen stay, and on arriving at the-
bottom we could proceed no further, we were so com-
pletely benumbed with the cold. The seas and
pieces of wreck kept constantly washing over us. The
Scotch boy let go his hold, being quite unable to hold
on any longer, on account of the cold. He was just
being washed overboard when, by accident, he caught
hold of the main topsail halyards, and so was able to
get on the shrouds and ascend with very great diffi-
culty into the maintop.
All this time, I was clinging to the main lift, and
making efforts to climb a little higher. Being so-
very cold and benumbed, I was quite an hour in
going the distance I could otherwise have gone in a
minute or two. Here I stayed through the whole of
the night, hoping and wishing for daylight to dawn,
that I might see some opportunity to release myself
from my very uncomfortable and perilous position.


CHAPTER III.
"When day at last broke, we relinquished our perilous
position, and came down to the deck-house, part of
which was above water. As the day began to unfold,
we were gradually enabled to perceive a large rock
in the shape of a sugar-loaf, about two masts high,
towering far above our heads. were so close,
that the bowsprit nearly touched it. There stood
the island, destined to be our home for more than
six months. The cliffs were about two thousand
feet high; but, being covered with the clouds, wo
were unable to see the summit. None can possibly
picture the scene but those who saw it. There was
our beautiful ship, which a few hours before was
gaily riding the glass-like ocean; but now, alas! all
that was left was a scanty wreck, with a few human
creatures clinging to it for their life. On the one
side was the cruel, merciless sea, and on the other
stupendous rocks and cliffs.
Before the water got into the forecastle, we clothed
ourselves with whatever clothing we could lay our
hands upon, and then followed the attempt to land.
The lashings which held the gig and dingy we cut,
and, after some little trouble, we got them right-
side up and launched. The gig, manned with nine
hands, in charge of the second mate, and the dingy,
manned with four hands (not being able to hold
more, owing to her gunwale being stove in), left as
soon as possible, in search of a place where we might


land. The second mate said that if they did not
return that day, we might not expect them, but give
them up for lost. It was indeed a day, one ever to
be remembered. It seemed more like a week than a
few hours; suspense and hunger, under such circum-
stances, were very hard to endure. At last, however,
much to our great joy, the gig returned in the after-
noon. They had found a landing-place. Four pas-
sengers and a baby were put into the boat, after
having first been dropped from the “ cross-jack” yard
into the sea, and then picked up. The second mate
said that they could not return to the wreck again
that night, as it was then late in the afternoon.
They had, during their trip, fallen in with the life-
boat, with its nineteen occupants, on the other side
of the island. It was stove in, and consequently
nearly full of water. The gig took her in tow, and
extricated her from the sea-weed amongst which she
had drifted. The mate had effected a landing about
a mile and a half from the wreck. There were now
only eleven of us left on the wreck. I was the only
apprentice who remained,- as Frank had gone away
in the life-boat, and Ted, the other apprentice, in the
gig on her first trip. We, the disconsolate eleven,
sat on the anchor or anywhere we could, and tried
to make ourselves as comfortable as our position
would allow. We were very thankful that we had
a few biscuits to eat, and especially that our lives
had been spared thus far. We had plenty of time
to think of the happy past, the miserable present
and the foreboding future, and to speculate as to
what was in store for us. We all felt that the Hand
n


which had so providentially kept us so far would,
indeed, complete the work of preservation. The sea
was perpetually washing over the wreck, and washing
against the break of the forecastle. The night camo
on again with its thick darkness, and cold almost to
freezing point. What with the spray which satu-
rated our clothing, and the cold, we were almost
frozen lifeless. The misery of the awful suspense,
and the horrid fancies and dreams, were almost
unbearable. Then did our minds travel to that
dearest spot on earth—the home of each one. We
thought of our dear friends enjoying all the comforts
and peace of home-life, while they little thought of
our perilous and painful situation.
Daylight once more dawned, and what that day
would bring forth we knew not. Our great fear was
that the vessel would not hold together. There were
no signs of the boats, hut plenty of wreckage floating
about to remind us of our unpleasant condition.
Portunately, we had saved two chests from the fore-
castle. These contained, among other things, about
a dozen boxes of matches, pipes, and a few pounds of
tobacco, a Bible, and a writing-desk, full of writing-
paper. We broke the chests up into pieces, and made
a fire to warm and dry ourselves. The matches were
rather wet, and to dry them, we rubbed them in our
hair. About ten o’clock, we were thinking of making
a raft and going in search of the boats. We were
afraid the gig and her crew must have been lost.
Wo were looking in the direction in which she went
the previous night, when one of us happened to turn
round, and there, to our great surprise, she was close


upon us. We gave three hearty cheers. We were
not long in ascending the foreyard and forehrace into
the boat. The quartermaster and I remained till the
last, to throw the remainder of the clothing, &c., into
the gig. I was the last person to leave the wreck.
When we were about one hundred yards from the
vessel, wo had one more look at our old home. It
was, indeed, a pitiful sight. There she was on her
beam-ends, all her stern' under water, and her lee
rigging swinging loosely about. A heavy swell
rolled loosely over her, and death-like noises came
from her inside. When we arrived at the landing-
place, we had to climb about thirty feet up the cliffs.
Upon landing, we found that in all forty-nine souls
had been saved, and of that number only one woman,
Mrs. Wordsworth, a saloon passenger, who was going
out to New Zealand with her son Charles. The same
day, the boats went hack to the wreck, to get what-
ever they could that might he useful; hut they were
unable to hoard her. On coming hack, they picked
up a passenger’s chest, containing sheeting, blankets,
table-covers, knives, forks, spoons, and a few other
things; also, a cask of port wine, two oases of gin,
two of rum, one of brandy, one of pickles, a chest of
ladies’ hoots, which were not of much use, a case of
confectionary, containing eight tins—afterwards used
for cooking in—and two kegs of gunpowder.


CHAPTER IV.
An amusing incident occurred soon after we got
ashore. One of the saloon passengers had been out
in search of whatever he might find. In his travels,
he killed an albatross, and upon returning, he com-
menced to eat one of its legs. “ Steward,” said ho
to that worthy, who was standing by, “ have you got
a knife and fork anywhere ? ” It seemed so ridiculous
to us all to ask for such a thing there, that we could
not help having a hearty good laugh.
We erected the boat’s cover against a rock for
klrs. Wordsworth. She, poor lady, had hut little
clothing with her, coming off the wreck, as she did, in
her hurry and confusion. The sailors gave her a
pair of trousers, some taking off their shirts and
jackets, to protect her from the severe cold. I never
met with a more selfish set of men than most of the
passengers were, they took care to look after number
one. As soon as the clothing came ashore, the pas-
sengers put it on, some taking two or three shirts,
two pairs of trousers, besides drawers and jackets,
whilst some of the poor sailors were nearly half
naked. A watch was set over the boats; but on the
3rd of July, they broke from their moorings, and
drifted out to sea. We thought then that our only
chance for life had gone. Our provisions, too, seemed
to be taking to themselves wings to fly away. We
built two camps below the overhanging rocks, the


wall in the front being composed of stones and turf,
and was about four feet in thickness. "We divided
into two companies. I and most of the crew were
in “Black Jack’s” camp, so called from one of the
sailors, who had a very swarthy complexion, but who
was as thoroughly good-natured and as genefous as
any sailor who ever stepped aboard ship. The first
night, one of the passengers died. He was found in
the morning lying across a fellow-passenger, quite
dead. The shock or fright was supposed to have
caused his death. Two men threw him over the
cliff, as they could not very conveniently bury him,
being afraid lest Mrs. "Wordsworth might see the
corpse. His name was George Mellor, from Hud-
dersfield.
The other camp was known as the “Second
Mate’s,” and it was there we had our meals and
where the cooking was done. We had to be careful
with the fuel we had, and therefore could not afford
more than one fire. The wood wo picked up lasted
about ten days; and when that was done, wo had no
more, as there was not even. a single tree on the
rocky island. Ever since the incident about the
albatross, we had been living on that kind of bird.
Eor some days after our fuel was done, we were ob-
liged to eat the raw flesh, until one of us found that
the akin of the albatross would burn almost as well as
wood ; but it required that one person should always,
bo kept at the fire all day long. We went on thus
for about three weeks, when the birds began to get
scarce. It was natural enough that their number—
about two or three hundred —would diminish among
b 2


so many hungry people. When the albatrosses be-
came scarce, we took to catching and eating grey-
hacks, which also were very scarce. Some days we
were without food altogether, other days we were
obliged to be content with one meal. About half the
island was covered with a long, rank grass, the other
half being nothing but stones, with here and there,
at intervals, small patches of grass. The upper por-
tion looked like the tops of carrots ; the root, which
was about the thickness of a penholder, crept along
the surface of the ground.
When about two months had passed, our hopes of
being relieved were revived. A man came running
down the hill, crying, “ Sail, ho ! ” Wo picked up a
blanket, and ran up the hill. A vessel could just bo
seen on the horizon. A little fog came, and she dis-
appeared from view. Our hopes were again gone.
One of the third-class passengers put his hand over
his heart, and began to cry, saying that it would
break his heart. We laughed at this, as wo wished
to keep up our spirits as much as possible. About
the middle of October* another kind of bird visited
the island. It was a little larger than a goose, and
called by us the “ Molly Hawk.” Two men from
each camp were set to watch for their coming. When
they settled, there was a general rush to see who
would get them. The birds did not seem to know
what to understand by the reception we gave them.
They would stand staring at us, and would not move
till we knocked them down. The men on watch were
relieved every four hours. It was about Tuesday
when they began to come in. At first we got about


a dozen between us; but towards Saturday, they in-
creased considerably in numbers, and on Sunday,
they literally swarmed in in hundreds. They were
just like a swarm of bees. Some would fly against
us, and, others would try to settle on our shoulders.
All hands were now at work. On the Sunday, we
killed in all about five hundred. We no longer got
our food cooked at the mate’s camp. We took to our
camp one of the confectionary tins and cooked for
ourselves; and that day we did nothing but eat after
the birds were caught. One portion of the island
was quite white with the birds—l should think there
were thousands of them. We re-christened the birds,
calling the “ Greyback ” “ Molly Hawk, - ’ and the
“Molly Hawk” “Freemason.” This latter bird
made a most ingenious nest of mud, almost perfect in
shape, as if it had been cut out of a piece of stone.
Not having much trouble in catching birds, we made
ourselves very content under the circumstances. That
which troubled us most was the inclemency of the
weather, the wind at times blowing so strongly that
we were almost unable to stand on our feet. This,
with constant showers of sleet and snow, made things
more unpleasant. The shanty wall would often blow
down, and then we were obliged to leave our blankets
in the middle of the night, and go among all the snow,
to build the wall up again. We often had to do it,
shivering in our wet clothes till they were dried.
Some of the passengers were in the habit of reading
the Bible and singing hymns and psalms, when there
was a scarcity of birds; but when they became plen-
tiful, they soon ceased to “ read and sing.”


CHAPTER V.
One morning, about the latter end of October, when
the ground was covered with snow, and we were snug
under the blankets, we heard the cry of “ Sail, ho! ”
from Mr. "Wordsworth. We immediately picked up
a blanket, and ran up the hill, and attached the
blanket to the lifeboat’s mast, which we had pre-
viously fixed on the hill’s summit. Besides this signal
of distress, we each waved a blanket or some kind of
clothing, in order to attract attention ; but all to no
purpose. The ship was coming between the islands.
We calculated that she would be about two miles
away, as we could see her deck quite distinctly.
When she got to the end of the island, we lost sight
of her in a squall, and so saw no more of her. Our
disappointment can scarcely be imagined. The
signal-blanket was blown to ribbons, the gale of wind
being so strong. It was with much difficulty that
we could walk to the top of the hill. Thus one more
hope of rescue faded away, and we were obliged to
settle down again to the dull monotony of our weary
life. We spent most of our time in hunting for food.
Our clubs for killing the birds were made from the
boats’ oars, doubled round with hoop iron. We
adopted several ingenious methods of improvising
necessary articles of use. We made knives from the
hoops of the boats’ kegs; and, finding a parasol in
one of the chests, we made needles from the wires;


and for thread we unravelled our stockings, jerseys,
and canvas; and suits of clothes were made from the
feathers of the albatrosses. We took “turn about” in
cooking and looking after the fire, lest it should go out.
We made soup of the salt sea water, the tops of a
plant we called carrot, and grass for herbs. The
water we had to carry in a pair of Wellington boots.
We rendered down the fat from the birds, to make oil
for the lamps, which were made out of pieces of tin.
We had to he very careful with our light, because
we had only half a box of matches, and these we used
very sparingly. Several of us had watches, but each
in its turn stopped, owing, we thought, to the damp.
At this time, another of our small party was taken
from our midst—a Mr. Stanbury, third-class pas-
senger, whose death was caused by lock-jaw and the
frost. My readers can imagine the intensity of the
cold, when I tell them that this poor fellow’s feet, being
so severely bitten by the frost, almost fell off. He
was given as decent a burial as we could improvise,
a chapter from the Bible being read over his dead
body. I regret to say that the Bible was not read
very much; it was certainly read more on the Sun-
day. We kept an account of the days, and would
often conjecture what our friends at home were doing,
and wonder whether they had given us up as lost.
One of our boats, which left the wreck with a number
of passengers, never made its appearance, and its fate
was a source of trouble to us. What became of it
must ever remain a mystery.
As I have before said, the cold was most intense.
Several were frost-bitten. We seldom washed our


selves, on account of the water being so very cold.
When we did, we used eggs for soap; and when
they were scarce, we found blood not a bad substitute.
Truly, “ necessity was the mother of invention ” with
us in a thousand ways. For frying-pans, we used
the hollow stones, in which we fried the flesh of the
birds. The fatty part of the birds, when fried and
the liquid extracted, made a very savoury dish, which
we called “ cracklinsfor these there was a great
demand. Our clothes wore out very quickly, and these
we knew not how to replace. To save our shoes as long
as we could, we used to wrap birds’ skins round our
feet; but these temporary shoes lasted only a day.
When our hair wanted cutting, it was cut with a
knife, the operation being more painful than pleasant.
Penguins now began to come ashore. They live
chiefly in the sea. They are a kind of mixture be-
tween a bird and- a fish. They have web feet and a
head like a bird, with seal-like flippers. The flesh
was black, and when fried became very dry. We
used to cut away the fat, which was about an inch
thick, to render into oil for our lamps. Their skins
we used for shoes and clothing, and, being of a close
nature, they were very warm. The habits of these
birds were very singular. They would come up from
the sea, marching in single file, and congregate to-
gether on the hillocks of stones. They divided
themselves into two companies, which we called re-
spectively the Prussian and French armies. I am
sure there must have been several thousands in each
company. Sentinels were perched here and there on
high places; and if anyone was seen approaching,


they -would make a cawing noise, as a signal to the
rest. We found these birds very useful in many
■ways. The eggs, which were about the size of a
hen’s egg, we stowed away for the winter in largo
pits dug in the ground. The skins, too, we stowed
away, as also the oil, which, when'cold, we put into
the birds’ bladders. We were much amused to find
that some of the eggs began to hatch, even in pools
of water. The young birds were covered with a
lead-coloured down, and consisted chiefly of stomach.
They seemed particularly tenacious of life; for if we
threw one, say five or six yards, it would burst open,
and almost immediately, it would pick itself up again
and run away. The molly-hawk when chased would
turn round and vomit its food over its pursuer, in
order to stop bis progress, and to enable it to run the
faster. Another bird, which we christened the
“ mutton bird,” wo found to be most delicious eating.
It lived generally in the ground, much as rabbits do
in England.
Our number was diminished a third time by the
death, caused by dysentery, of Mr. Henderson, a saloon
passenger. He and his sister (who was washed over-
board on the night of the wreck) were on their way
to join their father, an engineer, in New Zealand.
We buried him on the island, having first taken off
all his clothes, as we could not afford to lose any.
After the reading of a chapter from the Bible by one
of our men, we closed up his grave, and there left
the earthly remains of one who had proved himself
a kind man and good companion under our un-
pleasant circumstances.


CHAPTER VI.
One day, as three of the men were on one of the
hills, one of the number threw a club at a hawk, hut
unfortunately missed his aim. Although the club
was very heavy, being wrapped at one end by wire,
the hawk picked it up by its beak, and flew off with
it some distance over the sea, and then let it drop,
when it immediately sank.
About this time, some of the men began to secede
and to make camps for themselves. There was no
longer any cause for living together on account of
the food, as the birds became very plentiful. These
camps were distinguished as follows: —“ Lower
Shanty,” occupied by the second mate, Bill, the
quartermaster, and several others ; “ Sea-Yiew Ter-
race,” so called on account of the view of the ocean
from the camp. It was often called “ Black Jack’s
Camp,” from the man who was the chief. Here I
and twelve others lived. I preferred living in this
camp, because the occupants, with two exceptions,
were sailors. “ Flagstaff Yilla,” situated near the
flagstaff, was tenanted by the cook, steward, and
several passengers; “ The Hermitage,” a nice little
cave on the highest part of the hill, was not wholly
occupied, as it was too far up the hill, and quite out
of the way; “ Freemason’s Lodge ” was inhabited
by the third mate and several passengers ; “ Pleasant
Valley Cottage,” situated in a pretty picturesque


valley, was occupied by the boatswain and several
passengers; “Mud Cottage” was obliged to be
abandoned, on account of its insecure condition;
“ Penguin Cottage ” bad the most extensive view of
the sea, and here it was that Mrs. "Wordsworth and
her son Charles lived. We all tried to make our-
selves as comfortable as we could, and, to a certain
extent, succeeded.
Once more our hopes of being rescued were raised.
A ship, about two miles off, was seen from “ Flag-
staff Villa.” We did our utmost to attract their
attention, but without success. We often" saw sea
elephants and any number of golden seals, but were
unable to reach them, or we might have changed our
diet a little. About the middle of December, the
albatross began to make its appearance; but we de-
cided not to kill them, but allow them to live and
breed. Their nests were elevated about a foot above
the ground, and were composed of the thick roots of
grass. About this time, one of the quartermasters died,
being almost wasted to a skeleton. We buried him
in like manner to those who had already died on the
island. On Christmas Day, the little baby-boy,
Willie Walker, died; it was, indeed, singular how
he survived for so long a time. Bill, the quarter-
master, a sailor of the right type, attended to it
with great care, nursing it and feeding it alternately
with its father. lam sure it was a great mercy that
it did die, for its life would ever have been a misery
to it.
c


CHAPTER VII.
Christmas Day ! How all our thoughts turned to
former days and to our homes! Long, long ago
must our friends have given us up for lost; and no
doubt their hearts that day yearned for their lost
ones. About this time the whale birds began to
hatch their eggs, their nests being built under the
ground, like those of the mutton bird. In size they
were like the thrush, and of a light bluish colour.
Other birds now began to frequent the island. One,
which we called the “ diver,” from its habit of diving
into the sea, was too small—about the size of a spar-
row—to be of much use to us. About a week in the
new year, we sighted another vessel, which I am sure
must have seen our “ Turf Tower,” which was about
twelve feet high, with an oar stuck in the middle and
a blanket attached to the top. They seemed quite
close to us, and were becalmed. The air was so clear,
that we could see distinctly for quite thirty miles.
As the vessel gradually disappeared from our sight,
wo became thoroughly disheartened. All our hopes
of being rescued seemed to vanish, and we began to
care very little whether we were taken off the island
or not. Indeed, we were quite accustomed to the
wild, reckless life we were leading, and our only care
seemed to be to provide food for our daily subsist-
ence. But perhaps lam wrong in saying this was
our only care; for wo were constantly dwelling on


the thought that some day kind Providence would
send us a deliverer, that we might again rejoice the
hearts of those who were still hoping that we might
again return to them. We sent several bladders
over the cliffs into the sea, containing a note telling
of our perilous situation.
Thus life went on till the 25th of January, when
the fifth and last vessel was sighted—but this time,
thank God, not in vain, for we were seen ; and very
soon we could see them bearing towards the island.
How to show our joy we could not tell. Some turned
somersaults, others turned cart-wheel on their hands,
whilst others ran up and down like so many wild
beasts. The vessel proved to be the Young Phoenix,
of New Bedford, commander, Captain Giffard. When
about half a mile off, she hoisted her ensign, the
stars and stripes. No one can imagine what was felt
at that moment. Two boats were lowered and came
towards us, and we descended to the lower cliffs and
on to the rocky beach to meet them. They were
unable to come alongside the island, on account of
the high wind which was blowing at that time. Our
sailmaker stripped, and, having swam to them, was
taken in. We therefore relieved our feelings by
shouting three cheers in good old English style.
They then came round to our former landing place,
accompanied by Captain Giffard, and took off Mrs.
Wordsworth, her son, the second mate, the engineer,
and a third-class passenger. No more could be
taken off, as it was too dark; however, they left
us a bag of - biscuits and some salt pork, both of
which we ate with a good relish. After they left us,
c 2


we went to our old quarters for the last time. Wo
slept but little that night, hut sat up singing,
smoking, and telling yarns. We were up on the
top of the hill before daybreak the next morning.
The three boats returned three times to take us off.
We descended by means of a rope fastened to a piece
of projecting rock, and so slipped down into the
boats beneath. The last time the boat came, the
second mate returned with some wooden crosses,
which he planted on the graves of our comrades.
He also left on the island a written account of our
wreck, with all particulars. This was sealed up in a
bottle. With the last boat, I and several others
went away, I being the last person to leave the
island, as I had been the last to leave the wreck.
On our boarding the vessel, we found the boilers
full of hot water for our use. We were certainly in
a condition to be washed, for we were filthily dirty.
Our clothes, too, skins, and the remnants of the
wreck were quite fit to be cast on one side. Clothes
were given to -us, which we put on after a good
washing. We felt like new creatures when we sat
down to a capital meal of potatoes and salt meat,
with new clothes on, and clean skin. Comfortable
quarters were given us between deck, with a sail to
cover us. It was fortunate for Mrs. Wordsworth
that the captain’s wife was aboard. lam afraid she
would have come off badly in the petticoat line had
she not been. After we left the island, we had a
capital opportunity of seeing the remainder of the
Crozet group, or Twelve Apostles, as the islands
were called. The one we were on was by far the


largest. On tlie fourth day after we left, we spoke the
Sierra Iforena, of Liverpool, hound for Kurrachee, who
took the second mate, sailmaker, cook, two stewards,
a sailor, and fourteen passengers off. The same day,
we spoke the Childers, of Liverpool, hound for
Rangoon, and she took the rest of us, twenty-four in
number, consisting of Mr. and Mrs. Wordsworth,
two of the first-class passengers, and twenty sailors.
We heartily cheered Captain Giffard, his wife, the
officers and crew of the Young Fhcenix, which steered
away for her whaling in the neighbourhood of the
Grozettes, in the Southern Ocean. We then went on
our way in the Childers. In due time, wo reached
the river which led up to Rangoon, and, after over-
coming several difficulties, we were towed by the
tug abreast of the other ships which lay in the river.
We left the Childers on the Monday—that is, the
day after we arrived—with a gift from the sailors of
a rupee and a half each. We took up our abode at
the Railway Hotel, and, but for the false statement
of one of the passengers concerning the conduct of
the crew, we should have had divided amongst us
the sum of 1,000 rupee's, which had been promised
by the merchants of Rangoon. Instead of that, we
only got ten rupees each. The fourth day after our
arrival, several sailed for London, in the South Tyne ;
and two days afterwards, Mrs. Wordsworth, her son,
two sailors, and the three apprentices, including
myself, left in the steamship Chancellor for Liverpool,
via the Suez Canal. On our way, we called at Aden,
Port Said, and at Malta, for coals, landing in Liver-
pool on the 2nd of May, 1876. On the 3rd, I went


home, and was heartily welcomed by all my friends.
It seems that they had received the report of the loss
of the vessel in September, 1875 ; but this was con-
tradicted, and again afterwards proved to be true.
Many -were the surmises as to our fate, the principal
one being that the crew had mutinied and set fire
to the gunpowder which was on the vessel. At last,
news of our safety was telegraphed from Point do
Gallo to Dundee, and from thence to each of our
friends by Mr. Bruce. I had written from Rangoon
and Port Said. My mother and sisters had put on
mourning for me, and were sorrowing when the
joyful news arrived. On my arrival at Poulton-le-
Fylde, the bells of old St. Chad’s Church rang a
merry peal, and the inhabitants of the ancient
metropolis of the Fylde showed heartily that they
were as ready to rejoice with those who then rejoiced
as they had been with those who had mourned.
FINIS
