

ON SOME INTEODTJCED PLANTS OP AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA.
By the Eev. J. E. Tenison-Woods, F.G.S., F.L.S., Hon.
Mem. Eoy. Soc. Tasmania, and President of the Linnean
Society of N. S. Wales.
[Bead 13 th September , 1880.]
A good deal of attention has been devoted to the introduced
plants of Australia and Tasmania, and various lists of those
introductions have been given in different colonial publi-
cations. Dr. Hooker has added a rather extensive catalogue
in his introduction to the Flora of Tasmania, and since then
the subject has been dealt with by Baron von Mueller, Dr.
Woolls, and Mr. P. M. Bailey. But while these essays have
given complete lists, and thus serve as records for distinguish-
ing hereafter what is indigenous to the country, and what is
not, none have especially dealt with the peculiar and abundant
spread of some plants in certain localities, and not in others.
This is what I propose to consider in the paper which I offer
to the Society.
Any one who travels much in Australia will be struck by
the prevalence of plants, which are called weeds, in some
districts. Some of these have a very wide range, and
wherever they are found are most abundant. They seem to
grow and flourish under the most adverse and different con-
ditions. Others, though equally abundant where they grow,
are limited in their range. Now this varies in a remarkable
manner for different parts of Australia and Tasmania. What
is a weed in one place is not known, or hardly known,
elsewhere. In Adelaide it is one plant, and in Queensland
another. No particular order is especially singled out,
though, perhaps, the Gompositce are the best represented, and
no particular soil seems to be excluded. There are weeds for
the sandy, poor, and dry soils, as well as the rich and humid
ones. I intend entirely to confine this paper to those plants
which have become noxious weeds, that is to say, plants
which grow so very abundantly they injure the land by
excluding every other kind of vegetation. Other introduced
plants will not demand any attention in this paper, and I do
not propose to give even a list of them.
The first and most remarkable instance is Oryptostemma
calendulaceum, Schl. This may be said to be the bane of South
Australian pastures. In the neighbourhood of Adelaide it is
found everywhere. In the early part of spring its flowers


cover the whole hill-sides and every vacant spot, with a pale-
yellow hue that can be seen for miles. It has long succulent
leaves, and the climate or the soil of this part of Australia
seem so suitable to it that it revels in luxuriant growth in
every place. No sort of soil seems too poor, and no kind of
hard usage will destroy it. It grows in knee-deep masses by
the wayside, it spreads on the paths that are constantly
trodden over, and even it is found in ruts and on ridges
in the middle of the country roads. On the whole, its
appearance is rather in its favor. The ligulate floral rays are
of pale yellow color. They are long, and make the flower
look at a distance like a conspicuous star. The centre is
apparently quite black, but under the microscope the disk
florets are seen to he a very dark purple. The stem of the
flower is solid, and the leaves rather ornamental. But,
however abundant and luxuriant, its life is but short. It is
one of the first flowers to feel the effect of the burning heat.
After the first few hot days of the summer, the weed has left
no traces behind it, except its withered and dead leaves.
The dense mass of woolly pappus, which covers the ground,
defiles everything, besides being most injurious to wool, etc.
This rapid disappearance of the weed is one of the great
objections to it. When it is fresh and green, cattle will feed
upon it readily, but it lasts such a short time; and when it is
gone it has so completely occupied the ground that there is
nothing to occupy its place. Its spread over the whole of the
districts round Adelaide has something alarming about it,
especially as it is known to have been introduced from the
Cape of Good Hope within the last 40 years. lam not
aware how far it has gone north of Adelaide, though I have
seen it abundant at least 60 miles away. To the south it has
spread rapidly and extensively. There are some who look
with apprehension at its progress. It is already very abun-
dant round Melbourne, and has made its appearance in
Tasmania. I don’t remember ever having remarked it about
Sydney, or the flats on the sea side of the Blue Mountains.
On the Bathurst Plains it is not known, nor in any of the
Western Districts, as far as I have been able to enquire.
All these places have other pests to deal with, as I shall
relate in due course. I may observe here that the apprehen-
sions about the spread of this weed are probably exaggerated.
There seems a limit to the spread of these weeds, the cause
of which we are not acquainted with, but which would very
easily be discovered were we to pay attention to their habits.
These may not operate in other places, or they may be
counteracted by circumstances of a different kind. Thus I
have thought, though I do not say it is the correct explanation,.


1 that why the seed spreads so well in South Australia, is the
long period of dry weather, accompanied by the strong hot
winds. This may free the seed from its woolly pappus, and
secure its transport spread and desiccation until it is ready
for germination. This may be exactly the time when the
autumn rains come in South Australia. None of these
conditions would be favourably found in New South Wales or
Queensland. December and January are wet months, indeed
all the summer is more or less rainy. The seed would
neither be scattered nor dried. The woolly covering would,
when wet, fix it on the soil. I only offer these suggestions,
not as giving the right explanation, but as showing how the
facts are capable of interpretation by a careful attention to
the habits of the plant.
Another curious instance of the rapid but partial spread of
a weed is found in the same order of Composites. This is the
well known Carduus marianus, Linn. It is equally common
in the southern parts of South Australia, in Victoria, New
South Wales, Tasmania, and some parts of Queensland. It
chooses open ground for its spread, though very often poor and
sandy soils. It produces immense tufts of its peculiar large
juicy leaves. Sometimes it covers the ground closely—as
closely as it can possibly grow—and this to the extent of
several acres. It thus spreads into a thicket four or five feet
high, with the large flowerheads on their long stalks con-
siderably higher. In this way I have seen it keep to the
same open space for two or three years, not spreading much
beyond, and then I have known it as suddenly to disappear.
It seems to be a more troublesome and persistent weed in
Tasmania than in Australia. In New South Wales it is
regarded with a more friendly eye. In some portions of the
Bathurst District, during the severe drought of 1876-77,
horses used to feed upon the seeds contained in the dry
flower-heads. In its green state both horses and cattle will
readily take to the young leaves and stumps when other feed
is scarce or dry. The way in which it suddenly appears and
spreads in remote portions of the bush is very singular.
Thus, on the Elderslie sheep station, just on the boundary
between the colonies of South Australia and Victoria, there
was an old sheep camp near Lake Wallace. I remember in
1857 noticing that this was covered with Carduus marianus,
though there was none anywhere else in the neighbourhood.
It is a very local weed, and not troublesome, but the singular
thing about it is the spreading so much in certain places and
no further. I have observed that it is very common all along
the rich flats of the Lachlan Eiver.
Carduus ( 'cnicus ) lanceolatus, the so-called Scotch thistle, is so


wellknown, and the history and manner ofits spread has been so
much written about, that I need not particularise it here. I will
just observe, however, that it has not spread very much into
New South Wales, and is not a troublesome weed. It is in Vic-
toria and Tasmania its advance has been chiefly felt, and as we
hear less about it than formerly, we may suppose that the
measures taken for its extirpation have been in some degree
successful.
Carduus (cnicus) arvenis. Californian, Canada, or Creeping
Thistle, so pernicious in Tasmania as a weed, is not known in
New South Wales or Queensland,and probably South Australia.
In Victoria I have had no recent means of ascertaining.
In many parts of South Australia, and notably in the rich
volcanic soils around Gambier, one of the most terrible pests
to the farmer is the common wood sorrel, Bumex acetosella.
It is not so conspicuous as other weeds, but it is almost
impossible to eradicate, because of the way in which the
small wire-like fragments of roots germinate when every
other part of the plant has been removed. I believe that the
same species is the farmer’s plague in Victoria and Tasmania,
but complaints about it are not common in New South Wales or
the colony of Queensland.
It is needless to refer to the common sweet briar. Sosa
rubiginosa, as an instance of how a plant will become a
dangerous weed when, from its peculiar character, it would
not be supposed very likely to spread. In Tasmania,
unfortunately, its baneful propensity is well known. It has
spread widely over the pastoral districts, and forms bushes
and thickets which not only exclude more useful plants, but
its thorns are very injurious to the wool, and remove con-
siderable portions of the fleece from the sheep which browse
near it. It is remarkable that this weed is only known to
spread on the high table lands of New South Wales. Its
most common habitat is the Bathurst district, where it is
every bit as troublesome as in Tasmania. But I have not
observed it anywhere else, nor do I think it -would flourish
except in places where it was not liable to great heat. The
severe frosts and occasional snow of the Bathurst and other
table lands seem to agree with its habits. I may mention,
with regard to the weed which is so formidable from its
shrubby habit, that no effort appears to have been made
towards its extirpation in New South Wales. In fact, it is master
of the situation, and covers the ground so thickly and deeply
that it is next to impossible to meddle with it. In some
places it is used for hedgerows, but that is not common. For
the most part it merely encumbers the ground.
In the same district exists a weed which has obtained for


the place an unenviable notoriety. I refer to the Bathurst
burr, a member of the Composite order, named Xanthium
spinosum. If this noxious weed had no other quality than
the destructive seed case, or “ burr,” which it produces so
abundantly, that qualtity alone would make it one of our
most formidable weeds. But this is only one of its properties.
Its abundance in some portions of the Bathurst District is
perfectly amazing. In the Wellington valley and along the
valley of the Macquarie, many hundred acres are wholly taken
up with this weed. It forms a dense thicket about three
feet high, which is of dark brown color, and anything but
picturesque. If any other plant struggles against it, the
only one appears to be the almost equally-dreaded sweet briar.
Xanthium spinosum has now got such a hold on the district
that its eradication is hopeless. So far as we know, it serves
no useful purpose. Cattle will not eat it because of the thorns,
and it is believed to have poisonous qualities. Another species,
Xanthium strumarium, Dilw., which has a burr but no thorns,
is proved, beyond all doubt, to be a sheep and cattle poison.
It is not a common weed, but its poisonous effects have been
experienced in some parts of Queensland, so that the most
vigorous measures are being taken for its extirpation. I have
never seen it in the Bathurst district. The other species, X.
spinosum, is all over the western district. I saw specimens-
of it about sheep-yards in South Australia twenty years ago,
but it does not appear to have spread much in that district,
neither have I observed it anywhere covering the ground so
thickly as along the valley of the Macquarie Eiver.
While on the subject of “ Burrs ” I may mention that
Medicago denticulata, Linn., has spread, as a fodder plant,
through all the pasture lands of Victoria, South Australia,
and most of New South Wales. It is a useful plant but for the
seed pod, which is injurious to wool. Everyone is familiar
■with the way the legume is curled into close spiral, from which
short hooked spikes project in a radiate manner. These are
abundantly scattered over the ground, and cling to almost
everything which touches them. Thus the seed is spread.
An enormous quantity of wool is damaged in this manner,
and, as it is more widely spread than the Bathurst Burr, it
probably does more harm.
Another curious example of the spread of one particular
plant, is seen along the valley of the Hunter Eiver, and the
most of its tributaries. This is Argemone mexicana, one of
the poppy tribe. It is rather a showy plant with leaves, which
at a distance, appear pale, bluish white, of rough, harsh con-
sistency, and covered with prickles. It has powerful narcotic
properties from which it has received the name, from the


Spaniards, of Figo del Inferno, Devil’s or Hell Pigs. The
pale yellow flower with a dark centre is decidedly ornamental,
and when any part of the plant is bruised it yields a thick
yellow juice. It is a native of Mexico, but has spread over all
the world. On the roadsides in England it is a common weed,
and, therefore, it would be no wonder to see it in Australia.
But I don’t know any place where it is common, or has become
a weed to the extent it has done on the Hunter River. About
Murrundi it occupies every spot of waste ground, but especially
in the black soil liable to inundation. There is a peculiarity
in this plant which I have not seen noticed, and which may
not occur elsewhere. The calyx is often modified so as to form
a cup, out of which the ovary, etc., spring as a straight stalk,
transformed at its termination into a second calyx, filled with
green filaments which may represent the other portions of the
flower. The monstrosity is a very common one, and is subject
to various modifications. It illustrates in a striking manner
how the flower and all its parts are but modifications of
leaves. The seeds of this plant possess various medicinal
properties, and they have been used as an emetic instead
of ipecacuanha. They contain a stimulative oil which is very
acrid, and is a narcotic and purgative together. The yellow
juice of the plant is used to allay inflammation of the eyes,
and a poultice of the bruised leaves, wrapped in muslin and
bound over the eyes, is said to give great relief in what is called
the sandy blight. It can be kept on for an hour, or as long as
it does not cause giddiness or smarting of the eyes.
One of the most troublesome weeds that has ever perplexed
the colonists is the renowned Sida rhombifolium, Benth.
This is better known by its former apellation of Sida retusa.
It is one of the Malvacece, and the tradition about it is that
the plant was introduced by the Acclimatisation Society for the
sake of its valuable fibre, but that it soon spread beyond all
restraint and became a pest to the colony. This is entirely
incorrect; the plant is indigenous and belongs to the northern
part of the continent. It is very difficult to account for its
sudden and rapid spread over the uncultivated lands of the
south of Queensland. No conception can be formed of the
pernicious character of this weed by those who have not seen
it. It forms dense thickets of low, twiggy shrubs, covering
the ground as closely as possible. It seldom grows higher
than a few feet, but the branches are very tough and strong;
in fact cannot be broken, and only wrenched away with
the greatest difficulty. From these characters it becomes
almost impossible to deal with land that has been overrun
with it. Then again the extent of the evil is enormous. One
meets the mischievous shrub everywhere. By the roadsides


and on tho river banks, but especially on neglected ground it
spreads with alarming rapidity. About Brisbane it is simply
excluding every other vegetation in some places, and each
year witnesses its wider extension, and makes it jmobable that
some measures will have to be taken for its destruction. It
has found its way into New South Wales, and is not uncom-
monly met with around Port Jackson. I have never seen it on
the western side of the dividing range. It loves rich soils and
those that have been recently under cultivation. Why it should
never have spread before now is a difficult problem. I am
not aware whether its cultivation was ever attempted, or that
any artificial means were adopted to bring it from its natural
homo in North Australia. There can bo no doubt that it
possesses a most useful fibre. I have seen specimens prepared
from it as fine and glossy almost as silk, and of extraordinary
toughness. There is no great difficulty in its preparation, so
that in time wo may hope to see it utilised.
Lantaria camera is a showy garden plant which has sjiread
very remarkably in certain places. Around Port Jackson, it
has become a complete nuisance, forming dense thickets
which render tho shores almost unapproachable. As
it is always covered with handsome flowers, and its bushes form
dark masses of evergreen leaves, it is a very pleasing addition
to tho rocks and precipices of some of the bays. The effect
of its immense overhanging masses of green on some of the
shores is very beautiful. On the banks of the Brisbane Eiver
it has spread with equal luxuriance, and has become trouble-
some. Two things, however, seem to be conditions for its
growth ; these are, very rich soil and plenty of moisture, so it is
probable we may not witness any very extensive development
of tho shrub in Australia. From Port Jackson to Port Den-
ison it is very well spread along the brackish or saltwater
streams.
On tho Brisbane Eiver also, and in many places further
north, Ageratum mcxicanmn or conizoides is widely spread much
in the way that thistles are, the flowers of which it resembles.
This is a curious instance of an indigenous plant becoming
spread through a garden variety. There can be no doubt that
the species is indigenous to North Australia, and it is equally
certain that it has been introduced to the colony as a garden
flower from European descendants, probably of an American
stock. It is the introduced variety which has spread and
become a weed. Though near Brisbane, whole paddocks may
be seen covered with it, yet it cannot as yet be said to have
become troublesome.
Struggling with it and with Lantaria camera wo find a weed
which is getting an unenviable notoriety all along the west side


of the dividing range, from Brisbane to Port Jackson, and even
further. This is Verhenahonariensis, often metvvithcultivated in
gardens, though there is nothing very attractive about it. It
produces spikes of flowers something like lavender, but with
no perfume. On the Cow-pasture Plains and the Nepean
Eivcr it grows thickly on rich soils, often producing shrubs of
over eight feet in height. It bids fair to become a mischievous
weed. Already patches of many acres may be seen on the rich
alluvial plains of any of the coast rivers. No animal eats it,
so unless some unlooked-for check meet it the species is likely
to spread.
One of the most attractive features of the northern ports
of tropical Australia, is the profusion of large pink and
white flowers, which line the shores and surround the town.
In Townsville or Cleveland Bay the beach looks really beautiful
from this cause. The flowers arc pink and white varieties
of Vinca rosea, a tropical relative of the well-known Vinca
major, or common porrywinkle. The flower of the Queensland
weed is very like the perrywinkle in size and shape, but the
plant, instead of being a creeper, is a strong succulent under
shrub, with stout, dark green leaves. It is the only very
common weed or flower one meets all about the settled districts
from Queensland northwards. It is not confined to the coast.
It is just as common round the town of Charters Towers as at
Townsville, and I found it abundant at Thornborough and
Kingston, as the two townships of the Hodgkinson Diggings
arc called. It grows abundantly about Brisbane, but not to the
extent that it is found round the settlements within the tropics.
It is not at all difficult to account for its spread. Belonging
to the order of Apocynacma or dogbanes, its leaves are acrid
and poisonous, so that no animal, not even the almost omniv-
orous goat, will touch it. It seeds abundantly; and, as it is
always in flower, there is practically no limit to its spread, as
the seeds are very easily carried about by the wind. But it is
strange to me how it follows the haunts of man, and it is not
found at intervening places. I do not think it was transplanted
to the Hodgkinson Diggings, yet there it is abundantly on the
hills. That settlement is not yet four years old at the time I
am writing. It is like the house nettle, it clings to the dwel-
ling and is never far away from the houses. Another peculi-
arity in this species is its liability to vary. There is a white
and a beautiful rose pink variety. The white flower has often
a red centre, and the pink a white centre. But flowers uni-
formly white or pink are the most common. Now, one would
imagine that this arises from cross-breeding, but it is not so.
The flower of Fmca rosea is so constructed that it must fer-
tilise itself. Like nearly all the members of the order, the style


is enclosed in the tube of the corolla. Above this there is
a circle of filaments which completely close the tube, and pre-
vent anything entering to the surface of the stigma until it
has been impregnated with its own pollen. I examined a very
large number of flowers, and in all I could see no provision
except for self-fertilisation. It seemed to me scarcely possible
that any insect would force a passage down to the stigma, but,
as a matter of fact, insects scarcely ever visit these plants. I
once observed a butterfly (Banaia erippus) fluttering over the
flowers of a large bush of white and red Vinca, so I caught it
and examined the proboscis and head carefully with the
microscope, but could not see any trace of pollen upon either.
So we must regard the many varieties of this plant as dependent
upon some other cause than cross-breeding.
The butterfly I have just mentioned is a recent introduction
to Australia from America. It is now very widely known
throughout the continent, and I have seen it from Adelaide to
Cape York. Quite recently immense flocks were met with by
a vessel in the Pacific, at a distance of some 300 miles from the
Australian coast. It is said to have been introduced by means
of a plant which is very common as a weed in all Southern
Queensland, and in the northern coast districts of New South
Wales. This is Asclepias curassavica, or cotton weed, as it is
called frequently. It has rather showy red and yellow flowers,
and was a favourite in gardens until it became troublesome.
So far it cannot be said to have spread mischievously, though
it is very abundant in all waste places throughout the district
specified. In the West Indies the dry and powdered root is
used as a substitute for ipecacuanha. In Australia it is very
much infested by a dark coloured aphis, which, no doubt, it
serves to spread throughout the country.
Many garden plants have found the soil of Australia so
suited to their wants, and the climate so suitable also, that
they have gone out and “done for themselves,” and have
become very overbearing in their prosperity. It is generally
found that these “ settlers ” are the species which readily get
naturalised in other countries. CEnothera hiennis is an instance.
It is exceedingly abundant about the Bathurst plains, and is
rather annoying to farmers, as it takes up much good ground,
and no cattle will eat it. Verhascum fhapsus, or mullein, is a
very constant companion, but not nearly so abundant.
A very large quantity of useful land is almost destroyed in
many parts of New South Wales by the spread of the “ Coch-
ineal cactus ” ( Opuntia vulgaris), and another, or, perhaps, two
more species. It is not a plant that one would consider likely
to spread, and yet it has done so most disastrously along the
open lands of the Hunter Eiver. It renders the ground quite


inaccessible where it grows, and this it does in large patches
of an acre or so in extent. At present the evil is not so great
as it threatens to be, but it has rapidly assumed alarming pro-
portions. It is hard to say, also, how it can be dealt with.
Cutting it down does not meet the difficulty, as a small frag-
ment grows readily. The depth to which it sends its roots is
also very considerable. I noticed the same weed upon the
Brisbane Eiver, and at Port Denison it forms a thicket which
is impassable on the beach in a few spots. Of all the weeds
I have mentioned it would probably be the worst. Not only
does it exclusively occupy the ground, but nothing can even
approach or tread on the places where it grows.
It will be observed that, in the most of these instances of
the spread of plants, they follow the course of rivers. This is
not alone because the soil is so rich and moist for their develop-
ment, but also because the seeds are more easily transported
by the streams. A question will often arise as to how many
plants were introduced at all, and I can give an answer in the
case of one; this is the common Fumitory, Fwmaria officinalis.
The late Mr. George Crouch, of Portland, assured me that
he had never seen the plant in Australia until 1853. In that
year he was surprised to find it growing abundantly in his own
garden, with some other new weeds. He had bought some hay
from a merchant vessel discharging at Portland, Victoria. It
was English hay, the surplus of a supply for some valuable
stock brought out in the vessel. Mr. Crouch assured me that
wherever the hay had been stored, the Fumitory began to grow,
and it is now widely spread over the colony. It is a common
weed in the gardens near the Parramatta Eiver, near Sydney,
and in various other places.
In the preceding remarks I have not mentioned any of the
more common weeds which are wide-spread, and about whose
introduction, in some cases, the evidence is unsatisfactory.
Polygonum aviculare is one of these. It is seen everywhere
near settled districts, and takes the place of much valuable
feed, by its abundant growth. In Tasmania and Victoria
Hypochare glabra is the common weed of the pastures. It is not
much seen on the east coast. Erigeron conizoides is very much
spread everywhere, but especially in New South Wales and
Queensland. As a rule the Victorian and Tasmanian pasture
weeds are the common British ones, while on the east coast
there is an approach to the tropical forms with the unusual
spread of certain species according to what has been related in
the preceding pages. I may mention that I have never been
in any part of Australia —even the tropics —where, near the
dwellings of man, I have not found the common house nettle,
Urticaurens, Solanum nigrum, and, probably, Anagallisarversis,


though lam not so sure of the last being in the tropics. It
is curious to remark also that species of certain plants which
have become abundant weeds in Great Britain are spreading
to an equal extent in some parts of this continent. Thus
Galensoga paniflora is a South American Composite weed
which has of late years become a very wide-spreading
nuisance in the gardens around London. It is likewise
very abundant in all gardens about Port Jackson and
Brisbane. This weed is a species of Amaranthus, one of the
most common and disagreeably abundant garden weeds of
New South Wales.
1 have not alluded to TJlex europews or common furze, which
has spread so rapidly and so disagreeably in Tasmania. It is
not known as a weed in Australia.
DESCRIPTION OE TWO NEW SPECIES OP PISHES
(TEA CHI CHTHYB MA OLE A YI, AND MENDOSOMA
ALLPORTI), CAUGHT IN THE ESTUARY OP THE
DERWENT.
R. M. Johnston, P.L.S.
[Read 1 1th October, 1880.]
Mendosoma, Gay.
One dorsal fin deeply notched, with twenty-two spines
(23) ; the anal fin of moderate length, the caudal forked ;
the simple pectoral rays feeble, not exceeding the margin of
the fin. Small teeth in the upper jaw only ; none in the
lower, or on the palate. Scales of moderate size; cheeks
scaly. Six branchiostegals.
Mendosoma, Allporti. New sp.
86, D 23*, A*, P 16, Yh L. lat. 76, L. tr. *. Body
elliptical, compressed. Head small, pointed. Cheeks scaly.
Height of body is 3J in the total length, the length of the


The total length.
15-£ inches
Length of head
3| „
Length of snout
1* »
Diameter of eye (horizontal) ...
6
b
Greatest depth of body
Least depth at tail peduncle ...
1 1
X 8 , 3>
Largest cycloid scale near shoulder ...
Iv i
Longest pectoral ray
Ol
“ 3 V
Length first dorsal spine
3
8 »
„ of sixth, seventh, and eighth do.
1.2
J-b
„ of twenty-third do.
3
8 »
head 5 times. Dorsal fin notched ; the sixth, seventh, and
eighth are the longest, higher than the longest, of soft
dorsal, and about one-fourth the depth of body. The first
soft dorsal is situated in a line vertically drawn through the
anus ; the third anal spine longer than the thickish second,
and about half the length of the longest dorsal spines.
Pectoral rays more or less covered with linear oblong scales ;
simple rays of pectoral 5 feeble, all shorter than the
immediately superior branched rays. Body scales moderately
large anteriorly, decreasing in size towards tail. Caudal
forked. Uniformly blackish grey, with a deeper shade along the
back. Named in honour of the memory of the late Morton
Allport, Esq.
This interesting fish was obtained by Mr. Webb from one
of the Derwent fishermen. Mr. Webb states that he has
occasionally caught the fish while “ trumpeter ” fishing, at
certain seasons of the year, towards the mouth of the estuary
of the Derwent. It is known to fishermen as “ The Keal
Bastard Trumpeter,” and vies with the latter in delicacy of
flavour. The only fish allied to this species seems to be
M. lineatum, Gay, from the coast of Chili. It is interesting
to know that the only other species of the genus is to be
found on the coast of Tasmania. I have included the Tas-
manian species within the genus Mendosoma, of Gay, not-
withstanding that the spinous dorsal has one more spine
than the first described species. It is true that Dr. Gunther
considers the number of dorsal spines to be of generic value,
and within certain limits no doubt this is correct, but the
allied genera, Latris CMlodactylus and Nemadactylus, show
within a certain limit a wonderful variability in the number
of dorsal spines in individuals of undoubtedly the same
species. In such cases it would be absurd to base the
generic standard too rigidly upon a character so variable.


Length of first soft raj dorsal ... If inches
„ of last do. ... ... ... | ~
„ of first anal spine ... ... j „
„ of second do. ... ... ... \ „
„ of third do. ... ... ... | „
„ of first soft ray (anal)... ... If „
„ of last do. ... ... ... | „
Longest ventral ray ... ... ... If „
Distance between occiput and first ray
of dorsal ... ... ... ... 26 mil.
Distance between last ray of dorsal
and caudal ... ... ... 21 mil.
Genus Teacuiciithys, Shaw.
Muzzle very short, rounded, not protruding ; cleft of the
mouth oblique; chin prominent; eye large. Exceedingly
fine villiform teeth in both jaws, on the vomer, and on the
palatine bones ; eight branchiostegals. A strong spine on the
scapular bone, and at the angle of the prteopcrculum, a
small one on the operculum; suborbital arch with radiating
ridges. Scales ctenoid rather small; abdomen serrated. One
dorsal fin ; ventral with six rays ; caudal forked. Australia,
Tasmania, New Zealand.
Teachichthys Macleayi. New sp.
D -fy, A t 3 q, YB. Scales minutely irregularly spiniferous ;
a series forming the pierced scales of lateral line (about fifty),
larger, and armed with one or two visibly prominent trans-
parent spines. Height of body is 2 j in. the total length ; the
length of the head nearly three times Cleft of mouth wide
almost vertical. The serrated ventral keel composed of 13
prominent spiniferous scutes. Upper and lower margins of
caudal peduncle armed respectively with 8 and 7 strong
adpressed translucent spines. Colour of a uniform bright
golden yellow when fresh. Mouth of the estuary of the
Derwent. Rare. Named in honour of W. Macleay, Esq.,
F.L.S., Sydney, to whom Australian naturalists are indebted
for much of their knowledge of the Australian fishes.
The total length 9| inches
Length of body ... ... ... „
„ of head 3£ „
Greatest depth of body 4| „
Least depth at caudal peduncle ... | „
