

W.E.A. Pamphlet No. 3.
prostitution.
BY
MRS. JAMES BOOTH.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
»iat»4-a 1917.
PUBLISHED BY THE
Holers’ dEkcatiorarl Jssomtioit of |Ufo Sotttjj Hales,
EDUCATION BUILDING, BRIDGE-STREET, SYDNEY.


Workers' Educational Association of A.S.W
WHAT IT IS.
The Workers’ Educational Association Is a Federation of Working Class,
Social and Educational organisations, united for the purpose of promoting the
Higher Education of the People. It is entirely non-sectarian and non-partisan
in policy. Its membership includes individuals of widely different tempera-
ment and outlook, but who can unite for the one purpose for which the Association
exists.
WHAT IT DOES.
The Assooiation endeavours to promote the Education of the people in any and
every way possible, whether of the child, the adolescent, or the adult. It seeks
to impress upon our Educational systems the point of view and the Educational
Interests of the both men and women. Our principal work, how-
ever, is, and must always be, to promote adult education, particularly on those
subjects of bror 1 human interest, such as “ Industrial History,” “ Economies,”
“Sociology/’ “ Political Science,” “ Psychology,” “Biology,” or “Literature.”
Our work m this direction is not designed to have a technical value, but aims
at giving to students a mental training and a knowledge of the subject they are
studying, which will enable them to become worthier and better citizens by
equipping them for more efficient social service. It is the desire to serve the
community which, in the eyes of the Association, constitutes the real hall-mark
of true citizenship.
HOW IT WORKS.
The Assooiation believes that the only way by which it oan provide such a
training is to encourage absolute freedom of thought and freedom of discussion
on all phases of whatever subject any particular group of students may be interested
in, at the same time giving each student free access to all the latest books and
sources of knowledge that are available, and also the assistance of a skilled tutor,
who has specialised in that particular subject, to assist him in his search for
knowledge, and to discuss the subject with him.
WHY HOT JOIN?
If this movement appears to you to be good, then why not join 7 And
why not try to influence any organisation to which you may belong to affiliate 7
SUBSCRIPTION.
There are throe minimum rates of subscription for individual members.
They are: 2/6 for membership only; 5/- for membership and twelve copies
of the “ Highway ” (monthly magazine of the Association), sent post free to
any address; and 7/6 to include membership, “Highway,” and free admission
to all Public Lectures organised by the Association.
JOIN NOW.
If you are not personally acquainted with a Card Steward send your sub.
soriptlon direct to the General Secretary,
D. STEWART
Education Building,
Bridge Street, Sydney.


W.E.A. Pamphlet, No. 3.
PROSTITUTION.
LECTURE
DELIVERED BY
MRS. JAMES BOOTH.
>(Hon. Organiser,Society for Combating Venereal Disease, Melbourne)
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
Workers’ Educational Association of New South Wales*.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
1917.
12474—A


SYNOPSIS.
1. The development of mind and the birth of a sex ethic.
2. How to tackle the problem^
3. Continence among men.
4. Transmuting sex impulse.
5. Influence of the Church.
6. Attitude of Mind all important.
7. Other influences besides sex stimuli with men.
8. Three factors which lead women to adopt prostitution as a
calling. (1) Economic. (2) Biologic. (3) Social.
9. Regeneration.
10. Prostitution and family life.


A Lecture on Prostitution.
(By MRS. JAMES BOOTH.)
Mbs. Chairman, Fellow-men and Women. —There is a hard task
before us, because the President has asked us to do in one evening
that which requires three lectures to develop satisfactorily. So
this' evening’s Work will be a test of my lung power and your
patience, because I want you to give me the longest moment you
can'. We are to deal to-night with prostitution itself ; not with
venereal diseases, but with their foci, their nursery, which is
traffic in sex.
When I took up work among prostitutes I was still a
girl. As I grew older it was the misery I suffered because
of the utter inadequacy of any method adopted to deal with this
evil'which drove me to study it for myself.
This question requires for a clear understanding of it that we
go back.to primitive times in order to study the rise of the causes
that lead to prostitution as we near civilisation. It is impossible
for us to consider the pros and cons of the position I take up. I
must assume a case I cannot develop before you for lack of time,
but I hope the logical result of my case will be clear to you all.
Carlyle has said, “ Until cant ceases nothing can begin.” No
truer word has been spoken. So I shall call things by their
right names, because I am certain until we change pur false
attitude to this evil there is no such thing as hope for it, because
it is the. duty of society to probe it, to uncover it, and until
society does so there can be no hope of social redemption.
There is no offence to modesty, none to decency, in what I am
about to say. The offence’to modesty, the wound that is bleeding
true decency to death, is that the evil is as rampant as it is in
this young and prosperous nation, where women have freedom,
where women have power, and divert that power to party ends
.and as a body keep silent on this question.
The history of human progress is the history of mind, and at
any epoch the level of sexual law is exactly commensurate with
the growth of the moral idea at that time. It is a fascinating
story of the development of mind through experience and of the
birth of a sex ethic through the growth of mind. In each
particular phase of conduct between the sexes we watch, as it
were, humanity travelling after the idea implanted in it, as I
believe, by the Creator of all things.
A study of the relation between the. sexes in primitive times
shows one thing clearly, that progressday always in the direction
of limiting the sex relation. At each stage of their progiws?


towards civilisation early human peoples found further advance
impossible until they restricted, again and again, their progressive-
systems of cohabitation. When our primitive ancestors first
evolved from some preceding form they had to dispute with wild
animals for a place on the earth. In these primitive human
beings the sex impulse was restricted to seasonal activity, as it is
with all other wild animal forms. With the growth of domestica-
tion the sex impulse underwent a change, and, from being limited
to certain seasons, it became a power that was at the service
of the human creature at any time. Here we have the beginning
of the sex problem—when the sex impulse was no longer restricted
to reproductive ends, but became an appetite whose craving was
as strong as hunger. Here, too, we have the birth of lust. If
we examine what lust is we find it is the misuse of a high power
to a lower end; the end in lust being the conscious pursuit of
physical satisfaction, as against an instinct blindly followed to
reproductive ends. We must keep in mind this growth of un-
restricted sex impulse in the human being, and how it grew side
by side with intelligence) with the winning of domestic comfort
that resulted from man’s conquest of the earth.
The primitive human being was in the grip of a powerful
appetite, while the mental and social development was not of an
order to require control of that appetite. When, therefore, the
human creature gave up solitary habits and gathered round a
primitive hearthstone to enjoy the comfort that fire gives and to
have one another’s company, then, it seems to me, the whole
weight of human probability is on the side of promiscuity, that
is, in the sexual relation every man was for every woman, and
every woman for every man. The opponents of this theory of
promiscuity contend that the passion of jealousy must have been
too strong to permit the human female and male sharing their
partners. But in the underworld we can point, even in a young
nation like ours, to cases of the husband being a willing partner
to the prostitution of the wife ; and these instances of the absence
of a jealousy common to normal civilised human beings we must
regard as reversions to a primitive low type.
Briefly, my position is this; “ Pairing now so, powerfully
developed in civilised men and women is not normal to mankind,
but is a growth like all other powers and passions of the mind.”
The history of prostitution shows that infamy, death, exile, and
torture have all been equally powerless to stop the growth of this
evil. Where the punishment of prostitutes was heaviest, the
sexual idea of woman was lowest, and, as a consequence we find
prostitution increased in spite of all penal measures.
The various methods of repression were directed always at
prostitution itself, while nowhere was there a recognition of its
causes.


Herbert Spencer makes a great illustration with regard to the
treatment of the evils of society. He takes a wrought-iron plate,
and he says:— ■“ You see this wrought-iron plate is not quite flat;
it sticks up a little here, towards the left— ‘ cockles,’ as we say.
How shall we flatten it ? Obviously, you reply, by hitting down
on the part that is prominent. Well, hero is a hammer, ahd I
give the plate a blow as you advise. Harder, you say. Stall no
effect. Another stroke 1 Well, there is one, and another, and,
another. The prominence remains, you see; the evil is as great
as ever—greater, indeed. But that is not all. Look at the warp
the, plate has got near the opposite edge. Where it was-flat,
now it is curved. Instead of curing the defect we have made a
second. Had we asked an artisan practised in planishing, he
would have given variously directed and specially adjusted blows
elsewhere, so attacking the evil by indirect, and not direct,
actions.”
So it is with prostitution. To eliminate prostitution we must
work all round the evil, giving well directed and specially adjusted
blows at its causes.
Where are we to begin 1 Assuredly not with the supply.
For the eliminating of the supply, i,e., the prostitute, anything
that repressive measures could do has been done from Moses to
to-day, and always with signal failure. By eliminating the
supply you do not eliminate the demand.
Let us take a commercial product. We will assume that, by
some mischance, butter was quite unobtainable in the Common-
wealth. The demand would exist all the same, and toa great
extent be increased. The public would clamour for butter, a
substitute would be concocted, and when the first shipment of
butter came it would be bought up at greatly increased prices.
That would be the effect on the demand. But suppose an
authoritative bulletin were issued to this effect: “It has been dis-
covered that most of the ills we are suffering from is due to
butter. It is an insidious poison, and the public are warned
against its use.” The majority of sane people would give heed
to the warning, others would take butter in spite of it. They
would probably argue, “ Eating butter has not killed me yet.”
But the large demand would be eliminated. So it is with the
sex impulse and prostitution. Take away the supply and you do
not eliminate the demand. It is clear, when we begin to work
round this evil, we must give our first well-directed blow at the
demand which exists in the male. “Our task is not easy, but at
is an enormous gain to have learnt that a considerable volume -of
prostitution and of the demand for it is the product of conditions.”
—Flexner. These conditions are socially controllable, as I hope
prove to you.


With one or two exceptions male continence has never Been
required in civilisation, either by tradition or opinion.. Moll
says the German peasant has no idea of chastity, and that in
certain communities in Saxony no girl over sixteen is a virgin.
Welarider, a fellow-countryman of Moll, dealing with 452 prosti-
tutes', who gave a clear account of the cause of their first lapse,
states i;hat 299 had lapsed while still at home before going away
to ta?e situations. Incontinence has been cultivated, and this
cultivated habit begets a secondary demand and stimulates supply.
Consequently, the natural power of the sex impulse has been stimu-
lated’ in the human male. “ Continence is not man’s ideal,” a
fine Frenchman has said, “ simply because woman has not required
it of,man.” It used to be held that continence was injurious to
the . male, but the progress of medical science has reversed that
opinion, and we know to-day that continence, so fat from being
injurious, is highly desirable from every point of view. An
authoritative writer on this question says: “There is no doubt
the majority of normal men can no less than women renounce
sex life without injury. Neither for prostitution, nor for wild,
extra-conjugal intercourse, can any justification be found from
the.,point of view of medicine, hygiene, or sociology; these lead
to the death of all individual love by which the nature of man is
so greatly enhanced.”
In civilisation, as we have said, continence has not been
required of man. In barbarism, however, it has been exacted
and practised. Among the Germanic hordes that overran
Rhine and finally subdued it, among that barbaric people contin-
ence was exacted of a youth until he had done some great deed
to deterve the possession of a woman and fatherhood. This is a
proof of the position of women in those tribes. The Spartan
laws of Lycurgus required the youth of Sparta to remain conti-
nent until the age of twenty-five years. Plato thought thirty
years the ideal age for marriage in a man. In these ideas we see
the recognition of the possibility of control of sex impulse.
Among higher savages and barbarians the connection between
continence and nerve-balance is recognised. When it is a
question of hazardous enterprise, say, for example, where the
sustenance of a tribe depends upon bringing down big quarry, the
nahn live continent lives before the time for that enterprise,
because experience has taught them that a man’s aim is steadier
for that control. A man’s bones are not set till between twenty-
five and thirty years of age ; what injury must result, physically,
to a youth who begins the sexual life at sixteen and seventeen
years of age! And in this country this practice is very common.
of men whose physical and mental growth is thus
stunted go to swell the lists of the inefficient. These men are
the propagators of the great mass of unintelligent human beings.


Most authorities on the question of continence are agreed that
control, so far from being injurious, is beneficial to the mental and
physical man. The power of the sex impulse is admitted. It is
a great elemental force. We shall not be so foolish as to try to
repress that force.
In the past, where there has been an effort for control, the,
mistake has been to repress the impulse instead of changing its
direction. Men and women have wasted their lives in the effort
at mastery, a fight in which they have often been worsted ; but.
to-day science comes to our aid. Science is for the control of life,,
and by its light we now know that the sox impulse can be,
transmuted into other forces. The energy squandered in illicit
intercourse might have filled the world with glory, and the
cherishing of that energy have saved us from many of the bad
and depraved stocks that are now burdening society. Speaking,
of the transmuting of sex, a great Frenchman says: “ I got rid
of my sex through my brains.” ‘ Nothing is more certain than,
that control will be possible to most normal men when they have,
a chance.
A notable sexologist, and he a German, asserts that when the,
sex impulse is driving hardest, at that very moment the spiritual
and mental forces of the human being are richest, and that it
needs only an effort of will to direct that driving force into,
channels which will result in good, not only to the individual,,
but to the community.
In the past the method has been to run away from the enemy ;,
but I would say to you that the sex impulse is not an enemy,
but a precious heritage, out of which spring the greatest spiritual
possibilities to man and woman both. “If man were robbed of
sexual desire and everything mentally connected and emanating.
from the same, almost every vestige of poetry and, perhaps, all,
moral sentiment would be torn from his life.”—Maudsley.
“ You are the first and only woman I have ever possessed ! ” a
great Frenchman said to bis wife on their silver wedding-day/
and he handed on that ideal to his grandsons. One of these
children, writing of his grandfather, says: “My grandfather
was a man of the first consequence in his city. By no means-was'
he a milksop or a hypocrite, but a genial, pleasure-loving man;
one who had known life and understood it. Exposed to tempta-
tions of all kinds, he remained continent in youth and faithful in
marriage. He was a rigid Catholic.” The Attitude of Mind' of
this man w,*s set for him by his religion, but I do not place the
greatest importance on religious teaching now; we live in a
different age.
Youth is naturally pagan. The religious life develops in the
majority when life has dealt out its blows, not before, and that’
is often top late to set a mind about the sex impulse. Religious
12474—8


beliefs to-day are not what they were. Th 3 Church has not
renewed itself. It attempts to vitalise the morals of the day by
dogmas that have been outlived. The spirit of man exists inde-
pendently of creeds and dogmas; these have grown up around the
spirit of man. At no point in our social evolution are we
stationary, and unless the Church and educational institutions
keep pace with man’s evolution, they cannot supply the needs of
his spirit. The question is, how are we to help a youth to gain
the power to guard his heritage 1 If I have made any contribution
to this question, it is of the absolute importance of the Attitude
of Mind. It is the Attitude of Mind of the youth of either sex
which is the deciding factor in this battle. Let us take a case of
three normal young students leaving their college for the evening
recreation. They are met by a young prostitute. What is it
that causes two to remain with her and the other to pass on his
way alone 1 You will find it is the Attitude of Mind that has
been the deciding factor. ' The sex impulse is not absent in the
youth who passed on; not at all, but his Attitude of Mind to
the question decided the issue for him. That Attitude of Mind
may have resulted from a religious scruple, from a chivalrous
regard for women, from an attachment, or from early training; but
from whatever cause, it was his Attitude of Mind that decided.
The fact that he employed control is a proof of the possibility of
that control. If it is possible to one normal youth it is possible
to all normal youth. It is only a diseased and morbid nature
which renders a youth of either sex incapable of reducing the
impulse to silence if only they have a fair chance. Unbridled
instinct is due to depravity, and depravity is due to one of two
causes, heredity or environment. The mind of youth must be
trained ; his Attitude of Mind to love and reproduction must be
set, and you can set it to a fine moral ideal.
lam here to ask you to give the man a chance. He has never
had a chance. I repeat it, the man has never haft a chance. If
wemean material chances, then he has had them all and he is
welcome to them, but of spiritual opportunities he has been
deprived. I will give you two significant examples of a very
general custom. Even to-day we hear the question of polygamy
being discussed as a possible solution after the war. Is man only
the propagator of the species, I ask you ? Has he not a mind and
spirit too, that should be cultivated ? And will you forever tie
him down to lusts ?
“A large part of what is called irresistible demand for pros-
titution is not due to the sex impulse, but to artificial stimuli and
suggestion associated with late hours and alcohol.”—Flexner.
The trade of prostitution is not kept up by the unmarried man.
There are authorities who, like Havelock Ellis, incline to the
view that the majority of its traffickers are among the married


men. Bob Ido not go quite so far. The very considerable
support of the married man is, however, proof that it is not the
natural sex impulse which is the cause of the demand. This is
due to more than one cause. : 'A great contributing factor of this
evil among married men is that in their youth they have learned
perversions which they hide from the wife. In the trade of
prostitution men learn habits which unfit them to live with a
clean woman, and this is again a cause of a great number ef
miserable marriages and divorce. Prostitution is the enemy of
the home from whatever point of view you look at it.
I do not hesitate to say that if we could shut away alcohol a
large volume of prostitution would be eliminated. Nowhere, at
no time, do you find prostitution unaccompanied by intoxicants.
It is alcohol which makes the continuance of the trade possible
to many of the women; it is a large factor in the White- Slave
Traffic, and it is always running freely in houses of prostitution.
A large number of young men who begin an illicit manner of
living do so under the influence of alcohol.
In Jjord Chesterfield’s letters to his son, we read the following
advice :—“Spend your days with books and your flights with
women, arid be sure to use only the best editions of both.”
Fellow-women, I do not quote this for its terrible insult to
women. Why should 1 1 Where in the annals of that time can
you hear an echo of women’s voices raised in protest against this
sexual value of women 1 I quote this passage to show you how
male youths have been pointed down the path that leads to the
murder of love before they have begun even to live. And when
women wake they rave of the profligacy of men as though women
have had no hand in the moulding of men ! Another example
is that of Tolstoy. He was a great spiritual force, and yet
towards the end of his life we find his attitude towards sex is out
of line. Even marriage he regards as a necessary evil.
In the biography of Tolstoy, written by Aylmer Maude, a
work which had Tolstoy’s assent, we learn that Tolstoy was
brought up practically by his Aunt Tatiana. She was a woman
of irreproachable life, and Tolstoy was devoted to her. We are
told that when Tolstoy reached a certain age his aunt advised
him that “ nothing so moulded a young man as a liaison with a
married woman.” Tolstoy was not slow to follow the advice, and
the sexual excesses of his youth were probably no worse than
obtained generally among his associates. But, as we have said,
Tolstoy was a great spirit, and as he grew we find all along the
line signs of his revulsion against his own excesses. So that
when his wife is in the pains of child-birth with her thirteenth
child, Tolstoy rushes from the house to a monastery. The
apparently cold-blooded inhumanity of the act finds its explanation
in sexual excesses of Tolstoy’s youth. Love had been physical


only for Tolstoy, and so it was unclean. This and similar actions
•of his are the rebound of the fanatic—the sufferings of a great
spirit in toi ture, driven into a corner by its dark memories. If
his wife had had understanding enough and had sent Tolstoy
away from her when he began to revolt against himself, I hold
we should have had one of the great love poems of history instead
of a very painful drama.
Tolstoy was pointed down the path also, and by the hand of a
woman who loved him. In these two examples of a very general
custom we see the cultivation of the sex impulse in the male
youth. Man has never had his chance.
Mrs. Bramwell Booth in quite recent figures has again proved
that out of 100 men who visited houses of prostitution for the
first time over 50 per cent, did so under the influence of alcohol,
and 20 per cent, under compulsion of their companions.
Neissers’ cases give the result that less than half are due to
native impulse, while 23.6 are due to alcohol, and 29.4 due to the
compulsion of comrades. These heavy percentages of men who
go under do not owe their initiation into vice through the jiative
sex impulse. This is what I want you to observe ; but their
initiation is due to civilised social causes.
Civilisation carries with it the seeds of its own destruction.
We must pluck up the weed growths. You may say that prosti-
tution is practised in what are practically non-alcoholic countries
in the East. They have intoxicants nevertheless. In China it
is opium. The effect is the same. In other countries the dance
and sensuous music lull the spirit and mind of the man to sleep,
anid are employed for that purpose. Alcohol is the enemy Of con-
tinence. It stimulates the physical impulse while it weakens
the will power, and ultimately destroys the moral sense. Ido
not belong to any temperance society, so I have no personal end
to serve, but experience has shown me the inescapable connection
between vice and alcohol.
Where lust is rife, drink is abundant ; where alcohol flows,
continence is impossible.
The Pirogoff Society, the leading medical society of Russia,
States;—“The suppression of the drink traffic has led to the
diminution of sickness, especially of venereal and mental diseases,
suicides, and crimes, and to an increase of industry. In the pro-
vince of Penza it is shown that only 14 per cent, of former
drinkers had used substitutes, and most of these were compara-
tively harmless beverages.”—B.M.J., 4th March, 1916, page 363.
This result was possible, because many consumers of alcohol do 'not
even desire to take it; it is the social cause which induces a very
large consumption. The national crisis in Russia has probably
made this stringent legislation more successful than it might have
been in normal times.


Special lectures on the evils of alcohol should be given in the
schools. If you take away the demand in this way, your fight with
drink shops will be almost won.
Again, it is to be quite ignorant of a great biological factor to-
suppose it is sensuality which takes all young men to houses of
prostitution. That is riot so. Physiologists tell us there is a
condition which they call sex-hunger. It is a human need, and
exists quite apart from the reproductive power. A youth craves
fpr woman’s society, a yeung woman craves for man’s society,
and if they are entirely deprived of that companionship, it causes
much suffering. This need has its root in a deep biological cause.
Neither woman nor man is a whole—the happy union of both
achieve that end—but each possesses its own psychical powers,
and certain temperaments crave for the society of the opposite
sex, and sensuality is not necessarily in that craving. So those of
us who are acquainted with brothel life know that many men go
there merely for women’s society and gaiety and come out as
clean as they went in. That is no myth, but a fact. They are
men, of course, who have bad commerce with women, know some
of them, take them gifts, spend the evening, and come away.
Many lonely men have done so. I was very interested in a book
by Corbett-Smith, in which he expresses his astonishment at this
condition, which he found often in the better houses of prostitu-
tion in Shanghai. Loneliness is great suffering ;it deprives
people of their judgment, and they do many things under its pain
quite foreign to their real natures.
We may safely say the native impulse is not the problem ; it
lies in the direct and indirect result of economic and industrial
causes, and in the provocative civilisational or social causes. If
this were not so, how can you account for the difference in the
level of sexual ethics often obtaining in different parts of the
same country? Let me .’give one striking example. At that
period in Prance when the northern peasants of Picardy, Brittany,
and Normandy were remarkable for their chastity of manners,
at that very period in the south of France there was the great
infamy of the Chateau Vert. This was the name of a habitation
of prostitutes who were salaried women, and the profits from
their trade were shared by the University and the City.
The importance of the Attitude of Mind, in determining right
sexual conduct is, in my opinion, inescapable.
In attacking prostitution, we must, at first, attack the demand.
To do that, we must start with the boy in school in order to set
his Attitude of Mind towards a sexual ethic. Sex teaching must
be given. The boy must be shown the anti-social character
of illicit intercourse, and the right of the unborn child to a clean
and sound heritage. He must learn that the sex impulse in man
and woman is the source of all the energy that has changed the
1M74-C


surface of the earth; that the impulse is not an enemy to run
away from, but a great possession which, if controlled, leads a man
to the truest life, and which, if it control him, leads him to death.
He must know that the counter-principle to license is conjugal
love, that sex abstinence before marriage is the ideal, and that
the moral man cannot accept prostitution. He must be warned
that there is a battle before him, and that victory is to him who,
to quote Bloch, “ avoids the first sexual contact” ; that these im-
pulses die down if they are not fed ; and he must know that the
energy underlying that impulse is the power that can carry him
to some fine constructive effort. His Attitude of Mind must be
set to that ideal of chastity which he expects from the woman
who is to be his wife.
But we shall not advance much till man comes into his own.
He must cease to be merely the propagator and money-getter of
the family, and become a spiritual factor in the home. Half the
wastrels among men are the result of an undeveloped sense of
family responsibility.
Which of us who has moved round the world has not known of
roues, men corrupt to the core, who cannot talk of their mothers
without sentimental tears 1 They tell you she was a woman
apart, the'hest and purest, while behind the man himself there
is an invisible train of debauched women.
We have our brains in order to examine these remarkable in-
consistencies and find their causes. I tell you, however great
as an ideal the memory of his mother may be to a young man,
that youth has lost a great part of his birth-right who has not
had his father for his best and truest friend. I ask you who
should be so fitted to fortify a youth against the temptations of
his own impulse, and of those outside him, as his father, who has
faced them all ?
If the history of human sexual conduct shows anything, it is
that the cause of the evil comes from two sources—the debauching
of man and woman. How, then, can one sex only deal with the
problem 1 It is the work of both man and woman. The paternal
in man needs development. Woman must require of him the
single moral standard. The inhibitions which we inculcate in
the youth about general morality must also be cultivated about
sexual ethits. If you set his Attitude of Mind, you will find he
will respond to the new ethic, which is the right of the unborn
child to a clean and sound heritage. A youth must be continent
till he finds his mate ; his personal responsiblity to the woman he
marries requires it.
But you must make this victory possible. It is useless to give
instruction if you leave all the pitfalls of an imperfect social
condition untouched. Authorities who, like Orlow, insist on the
value of continence in youth, admit its greatest enemy is
pornography and idleness.


They are agreed on the perverting influence of voluptuous
reading, of low musical comedies. A youth in the first stages of
the driving of the impulse must avoid these suggestive media if
he is to get through. We have to reckon with the superfluous
energy of youth. To this end we cannot value too highly the
importance of noble sport which requires frugal living, the
submission to discipline, and the employment of control.
“ Pairing is not normal, but is a growth like all other great
powers and passions of the mind,” says Morgan. If youth is
perverted it turns naturally to promiscuity in the sex relation.
Let me give you another example of the creating of the
demand in the male.
In Bourke-street, in Melbourne, there is a tailor’s shop. It
usually has a number of postcards in its window. They are
never delicate, and are often filthy. My husband and 1 have
frequently called the attention of the police to them.
A little while ago in that window there was a postcard of a
girl sitting down, her legs well crossed, and a dog sitting under
her legs. On the bottom of the card was written, “It is good
to be a dog sometimes.” I am not giving this as an example of
the frightful cheapening of women—we deserve it since we permit
it; but round that window, reading the postcard and laughing
hilariously over it, were four boys from 12 to 16 years of age.
They saw the insinuation in the writing, because outside the
insinuation there was nothing in the card itself even to cause
comment.
One’s heart swells with grief for these children, and only a
(biassed mind can refuse them pity ; they go to swell the ranks of
the tainted,, and perhaps lose their chance of one day becoming
■a good husband and a happy father.
Now consider the kind of young boy who is about Bourke-
street, the class of home he comes from, his probable utter lack
of a single chance; consider all this, and when such a boy
reaches 16 do you wonder be will naturally drift to the prostitute
class ? Can you be surprised if one day you find him soliciting
girls at the street corner, or making criminal attempts on
children! And when you find it, dare you judge him apart from
the causes of his degradation ? When one sees these children
one longs for the opportunity of giving them their chance ; but
individual effort is as a drop in the ocean. You see what I mean
when I say it is useless training a boy to “avoid the first sexual
contact ” while yon leave these pitfalls about his feet. To tell
such a boy at 16 that he will dig the .grave of love if he
commences the sexual life before his soul awakes—is to talk to
him in a foreign tongue, for love can never be an inmate of a
depraved and perverted heart. Oh, women! what are you
thinking of, what are you dreaming of, to leave your sex still
open, to be the call to hell of men !


Now we have to deal with the supply. There is-not much use
in directing our effort® to the demand unless at the same time
we tap the supply. Like the demand, supply is to a great extent
artificially created ; and its artificial causes are in greater or less
degree socially controllable.
If the supply were due to a natural demand, you would not
have a supply of prostitutes greater than the demand. “ This
greater supply obtains in most large centres and creates further
secondary demand.”—Flexner.
We must remember the part that is played by the third
parties for the sake of the profit accruing from the trade. These
third parties are the procurers, brothel-keepers, and the pro-
tectors or bullies of the prostitutes.
There are three factors which |ead women to adopt prostitution
as a calling. They are the biologic, the economic, and the social
causes. Each of these factors is a study in itself; we can,
therefore, only deal briefly with the whole. It used to be held
that the economic factor was unquestionably the greatest of the
contributing causes, but there is, at the present time, some
diversity of authoritative opinion on this question. Social
workers like Chaplain Merrick, of Millbank Prison, have started
out with the belief in the paramount importance of the economic
cause, but experience, they tell us, has caused them to modify
their opinion. Prom Duchatelet, who compiled the first book on
prostitution, to the latest writers, efforts have been made to get
at the truth from the admissions of the women themselves.
We shall take the economic factor first. The strongest
argument used against the economic cause is the undeniable fact
that the domestic wage-earner replenishes heavily the ranks of
prostitution. There is no question of the food and shelter of
this class of worker, yet from this branch of industry the largest
number of recruits to prostitution is made. There is no more
reliable authority on this question than Mrs. Bramwell Booth,
and she has repeatedly got the same results from her researches;
out of 150 prostitutes, taken from various sources, she again finds
only 2 per cent, were due to a foodless condition. This 2 per
cent, is horrible, of course, but we have to remember that the 98
per cent, is due to other causes. Still, in spite of this well-ascer-
tained fact, there is the other indubitable one that “ the greatest
number of prostitutes come from the region where the economic
pressure is heaviest, i.e., from the lower working classes.”—
Ptexner.
Havelock Ellis holds it s indifference to moral considerations,
rather than economic causes, which leads women to adopt proati-
tution. Merrick inclines to think the greater cause is inherited
instability.


After we acknowledge the percentage of foodless and seduced
women who ate driven to the trade, I agree with both, but I
contend it is the economic factor that is largely accountable for
the moral defection, and the poor heredity of the prostitute.
Havelock Ellis’ position is, on the face of it, supported by the
fact that the great army of under-paid and under-fed women do
not trade in their sex, but defend their chastity. Not to admit
that would be to put a heavy slur on the virtue of a fine class of
women—the working-class women. We know the heroic fight
the working mother puts up under desperate conditions in the
older countries.
But the ability to get bare food and shelter is not the only
point we must examine in the economic cause. We have to
reckon with the result of that pressure when it gets below a
certain point. Only the poorest or the finest spirit can live on
bread alone; there are other normal requirements which youth
especially craves. In my opinion an unanswerable proof of the
importance of the economic factor is that prostitution fluctuates
like all other trades, only in an inverse ratio. When times are
bad prostitution increases,, when times are good this trade
decreases. The cause and effect are here. There is a large body
of women who ply this trade for a time, and leave it when
industry is brisk, and it is shown, without shadow of doubt,
that the greatest number of prostitutes come from the stratum
where the economic pressure is heaviest. In that stratum
conditions are not favourable to morality. We have, in the
unskilled branches of labour, which include domestic service, the
least intelligent class. This apparently supports Merrick’s con-
tention of instabilities, but my point is that these very instabili-
ties are often due entirely to lack of opportunity of development
at adolescence, which is an unstable period in youth generally,
and that the economic factor is largely responsible for this lack
of opportunity. Even the more intelligent workers in unskilled
.industries frequently come from homes broken by drunkenness,
where conditions are unfavourable to morality or right ambition,
and meanwhile the girls crave gaiety and brightness. These
girls become the easy prey of the seducer and procurer. Merrick
would probably say the lapse of such girls is-due to moral
instability. I admit that, too ; but beneath it, if we look closely
enough, we find the economic factor largely responsible for the
condition, as moral stability at adolescence is largely the result
of training, and of inhibitions induced by training.
Professor Forel is insistent, almost to weariness, on the effect
of alcohol on the human fetus, and of its blighting effect on the
seed of the father; ifc begets what Forel calls a false heredity.
The unskilled labourer is often an alcoholic, made so by his
economic condition and en vironment, and the inherited instabilities


of his offspring are often -due to these causes. In my opinion
the enforced bearing of children on the over-burdened woman of
the working class is responsible for great physical wreckage—the
bringing in of poor stocks. The mother is often physically unfit
to bear, she is underfed while pregnant, and she may work under
the most unfavourable conditions ; do you wonder then her
children go to swell the number of the feeble-minded 1 Here is
the result of economic pressure, and of the industrial and social
causes.
An unskilled labourer that at the most can support two
children is often the father of seven or eight. The whole condi-
tion of this social stratum tends to be a vicious circle. Can yon
expect anything but moral indifference to come out of it ? And
is the evil not due, in a large measure, to economic and industrial
causes which are controllable ?
The role played by alcohol as a contributing factor in prosti-
tution cannot be too greatly insisted on. Bonhoffer found that
out of 190 prostitutes 100 came from alcoholic families.
Alcoholism produces the soil favourable to immorality, and
besides being the cause of abnormalities in the offspring, prema-
ture sexual development is often met with among them. In 800
such cases 52 sold themselves before 15 years,. 11l before IS
years. “In that stratum young children give away, long before
puberty, that which later they learn to sell.”—Webb. The
great danger point is from 12 to 21. It is rare to find a girl
take up prostitution after adolescence has been passed. Of 882
prostitutes arrested in Glasgow, 314 were between 16 and 21,
seven between 14 and 16 years.
We admit that to the unskilled labour market drifts the
wastrel of other social strata, but the percentage is negligible.
According to Merrick’s own data, of the 11,413 women (all of
working-class fathers) who passed through Millbank prison, half
were domestic servants, one-tenth each laundresses, charwomen,
and seamstresses. Of 1,000 enrolled women in Berlin 430 were
servants, and 445 factory girls. The Parisian prostitute comes
almost entirely from the family of the artisan, and this is as true
to-day as when Duchatelet compiled his data.
In another feet of 165 cases taken from various institutions of
reform, the girls were under 18 years, and not really prostitutes
eighty-one had worthless fathers, with all the misery in the home
that means; forty-one had bad mothers, and sixty were motherless.
None of these girls had known a normal home life. My contention
is that the moral irregularity of such girls is probably due in greater
measure to their environment than to inherited instability. I
hold 1 am justified in this opinion by the results got in various
institutions of reform when the girl is caught young enough to
leave her a chance of recovering herself. The lack of opportunity


of right development in early adolescence is a far greater cause
of vice and crime than is generally suspected. In this regard it
has yet to be computed how heavy is the count against the social
conscience.
Out of 356 representative cases, Dr. Helen Wilson gives 159
as due to bad homes, thirty-nine to had mothers, forty-two to
drink, thirty-three had no homes, and twenty-two ran away from
home. Let us say that the twenty-two who rah away were the
parasitic type —they are only in the proportion of 6'5 per cent,
of the whole.
“ Sidney and Beatrice Webb in their work on destitution
describe conditions common to all European cities—conditions
which we, in this country, must guard against. In Berlin, in
1910, 73‘7 of the population lived in dwellings of two rooms or
less. 785,000 lived in single rooms, 561,000 in two rooms, 5,450
in one unheated room, 7,759 in a kitchen.” —Flexner. “ Anyone
who knows the slum life of large cities knows there is a stratum
of society where children part with innocence long before
puberty, and where chastity is unknown; an environment in
which to have a baby by your father is laughed at as a common
mishap.” —Webb. In the closes of Edinburgh and in the
East End of London it is common to find father, mother,
grandmother, and the children of both sexes in one double bed,
three sleep at the top and three at the bottom. This herding
together of the children of both sexes in the bedroom, often of
drunken parents, makes chastity clearly impossible. The con-
ditions of living cause boys apd girls to drift into promiscuous
relations. The only wonder is that incest is not more common
when you consider the contact. Living conditions are responsible
for children learning all the forms of evil, and these children are
the weeds that might have been perfect blooms.
We cannot escape the direct influence of the economic and
social causes in producing the instabilities noted by Merrick and
the moral indifference deduced by Ellis. Will you say that the
conditions we have been describing are not controllable ?
There still remains the parasite to deal with. I think it is Olive
Schreiner who remarked that everything said on the question of
prostitution was unsatisfactory because the parasitic woman was
ignored. The parasitic woman exists. This type of woman
who prefers to live on man is very evident in this country. She
is indifferent to moral considerations, of course, but she is more
than that. She prefers the life of idleness and comparative
luxury. The normal life does not attract her; she laughs at
keeping to one man when she may have numbers, The love of
excitement and false pleasures marks her. “ The attitude of
the parasitic woman to society is one of wilful revolt against
accepted standards, against uninspired drudgery of daily life,


and this is responsible for the fact that as civilisation advances
the supply of prostitutes outgrows the demand.”—Flexner.
There are ill-advised women who affect sympathy with the
comparatively well-paid girl of this community who forms illicit
relationships because she craves luxuries her wages won’t give
her. You must admit that to accept that standard is to do
away with discipline and character. Standards of luxury are
comparative, and if you excuse on that count the girl you see
soliciting soldiers at the corner, because she wants a fur coat,
then you must excuse the woman of a higher class who may
envy diamonds, can’t legitimately have them, and who takes a
lover to gain her end. Discipline, control, acceptance of certain
drudgery must hold if there is to be any worth in life at all. In
no walk of life can we escape the necessity for such discipline.
Prostitution in this country is due chiefly to the parasite
women and to the social cause, The biologic factor, or the
power pf the sex impulse, has least to account for as a cause
of prostitution. This is readily understandable. If we except
thOsp children who are marked for, the trade by the condition of
their life, we find it is the heartless girl who deliberately adopts
the trade. So clear has this become to many inquirers that they
incline to think the prostitute is a born frigid. It is not the
warm-hearted girl, with blood throbbing in her veins longing for
love and motherhood, that ever becomes the type of prostitute.
She is often the unmarried mother, and has been driven into the
stream by social causes. Of course, the abnormally sexual woman
is found in the trade also, but the women who adopt prostitution
through the power of the sex-impulse are the lowest in number.
As in the male it is not the native condition of the impulse which
is the problem; not human nature as you call it, but the
civilisational causes which constitute the problem.
Some criminologists have tried to prove that the prostitute is a
born degenerate, but they failed to establish their case. They
contend that the men in a degenerate family turn to criminality,
while the women turn to prostitution. The great objection to the
theory of the born prostitute is that there are degenerates in
every class, while, with few exceptions, prostitutes comes from
one class.
But when we have said all we can say of other causes there is
still the direct and the indirect relation of the payment of
women’s work. The longer I live the more lam obliged to place
increasing importance on the indirect result. The underpay-
ment of woman’s work keeps her in a state of discontent. Her
work has never been an end in itself. She seeks marriage more
eagerly than men seek it, and while that is so one of the worst
conditions obtains—the cheapening of woman. Love ought to
come to a woman. Without love*there is nothing in the double


life that will bring her happiness enough to recompense her for
what she pays for it. Nowhere in the realm of nature do we
find the female laying herself out to court the male—nowhere
until we come to mankind. “It has been left for the human
female to plumb that depth of degradation. In whichever grade of
human society we look it is the female is out-to catch the male.”— l
Schreiner. A girl must be trained to labour in some form that
she may be happily independent. If love and motherhood come to
her so much the better; if not she must be able by proper pay-
ment of her work to provide a home for herself. The right
payment of her work would free woman from the degradation of
looking to marriage (whether she is suited to it or not) as her only
escape from ill-paid labour. The great evil of keeping woman look l
ing to man as the only means by which she must obtain that which
she desires instead of winning it for herself is, in my opinion, one
of the greatest of the factors which lead women to prostitution.
There are women married who ought not to be married; they
are poor wives and indifferent mothers. They married because
it was their only escape from a worse condition. But with all
avenues of labour open to them, and the right payment of their
work, such women will leave marriage to those who are fitted for
it and desire it.
The work ahead is difficult but not impossible. Prostitution
as a trade can cease, but not before you attack social conditions.
Prostitution is the product of great cities; that it is not the
problem of the country is another proof that the difficulty is not
in the native sex-impulse. Ruskin once said : “If vice is in-
separable from great cities then we must not have great cities,”
and Ruskin was laughed at as a visionary. But to-day we see
the commencement of a movement towards decentralisation.
There is great increase in sexual intimacy among the youth of
this country. It is argued sometimes that such intimacy is the
affair of the two if no child result. It is false to say so. lii
their essence these intimacies are merely the satisfaction of
appetite before the soul of either is awake. However you veil it
it is a condition of licence which kills the finest things in those
who participate in it. It is a squandering of a great force. You
will never combat this tendency to promiscuity by silence, but
rather by teaching'the value of sex and its high function, and
that chastity is essential to the dignity of love.
A low value of the sex function leads to the selling of it—-it is
only another step downwards.
The single standard of morals must hold ; but women cannot
enforce that standard until they are economically independent.
Not much progress can come of any effort until the spiritual in
youth is awakened. What have you to say for a school system
that passes its girls through a number of classes and finally turns


them out so spiritually unawakened that they can adopt pros-
titution as a trade and find the life easy 1 The girl must be
taught the pricelessness of personal love, that control of sex-
impulse cultivates the power to love, and that happiness cannot
be found in individual ends alone but in the acceptance of
responsibility ; in the service of some fine thing outside self.
One great step towards reform will be made when the stigma
is taken off unmarried motherhood. There should be no such
creature as an illegitimate child. 'Do not fear the result. If
anything you have ever done had controlled illegitimacy you
might be justified in your fear.
In Germany one-tenth of the whole birth-rate is illegitimate,
i.e., 180,000 yearly. In England the rate before the war was
,40,000 yearly, and in this city of Sydney for the month of
September, 1916, 121 of the whole birth-rate was illegitimate.
What can you expect while you leave the conditions which
cause illegitimacy untouched ? The boy and girl, equally ignorant,
hear nothing but the call of the sex-instinct. If pregnancy
result illegitimacy is not the worst evil; the girl is often driven to
abortion, infanticide, and prostitution. In any case, the child
loses its chance of normal health because of the mother’s wretch-
edness, and in this way you aggravate the condition.
Take away the stigma and you will develop responsibility in
the youth of a because opinion which will bring about the
reform will exact responsibility of the natural guardians of such
children. People talk as though reform in this direction would
mean the destruction of an idyll, instead of an attempt, as it
is, to alter a wholly wrong condition of things. ,
The marriage law cries aloud for reform. Divorce will event-
ually be x by mutual consent; this step is necessary for the
cleansing of the marriage relation. We must always hold aloft
the ideal of the conjugal life, of the permanent union in which
men and women find their surest refuge from the storms of life-
but, because men and women sometimes wander along the wrong
path, it is sheer lunacy to hold them there until hate comes and,
unwillingly, parenthood results. The Church has too long enforced
the committal of this flagrant sin. The unfit in the community
are often the children of the healthy mother, who, living in mar-
ried misery, bears her children unwillingly, while the man, more
frequently than not, becomes a supporter of prostitution. Such
a vicious condition could not arise with divorce by consent, i
Action is necessary in the direction of eliminating bad types
and breeding in good ones. Eugenics has a great r6le to play.
Some biologists advise us not to concern ourselves with the unfit—
but to prevent the continuance of them. How morally blunt we
must" be to suffer, without shame, the propagation of children
destined never to know happiness, and who ultimately fill our


various institutions ! The sterilisation of the unfit is carried out
in New Jersey, but the London Spectator, not long ago, refused
to publish a letter by a Melbourne physician, which advocated
this reform. Truly, “ until cant ceases nothing can begin.”
The brothel, that stain on civilisation, must go. While the
brothel is tolerated it is always to the interest of the landlord, and
the woman who keeps it, to make the house a commercial success.
We have said that a great deal of prostitution has no relation to
normal demand. The brothel forces both supply and demand.
In California and lowa every citizen is a guardian of the morals.
Any citizen may take a case against the keeper of a disorderly
house direct to the court; police intervention is not necessary.
Now as to the parasitic woman. The time is coming when
society will say to its members, “Here is work and scope for work.
If you do not accept it, but live by a trade that corrupts society
at its base, then you shall be amenable to the law.” These women
must be placed under the' same restraint as other anti-social
and criminal classes. But until you provide equal payment for
women’s work this step towards reform will not be possible. The
girl who deliberately adopts prostitution as a means of getting
accessories is a moral degenerate. Put away all false sentiment
about her and give your sympathy where it belongs. Because of
these women who adopt gallantry thousands of splendid women
wither in loneliness, longing for love and children. Prostitution
is the greatest enemy of the home. It perverts men: it leads
them to be content with so-called celibacy until they are past
middle-age; they know they can get some woman to accept them
—pity and shame it should be so ! The life-history of many such
men would have read very differently if they could have escaped
the conditions that destroyed them. There are those who say a
woman’s body is her own, to do as she likes with. But prostitu-
tion is not the affair of the prostitute woman alone ; it is the
affair of society. “So long as a large class of women barter
themselves outside marriage so long a large number of men will
find abstinence from marriage easy”—their outlook becomes
dwarfed, and a number of splendid women will sigh for mother-
hood in vain. So far from being silent about prostitution, we
should decry it from the housetops in the name of love, whose
murderer it is.
There are sociologists who tell us prostitutidn is a great elim-
inating process of nature; that is, that the prostitute, like the
criminal, rarely propagates herself, and the type tends to die out.
These fallacies of men show us the need for women in the work
of the world. If the prostitute traded only with the criminal
and vicious man there might be some truth in this theory, but
she sends back to the best of homes, and to the best stocks,
disease, sterility, deformity, and death.


Most of you, no doubt, are acquainted With Leek y’a description
■of the prostitute. The fine rhetoric of that passage blinds us to
its fallacy. He says: “. . . . Herself t lie supreme type of vice, she is
ultimately the most efficient guardian of virtue. But for her, the
■unchallenged purity of countless happy homes would be polluted,
and not a few who, in the pride of their untempted chastity,
think of her with an indignant shudder, would have known the
agony of remorse and of despair. On that one degraded and
ignoble form are concentrated the passions that might have filled
the world with shame/’
On that one degraded form lust has not been concentrated, and
the world is filled with shame. According to Dr. Mary Scharlieb,
in 1915 as many children died in the six months before birth as
in the twelve months after birth, and the great majority' of these
premature deaths from the third month onward were due to
syphilis. This holocaust of the born and being-born shows us how
the prostitute and her trade have guarded the home. The British
Royal Commission found that 10 per cent, of all large cities are
infected with syphilis acquired or congenital, and that 30 to
50 per cent, of sterility in women is due to gonorrhoea. Of 1,000
■childrenin London blind schools 3D2 per cent, are certainly, and
in addition, 2 8 per cent, are probably, due to syphilis. The
Commonwealth report tells us that children tainted with syphilis
die early in great numbers from marasmus. In 1914 the number
•of children’s deaths attributable to syphilitic causes was 3,32fi.
We see here how the prostitute has guarded the virtue of clean
women, thousands of whom have reaped disease and sterility in
marriage because of the infamous traffic. The prostitute and
her trade scatter misery and bring destruction to what might
have been countless happy homes. Consider this terrible wastage
of human life and energy and begin to reckon with it!
“ Losch has reckoned the annual cost of prostitution to the
Herman Empire at something between 300 and 500 millions of
marks. Contrast this outlay with that spent by the Prussian
Government on its entire educational system, its Universities,
secondary schools, elementary schools, and professional institu-
tions of all kinds. They involve, according to the Budget of
1909, an expenditure of 200 millions of marks, while prostitution
costs that State from 300 to 600 millions of marks.’’—Flexner.
We see here the terrible economic burden.
Venereal diseases cost America three billion dollars a year.
In Chicago alone 15,000,000 dollars a year profit in prostitution
occurs to those who run it.
It is < stimated that 125 billions of dollars are spent annually
in illicit intercourse, and this figure is easily understated. The
world needs woman’s understanding in its guidance. W ith that
understanding sex antagi nisih will disappear. It began i|i


ignorance, in savagery, it will disappear with enlightenment. I
hope to see women in Parliament. They should be there, not on a
party platform, but to push forward the vital interests of women
in which the social welfare is bound up. , One is tired of. the cry
that people cannot be made good by legislation. A great mass
of human beings cannot hope to be moral until legislation: makes
the-conditions of morality possible for them. If men were awake
they would help, women to place their forces at the service of ijdan-
kind. There are millions of women, who, do not perform their
appointed-task so well as the females of insect species. The
insect may add to the beauty of the landscape, reproduce itself
and pass away, having fulfilled its appointed task. The human
female may add to the sum of beauty, reproduce herself, and
pass away without having fulfilled her appointed task, because
she has neglected those gifts of mind and spirit which mark the
human being. It has been finely said that “ the civilisations of
Greece and. Rome had not reached a higher stage of morality
because they failed to Utilise the mental and forces of the
female intellect, which is as essential to the progress and
preservation of nations as the forces of men themselves.”—-
Morgan.
Quite recently in this city a medical discussion took place on
the problem of dealing with venereal diseases. That discussion
showed that, however, eminent a man may he as a physician, it
does not necessarily, follow he is a sociologist. We can only
deal very briefly with it. One view put forward was that
biologically it is unnatural for sexual intercourse to take place
withput affection. My position is that there is no biologic
offence in promiscuity ; that it is the impulse which is the biologic
cause. But illicit intercourse is revolting to the mind of civilised
human beings ; and this revulsion is the result of an evolutionary
process towards a higher, sexual ethic. The offence is a psychical,
not a biologic one. As we have said, promiscuity was normal to
the primitive human, being, on the development of the sexual
power from instinct to appetite. “ Pairing is a development like
all other great powers and passions of the, mind.” If you fail to
cultivate inhibitions regarding sexual conduct in the children
and-youth of the nation, and link up ignorance to liberty, the
tendency will be to promiscuity. The sexual conduct of woman
is a proof of how powerful a factor in chastity inhibitions
may be. Her superior chastity is the one great good that has
come to woman through ages of wrongful treatment. , At first,
chastity was imposed on her when the man’s part in human
birth dawned on human intelligence. That acquired control
passed into an almost normal condition. In the present day
where restrictions have been comparatively suddenly removed
we see the old power of the impulse re-asserting itself and the


sexual appetite in young women increasing. But this impulse is
not an enemy, but a gift to be guarded, not squandered., The
whole question is one of the control of the impulse through
education and understanding. In the same discussion early
marriage and large families were advocated as a remedy, because
“ biologically, woman’s sphere is to look after children.” Let us
examine this. Human conditions are always in a state of
change. To-day a man and woman cannot create large families
unless they have a reasonable hope of placing them well. To do
so is anti-social, as it tends to beget again the conditions we Are
seeking to remedy. You have to reckon also with the probability
of increased divorce by forcing too early marriage. Early mar-
riage will not serve your purpose. In its essence this proposal is
to catch the women of the nation, and force them into marriage.
Why? That the uncontrolled impulse of the jmle may spend
itself in marriage. This is exactly what was tried in the past,
and you are not satisfied with the level of morality that it
produced, nor yet with the weeds brought in among the numerous
progeny. Society has passed through a stage when girls married
at 16 and 17 years generally. Did it beget faithfulness in the
husbands ? The great support of the married man in prostitu-
tion is the answer. It is the low purpose of marriage that has
led to the prostitution of it, and it was the necessity of relief
from this condition that forced divorce to the front as a step
towards reform in sexual life. In its essence this suggestion is
to make woman’s value a sex value only as in the past. She is
worth more than this, believe me. Until you review her worth
you will not make much headway towards social regeneration.
The woman who is most worth a clean man’s devotion, whose
children would be of most value to the State, is the woman who
will renounce marriage and motherhood if the price she- has to
pay is the degradation of the best that is in her. But while
saying this, we must determine to resist the false standards that
debar from marriage men and women who have found each
other. This is what I mean, when I say civilisation carries with
it the seeds of its own destruction, and that it is necessary to
pluck the weed growths as they appear that the flowers may
live. It was also said in that discussion that unmarried women
are tragedies. Some may be; but many are not. You must
not forget to reckon with the tragedies among married women ;
far, far deeper tragedies than those of spinsterhood—women
sacrificed to lust and disease. It is wearisome to keep on with
the old story and not review it by the light of fresh knowledge.
The fact is there is a non-maternal type and a bachelor type of
woman. In the past their counter-parts were driven to marriage
because their human activities as against their sexual activities
were of slight value. But if the unmarried woman is a tragedy


we will have many in the day at hand—therefore, see to it
she gets the right payment of her work that she may 'be an
honourable, self-supporting unit.
The registration of the brothel and the registration of the
prostitute were both advocated. Indeed, one of the speakers
said brothels were beneficent. Solon, the Athenian lawgiver,
thought the brothel would be beneficent six centuries before
Christ. He established the first brothels and filled them with
female slaves. But were they beneficent ? Did they improve
Athenian sexual conduct? And have we nothing better than
this to offer in the twentieth century ?
Does any sane man not concede that in the abstract, at any
rate, it is an infamy to license for traffic the sex that has given
him birth ? The brothel must go, for only by fighting this infamy
will we begin to create the atmosphere which will bring about
the social ostracism of those who traffic in sex, as duelling and
murder have been put down. If we countenance brothels we
defer that time. The licensing of the prostitute has much 'to
answer for in stimulating the demand. It is often the last card
played to break down the resistances of a youth. They are told
all men support prostitution—that if it were not necessary the
Government would not legalise the traffic.
I admit that men already old in vicious ways will continue to
seek out prostitutes. But we have said the supply is greater
than the demand. There are numbers of hopelessly depraved
women already who will naturally drift to the same class of man.
So long as you keep the brothel you foster the condition that
continually increases further supply and demand. It is to the
interest of the landlord, the proprietress, and the procurer, to
make them successful, and that can only be done by stimulating
demand.
Prophylaxis was strongly advocated, i.e., certain methods of
making vice safe. We have seen the large percentage of men who
owe their initiation into vice to social causes and the stimulation
of alcohol. If these causes operate so largely when the risk of
disease was run, how irresistible will be the temptation when vice
will be safe for them ! I place it on your consciences to answer
that question to yourselves. You may stamp out venereal disease
by prophylaxis, but, even if you do, what will yon have gained 1
A generation of, perhaps, physically clean men and women, but
over whom hangs the shadow of a spiritual death. These methods
are in the wrong direction—for all progress in sexual law lies in
the control of appetite, and not in the glutting of it.
A medical witness, speaking before your Venereal Commission,
said in the course of his evidence: “There was a time when a
man coming from the country went to one of these, properly-
constituted brothels. There is no disgrace in a man doing that.


Now when they come to Sydney there is no such place for them
to go to, and the .consequence is decent girls fall in.” This tragic-
comic sentiment reduces one almost to silence. If the man could
be continent in the country surely be might he continent in the
city. But he comes to the city to have a good time and you must
change his Attitude of Mind to the sex relation. You won’t do
it by keeping brothels open for him, but you will send other
youth following him there.
Moses acted on the same lines as are here advocated.. In order
to keep the Jewish maidens pure be cohnited at the commerce of
the male Jews with the Midianitish women. What was the
result T Disease spread so rapidly he slew all the Midianitish
women save the virgins only —it was the woman who paid, and to
no purpose. But Moses lived in the fifteenth century b.c., a,nd
this is the twentieth a.d. To-day it is proposed not only to
sanction the traffic but to make it safe. Men and women answer r
Is this to be your twentieth century contribution to the problem 1
I resent this insult as deeply for manhood as for womanhood.
When will man fling off this yoke 1 God grant it may be soon !
I see signs everywhere of men rising to resent sex-tyranny, and
man is our great hope. I almost perceivy a pause in evolution—
a pause that is waiting for him to respond to the call he must
soon hear in his soul—the call for raCjal and ethical regeneration.
Women must help by bringing understanding and reasonableness
to this question. But they must pull out the beam that is in
their own eye—the beam that still blinds them to the opportunities
of right direction they have missed.
Humanity has come far in its search after a sexual ethic, but
it has still further to go. All along the line of our social evolution
the weeds come tip with the flowers just as it happens in our own
gardens. But we love our gardens, and we pluck the weeds as
they appear lest they rob the flowers of sustenance. But in our
social garden we do not display such care, such love—-we leave
the weeds, often to displace the flowers or to rob us of what
might be perfect blooms.
Sydney : Williapi Applegate Guiliok, Government Printer. —1917.


W.E.A. PUBLICATIONS.
"TRADE UNIONISM IN AUSTRALIA.”
Report oj a Conference held in 1915, containing Papers on—
" Relation of Tbadb Unionism to Co-opbbation, Co-partnership and
Profit-sharing.” By Meredith Atkinson, M.A.
“ Trade Unionism and Efficienoy.” By Professor R. P. Irvine.
“ Tbade Union Administbation and Industrial and Cbaft Unionism.”
By the Hon. W. G. Spenoe.
“The Historical Development of Trade Unionism in Australia.” By
Gerald Lightfoot, M.A., and J. T. Sutcliffe.
“The Effect of Industrial Legislation in Australia upon the Ideals
and Aspirations of the Workers.” By F. W. Eggleston.
“ Industrial Legislation in Relation to Socialism.” By P, A. A.
Russell, M.A.
Price 1/6. post free.
"TEACHING SEX HYGIENE.”
A Book no Parent, Teacher, or Social Worker can afford
to be without.
Report of a Conference held in 1916, containing Papers on—
“ The Massacre of the Innocents.” By Professor D. A. Welsh.
“ Prostitution.” By Mrs. James Booth.
“ Tee Child and the Sex Problem from the Psychological Point op
View. By H. Lovell, Ph.D.
“ Sex Irregularities op Childhood and Youth.” By W. A. T. Lind,
M. 8., B.S.
“ How Much Should be Taught to Children and Young Adolescents.”
By Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart.
“ How the Church could Co-operate in the Teaching op Sex Hygiene.”
By Right Rev. G. M. Long.
“ Teaching Sex Hygiene to Children and Teachers. By Dr. Q. Savill
Willis, Principal Medical Officer, Department o£ Education, N.S.W.
“ Teaching Control of the Sex Instinct.” By Dr. Richard Arthur,
M.L.A.
1 “Preventive Training for Young Children in Relation to Sexual
Control.” By Miss ZoS Benjamin, Lecturer in Psychology, Sydney
Kindergarten Training College.
“ The Case fob Sex Education of the Adolescent Girl.” By Mrs.
James Booth.
“ Sex Education for Boys.” By J. Smyth, M.A., D.Phil., Principal, Teachers’
Training College, Melbourne. ■* •
“The Double Standard of Morality.” By J. Smjth M.A., D.Phil.
Price 1/9, post free.
