

piTTH Ft'TVi




SOME EVENINGS WITH CLAIRVOYANTS
Credulous believers and sceptical un-
believers have often discussed in my presence
the possibilities of Mesmerism and Clair-
voyance—the one side all faith, the other
side all sneering doubt. My share on such
occasions has been simply wonder at the
bold daring of the half-informed, when they
have ventured to affirm the truth or the
untruth of “ unknown quantities” in the
regions of mystery and Mesmerism. Tome
it has only been safe to say, “ I do not
know,” when challenged as to my beliefs or
unbeliefs in psychical phenomena ; and the
wisest and most thoughtful amongst us
may for the present rest satisfied in the
admission that we have but reached the
threshold of “ the unknown,” even when
we have made our furthest explorations in
the direction of mesmeric experiment. Yet
this I fully understand : that there is advan-
tage in public education up to that furthest
exploration, and perhaps some wisdom in
keeping an intelligent and watchful guard
as well over the attempts of charlatans and
the unprincipled to use Mesmerism in its
various branches for evil purposes as to learn
from the honest experiments of the true
explorer. Filled with such views, I
gladly availed myself of a kindly-afforded
opportunity to be present at some of Mr.
Dobbie’s stances devoted mainly to the
development of medical clairvoyancy ; and
on 27th December last and on following
evenings witnessed and heard that which I
here transcribe from my shorthand notes
for the benefit of my readers. Let it be
understood that the gentleman subsequently
named (Mr. Dobbie) is in no sense responsi-
ble for the appearance of these notes.
At the appointed hour there arrived at
Mr, Dobbie’s residence a gentleman ac- ;
companied by his two daughters—young
ladies of about eighteen and twenty re-
spectively. Their names I purposely omit,
not having sought permission to use them.
These young ladies, wc re of modest and I
unembarrassed demeanor, the one fair with
light hair and slightly sharpened features,
with nervous temperament ; the other less
fair, well developed in figure, brown hair,
and of lymphatic temperament apparently.
Under special favor I was permitted to be
present whilst the mesmeric sleep was
induced, other invited guests not receiving
had been entranced. It need only be said
that the operation of throwing these into
“ sleep” was by the ordinary form of
mesmeric manipulation—a few, and only a
few passes being made over the head, face,
and eyes, with great slowness but immediate
effect. The company now gathered in the
j well-lighted room included one or two pro-
fessional gentlemen, and several other
thoroughly intelligent people, prepared and
qualified for keen and close observation, and
little fitted to be “ humbugged,” as the
sceptic would no doubt allege in regard to
the whole affair. We were grouped as
nearly as might be at the northern end of
the large apartment, the clairvoyant sisters
being seated in an easy reclining position on
two low chairs in full exposure to the
brilliant light, Mr. Dobbie reserving for
j himself a seat between the two. The sisters
sat as if in a profound sleep, and occasion
was taken to show their absolute insensi-
bility to pain and to their surroundings,
and also that their eyes had retreated into
their orbits so that nothing could be seen
of them save “ the whites.” After* a brief
pause, Mr. Dobbie, passing his left hand
lightly over the head and face of the younger
sister, called her by name. She slowly re-
sponding said—
‘ Oh, why did you bring me down V
D.— ‘ Why, where were you !’
* Up in the clouds.’
D, —‘ What were you doing there V
‘ I was waiting up there : you know that
is where we all have to go.’
D. —‘ Who do you mean by ‘ we’ V
‘ Oh, yon know : all Clairvoyants.’
[Here Mr. Dobbie placed between the
finger and thumb of the clairvoyant’s right
hand a small piece of bone, which it was
subsequently stated had formed a portion of
a backfellow’s skull. Presently the young
lady said—]
‘I am going somewhere.’ (A pause).
D.— ‘ Well, what do you see now V
‘ I see some trees—gum trees. ... (A
pause ; then with energy). Oh, look at
them !’
D. —‘ Look at what V
‘At those black men—can’t you see
them V
D.—‘ What black men : niggers or In-
dians V
admission to the room until the clairvoyantes i ‘No j our kind of black men. . . . They


have got a fire, and they are eating some- in flashes. Clairvoyants met there: not
thing—something. they have caught. And bodily but their spirits. I hey were the
ain’t they hungry too 1 They tear it up and spirits of live people. ,
pass it to one another. . . . Oh, the
dirty things ! I won’t stop here : they don’t
smell nice. [Being soothed by one or two
‘ passes,’ and urged to remain and describe
all she saw, she resumed —] See that fellow 1
He does take a big bite. . . . The nasty
things. (Clairvoyant shudders as with strong
disgust). . . . They don’t let the poor
old women have much ! They soon take it
away from them !'
B. —‘ What kind of meat is it ? Sheep or
bullock ?’
‘ No ; it is 1 can’t saylit.’
D. —‘ Can you write it?’
‘Yes. [Paper and pencil furnished, when
the clairvoyant wrote ‘ kangaroo’]. . . .
They are all getting up in a ring, and are
dancing about. They look as if they were
cranky ! They are jumping about, and up
and down. They are doing it so quick that
it makes tl eir hair all fly about. They are
pointing up at the moon the while ; I wonder
what they are doing that for 1’
D.—‘ Can’t you ask them ?’
‘ No, I can’t ; I’m not there.’
D. —‘ How can you see them if you are not
there V
‘ Only a part of me goes there.’
D. —‘ What part ?’
‘ You know ; not the body,’
D. —‘ Well, can’t you explain what part ?’
‘ The part that does not die.’
D, —‘ Then can’t they see you ?’
‘ No, they can’t.’
Here the writer desired to try an experi-
ment and was permitted. Knowing that
the mesmeriser is usually en rapport with
the clairvoyant, 1 wished to test the possi-
bility of communicating with the young lady
through Mr. Bobbie, that gentleman laying
hold of her hand with his right hand, and the
writer touching his left. Then a question
was put, but from the moment of contact
through, the clairvoyantmanifestedsymptoms
of distress, until she verged on a hysterical
condition; explainable on the hypothesis of
what may be 'called ‘ Cross magnetism.’ As
the clairvoyant—answering Mr. Bobbie’s
enquiry— expressed it —‘ Something made
me feel all nasty.’ Some soothing mesmeric
passes speedily restored the young lady
to serenity, and it being asked —“ What
are the blacks doing now ? the reply was—
“ I can’t see them now. 1 must be waked up
and put off again.’ This being done, she
still declared ‘I can’t see anything; you
will have to wait.’
Attention was then directed to the other
mesmerised subject, who all this while had
sat in a composed position, apparently in per-
fect repose. A small pocket-microscope be-
longing to a gentleman present was placed
in her hand, and preliminary enquiries
caused her to start and explain that she’d been
“up there, such a long way away.” There
were a great many there, but the only one
she knew was her sister. Her body was not
there. The feeling was the same as hanging
suspended in the air. It was ‘ lovely’ up
there; the light was like lightning, only not
spirits of live people.
B. —‘ What were you doing there ?’
‘ I was waiting for something to do.’
D. —‘ Well, here is something. Tell me
what you see.’
‘ I see a gentleman, rather tall, grey hair
and whiskers nearly white. Looks as if he
was here.’
B.—‘ What is he doing ?’
‘Sitting down; with some paper before
him, writing, ... I can’t read it.’
D.—Why can’t you read the writing ?’
‘ It is like the birds a long way off that
you see in a picture; shorthand, is it not'/
. . . . I can’t read it.’
D. ‘ How I want you to diagnose that
gentleman. Can you do better by holding
his hand ?’
‘Yes, holding his hand, . . • (Then
slowly)—I see his brain; it seems as if there
was a lot of liquid on top, of a peculiar color
—bluish; it is magnetism. His brain is
soft.
‘ What do you mean ?’
‘I mean it is soft, right: it would not be
any use if it was hard, would it ?’ ... I
am now looking at his eyes; they seem to
have been overworked and tired. There are
some nerves crossing each other and going
behind the eyes into the brain. It is the
brain that sees through the eyes. The nerves
are hollow. I’m watching something white
inside the nerve that seems to run backwards
and forwards between the eyes and the brain.
B.—‘You say that this gentleman has a
great deal of magnetism. Can he mesmerise
people V
‘ Oh, yes.’
B. —‘And perform cures?’
‘ Yes, he can cure nervous complaints.
(Case closed).
B,—‘ Here is another person whose hand I
join to yours. Look at this brain, please.’
Clairvoyant somewhat disturbed, asks—
‘ Where have you been ?’
‘ Alongside you all the time. (A few seda-
tive passes). You are all right now ?
‘Yes.’ (But her head shakes as with
sense of discomposure).
B. —‘ Why is your head shaking so ?’
‘ I want you to make a few more passes
over my head. . . . Now I’m better.’
B, —‘ Well, what do you see of the brain ?’
‘lt is funny ; it is like milk sop or some-
thing ; it is pinky. What is all that stuff
round it, like smoke 7 Oh, 1 know now : it
is.magnetism.’
B. —‘Now pass down to the lungs.’
‘ I can’t see them very plainly.’
B. —< Well then, look at the lower part of
his limbs, and tell me if anything particular
strikes you.’
‘Wait a minute. ... It is making
my leg ache, down below the knee. (Trem-
bling.) I don’t like to look at it. [Here the
Clairvoyant desired to be ‘ waked up’ and
re-composed to sleep, as she felt ‘ cross’ and
‘nasty.’ Meanwhile the gentleman passed
over to be ‘ conned’ by the sister clairvoyant,
B. —‘ Can you diagnose this person, E ?.
am I to look at 2’


‘ There was a storm.’ (Marks of disgust on
the face, and shuddering).
D.— ‘ What makes you do that ?’
‘It smells so nasty here. . . . The
blackfellow is bad ; he would like a drink.
I wish I could give him one, but he smells so
nasty. ... He has got thin ! . . .
What is that he is saying ? . . . I can’t
say it.'
H.— ‘ You could imitate some of it couldn’t
you?’
‘ I’m not going to ; it is too silly. II he
could have a good bath he might feel ever so
much better. lie is rolling about ; he does
not know what he is doing. He’s got some
sort of fever. . . . Now he is jumping
I’ve nearly all I want.’
D. —‘ What do you want them for ?’
‘ You know: to put them properly to-
gether. These must have been down here a
long time.’
D.—How far are you under the surface?
This is about the depth of a man and a
half. Some of the bones have been washed
here by water, fresh water. Some were
washed here, and some were together, and
gradually the earth covered them; they have
not been buried here by anyone.
D. —Did the animals come here and die ?
I have not got to that yet; you must wait.
. . . Now I have come to the surface: a
wild place isn’t it ? Here is water; it used
to come around this way, but it runs over
there now and has altered its course. It is a
river, not a very big one. . . . This is a
D,—‘Tell me if there is anything the (Horror and disgust). Now they are eating
matter with his lower limbs—the legs from
the knees downwards.’
(Shuddering) —‘ It makes me feel as if my
leg was crooked, down here just above the
knee, the right leg. It looks as if a long
while ago it had all been broken —about 17
years ago.’ (Subsequently the gentleman
himself informed the company that the
accident occurred exactly 17 years ago come
the morrow).
D,— ‘ Describe the cause and where it
occurred.’
‘ I can’t; I can’t go there.’
D. —‘ Now look at the face.’
4 It looks like Mr. B ; it is him !’
This gentlemen’s place was taken by a lady,
and the Clairvoyant was requested to look at
her brain. She replied—
‘lt makes my head too tight, just here
(putting her hands to her head). It is a
lady’s brain, not very big. It looks like thick
cream. It is all right. Her lungs look
rather tired ; they are not regular in their
movement. It is a trouble for them to do
their work ; I cannot tell you the reason.’
The Mesmerist thought fit at this stage to
resume with the Clairvoyant a descriptive
scene of a few evenings previously, placing in
her hand a small fragment of bone. She
at once remarked with a strong expression
of disgust—
‘ There are some nasty old blackfellows in
this room, and they smell nasty 1’
D.—“ You remember where we left off ; I
want you to go on and tell me more about
the sick black.’
about like anything ; you wouldn’t think he
could to look at him. Now he’s fallen down.
. . . I don’t like to look at him longer; he
looks awful. (Shudders). Oh, he’s dead. There
is nobody there.’ (Signs of strong repug-
nance).
D.—‘ What is the matter ?’
‘I won’t tell you, it is so nasty. . . .
[Being urged she continued] —Now there is
another blackfellow; there are three of them.
They are nasty things.’
D.—‘ What are they doing ?’
‘ I don’t like to tell you, it is so nasty.
(After being again urged and encouraged,
she proceeded). They have made a big hole
in his side. One of them has put his hand in
and pulled something out. They have pulled
out his beard too. They are kicking the
dead man about. It is fat they have taken,
and they are rubbing it all over them.
the body.’
D. —‘How long was this ago ?’
‘ About seventy years.’
D. —‘ At what place ?’
‘Australia; it looks all one.’
‘ Can’t you make it plainer where this
occurred ?’
‘Yes; now I can see something: it was
500 miles north of Adelaide.’
D. —‘ You will remember this when I want
you to follow it up ?’
‘ Yes; but don’t let me remember it when
I am awake.’
This being promised by Mr. Dobbie, adieus
closed the proceedings of this my first even-
ing with Clairvoyants.
The Second Night.— December 29, 1885.
On this occasion there were three medical
gentlemen present, and the Clairvoyant was a
young man about 22 or 23 years of age
apparently, and of fair complexion, delicate
organization, and nervous temperament. He
was easily brought under mesmeric influence
by Mr. Dobbie, and sat in an unconstrained
position, with his face towards the operator,
and head slightly inclined. A question being
put and a fragment of an amber mouthpiece
of a pipe placed in his hand a long pause
ensued, in which the Clairvoyant gave im-
pression of coming from a long distance. He
said —‘That was quick travelling 1’
D. —‘ Where did you come from ?’
‘ I came right down, right through the air,
nearly to the top of it.’
D. —‘ Where are you now ?’
‘ln the earth; I was looking round here.
Such a lot of bones; of different sizes !’
D.— ‘ Where ?’
‘ Don’t you see ? In the ground. . . .
I want to sit here and sort them up and put
them together. It is very dry down here; I
want a drink of water. . . . [This being
given, he proceeded]. They have been mixed
very badly; it is a dreadful job to sort them
out.’
D. —‘ What are they like ?’
‘They look like big animals, bones, and
also human bones. This must be human.
hot place, and there is a lot of trees, tall, with
no leaves until you get to the top nearly, and
the foliage is dark, and the leaves as large as
the palm of the hand —a kind of palm tree.


. . There’s something I can’t find. It is
getting night, and the stars are coming out.
. . . Isn’t that a bright star, right over
the tree there! It’s putting its light all on
me. . . . It’s taking me into its light.
There seems to be no life here at all. This
would be a grand place to live in. . . .
Now it has all gone !
D _< What about that star you told us was
taking you into its light ?’
1 1 am in its light now; it comes all through
me. It is my star ; it is my light and my
life,’
D. —‘ How do you know it is your life ?’
• Because my life is my light.’
D.—‘ Can’t you tell me something more
about the bones you saw? . . . What
have you in your hand now ?’
‘ I don't carry anything, I don’t want
hands.’
D. —‘ How is that ?’
‘ I don’t go about like you do '. I go about
in my light. . . . Now it is more trans-
parent.’
D, —‘ What color is it : blue, grey, or red V
‘ Don’t you know ? It is light. It is a
bluish white.’
D. —‘ Then don’t you go about in your
natural frame ?’
‘ What do you mean by natural frame ?’
D. —‘ How do you manage to see things
and see the light if you are in the light ?’
‘ I told you, light is life.’
D. —‘You have something in your hand.
I want you to tell me if it has anything to do
with what you have been seeing ?’
‘ I’ve got nothing in my hand.’
D. —‘ You have something in your bodily
hand, . . . Where are you now ?’
‘ I am there still.’
D.—‘ What are you looking at so
earnestly ?’
‘ At that big trunk of a tree, just about
where I saw the bones.’
D. —‘ How about the bones ?’
‘ I told you about them.’
D. —< What have they to do with what
you have in your hand ?’
‘ You won’t believe me when I tell you :
I have nothing.’
D.— * But (touching the clairvoyants hand)
here is something.’
‘ Oh, do you mean that 1 It is a part of
one of them : it belongs to a human body
which was laid under this tree.’
D. —‘ Tell me all about it ?’
1 Yes, but you must not be in a hurry. . .
(Slowly—) He died there. He was not a
civilized man : there was more of the animal
about him.’
D.— ‘ What is the difference between
civilized and savage ?’
* The bone of a civilized man is finer : this
is coarse. There is no difference in outward
form ; some short and some long. . . .
This was a small blackmail, about five feet
five inches high. His head looks nearly as
big as his body—a long awkward head,
nearly twice the size of ordinary heads ; it is
his hair makes it look so much larger. . .
I see a lot of them kicking about. They are
talking chatter, like a lot of monkeys.’
D. —‘ Can’t you imitate them V
* It would put my mouth out of shape ; I
could not do it, it is like jabbering—about
half an inch long.’
D. —‘ What like are the women ?’
‘ There are no women there. Two men are
walking away now. They are fighting to-
gether —one of them is the one who is now
dead. They fight with a sharp stone in a
piece of wood. The stone is nearly white,
and is tied to the wood by a piece of gut, the
wood having been opened out and the stone
slipped in. . . . Oh, dear ! he’s tumbled 1
It came right down on his head, just as
though he was chopped down. The other
killed him with one blow ; he got the first
show. ... I should like to have hold
of that hatchet. It is not heavy. I must
follow him up. . . . [Being constrained
by Mr. Bobbie’s request—] I’ve come back
to the bones now. They will have to decay.
They sink down. There is a big rain here.
All the bones will be washed off, and the
trees.’
D. —How many days did it rain 1
Days ? They don’t measure by days.
D. —Follow up that bone please to the
present time.
Yes ;it is getting mixed up with sand.
The water is soaking through and mixing
them up. . . . It is like a forest of trees
about the bottom of the water ; the water is
very high now. It has made the soil all
into hard rock. Isn’t the water cold I . .
This rock has broken away in places ; it has
rolled into hard bits of stone like. . . .
I’m not there now : the land has gone under
the sea. The rain came and made a big
flood. The rock has now all decayed.
D. —How cold is the water ?
If you put your finger in, it will take the
feeling out nearly. ... I am following
that stone. It rolled about. Doesn’t the
water wash it about 1 ... It has come
out of the water now.
D.—How long between this time and that
you are speaking of ?
I don’t know how to count. It is a big
time.
D. —A thousand years ?
That is only a small time. . . . There
is a lot of it here, grey colored ; it is not
heavy ; lumps of all sizes—as big as your
fist down to the size of a nut—the small
pieces are not much good.
D. —Now follow this piece up.
Well they are collected, and taken away,
. . . This is a fine place 1
D. —How came you there ?
I flew here. . . . It’s a fine street,
trees both sides of it. This is a foreign city ;
the people jabber ; French, I think. You
see the names up are French. I can’t pro-
nounce them. I was trying to read the name
of a street: they would not let me. [The
clairvoyant then laboriously spelt out 1 Bon
Marche,’ transposing the letters however.]
It is a fancy bazaar, and there are some
workshops. ... I will go and see what
those men are doing. They have got some of
this cut up into pieces. . . . Isn’t it
turning round quick, and something chisels
it as it goes by. Some of the men are cutting
it into pieces and some shaping them into


pipe-stems, others into crosses. They have
to go through a lot of hands, and one of
them bores a hole right through. They are
polishing them with a cloth.
D. —Do you notice anything come from
it when it is being rubbed ?
Yes, like little sparks, the same as you
get from steel. Those boys are fixing them
on the pipes, screwing them on. I suppose
this is a wholesale manufactory. (The
clairvoyant here dropped the piece of amber
that he had all along held in his hand,
and the vision at once disappeared.
On it being restored, he said —) I can see
them all again at work. He then described
the packing and exportation. Afterwards a
subject for diagnosis was introduced—a lady
in infirm health, and a description of the
brain and lungs given as being weak, as were
all the internal organs. Then the clair-
voyant said he was too tired to go further,
and so the seance closed.
The Third Evening.—Jan. 1, 1886.
Two sisters composed into mesmeric trance.
The operator varied his method on this
occasion, thus : he mesmerised the younger
of the two ladies directly by the usual passes;
then retired from the room. The elder of
the two sisters conversed with me cheerfully,
when—in the midst of the conversation and
without the least warning—she suddenly fell
into the mesmeric sleep. Mr. Dobbie had
magnetised her from another room through
the intervening wall!
In the hand of one of them a tooth was
placed, extracted from the bleached skull of
an aboriginal. Being interrogated by Mr.
Dobbie, she said —‘ 1 can’t tell anything
about this.’
D.— ‘ Well, can you look at my lungs ?’
‘ I can’t. Something does not want me to
come. It is like something holding me back.
. . . [A long interval allowed to elapse,
it being thought that the extreme heat of
the weather was interfering with successful
results. In the meantime experiments were
made with her sister. On resumption ques-
tion and answer proceeded]
D. —‘ Well, M., do you see anything now V
‘Oh, isn’t it hot! What a lot of trees !’
. . . They are all black 1’
D.—Who ?
All those people.
D. —Are they our blackfellows ?
(Somewhat impatiently) —Can’t you see
them ?
D.—You must remember we cannot see
them so well as you can. We want to know
what they are like ?
You ought to look then : they are our kind
of blackfellows. . . . Oh, the dirty
things ! Faugh ! They smell so nasty. . . .
They have a fire. They are cooking some-
thing.
The clairvoyant related circumstantially
incidents which tallied in every particular
with those given on a previous evening ;
and she was asked—
D.—Did you not see this some days ago 1
Yes.
D. —Do you remember where you left off 1
Yes ; about an old man.
D, —Well, I want you to go on just where
you left off ; follow up his case.
He was lying down. He wanted someone
to come to him. [Turning to the mesmerist,
the clairvoyant said ‘ Don’t you go away.’
To which he replied ‘ Don’t fear ; I won’t go
away ; lam close to you’]. He is there now.
I think there is someone else coming. . . .
I can see three men. They are coming to-
wards him. They are not near the old man
yet. He is going to die. . . . He is dead
now ;he does not move a bit. . . . They
are coming on now. They are all jabbering
too. They can see him. . . . They are
taking the skin away from him : the skin he
had round him. ... I don’t like them.
. . . I wish they would wash themselves.
. . . What are they going to do ? They
are pulling him about so. ... I won’t
stop here.
D. —I wish you to stay and tell us all you
see.
(With strong facial expression of disgust),
One of them has got a piece of stick. They
are making a hole in him. ... I won’t
look at them.
D.—l want you to look, and to tell me all
they do.
They are making a hole in his side. They
are nasty ! They are putting that piece of
stick in. [Here again the clairvoyant mani-
fested the strongest repugnance]. They are
turning the stick round. ... I don’t
want to stop here.
D.—Never mind ; the man is dead, it
won’t hurt him.
But it is so nasty. . . . They are pull-
ing something out: it looks like fat. Another
one is pulling at his hair—the hair of his
head and beard. I should like to hit them.
I wonder what they want it for. . . .
Now they are rubbing that fat on their
bodies. It must be that which makes them
smell so nasty. ... I don’t like to stop
here. They are pulling that old man about.
. , . They are twisting that hair up,
making it long, like a rope. Another of
them wants it, but the man who has it wont
give it up. He is twisting it with his fingers,
so quickly, and now he is pulling it round
his waist. I wonder what he does that for.
D.—How is that man dressed 1
He has only a piece of skin on his shoulders.
. . . He is rubbing that about himself
now. The other one wants the girdle now !
There must be something grand about it
surely 1 I believe he thinks it will make him
strong. That is why he rubs the fat about
him. . . . Something keeps pulling me
all the time; I don’t know what it is. . .
(Starting and shuddering) I want to go and
can’t; I cannot tell the reason.
Questions discontinued for a time, the
Clairvoyant resting in her mesmeric trance.
Meantime her sister takes up the communica-
tion. Upon the tooth being placed between
her fingers she shuddered and contracted her
brows.
What is the matter 1
I don’t like it: it is nasty.
Don’t give way to that feeling. What is it
makes you shudder so 1
It seems as if somebody had died.


D. —Tell me all about it.
It won’t come.
D. —What is the reason ?
It is too hot. I don’t feel comfortable.
D.—Do you want to wake up for a little
while ?
Yes, I do. [Adjournment to a cooler
locality; then resumption, the mesmeric
sleep being induced by a sip of water which
Mr. Dobbie had magnetised].
D. —What do you see now ?
A river; it is a wild place. I like it here.
There is a lot of nice trees and green grass.
D.—What kind of trees ?
Rather tall; gum trees are there —more
gums than any thing else. There is also
another sort of tree; I don’t know it. It is
not a fir; it has not got leaves at all; it is
something of the pine kind—rather pretty.
D.—What do you see ?
There is a snake mo r ing about. (Clair-
voyant restless as if attempting to get out of
the way).
D. —What kind of snake 1
Oh, it is a pretty one, but I don’t like its
head. . . . It is like a carpet (still ex-
hibiting uneasiness).
D. —Don’t mind it; I wont let it bite you.
It can’t get at me: I’m not there, you
know; the part that is there can’t be hurt. , ,
Why, I thought that was a monkey 1 Its
a little baby, and its black. It’s left out there
in the open air. . . . That’s a funny
house 1
D. —What kind of house do you see ?
Its not a house at all: it is made of
boughs. . . . Oh, what a nasty smell
there is there. And there’s a fire.
D. —Go inside the house, and tell me what
you see.
I’m inside, and I see an old woman.
D. —What would you call the place you are
in ?
(After a very long pause)—l’m going to
say it directly. . . . It is like a wurley.
The old woman is sitting down with her arms
round her knees, making such a funny noise.
She thinks she is singing, and that the baby
can hear her.
D.—How is the old woman dressed.
She has got some sort of skin, forty pieces
sown together. . . , What is the matter
with that other blackfellow ? He’s cross
with her I suppose. He gave her such a
blow I I would give him one if I was her.
. . . I know 1 what it was for : because she
had let the fire go nearly out. ... He
has only just come in. He has brought some
animal home ; a little one like an opossum.
He hit her with it, she did not know he was
there, and she was frightened. It was like
that (Clairvoyant giving action to one of her
arms). . , . Faugh 1 It is smelling nasty
in this place. lam coming outside. There’s
a lot more of these places, these wurlies.
. . . That is an old man ; his hair has
gone white. What has he got in his mouth 1
D.—You had better find out and tell me.
Oh, it is the root of a tree.
D. —What is he chewing it for 1
I think he is bad ; he looks bad, very thin.
. . . Let me go away from this, it smells
so nasty.
D. —I want you to follow up and watch
them.
Well, these are dirty things. They have
got a lot of grease, are rubbing it on their
baby. No wonder it cries. . . . Now
the old woman is bringing out a piece of
skin, and putting the baby on it. 1 suppose
that is instead of washing it ! . . . There’s
a lot more children there now.
D. —What are their ages ?
I don’t know. . . . The biggest of
them is about sixteen. . . . Oh, they
are all tearing up that little animal. They
are eating it raw, and the old people don’t
know they have got it! (Shuddering). Now
they’ve come back from the baby, and they
are making such a row. They are cross with
the children for eating the opossum. The
youngsters have all run away. They are
just like monkeys ; 1 see them climbing the
trees, to get out of the way of the father.
He is trying to blame it on the old woman ;
going like that at her (Clairvoyant shakes
her head threateningly). Now he is lying
down. ... I see a lot of blacks ; they
have some long wooden things in their hands,
and they are running like anything.
[At this stage enquiries were suspended,
pending the diagnosis of a disease, for a lady
who was waiting].
The Case of Mbs. S .
D. —Diagnose this person (her hand con-
nected with that of clairvoyant) ; commence
whatever part you come to first.
I feel heavy in the chest.
D.—What is the matter ?
I see the lungs : they are worn out. They
have grown too thin, or something. . . .
You can see like little branches amongst
them ; they are not blood-vesseis ; I suppose
it is the air-vessels —like a lot of roots going
all about the lungs.
D. —Look at the outside as well as the
inside.
Well, I am. . . . It did not ought to
be like that. The right one looks the worst.
It seems like as if the air goes puff. (Clair-
voyant here again indicated pain in her
chest). At the back of the lungs in the
blood there are a lot of little round things
coming all together, just at the top, of a
pinkey color. That is because the lungs
don’t work properly. The blood can’t get
out quick enough.
D. —What is the cause of all this; where is
the mischief ?
The heart does not look all right: it looks
all black outside.
D. —Go back to the lungs again, and to
the one you say is worst, and then to the
outside of the body and tell me what you
see ?
Let me look at yours first.
The operator here complied, giving his
hand to the Clairvoyant, who still retained
her hold of one of the hands of the lady, and
evidently was busy comparing. Oh, it is not
the same; it looks as if it had grown on to
the side—not yours the other’s. There is a
skin like (moving uneasily as if in pain). It
gives me pain, as if something was striking
through. It looks like a little hole in the
lung, as if something had been packed into


it, I see a bone among the ribs that is
crooked, more than it should be. It is near
the lung. It look as if it was that which
made the lung bad. It makes me feel funny.
(Symptoms of distress). It looks as if some-
thing had been thrown from the outside to
the inside. The outside of the body looks
drawn up like.
B.—Can you tell me anything more about
it, or suggest anything to be done to improve
matters ?
No; it makes me feel heavy.
[Evidently the Clairvoyant was tired out,
the weather beinc intensely hot and exhaust-
ing, So the seance closed].
The Fourth Evening.—March sth, 1886.
The Clairvoyants on this occasion were
the two sister already mentioned and the
young man who occupied Mr. Bobbie’s at-
tention on the second evening of the series.
There was introduced a young lady whose
friends desired a diagnosis of her ailments.
For the purpose the usual formal introduc-
tion was made by Mr. Bobbie, he placing the
hand of the visitor in the hand of the young
man, and making a few magnetic passes
over both hands. The Clairvoyant shivered
and said he felt cold. Then proceeded Mr.
Bobbie—
B.—l wish you to diagnose the case of this
individual.
It is very active.
B. —What do you refer to ?
The brain. She is too excitable.
I am looking at the throat.
B. —What about that ?
It seems puffed: it is not so sound as it
should be, ... I see that the heart is
beating too quick.
B. —What is the cause of that ?
The blood comes in too quick, and the pul-
sations do not correspond. It wants to go
faster than it does. ... I want a drink
of water. (Given), . . , The action is
quick. She must not give it too much work;
must not become over-excited. She must
not walk fast. But she should take more
exercise. There is not sufficient life in all
the parts.
B,—What do you mean by more light ?
) mean life.
B.—Have you looked at the lungs yet ?
No.
B. —Have a look then.
The left lung is not so strong as the
other; it is jagged.
B, —What makes it jagged ?
It has been used violently. . . . The
cough does that.
B. —What is the cause of the cough ?
It has been brought on because the lungs
are not clear. They are naturally weak;
don’t throw oft the dead matter sufficiently.
There is always a waste going on; they do
not throw it off. . . . She should take
some sulphur in water—a small tea-spoonful
in a wine-glass of water. That would clear
the lungs and throat too. She must gargle
the throat every second morning before
breakfast, and then swallow the sulphur and
water. . . . She is all right otherwise.
P, —How long should she coiitioue this ?
For a fortnight, and then come here again.
Mr, Bobbie ceased his enquiries of the
young man, and acting upon a suggestion
given, resolved to ‘ check off’ his diagnosis
by referring the case to one of the young
lady clairvoyants. The usual contact was
followed by an immediate declaration that
she (the clairvoyant) felt faint. She drank
a glass of water, and then said her head
ached. [Subsequently the young lady stated
to Mr. Bobbie that both conditions answered
to her then feelings. The clairvoyant
evidently into subtle sympathy with pain.]
B. —What sort of brain do you see 1
It looks tired ; it is a good brain, but has
too much to think about: it is quite too
active. It is over active. ... I don’t
see anything the matter with the throat.
. . The heart looks too high up. It seems
to be right in the middle between the two
lungs. It presses against the left lung :it
makes the lung inclined to inflate sideways
instead of up. . . . The right lung
works too fast. ... I have a pain in my
side. . . . More blood is cleaned in the
right lung than ought to be. . . . There’s
like little doors in the head. I never noticed
them before. The heart is divided into parts
and they are close to the bottom. The blood
seems to come up the left side and down the
right. There is no disease in the heart.
B.—Have you anything else to say about
the case ?
Bancing is not good for her. ... I
am at the lungs again.
B. —Examine them carefully and tell me
all about them.
The left one is not right: it seems too hard.
All the air-vessels at the bottom of the lung
seem to be stopped up with something. . ,
. There was a cold a long time ago, and
not only once. She should take something
to dissolve it.
B.—What should she take 1
One-third citric acid to two-thirds salt-
petre-altogether an ounce, dissolved in
three-quarters of a pint of hot water. She
must take a dessert spoonful before break-
fast every morning for about a week. Then
I will look at it again.
B.—Boes anything in particular strike you
about the lungs ?
It seems to be thinner than it ought to be.
The left is not so good as the other. There
is no disease. It seems to have been strained
a bit.
B. —You said you saw nothing the matter
with the throat,
I was looking at mine a little while ago.
I wanted to see if it was like it, [Clair-
voyant’s father explained that she was her-
self suffering slightly from a sore throat.]
B. —Well, look at mine and then at that
lady’s, and see if there is any difference.
Your’s is bigger, that is all.
B,—Would flour of sulphur do the lungs
any good ?
Yes, but the other would be quickest.
B.—l got (indicating the male clair-
voyant) to diagnose, and he said the left
lung was jagged. How do you account for
the difference between you 1
It is strained, not jagged.


D.—He said the same and prescribed flour to call attention to the peculiar fact
of sulphur.
What did you ask me for then 1
D.—You have had more experience than
he ; I wanted to hear what you would say
about it. (A long pause). I see you are
thinking ; what is it about 7
I won’t tell.
D. —There is nothing more about this
lady 7
No ; I have already told you all.
D. —Can I do anything for your own
throat 7
Yes ; you can magnetise some oil, and then
I must rub it in and take some. I will rest
a bit now.
In the midst of a most interesting descrip-
tion of the complicated ails affecting ano-
ther person, the time available to me expired,
and I bade adieu to the operator and his friends.
But I would not close this ray genuine report
without stating my purpose; 1 simply desire
that persons not technically educated in
anatomy or physics—as in these instances —
appear to have special though crude develope-
ment ot faculty under mesmeric or magnetic
conditions, and that it may be better worth
while to give attention to these, with a view
to their useful and even valuable employment
than some persons are willing to allow. I
gladly note the fact that some of the
members of the medical profession are
willing to allow the value of mesmerism in
relation to surgical operation, as well as in
some forms of disease ; and I am in full
expectancy that many of them will ere long
follow in the steps of Dr. Esdale, in India,
and some of the leading professional men in
England. I would like to add the expression
of my conviction that Mr. Dobbie is pursuing
his enquiries with a most praiseworthy pur-
pose, and that he has already been largely a
benefactor to the suffering and weak.




