

The
White
Australia
Question.
CONTENTS*
x, —A Whit* Australia Impossible.
2.- -The Cause of Color in Ma nkind.
—To: W toU Hutniu Rik t» Mixia*.
4. —The Negro. ®"v ®*\. @N S'v ®*v
"With over 10c illtiJtratiioa.
By E. W, COLE.


PART 1.—25th Thousand. 5th Edition.
A
White
Australia
Impossible.
BY E. W. COLE.
OUR AUSTRALASIAN MIXTURES.
Australasia, including Australia proper, Tasmania, New Zealand, and
British New Guinea, contains at present a population of about 5,300,000.
Tins population is made up, firstly, of the English, Irish, Scotch, and
Welsh mixtures ; next, of Germans and representatives of all the European
races, of Americans, and of various coloured races. The coloured races are
approximately in number as follows; natives of New Guinea, according
to the Rev. Dawes, the missionary, and Mr. W. Edgar Giel, fully
450,000: Australian aborigines, according to Mr. Coghlan, 153,000; Maoris,
according to census, 43,000; Chinese, according to census, 36,000;
Polynesians. 8,000 ; Hindoos, Malays, Negroes. Japanese, Syrians, and all
other coloured people, say 20,000. It is difficult to say how much of
aboriginal Australian blood runs in the veins of our Australian nation, but
from the very first of European settlement, white men, shepherds, station-
bands and others, held converse with the aboriginal women, and half-
caste children were born all over the country, and from that time till now
this mingling of blood has beeu going on. Half the natives in the various
aboriginal stations, and elsewhere, have more or less white blood in their
veins, and some Mulattoes, Quadroons, Octoroons, etc,, are married to
white partners, and consequently mixed children are born Even the
blood of the Tasmanian aboriginals, who are supposed to be extinct, is
mixed in the living Australians. A late census gives 124 of their mixed
descendants, while others have certainly merged into the community.
The Maoris have 9,000 of mixed blood, some living with the native tribes
and some with the Whites. And the Australian aboriginals’ mixed des-
cendants must be more in number than those of the Maoris. Therefore,
I think that the present mixture of Coloured and Whites, including
Aborigines, Maoris, Chinese, Polynesians, Hindoos, Malays, Negroes,
Japanese, Syrians, and all other coloured races, cannot be less than 30,000,
or a total of coloured and mixed people in Australasia of 740,000. The
total population of Australasia being 5.300,000, there is, therefore, one
person more or less coloured to every six of the European white mixture,
at present living in this country, In the face of the above figures alone
there is not, and cannot be, a " White Australia.”


“There is a man in Melbourne, named H. W. Cole, who has written a
pamphlet to prove'that 1 A. White Australia is Impossible,’ and he talks
a lot of sense." — Stcck ani Station Journal.


A WHITE AUSTRALIA IMPOSSIBLE,
and for Very Important Reasons
UNDESIRABLE.
“We will not allow any Asiatics, or other Coloured People, to settle in
any part of Australia.” So say many Australians.
o
“ God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all
the face of the earth.” “Do unto others as ye would they should do
unto you.” These just and humanitarian doctrines were taught by
two Asiatic , coloured men, Jesus and Paul.
Yes ! The man who taught men to love one another—that the
foreigner is our neighbour—and to do as we would be done by—the
man who has influenced for good more of the human family, our
white selves included, than any other man that ever lived, the man
whose doctrines are taught every weeh in the eight hundred thousand
churches and chapels of Christendom —that man, under our proposed
Alien law, would not he allowed to live in this country through being
an Asiatic and a coloured man. Now, whatever may happen,
or however we may reason, one tiling is certain —that no
man can support such a law and remain a Christian.


Synopsis of Contents.
This pamphlet contains arguments against the possibility and the desirability of
••A White Australia"; an account of the amazing progress, the great and growing
power, and the increasing population of Japan,—our possible enemy; and of the
enormous and overflowing populations of our other near neighbours, Java, China,
and India.
The object of the whole argument is to demonstrate that these countries, containing
about half the human race, all coloured, are increasing their population very fast;
that, as they lie very near to us, a large portion of their excess muse overflow
Australia-wards; and that it is safest, most humane, and best for the interest of
Australia and mankind at large, that, under just and proper restrictions and
regulations we should receive, and even invite and assist them to settle, as friends ,
instead of attempting to repel them cts undesirables or as enemies •
Holding as I do, the Oneness of Man, I am much interested in the
present burning question of a "White Australia,” and with all respect I
think that it has not been sufficiently looked at in all its aspects. I know
that the feeling is strong, and almost universal, against the coloured man;
but I also know that there is no material difference between the white
man and the coloured. I have done business with and employed different
coloured races and observed their conduct, and I affirm, and those who
know them best generally affirm, that their conduct is as good as that of
white men and women. Even the moral conduct of the despised Chinaman
is as good as that of the average white. Somebody has said, and Mr. Glad-
stone re-affirmed, that the Chinaman in America and Australia is hated more
for his virtues than for his vices. He is honest and peaceable, but his great
sin is that he is industrious and frugal. Prejudice is strong, exceedingjy
strong, in the white man against the coloured races of the world. Pre-
judice will not allow the white man to understand the coloured and do
him justice. The whites generally quarrelled with and exterminated the
American Indians; but that great and good man William Penn, acted hon-
estly with them, and they did the same with him, and he and they became
fast friends. Since white men have come in contact with the Indians they
have largely demoralized them with their "fire-water.” But Catlin, the
American traveller, affirms that for eight years he wandered amongst
400,000 of the Red Indians, enjoying their hospitality, and that, under
much romantic exposure, “no Indian ever betrayed me, struck me a
blow, or stole from me a shilling’s worth of my property”; and he con-
tinues “1 look upon the Indians as the most honest and honorable nice of
people that I ever lived among in my life”; and he further says that when
he came back among civilized people the first thing they did was to steal


his canoe, a thing which the Indians never attempted to do whilst he was
among them. Take another despised coloured race, the African; they,
too, can appreciate kindness and right behaviour. That great and good
man Dr. Livingstone, who lived amongst many African races for thirty
years, ate with them, travelled with them, prayed with them, daily conversed
with them, and who probably knew more of the African character than
any other man, affirmed that “Any man could walk through Africa from
one end to the other unmolested, if he would only keep a civil tongue in
his head.” I have a little paragraph lying before me, entitled “ Kindness
and Safety," which says “Livingstone had been more than twenty
years in Africa before he was robbed by a native.” And so, take the world
through, the coloured man is as good as the white man; acquaintance
only is required. Put aside your prejudice and try to understand other people,
and you will find that the people everywhere that you do not know are as good as
the people that you do kno w.
But again. Can we keep the coloured people out of Australasia, even
if it were just to do so? Let us look at the situation. We havea territory
2u times the size of England, Ireland and Scotland, while in a hundred
years we have only increased to a population of four millions. To the
north of usand within a few days’ steaming, lie Java, Japan, China Proper,
and India, containing a coloured population of 800 mMlions, — one half of
the tntire human race. These four countries united are only about the size
of Australasia. While we have increased only to four millions in 100
years they have increased by 200 millions, artd are still fast increasing.
This expansion of population will, eventually, largely flow towards
Australia, and we cannot keep it back. Tht Javanese will come, the
Japanese will come, the Chinese will come, and lie Hindoos will come, as
soon as they are awakened and educated to act, ind that awakening and
education are fast coming about.
There are already many Japanese in Queensland and Thursday
Island, and they will soon come in numbers to Northern Australia; and
Japan will protect them with her fleet. This is no dream. Already she
brings her ships, built and manned equal to our own, into our harbours,
(and if one can come ere long many can come): and not long ago she was
prepared to measure arms with the United States in defence of her
countrymen in the Sandwich Islands. Of the coloured nations Japan is
first in the field, progressing and developing her latent strength; but,
with a civilized education which they are now receiving, the hundreds of
millions of China will gradually awaken, and the hundreds of mdlions of
India will gradually awaken, and millions of them will come and settle in
Australia, and, if we are wise they will gradually come as invited friends
instead of as armed hosts of uninvited enemies.


Some may laugh at this climax ; "but I would advise them to well
consider tlic possibilities, nay more, the strong probabilities here indicated,
and particularly to remember that the coloured peoples of the world are
progressing in education and gradually awakening to a consciousness of
their latent strength, and that in the future millions of armed men will
mean a great deal, even if those men are Japanese, Chinese, or Hindoos.
'When Lord Beaconsficlcl brought the disciplined Hindoo soldiers to Malta,
ihe world felt that it was an effective force, and that a coloured man,
when well disciplined, can £ght and shoot like any other man; and so
when the Indian regiment wont to China they showed what they could
cio. and the world saw their fighting power. As for the Chinese, eminent
military commanders, including Lord Wolseley, say that the hundreds of
millions of Chinamen, one quarter of the human race, if properly
disciplined, would make some of the best soldiers in the world. Of the
Japanese—we have seen their growing ability to manoeuvre and light.
Hut another question arises. Have our few millions of whites, present
and to come, aright to monopolize this vast continent to the exclusion of
tire coloured man whose necessity for expansion is greater than ours? I
think not. [am certain not. It is said that po millions of the inhabi tan ts of
Indiaareina chronic stale of starvation and go hungry to bed every night;
and that a million persons died of starvation last year. In the name cj God's
fairness to His children—in the name of our common humanity—what right
haze ize to prevent these hungry souls from settling on a portion of this vast,
unoccupied territory of Australia? Nay more, is it not our duty
to even assist them to do so and turn the misery of these starving millions
into gladness ? "Why should not happy colonies of our coloured brethren,
influenced by our advanced civilization, language and religion, grow,
increase, and expand in. the enormous, sunny lands of Australia, where
reign now only profitless solitudes? Surely this would he one of the most
huntune and lest developments for ihe progressive advancement of Australia, the
fence and progress of the world!
Besides, it is our duty to try and prevent wars of colour.—Of course it
is undesirable that great numbers of destitute, ignorant, and more or less
uncivilized foreigners should swarm into another, settled country, to the
detriment and annoyance of the people of that country, and legislative
measures should he taken against snch a wrong; but no educated,
respectable person, particularly one speaking the language of that land,
should beohjected tothrough prejudice, because his skin has been more or
less tanned by the rays of the sun, or because he came from Asia or any
particular country. I shall show further on the danger there will be to
Australasia aboat this colour prohibition, firstly and soon from sensitive
and powerful Japan, and later on from Java, China, India, and the other


coloured peoples to the north of us, as soon as they awake to a consciousness
of their power. 800 millions of them, and their increase, against our few
millions, and we in the wrong!
Another argument against a "White Australia” is that the thing is a/'Ziys/ra/
impossibility. There never can be a "White Australia,” because nearly
half of it lies within the tropics; and wherever white people settle in the
tropics, in the course of time they become coloured. This can be seen by z
reference to complexions all over the world. People in the North of
Europe are light, in the South dark ; in the North of India light, in the
South dark ; in the North of China light, in the South dark ; in the North
of Japan (1500 miles long) light, in the South dark; and so everywhere
throughout the world—the nearer to the Cquator the darker, the nearer to
the Poles the lighter, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred; and the
influence of the climate of Australia on the complexion is no exception to
the rule. Take two brothers as near alike as possible, send one to Northern
Australia and the other to Southern New Zealand; let them come back a
few years hence, and the North Australian will be much darker than the
other one. Let them and their descendants remain in those
respective localities for thousands of years, and they would be like races of
■different colours. Therefore, for this reason alone, there cannot be a
" White Australia”; for if such a thing were possible as that only white people
settled in Australia, without any coloured admixture, all the Northern part
of it would in time have a population as brown as the Chinese.
If we consider the equity of the thing, the coloured man has as much
right to settle in the white man’s country as the white man has to settle
in lire coloured man’s country. Throughout Asia, Africa, America, and
Oceania there are at least 100 millions of whites settled in the coloured
men’s countries, and upon the simple law of reciprocity, 100 million
coloured men have an equal right to settle in the while men’s
countries. Contucius was asked to express a golden rule of conduct
in one word; he gave the word "Reciprocity”. The coloured Asiatic sage
concisely gave one of the best maxims ever uttered by man for the welfare
of mankind—there must be "reciprocity” everywhere in the world, between
man and man, and between nation and nation, or there will be no peace.
Australasia contains a seventeenth part of the land surface of the
globe, and only a four-hundredth part of its population, and therefore it
is vastly under-populated; and needful humanity, whether white or
coloured, under reasonable regulations, should be allowed to settleon it and
use it. Australasia, with water conservation, irrigation and scientific
jarming (for that is what it will come to), is capable of supporting at least
400 millions of people. Now, how long would it take, allowing the thing
were possible, to fully settle it with white inhabitants? In the last hundred


years we have increased 4 millions, and if we only go on at that rate it
will take tea thousand years to fully populate Australasia!
It may be argued that our population in the future will increase much
faster, and most likely it will; but even if we increase at the rate that
America has done, the settlement is far too slow to meet the requirements
cf suffering humanity. After deducting the negroes, mulattos, quadroons,,
octoroons, Indians, Chinese, and mixed coloured breeds of every kind and
degree, the increase of what may be termed the pure whites in the United
States cannot be more than 50 millions during the last hundred years; and
supposing we increased as fast as that, it would take 800 years to fully
populate Australasiawith whites. Weareproud of our progress ; but when
wecorae to reflect upon it, it is really (in comparison) remarkably slow, for
the coloured races to the north of us are increasing a very great deal faster,
and if we do not soon agree with them and invite them as friends,
they will overflow on to our Northern Territory as unpleasant strangers.
During the last fifty years, Victoria, with her fertile soil, splendid
climate, and rich gold attraction, has increased 1 million, and the whole
of Australasia about 3 millions; while the little island of Java, not so large
as Victoria, and only three days’ sail from our northern shore, has
increased 16 mil lions and is still increasing at the rate of 300,000 a year ;
and yet with our few hundred of climate enervated settlers up there, we hug
the idea of a white Northern Australia! The thing is utterly pvepostero-ns t
dni the sooner we realise this the better for us all ami all others concerned.
Japan again, one-twentieth the size of Australasia, has increased
faster than Java, and is still increasing at the rate of 1000 a day. India
again, about half the size of Australia, has increased more than 100 mil-
lions with in the lastsoyears. With respect to China Proper we
cannot speak so positively, as her census returns are somewhat unreliable;
but at all events she, too, is increasing much faster than we are, and
all this increaseof our coloured neighbours goes to lessen the possibility of a
“White Australia. ’’
Lna consideration of this subject, it will be necessary to enquire, what
are the proportions of white and coloured people in the world? I think
tbat three out of every four of the world’s inhabitants, must be called
coloured. The inhabitants of Africa, India, China, Hindo-China, Japan,
thelndian Archipelago, mostoftheotherislands of thesea.apartofSouthern
Europe, a part of North America, and nearly the whole of South
America—in fact nearly all the inhabitants of warm countries, are more or
less coloured; as a rule the hotter the country the darker the inhabitants.
I think that there is very little doubt but that three-fourths of the inhabitants
cf the world are at present more or less coloured. And here another diffi-
culty arises against the “White” man, namely, that the coloured races


are increasing faster than the white, which results principally from two
causes; firstly, that the warm countries will support a much greater
population than the cold countries, on account of their superior fruitfulness;
and secondly, that the inhabitants of warm climates, through living
principally upon vegetable diets, are healthier and increase faster than
the white races who largely live upon animal foods. It seems, therefore,
that in the future the world is destined to have a vastly preponderating
majority of coloured inhabitants upon it; and if this happens (as I
•firmly believe it will), what then ? Shall we accidental pale-faces, in our pride,
prejudice and selfishness, kill all our equally accidental climate-coloured brethren?
,Must there be wars of extermination on account of the accidental colour of the skin ?
White Man, what is your answer ?
OUR FIRST GREAT COMMONWEALTH TROUBLE.
I shall now give a-concise description, and particulars of the character
.and power, of the nation whom the-Australians will probably have to fight
first, if they persist in their “colour” prohibition.
JAPAN.
Japan is a beautiful country in the North Pacific Ocean, east of
China. It is comparatively narrow, bm about 1500 miles in length, and is
composed of 4 large and about 5000 small islands. It is very mountainous
and subject to frequent earthquakes, is intersected by innumerable bays
and inlets, has an inland sea, narrow, but 240 miles long, which is dotted
over with about 3000 islands and islets. The nature of this sea is such
that it has been described as “an elongated Sydney harbour.” The area of
the country is 148,000 square miles, and it contains a population of 45
millions. The capital of the country, Tokyo, (thelargest city in Asia),
has a population of about 1,500,000, and Osaka 825,000. There are 72 other
cities containingfrom 20,000 to 325,000 each, about 1000 smaller towns, and
53,000 villages.
It is not necessary for the present purpose to give the history of Japan,
further than to state that it had an ancient and peculiar civilization and
government of its own, and held no intercourse or commerce with other
nations except the Chinese, and in one small guarded settlement with the
Dutch, until 1853, when the United States Government sent out a naval
force, under Commodore Perry, to demand of the Japanese Government
that they should throw open their country to trade and residence. The
Japanese authorities demurred and threw obstacles in the way; but the
American commander persisted that he could not take a denial, and the
Japanese, making a virtue of necessity, at length agreed to the demand,
and signed a treaty. But they also began to see their weakness as a fighting.


a growing and a manufacturing nation, and soon decided to copy ail that
they considered good in the laws, customs, tactics, arts, sciences, manu-
factures, and general policies of the Western nations; and the result has
been that never in the world’s history has there been such a sadden and
effective transformation in a nation as in this Europeanization of
Japan.
Hear what a “ coloured” man, a Japanese, says of his country in 1891: “In 185 S Japan*
was an obscure country, almost unknown to the rest of the world, and her government
a (now obsolete) feudal system. The foot of man or horse supplied the place of mail-
train. telegraph, and telephone ; the back of beast or the shoulder of man was her onh
ineans of land-transport; her people went about the streets armed with swords, and no-
s iga of Western civilization could be detected in her social or political life
Thirty-two years have passed away, and in the interval our
country has seen a great and Ljlonous revolution, followed by a period of social and
national progress which is unprecedented in the annals of the world.”
Daigoro Goh in the “Nineteenth Century," February, 1891.
THE JAPANESE CHARACTER.
The Japanese have a varied complexion, ranging from a light olive to a*
deep copper-colour, the result of their various climates from north to south.
They are small, thick-set, muscular men, possessed of great strength of
body and powers of endurance. They are very cleanly in their persons,
polite, cheerful, good-tempered, Idnd to animals, frugal, industrious*
ingenious, and very apt at imitating anything they take a fancy to.
The Japanese women are small, good-tempered, industrious, affectionate,*
and fascinating. Mr. Warland terms them “little bundles of love."
Japanese children are happy, affectionate, and particularly respectful
and obedient to their parents, (a good example for young Australia)..
Japan is sometimes called “ The Land of Happy Children.”
Taking men, women, and children together, probably, with all their
faults the world does not contain a more respectable and lovable people
than the Japanese.
DRESS.
With respect to clothes, the peculiar national dress is still generally
worn, but a great many have adopted the European dress, especially all
kinds of officials.
SPORT.
The great national sport of Japan is wrestling, but street juggling and
kite-dying are also favourite sports, and the base-ball game, introduced
from America, is becoming exceedingly popular.
EDUCATION.
Education is compulsory in Japan. There are about 30,000 schools,
xoo.ooo schoolmasters, and 4,000,000 pupils attending school. Every
child is taught to write with both hands. More people read in Japan,.


in proportion, than in England : about 80 per cent, of the boys
and 40 per cent, of the girls attend school. An authority before me
says: “The Japanese resemble the Chinese in their love of learning.
With the Japanese learning seems like play.” There are also at least
3000 colleges and higher schools in Japan, and the Imperial University of
Tokyo is said to be the largest in the world.
The English language is making great progress and is also being taught
in the schools. Mr Thomas Finney writes: “The future of the Japs will be,
I should think, a most marvellous one. They have a country which is in every
way magnificent, and their putting on of the clothes of civilization shows
what the industrious little people are capable of. They are able to make
sacrifices which would check most western nations, and possess an
endurance that must be seen to be understood. The tendency of the
new education is also, as far as I could learn, on most advanced lines, and
the whole aim of the Government is to erect a me.del State up there in
that remote corner of the Pacific. English is being taught everywhere.
English is thelanguage of commerce and of the Government offices. The Americans,
especially, have a big hold there already, and some even theorise about
bringing Japan into the American Union. Whether this is the Jap’s fate
or not, there can be no doubt that he is destined to attain the highest
civilization known, and that already he has won the right to he considered not
as Asiatic but as Western. His sympathies and proclivities are all with us."
Another writer savs: “It is even proposed to substitute English for
Japanese as the language of the country. It is not likely, however,
that a people with such a history will break with its past thus. But
English has been made obligatory in the common schools of the country. 1 '
There are a great many newspapers in Japan. An authority writing
about 1890, says; “ Twenty-five years ago Japan had no newspaper, now
it has over two thousand —more than we should find in Spain or Russia,
or in all the rest of Asia. These represent all varieties of interest—
Industrial, mechanical, medical, legal, educational, political, and Christian.
You may address any of the leading dailies in Tokyo in French, German
or English, and a translation of your letter will appear in the next issue ”
Books are increasing very fast, and many of them are in the English lan-
guage. There are, probably, at least .1000 bookshops in the country.
RELIGION.
The Japanese have three religions: firstly, Shintoism, the national religion,
which they hold was originated by Simmo, the founder of the Japanese
Monarchy, spiritual and secular, about Coo years, b.c., and from whom is
•descended the present Mikado, who is still the spiritual head of that
religion as well as the secular ruler; secondly, Buddhism; thirdly,
Confucianism. Some profess only one of these religions, some two of


them, and some all three, as they do not to any extent contradict, but rather
supplement each other ; just as Swedenborgianism is held by many Chris-
tians not to contradict, but to supplement and explain their other Church
doctrines. Shintoism has about 20,000 priests, and Buddhism about
70,000. There are also many Christian missions and converts distributed
all over japan; the Catholics, under the Archbishop of Tokyo, number
56.000; the Protestant Churches 44,000; and the Orthodox Russo-Greek
Church 26,000; or a total of 126,000. "In religious matters absolute-
freedom is allowed, subject to the preservation of peace and order." Of
late years great preference has been shown to the Christian religion as-
compared with the old persecuting times.
DRINKS.
The principal drink in Japan is tea, which is grown and drunk in large
quantities, in weak decoctions without sugar or milk; and one of the greatest
features of Japan is that tea-houses are met with everywhere. They
have also a weak spirituous drink called Sake; it is said that 150-
millions of gallons of it are made yearly from rice.
FOOD.
The Japanese are almost vegetarians and the principal food eaten is
rice, of which the averaga production is about 5,000,000 tons, valued
at £30,000,000. Her next vegetable product is sugar, and her total
agricultural produce for 1896 was valued at £70,000,000. They have-
very few sheep, cattle, or other live-stock, use no milk and very
little meat, but consume enormous quantities of fish, which are very
plentiful along their extended coast lines. It is said that they have 600,000
small junks used for fishing in their numerous waters. The cultivatable
area of Japan is not, at most, more than an eighth part of her surface
consequently her people have to strain every nerve at economical farming.
A writer speaking of this phase says:—"ln Japan, 2560 persons subsist
from each square mile of tilled land. A people existing in such circum-
stances must from necessity of preservation be provident, painstaking,,
hard-working, ingenious, and frugal. The Japs appear todeserve all these
adjectives. Agriculture with them is literally market-gardening, because
the soil is required to produce more than in any other place in the world. '
Such being the case, and increasing as they are, their superabundant
population must overflow into other lands, and one of those lands will
undoubtedly be Australia
FLOWER GARDENING.
The Japanese have an intense love of flowers, and nearly always have a.
flower-garden attached to their dwelling, however poor they may be.
It is a beautiful flowering country that they possess; in fact, Japan is called


“the land of flowers.” Wistarias, azalias, camellias, and other beautiful
flowers grow profusely everywhere. The chrysanthemum, a native of
the country, is the national flower and is used as the official crest of
Japan.
MANUFACTURES.
The manufactures of Japan are increasing rapidly and bid fair to largely
supplant the cheap productions of the Germans. Watches, clocks, boots,
hats, mats,matches, brush-ware, metal-ware, china-ware, glass-ware, wood-
ware, wicker-ware, etc., are being produced in enormous quantities and at
very low prices. It is true that many of these productions are imitations
of the goods and inventions of Europe and America, and this immediately
brings us to the charge that the Japanese, and Chinese, and other Asiatics,
are not inventors, but only imitators. As far as the Japanese are con-
cerned, it is true that they are apt at imitating, but they have also
invented and perfected productions of their own. There are their cotton
and silk goods, their bronzes, and screens, and fans, and vases, and inimitable
lacquer and Japanned ware, papier-mache goods, the present army rifle (the
Murata), and their jinrickshas; and their different Japanese patents show
that they have the inventive as well as the imitative faculty. But let us con-
sider this question of invention on its merits. No nation in the world invents
all the articles it makes. At least nine-tenths of the productions of
England, France, Germany, and the other European nations, were not
invented by themselves; they have been imitated from others in all parts
■of the world. It is astonishing what a vast amount of imitation there is
in the world. The great bulk of us follow our leaders year after year,
and generation after generation ; and, what a few inventions there were in
Europe for thousands of years down to a hundred years ago! There have been
more practical inventions and discoveries made within the last century than
were made in all the preceding centuries of man's existence upon earth.
This may seem a startling statement to many, but it is nevertheless true.
It is during the last hundred years or so that mankind has invented Sewing
machines —Reaping machines —Thrashing machines —Printing machines—
Linotypes —Lithographs—Process printing—Type-writers—Steel pens—
Shorthand —Photography —Phonographs Steam-engines—Railways—
Telegraphs—Telephones —Submarine cables —Bicycles —Cable-trams
Diving-dresses —Life-boats—Safety-lamps —Registers Hydraulic lifts—
Lucifer matches—Gas lighting—Gas engines—Gas stoves —Electric
lighting—Electric engines—Electric cars—Freezing engines—Meat-
freezing—Chloroform—X-Rays—lndia-rubber —Gun cotton—Dynamite—
Rifles Revolvers— Maxim guns —lronclads —Monitors —Torpedoes
International exhibitions —all these, and hundreds of other important
ahinas, and hundred of thousands of less important things, have been


inventedor practically adapted within the last century. There has, indeed,
been an awakening of Christendom during the last hundred years, just as
the Japanese are now having their awakening, and as China and India and, in
fact, all the remaining parts of the world will have their aivakening
shortly. Bnt in the back ages, before the awakening of Europe, the
European mind did not make all the inventions and discoveries ; the
mind of the coloured Asiatic made many of them. The despised
Chinaman discovered the mariner's compass, the art of paper-making,
the art of printing, the arts of making silk and porcelain, the
composition of gumpowder, and the use of tea —seven things which have
influenced the human race to an enormous extent. And the mind
©f the coloured Asiatics discovered and taught rules of conduct which
for ages have influenced, and still influence, the most important
actions of men’s lives Yes! Even we Europeans were once savages
and the coloured Asiatics taught us how to behave ourselves —they gave
us the most famous book in the world, the Bible —they gave
us our religion; in fact, not a single important religion existing in the
world at the present time was the product of the European mind; the
Asiatic mind produced them all, for every one of the founders of the ten
great religions of the world was an Asiatic and also a coloured man
Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, was an Indian; Vyasa and Menu,
the practical founders of Bindooism, were Indians; Nanuk, the founder of
Sikhism, was an Indian; Confucius, the founder of Confucianism, was a
Chinaman; Laou-tse, the founder of Taouism, was a Chinaman; Simmo.
the founder of Shintoism, was a Japanese; Zoroaster, the founder of
Parseeisnx, was a Persian ; Mahomet, the founder of Mahometanism, was
an Arabian ; Moses, the founder of Judaism, was a Syrian. These were
all Asiatics and coloured men, and as before mentioned, even Jesus, the
founder of the Religion of Christendom, the pre-eminent preacher of
“peace on earth and goodwill to men,” was an Asiatic, a Syrian, and a
coloured man; and Paul, who taught that all men on the face of the earth
arc of one blood, mis also an Asiatic, a Syrian, and a coloured man. Now, I
again ask, would these two sun-tanned Syrians, the founders of our Faith,
be voted 1 ‘alien” and not allowed to live amongst us “ White Peofle' ’ if they
came again ?
POSTAL.
Post-offices were established in Japan in 1871. and now they are over 3000
in number. j An authority says; “The post is extremely cheap in Japan,
§d. being charged for letters and for post-cards. In 1896-7 503 million
obj ects passed through the post-office, of which 263 million were post-cards,
122 million letters, and 87 million newspapers.” Another writer says: “in
Tokyo there areletter-boxes in almost every street, red mail-gigs hurrying


to the stations, and smart postmen in uniform delivering letters six or
seven times per day. The words ' post-office’, in English, may be seen in
many a village, and money orders and savings banks have been added.”
RAILWAYS.
The first railway in Japan was opened in 1872. Mr. J. Morris, in his
■Advance Japan,” states that in 189 S there were over 2000 miles of rail-
way open. Through the hilly and broken nature of the country it is very
difficult to build railways, and very costly. An authority before me says :
“ Great difficulty is met with in the making of railways there however,
one line of 205 miles in length involving the construction of 16 tunnels
16,000 feet long, and the bridging of 11 rivers, one of which latter has the
velocity of 27 feet per second ; and in another instance brick piers had to
be sunk to a depth of 80 feet. A range of mountains had to be crossed at
a height of 1,468 feet.” Another authority says: “The railways are well
managed and well ordered, and the trains are comfortable, clean, and
punctual.”
TELEGRAPHS.
There are about 10,000 miles of telegraphs in Japan, some single and some
duplicated. One writer says; “Till 1869 there was no telegraph; now,
its network of 15,000 miles of wire covers the country, and four cables
connect Japan with the rest of the world.” Captain Younghusband writes:
“ The postal and telegraph services,- are, I am informed, as good and
reliable as those of most European nations.”
TELEPHONES.
Lines of telephones are also opened in the principal cities. The author
of “The Awakening of the East” writes: “Telephones, telegraphs, electric
light, gas, petroleum lamps, etc., are as plentifully used in Tokyo as they
are in any English or American town.”
ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER.
The electric light and electricity as a motive power are largely used.
Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, writing in 1899, says :—-
■‘ On the 15th of January, at Kioto, I went over the great electric plant
worked by water-power, produced with a fall of 120 feet. This power
supplies Kioto with two-thirds of the electric light, works the electric
trams, the pumping for the water-works, and no less than sixty different
industries in or near the town. All the machinery, which is excellent, is
American. The entire plant cost £50,000. This sum was found by the
municipal council, who are solely responsible for the scheme and its
successful carrying out. This system of electric batteries is, I think, one
of the most remarkable examples of municipal progress, energy and
enterprise to be seen in Japan, or perhaps in any country.


“There is no country which I have visited where electricity, as a motive
power, has been taken ad vantage of to the same extent as in Japan, for the
furtherance and development of trade and commerce. Telephones and
telegraphs abound in every street in nearly every town throughout the
empire, and a very large and increasing number of manufactures are
worked by electric power. I made many enquiries as to the original
outlay and working expenses, comparing electricity with steam-power,
and. taking ail circumstances into consideration, the former is unquestion-
ably the cheaper."
HEALTH, MEDICAL, ETC.
The Japanese are a remarkably cleanly people in their towns, their
dwellings, and their persons. One writer says : —“The Japanese seem to
be further advanced in sanitation than the inhabitants ot the British
Islands. It appears that every town and village has an abundant water-
supply, and the sewage and refuse of every house are collected nightly, and
carefully used in agriculture, ” Another writes:—“The Japanese are far in
advance of us in matters of private cleanliness and sanitary arrangements.
In large towns there are streams of clear water running on each side of the
street. The streets in most towns are open, well paved, and well swept,
and the houses of all classes have their floors covered with neatly-worked
matting,’’
But bathing the person seems to be a perfect passion with them. One
writer says:—“lf 'cleanlinessisnext to godliness’, the Japanese ought to rank
very high in the moral scale, for there is no people so generally given to
bathing. The number of bath-houses in Tokyo is twelve hundred, and the
average daily attendance at each is seven hundred. ’* Another says:—“There
are public baths in every street, known by the black flag suspended over
the doorway.” Another says:—“A traveller in Japan writes that the
Japanese pay more attention to personal cleanliness than any other people
in the world. High and low bathe all over at least once a day, and
sometimes oftener.” One great fancy they have is to bathe frequently in
very hot water.
There are probably 1000 hospitals in Japan, and it is estimated that
there are 40,000 doctors, but they appear to act largely as philanthropists.
One writer says: —“When a Japanese calls in a physician, he does not
expect that he will be presented with a bill for medical services. In fact, no
such thing as a doctor’s bill is known in Japan, although nearly all the other
modern practices are in vogue there. The doctor never asks for his fee.
The strict honesty of the people makes this unnecessary. When he
is through with a patient, a present is made to him of whatever sum the
patient or his friends may deem to be just compensation. The doctor is sup-
posed to smile, takethefee, bow, and thank his patron." Another writes:—


•' The doctor never thinks of asking poor patients for a fee. A proverb
among the medical fraternity runs: ‘When the twin enemies, poverty
and disease, invade a home, he who takes ought from that home, even
though it be given to him, is a robber.’”
Vaccination is universally enforced by order of the government, under
stringent regulations, and during epidemics of small-pox local authorities
have power to order the vaccination of all the inhabitants of their districts.
It was a Japanese who discovered the microbe of the bubonic plague.
GOVERNMENT OF JAPAN.
Up to the year 1868 the supreme governing powers of Japan were a
spiritual emperor, called the Mikado, a temporal emperor, called the
Shogun, and a numerous body of feudal lords. When the Japanese
became imbued with the idea that the Western forms of Government
were superior to theirs, they determined to adopt them, and a revolution
took place in which the Shogun was deposed, and the Mikado, the
descendant of the ancient dynasty, became both spiritual and secular
Emperor. In 1871, the feudal system was abolished, and a diet, consisting
of two Houses of Parliament on the European model, was adopted.
The House of “ Peers ” or Nobles numbers about 300, and consists of
Princes, Marquises, Counts, Viscounts, and Barons. The House of
“Representatives” contains about 370 members, and is elected by ballot
on what may almost be termed “universal suffrage”. Each member of both
Houses receives (if he chooses) about a year and travelling expenses.
The Japanese study English Parliamentary procedure and follow it as
much as possible in their own parliament. A writer referring to this
says; “Mr. K. Kaneko, one of the most intelligent men turned out by
modern Japan, was sent over to Great Britain in order that the rules for
the regulation of the procedure in the Japanese Parliament might be drawn
up with the advantage of the ripest experience of the world. Mr. Kaneko
is a sharp-looking young fellow, and, but for his narrow eyes and olive skin,
might well pass for an English youth. He was educated at the American
University at Harvard, but is devoted to his native Japan, and hopes to
introduce great reforms there.”
LAW, POLICE, ETC.
A new set of laws, criminal and civil, for Japan, has been gradually adopted,
drawn up on theTinesof European codes and usages, especially upon those
of the “Code Napoleon,” and they are well administered. An authority,
referring to the perfectness bf Japanese administration, says; “So exact
is the control exercised by Japanese authorities over the whole of the
people, that every street has its magistrate, who is expected to settle
disputes, to know the most minute details of the private and public affairs
of every creature within his jurisdiction, as reported to him by spies, and


to keep an accurate record of births, marriages, and deaths. He is
responsible for the good conduct of the street generally, and is elected by
the popular voice of the inhabitants of the street; he is assisted in his
duties by small companies of the principal householders, who also patrol
at night. ”
Referring to the humaneness of its laws another authority says: “The
penal code of J apan is one of the most moderate in the world, and the
death sentence is only pissed in cases of crime against the Emperor.”
Referring to the police an authority says; “Surpassing both army and
navy in the calibre of its men was, and is, strange to say, the police force.
"When the feudal system fell in 1871-2, and the Samurai were disbanded,
many cf them became police officers. There must be 20,000 members of
tire force, mostly of superior build, educated and patriotic, and trusted by
the people,”
ARMY OF JAPAN.
According to the present law, all male Japanese subjects from the age
cf 37 to 4.0, are liable to military service, and it is stated that the number
of persons liable to be called out under the conscription, amounts to about
S millions. According to the ‘ ‘Statesman’s Year-Book”, the active army in
1599 amounted to 1.57.000 and the reserves of all kinds make up its present
strength to 603,000 officers and men. All the fire-arms, ordnance, and
ammunition used in the Imperial army are manufactured at the arsenals
of Tokyo and Osaka. The rifle now used in the army is the latest form
of the Mumta repeating-rifle which was invented in Japan.
Captain Younghusband, in his “On Short Leave to Japan,” says: —
“It has been my privilege lately to study in some detail, and on the
spot, the armies of France, Germany, Italy, and Belgium, besides
those of Great Britain and India, and I will hasten to acknowledge that I
am more than astonished at the military efficiency of the Japanese army.
... I had the gratification of meeting troops who would do credit to any
army in Europe.'*
Speaking of the Japanese soldiers the “Pali Mall Gazette” says:—“The
J apanese soldiers need nothing to make them the equal of any army of the
West. They are faithful, brave, and confident, impressed with a fearless
courage which is almost fanaticism, of remarkable endurance, possessing
a capacity for organization, stability, and tenacity of purpose which has
prompted them to devote such time and thought to their requirements
that they have become, in a single step, as it were, the equal of any troops
which can be put against them for the purpose of comparison. They may
lack the numbers of Germany, the infinite expansion of Russia: but the
care with which they have perfected their strength created, out ol the
hereditary qualities of the nation, an army which cares nothing for
obstacles, which is patient, courageous, and self-reliant, and which needs


but the devotion of the men to the cause for which they are fighting to
render them victorious. Their leap from feudalism to modernity is
without parallel, and has been accomplished with such success that it is
inpossible not to welcome their appearance among the Powers, or to
ignore their forces among the armies of the world. The mechanical
precision of their march-past reveals the quickness and the ease with which
they have assimilated the teachings of their instructors. In review order
they have copied to some extent the goose-step of the Germans, removing
from it, however, something of its exaggeration, while differing so lar from
it that they make a brief pause upon the right foot, making the
distinctive step only with the left. Their appearance upon parade evoked
the keenest admiration, while there is no one who does not give credit to
their innate fighting qualities.”
The “Review of Reviews” says; —“Mr. Thomas F. Millard in ‘Scribner'
contributes from his personal observation ‘A Comparison of the Armies
in China.’ He* says the various military Powers engaged have watched
■each other even more closely than they watched the enemy. They have had
an unrivalled opportunity in the comparative study of armies. The writer
-awards the palm to the Japanese. hie says: ‘To the little brown soldiers
•of the Mikado such honours as this inglorious war has to bestow must,
■by common consent, fall. Unpleasantly surprising as it undoubtedly wall
be to western nations, there is no gainsaying this. The Japanese have, of
all the nationalities engaged in this business, shown to the best advantage/
But for Japan the Allies would not have good maps. They had continually
to apply to the Japanese for intelligence. The Japanese excelled in their
medical and ambulance department: but most of all in their transport
and commissariat service.”
NAVY OF JAPAN.
Japan has more than 50 war vessels, a dozen of them from 9000 to
15,000 tons burthen, and she is still constructing warlike vessels of all
descriptions. The navy is manned and officered entirely by Japanese, and
is more powerful than that of perhaps any of the European nations, except
those of England, France,and Russia. The author of “The Awakening of
the East” says: “The Japanese navy is equal to that of either Italy or
■Germany.” Japan is frequently and aptly called “the Britain of the
Far East’’; but not even Britain itself has nearly so extended a coast and so
many hardy sailors along and upon it. There are 2,500,000 fishermen
.alone, from which, in case of need, sailors could be drawn. The 5000
great and small islands must have an enormous coast-line. It is the most
mixed, land-and-water country in tue world. In 1898 the merchant navy
of Japan consisted of 1130 steamers of European type, 1914 sailing vessels
■of European type, and 19,097 native craft above 50 koku.


The following on the growing power, resources, and progress of Japan,,
is from Admiral Lord C. Heresford’s “Break-up of China,” and his Report
to the Associated Chambers of Commerce in 1899.
“On artiding at Nagasaki, January ir, 1899,1 visited the large mercantile-
docks and works of the Mitsu Bishi Company There are two-
yards a short distance apart, both under the direction of the same-
company. They employ 4000 men. I found on the stocks a steamer
building for the Japanese mercantile fleet—6,ooo tons, 430 feet long, and
45 feet beam, She had a double bottom right fore and aft, 11 water-
tight bulkheads, without doors, twin-screws to run 12 knots with 7,200 tons,
dead-weight. I vvasmnch struck by the safety and capabilites of this vessel.
She bad a sister ship already launched and carrying freight L
saw two good docks, one 520 feet long, and the other 360 feet long.
Ah the boilers and engines and ordinary shafting are made at the
works, but very heavy shafting comes from abroad. The shops
were in first-rate order, well found, well built and cared for. The
Japanese are making strenuous efforts to convey all their water-borne-
commerce in Japanese vessels. .... At Osaka I visited the Military
Arsenal, tt was principally employed making a new quick-firing gun—l 2
pounder, for horse and field artillery, Japanese patent. The principle was
certainly second to none. They were also making a magazine rifle, Japanese
patent , and quite perfect in design and construction.
“I arrived at Yokohama on the 24th of January, and was invited by
the Minister for Marine, Admiral Yamamoto, to visit the dockyard and
fleet at Yokoska. The Admiral placed H.I,M. cruiser Tahasago, built at
Edswick, at my disposal to take me from Yokohama to Y r okoska. I went
ail over the ship, engine-rooms, boiler-rooms, dec. She was in as good
condition as a man-of-war could be, and her ship’s company were smart,
well dressed and well disciplined. There is a large torpedo depot at this
place, where everything connected with torpedo warfare is kept under its
own administration for care and maintenance—boats, mines, cables,
batteries, torpedoes of all sorts, and all stores connected with torpedo
warfare belong to this depot. This is an infinitely preferable plan to the
British, where everything connected with torpedo warfare is only an
auxiliary of the great dockyards. I saw here three of the Chinese ships
captured by the Japanese in the late war, among them being the Chen
Turn. They were all being refitted for service in the fleet. I went all
over the naval barracks, which were in the same complete state of
efficiency that T found in ail the naval and military establishments in Japan.
"I also went over the Arsenal and made myself acquainted with the
pay, hours, and system of the establishment; there are 5000 men.
employed. No country turns out belter work.


“My visit to Japan impressed on me that the political, as well as the
•commercial, classes are determined to maintain an * Open Door’ in China,
in those places where they have at present large commercial interests.
The nation is arming slowly, but most effectively. There is a patriotism
.among all classes that is most discernible The population
■of Japan is increasing rapidly. Only one-twelfth of the whole Empire
•can be cultivated I have entered rather fully in this Report
into the question of the organization and efficiency of the naval and
military forces of Japan, because these forces will have to be reckoned with
when solving the problems connected with the future development of trade and
-commerce in the Far East."
I have sought in the foregoing remarks to give a concise and clear
■account of the Japanese, their astonishing progress and power, and the
great and immediate danger to our Commonwealth of Australia if ive are not
.careful with our prohibitive 41 colour legislation."
Japan having a population of 45 millions, in a territory half the size of
New South Wales, (and at most only one-eighth of that capable of cultiva-
tion), and increasing at the rate of 400,000 persons a year, that population
must overflow into other lands : she has already 25,000 of her people in the
■small Sandwich Islands, forming nearly a fourth of the population, and she
has shown emphatically, more than once, that she is prepared to defend
them, if necessary, by force, even against the United States.
The Jap is not now a stay-at-home man ; there is not a greater traveller
in the world than he is. We have a good number of them already in
Australasia, and more will come, especially into Northern Australia, which
is nearest to them and warm and fruitful; and if we attempt to shut them
■out by “colour legislation”, or check them with a prohibitive poll-tax, we
shall soon have war with Japan, and, if not at once in the long run she
would be almost certain to beat us.
We could not defend ourselves; 4 or 5 millions against 45 or 50 millions,
■and they proportionally as capable as we. Britain, even if she felt inclined
to fight for us on this question, (which I doubt}, could not spare the force
necessary, and then, perhaps, could not beatjapan. The position of Japan
is a very strong one. She has half-a-million brave soldiers in barracks,
reserves, etc.; a fine and increasing fleet, and good supplies of all kinds.
She could soon land 100,000 trained soldiers on our shores, if required,
•and what could we do against her? It is doubtful whether any Power in
the world, at such a distance as they must be from their bases, could
successfully invade Japan, and she at home amongst her rocks and her
five thousand islands. She has never yet been successfully invaded, and she


is now stronger than ever she was. Bat another danger may arise..
Supposing that some morning we wake np to find that Russia and Japam
have joined in alliance; perhaps with the friendship of France. Then,
*' Where are we?” This may not happen ; but it may, if we msult Japan;
and it is better not to risk these things if we can help it. The Japanese aie a
sensitive as well as a brave nation ; they are frequently called “the French
of the Far Fast” for their quick temper, and “the British of the Far East"
for their naval character and insular position.
With all reject, hut earnestly, 1 would warn my fellow Australians that it’
would be exceedingly dangerous to apply the proposed “ colour legislation’' to the
Japanese.
It has been suggested in the Federal Parliament that the speaking of
some European language should qualify a person to reside in Australasia,
and Mr. Eitaki, the Japanese Consul-General for Australia, in accordance-
with instructions from his Government, has suggested to the Premier of
the Commonwealth that they should allow a knowledge of the Japanese
language also to qualify, and so prevent what he terms “an altogether
unnecessary slight" to Japan. This might satisfy Japan, but it would
undoubtedly offend China, and our own fellow-subjects in our Indian
Empire.
JAVA.
I think that Japan is our first danger, if the proposed law against coloured
settlement is enforced against her citizens; but there are dangers from
other peoples looming ahead. First, there is Java as before mentioned, a
country much smaller than the State of Victoria, yet with a coloured
population of 26 mill ions which is sti il increasing at the rateof nearly r.ooo
a day. This conn try is only three days’ sail from our northern coast, and
will almost inevitably supply millions of coloured inhabitants for that
part of tropical Australia. There is no country in the world of equal
population to Java of which so little is known, or which is so little heard of
or spoken about; and yet it is sj close to us. Supposingin the near future
there is an avvakeni ng of Java, as Japan has awakened. Reader, just reflect!
If 2.0 mi iliens of souls should arouse themselves, being only 3 days’ sail from
us; and with the object-lesson of Japan before us this seems no-
unlikely thing to come about. The Dutch semi-serfdom cannot
last much longer in these progressive and self-assertive times. And,
like all the other races of the world, they can fight if induced to it.
They are a kindred race to the Achinese who have not been fully con-
quered by the Dutch after a century of trying, or the Philippines who give
the .Americans so much trouble in the Philippines.
CHINA.
A few days’ sail further north and we have another nation of 400 millions


of coloured people, the Chinese, as capable of fighting as any others
if they only awake and adopt similar methods to the Japanese. Fancy a.
homogeneous empire of 400 millions to our 4 millions! We should require-
to more seriously consider onr thoughtless and selfish “colour legislation"
then.
Many eminent military authorities believe that the Chinese, with their
dogged perseverance, powers of endurance, fearlessness of or indifference
to death, would make splendid soldiers; even their late enemies, the
Japanese, say so. Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, writing on the
subject in 1899, says; “While I was at Tokyo, fifty-seven Chinese recruits
arrived from China to be trained as non-commissioned officers. I asked'
the opinions of those officers tvho had been in command in China during the late
Chinn-Japanese war, as to the soldier-like qualities of the Chinese. Opinion was
unanimous ihat they would make splendid soldiers if properly trained, properly
treated , and properly led."
Of their great value as marines, the “Statesman’s Year-Book" for 1901
says; —“ The Chinese blue-jacket is as good as any in the world ; hence the val ne
to Japan of an alliance with China, allowing her to officer the Chinese-
navy.’’
“AWAKENING" REFORMERS IN CHINA.
Chang Chih-tung, the viceroy of Hupeh and Hunan, governing 55
millions of inhabitants, “ China's greatest viceroy", a very able and gnod
man, just alter the disastrous war with Japan wrote a book entitled
“ China’s only Hope," recommending China to follow in the footsteps of
Japan and adopt European methods, to save her from dismemberment,
and to strengthen and consolidate her nationality. The book was very
advanced and plain-spoken about the deplorable deficiencies of the 1
Chinese officials and modes of government. It was endorsed by the liberal-
minded Emperor in the following words :—“ We have carefully inspected the-
volume, and find that it embodies a fair and candid statement of facts. A
diligent perusal of its contents will broaden the mental scope and open up methods of
far-reaching usefulness. We hereby command that the forty volumes which have
been senl.be handed to the Grand Council of State, whiSi shall distribute a copy
each to the Viceroys, Governors, and Literary IL.vaminei s of China, in order that
they may be extensively published and widely circulated in the Provinces.
Respect this.’ 1
The translator affirms that a million copies of the reforming book were
distributed throughout the empire, were eagerly and enthusiastically read
by th • people, and largely influenced them in favour of reform. But China
is an immense, fossilized country, and its antiquated, bigoted, and corrupt
officialdom was not to be hastily reformed, without a struggle. A revolu-
tion took place. The Empress-Dowager headed th e " hyper-cautious, self--


■opinionated old ' gvomlmoihers' ” (as Chang Chih-tung calls the present
incapable advisers and managers); they deposed the liberal-minded young
Emperor and executed all they could catch of the leaders of the reform
movement, and /or a time delayed the inevitable progress of China. Among
the reforms which Chang Chih-tung recommends in his famous book,
are:—
That annually a number of young, intelligent Chinese should travel for
a year’s study in foreign lands and learn about their methods, etc.
That schools should be established everywhere throughout China to
give technical, as well as scholastic education, "to be largely founded on
translations from the commercial, political, and scientific works of the
"Western nations. 1 ’
That it is the duty of the people to read the newspapers,
•especially the foreign ones, and so become acquainted with what is going
on in the world at large ; and he says that “ In order to render China
powerful, and at the same time preserve our own institutions, it is
absolutely necessary that we should u'.ilise Western knowledge.”
That a large number of foreign officers should be engaged for the
inculcation of discipline and drib, and the formation of a?i enormous
territorial army.
That young Chinese should be first sent to Japan to learn all that the
Japanese have learnt of Western methods, "and if it were deemed
advisable, some students could afterwards be sent to Europe for a fuller
course,”
That the Buddhist and Taouist temples (which are little used) should be
turned into schools throughout China.
He would tolerate the Christian religion as the three religions of China,
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taouism, are now tolerated.
But lie is most emphatic on the great value of railways as a means of
preserving the independence of China as a nation. He writes:—
‘ 1 Is there an y one power that will open the door of learning [progress] for
the scholar, the farmer, the workman, the merchant, and the soldier? To
this question tve reply emphatically, ‘There is’, and it is the Railway.' The
potentialities of the scholar lie in extensive observation; of the farmer, in
finding a ready sale for farm products ; of the workman, in the increase of
machinery ; of the merchant, in cheap and rapid transit; and of the
soldier, in the quick despatch of the munitions of war Let us
build Railways and then the scholar can have easy communication with
dis tant friends, the fanner can utilize much that is now waste, the merchant
can readily meet the demand for supply, forwarding the heaviest material,
the workman will soon find machinery everywhere, the abundant pro-
ducts of the mines wid be beneficially distributed, and our China coast will


be securely protected and guarded by myriads of efficient troops. Then will
there be economy of time and money ; the officials cannot become idle nor
the people oppressed. The whistle of the train will wake the echoes and
dispel the doubts of the Conservatives. Rapid communications with
headquarters will be made and much labour and expense saved in
preparation for the reception of officials. The whole country r ill become really
ours, and China will he one great, united family, with no fear of famine o\
way Every country considers Railways most urgently
important. They have been introduced all over the globe, and even now
are daily spreading. They interlace the earth like spider-webs stretching
over the land for millions of miles. If China does not introduce them we-
shall remain isolated from the rest of the world. While others are
travelling with facility to the sea-coast, we shall be sitting, bound and
paralyzed, in the house! How can the people of our Flowery Inner Land
progress, or even exist, without Railways P l '
There is no uncertain sound about the utterances and advice of Chang
Chih-tung, and he is a power in the land and seems destined to use his
power to reform his country into safety. The Emperor and a large body
of reformers spread throughout China are with him; and China, in my
opinion, after some obstruction from the old school, is certain to he-
re formed and become strong, and then, what a wonderful nation it will be!—
a compact, homogeneous nation of 400 millions, one quarter of the human race,
under one Government, with a population of 70 million males between the
ages of 17 and 40, and capable of raising an army of 40 millions of able-
bodied soldiers for defence or offence. I believe this is almost certain to
come about, and then, what could our 4,5, or 6 millions of “White
Australians”, men, women., and children, do against such a nation as that?
No country in the world could conquer her, and even Russia may be
compelled to give back the provinces she has taken from her in her mis-
governed, undisciplined helplessness.
INDIA.
A few days’ sail to the north-west of Australia we have the other great
and compact body of coloured people, the Hindoos, numbering
300 millions. These 300 millions are composed of “an immense variety of
people professing different religions, speaking different languages, owning
different customs, boasting different ancestry,’’ and, it may be added,
of all shades of colour, from almost white to the deepest black. Under
English direction these 300 millions are becoming an homogeneous and a
mighty nation; and under English direction and example, they to j are awaken-
ing. Lord Hipon, alate Governor-General of India, writing on this subject,
says: "India, such as our universities, and colleges, and railways, and teTgiaphs,
and general codes, and cur universal language have made it, is instinct with r.:w life


■mdiremdow with nuv ideas" Twenty millions of this mighty nation to
be, onr own fellow-subjects, now write and speak English—it is taught in
tier schools and is destined ere long to supersede the twenty-odd distinct
languages and all the innumerable dialects now spoken there.
'Whether India remains allied to the British Empire or not, (as in
the interest of humanity it is to be hoped she may), millions of her own
people, for want of room in their own land, will come and settle in Aus-
tralia, and in the near future we shall not be able to prevent them.
300 millions of people means 50 millions of males between the ages of 17
and 40, from which 30 millions of fighting men could be drawn and
disciplined for war if they chose; and what could “White Australia, ’’
with form, five, or six mil lions, do against them if they choose to speak and
act? ‘'But," a.n Australian may say in his pride of youth and colour, “one of
us is equal to ten of the Hindoos!” But the Hindoos can fight like other
men when they are disciplined, and they have fought for us many a time.
The English conquest of India has been a great blessing to the people of
India, as a whole, and peace and progress reign now where there was
constant war before between the various races and factions. But
the few thousand English troops could not have conquered India
without the help of some of the Hindoos themselves, and they could
not now hold India for a single day if the whole of the
Hindoos, even in their present state of discipline, were to unite against them.
And I must remark in passing that it is certainly ingratitude for the white
man, after the coloured man has taken his life in his hand and helped to
fight his battles for him, to turn round and sneeringly call him “ a nigger,"
or “ an inferior coloured person.”
During the Commonwealth celebrations when the invited Indians were
in Melbourne, I heard one gentleman, speaking on the colour question, ask,
“ Can we shut out these coloured men with medals on their breasts, when
they have won them fighting our battles for us?” Certainly not : they
are as good as the average of mankind. 7he people ncvyivlure, white or
cdvnirX, that we do not /mow, cm as good as the people that toe do knoiv. We
have a prejudice against coloured people because we do not know
1 hem; but those who have travelled amongst them, and lived amongst
them without prejudice, know that they have qualities as good as
ours.
Dr. Holden, after travelling amongst and mixing with the Hindoos,
says: —“Von find nothing but friendliness and courtesy among the countless
millions of this land, from strangers, townsfolk, peasants, servants, men,
women, and children ; a thousand instances of simple virtues—of charity,
of domestic affection, of natural courtesy, of inherent modesty, of honest
• dignity, of devotion, of piety, of glad human life —do you encounter in


passing, as one encounters bright birds and fair flowers. I write warmly
on the subject because I feel it is due to this great nation to paint them as
they really are. It is not that lam ignorant of the crime, superstition,
and ignorance yet to be combated among the masses; but for every trait of
brutality, ingratitude, or folly which can be cited against the Indian
peoples, those who love and know them could relate many true and
striking proofs of their innate goodness.” Of the women of India, in
particular, he saysl wish that there was space to speak here of the
Indian wives and mothers, among whom are to be counted humble saints
and angels by the lakh--gentle, patient, laborious, faithful, pure, contented,
cheerful, and affectionate souls. Let ns hope that some day they will be
educated, but not overmuch, so as to know how to enjoy life more.”
Yes! and however strong our prejudices may be against our coloured
sisters of India, the Hindoo nurse-girl who grieves to death because the
child dies to which she had become intensely attached, is as sublime an
example of human love, as the world can show.
ENGLISH LANGUAGE BECOMING UNIVERSAL.
20 mill ions of the Hindoos already speak English and many millions
more are learning it, and it is probable that ere long their 300 millions
and their increase will speak it, and the whole of the future inhabitants of
Australia, come from where they may, should be required to learn it. We
have no right to exclude anyone because of their colour or religion ; but in
the interest of ourselves and themselves, we have a right to determine
that every citizen of Australia should speak the common language of the
land, just as we have a right, for the public good, to enforce a general
compulsory education. One of the greatest blessings to the world would
be Cl universal language so that every person could easily converse
with, and understand, every other person. The English language
is fast becoming that one. It is already preeminently the language
of literature and colonization, and as the language of commerce it
is being taught as a necessary part of education in the schools of Japan,
Siam, China, India, Russia Germany, and most other countries. It has
increased, during the last hundred years, faster than the French, German, ,
Italian, and Spanish languages all put together, and is now beating them
more than ever. Other nations, wtio very naturally cherish and feel
prejudiced towards their own language, will feel hurt, but the inevitable,
must come. For irresistible reasons, the English language must prevail—it
is the most comprehensive and powerful language on earth, and is contin-
ually getting stronger; it is a composite and progressive language, gradually
adopting the most beautiful and expressive words of all other languages,
and newly-coined words, to itself The latest American dictionary contains
300,000 words, —a far greater number than in any other language. All the
other principal languages are largely represented in it, the French, the ■


German, tie Italian, and the others. it is gradually becoming a iwmli
language instead cf a national one ; therefore, for the above reasons, for
our own and for the general good, let ns (ignoring colour and practising
a liberal h nvacuity) , strive to give all who settle on onr continent a good
education in onr glorious peace-inducing and coming-universal language.
Respecting the few thousand Kanakas or Polynesians in the sugar-
plantations of Queensland, undoubtedly there are evils existing in connec-
tion with them, bat surely these evils could be greatly modified or entirely
removed without exclusion. But the whole matter is very trivial
compared with themost important one of excluding all “ coloured" people.
For A ustrahisia, with only her d Millions of whites, to warn off all the teeming col-
oit ml people inexistence from a country l capable of supporting4oo million, in favour
of ir languishing white imm ignition from the other end of the earth, is not only a
deplorable political cnul economic mistake, but is an insult to, and a grievous wrong
tc three-fourths of mankind.
It may be said “ This is onr country and we can allow into it whom we
choose.” But has humanity no right, have the starving millions of India and
China no right, to overflow into this vast and practically unoccupied
continent ? I hold that they have; and by virtue of their necessities, a
greater ri glit than we have. "What gives people a right to a country?
14 Priority of occupation,” says one ; butif that is so we have no right at all
iu Australasia, in Africa, in India, in Canada, or in any of the colonies, for
they were all pre-occupied. Yes, and all by coloured people! *' But,” says
a.uother, 41 the natives of this country made no use of the soil; they only
hunted and fished.” Yes, and we do not use a hundreth. part of its soil,
except tor sheep and cattle runs, while millions of our crowded-out, starving
fellow-crcaiures might come and profitably till it.
Wo have a magnificent possession entrusted to us to administer. Let ns
be true to ihu: imsl; let it be our pride and glory to do our work without
prejudice, and wisely, so as to make it a blessing to all mankind; and if
some of onr brethren have been enervated by the torrid heats, coloured by
the sun’s ravs, or are uncultured for want of opportunity, let us more
highly favoured ones act fairly, and even charitably, towards them. It is
our duty, for unto whom much is given of them much will be required.
One word more about colour. Man is a bundle of prejudices; he is
prejudiced in favour of bis own clan, his own religion,his own colour, etc.,
etc., and bates all others. The prejudice against the skin-coloured is one of
the worst, for it is absolutely senseless; and one of the most glorious events
that have happened for a long time, is the fact that the new President of the
United States has had the humanity ami the courage to publicly invite a
-cultured negro to his table. Great honour to him ! Let us hope that this


distinguished example will be the beginning of fairer conduct towards-
poor, persecuted, coloured humanity.
As shown in the above diagram, the whole of Africa, called the “Darkest Con-
tinent." lies in the tropics or semi-tropics. In the centre, where it is the hottest place
on earth, the people are black In the extreme north and south of the continent, where
it is cooler, the people are brown, except in case of immigrants. Australia lies in the
tropics and semi-tropics, and, consequently, all her people must become more or less,
coloured Theicjore, a permanent White Australia is a physical impossibility.


AREA, POPULATION, and RACES of the . .
BRITISH EMPIRE.
The British Empire, including the British Isles,
the colonies, the other possessions and the pro-
tectorates in all parts of the world, contains nearly
a quarter of its land surface, and over 400 millions of
inhabitants, —just about one quarter of mankind.
At this moment it contains within its borders,
representatives more or less numerous of every
important race and people on earth —and of every
religion on earth; far more so than any other
confederation that ever existed ; and it is my
confirmed opinion that with 4 its comprehensive,
progressive, and fast-extending language, and
its free, humane, progressive, and cosmopolitan insti-
tutions, it is destined to form the chief nucleus of a
coining federated world. This vast and varied
Empire, or rather Confederation divided into
nationalities, stands approximately as shown in the
side column.
1 have not space or time, nor sufficient information
at hand or obtainable, to give the names and numbers
of all the various races of India and Africa under the
British Government, and therefore must give these
■ two large items “in globo.”
I have included Egypt and the Egyptian Soudan
with a population of about 24 millions, amongst the
British protectorates.
Some of my estimates may be under or over the
correct number, but I have tried to get them as near
as possible, and I believe that in most cases they are
approximately correct. Of course, in the case of the
United Kingdom, India, and most of the colonies and
other possessions, where censuses aie taken the matter
is easy,but in the case of most of the protectorates
there can be only somewhat rough approximations.
I have arranged the different nationalities of which
•the Empire is composed according to their num-
bers as the reader will see.
Asshown in the table the British Empire contains
. about 52 millions of what may be called white, and
370 millions of what may be called coloured people,
• or about seven coloured persons to one white.
Vastness of the Empire.
It is difficult for the mind to comprehend the vast-
-ness of the British Empire with all its colonies,
possessions.dependencies, and protectorates. It con-
tains 12 millions of square miles, has a population ten
times as large as the United Kingdom; it has 3 times
th' area of Europe, 4 times the area of Australasia,
and 100 times its population.—This vast and mighty
Empire of which we are a part, is 100 times the size of
the mother country, or 236 times the size of England,
368 times the size of Ireland, =O3 times the size of
Scotland, and 1629 the size of Wales.
The empire increases by births probably 6 mil-
Jions a year, or more than the population ol Scotland.
POPULATION.
East-Indiansof all races 294,000,000
Africans of all races 65,000,C00
English 31,000,000
Irish 7,800 OCO
Scotch 6,900,C00
Cingalese 2,400,000
French 2.000,000
East-Indians ostside India 1,950,000
Welsh 1,920,000
Negroes outside of Africa. .1,400,000
Chinese I 000,000
Malays 1,000,000
Germans 500,000
Papuans 450,000
Dutch 400,000
Dyaks, probably 300,000
Jews 230,000
Greeks 200,000
American Indians 200,000
Maltese 170,000
Australian Blacks, probably.. 150,000
Fijians 110,000
Persians, including Parsees..loo,ooo
Solomon Islanders 100,000
Polynesians, various, say ..100,000
Arabs outside of Africa 60,000
Italians 57,000
Maoris 43,000
Gilbert Islanders, etc 41,000
Turks 40,000
Scandinavians 30,000
Tongans 23,000
Russians 22,000
Spaniards 18,000
Poles 14,000
Austro-Hungarians 12,000
Swiss 10,000
Belgians 9,000
Japanese, probably 8,000
Portuguese 7,000
Miscellaneous Races un-
enumerated, probably.. 3,000,000
Grand Total ....422,754,000
(Revised estimate.)


OUR AUSTRALIAN COMMONWEALTH,
AND JAVA, OUR MARVELLOUS NEIGHBOUR.
On page 20 I made a few remarks about Java and its enormous coloured
population. It is astonishing how little we hear Java spoken of, a country
that must in the near future have more influence on the destiny of
Australia than any other, and a country that will of itself entirely prevent
ihe possibility of a White Australia. Java is a country about the sjzg ut
England and nearly as thickly populated. It contains a population of
about 28 millions in a country less than two-thirds the size of little
Victoria.
I shall first speak of the tremendous and portentous increase of it
population, so near to our shores. 100 years ago Java had a population of
about 4 millions; now it has a population of about 28 millions, making an
increase during the 100 years of 24 millions. We can better realize this
tremendous and startling fact by contrasting it with the increase of
population in Australia. Australia with all its cattle, and sheep, and gold
mines, and all other resources, has increased in population nearly 4
millions, while Java, only a sixtieth the size of Australia, has increased
24 millions, or six times as fast as the whole of all the Australian states
put together. Probably no race in history has increased so fast as the
Javanese. Of course we cannot rely too implicitly upon estimates of
population, especially those taken some time ago in countries like Java :
but the following are figures taken from various authorities, giving the
population at different periods and showing its gradual but rapid increase :
1780 . . . . 2,000,000
i8oo .. .. 3500,000
1815 .. .. 4,600,000
1826 .. .. 5,500,000
1850 .. .. 9,570,000
1865 .. .. 14,168,416
1870 .. .. 16,452,168
1880 .. .. 19,794,505
1888 .. .. 20,898,122
1890 .. .. 23,912,564
1898 .. .. 25,697,701
1903 .. .. 28,000,000
The population of this little island is greater than that of Australasia,
Kew Guinea, Borneo, Sumatra, the Philippines, the rest of the Indian
Archipelago, and the whole of the islands of Oceania, all put together; it
las increased on an average 240,000 a year, or 4.600 a week for the last
too years, and is increasing faster than that now
The bulk of the Javanese are simple peasants, being subject to a kind cf
benevolent serfdom under the Dutch, working hard but eating good,
healthy, vegetable food, and dwelling contentedly with their large families
in many thousands of villages distributed thrpughout the land.
RACE AND CHARACTER OF THE JAVANESE^
In race they are said to be a mixture of the Malay and the Tartar, and
there are about a third of a million of Chinese living with them, and, as usual.


intermarrying. Mons. Reclus says:—" The Javanese owe their origin to
the trituration of tribes that were brayed by war and amalgamated by
marriage into a Malay people.”
Sir Stamford Raffles says;—“Their colour is that of virgin gold. . . .
Their countenance is mild, placid, and thoughtful.”
Wallace, describing them, says : —“ They are of low size, averaging little
Over five feet, with yellowish complexion, straight black hair, round
(brachycephalic) head, somewhat almond-shaped eyes, small nose, high
cheek-bones, flat features, small hands and feet; in general so like the
east Asiatic Mongols that Chinese dressed as Balinese could scarcely be
distinguished from Malays, while many natives of Java might pass very
well for Chinese.”
Of their character, one writer says:—“ Originally, no doubt, these
people may have been as warlike and ferocious as some other Malays
but, at present, under the influence of peace, they are rather unwarlike,
and docile, industrious, and sober; and they rank among the most
truthful and straightforward of Asiatic people.” —lnhabitants of the World.
“ Major” Cummings, of the Salvation Army, who has been living amongst
them, in answer to a question told me that they are more moral than the
white Europeans in Java.
Bird's Geography refers to them as " the gentle and refined Javanese."
The whole world contains three coloured persons to one white, and the
whole British Empire contains about seven coloured persons to one white
one, while tropical Java contains about 500 coloured persons to every
white one. Reader, workout this Java-Northern Territory problem for
yourself, and see what is likely to happen up there in the near future.
Less than 40 years ago I wrote a book giving the populations of the
different countries of the world, and put Java down at 12 millions. Since
then, to my great astonishment, it has increased to 28 millions.
OUR NORTHERN TERRITORY.
The country called the "Northern Territory” is that portion of Northern
Australia which was annexed to the colony of South Australia in 1864
It contains an area of 523,000 square miles, or is more than
4 times the size of Great Britain and Ireland. In the 40 years
since it was annexed to South Australia, the population has increased to
1600 Europeans and about 3000 of other races, principally Chinese.
It is a fruitful country, and the Hon. J. L. Parsons, who was for 6 years
Government Resident, informs me that it will grow in abundance sugar
rice, or any tropical produce: and Dr. M. W. Holtze, the present Curator
of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens, and who was for 18 years Curator of the
Botanic Gardens at Port Darwin, informs me that it is capable of growing
all kinds of tropical produce in great abundance, and that he has grown


there, with great success, all the kinds of products which are now grown
so successfully in Java. So that we have in this Northern Territory,
belonging to our Commonwealth, a much larger Java, lying waste for want of
suitable inhabitants to utilize it. As we have seen, the increase of the
white population in this vast area has been only 1600 in 40 years; while
Java has increased during that time by more than 14 millions of coloured
people, and is now increasing at the rate of nearly 1000 a day. Certainly
Java is increasing in population every 2 days more than we have increased in our
Northern Territory (anarea 70 times its size), in 40years ; or, to put it in other
words, the population of Java has increased during the last 40 years 8,750
times as fast as that of our Northern Territory.
Inevitably that vast Javanese population, increasing as they are. will
overflow into tropical Australia, and the responsibility devolves on our
Australian voters to decide under what conditions that human overflow
shall come. Shall these industrious, gentle Javanese come gradually, as
invited immigrants, to form peacefully a part of our citizenship and Com-
monwealth ? or, shall they come, after their awakening to their strength a
little later, and settle without our leave as an invading force, as the
Saxons and the Danes did in England, and others have done elsewhere ? or,
will they come subject to and led by another European power ?
Now, although I, as a simple citizen, would allow any human being to
settle in Australia who chooses to come, yet I hold that fair and reason-
able regulations should be made and carried out to control such
immigration, I would exclude no man on account of his colour, or his
creed, or his race, but I would not do my own country the wrong of
inviting or allowing a lot of undesirables to come. In a previous edition
I wrote: —“ Respecting the restrictive immigration of aliens, America, a
few years ago, found that she was being made the dumping ground of the
paupers, the incapables, the ne’er-do-wells, the ignorant, the criminals, and
the general undesirables of Europe, her nearest neighbour, and she very
properly passed restrictive immigration laws lo check the evil and the
wrong; and our Commonwealth has the same right to pass similar laws to
prevent being flooded by similar undesirables from Asia, her nearest
neighbour; but she lias no right in a general way to prevent respectable
mankind from spreading over the earth in pursuit of necessary sus-
tenance,”
I would make it a condition that any respectable immigrants should
come, that they should come gradually in small numbers, that they should
learn the language of their adopted country as soon as possible, that their
children should receive the common education of the country, that they
should become in every respect genuine citizens of the country, and that
there should be no secret governments, or secret societies, among them
adverse to the public welfare. Subject to these conditions I would invite
the Javanese in, and any other respectable human beings who liked to
come.


A POSSIBLE PARTITION OF AUSTRALIA.
Sir Edmund Barton and the Rt. Hon. George Houston Reid, as the tvva
leaders of the Commonwealth, both argue strongly for a “ White Australia.’*
Sir Edmund Barton affirms the doctrine on every important occasion.,
and VI r. Reid went so far in a public speech, in Western Australia, as to.
say that he would rather see tropical Australia remain a desert, than to.
have it occupied by coloured people. But I hold that to selfishly and
forcibly keep people from a country who require it as a means of subsis-
tence, and, with malice aforethought, to deliberately allow it to remain a
desert, is a crime against humanity, whether coloured or otherwise. But
another question arises—ls it not presumptuous, insulting, wrong, and
foolish of ns :cw millions, in number not one fifth of the population of little.
Java, to warn oft all comers from this island-continent, containing 3 million,
square miles, 1 ,goo million acres,or one seventeenth of the entire globe?
A doctrine has been whispered abroad of late years, that effectual
occupation is necessary to retain permanent possession of territory. This,
doctrine has been discussed in Germany, and it is within the bounds o
possibility that Germany may conceive, or perhaps has conceived, the idea
of applying that principle in Oceania.
A short time ago a cablegram came to Australia, informing us that it had
been mooted in influential circles in Germany, that possibly Germany
might extend a protectrate over Java and the other Dutch colonies in the
Indian Archipelago, and, in case of war, make use of the Dutch fleet
and harbours. Of course it was only a suggestion, but suggestions are:
sometimes acted upon. It is well known that Germany, in her natural wish
lor expansion, desires Holland and her colonies, and either by conquest,
purchase, or federal arrangements, she may get them ; and thena little later
Germany may feel that as Australia is not making use of her tropical
regions, Java, with her increasing millions, has a natural human-
expediency right to overflow into and annex these unused territories only
a sail of four days off. It is said that Germany is increasing her navy
with feverish haste. She has annexed the Carolines, the Solomon and,
other islands, and a part of New Guinea. What more natural than that
she would like more ? and, in fact, she says so. Australians worry about
tire French in New Caledonia and the New Hebrides; but the Germans, in,
possession of Java and the rest of the Dutch colonies, with their 40.
millions of inhabitants to exploit and drill just at our back door would be-
a more serious matter for Australia. "With this outlook, it behoves the-
voters of the Commonwealth to fill up their own territory with good
settlers of any colour, and, in their own interest and in the interest of
genera] humanity, with care ini foresight to so manage matters that Java
and the rest of the beautiful Indian Archipelago fall into one great con-
federation of Oceania, instead of into the hands of a foreign power —it
may he Germany with Russia - the “King of Asia ” and '* Monarch of
the Pacific'' -at her back. Voters of Australia ! Think over tnese possi-
bilities, these probabilities !
Russia is making great eflorts with her trans-continental railway and.
her advanced ports in Manchuria, China, and Corea, and her increasing;
shipping to get full command, at least of the Northern Pacific.


A WHITE AUSTRALIA IMPOSSIBLE.
By E. W. Cole,
PART 1. 3D.
PRESS NOTICES.
11 Is a ‘ White Australia ’ possible 7 In a briskly written pamphlet—an
Instalment of a larger work, Mr. E. W. Cole, of the Book Arcade, Mel-
bourne, answers this question in the negative. . . . Mr. Cole has the
courage of an unpopular reading of probable events.*' Melbourne Argus.
" There is a man in Melbourne, named B. W. Cole, who has written a
pamphlet to prove that ‘ A White Australia is Impossible,' and he talks
a lot of sense." Stock and Station Journal,
“ 1 A White Australia Impossible, and for very Important Reasons
Undesirable,' in which is set forth in a very telling manner the reason
why this is so. . • To all interested in the question a perusal of the
pamphlet should prove a benefit.” Mount Benger Mail,
“ The whole question is argued from a logical, and somewhat original
standpoint, and principally with an eye to the future, when it would, ac-
cording to Mr. Cole, be better to have the Japanese, Javanese and
Chinese for triends than enemies." Bt._ A maud Times,
"It should certainly be pondered by our politicians, especially the
* Christian’ politicians." Harbinger of Light,
" The pamphlet is interesting reading, alike to those that support the
Christian doctrines previously set forth, and those who cry loudest for
a ‘ White Australia.’" Molong Express.
"We regret being unable to find room for further extracts from Mr.
Cole's pamphlet, which forcibly shows the utter ridiculousness of a
* White Australia' in the tropical parts thereof." Fitxroy Observer.
"In the present temper of King Demos this view of the easels not likely
to receive the attention it deserves. The logic of facts, however, will
plead powerfully in Us favor.” A ustra.'ian Mining Standard,
"At a time when it is the fashionable thing to swim easily with the tide,
and re-echo the popular cry for 'A White Australia,'it is at least refresh-
ing to find someone with the moral courage to disinterestedly raise a
protest from the other side. ... Mr. E. W. Cole (the writer of a booklet
entitled ‘A White Australia Impossible'), is an entirely free
agent whose views are not actuated or colored by any self-interest.
Consequently what he has to say on the question is worthy of respect
and consideration, no matter bow much it may clash with our own
cherished, pre conceived notions as to the national necessity for exclud-
ing alien races from the Australian Commonwealth. Mr. Cole is
apparently a Christian of the ancient school first ana an Australian
afterwards." Albury Daily News.


WHAT 25 OP OUR FEDERAL LEGISLATORS SAID ABOUT THE
ALIEN IMMIGRATION EDUCATIONAL TEST.
Oar legislators, to redeem their pledges to the electors in favour of a “White Aus-
tralia," and at the same time not to compromise the British Government with other
nations, had a very difficult duty to perform, so they passed a diplomatic Act. The
following are some of the expressions of opinion by the legislators during the
discussion:—
Mr. Sawers.— “A roundabout course. “Clumsy, fraudulent and absurd.”
Mr. Cruickshank.— ” I look on the educational test as a perfect farce.”
Mr. Manifold—“l have a horror of going round corners.”
Mr. Ronald—“ Why should we have this hypocrisy?” “This kind of cant.”
Mr. Thomson —The Bill is“only workable by a certain amount of evasion.”
Mr. Fowler—“ Hypocrisy”
Mr. Spence— “ Not straight-out.’ 1
Mr. H iggi ns— “ Here we are in open Parliament discussing how we can bamboozle.
Sen ator Wal ker —“A legal subterfuge to prevent any person of colour from entering
Australia."
Mr. O' Malley—“ Hypocritical diplomacy.
Senator Pulsford— “ In my judgment paragraph (a) in the clause is not an honest
one.”
Hon, A. McLean —“A side-wind.” “We are not saying all we mean in this Bill.”
Mr. G. B. Edwards — 41 A piece of deceitful legislation.” “So much of a subterfuge.'*
Senator Milien —“This thimble-rigging Hill.” “A subterfuge.”
Senator Clemons —“ It is entirely un-English.” “This sham educational test.”
Senator Stewart —“The miserable subterfuge of an educational test.”
Mr. B Pown-" This roundabout method of dealing with this matter.”
Senator Stanlforth Smith —“Will be a disgrace to our statute-book.”
Mr. Bruce Smith —“A pack of fiction from beginning to end.” “Hypocritical.”
Senator sir Josiah Symon-" A mere subterfuge and a cloak.” “ Euphemism."
Mr. Poynton—“The Bill is a delusion, and it is deception.” “A subterfuge.”
“Hypocrisy.” “ A miserable Bill carrying a lie on the face of it.” “ Dissembling our
real intentions.”
Sir Wm. McMillan — 41 An infernal-machine Bill.” “One of the most crooked
measures that it was ever attempted to place on the statute-book.” “An absolute fraud."
“An insult to the one country which we desire to uropitiate.”
Rt. Hon. G. H. Reid— 14 A depth of Australian duplicity—and diplomacy—which I
hope this Parliament wilt never descend to.” “This sham test." “ Indirect method * * fixed
up between Mr. Chamberlain and the Government ” “At the present moment we make
a very silly and undignified appearance before European nations.” “A legalized lie.’
“ We ought to blush for shame in this first Federal Parliament, when, instead of having
the courage to state our case and make our position clear, we legalize a He.”
Senator Charleston—“ The very fact that the Government has staled plainly that
their aim is to administer the Act in such a way that people shall be excluded on the colour
line and not upon the educational test, should prove that this is a piece of hypocrisy."
“ I condemn the Government most strongly for introducing such deceptive legislation.”
Senator Harney—“lt not only is silent as to the true ground of exclusion, but it
sets up a ground that is not genuine It is a most extraordinary thing to a-k any
Parliament to legislate by means of dissimulation and of false pretence. ... A piece of dif
or_aniscd dissimulation.” ‘Open, acknowledged, written, statutory deception ; that is
what we are asked to assent to in this Bill ” “Let us refuse to put it on the Statute-
book, where it would serve as an everlasting exposure of our dissimulation.” [lronical'y]
‘ What a noble and ingenious piece of legislation it is!” "A mere thin veneer, covering
an insult we have not the manliness to state.” “ 1 shall vote against the Bill as it stands
as Seeing fraudulent, delusive, and incomplete.” “Organised chicanery, fraud, and
deception.”


A White Australia Impossible.—Part 2.
The
Cause
of Colour in
Mankind.
BY E. W. COLE.
Ah! be kind—life hath no secret
For our happiness like this;
Kindly hearts are seldom sad ones,
Blessing ever bringeth bliss ;
Lend a helping hand to others,
Smile though all the world should
frown,
Man is man—we are all brothers,
Black or white or red or hr^wn.
Man is man through all gradations,
Little recks it where he stands,
How divided into nations,
Scattered over many lands ;
Man is man by form and feature,
Man by vice and virtue too,
Man in all one common nature
Speaks and binds us brothers true.
JOSEPH HOBBING.


The Pamphlet, “A White Australia Impossible/' in the
Federal Parliament.
In referring to this book in Parliament, Senator Harney said:—
“Before E conclude, let me make a couple of observations upon certain
arguments used in this pamphlet headed *A White Australia Impossible,’
and signed by Mr. E. W. Cole. One of the arguments he adduces is that
a white Australia is a physical impossibility. He bears out that argument
by printing a shaded globe. ****** His argument is that we never
can make a white Australia, because the rays of the sun, which in the past
have darkened the human race in diminishing degrees from the equator to
the poles, will continue to do likewise in the future; and that therefore
Australia, by reason of her geographical position, must, generation after
generation, be developing people of a duskier hue, and that it will be im-
possible for us to have even a continuous colour amongst our own people
on this continent. My answer to that very ingenious argument is this.
I do not deny the proposition, nor do 3 think it is necessary to do so; but
it is no argument against exclusion. It is a mereplay upon the expression,
' a white Australia'; because although we now object to the people who
have a certain colour, our objection is not to the colour itself, but to the
characteristics which accompany the colour. And though centuries of a
tropical sun may tan the features of our children, still if they emanate from
the same stock, it cannot alter the essentials of our race. What argument
is it, then, to speak of the change that the sun will make, and which we
cannot fully foresee in the dim and distant future? The fact that there
will be a deeper hue in the complexion of those persons who reside upon
this continent docs not matter, so long as we retain the habits, manners;
and traditions, and all those things which go to make and to endear us to
the British Empire.”— Hansard,
In following parts of this work I intend to answer the above remarks of
the Hon Senator, and show that white men do not, will not, and cannot
work in the fertile, low-lying tropics in any part of the world, and that
they will not, probably, work in the tropical part of Australia.
I also intend to discuss the following subjects:—
"The Blessing and the Curse of Factory Legislation.**
"The Value and Otherwise of Woman Suffrage.”
"The Possibility of Australia, by Scientific Culture, Water Con-
servation, and Irrigation being able to Support 400 Millions
of People.”
Etc., etc.
E.W.C.


Here and there exception has been taken to my representing Jesus,
in the first section of this book,as a coloured man Our egotistical pride
would make him a white man; but general legend and literature
represent him as of the same colour as all the Bible characters, namely
of a tan or brown, as all the Syrians are and must be in such a warm
climate, Adam (which signifies red earth), and Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and the twelve patriarchs; and Saul, and David, and Solomon, and
all the kings and judges ; and Moses, Samuel, Elijah, Elisha, Ezekiel,
Jeremiah, Isaiah, Nehemiah, Daniel, and all the prophets; and Sarah, Hagar,
Rebecca, Ruth, Esther, the woman of Samaria, Martha and Mary,
Mary the mother of Jesus, and the other women of the Bible—.all the
above, as well as Jesus and his Apostles, are generally represented in
pictures as of a tan or brown colour. Some Jews, many hundreds of years
ago, left Palestine and settled in Europe, and have become white ; some left
and settled in the tropics and have become black; but those who have
remained in Palestine are still tan or brown, like the other Syrians.
A Syrian
A Syrian Woman.
A White Australia Impossible.
PART 2.
CAUSE OF COLOUR IN
MANKIND.






JEWISH WOMEN OF PALESTINE.
From Photograph by BONFILS.
GREAT IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING THE
CAUSE OF SKIN-COLOUR IN MANKIND.
As this colour prejudice is so Intense, unfair, and cruel in its effects
against three-fourths of our fellow creatures, even to the withholding of
unalienable human rights, it is our duty to try and make clear to those
who have not thought on the question, what really is the cause of skin-
colour in human beings. Now, the evidence is overwhelming that it is solely
the influence of the sun which causes this colour Everywhere throughout
the world the black people inhabit the hot countries, the brown, olive, or red
people the warm countries, and the white people the cool countries; and
there is no exception to this, unless there has been comparatively late im


migration of a differently coloured people or peoples into those countries.
1 n a general way the colour of the human skin is everywhere dependent upon
the climate People in the south of France are darker than those in the
north of France; people in the south of Germany are darker than those in
the north of Germany; people in the south of Spain are darker than those
in the north of Spain ; people in the south of Italy are darker than those
in the north of Italy; people in the south of Russia are darker than those
in the north of Russia; and people in the south of Egypt, and Arabia, and
Persia, and India, and Burmab, and China, are everywhere darker than
those in the north of their respective countries. Climate everywhere
governs ; and, to generalize again, the people are always black in the hot
countries, brown in the warm countries, and white in the cool countries.
This innocent cause of colour is not known to the vast majority, hence the unfair and
deplorable prejudice of white people against coloured people. In trying to assist in
the removing of this unfortunate prejudice, I shall now give concisely a variety of
evidences showing clearly the cause of the dark colours in the human skin.
In all ages of the world observant men have noticed that the colour of
the human skin has been developed,‘governed, and modified by the sun.
This must be so, because the matter is so apparent. Give the latitude
where a people have dwelt for thousands of years, and the traveller or
ethnologist will tell you, in almost all cases, the colour of that people.
The ancient writers refer to the cause of colour being the sun. In the
Song of Solomon, the Daughter of Pharaoh speaking says ‘Tam black but
comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. Look not upon me (or 'depreciate
me not’) because I am black, because the sun hath looked upon
me.” Galen and Aristotle held that the sun blackened the skin.
Herodotus says that it is the sun that blackens the skin. The tragic
poet Theodectes, speaking of the Ethiopians or negroes, says: “By the near
approach of the sun-god in his course, they have their bodies covered with a dark,
sooty lustre, and their hair curled and crisped by his parching rays.”
M. De Pages, in his Travels round the "World, during the years 1767-1771,
speaking of his passage over the Great Desert, says: “The Arabs, who
frequent the middle of the desert, have their hair almost frizzled, fine, and
of the same nature as that of the negroes. . . . Daring the short period of my
passage, my own hair became more dry and delicate; and, receiving no
nourishment for want of perspiration, showed a tendency to assume the
same frizzled appearance* Might not the frizzled appearance, the entire
failure of moisture, and the excessive heat of the climate which occasioned
it, have been the chief cause of that frizzling? My blood was become
extremely dry, and my complexion differed but little from that of a Hindoo
or an Arab."


SUNLIGHT GOVERNS COLOUR EVERYWHERE.
It is a universal rule everywhere that black people living’ in a cool
country become lighter, while white people living in a hot country become
darker. “Chambers’s Information” says: “The negro and his descendants,
when ivcinsplumed to a cold climate, become paler." Negroes long resident
in the cooler States of North America, become lighter in colour than those
in the hotter South and the torrid West India Islands. The Australian
aboriginal has become lighter since he has arrived in the southern or cool
parts of Australia, while he remains black in the northern parts. The
Arabs are nearly white in Algiers, but in the hotter countries of Nubia
are very dark, and further up the Nile towards the equator are black.
The Zanzibar Arabs, living as they do nearly on the equator, are also
black.
Buffon in his ‘'Natural History,” says: “In further corroboration of
the influence of climate on the human complexion, we may remark, that
there is a colony of Jews who have been settled at Cochin on the Malabar
Coast from a very remote period, of which they have lost the memory.
Though originally from Palestine, and from their customs preserving
themselves unmixed, they are now become as black as the other
Malabarians, who are scarcely a shade lighter than the negroes of Guinea,
Benin, or Angola. At Ceylon, also, the Portuguese, who settled there
only a few centuries ago, are become blacker than the natives: and the
Portuguese, who settled near the Mandingoes, about three hundred years
since, differ so little from them as to be called negroes , which they resent
as a high indignity.”
Another writer says:—“ There is no fact better established in the physical
history of man than that colour depends primarily upon temperature. The
inhabitant of a northern clime is always white, of an extreme southern
clime always black. The varieties of colour exist between the two extremes
The Jews who are tawny in their own country, are white in Northern
Europe, with blue eyes and red beards; while in Borneo and Sumatra
they are almost black ”
Another writer says:— "The Jew is approximately white in the temperate
regions, brown in the semi-tropics, and black in the tropics. Sir Henry
Moncrieff speaking on this point says: ‘ The descendants of the very same
family , removed into different countries, not only change their family complexion
but art found to exhibit as many colours as there ire different regions which they
inhabit. The Jews afford the most signal and indisputable example
They are scattered over the face of the whole world, and are a distinct:
race from every people among whom they dwell. It is indisputably


certain, that the English Jew is white, the Portuguese is swarthy, the
American olive, the Arabian copper, the Abyssinian dark as the original
natives, and the African Jews, in general, black as the negroes.”’
A Jew of Morocco.
We read frequently that persons naturally swarthy tan more easily than
others. Through observation on the subject, I could pick out persons who
would tan or blacken readily in the tropics. Generally the dark races,
such as the Portuguese, southern Spaniards, and others of southern
Europe, tan more readily than those of more Northern parts Sir Richard
Phillips, in his “Million of Facts,’’ says; “Portuguese and Spaniards
living near the equator in several generations are almost as black as
negroes."
Another authority says: “The Spaniards who have, for any consider-
able length of time, inhabited America under the torrid zone, are now
scarcely to be distinguished from the native Indians; and. did they not
intermarry with Europeans, or if they led the same barbarous lives with
the Indians around them, as little protected as they from the burning sun, it is
more than probable, that, in much fetoer generations than any change hitherto
produced has required, they would become as dark us the darkest complexion
of the country.''
THE HOTTEST COUNTRY PRODUCES THE
BLACKEST MEN.
The hot, low lands of the tropics produce the blackest people. Orr,
in his “Circle of the Sciences,” says'. “As a rule, the lower the level
of a locality, the more alluvial its soil, and the moister the character of


Its heat, the blacker the complexion of the inhabitants.” And again: “The
Burmese grow darker as the valley of the Irrawady becomes broader and
flatter/'and,-we may add, hotter. The hottest, extensive, low-lying region
on the earth is on the west coast of Africa, and it has produced the negro,
or rather that torrid, horrid climate has modified man into the negro type.
"Chambers’s Information,” says: "The negroes occupy Western Africa
from the Senegal to the Gaboon, the Soudan in the centre, and the low
parts of the Upper Nile. The dusky or brown hue of the Arab and Aus-
tralian is more prevalent through Africa, as a whole, than the jet black oj
the negro, which seems nearly coincident with river valleys and deltas lying within
the tropics ”
Another authority says: “The blackest negroes in Africa are generally
to he found in the river valleys and deltas lying within the tropics
Milner, in his “Gallery of Nature,” says: "The weather is so hot in some
parts of the negro country, (for instance, on the banks of the Senegal), that
U causes spirits of wine to boil.” Another describes the country as being
so hot as to cause brandy to boil. Now, brandy boils at 173 degrees
Fahrenheit. I have shown elsewhere that the average life of the white
man in that country is only two years, and that no white children can
live there. Now, my theory of the origin of the negro is that some
portion of mankind, wherever they came from, got into this region, and
that the torrid climate has, in the course of ages, transformed them into
what we now find them, with a jet black skin, thick skull, thick lips, and
curly hair. Surely the heat which makes brandy boil is enough to turn the
skin of any man black, and frizzle his hair! As we have seen, the tragic
poet Theodectes, speaking of the negroes, says, "By the near approach
of the sun-god, in his course, they have their bodies covered with a dark
sooty lustre, and their hair curled and crisped by his parching rays.” One
writer in answer to the question, "Why is a negro’s skull harder and
thickerthan a white man’s?” says, “Herodotus explained it by attributing it
to the early exposure of African children to the heat of the sun; and Pro-
fessor Virchow, after his trip up the Nile, sides with the Greek historian.*'
Climate has a powerful and mighty influence in the formation or modifi-
cation of all organic beings, vegetable and animal, including man. The
effect of climate on man, taken in connection with other influences, such
as locality, food, occupation, education, association, example, religion,
government, and other forces and environments, accounts for all the
variations which now exist amongst mankind, in colour and all other parts
of their entire character.
The following, in substance, was related to me some time ago by a
Hindoo gentleman. The Scotch captain of a ship lying in the Rangoon
River one day shouted out to a black man standing near, “Come and lend


a hand, Johnny, and help us get these things on board.” The answer
came, "Eh, mon, wha are ye callin’ Johnny? I’m just a Scot like yoursel'!”
In explanation it transpired that he had been living in that hot, low, damp
climate for 30 years, and had turned completely black through the force
of the sun’s rays.
All the travellers or residents in tropical Africa, or the "Dark
Continent ” as it is aptly called, turn brown or even black in a very short
time. The following are six well-known white travellers and residents in
Africa, who all turned very dark, or black, in a few years : Jephson, one
of Stanley’s officers when he went to relieve Emin Pasha, speaking of
Captain Casati, an Italian, who had been ten years in equatorial
Africa, says: “He was burnt almost black from exposure
to the sun.”
Portrait of the skin-blackened
Captain Casati.
Emin Pasha, the eminent German traveller,
governor, and scientist, as he appeared after
several years’ residence in tropical Africa.
Portrait of Cardinal Lavigerie, the
famous friend of the slave, after many
years in tropical Africa.
The intrepid Sir Henry M. Stanley
as he appeared, sun-tanned, after
travelling through and through tropi-
cal Africa.


Portrait of General Gordon, who
became coloured through spending
several years in the torrid Soudan.
Dr. Livingstone, the eminent mis-
sionary and traveller, whose skin
became very dark after living many
years in the tropical heats of Africa
King Edward’s brother-in-law, the present Duke of Argyll, writing in
the “North American Review” of the good Dr. Livingstone, the long-
sojourner in tropical Africa, incidentally refers to his sun-tanned skin in
the following passage :
“ Livingstone, to be sure, did little to encourage the idea of gold. The
only gold visible abont him was the gold of his character, and a remark-
able hat-band of the same colour he always persisted in wearing, whether
in Africa or in Europe. That gilded hat-band had probably much to do
with the conversion of the savage to Christianity, which was the purpose
for which Livingstone travelled, toiled, and died. He had probably found
it an open sesame to distinction in the minds of the natives. It was a
most awe-inspiring diadem; and if it avails on the captain’s head or the
merchantman’s deck, why should it not help discipline and enforce awe
on the children of Ham ? When there remained little to mark Livingstone
as an Englishman, when his skin was burned dark brown, and his speech had
become almost wholly Makololo, that golden hat-band remained to
distinguish him outwardly from all others.” Dr. Livingstone tanned
so dark with the African sun that the natives sometimes did not believe
that he was a white man until he showed them his white skin under his
clothes.
SUN-TANNING WITHIN OUR OWN EXPERIENCE.
Being much interested in this subject of mankind, and, through the
accident of my situation, coming in speaking contact with an immense
variety of people, I have observed the features of many thousands, and


have asked many hundreds what countrymen they were, and to what coun-
tries they have been. If they look very brown or dark, I generally ask,
“What warm country have you been into?” and the answer is generally,
“I have just come from the West,” or from the Transvaal, or from Queens-
land, etc. A gentleman spoke to me the other day, and I could not
conclude of what race he was. He was the colour of a Malay, but had
not the features. I asked, “ What countryman are you ?” He answered, “ I
was born of Irish parents in Sydney.” I said, “ You must have been into
a hot country.” He answered, “ Yes ! I have been 27 years in Northern
Queensland”: and it then transpired that he was the Rev. John Thompson,
who had been, for many years, a missionary amongst the kanakas. I
said, “You are very dark.” He replied, “Yes; and when I have worked for
any length of time with my arms exposed, they have turned quite black.”
Rev. John Thompson’s Portrait
from a Photograph.
A few days ago I met at table in South Australia, a gentleman who had
English features, but was exactly the colour of a Malay. I asked him,
" Have you been living in Northern Queensland ? ” He answered, “No, 1 *
and handed me his card.
<7. /. KIRKLAND ,
Proprietor 11 NJ. Times & Govt. Gazette," Port Darwin.
He affirmed in the most positive manner that it was impossible for white
men to do field-labour in the Northern Territory I was speaking to Dr,
Holtze, the present Curator of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens, and who
was for 18 years Curator of the Botanic Gardens and Tropical Farm at
Port Darwin, and he affirmed that white men cannot do field-work


in that country. I also saw the Honorable J. L. Parsons, who was foi
six: years Government Resident in the Northern Territory he also
affirmed that white men could not do field-work in the Territory. And
he also said to me, ’’Your White Australia Impossible, has opened the eyes
of some of our legislators, and one of the greatest points you make is, that
all the descendants of the white inhabitants who settle in the Northern
Territory, will in time become coloured by the tropical climate. Un-
doubtedly they will.” But not only does the climate of tropical
Queensland darken the skin of white people ; the climate of most other
parts of Australia does so, more or less.
I went to the Goulburn Valley a short time ago to observe the progress
of irrigation there, and saw the nephew of an old German friend on his
fruit farm. He was loading fruit for the market; his shirt sleeves were
tucked up, and his arms were tanned by the sun as dark as those of a
Malay, I said, “Pull your sleeve up a little higher,” He did so, and
showed the part of the skin covered by his clothes perfectly white, and
putting his fingers upon his sunburnt arm, he jokingly remarked, “ That
is my Australian part,” and then putting them upon his white skin, said,
41 That is my German part !”
Victorians who go to Queensland, or Western Australia, or South
Africa, and live in. the open air in either of those places for a time, always
become darker. Ewen the out-door workers at Sydney are darker than
the same class at Melbourne, through its being six or seven degrees hotter.
The carters, lortyraen, and hansom-cabmen in Sydney, are very reddish
or brown, according to their constitution, through being exposed to that
climate,
"Keep your face and arms out of the sun, or you will be covered with
freckles,” is the anxious mother’s frequent caution. Of course, freckles
are the rapid beginning of colourizatiou through being exposed to the sun.
“I took my children down to the sea-side for a month during the summer,
and the sun burnt them as brown as berries,” is the observation of many
thousands of mothers. We know that we always get sun-burnt if we go for
an outing or a pic-nic on a hot day. We know that if we expose our faces
and arms they get browner than the rest of our bodies, which is protected
from the sun by our clothes. Pull back your sleeve and you will find
that your arm, which is protected from the sun, is paler than your hands
which are exposed; strip back the sleeves of a thousand men who are
exposed out of doors and you will find everyone in this respect the same.
In England, France, Italy, South Africa, Australia, and even near the
Poles, **nd, in fact, in all countries, the people are several degrees darker at
the end of the bright, hot summer, than they are at the end of the dark, cold
winter, This evidence anyone in any country can observe for themselves


RICHARD ANDREWARTHA. ARTHUR MURPHY. WILLIAM GOODWIN.
Three Melbourne Youths, showing just what they would look like if they worked out in the
sun in Central or Northern parts of Australia, with their faces bare and their arms bare up to
just above the elbows, and then stripped to their waists; and if they went perfectly naked for
years, in the same hot climate, they would turn brown all over. And so would any other white
persons. Even in Melbourne and Sydney, at the baths, when out-door workers strip to bathe,
anyone can see that they have white bodies but brown faces and arms, caused through exposure
to the sun.


SHADED PERSONS ALWAYS LIGHTER.
Black children are very much the same colour as white ones when they
are horn, perhaps a little redder. Horne, in his “ Introduction to the Holy
Scriptures”, says; '‘Black is not the colour of the negro when first born. It
is a remarkable fact that the negro infant comes into the world white,
only with a yellowish tinge, and that it becomes progressively darker.’’
Children born of black parents in a cool country are lighter than the
parents. A black man from Mauritius informs me that half-bred
children born in a hot country are blacker than those born in a cool
country. All persons become pale-faced if they remain much indoors, or
in cellars, or in dimly-lighted factories, compared with those who go out
and work in the open, sun-lit fields and get browned; they seem in com-
plexion like another race. If a woman stays in a dark or darkened room
she becomes pale, and continues so, and then when she goes out into the
sunlight she becomes sun-burnt, brown, or freckled, One writer says:
“Shut up within the walls of their seraglios, and secluded from the sun,
the Asiatic and African women are frequently as white as the Europeans;
while, in England, exposure to the sun is well-known to produce a deeper
complexion, and artificial protection from its influence is adopted to
preserve fair and unfreckled skin.” Another says: “The dark-haired
women of Syria and Barbary are indeed frequently very white; but this
is owing to the careful avoidance of exposure to the effect of climate,
which Pritchard calls, a being 'bleached by artificial protection from light,
or (it least from the solar rays.' ” An objection is raised That the white men
in India do not always turn brown. My answer is, “because they seldom
or never go out during the blazing heat of the day; if they did they would
certainly turn brown.”
SHADED PARTS OF THE BODY.
Another evidence that the sun and its offspring light are the cause of
skin-colour is shown in different parts of the human body, as in the under
and shaded parts of animals. The shaded parts of coloured people are
always lightest; in the arm-pits, in the palms of the hands, between the
fingers, between the toes, under the soles of the feet, the blackest person
is always lighter—this any observers can see for themselves. A Melbourne
lady who reared a Queensland black boy, said to my wife, “The soles of
his feet ate as white as my hands”; and I have seen this feature myself
many times in coloured persons, and have never seen an exception. The
inside of a black man’s mouth, and, in fact, the inside of all parts of his
body, is the same colour as that of a white man, and the soles of his feet,
which are always shaded from the light, arealnavs white.


THE COLOUR PIGMENT.
A peculiar substance called “pigment” exists in the skin of every human
being, in all countries. Many scientific books describe this substance.
One writer says; “Colour resides in the lower or second layer of the
outer skin, in the shape of pigment granules, which are perfectly analogous
to the colouring matter of freckles, moles, claret-marks, etc.” Another
says; “A pigment under the epidermis makes the complexion. The
coloured person has a black pigment, the brunette a light brown pigment,
and the blonde a still lighter pigment. When there is no pigment in the
skin an aibino is the result, with pink eyes.’’ Another says: “The skin
varies much in colour and texture in different races, from the pale
reddish-brown of the ‘ white’ races, to the black tint peculiar to the negro.
The true skin is the same in all races.”
It appears that the presence of this pigment in smaller or larger quanti-
ties, is a feature of the skin of all human beings, and that external light
and heal are the principal agents which develop or bring it out. One of the
clearest, most concise, and most decisive statements which I have seen on
the subject is that of Dr. Warren, of America. He says :
“The depth of colour in the skin depends on the amount of a certain
colouring matter, called pigment, incorporated with the deeper and softer
portion of the scarf-skin. In the scarf-skin of the inhabitants of northern
latitudes there is but little of this pigment; in that of the dwellers in
Africa there is a great deal; among the inhabitants of Southern Europe
the quantity is intermediate between the two. The depth of colour in
the skin depends on the energy of its action In the tropics, where light
and heat are in excess, the skin is stimulated to great action, just as
vegetation is, and the colour is increased and intensified. This is
illustrated every year before our eyes. In summer, under the heat of
the sun and the flood of light, the pigment-forming power is increased,
and the fairest skin is browned; while the withdrawal of these forces
leaves the winter’s scarf without pigment, and blanched.”
VEGETABLE COLORING PIGMENT.
Nearly all plants have a colour-pigment near to their surfaces
corresponding ,to the colour-pigment of the human skin This
plant-pigment is called chlorophyll, and in the light develops a green
colour on the surface of plants, exactly as the human pigment develop,
the dark colours of the human skin. Writing of this plant-pigment, Sir
J. D, Hooker says: “The green colour which prevails amongst plants
depends on the presence of a peculiar matter (chlorophyll) within the
cells, especially those near the surface of the plant. This matter becomes


green only under the action of light, consequently plants grown in quite
dark places are never green, nor are those parts of them which are not
exposed to the light, except in very rare cases."
INFLUENCE OF HEAT AND LIGHT ON THE
COLOURS OF VEGETABLES.
In the same way as the under parts of almost all animals of the land,
reptiles of the swamps, fishes of the waters, and birds of the air, are lighter
than their upper parts, so the underneath, or shaded, sides of the leaves of
nearly ail trees are paler than the sides which face the sun and light.
The parts of nearly all plants covered by the ground are paler than those
parts which grow above the ground in the sun and light.
When potatoes grow in a dark cellar, their halms are bleached ; when
green celery is earthed-up it is protected from the sunlight and soon
bleaches ; when a green lettuce is tied up the heart soon bleaches through
being protected from the light. An authority to hand says: "Light is
essential to the creation of colour. In flowers, as everyone familiar with
the subject knows, the most gaudy blooms and the most brilliant foliage,
if kept in the dark or overshaded, will become pale and almost white."
Another notable feature is that almost all night-flowering plants have
snow-white blossoms. Cabbages and lettuces, and nine out of ten of
all the vegetables, fruits, plants, and trees of the earth, are lighter in their
inside, which is protected from the light, than on their outside which
is exposed to and coloured by the light; and their outsides are always paler
when they are in any way shaded from the sunlight. Watermelons, and
pumpkins, and cucumbers, are lighter on the side on which they lie than
on the upper side which the light and sun play on; and so it is right
through the vegetable kingdom. In ninety-nine times out of a hundred,
plants are green or dark on the parts exposed to the sun, and lighter os
the parts shaded from the sun.
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAT AND LIGHT ON THE
COLOUR OF ANIMALS.
Foxes and hares, and most other Arctic animals turn white during the
long sunless winters of Polar regions. All kinds of fish and reptiles that
swim in the water and crawl on the land, are darker on their back and lighter
under their belly. The great majority of birds are the same, and the vast
majority of four-legged animals are the same. One authority says: "The
larvae of many insects deposited in dark situations are white, and acquire
a brownish hue upon being confined under glasses that admit the influence
of the solar rays. Facts of this kind indicate the powerful operation of diverst


climates in the various colouring of the human skin, and are sufficient to show
that the different complexions of mankind are mere varieties, int.oduced and
rendered permanent by the continued action op local causes."
An authority before me says: “Both the plants and animals of hot
regions display the deepest colours with which we are acquainted, while
lighter shades are characteristic of those that are situated in cold coun-
tries. Within the tropics, the birds, beasts, ploiuevs, and even pishes have the
respective hues of their feathers, hairs, petals, and scales uniformly very deeply
tinctured; while, as we recede prom the equator, the colour op the animal races
progressively becomes of a lighter cast, till, approaching the poles, white is their
common livery
ANSWER TO SOME OBJECTIONS.
It is sometimes said that the solar heat and light cannot be the cause
of the dark colour m the human skin, because in some cases we find black
or dark people in temperate countries. The caffres of South Africa,
the Australian aborigines, the maoris of New Zealand, and the esquimaux
of the Polar Regions, are given as examples of coloured peoples being in
temperate or cold countries. In answer I would say, we have traditional
or historical evidence that the southern Australian aboriginal came from
the tropical north of Australia, that the caffre tribes of South Africa came
from the tropical interior of Africa, and that the maoris of New Zealand
■came from the tropical islands of the Pacific. With respect to the
esquimaux, firstly, they are acknowledged to be a branch of the North
American red Indians, but there is a misconception about them; many
hold that they are lighter when their faces are washed than they appear
to the stranger. The truth is that they exist upon fish, and fat, and oil,
and blubber, they dwell in small huts saturated with grease and smoke,
and they anoint their bodies with dirty oil. Soap is unknown to them,
and in consequence of the cold they never feel inclined to wash themselves
in water. Nansen, in his “ Farthest North,” tells us that he and his com-
panions went almost black with tenaciously-adhering filth in that horrid
wintry climate, and through staying for months in small snow huts
amongst blabber, and blood, and oil, and smoke, and dirt; and in one place
he describes himself and companions as " black with oil and soot.' ’ The dark
colour of the esquimaux, for the above reasons is very doubtful, and
certainly no reliable proof on the whole question.
There may be, here and there, a cause why a local race of people may be
lighter in complexion, while surrounded by darker races in the tropics; one
of these is that of the pigmies, or dwarfs, travelled amongst and described


by Stanley, He describes their colour as that of a common red-clay brick,
when half baked, and one man he describes as “coppery.’’ Now some may
say, “here is a contradiction of the assumption that all men should be black
under the lire in the centre of Africa”; but to me it appears that these
people cannot be black, living as they do in a dense forest where very
little sun-light can penetrate. In describing the extent and nature of
this vast forest, Stanley says: “ Imagine the whole of France and the
Iberian Peninsula closely packed with trees, varying from 20 to 180 feet
high, whose crowns of foliage interlace and prevent any view-of sky and
sun s '; and later on, after emerging from that dense forest, he says: “Three-
and-a-half hoars’march from the Ituri, we issued out of the forest, and
again the change fromperpetual twilight to brilliant sunlight and a blue sky,
was astonishing, and we all smiled to witness its effects on the nerves of
cm gentle friend and companion, the first son of Erin who had ever
viewed the grass-lands of these regions. This was the 289th day of Dr.
Parke's forest-life, and the effect of this sudden emergence out of Ike doleful
shades into this enlarged view from the green earth to the shining
and glowing concave of Heaven caused him t» quiver with delight.”
THE PEOPLE OF TROPICAL HIGHLANDS LIGHTER-
SKI NNED TH AISI THOSE OF THE LOWLANDS IN THE
SAME LATITUDE.
As I have shown in the foregoing pages, as an almost universal rule
the colour of a people is decided by the latitude of the country in which
they have long dwelt; but there is another considerable exception, namely,
that the people dwelling in the highlands of the tropics are always lighter
in complexion than those living in the lowlands of the same latitude; and
if heat is the cause of colour, this should be expected, as the highlands are
cooler than the lowlands. Lassa, the capital of Thibet, is in almost
exactly the same latitude as Cairo, the capital of Egypt, but it is much
cooler, and its inhabitants are much lighter than those of Cairo, because it
lies at an altitude of about 12,000 feet, while Cairo lies only a few feet
above the level of the sea.


Average elevation of Thibet,
15,000 ft. above the sea. Latitude 30.
Average elevation of Bhotan,
15,000 ft. above the sea. Latitude 28.
WOMAN OF BHOTAN..
A THIBETAN.
The above persons would both pass for Europeans.
Another instance of a light people living in the highlands, is that of the
Abyssinians: although their country is within to or 15 degrees of the equa-
tor, yet as it lies from 8,000 to 10,000 feet above the sea level, it is cooler,
and their complexions are lighter than those of all the races around them
that live on the lower lands. An authority to hand, says: “The
Abyssinians are much less dark than the negro races, for though their
geographical climate is the same, their physical climate is very different,
the high table-land of the country placing them in a lower temperature."
And this rule holds good everywhere in the tropics. Those who live on
the cool highlands are always lighter in complexion than those who live
in the hot lowlands.
The evidence that the colour of the human skin is not regulated by the
sun is very trivial and exceptional, while the evidence that it is regulated
by the sun is positively overwhelming. So generally does climate regulate
the colour that whenever we see a dark-skinned man in a cool country, we
may be pretty sure that he or his near forefathers came from a hot
country ; and whenever we see a light-skinned man in a hot country, we
may be pretty sure that he or his near forefathers came from a cool
country: and the same may be said of entire tribes or peoples.


THE PRETTIEST SKIN-COLOUR,
As natural egotism makes each people think that their race is the best,
Iheir country thebest, their religion the best, their language the best, etc.,
so each people thinks that their skin-colour is the best. The white man
-calls the Indian a “ red-skin.” savage, the Indian in his pride of colour,
half scornfully, half pityingly, calls the white man “the pale-face.”
The white man makes the devil black, while the black man makes
him white, and his own god black. The white man calls the Chinese the
“ yellow agony”, whilst the Chinamen call the white or pink men the “red
devils”. Like the fond mothers with their babies, as a rule each thinks
their own people, country, religion, language, and skin-colour the prettiest
and best. A few artistic white people in all ages have thought that of all
the colours of the human skin the bronze is the prettiest. One writer to
hand says; “ The deep bronze is more naturally agreeable to the human
eye than the fair skins of Europe, since we are not displeased with it even
in the first instance, while it is mil-known that to colowed people a fair
complexion gives the idea of ill-health, and oj that sort of deformity which,
in 9\cy eyes, belongs to an albino." Bat, to put aside all prejudices for
or against any particular skin-colour, and while different peoples may
differ about which is the prettiest and best, one thing is certain —namely,
that everywhere throughout the world, sunlight or its absence will go on
deciding the colour of every human being.
Little Dwarf Woman, Central Africa.
An Abyssinian


SIMON GABRIEL, THE BLACK MAN TURNED WHITE.
Coloured Man Photographed 1890.
The Same Man Photographed 1897.
I shall now relate one of the most extraordinary events in connection
with skin colour that ever occurred in this world, and which emphatically
shows that there is no real difference between the black man and the
white man, when the colour of the skin, and consequently the colour
prejudice, is removed.
The case is that of Mr. Gabriel, already known to a good number of the
public as that of “ the black man turned white M . I may state,.that although
many thousands have seen him at the Book Arcade, Melbourne, the case
is so extraordinary that comparatively few believe it, but I shall here
adduce such testimony from creditable witnesses as to convince the most
incredulous,
He was born in Mauritius, of coloured parents. At the age of about 34
he was engaged at the Adelaide Hospital, and known as the black cook,
and shortly afterwards gradually turned as white as any European. But
I will let him tell his own story, and then give the independent testimonies
as to the wonderful transformation from a black skin to a white one.
He says :
“I am one of a family of six boys and four girls, all of a dark chocolate
colour, and children of Tamil parents, who were natives of Goa, the
Portuguese settlement on the south-west coast of India. I was born at
Port Louis, the capital of Mauritius, in the year 1855.
"In 1886 I settled in South Australia, where I lived lor n years. In
1889 I was appointed as head-cook to the Adelaide Hospital, and held


positions as chefi a several of the leading hotels and clubs in that city,
until in rSpr I went to Mildura. Tlie first indication of a change in the
colour of my skin 7 came across in Adelaide in 1887, when a large white
spot, the size of a penny, appeared on my left temple. But five years
later the whole surface of my body commenced to change into various
colours—notin patches or spots, but the whole surface was graded from
ray original chocolate-colour to copper-colour, then to dirty-brass colour,
then a dry-lemon colour, then pale and white, then yellow like a China-
man. These changes continued for about three years and a-half, and I
was nicknamed ‘the yellow man,’ 'the white-washed man,’ ‘the magpie,
and other such names; besides, my wife was asked by those who knew ns
what she was doing to me, or what was I doing to myself. It was early
in 1894 that my skin achieved the hue which yon now see, and which is
the characteristic calmer of (hi ruces of Western Europe.”
In reply to an enquiry Mr. Gahriel states that he was married some
years ago to a young woman of German parentage, who was born at
Lyndock Valley, nearGawlor, South Australia. There are seven children
of the marriage—two boys and five girls—one of them having been born
when the father’s skin was still dark, another when it was changing colour,
and five since he has been a white man.
TESTIMONIES.
Front the Adelaide “Register,” November 19th.
A. Steakoe Occcere nce.— What may be termed an extraordinary
conversion has happened to a man who for many years has resided in this
colony, and who at the present time is unfortunately confined to his bed in
the Adelaide Hospital with rheumatism. He is a native of Mauritius,
horn of Goanese parents, and until four or five years ago he presented the
ordinary colour of the natives of Goa—a dependency of Portugal in India
—a dark chocolate. But a change to white skin began, at about the time
mentioned, on the left temple, and the gradual disappearance of his dark
colour was witnessed, and in its place a whiteness to be envied by many a
*’ white man ” has come, evidently to stay.
Office of the Minister of Education, Adelaide, June 26th, 1896.
I know Mr. Simon F. Gabriel well. The first time I met him he was a
man of dark cohur (about twenty-two years ago). I have seen him several
times since, during the stages of his metamorphosis.
[Sir] JOHN A. COCKBURN
[Non. —This was on board thes.s. “John Tennant,” of which Sir John
was surgeon and Mr. Gahriel second steward.]


The University, Adelaide, July 2nd, 1896.
An account of the wonderful metamorphosis from black to white, which
has taken place in the person of Mr. Simon Gabriel, will be published in
the transactions of the recent Intercolonial Medical Congress, held at
Dunedin in February of the present year. Seven years ago Mr. Gabriel
was a man of almost Ethiopian hue.
A. WATSON, M.D., F.R.C.S.,
Professor of Anatomy.
ANOTHER MEDICAL MAN SAYS I
I also saw this case when he was an inmate of the Adelaide Hospital,
S.A., and certify the correctness of the statements made with regard to
his change oj colour.
E. C. STIRLING, M.D., F.R.C.S.,
Lecturer on Physiology
Adelaide Hospital, July Ist, 1896.
Simon Gabriel was an in-patient of the Adelaide Hospital for four
months from September 24th, 1895 Several employed in the Hospital
recognized him as the same Simon Gabriel who was a black cook in
this Institution several years ago. With the exception of a few dark
patches, and these are rapidly fading, his skin is now quite white.
A. E. J. RUSSELL,
Medical Superintendent.
Adelaide Hospital, February sth, 1896.
I beg to certify that Simon Gabriel was employed in the Adelaide Hos-
pital daring 1889, and that he was very black-skinned. Since then he has
become quite white. —
H. D. HAGGARD,
Secretary.
Adelaide Hospital, February 4th, 1896.
I certify that the bearer, Mr. Simon Gabriel, who was a late cook in
this Institution a few years ago, was a coloured man. then being very black,
but since that time has undergone a remarkable change in the colour of
his skin, which is now white.—'
W. CHAS. MEDLYN,
Accountant, etc.
Adelaide Hospital, February sth, 1896.
I certify that the bearer, Mr. Simon Gabriel, who was a late cook in
this Institution a few years ago, was a coloured man, then being very dark,
but since that time has undergone a remarkable change in the colour of
his skin, whi«h is now white.-
JOHN WOOD,
Attendant Operating Theatre.


Adelaide Hospital, February sth, rBg6.
To Simon Gabriel, —
I hereby certify that when you were cook at the Adelaide Hospital your
skin was quite black: now, however, you are become quite white-skinned.
A. GLASTONBURY, Attendant Out-Patients,
Other residents of Adelaide testify to his transformation from black 10
white, among' whom are the following :
ST AN LEY DOBBS, R. and I. of S., Adelaide Hospital, Feb. 5 tit, 1896.
E. T. LEANE, Cambridge Terrace, Malvern, Adelaide, July 2nd, 1896.
\VM, COWARD. Adelaide, January 4th, 1897.
G, HITTMANN, Pulteney Street, Adelaide, January sth, 1897.
O. ELLLNGHAUSEN, Compositor, 74. North Terrace Adelaide,
February sth, 1896.
V. A. WORDIE, 5 Moonta Street, Adelaide, S.A., February 6th, 1896.
JOS, A. DUGGAN, Inspector and Collector, Corporation Offices,
Town Hall, Glenelg, S.A.. Jan. 4th, 1897.
As many people, with a natural incredulity, have doubted the story of
Mr, Gabriel (the black man turned white), I can certify that Adelaide
people are constantly interviewing him at the Book Arcade, who knew
him when a black man in Adelaide. His transformation in colour is
undoubtedly a fact, and I look upon his case as one more peculiar, but
splendid illustration of the Oneness of Man,
He is well-up in languages—French (from Mauritius), Tamil (from his
parents’ training), Hindoostanee (picked up in his travels), and English
(gleaned after 30 years’ contact with English-speaking peoples). Yet no
cue who has had a conversation with him now, in English, would suppose
that he was other than a pore-bred Englishman.
He has been with me about six years, and as an employee, he is above
the average in intelligence, carefulness, and industry, and so much is he
in appearance, language, and manner, like a white man, that I determined
to take a concensus of opinion as to what race he belonged to. In
a comparatively short time I requested 200 visitors to guessof what race he
was. The gentlemen asked came from a dozen different countries, namely,
"Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, West Australia,
Tasmania, New Zealand, England, Scotland, France, Germany, America,
India, etc., of these 65 guessed that he was an Englishman, 39 a German,
27 a Frenchman, 16 a Scotchman, 14 an Italian, 8 a Jew, 6 a Dutchman,
<j an Irishman, and 17 other nationalities were guessed; but none
guessed that he was a coloured man. This case demon-
strates that when the sun-caused colour is removed,
and the man is educated, the coloured man is not
generally distinguishable from the white man.


The following are the names, addresses, and guesses of the
200 gentlemen who responded to my invitation to judge or
guess to the best of their ability as to his nationality:
Mr. Gabriel was seen by four Frenchmen: one
took him to be a German, the second to be a
Russian, the third to be a Greek, and the
fourth to be a Spaniard.— E.W.C.
Algerian. —B. Cohen, Lit. Collins-st., Melb
American.— D. Meeaam, Dimboola.
American. —Albert Drew, Sandgate, Q’land
American. —c. W. Hartshorn, Elsternwick.
American. —H. Speight, Wingadee Station,
N.S.W.
Armenian.—A. J. Davis, Ormonde Vale,
Foster.
Australian.— J- M. English,Essendon.
Austrian. —The noted Louis de Rougemont,
Melbourne.
Belgian. —J. Henry, Westbourne Street,
Petersham, Sydney.
Britisher. —Henry Wilson, 121 Gore Street,
Fitzroy, Victoria.
Canadian.— F. J. Finn, Wahunyah.
Colonial. —A. C. Greenwood, Surrey Hills.
Dutchman.—vv. J. Irwin, Geelong.
Dutch. —R- Wadill, Post Office, Charters
Towers, Queensland.
Dutch. —Mr. I. G. Schnieder, Broadway
Street, Brisbane.
Englishman.— Mrs. L. E. Graham, Shep-
parton.
English man .—Rev. P, O'Dwyer, Brisbane.
Engl ishman-— Sergt. Gray, 3rd QTd-
Englishman.— W. P. Higgins, Brighton, Vic.
Engl ishman.— Jas. Tingey, Adelaide, S.A.
Englishman. —Geo. Steward, Under Sec-
retary for Tasmania.
Englishman. —Taliesin Morgan, Ballarat.
Englishman- —F. M. Paton, Welaregang,
Upper Murray, N.S.W.
Englishman- —I. Carson, Yannathan, Vic.
Engl Ishman .—Wm. Francisco, Wonwondab
East.
Englishman. —Mark. Tibblts, Kalgoorlie.
We have had the pleasure of interviewing Mr.
Gabriel, at Cole’s Book Arcade, Melbourne. He
asked the question te our opinion of his nation-
ality. Without exception the party took him to
be an Englishman- Without doubt an unique
case. —John R. Rodgers, Sydney.
Englishman— A. J. Dunstan, Cardigan St.,
arlton.
Englishman— A. Stepley, Pt. Pxrie, S.A.
Englishman —W. E. Smith, Nicholson St.,
Carlton.
Englishman.— E. S. Duckett, 14 Grant St.
North Fitzroy.
Englishman-— H. N. Wilkinson, Middle Pk.
Englishman-— A. W. Crichton, Auckland.
Englishman. —Guy W. Court, Adelaide.
Englishman-— Trooper H. Fitzgibbon,
Merino P. 0., Victoria.
Englishman.— N. Rogers, Horsham.
Englishman.—J. Street, Somerville Road,
Yarraville.
Englishman-— James Fulton, Brisbane St*,
Launceston, Tasmania.
Englishman. —Mrs. M- J. Clarke, Adelaide.
Englishman.—J. Edwards, Forbes, N.S.W.
English man . —Sir Matthew Harris, Sydney.
Englishman. —Arthur Porrae, Kalgoorlie.
Englishman. —Rev. W. O’Brien, Sydney.
Englishman.— Sergt. J. E. Cope, 3rd Q.M.L,
Charters Towers.
Englishman. —M. B. Ferguson, Music Pub-
lisher, 54 Queen Street, Glasgow.
Englishman Brim all, Perth, W.A,
Englishman.— J. Thompson, Sunbury.
Englishman. —Major Reay, Melb. Herald.
Englishman.— L. Stevens, Spring Hill.
Kyneton.
Englishman.— H. Hoystead, Wangaratta, V.
Englishman. —R. Simpson, Senr. Const., 39
Davis Street, North Carlton.
Englishman. —John Harcran, Burrereo P.O.
Englishman. — H. Burdelt, Prahran.
Englishman.— Rev. Dr. Kelly, St. Brigid’s,
Nicholson Street, North Fitzroy
Englishman. —W.W. Dopson, Brisbane, Q.
Englishman. —Joseph H. Grice, Wynnum.
Brisbane.
Englishman. —Geo. W. Bloomfield, Herbert
Street, Spring Hill, Brisbane, Queensland.
Englishman. — H. Palmer,Taringa, Brirb’ne.
From appearance and conversation, would take
him for an Englishman J. Jackson. Cumber-
land, England.
From Mr. Gabriel’s appearance and conversa-
tion I would certainly take him for an
Englishman— J- Wills, Hamilton.


I guessed Mr, Gabriel tobean Englishm an.
—Alexander R, Cant, Newcastle, N.s.W,
Engl ish.~Mr. Cooper, East Melbourne.
Engl ish. A, Barker, 3rd Q.M.L, BSquadron.
English. - Captain S. H. Stuart, of Phil-
Pa.
English T. Mac Bain, Point Lonsdale.
Engl ish.—VV. Soden, 3rdQ.VI.I-, A Squadron.
Engl ish.—Manißam H amildar, 4-th ICashmir
Elites.
Engl ish. —W. Witliell, Heyfield, N, Gippsl’d,
Half-bred English and Italian. —P. N.
Shaw, Tasmania.
Lancashire, England-—John Lavars,
Bal larat.
From London, —Wm. Foy.W.A,
London© r.— R. G. Parker, 2 Cameron St,, Bk.
Londoner. —S. E. Saunders. | “Ormuz ’
London©r.— A.Hording. | Passengers.
London© r.—J. A. Ogle, George St., Sydney.
Middles©*, England. —T. H. Lavars,
Ballarat.
NorthE glishman. — T. Cormick, S.Yarra.
I iiaxe taken you to be a (North of England
Man.—Henry Spence, N.S.W.
Vorkshi reman or Irishman of English'
descent.—John Robertson, Moonee Ponds, Vic.
Vorkshi re mar , educated in London. —
Edgar J. Moore, Domain Street, South Yarra.
Frenchman, —R. W. Fisk. Neerira, Gippsl’d.
Frenchman. —J. Firth, Nicholson St.. B’k
Frenchman. —Vl. Jarick, Forbes, N.S.W.
Frenchman. —J. S. Charton, 360 Collins St.
Frenchman. —G. E. Caslette, Collins St.
Frenchman. —P. O’Toole, Merton Street,
Albert Park
Frenchman.—T. McGuitmess, Beechworth.
Frenchman. —H. J. Hero, Liverpool.
Frenchman. — T. Kennedy, Gippsland.
Frenchman. —W. H. Broomfield, Wyong,
N.S.W.
Frenchman. —W. Drew, Sandgate, Q’land.
Frenchman, —E. D, Campbell, Brunswick.
Fre nchm an. —David Brogdeu, Ballarat,Vic.
I take Mr, Gabriel to be a Frenchman. —
Jas. Weston, 1.0. F.
Frenchman, but by speech an Englishman.
—Geo.Lance, Art Gallery, Warrnambool,
Fre nchm an, —H. Northfeld, Horsham, Vic.
From appearance I would take y©ei for a
French man .—c. E. Hubbard, Liverpool, Eng.
1 should take Mr. Gabriel to be a French-
man.—J- J- Meagher, Sydney.
French, —H. Wadham, Adelaide, S.A.
French,—E, Ringasami, Snbadar, Q.M.O.
S.anciM,
Frenc h. —N. S. Isaacs,3rd Q.M.L, Brisbane*
French. —D. MacKcnzie, Mooroopna.
French. —L. S. Stuart, Coomera, Queensl’d.
French, —VI. O'Brien, K.M.R.
French. —John D, Russell, Longford, Tas.
Of French extraction. —W. A. Stace, Java.
French Canadian. —W. L. Lambe, Lakes
Creek, Queensland,
German. —William Thompson, Cressy,Tas.
German. —William Blake Dorman, Bundle
Street, Adelaide, S.A.
German. —J. D. Lee, P. 0., Melbourne.
German J. M. Young, Kalgoorlie, W.A.
German. —H. J. Wickes, Greymouth, N.Z.
German. —Thos. E, Ekberg, Ballarat.
German. —J. B. McAdam, Neerim.
German. —Snbadar Shiwa Modak, rst.
Bombay Grenadiers.
German extraction and brought up in Ire-
land. —Geo. Brennan, Rainford Street, Sydney.
German. —C. E. Lewis, East Melbourne.
German , —H. Taylor, Melbourne Herald,
German-— J. Wyatt, to Priory Avenue,
London, N.
German- —J. A. Webber, Sandgate, Brisbane.
German. —J. W. Hunt,J.P., Melbourne.
German. —Cyril H. Stubbs, Adelaide.
German. —F. Milsom, Launceston,Tasmania.
German. —W. Jenkins, B.S.A.P.
German. —R. Webster, Pakenbam, Gippsl’d.
German.—H. Alger, Blackburn.
German.— W. G. Pickford, Buangor.
German. —William Coombe, Moonta, S.A.
German. —S. Ricks, Mary St, Unley, S.A.
I took Mr. Gabriel to be a German. — Fred.
Mann, New Gisborne.
German. —H. Angwin, Spencer Street.
German. —A. Lennen, 22 Andrew St., N’cote,
German. —Fred. Brathwaite, Melbourne.
German.— Mrs. Hunt, Granville, N.S.W. ■
German. —G. Lawlor, n Dickens Street,
Moonee Ponds.
Germ an.— Wm. Thompson,Pitt St, Sydney.
German. — H. B. Evans. Maryborough, Vic.
1 guessed Mr. Gabriel to be a German. —
Arthur C. Zietsch.
German or An strl W. Lee,Victoria,
signed for three persons.
German- English.—Josed Booster, 33 Vio-
toria Street, Auckland, New Zealand.
North Germany. -Carl Pohlmann, Toy-
nesod, Queensland.
North German.— A. R. Fremiin, Marrick-
ville, N.S.W.
South German.— D. Wilkie, Melbourne.
Hollander. — W. Bowman, N.S.W. Mounted
Infantry, South Africa,


Hollander. —R. H. Hamilton, 58 Cowie St.,
South Melbourne.
Hollander. —w. A. McAdam, Toora.
Indian Born Gimdiepshing, Captain,
Pnnjaub 4th Kasinnir Rifles.
I rlsh. —E. McComb, “ Ormuz ” Passenger.
Irish. —J. Brown, Fremantle, VV.A.
Irishman. —J. R. McLanrin, Yarra Yarra,
Germanton, N.S.W.
Irishman.— B. J. Farrelly, 3rd Q.M.1.,
B Squadron,
I rishman. —J. F. Shuter, Drum wood, Jindera,
Albury, N.S.W.
Ireland.— Brennen, K.M.R.
Itali an . —William Robinson, Corryong.
Italian, —Michael Jackman, Horsham.
Italian —E. G. Carter, 3rd Q.M.1., Q'land.
Italian- —A. Denehcr, Malvern.
Italian. — R. Curtis, Gippsland.
Italian. —Mr. Mackey. Adelaide.
Italian.— L. A. Watchorn, Hobart.
Italian— o. E. Barrett, 27 Howe Crescent,
South Melbourne.
Italian- —H. Bjorksten, Narbethong P.O.
Italian. -A, S. Arnott, 69 Bourke Street.
Italian. —McKinnen, West Australia.
Italian Dr. John Buchanan, 337iirixton Rd.,
London, England.
Of Italian Descent— J. Marriner, Christ-
church, New Zealand. Late manager of the
Religious Tract Society Depot, London.
I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be an Italian or
Spaniard .—Cecil Le Bull, Newcastle, N.S.W.
Jew. —W. J ones, Ballarat.
Jew. —J. H. Davis, Cambria, Caulfield.
Jew. —John A. Findlay, Tasmania.
Mrs. E. J. Moore took you to be a Jew with
a colour of dark blood.—-28 Domain St., S. Yarra.
JeW.— J. T. Woods, Ballarat.
jQ Wi _Councillor T. J. Gardner, Mansfield.
Jewish Extraction. —Wm. T. Wiltshire,
Moonta Mines, South Australia.
Irish Jew. —James Freeman, Fmgal, Tas.
Norwegian H. C. Akerman, Sydney.
Octoroon.— G. H.Lee, 72Nicholson St., Fitz.
Polish. —Wm. John Matthews, Glenelg, S.A.'
Pole .—Wm. Kibble, 28 Park Road, St. Kilda.
Russian Pole.— -G. Morgan, Perth, W.A.
Portuguese Descent.— Mr Berry Cass,
Perth, W.A.
Portuguese.— A. E, Maddisou, Corryong.
Russian. —H. Vernon. Adelaide.
Russian. —A. Somerville, Adelaide.
Of R ussian Descent-— Mr. |ohn, Arundel
Street, Fremantle, W.A.
Scotchman. —Dr. J, V. Eccles, Collins St.
Scotchman.— Alex. Munro, N.S.W.
Scotchman. —W. Parry, Beaconstield, Tas.
Scotchman. —M. Wiseman, Auckland, N.Z,
Scotchman.— Mr. C. Troedel, Flinders lane.
Scotchman.— J. Sharpe, S.A.
Scotchman. —J. Belt, London,
Scotchman . —J. Goodrope, Kalgoorlie,W.A..
Scotchman- —W. Bauer, Forbes, N.S.W.
Scotchman. —J- E. Crun, Balmoral, Vic.
Scotchman.— Gerald Fitz Gerald, Muilagh,
Harrow.
I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be a Scotchman, a,
real Glasgow type. —Rev. J. P. Cardlan.
Scotch- —C. B. Williamson, 20 Brighton Rd-,.
St. Kilda.
Scotch. —E. Davis, Charters Towers, Q’land.
Scotch.—Mrs. E. Smuts, Cape Colony.
Scotch, —E. S. Joel, 346 Punt Rd., S. Yarra*
Slav, —Geo. McArthur, Maldon.
Spaniard.— Arthur Day, 10 Milner Street,
Islington, London, N.
Spaniard.— Win. G. Holden, Stanhope St,
Malvern.
Swede- —Rev. P. J. Flanagan, Maitl’d, N.S.W.
Swiss . —B. Lyons, manufacturer, Fitzroy.
Swiss. —Alex. Hunter, Adelaide,
Switzerland.— Albert Edward Harris,.
Mount Lystron Road, Charters Towers.
Tasmanian —Mr. J. B. Crathern, 123 Lang-
ridge Street, Abbotsford.
Welshman— Harry Thomas Stone, North’
Road, East Brighton.
Welshman—J- Kirkpatrick, Mornington.
At first'glance I also thought Mr. Gabriel was a
Welshman.—S. M. Davies, Precentor, Welsh
Church, Melbourne.
Welsh.— R. Thomas, Chines.
By first sight of Mr. Gabriel I took him to be
Welsh.-R. Rowlands, barque “Snowdon" ot
Liverpool.


Mr. Gabriel, his German Wife, and his four eldest Children.
(From a Photograph taken in 1897.)


CONCLUDING REMARKS.
A few months ago a Tamil, Mr. Shadrach James Peersahib, teacher of
the Aboriginal public school, Cummeragunja, in Riverina, near Echuca,
called at the Book Arcade and chanced to speak to Mr. Gabriel, when to
his intense surprise he learned that this white man was his black cousin. It
was such a meeting as has probably taken place but a very few times in
the long history of the human race. A chance meeting of dear friends
under such peculiar circumstances in a foreign land was uncommonly
surprising and affecting, and for a few moments the two men were over-
come with emotion, shook hands, but could not speak Being informed
of this shortly afterwards, and having known Mr. Shadrach James
Peersahib for some years, I wrote to him for corroboration, and received
the following reply;—
Cummeragunja Public School,
E. W. Cole, Esq.,
February 14th, 1898.
Dear Sir, —I have known Mr. Simon Gabriel for many
years. We are both of Indian parentage and natives of Mauritius.
Before coming out to the Colonies he and I were connected with the
Postal Department of Mauritius and occupied the same house for some
years, and Mr. Simon Gabriel was then a black man like me.
Yours truly,
THOMAS S. JAMES.
I must mention that Mr. Peersahib, instead of signing his full Indian
name, has adopted the name of “Thos. S. James” in his English home,
and also that in the following letter he addresses Mr. Gabriel as “brother, ’*
as well as “cousin,” in accordance with an Indian custom. Mr. Gabriel
incidentally showed me the letter, and I asked his and Mr. Peersahib’s
permission to publish it. My reason for doing so was to show it as a
testimony, and also as a simple, but telling, production of a black man’s
mind. The letter reads as follows:
Cummeragunja Public School,
21st January, 1898,
Dear Brother,
I was much pleased to get your letter to-day, and to find your dear
ones and yourself were all well. I intended writing earlier than this, acquainting you
with my safe arrival home and the surprises I gave all my folks here; but my time has
been fully taken up through the absence of my assistant, who has been appointed to
another school near Sydney.
I reached Echuca at 2 p.m. the next day after bidding you and the dear ones adieu.
My wife and family were at the railway station, and the moment the baby saw me in the
carriage she shouted out: “Oh, my papa! my papa!” and the next moment she was in my
arms with hers around my neck. We drove home immediately after making a few


purchases, and mcher* it about 7 p.m. After a wash and a hurried tea I gathered my
little flock around me, and having thanked the Lord for my safe return, I pulled out the
large envelope containing photos, of my dear ones in Melbourne, or rather at Brunswick
What a surprise! The topic till late at night was only Uncle Gabriel and his miraculous
transformation. The news of this event and the unmistakable proofs in my possession
spread like wildfire throughout the village, and in a few moments my house was filled
with men, women, and children, all desirous to get a glimpse at the photos., and to get an
explanation of it from my own lips. '‘Wonderful!” Marvellous! were the exclamations
that fell from many lips. With eyes riveted on me, with ears and mouth wide open, they
listened as I recounted our career in Mauritius, our long separation, and then our meeting
under such strange circumstances, but none the less happy.
My wife and children are immensely delighted. They had often heard of and from
Uncle Manuel, but to realize now they had Uncle Gabriel so near was a surprise indeed
It is so thoughtful of you to inquire after Miriam who was unwell. lam thankful to say
-she is now quite well. Both my wife and I are deeply thankful to you for your kind
invitation to Miriam and my wife. I would gladly take advantage of it, but for the fact
that Miriam assists me in the school, and I can ill spare her just now. I know well that
Miriam would be delighted to go and see her uncle, and aunt, and cousins: she would
prefer that to teaching here. As regards news from Mauritius, lam now sending to my
Uncle Manuel, and this gives me a splendid opportunity of giving them a,so a surprise,
as well as eliciting all you want concerning Brother Emil, etc.
Trusting you are all well, with Christian love to Mrs. Gabriel, Miss Bruggemann, and
yourself, and kisses for the children, in which my wife unites.—l remain,
Your faithful and affectionate cousin,
THOS. S. JAMES.
1 have long held that there is no real difference in the raises'of mankind
but what circumstances and environments have produced: that if all men
were fed and clothed alike, educated alike, and dealt with alike in every
respect, there would be very little difference between them mentally,
morally, and physically. That man is one is an eternal truth, and it
is nowhere better shown than by the products of the mind.
“ The mind’s the standard of the man” of all countries and colours, and
universal education will ere long demonstrate this through its literature.
The above letter was not written to order : it is an ordinary product of the
black man’s mind, and it is exactly like the products of a white man’s
mind. He is an educated Indian; but an educated Negro, or an educated
Chinaman, would write one just as sensible and as human.
I have letters in my possession from educated Chinese, and Hindoos,
and Negroes, representatives of the three great coloured races of mankind,
comprising more than half the population of the world. These letters,
promiscuously written, are in thoughts, in words, in inscription, just such as
would have been written by other educated persons, and no one can tel
by looking at them whether they were written by white or coloured
people, except by their foreign names.
I have had Chinese, Indians, and Negroes in my employment, born and
educated in English countries, and they are just as good mentally, morally,


and physically, as the average of mv employees, and I am sure this would
hold good with all mankind, if all had equal opportunities,
The case of this black man of the Hindoo race turned white, illustrates
the tact that, when the coloured pigment is removed from coloured persons
they look just like while ones, black men may not all turn white; but travel
and friendlv intercourse are gradually convincing multitudes that colour
makes no difference, and that humane, practical, sensible education is
making all men equal, and rypidly deni mst rating that all belong to the one
great family.
SIMON GABRIEL.
Photographed in 1890.
SAME MAN,
Photographed in 1897.


this precious fact for the cause of humanity remains —that his case
right through emphatically supports and corroborates another fact,
that there is absolutely no difference between the man with the white
skin and the man with the coloured skin ; and also that if this now white
man, possessing all the characteristics of white men in general —men-
tally, morally, socially, and physically —had not told us we should
never have known, from the keenest observation and examination, that
he had ever been a black man.
These two photographs were taken in March, 1903, for the purpose of
showing that Gabriel's original colour is gradually coming hack again.
If the reader will lake a microscope and look he will sec the colour
on the ear, some spots on the cheek, and one spot over the left breast.
He says that he would like to turn coloured again to be in sympathy
with his coloured relatives and friends, while he would like to remain
a white man to avoid the white people’s prejudice against colour. I
care not whether he remains white or becomes coloured again; but


HOBBY PUBLICATIONS.
It is intended to publish a series of papers entitled,
“Hobby Land," demonstrating the great blessing of hobbies
to the world, as shown in the lives of the most famous lovers
and helpers of mankind, in which will be given a short sketch
of the lives of the principal English-speaking persons, who,
by following their natural inclinations with zeal and delight,
or in other words, following their hobbies, have become
famous as:—
Astronomers
Architects
Actors
Antiquarians
Botanists
Biographers
Chemists
Divines
Doctors
Essayists
Engineers
Electricians
Emancipationists
Founders
Geologists
Historians
Inventors
Journalists
Lawyers
Linguists
Missionaries
Moral Philosophers
Musicians
Mathematicians
Metaphysicians
Millionaires
Novelists
Naturalists
Poets
Painters
Publishers
Princes
Presidents
Philanthropists
Soldiers
Sailors
Statesmen
Sculptors
Travellers.
In demonstrating the prevalence of the Poetical Hobby,
the lives, and examples of the work, of about 60 of the prin-
cipal poets will be given. Undoubtedly the greatest hobby
of civilized mankind is the Reading Hobby, and an essay on
that is nearly ready and will be published shortly.
One book is now ready, entitled the “ Happifymg Gardening
Hobby," containing 200 pieces and poems in praise of gar-
dening and flowers, most of them eloquently and forcibly
written by the good and great, including philosophers,
divines, princes, judges, statesmen, writers, scientists, philan-
thropists, and other eminent personages who have seen and
felt the great value of the gardening hobby to mankind,
physically, morally, and socially. It also contains other
matter, and about 70 pictures of beautiful cottage-gardens,
flowers, fruits, and vegetables, and vegetable and garden
curiosities. It is an interesting and instructive little book of
180 pages, price 1/6 Every lover of gardens will love this book
and should get it.


PUBLICATIONS
EDITED AND PARTLY WRITTEN
By E. W. Cole.
FUNNY PiCTL'RE Book. (The best child's book in the world).
Price r/6. 250,000 sold.
Pun Doctor. (The best fun book in the world). 2 series,
2/6 each. 100,000 sold.
Funniest Book But One. 6d. 80,000 sold.
Fun Doctress. Containing4oovery funny pictures,
1/6. 20,000 sold.
Thousandßest Poems. 1/6; cloth2/6. 70,000 sold.
Thousand Best Songs. 1/6; cloth 2/6. 40,000501 d.
Thousand Best Come Songs. i/6; cloth 2/6.
20,000 sold.
Cole’s Music of the Bells, i/-. 100,000 sold.
Intellect Sharpener, r/5. 35,000 sold.
Pleasant Learning Land; or Kindergarten series.
■2O hinds, 3d. each. 140,000 sold.
K indness Land. 12 numbers, 3d. each.
Child Land; A Book of interesting Poems and
Pictures. 1/-. 14,000 sold.
Child’s Guide to Health. 6d.
Advice of ten Doctors. 2/-. 9,000 sold.
Advice of ioo Doctors on Tight Lacing. 1/6.
100 Short Essays on Convenient Holidays. 6d.
The Cowing Fashions; or, Rational Dress. 150
pictures. 6d.
Religious Sects and Sacred Scriptures of all
NAT lON S. sd.
Federation of the World Essay. 6d. 100,000
sold and distributed.
50 Prize Essays on the Federation of the
World. ' Selected out of 650 contributed. 2/-.
Book of Frauds in Trade. 1/6,
Greater Melbourne, our Inland Sea, and the
Federal Capital, i/-.


A White Australia Impossible.—Part 3.
The
Whole
Human Race
is
Mixing.
AND MUST MIX, EVEN IN AUSTRALIA.
All the World Akin.
Every Person is Cousin to Every Other
Person.
READ THE EVIDENCE.
BY E. W. OOLE.




Reader, I intend in the following pages to show that all mankind are
akin—that all are cousins, Ist cousin, 2nd cousin, 32nd cousin, or
132nd cousin as the case may be, but cousins of some degree. It is
certain that there is not an Englishman, nor an Irishman, nor a Scotch-
man, nor a Welshman, nor a Frenchman, nor a German, nor a Jew, nor a
Chinaman, nor an Indian, nor a Negro, but is his own cousin of some degree.
This may not be pleasing to the man dwelling in temperate climates,
and proud of his white colour, but it is true nevertheless. We must not
think, because portions of the human race have dwelt for a long time
in distant and tropical climates, and been coloured by the sun, that they
are not our blood relations. All mankind are our blood relations.
So, Reader, whenever you meet, in the street or elsewhere, in any
country, a man, woman, or child, of any nation, colour, or position in life,
you may say to yourself ; " I know not who this person is, but I know that
he, or she, is a blood relation of mine—he, or she, is my cousin.”
Without reckoning grand-parents and gr-and-children there are eleven
kinds of blood relations—father and brother, son and daughter, brother
and sister, uncle and aunt, nephew and niece, and cousin. All of the
above belonging to each person are very few in number, except cousins,
and these are innumerable; for every person in the world is cousin to
every other person, even to his or her own mother or father, or son, or
daughter, or brother, or sister, or uncle, or aunt, or nephew, or niece.
The bulk of us know little of our pedigrees. There is not one man in
ten thousand that knows the maiden names of his four great-grand-
mothers, or even the surname of his four great-grandfathers, or even of
what race they all were. A certain writer says:—‘‘A family chart show-
ing the whole of a man’s blood ancestors for five generations is an
extremely rare and interesting document.” Yes; and a simple glance at
such a document would astonish most people, while a complete table
showing ten generations of ancestors would surprise them still more.
Reader, if you wish to be exceedingly astonished and startled, make up
such a table of your own ancestors.
The reader may exclaim : —“ These are startling statements, Can they
beproved ?” I answer, ” Yes,” and shall attempt to prove them in the
following pages. It is very astonishing when we come to reflect how
every person is related to all the rest of mankind. For instance, Reader, to
illustrate your relationship—you had i mother and I father, 2
grandmothers and 2 grandfathers, 4 great-grandmothers and 4 great
grandfathers, and the figures go on in a geometrical progression, B—l 6
32 —64—128 —256 —5t2 —1024; eleven generations bring you back to
THE WHOLE HUMAN RACE IS
MIXING.
And Must Mix—Even in Australia.
All the World Akin.
Ever/ Person is Cousin to Every Other Person.


1024. ancestors. Carry this doubling back for a hundred generations, say
to the time of Moses, and it gives you thousands of millions of progenitors.
Reckon it out for yourselves,- and, after making all allowances for inter-
breeding, see how widely related you are to all races, and ranks, and
conditions of mankind. The progeny of a negro, an Indian, a Chinaman
or a human of any race will in time blend into the blood of millions, and
therefore, all mankind everywhere are mixed, more or ' less. —And a glorious
thing, too ; for isolated races evolve types and clannishness and race
prejudice, and these are a curse to mankind ; intermingling brings health
and strength, physically, while morally it will more and more bring
concord and peace and universal brotherhood.
But let us follow this startling genealogical arithmetic and see where it will
bring us:—lf a person were to have two children, and these again two child-
ren each, and so on for 14 generations, the direct descendants of the first per-
son would be 16,384, as shown by the first column of the next page; but if
a person had five children, and each of these five children again, and so
oh, in 14 generations this first progenitor would have 6,103,515,625 direct
descendants, or about four times the number of the present inhabitants of
the globe - , as shown by the last column of the next page.
In the ordinary course of generation population does hot increase so
fast, but every fruitful person who has fruitful descendants will have an
amazing number of successors; and if every generation doubles itself-it
will soon run into thousands and even millions. A person may have
numerous descendants or not, but one thing is certain, that every person
on earth has, during the last 1,000 years, had 2,000 millions of ancestors,
reckoning all' the interbreedings or plural blendings. This is a mathe-'
matical certainly; see the table on the next page.
With respect to the blending of coloured people with white people, in
the'time of Christ Europeans, Asiatics, and Africans were dwelling with
each other around the Mediterranean, and it is certain and well known
that the Roman power had many coloured people, including negroes, in
her service, and most likely a good number of galley and other slaves.
Probably a number of these galley-slaves came to England with the
Roman army of occupation and dwelt there in charge of the Roman fleet.
Probably many of these negroes interblended with thenafive women, as all
armies of occupation do. Their blood would be now blended with that of
the whole British nation. This flow of the crimson fluid in human veins
in its action is ever expanding, permeating, and all-pervading, until it
comprehends first the district, then the country, then the whole human race.
If we turn to rrionarchs, whose genealogy or direct descent is more
taken notice of than that of common people, we find that they are of very
mixed, blood. The three most powerful monarchs in the world, with
whose pedigrees we are familiar, the King of England, the Emperor of,
Germany, and the Emperor of Russia, who between them govern half the
world, are descended from at least a dozen modern nations—our own
Idngtis descended from the Efiglish, Scotch. Welsh, French, German,
Danish, Jewish, and I don’t know how many other races; and
even you. Reader, be you who you may, have also Royal blood in your
conditions of men, including the greatest saints, the greatest sinners, and
tbfe greatest monarchs.—Look at the diagram.


Every Person in the World, akin to every other Person.


RACE MIXTURE OF ALL MANKIND.
And now, Reader, I intend, in the following pages, to prove by quota-
tions from well-known authorities that mankind in all ages and countries
has mixed, and is still mixing, and that judging by that evidence and my
own observation, I am convinced they will continue to mix, in spite of all
prejudiced and restrictive legisiation to the contrary. I shall take the
five divisions of the world —Europe, Asia, Africa, America, and Oceana —
consecutively, beginning with
EUROPEAN MIXTURES.
A writer says “ “ The inextricably mixed populations of Europe.
. In no other part of the world, save modern America, is such an
amalgamation of various,peoples to be found.” — Critic.
ENGLISH.
“To call the English Anglo-Saxons is to do violence to history. This
name recognizes the Germanic element which has entered into the nation,
and that alone ; possibly five hundred thousand Frenchmen emigrated to
England between 1066 and 1450 : Normans, Picards, Bretons, Parisians,
natives of Champagne, of Le Mans, of Anjou, of Touraine, of Poitou, and
of Gascony,—all these adventurers poured into the crucible, where the
English people were fusing, their qualities of cleverness and daring. A
certain proverb, which displays more wisdom than many a savant, declares,
‘A Briton, a Saxon, a Dane, and a Frenchman make an Englishman'.
Even at the present day, the English race is mixing in England with Irish,
German, Scandinavian, French and Italian elements, with people of every
complexion and every tongue.
“The English race is extraordinarily vigorous ; in physical strength,
practical intelligence, mental soundness, and tenacity of purpose, it is the
equal of any on the globe.”— Reclus.
Mr. James Bonwich, in his book “ Who are the English ? enumerates
the following races as entering into the mixture :
The Primitive Englishmen
The Iberian Britons
The Ancient Britons
The Phoenicians
The Trojans
The Gaels
The Cymry
The Piets
The Romans
The Saxons
The Sclavonians
The Danes and Norse
The Normans
Flemish and Dutch
The French


IRISH.
“The Irish are, largely of the Celtic race, but mixed with Spanish,
English, Scotch, and other blood. In Connaught and Munster the people
are almost solely Celtic, of Erse descent. In Leinster the Celtic is mixed
with English blood, and in Ulster there is a very large Scotch and English
element.”— Longman's Geography.
Several hundred years ago many English settled in Ireland and mixed
with the Irish, much to the annoyance of the English Government.
One writer says:—‘As time went on, however, a curious change was
taking place. The English began to be drawn very much towards Irish
ways and Irish people. They took to marrying Irish women and speaking
the Irish language. This mingling of races alarmed the government in
England, and the severest enactments were passed forbidding the adoption
by English settlers of Irish names, speech, customs, or garb. One
especially cruel edict ordained that any Englishman who married an Irish
wife was to be mutilated in a horrible way and then put to death. It was
not found possible, however, to put such laws in force often enough to
prevent the blending of the races. The Englishmen still married the
Irishwomen.”
Mr. James Bonwick, in his book “ Who are the Irish ? ” says : —“ Ireland is
perhaps inhabited by a greater mixture of races than any other nation in
Europe.” And he enumerates, the principal races from which they have
descended as follows:—
The Primitive Irish,
The Great Stone-builders.
The Crannog Race.
The Iberian Irish.
Early Races, according to
Irish Bards.
The Nemedian Irish.
The Fomorian Irish.
The Firbolg Irish.
TheTuath-de-Dannan Irish.
The Milesian Irish.
The Fenian Irish.
The Phoenician Irish.
The Celtic Irish.
Piets and Scots.
The Roman Irish.
The Danish Irish.
The Norwegian Irish.
The Flemish Irish.
The Welsh Irish.
The English Irish.
SCOTCH.
“ The lowlanders of Scotland are a mixed race of nearly the same com-
position as the English.”— Longman's Geography.
The following mixture, constituting the Scotch nation, is given in Mr.
Bonwick’s book, “ Who are the Scotch ? ” :
The Primitive Scotch
The Broch-menoftheNorth-
east
The Great Stone Builders
The Stone Inscribes
The Crannog Pile-men
The Ibernian Scotch
The Scotch Celt
The Caledonians
The Romans in Scot-
land
The Cymric Scotch
The Fenian Scotch
The Pictish Scotch
The Gaelic Scotch
The Norse Scotch
The Scots of Scotland
Round Tower Scotch
The Flemish Scotch
The French in Scotland
The Irish Scotch
The Highland Scotch
The English Scotch


THE ROMANS IN SCOTLAND.
“ Rome withdrew her legions, but she left her blood. But Caledonia,
in its Romans, had men from Iberia, Gaul, Africa, Greece, and Scythia.
These, in alliance with the Celts, produced a pretty mixed lot of descen-
dants.
THE HIGHLAND SCOTCH,
‘ ‘ They are Piets, Scots, Saxons, Norwegians, Danes, Normans, in addition
to the basis of primitive pre-historic nations. They are therefore suffici-
ently heterogeneous.
THE ENGLISH SCOTCH.
‘ ' Whatever English may mean in England, it may be well concluded to be
in Scotland a compound of the blood of Angles, Danes, Saxons, Flemings,
Normans, and Norsemen or Norwegians.
" The inquiry into Who are the Scotch ? may prove that the mixture of
blood is more general than was at once supposed, and may show that the
very difficulties of distinguishing remote parentage of families should induce
more charity toward others, and more readiness to hail as brethren all
who own one common Father—Bonwick.
WELSH.
A great many people dispose of the Welsh nationality in about the
following words: “Oh, they are descended from the ancient Britons, they are
pure Celts but the truth is that the Welsh, like the English, Irish, and
Scotch, are a very mixed people. Mr. Bonwick, in his book “ Who are
the Welsh ? ” says ; —“The Welsh are a patriotic people, but they are not a
homogeneous one. Unity of race is not essential to love of country. The
French are patriotic though a strange jumble of nationalities, once
separate and hating each other, but now in one bond of unity.” He then
enumerates and enlarges upon the various races which, during the course
of ages, have been blended into what now constitutes the Welsh people.
They are as follows :
The Primitive Welsh.
The Welsh Stone-builders.
The Trojan Welsh.
The Iberian Welsh.
The Celtic Welsh-
The Gaelic or Irish Welsh.
The Cymric Welsh.
The Roman Welsh.
The Strathclyde Welsh.
The Saxon Welsh.
The Norse & Danish Welsh.
The Norman Welsh.
The Flemish Welsh.
Speaking of the Roman occupation and mixture, he says:—“The
Romans in Wales were mostly soldiers. . . . Yet we know as a fact that the
legions were in several cases not Roman and not Italian, but of races far
removed from the peninsula, brought from subjugated nations in Europe,
Asia, and Africa. . . . Some Roman ladies may have been introduced, but
the general practice would have been the formation of ties with the
females of the country.” And hence European, Asiatic, and African blood
entered into the veins of the Welsh people.


FRENCH.
The early inhabitants of France were called Gauls ; but Phoenician,
Greek, and Roman invaders came, and “in Rome’s declining days, savag
men of every complexion and every country entered Gaul, —Franks, Suevi,
Goths, Vandals, Burgundians, Alans, Huns, etc. Later, the country
absorbed Berbers and Arabs, English, Germans, Flemings and Walloons,
Swiss, Italians, and Spaniards. And after all these mixtures by fire and
sword, in times of peace the richness and beauty of the country attracted
great multitudes from every neighbouring land, and, in small numbers,
men from all quarters of the inhabited world. The French, therefore, are
greatly mixed, like other peoples; they have nothing to cement them
together as a nation except the long experience of the same joys and the
same griefs.”— Redus.
There are now more than a million foreigners in France belonging
to all nations.
ITALIANS.
“ Although the modern inhabitants of Italy are, in appearance, manners,
and language, a distinct nation, yet they have descended from numerous
and widely different races, such as the Ligurians, Umbrians, Etruscans,
Greeks, Romans, Goths, Franks, Longobards, &c.”— Hughes's Geography.
“ The Italian people of the present day are, therefore, a very mixed race,
formed of the union of the aborigines with Greeks, Gauls, Goths, Germans,
and Arabs. ’’ — Mackay's Geography.
SICILIANS.
“ Sicily has had as inhabitants, Iberians, Carthaginians, Greeks,
Romans and Lombards, Berbers mixed with Arabs and Negroes, and
later, Normans, Germans, French, Aragonese, and Spaniards.”— Redus.
CORSICANS.
“All the southern peoples have revelled here in an orgy of blood and
destruction, —unknown aborigines, Phceniciaus, Carthaginians, Greeks,
Romans, Arabs and Berbers, Italians, Catalans, and southern French :
but unity has been accomplished, and theCofsican now is Corsican. ''-Redus.
SARDINIANS.
“The Sardinians are of Iberian stock, but mixed with Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, Romans, and exiles from all nations, with Arabs and
Berbers, and, lastly, with Catalans.” — Redus.
MALTESE.
The little territory of Malta, in the Mediterranean, has had many
masters; Syrians, Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Goths, Arabs, Normans,
Turks, French, English;—here we have ten blends with the original
inhabitants, and the result is the homogeneous Maltese.


SPANISH.
“ The Spaniards are descended from the Iberians, Celts, Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Suevi, Goths, and Moors.”— Mackay's
Geography.
PORTUGUESE.
“ The Portuguese are made up of Iberian, Celtic, Roman, and Germanic
elements, with mixtures of Berberic blood and Arabic blood, and of
Negro blood south of the Tagus.”—[Yes, and north of the Tagus too.]
— Reclus.
SWISS.
*' The Swiss are composed largely of fonr nationalities, German, French
Italian, and the Orisons more or less mixed with each other, with ten per
cent of foreigners from many countries. " —Newspaper.
GREEKS,
‘' The people of modern Greece are a mixed race, the pure blood of the
elasgians having, in the coarse of ages, become largely intermixed with
Sclavonic, Tentonic, and even Turkish elements.’’ — Buckley's Geography.
“ The modern Greek is the product of so many racial fusions that he
might, at any rate, be justly expected to accept readily the gospel of
brotherhood.”— Edwards's Geography.
DANES.
"The Danes are Scandinavians mixed in early times with Finns and
Celts,and penetrated later by Saxon, Friesic, and Dutch elements.” — Reclus,
ROUMANIANS.
‘ ‘ The inhabitants of Roumania claim to be the descendants of a colony
of Romans located here by the Emperor Trajan, and call themselves
Romenl. The race is, however, far from being an unmixed one, being
modified by Greek, Gothic, Slavic, and Turkish elements.” — Chisholm's
Geography.
AUSTRIANS.
Austria, one of the most mixed countries in the world, with many
nationalities, as usual hating each other, but they must be gradually
blending, Reclus says of the Germans of Hungary ; “In Transleithania,
or Hungary, the two million Germans are of little importance. In the
north, they are disappearing more and more surely in the mass of
Slovacks: in the centre, they are rapidly blending with the predominant
race, and are becoming Hungarian, even in name,”
RUSSIANS.
” ‘ How much non-Aryan blood has entered into your nation ! ’ some
one once said to a Russian. 'So much the better ! The more mixed we
are, the more brothers we have, ’ was the response. The Russian family
has close ties of kinship with the Finns and with the Turks and Tartars.


Tt was founded among the first; the others were for a long time its neigh-
bours and enemies, and later its subjects. Who knows what elements it
absorbed from the Finnic Merya, Muroms, Mescheriaks, Mordvinians,
Tchuvashes, Tcheremisses, and Karelians: from the Tartars of the Volga
and the Sura; and even from the Mongols, who were less Mongols than
an immense camp of bandits representing all the races of central Asia?
Moscow was founded among the Murom Finns, Nijni-Novgorod among
the Mordvinians, Saint Petersburg among the Ingrians. But what
European people is there that is not incalculably mixed? ” — Rcclus.
Another writer says : —“ Russia is the natural mediator between Europe
and Asia. It happens with the regularity of an ethnic law that every race
partakes of the characteristics of neighbouring races. Everywhere the same
mysterious blending or transition may be witnessed. Apart from com-
plexion, it has been said, many a Russian peasant might pass in Lahore or
Benares as a native of the Ganges valley. Whatever the ethnologist may
say, one way or another, as to the racial elements of the country, anyone
who approaches the study of Russian men and Russian things perpetually
meets with traits that are not familiar to him as European, but which he
may have already learnt to know as Asiatic.”
COSSACKS.
“The Cossacks had opened their ranks to every intrepid man, no matter
whence he came, no matter who he was, to rentier as well as to settler,
provided the new member professed or embraced the Greek faith ; and in
that way Lithuanians, Poles, Roumanians, Bulgarians, Turks, and Tartars,
and even Mongols entered into the woof of this bold nation.” — Rcclus.
TURKS.
“ Accustomed to obtain their wives and supply their harems from other
races, they now constitute a very heterogeneous mixture, retaining few of
the leading features of their ancient national character.”— Chisholm.
“The Osmanlis are not a race, for the blood of the steppe, the Turkish
and Tartar blood, mingled with Finnic and Mongolian, has long been
diluted by numberless alliances with Circassian women, with Greek or
Slavic Christians, with slaves and negresses.— Rcclus.
ASIATIC MIXTURES.
HINDOOS.
“ India is inhabited by numerous peoples belonging to several distinct
groups of families, speaking numerous dialects, and much blended by the
intercourse of different races with each other.” — Chisholm.
“There are in India many races and fusions of races.”— Longman's
Geography.


The Hindoos are ‘"the bulk of them,of a very mixed nature. 150,000,000
are particularly mixed.” — Etimet.
CEYLONESE,
'"Of the 2,825,000 inhabitants of Ceylon, there are, in the south and
centre, more than 1,920,000 Singhalese, who are derived from a mixture of
the aborigines with Hindus, Malays, and Arabs." — Rt’cius.
ARABIANS.
Made ay says:—"The people of Arabia are a very mixed race." After
enumerating about a dozen races, he continues: “ These and many others,
whose precise localities cannot now be determined, came in the course of
ages to he thoroughly amalgamated, and to be known under the general
designation of Arabs"
Reclus writes: —* ‘ Arabia has given a very vigorous people to the world.
The race has not, however, retained its purity nor its unity anywhere
except in a few secluded regions of Yemen and Hadramaut; everywhere
else it has been mixed with Hindu, Iranian, and especially with African
blood.”
PERSIANS.
" The population is very mixed : that of the towns and settled districts
is a race descended from Persians, Thirls, Tartars, Georgians, Armenians,
Arabs, and all the other nations who have at different periods held sway
in the country."— Mackay.
BELUCHIS.
"The Bclachis are of Uranian descent with a mingling of Tartar
hlood. ” — ChaMhers's G&zetUer.
DRUSES.
"The Druses are a peculiar people of mixed Syrian and Arabic
orig in. ’ ’ — Chisholm.
ANAMESE.
"Very little is known of the origin of the Anamese; they have been
classified with the Japanese, with the Malays, and again with the Chinese,
to whom they bear a striking likeness, morally as well as physically.
. . . Advancing eastward from the Delta of Bengal, we find man taking on
more and more of the Chinese character.” — Ruins.
COCHIN-CHINESE.
“ Cochin-China is much more Chinese than French ; the Chinese, who
immigrate hither in large numbers, control all the trades and conduct all
the business. They bring no wives with them into the country, but ally
themselves with the native women, and by this means the race is tempered
for the combats of practical life.”— Reclus.


CHINESE.
The Chinese are generally considered a pure race, but they are composed
of many elements like all other nations, and one of their national titles is
“ The Hundred Families.”
Reclus, in his “ Bird’s Eye View of the World,” says —"The Chinese
are an exceedingly mixed people, exhibiting wide differences as to com-
plexion, physique, and physiognomy, but total strangers to beauty, as
Europeans understand the term.” In another place he says—'‘‘The
Chinese are evidently a very mixed race, presenting a great variety of
types in the vast region stretching from Canton to the Great Wall, from
the Pacific seaboard to Tibet. The average Chinaman, considered as
belonging to this assumed Mongolic type, is represented as of low
stature, somewhat symmetrical form, although occasionally inclined
to obesity, especially in the north It is certain that
the natives of the various provinces present the sharpest contrasts
with each other. The true national link is their common culture
rather than any common racial type. For the aboriginal elements
have been diversely modified by mixture with Tibetans, Tatars, Mongols,
Manchus, Burmese, Shans, Malays, besides the Si-fan, Miaotze, and other
still half-savage hill tribes, which have no collective ethnical designation.
For thousands of years the agricultural populations, of diverse origin,
settled in the Hoang-ho and Yang-tse-kiang basins have had the same
historic destinies, speak dialects of the same language, and have become
one nation.”
“All the countries south of China are probably of the same family, but
in each there are evident the signs of layer after layer, a conquering horde
conquered in turn. . . . The intermixtures in several of these countries, as,
for instance, in Malacca, of native, Indian, Chinese, European, and negro
elements will make it difficult in a few generations for the people to flatter
themselves with the foolish conceits of ‘ national ’ attributes.”— Edwards.
“As they emigrate without Chinese women, they mix with the races of
the countries to which they emigrate.”— Reclus.
The Chinese readily mix with other races wherever they go; in Burmah,
in Siam, in Malacca, in Tonquin, in the Philippines, right through the
Indian Archipelago, in Australia, in South Africa, in Hawaii, in America,
in fact in whatever country they enter. They are peaceable and domestic
and love children, and with all the objections to them from the men of
other races, they blend more or less with the native women and even with
white women. Let us look this Chinese question in the face, and try to
realize what it means in the future of mankind. The Chinese nation
numbers 400 millions, and forms a compact, homogeneous body of one
quarter of the human race, the bulk of them pent up in China proper, a
country containing only one thirtieth of the land area of the globe. Let


ns try and realize that r person out of every 4 in the world is a Chinaman
or aChinawomau. Let us try and realize that they possess those qualities-
which bring success; that they are a live, prolific, expanding, plodding,
agricultural, honest, but keen, determined, intellectual, and commercial
race, easily adapting themselves to any condition of life, and succeeding ia
any climate. Let us weigh all this and then we can realize that when, ia
the inevitable progress of the world, this vast, compact nation awakes to
a full knowledge of its own latent strength, no power on earth can
prevent its distribution all over the world, and its universal blending with
all other nations,
MANCHOOS.
“The Manchoos have been gradually becoming amalgamated with the
Chinese, and are destined sooner; or later to be completely incorporated
with that peopled’— Chisholm.
CHINESE TURKOMANS.
“In this vast depression Turks, Iranians, Chinese, Mongolians, and
Tibetans, as well as Hindus and Arabs, — in a word, all the Aryans,
Semites, and Mongols of the surrounding countries, —hare been fused as in 1 r
kitge rut. Out of the mixture has sprung a Turkish race, the members of
which differ greatly in features hut are unilinguah They all speak an
esc elle n t Turkis hd ’—E id ns.
EASTERN TURKOMANS.
“The population is very heterogeneous, and in the towns the mixing of
races has proceeded to such an extent that distinct races can hardly be
recognized, and all that cau be said is that the Mongol element appears to
predominated’ — Chisholm.
“The inhabitants are a mongrel race, consisting of Tartars, Persians,
and an admixture of Chinesed’— Mackay.
JAPANESE.
“The Japanese of the present day area mixed race, springing from Mon-
golian immigrants in prehistoric times and from an indigenous population.
These prehistoric migrations probably originated from the Chinese main-
land through Korea from south to north. Recently a share in the forma-
tion of the Japanese people has been attributed to the Malay as well as to
the Mongolian races.” —Habwlenidfs Ethnology.
“According to the Japanese themselves, they are descended from
natives of the Kurile Islands crossed with an autochthonous tribe, which
was related to the aborigines of Formosa. They are clearly a mixed race,
for they present an infinite variety of types, from olive-yellow to white,
from narrow and oblique eyes to wide open straight-set eyes, from pro-
truding high cheek-bones to sunken cheek-bones, from flat noses with big
nostrils to noses of the noblest mould. , , . There is some Aino blood in the
.veins of the Japanese.’’— Ridns.


COREANS.
" The Coreans are probably a mixed race, as their language bears con-
siderable resemblance to that of Japan.”— Buckley.
“ The Corean nation is evidently formed from a mixture of several races.
A great variety of types exists in the peninsula; not only do we find Mon-
gol, Manchu, and Chinese features, but faces of the Aryan cast. And it
is possible that some of the roots of the nation extend their ramifications
into what is known as the White race.” — Rcclus.
AFRICAN MIXTURES.
AFRICANS HOMOGENEOUS.
A writer says : Dr. Hartmann, who has studied this question most
is of opinion that the African people are of one stock,
and that however much thev may differ among themselves, they are
united by indissoluble bonds. In Africa, as Karl Ritter long ago pointed
out, the difference between individuals is less, and the likeness of one tribe
or race to another stronger, than in any other part of the world. Their
physical conformation, their mode of life, their food, their costume, all
approach each other very closely at certain points. The progress of their
intellectual development is nearly everywhere the same,: their very
language and their political constitution present, in the regions most
widely apart, numbers of striking resemblances, often in the aspects where
they seem to be most different. ‘ A family air, a marvellous resemblance,
unites them as the children of a common mother.’ By insensible grada-
tions, the entire group of races - from the Cape of Good Hope to Tripoli,
nnd from Senegal to Somauli Land—merge into each other.”
Sir Henry M. Stanley, in the North American Review, says: —“As
regards North Africa Greeks, Phoenicians, Goths, Gauls, Romans,
Celtiberians, Arabs, Jews, French, and Spaniards have left traces
freely on the mass of the peoples now found there, while the Negro blood
has not been wanting to give colour and picturesqueness to their physiog-
nomies There is no need to seek for traces of a submerged continent
to locate the home of the first woolly-haired Negro, or the clay-coloured
Bushman and the darker pigmy. Asia is of sufficient amplitude, provided
we allow time enough, and take into consideration its varieties of climates,
for the strange divergencies in the human races to have taken place within it.
The continent that exhibits the almond-eyed Mongolian, the blue-eyed
•Circassian, the deep black Gondas and Bhillas, the dark Paharias, the
dwarfish Aeta, the hook-nosed Jew, and the short-nosed Tartar, could
surely in the very earliest ages of man, have produced such contrasts as
the woolly-haired Negro, and the silken-haired Aryan. But in all my


travels I have seen nothing more wonderful than this, that, in whatever
disguise I have found man, something in him seems to justify the belief
that * we are all the children of one Father '.’'
" If we could at once grasp and set before our minds facts that are
known (whether as regards language, race, culture, history, or development)
of that vast region of the world which is comprehended in the name of
Africa, we should have before us the witness of an intermingling of races
which is beyond all precedent."— Schweinfaith’s “Heart of Africa."
‘‘ In Cape Colony, the extremity of Africa, where humanity has whirled
about considerably,and formed curious mixtures, we see the Hottentots,
Griquas, Namaquas and Korannas, a type formed by the average Negro
blended with the primitive Bushman.” —Sir H. M. Stanley, North American
Review.
MOROCCANS.
•' The Moors, who form the great mass of the population of the cities
and of the ' Tell ’ generally, have sprung from the admixture of the
Berbers and Arabs with the Phoenicians, Romans, Turks, and other
nations who have in turn overrun the country.”— Buckley.
ALGERIANS.
‘‘ It would be futile to attempt to estimate the number of pure Arabs in
the Algerian Tell, for Arabs and Berbers have been mixed to an infinite
degree, to say nothing of infusions of Blacks. Turks, and renegades and
captives from various nations. Many a tribe which boasts of its Arabic
blood is derived from exceedingly diverse sources. . . For the last fifty-seven
years French, Spaniards, and Italians have been intermarrying with the
Berbers and Arabs of North Africa. The new race resulting from these
alliances is growing vigorously in Algeria and Tunis.”— Reclus.
TRIPOLITANS.
‘‘ The rural population of Tripoli and Barca consists chiefly of Bedouin
Arabs and Berbers; the town population chiefly of Moors, with a consider-
able intermixture of Jews,” — Chisholm.
“ The regency contains a population of about 2,000,000, chiefly Arabs,
and Berbers, with a considerable admixture of Jews, more disposed than
their brethren elsewhere to cultivate intercourse with Europeans.” — Milner .
EGYPTIANS.
‘‘The people formed from the alliances of the invading Arabs and the
invaded Nilotics was afterwards penetrated by numerous elements. The
Turk having ruled for 300 years over Egypt, the Egyptian people absorbed
from the Turk ; and the Mamelukes, —who were Negroes as well as Cir-
cassians, Caucasians, Albanians, Greek renegades, Slavs, or Latins, —-
having riveted the shackles of slavery for the Osmanli, it absorbed from.


the Aryan Mameluke, from the Turanian Mameluke, from the Semitic
Mameluke, and from the Hamitic Mameluke; the negro, the bronzed, the
copper-coloured, and the white girls sold in Caucasia by father or brother,
the black or negroid men stolen, lance in hand, and from all Soudanese
countries accessible to Egypt, entered deeply into the essence of this
so-called Arabic nation, and they are entering it now as much as
ever. Of the 6,800.000 Egyptians returned by the census of 1882,
nearly 250,000 are Beduins, representing the more or less nomad element,
and comprising the only genuine Arabs in the whole nation. But the
Beduins themselves are widely and diversely mixed Over the entire
stretch of country from the Delta of the Nile to the centre of Nubia, from
time immemorial, Whites and Semites have been intermarrying with
bronzed and black races.” — Rectus.
There are also 100,000 Europeans, mostly men, and consequently
many Mulattoes, Quadroons, Octoroons, etc., and the mixing still goes on.
NUBIANS.
“ The Nubians are chiefly Arabs mixed with Negro elements. "--Milner.
ABYSSINIANS.
*' The name ‘Abyssinia’ refers to the diversity among the people, being
derived from the Arabic hahesch, signifying mixture, or confusion,”—
Milner.
SOUDANESE.
“The Sahara and Soudan border each other along an undulating line
more than 3,000 miles in length, extending from Saint Louis, on the
Senegal, to the Red Sea, and separating the zone of tropical rains from
the rainless zone. Black nations, nations bronzed by ancient alliances
with the Berbers and by modern, even contemporary, alliances with the
Arabs, are crowded into Soudan. They present the most diverse types as
regards stature, features, beard and hair, and shade of complexion. "-Rectus.
SAHARANS.
“ The western division is occupied mainly by Moorish tribes intermixed
with Berber elements.” — Milner.
CAPE VERDIANS.
“The islanders emigrate in large numbers to Brazil; they are composed
mostly of Negroes, or Mulattoes, with a few thousand of more or less pure
Whites, and scattered descendants of Canarian Spaniards.”— Rectus.
ST. THOMAS ISLANDERS.
“The inhabitants embrace about 1200 Whites and nearly 17,000 Negroes
and Mulattoes.”— Rectus.


CANARIANS.
“The present inhabitants of the Canaries are of Spanish, Flemish, Nor-
man, and Irish descent; in certain districts there is some little black
blood ; as for the derivation of the original inhabitants, the Guancher,.
nothing certain is known. ... Many of the Guanches ... intermarried with
the Spaniards. ’’^Reclus.
PORTUGUESE CONGOESE.
1 ' The eastern boundaries of Portuguese Congo are undefined ; its exact
area is therefore unknown, as also is the number of the inhabitants. It
comprises perhaps 400,000 square miles, with a population of possibly 2}
million, consisting of a few thousand Whites, with cross-breeds of all
degrees of mixture, and Lusitanianizing natives ”in unknown proportions.”
— Reclus.
GUINEANS.
“Guinea is inhabited by Negroes, nearly all of whom are remarkably
black. ... A multitude of half-breeds, nearly all of whom have more negro
than white blood, proclaim the passage of the European over the region—
especially the Portuguese.”— Reclus.
FELLATAHS.
“ The inhabitants of Central Africa are not exclusively of Negro race.
A large proportion of them are of mixed descent, partly of Moorish or
Arab blood. The latter are known as Fellalahs.” — Hughes.
“ The Fellatahs, a mixed race, supposed to be partly of Negro and
partly of Arab descent, have established a Mohammedan empire in the
West of Nigritia, embracing most of the kingdoms on the Middle Niger
and the Chadda.” — Buckley.
EAST AFRICANS.
“The natives of the eastern coast of Africa, and inland as far as the
great lakes, are regarded by Burton and Speke as belonging, to the great,
Kaffir or South African family, and as occupying a mean position between
the Syro-Arabian races of the Barbary States and the aborigines of
N igritia. ’ ’ —M uckuy.
SOUTH AFRICANS.
“Two-thirds of the Whites are Dutch ; the other third is composed of
Englishmen, Germans, Norwegians, Swiss, etc. The Boers, or Afrikanders,
are of double origin. The early foundations of the nation were laid slowly
(beginning with 1650) by Dutch seamen, soldiers, functionaries, traffickers,
adventurers, and outcasts, who embarked for the colony, or stopped there
on their way to India, Ceylon, or the Spice Islands. Then, in 1687.
French Calvinists arrived. Only 200 families, or perhaps 300, came; but
the Dutch settlement was still so weak that a third, if not a half, of the
Boers, are descendants of these 1,000 to 1,500 persons.”— Reclus.


I think that Mons. Reclus over-estimates the proportion of French
settlers, but still there have been many other ingredients blended with the
blood of the Dutch settlers, namely, English, Germans, Scandinavians,
Portuguese, Poles, Jews, Swiss, Mozambiques, Malays, Hottentots, etc.
The South African Boer of to-day may be estimated to be half Dutch, a
■quarter French, and a quarter composed of, at least, a dozen other nation-
alities ; if they are a bit ignorant and stubborn, they are a very brave
mixture. There are in South A frica many other mixed bloods between the
English and the coloured people, and also between the various coloured
people themselves.
GRIQUAS,
“The Griquas, or Baastards, are a mixed race, sprung from the inter-
course of the Dutch Boers with their Hottentot slaves.”— Milner.
KAFFIRS,
“ The Kaffirs are supposed to be descendants of certain superior races of
Negroes, evidently with some mixture of Arab blood in their veins.
They seem, at no very distant period, to have advanced from the interior
■of Africa.” —Sir B. C. C. Pine , Governor of Natal.
MALAGASIES.
“The inhabitants of Madagascar, who are known by the name of
Malagasy, appear to form substantially a single race, though they have
received a considerable intermixture of African blood, chiefly through the
importation of slaves, and also a certain amount of Arab intermixture.”—
■Chisholm.
MAURITIANS.
“The Whites of Mauritius are estimated at 20,000 ( 5 ), the Mulattoes
.and Blacks at 130,000 (?), and the coolies, nearly all of whom are from
India, at more than 200,000 (?).” — Reclus.
COMORO ISLANDERS.
“ The bulk of the inhabitants consists of divers hues, and of Malays
■crossed with Arabs.’’— -Reclus.
AMERICA N MIXTURES,
The continent of America, North and South, contains the greatest blend
of the human races that the world ever saw in one century.
UNITED STATES.
The present population is 80 millions ; of this number the British Isles
have contributed approximately a blood volume of 50 millions, which may
be termed conjointly the Anglo-Saxon-Celtic element. The Negro blood
volume is about 10 millions, and about 70 other nationalities have contri-
buted a blood volume of, say, 20 millions,
The following is a list of nearly forty of the nationalities which made up


the foreign population of the country in the year 1890, standing in their
numerical order, the highest first:—
Germany
Ireland
British America
England
Sweden
Norway
Scotland
France
China
Switzerland
Bohemia
Wales
Mexico
Denmark
Holland
Poland
Italy
Austria
Russja
Belgium
Luxemburg
Hungary
West Indies
Portugal
Cuba
Spain
Australia
South America
India
Turkey
Sandwich Islands
Greece
Central America
Japan
Malta
Greenland
To these must be added another thirty nationalities, all the Indian
tribes and all the native born Americans of all races and mixtures. The
reader can form some idea of what the inevitable must be amongst the in-
habitants of a country so situated ; already the “ American genealogy ”
is a standing joke at the expense of the would-be aristocracy.
English and Irish, French and Spanish,
German, Italian, Dutch and Danish,
Crossing their veins until they vanish
In one conglomeration.
So subtle a tangle of blood, indeed,
No Heraldry-Harvey will ever succeed
In finding the circulation !
And then the Negro comes into the circulation with his mixture of
millions. There is a strong prejudice in the United States against this-
mixture, but it is there; the blood of the White is in the Negro, and the
blood of the Negro is in the White, and no human power can take it out
or stop its circulation.
When the slaves were emancipated in 1864, there appeared a little book
entitled " Miscegenation,” and in it the writer says Three-fourths of
the four millions of the former slaves of the South, have the blood of the
white aristocrats in their veins. They are the direct descendants of
owners of plantations.” If three-fourths of the Negroes had white blood
in their veins when there were only four millions of them, with the blend-
ing that has taken place since it must be more widely distributed now;
besides, thousands of Quadroons, Octoroons, and lighter mixtures have
borne children to white men within or without the marriage bond since
the emancipation.
The eminent Theodore Tilton, in a speech at New York in 1863, said: —
“ The history of the world’s civilization is written in one word—which
many are afraid to speak, which many more are afraid to hear—and that
is Amalgamation. * • • Three stupendous processes of intermingling


are going forward in this country. First, we are absorbing the Irish race.
Second, we are absorbing the German race. Third, we are absorbing the
Negro race. A hundred years ago a mulatto was a curiosity; now
the mulattoes are half a million. You can yourself predict the future ! ”
These words were spoken 40 years ago. The census of 1890 gave:
Mulattoes, 956,989; Quadroons, 105,135: Octoroons, 69,936. But these
are only three out of a dozen existing blends of the Negro.
Respecting the Indians blending with the Whites, a writer says:—
“ The Indians still live in numberless white homes in the United States,
and the day when it shall be said that the last Red-skin has expired, that
day the blood of the Six Nations and of scores of other apparently lifeless
tribes will be coursing in the veins of thousands of families who boast of their
English ancestry.” Yes; and this blood will flow through all the nation.
CANADIANS.
“ How much aboriginal blood runs in the veins of the descendants of
the earliest settlers of Canada and the United States it would be idle to
ask, and perhaps not very soothing to their self-complacency to know ; but
in Manitoba a large, healthy, and ever-increasing ‘ half-breed’ population
is to be found, the beginning of which does not date back more than a
century. The theory of such hybrids being unhealthy and seldom living
long or multiplying obtains no support in the Red River country."
“ The French intermarried largely with the Indians ; the net result is a
considerable Indian strain in the French Canadian, of no conspicuous
value, and in the north-west a large number of rather turbulent and un-
malleable half-breeds,—the most keen, swift, enduring, and resourceful of
hunters and trappers.”— Reclus.
WEST INDIANS.
“ The total population of the West Indies is nearly 4,000,000, of whom
above half are Negroes, while the remainder are chiefly Mulattoes.”—
Whitaker’s Almanack, 1891.
PORTO RICANS.
The population of Porto Rico is 784,709. All these are Negroes except
about 50,000, who are Spaniards, English, Germans, Dutchmen, Danes,
Chinese, South Americans, and Canary Islanders. 400,000 of the Negro
inhabitants of Porto Rico are of unmixed blood; the rest (about 384,000)
are Mulattoes.
SAINT DOMINICANS.
■■ The Dominican Republic contains 300,000 inhabitants. The Spaniards
allied themselves with Carib women, and the Dominican nation owes its
origin to the union of Europeans and Indians, rather than to a mixture of
Whites and Negroes." — Reclus.
GUADELOUPEANS.
“In all, Guadeloupe contains 722 square miles, with 200,000 in-
habitants. The Whites, Blacks, and Mulattoes are distributed in the ratio


of 7 Whites, 31 Blacks, and 62 Mulattoes in every hundred persons.” —
Reclus.
BARBADOANS,
“ Among the 174,000 islanders there are more than 44,000 Mulattoes
and 15,000 or 16,000 Whites. The latter element remains stationary, or is
diminishing even, while the Blacks and Mulattoes are steadily increasing.”
— Reclus.
MEXICANS.
“ White people form about 20 per cent, of the population, and are fo
Spanish origin almost exclusively. Mixed peoples, ' Mestizoes,' form
about 43 per cent., and the remainder are pure natives of Indian race-
All distinctions of colour in political privileges are abolished by the
Constitution.”— Longman.
“Of the entire population—l2,oso,o46 in 1893 —the Whites are es-
timated to form 19 per cent., the Indians 38, and the half-castes (Mestizos)
43 per cent.”— Chambers's Gazetteer.
“ The 2 million Caucasians are by no means all pure Whites; the
number would shrink greatly if we should subtract from it all those who
are not really of European blood.”— Rectus.
VENEZUELANS.
"The whole population amounted at the census of 1873 to 1,784,000,
and has arisen from the intermixture of the aboriginal Indians of several
tribes with Africans and the European conquerors. Mulattoes and
Zambos form the bulk of the inhabitants; the creoles, or pure native-born
Spaniards, form only about one per cent, of the number.” — Milner.
“ A recent estimate places the number of inhabitants at 2,198,000,
500.000 to 600,000 of whom are enrolled as Whites; but the so-called
Whites of tropical America are often Indians but slightly modified by
European blood.” — Reclus.
NICARAGUANS.
“ The races are much mixed; the Ladinos constitute, it is said, three-
fifths of the nation, the pure Indians a fourth, the Blacks and Mulattoes a
seventeenth, and the pure Whites, largely of Galician origin, a twenty-
fifth.”—Reclus.
SAN SALVADOREANS.
" The Ladinos (mixed White and Indian) constitute the majority of the
population of San Salvador; next in number are the Indians. The pure
Whites form scarcely a fortieth of this rapidly growing nation.”— Reclus.
HONDUREANS.
■‘ The dominant people are the Ladinos (mixed White and Indian), who
are sober and persevering, steeled to endurance, robust, and capable of
exertion and heroism.”— Reclus.


GUIANANS.
"The interior is chiefly inhabited by various tribes of Indians, who are
allied to the now almost extinct aborigines of the West Indies. The coasts
and settled districts are occupied by European settlers, by emancipated
Negroes who are very numerous, and by mixed races.”— Mackay.
BRAZILIANS.
"The population of Brazil is composed of an agglomeration of many
races. While Brazil remained a Portuguese colony but few women
emigrated to it; consequently the European settlers largely intermarried
with Indian women; and afterwards an extensive intermixture of race
occurred with the Africans, who were introduced into the country as
slaves.”— Mackay.
■' The population of Brazil, according to an official estimate of 1888,
was 14,002,335, °f whom some 2,000,000 were Negroes, 400,000 Indians,
and the remainder pretty equally divided between Whites and Half-
breeds.’ ’— Chambers.
"Indians, Negroes, and Whites have been intricately mixed in Brazil.
Even in South America, which is the home par excellence of cross-breeds,
there is no other country inhabited by such an agglomeration of races.
Half-castes of every name and every colour are to be met in the Neo-
Lusitanian empire.”— Reclus.
PARAGUAYANS.
"The population, formerly perhaps amounting to a million and a half,
is now reduced to not more than 200,000, It is composed of people of
Spanish descent in all stages of intermixture with the aboriginal Guarani
Indian tribes, with a few Negroes and some Europeans,”— Milner.
URUGUAYANS.
“The population, estimated at 728,447 in 1802, is made up mainly of
Half-breeds, including Gauchos ; but the foreign element, largely Basques
and Italians, is rapidly increasing.”— Chambers's Gazetteer.
ARGENTINES.
"The people are largely of Spanish extraction, with many Half-breeds,
Indians, called Gauchos, and a large number of European settlers—viz.,
Italians, French, British, and Germans.”— Longman.
“ The settled population of the Argentine Confederation is composed of
Whites, Mestizoes, Mulattoes, Negroes, and civilized Indians. The bulk
of the population, especially in the country districts, consists of people of
mixed race.” — Chisholm.
ECUADORIANS.
"The smaller half of the population is composed of about 100,000
Whites, and from 300,000 to 400,000 White and Indian croos-breeds; the
larger half consists of catechized or Catholicized Indians.”— Reclus.


Countries.
Whites.
Indians.
Half-breeds.
Mexico {1882)
2,090,000
3,765,000
4,593,000
Central America
400,000
1,000,000
1.370,000
Colombia..
370,000
1,200,000
1,630,000
Venezuela (1884)
300,000
800,000
1,000,000
Ecuador (1885) ..
100,000
600,000
300,000
Peru (1876)
350,000
1,523,000
800,000
Bolivia
350,000
1,070,000
900,000
Chili (1885)
2,140,000
54,000
326,000
Argentine Republic (1887)
3,200,000
100,000
200,000
Uruguay (1884) ..
593.°o°
Paraguay (1887) ..
30,000
50,000
160,000
Brazil (1S85) .. .. '
3,900,000
3,900,000
5,200,000
Totals ..
13,823,000
14,062,000
16,479,000
The following is a table showing the relative proportions of the Whites,
Indians, and Half-breeds, in what is called the Latin-American States,
published by Mons. Reclus in 1892 :
In this table the Negroes are recorded as Indians, but the Half-breeds
exceed in numbers either the Whites, or the Negroes, or Indians through-
out the whole of South America.
NAMES OF AMERICAN MIXTURES
Principally used in South America.
“ In Peru the mixtures are so intricate that names have been applied to
them, which names have been adopted elsewhere (after Dr. Tschudi):
Parents. Children.
White father and Negro mother Mulatto.
White father and Indian mother Mestizo.
Indian father and Negro mother Chino.
White father and Mulatto mother Cuarteron.
White father and Mestiza mother Creole. (Pale brown).
White father and Chino mother Chino-bianco.
White father and Cuarterona mother ... Quintero.
White father and Quintera mother ... White (is considered a tfhite).
Negro father and Indian mother Zambo or Cafuso. (A miserable race).
Negro father and Mulatto mother Zambo-negro.
Negro father and Mestiza mother Mulatto-oscuro.
Negro father and Chino mother Zambo-cbino.
Negro father and Zamba mother Zambo-negro. (Perfectly black).
Negro father and Quintera mother Mulatto. (Rather dark).
Indian father and Mulatto mother Chino-oscuro.
Indian father and Mestiza mother Mestizo-claro. (Often very beautiful).
Indian father and Chino mother Chino-cola.
Indian father and Zamba mother Zamba-cloro.
Indian father and Chino-cola mother ... Indian. (With frizzly hair).
Indian father and Quintera mother Mestizo. (Brownish-skinned).
Mulatto father and Zamba mother Zambo.
Mulatto father and Mestiza mother ... Chino. (A rather clear complexion).
Mulatto father and Chino mother Chino. (Rather dark).
" Even then, this does not exhaust the actual intermixtures, though the
above will suffice to show what work for the future ethnologist is growing
up in one part of a single quarter of the world.’’ —American Book.


The designations given in North America to the first three mixtures of
"Whites and Negroes are Mulatto, Quadroon, and Octoroon.
In South America the offspring of a white and an octoroon is considered
a white person; not so in prejudiced North America.
BOLIVIANS.
“ The population consists of various races, chiefly a mixture of Spaniards
■with Indian natives ; the descendants of African Negroes ; and not a few
■Guaranis, or Indians. It is to the mixed races, however, that the popula-
tion owes its chief strength and intelligence; the Mulattoes, descended
from the Spaniards and Negroes; Zambos, Negro and Indian; and
-specially the Choios, Spanish and Indian. —The whole population is
estimated at about 2,000,000.” — Milner.
•' The proportion of the different elements of the population of Bolivia
is very uncertain. Probably not more than a fifth, if so many, are of pure
Spanish descent, but the Mestizoes, who with the people of pure European
origin make up according to some accounts less than a half, according to
others, much more than a half of the whole population, are reckoned as
Whites.”— Chisholm.
CHILIANS.
“The natives of Chili are a mixture of Spanish with the Araucanian
Indians. In the upper classes the race has been kept more purely Spanish
than in any other South American country.”— Chambers’s Gazetteer.
" The Chilians, though much more Europeanized than the Bolivians,
Ecuadorians, or Peruvians, are nevertheless largely of Indian blood by
their mothers.” — Reclus.
PERUVIANS.
“The people of Peru are more mixed than in any other state of South
America.” — Mill.
“ The population of Peru is rated at 2,700,000. Of these inhabitants, it
is supposed that 1,555,000 are Indians, 372,000 Whites, and 670,000 Cross-
breeds ; there are 53,000 Negroes and 51,000 Chinese.”— Reclus.
"Fully a half of the population are probably Indians, a sixth Whites,
about a fourth of mixed White and Indian race, and the rest Negroes or
people containing Negro blood.”— Chisholm.
COLOMBIANS.
“The population exceeds 4,000,000. Among them are Whites (of
Spanish descent), native Indians, a few Negroes, and a vast majority of
mixed Indian and Spanish blood.”— Hughes.
The pure or slightly mixed Whites are rated at 500,000 or 600,000, and
the same number is set down for the totality of pure Negroes (estimated at
100,000 or 120,000), Mulattoes, and Zambos. The rest of the population
is composed of 2 million Indians crossed with Spaniards in every degree
imaginable.


OCEANIC MIXTURES.
INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO.
The inhabitants of the whole of the Indian Archipelago are very much
mixed.”— lnhabitants of the World.
PHILIPPINOS.
“The exact number of the Chinese population of Luzon is unknown ;
there are more than 20,000 in Manila, and the entire group of the Philip-
pines contains, perhaps, 50,000. From their alliance with the Tagal
women, a powerful cross-breed race is growing up, called the Mestizo-
Chinos, or Mestizos de Sanglay, already numbering more than 200,000
persons. It is thought that fully a million of Chinese live at present in-
Megalonesia The Chinese have been intricately mixed with the
Malay, and the fusing process is still going on. The hot and brilliant
climate of the islands is not at all trying to them, and they immigrate by
thousands ; as they take no pride in the nobility of their own lineage, they
form alliances with Malay women, and the people springing from these
two sources is increasing very rapidly.”— Reclus.
JAVANESE.
“The Javanese owe their origin to the trituration of tribes that were
brayed by war and amalgamated by marriages into a Malay people.”— Reclus.
There are many Dutch Half-castes and other Euromalaysians in Java,
artificially divided into “ Whites ” and “ Coloureds ",
SANDWICH ISLANDERS.
“ A census taken in 1897 revealed a total population of 109,020, dis-
tributed according to race as follows: Hawaiians, 31,019; Japanese,
24,407; Chinese, 21,616 ; Portuguese, 15,100 ; Americans, 3,086; British,
2,259 ; Part Hawaiians or mixed, 8,485. The remainder were Germans,
French, Norwegians, South Sea Islanders, and representatives of other
nationalities.”— American Cyclopeedia.
NEW ZEALANDERS.
“ In 1892 the population was estimated at nearly 700,000, of whom up-
wards of 41,000 were Maoris and over 4,000 were Chinese. There are
about 9,000 Half-castes.’— ’Longman.
TASMANIANS.
“ There are a few Half-castes, the descendants of European sealers by
native jins.” — Chambers's Gazetteer.
“Even the Tasmanians have left Half-breed descendants dispersed
among the Australians.”— Reclus,
OUR AUSTRALASIAN MIXTURES.
Australasia, including Australia proper, Tasmania, New Zealand, and
British New Guinea, contains at present a population of about 5,300,000-
This population is made up, firstly, of the English, Irish, Scotch, and
Welsh mixtures; next, of Germans and representatives of all the European


races, of Americans, and of various coloured races. The coloured races are
approximately in number as follows : natives of New Guinea, according
to the Rev. —. Dawes, the missionary, and Mr. W. Edgar Giel, fully
450,000; Australian aborigines, according to Mr. Coghlan, 153,000; Maoris,
according to census, 43,000; Chinese, according to census, 36,000 ;
Polynesians, 8,000; Hindoos, Malays, Negroes, Japanese, Syrians, and all
other coloured people, say 20,000. It is difficult to say how much of
aboriginal Australian blood runs in the veins of our Australian nation, but
from the very first of European settlement, white men, shepherds, station-
hands and others, held converse with the aboriginal women, and half-
caste children were born all over the country, and from that time till now
this mingling of blood has been going on. Half the natives in the various
aboriginal stations, and elsewhere, have more or less white blood in their
veins, and some Mulattoes, Quadroons, Octoroons, etc., are married to
white partners, and consequently mixed children are born. Even the
blood of the Tasmanian aboriginals, who are supposed to be extinct, is
mixed in the living Australians. A late census gives 124 of their mixed
descendants, while others have certainly merged into the community.
The Maoris have 9,000 of mixed blood, some living with the native tribes
and some with the Whites. And the Australian aboriginal’s mixed des-
cendants must be more in number than those of the Maoris. Therefore,
I think that the present mixture of Coloured and Whites, including
Aborigines, Maoris, Chinese, Polynesians, Hindoos, Malays, Negroes,
Japanese, Syrians, and all other coloured races, cannot be less than 30,000,
or a total of coloured and mixed people in Australasia of 740,000. The
total population of Australasia being 5,300,000, there is, therefore, one
person more or less coloured to every six of the European white mixture,
at present living in this country. In the face of the above figures alone
there is not, and cannot be, a White Australia.
In some parts, especially in seaport towns, and islands like Malta,
Singapore, Hong Kong, Thursday Island, etc., the population is very
much mixed. For instance, the Hon. John Douglas, writing in the
*' Nineteenth Century,” July 1902, informs us that Thursday Island con-
tained the following mixture of a population on the land and the pearling-
fleet operating there :
Japanese .. .. .. 923
Europeans of all Nations .. 770
Pacific Islanders .. .. 323
Philippines .. . . .. 3 2 °
Australian Aborigines .. 284
Torres Strait Islanders .. 279
Malays 272
Chinese .. .. ■■ 114
Rotumah Men .. .. 79
Papuans .. .. . ■ 56
Cingalese .. .. .. 45
Samoans .. .. .. 27
Hindoos .. .. .. 22
Javanese .. .. .. 7
Other mixed races .. .. 197
Altogether Europeans of
different nations, other
mixed races, and twelve
coloured races, to make up
a population of .. .. 3718
This population will grow together and blend, and very naturally there
can be no “ White Australia ” there.


I have now cited evidence proving the mixed nature of the inhabitants
of go different countries, comprehending nearly all the world; and, judging
by the law of analogy, or Cuvier-like, by a kind of comparative anatomy,
I would venture to say that all the rest are equally mixed, although I have
not the evidence at hand to prove it. The reader, if he has leisure and
inclination, can search this out for himself.
TYPES AND PURE RACES.
Mach has been said about types and pure races. Beyond all doubt there
are many types of mankind in the world, but one type is not radically
different from another, and they are all alike human. Nature has a fond-
ness for types. She always forms types whenever and wherever the
opportunity occurs, but anyone who observes and reflects can see the
cause or causes of all these types—hereditary qualities modified by
climate, locality, food, occupation, education, religion, inter-marriage,
association, isolation, peculiar habits of life, and a hundred other in-
fluences and environments go to form types. It is a fact that there are
thousands of marked variations or types of mankind in the world. There are
the typical Englishman,.the typical Irishman, the typical Scotchman, the
typical Welshman, the typical Frenchman, the typical German, the
typical Yankee, the typical Jew, and, to descend even to small districts,
say in England, there is the typical Cornishman, or Yorkshireman, or
Cumberlandman, or Norfolkman, or Sussexman, all differing somewhat in
form, countenance, and language, but yet all Englishmen. And so it is
with every country in the world; the men of every considerable district
differ somewhat from those of all the other districts, and this must be so
inasmuch as the origins, associations, environment, etc., are more or
less different from those of any other.
Respecting pure, unmixed races, there is not a pure, unmixed race upon
the earth. A family, a clan, a tribe, a people, may, and will, develop a
special type for a time, through continual intermarriage, religious belief,
or any of a hundred causes singly or combined ; but the type continues,
even apparently stationary, only for a time entirely dependent upon other
influences which are ever active around. War, and immigration, and
beauty, and love, and desire, and affinity, and opportunity, and wealth,
and all kinds of necessity, and analyzing, progressive thought, and many
other forces and influences, ever active, ever working, are too strong for
the preservation of types; and all the family, clan, and tribal regulations,
and legislative enactments, and commands of elders, and all the restric-
tions and conservative forces are futile to stay the ever-acting anti-typal
forces of nature. But in the consideration of the subject we should always
remember that in this, as in all Nature throughout our universe of ever-
lasting change, there are ever the Creator and the. Destroyer at work;
always two forces, that which builds up and that which disperses worlds,
and suns, and systems, and even types of mankind.


THE JEWS NOT A PURE RACE.
It is held by many that the “ purest race ” in the world are the Jews; but
I feel certain that they are the most mixed race in the world, for the simple
reason that they are distributed amongst all nations far more than any
other, and have been so for nearly 2,000 years. It is very difficult, in fact
at present impossible, to say how many Jews there are in the world, but
they are generally put down, lately, at approximately 7,000,000. The
following was an estimate given by Prof. Brunietti, in an article in the
“ Archivichio di Statistica.” a few years ago :
Russia . . .. 2,700,000
Austro-Hungary .. 1,500,000
Germany . . .. 650,000
Roumania . . . . 400,000
Turkey in Europe 100,000
Holland . . . . 70,000
England 70,000
France . . .. 59,000
Italy .. .. 40,000
Switzerland .. 7,000
Spain . . .. 6,000
Greece .. .. 5,000
Servia .. .. 4,000
Belgium .. .. 3,000
Sweden .. .. 2,000
Portugal .. .. 1,000
IN AFRICA:
Morocco .. .. 200,000
Tripoli .. .. 100,000
Tunisia .. .. 60,000
Algeria .. .. 32,000
Egypt .. .. 8,000
IN ASIA:
Asiatic Turkey and
Arabia . . .. 350,000
India . . .. 150,000
Caucasus . . .. 30,000
Persia .. . . 20,000
Turkestan.. .. 12,000
China .. .. I,o^o
IN AMERICA:
United States . . 300,000
South America ~ 8,000
This, as the reader will preceive, is given only in round numbers, but
probably is about as correct as those with detailed numbers, because no
man on earth could give the detailed numbers correctly. For, as someone
has said, “ the Jews are not a race ; they represent hereditary ideas rather
than an hereditary race.” Quite true; their language, their literature,
their history, and their religion keep them together more than the bond
of blood relationship. There are many persons who belong to the Jewish
blood who do not belong to the Jewish religion, and many belong to the
Jewish religion who are not of Jewish blood. Besides, the Jew blends
his blood more or less with that of every race amongst which he lives,
Thirty countries are enumerated above, but he lives in a hundred, and he
blends his blood in all of them. There are millions of people who have
Jewish blood in them but who are not reckoned as Jews. They are a very
prolific race, and if all were reckoned as Jews who have half or qurater Jew-
ish blood in their veins, they would double their nominal numbers every
twenty years. But, as before remarked, not only is there much Jewish
blood-mixture outside the pale of the church, but those within the pale are
more or less mixed with every other people in the world. If the whole 7
or 8 millions that go under the name of Jews were collected together, they
would form a very heterogeneous and varied multitude, many of them far
removed apart in form and features. The typical J ew would certainly be
largely represented, but millions would not pass as Jews from their
physical appearance. But the Jews have not only mixed with other races
during late centuries, but throughout their entire history they have mixed.
This can be proved from the Bible.
Abraham, the famous founder of the Jewish nation, had a son named
Ishmael, by Hagar, an Egyptian maiden, which son, according to history
and tradition, founded the Arabian nation. And therefore, half the blood
at least of the Arabians must be Jewish.


The patriarch Judah married and had children by Bath-Sh.ua, a
Canaanite wife.
The patriarch Joseph married Asenath, an Egyptian woman, and had
two sons "by her, Manasseh and Ephraim, who founded two out of the
twelve tribes, and consequently, whose blood would run in about one
sixth of the whole Jewish race.
Moses, the great prophet and lawgiver of the Jews, married Zipporah,
the daughter of Jethro the priest of Midian, and had children by her. He
also married an Ethiopian or black woman, and his brother Aaron and
his sister Miriam were much offended at it and spoke against Moses, and,
•as an outcome of the quarrel, the Lord struck Miriam with leprosy. The
whole account is given in Numbers xn, and in Josephus.
The Jews frequently took wives and concubines from the “strangers’ 1
around or dwelling amongst them. They also took captives in war,
In Numbers xxxi, there is an account of the Jews taking captive
and, by the order of Moses, adopting into their nation 32,000 Midianitish
virgins. It is there recorded that 1,000 warriors of each tribe went to
war, took 52,000 virgins captive, and that 16,000 of these foreign virgins
were divided amongst the 12,000 Jewish warriors, and the other 16,000
amongst the rest of the Jewish congregation. Here was a wholesale
mixing of foreign blood which would blend with the entire Jewish race.
The grandmother of David, the greatest and most venerated of the
Jewish kings, and the direct progenitor of Jesus himself, was Ruth, a
Moabitish woman.
Solomon married many foreign wives besides the daughter of Pharaoh,
King of Egypt, and the mother of his successor on the throne, Rehoboam
(also a progenitor of Jesus}, was Naamah, an Ammonitish woman.
When the remnant of the two tribes, from whom, according to Jewish
history, all the modern Jews have descended, returned from the Babylonian
captivity, it was found that many of the men had married foreign wives,
and Chapter x of Ezra gives a list of about a hundred of the principal
men who had done so. And so right through the Bible history of the
Jews, More or less their admixture with other races went on within and
without the marriage bond. The principal objection that the spiritual
teachers of the Jews raised, was not so much that the inter-marrying with
foreigners would mix the race, as that it would encourage the adoption of
the false religion of the wives. This is referred to in many places, but is
particularly shown in the following passage * —“But King Solomon loved
many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of
the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites, of the nations
concerning which the Lord said unto the children of Israel, ‘Ye shall not
4>° i ll l° them, neither shall they come in unto you, for surely they will turn
■awccy ymer heart ajtet their gods. Solomon clave unto these in love, and he
had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines,
-and his wives turned away his heart after other gods.’ ’’ So common


were these mixed marriages among the Jews that the mother of David’s
son Absalom, was a foreigner, and Solomon’s own mother Bathsheba,
was first married to “ Uriah the Hittite ”.
In examining this question of descent and genealogies, sometimes unex-
pected and startling revelations crop up. Of this class is the following
from a paper entitled “ The Coloured American ” : —“ Dr. W. L. Hunter,
M.D., of Brooklyn, has given us a book entitled, ‘ Jesus Christ had Negro
Blood in his Veins,’ He proceeds to prove his assertion by scripture cita-
tions, which seem to bear out his contention that Jesus Christ did have
Negro blood in his veins. The book is worth perusing, and will furnish
much food for thought. Of course good white Christians and scholars will
hardly be willing to yield the point, even though it be made with crushing
effect. Still lam unable to see how they can successfully controvert the
knock-down arguments of the black doctor at Brooklyn, who has clinched
every point with a scripture citation to prove his assertion.”
I have not seen the arguments of the Negro doctor. It may be that he
traces the descent from the Ethiopian wife of Moses, or from one of the
wives of Solomon. But this trouble is not needed, for, in the time of
Jesus (as now) every person in the world had Negro blood in their veins,
and I am sure, from what we know of the character, sentiments, and
teachings of Jesus, that he would think it no dishonour to have a mixture
of the blood of all mankind in his veins.
Some of the Jewish writers are proud of the fact that their blood is
largely mingled with that of the Gentiles, especially with the royal, noble,
and aristocratic Gentiles. The Hebrew Standard of New York, under
the heading of “ Famous Folk of Jewish Blood ” says: —“Nearly all the
Imperial, Royal and noble families of Europe have Jewish blood in their
veins. There have been Popes of Hebrew descent A daughter of
old Perleoni, named Alberia, married King Roger of Sicily, to whom
almost every one pf the now reigning houses of Europe trace their
ancestry To-day there is scarcely a single family of the old French
aristocracy, either in the Faubourg St. Germain at Paris or in the pro-
vinces, which does not include members of the predestined race among its
more or less remote ancestors. Indeed, many of the bearers of the
grandest and most illustrious names in France have either Jewish mothers
or wives Beside the French nobles of ancient ancestry who have
Jewish blood in their veins there are an immense number of Portuguese,
German, Dutch, Belgian, and. Levantine Hebrews established at Paris and
naturalised as Frenchmen, who have obtained by purchase titles of duke,
marquis, count, and baron from either the Papal or the Royal Government
at Rome. It will be a surprise to learn that the nation which ranks next
to France as regards the Hebrew strain in the blood of its nobility is
Russia, the country above all others which is distinguished for its ani-
mosity towards the Jewish race. There is not at the present moment a
single family of the higher grades of nobility in Russia which has not at


any one time or another daring the past two centuries affiliated and inter-
married with the four great princely houses of Bragation, Davidoff,
Emerietinski, and Muskranski. Each of these latter claims to be descended
in an unbroken, direct line from the Biblical King David, and, like the
Georgian princely family of Gmiel, are proud of their Jewish ancestry,
[n Germany and Aastro-Hungary many of thegrandest families in the land
have Hebrew blood in their veins, and have marriages with Jewesses
recorded in their family archives A great German—or, rather,
European —family, in the blood of which the Hebraic strain is particularly
strong, is that of Saxe-Cohurg, which has intermarried with most of the
reigning houses enumerated in the ‘ Almanach de Gotha.’ Prince
Bismarck derives his Jewish blood from his mother, whose father,
Anastasias Menken,'one of the favourite bureaucrats of Frederick the
Great, was of Hebrew parentage.”
The writer mentions many important individuals who have married
Jewesses, including the English noblemen —the Duke of St, Albans, Lord
Battersea, Lord Rosebery, etc. ; but to every king, or prince, or nobleman
who has married a Jewess a thousand common people have married,
and so the everlasting blood-mixing has gone on right along the line.
OElate years the marriage of Jew and Gentile has become more common
than ever. It is said that in America such mixed marriages are becoming
very common, A few years ago I asked a Jewish lady in London about
the frequency of these marriages, and her reply was that “ since the mar-
riage of Lord Rosebery with Miss Rothschild, such marriages have become
fashionable andnnmerous.” ] ust so ; and with the irresistible progress of
human unity, such marriages will become more and more numerous ;
meanwhile the distinction of Jew and Gentile will gradually vanish away.
The following are some special causes of the mixture of races through-
out the world, ancient aud modern: —
MIXTURE THROUGH SLAVERY.
One of the greatest, if not the greatest and most comprehensive cause of
the blending of the peoples of the world, has been that of slavery among
the Egyptians, Polynesians, Chaldeans, Persians, Jews, Arabians, Greeks,
Romans, English, French, Germans, Dutch, Russians, Spaniards, Portu"
guese, Mexicans, Peruvians, Hindoos, Chinese, Africans; in fact among
the peoples of ancient and modern times, the blood of the slaveholder and
his male following have been more or less blended with the blood of his
female slaves. The latest phase of this on a large scale was that of North
•and South America aid the "West Indians. As we have previously shown
there cannot be less than fifteen million blends between the Whites and the
Negro slaves in America and its islands, and so it has been in almost
■every country where there have been slaves; blending of the races has
gone extensively and rapidly on.
Some have said that marriage of the White and Coloured is unnatural,
but speaking'of mixing in America, a late waiter in The Nation (New York)


says: —“ Bleaching went on under slavery at a rate and with an openness
which proved that nature offered no invincible barrier to the union and
mixture of the dominant and subject race.”
There was blending even among the Negroes themselves. The slaves
brought to America were of many African tribes or nations. Air, Thomas,
in his book, “ Fvoudacity, ” enumerates 16 races—Mandingoes, Koulahs,
Yorubas, etc.;—all these have blended together with each other and
with the whites in the great crucible of American slavery.
Some of the prettiest women in America are “ coloured and there are
tens of thousands of beautiful mulatto, quadroon, octoroon, and lighter
shades of women, the descendants of slaves, living married and unmarried
with white men throughout the United States, and the continual mingling
of the blood goes on into the national circulation.
Speaking of the South African slaveholder and his female slaves,
Olive Schreiner, the famous South African writer, sa\s: —“The bulk of
that half-caste population which to-da}- fills our Western towns and
throngs upon our Western farms, and which is found scattered over the
whole of South Africa, arose originally and mainly as the result of sexual
intercourse between the Boer and his imported slaves; and also with such
aboriginal Hottentots or Bushmans, as he obtained possession of.
*' In the early records of the Colony we find that out of every four children born
to slave mothers three were at one time the children ofi white men and masters.
Only nineteen years ago there died in the Colony an old man who left
behind him forty half-caste descendants—grandchildren and others—and
whose standard saying in his early days is reported to have been : ‘When
I want a smart slave, then I beget him ! ’
“ It may be remarked that no particular turpitude can be attributed to
the action of the Boer in this matter. English, Dutch-Huguenot, or
Spaniard, our Indo-European pride of race and our vaunted self-respect
have always failed to save our breed where Arian males have become
absolutely possessed of even the most loathsome or degraded females of
non-Arian peoples, That our pride should have the strength to save our
blood is a dream of the future, not a realization of the past.” Just so,
and only a dream ; for human nature will prevail in the future as it has in
the past. The females of all faces will be educated and raised up, but
they will continue to blend.
THE SOLDIERS’ MIXTURE.
Armies in prolonged occupation of subject countries are great agencies
in the blending of races. In the year 43 of the Christian Era, Aulus
Plautius, a Roman General, landed in Britain with an army of 50,000
men. His army and navy would be composed of Roman soldiers, a
number of mercenaries consisting probably of Greeks, Syrians, Parthians,
Armenians, Sicilians, Sardinians, Egyptians, Germans, Gauls, and other
nationalities subject to the Roman power, and also galley-slavescomposed
of Phoenicians, Jews, Negroes and others. Thousands of lusty Roman


soldiers and many of the different nationalities remained in military
occupation of Britain, and were continually replenished from abroad for
more than 330 years, and undoubtedly many, if not most of them, would
form marriage, or sexual connexions, with the native females of Britain.
Hence the blood of these Romans, Greeks, Syrians, Parthians, Armenians,
Sicilians, Sardinians, Egyptians, Germans, Gauls, Jews, Phoenicians,
Hegroes, or whoever made up the Roman army and navy, would be more
or less blended into the British race. It is now 1,500 years, or 50 genera-
tions, since the Romans and their following left Britain, but the blood of
their heterogeneous army, including the African galley-slaves, is now
"blended in every Britisher in existence. After this came the Saxons, then
the Danes, then the Normans, and the blood of these three peoples also
runs in the veins of every Britisher. And soil has been with every army of
lengthened occupation throughout the world ; the conquerors always mix
their blood with that of the conquered people.
The Saracen and Moorish occupation of Spain and Portugal, for
hundreds of years, introduced much Arab, Moorish, and even Negro
hlood into the Spanish and Portuguese peoples.
The Mongol Tartar, and the Manchu Tartar, and many other military
occupations of China, have continually mixed the people of China.
The Mongol or Mongol Tartar occupation, and many other military oc-
cupations have continually mixed the people of India, and so it has been with
all the prolonged military occupations, at all times, amongst all the nations
of the world; they have all materially mixed the peoples, as a rule through
the conquering soldier taking to wife or concubinage the native females.
The British occupation in India has, between the military and the
native women, produced hundreds of thousands of Eurasians, or Mulattoes,
Quadroons, and Octoroons, and further mixtures. The British occupation
of Burmah, and Ceylon, and Mauritius, and the Cape, and Malta, and
Hong Kong, and all the British military occupations have produced mixed
offspring with the native women,
And the French occupation of St. Domingo, and Algiers, and Tonquin,
and Madagascar, and all the French military occupations have produced
mixed offspring with the native women.
And the Spanish occupation of Mexico, and Peru, and Chili, and Cuba,
and the Philippines, etc., has done the same.
And the Portuguese occupation of Brazil, and Goa, and Macao, and
Angola, etc., has done the same.
And the Dutch occupation of Java, and all the rest of the Dutch Indian
possessions has done the same.
And so on with all the prolonged occupations of Russia, Turkey, Austria,
and all the powers ; they have all produced a mixture of the races.
Another minor, but extensive, mixture of the races, is what may be termed
THE SAILORS’ MIXTURE.
For thousands of years, but particularly within the last two or three
centuries, the mariners of the world have mixed their blood with the


native women in every port of call; and sometimes individual sailors even
have wives and families in more than one port. The sailors of the prin-
ciple maritime nations, the English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and
Dutch, have more or less blended with the Hindoos, Burmese, Cingalese,
Chinese, Tonquinese, Siamese, Japanese, Javanese, Malays. Philippinoes,
Algerians, Egyptians, Negroes, Indians, Polynesians, in fact with most of
the coloured coast peoples of the world. And many tens of thousands of
these indiscriminate mixtures are going on, distributing their mixed blood
into new generations, and will continue to do so. Thee again them is
THE TRADERS' MIXTURE.
From all time, in all parts of the world, many traders have married or
held friendly intercourse with the native women in the different countries
where trade has brought or located them, as Europeans in the treaty
ports of China, and the cities of India; in fact in all the principal cities and
towns of the world, the opportunity occurring to the trader has materialy-
mixed the races.
PROXIMITY A CAUSE OF MIXING.
In every part of the world the people or races living near to each other
resemble each other more than those living at a distance, in form, feature
mind, language, customs, etc.: this comes principally of social association
and blood-mixing.
A writer on this subject says :—All races, along their borders, merge
into contiguous races. .. . Results of intermixtures are seen in the blended
shades which characterise the co-terminous lines of all recognized races.
As on the east of Africa the black tribes have blended with Semites and
Hamites, so on the north, Egyptian and Berber intermixtures have so
obliterated racial boundaries that we can only say, the farther we proceed
southward the more negroid becomes the type, and the nearer we
approach the Mediterranean the more European the type."
The author of the " New Spirit' 1 article, Tolstoi, says:—"lt happens
with the regularity of an ethnic law that every race partakes of the
characteristics of neighbouring races."
MIXTURE BY EMIGRATION.
Emigration is the greatest cause of the mixture of races. There is
probably not a tribe of people on earth that live in the country where
their original ancestors did. The love of adventure, or the love of con-
quest, or the exigencies of human life have ceaselessly moved population
from one country to another. A moderate sized volume would not contain
even a concise record of all the migrations, conquests, and colonizations,
brought down to us by history and legends of ancient and mediaeval times.
Parts of humanity have been ever on the move into other lands.
In modern times, happily more on peace-and-progress lines, millions of
English, millions of Irish, millions of Scotch, millions of Germans, millions
of French, millions of Italians, and lesser numbers of nearly all the races
of the world, have migrated into new or already occupied countries.
There is not a country in the world without foreigners in it, and there is


not a country in the •world where these foreigners have not blended more
or less with, the natives of such countries and with each, other. And, be-
longing to the three great coloured races of mankind, hundreds of
thousands of Chinese, hundreds of thousands of Hindoos, and, by force,
millions of Negroes have migrated into, and more or less mixed with the
people of these countries. In fact, mankind has ever been, and is now
more and more, bee ~ming like unto the figures in a kaleidoscope, continually
moving and continuady blending into new combinations.
Speaking of this eternal race movement in Europe, Dr. Gliddon in his
'"lndigenous Races ol the Earth,” says: —" On the continent of Europe
there has been for several thousand years such a constant flux and re-flux
of people from wars and migratione, that races have become so mingled,
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic, astorenderit impossible now to un-
ravel the human maze and to give its proper value to each indigenous race.”
Respecting the movement of emigration towards America, another
writer says;—“The vast flow of currents of humanity never ceases to
wind over the face of the earth, and it seems that the general direction cf
the movement has been the same for thousands of years. One current
after another has been dammed for a time; but the vast, vague, general
tendency remains the same. As soon as a line of least resistance is found
out, then a hood of population is poured along it, and, little by little, with
the force of a glacier and the swiftness of driven water, the stream of
human creatures flows, , . . So this tide of the human race sets west-
ward ; and what will be the result of its flowing no man can say. In a
few years the population of the States will be two hundred millions; and
that amazing concourse of people will go on subtly blending, with
infinite complications, until a new race appears on earth surpassing even
the modern English breed in complexity of ancestry.”
RELIGION A CAUSE OF MIXTURE.
Religion has been a very potent cause of the mixing of races. Most
children brought into the fold of any religion, generally marry to persons
belonging to that religion, however different may be their race, and every-
body everywhere likes to marry a person of their own religion ; race
generally becomes a secondary consideration
There are many other causes uf the blending of the races such as
travelling, wealth, education, association, language, etc. but time and
space is limited, and I am compelled to close this part of the argument.
But the evidence which I have adduced clearly shows that mankind in all
countries, and of all races, and tongues, and creeds, and colours, are
gradually blending together, and my own opinion has long been, and I be-
come more confirmed in it, that tl’e world is gradually coming together
into one vast political and social coufederatior, with local home rule every-
where, with
One Universal Government.
One Universal Language.
One Universal Literature,
One Universal Education.
One single, sensible Religion, and
One vast, united, Human Family.
(To be continued.)


A White Australia Impossible.—Part 4.
The
Negro.
THE THIRD GREAT COLOURED RACE OF THE WORLD.
BY E. W. C OLE.
Archbishop Ireland says;—"l am prepared to say there is no such
thing as a colour line except in the minds of those whose intellects are
clouded by unjust reasoning. lam ashamed that prejudices of this kind
.should exist, especially in the United States, which so proudly, boasts of
being a republic where freedom and fraternity are the foundation stones.
I know no colour line—l will acknowledge none.”— NineteenthCentury, 1899.
President Roosevelt says ;—"I cannot consent that the door of hope is
to be shut upon any man merely upon the ground of race or colour."—
The Nation, New York, December 18; 1902.
“ Col. R. G. Ingersoll says:—“Allow me to say that I do not believe
any man fit for the Presidency of this great Republic (United States), who
is capable of insulting a down-trodden race. I never met a Negro that I
do not feel like asking his forgiveness for the wrongs that my race has in-
flicted on his. I remember that from the white man he received for 200
years agony and tears ; I remember that my race sold a child from the
agonised breast of a mother; I remember that my race trampled with the
feet of greed upon all the holy relations of life; and I ,do not feel like
insulting the coloured man; I feel rather like asking thd forgiveness of his
race for the crimes that my race have put upon him."
Rev. Dr. Hall says; —“Ido not care whether a man is black, or white, or
yellow, or chocolate-coloured, if he has in himself the idea of Christ, of
doing as Christ did when he sat by the well in this low world of ours. If
he has time to visit the hungry, and the weary, and the sad, he is good
enough for me.” — Arena. iBg6.


Negro Boy.
A Basuto Girl.
Soudanese Boy.
Mulatto Girl.
Kaffir Boy.
A Moorish Child.
Balolo Boy.
Central African Boy.
Abyssinian Boy.


There are three great ‘‘coloured ” races of mankind upon the earth, the
Chinese, the Hindoo, and the Negro. In round figures the Chinese
number about 400 millions, the Hindoos about 300 millions, and the
Negroes about 200 millions. The population of the world is about 1,600
millions, so that the three coloured races comprise more than half of
humankind, and the nearest shore of each of the great races lies only
fourteen days' steaming from Australia.
I shall commence with the Negro race, for two reasons: firstly, that
it has been in the past, and still is, most closely in contact with, and its
blood most blended with that of the “ white ” races ; and secondly, because
it is more convenient for me, as information about the Negro at present
lies closest to my hand. Africa, the home of the Negro, the Dark Continent,
the Hot Continent, par excellence, contains nearly a quarter of the land area
of the globe. I shall include as Negroes all the coloured races of Africa,
(for all without exception have more or less of negro blood in them) and
also all those who have been carried from Africa into America and other
countries, and their progeny. Almost the whole of the Negroes who have
left Africa, have been forcibly carried from their own to other countries as
slaves; it is therefore necessary, in giving an account of them, to enter into
and enlarge somewhat upon the history and nature of slavery. Slavery
was common with all, or nearly all, the ancient nations ; the Chinese, the
Hindoos, the Persians, the Arabians, tho Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the
Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, the Mexicans, the Peruvians, all had slaves
A White Australia impossible.
PART 4.
THE NEGRO.


They were acquired in various ways; some were captured in war, the stronger
man enslaving the weaker, some were bred up like cattle, some bought as
children from impoverished parents, some clandestinely stolen, some
bought from creditors who had power to sell them, some bought of them-
selves, etc. In fact slavery from various causes existed more or less in
every country of the ancient world. As we come down through the ages
slavery still existed innearly every country; in England, in France, in Italy,
in Spain, in Germany, in Turkey, in Russia, etc., it was still the order of the
day. Respecting slavery in England, an authority before me says:—
“Eaws respecting the sale of slaves were made by Alfred; the English
peasantry were sold for slaves in Saxon and Norman times, children were
sold in Bristol Market like cattle for exportation, many were sent to
’’reland and to Scotland.” Another says ;—“ A thousand years ago nearly
all the working people of England were slaves; there was a regular slave
market at Bristol for hundreds of years.” Another says:—“ln Britain,
great numbers of the Celtic and other nations were enslaved by the Anglo-
Saxons, and the Christian Anglo-Saxons had a regular trade with the
continent in Irish slaves.” An of about the year 1550
says: — 41 A statute was enacted by Edward VI, that a runaway, or anyone
who lived idly for three days, should be brought before two justices of the
peace, and marked Y with a hot iron on the breast, and adjudged the
slave of him who brought him for two years. He was to take the slave
and give him bread, water or small drink, and refuse meat, and cause him
to work by beating, chaining, or otherwise; and, if within that space he
absented himself fourteen days, he was to be marked on the forehead or
cheek, by a hot iron, with an S, and he his master’s slave forever ; second,
desertion was made felony. It was lawful to put a ring of iron round his
neck, arm, or leg. A child might be put apprentice, and, on running
away, become a slave to his master. ” In 1574, Queen Elizabeth ordered
her bondsmen i n the western counties to be made free at easy rates, and
by 3 660, serfdom, the modified form of slavery, was finally extinguished in
England, But, although slavery was abolished in England, the English
nation still bought, sold, and employed African slaves in their colonies,
and as late as the year 1770, nearly 200 English vessels were engaged in
the trade. In the middle ages, and later, a great number of Europeans
were captured and kept in slavery by the Mahomedans of Asia and Africa
The famous St. Vincent de Paul was a captive amongst them, and in the
year 1575 Cervantes, the famous author of “ Don Quixote ”, was taken
prisoner, remained a slave for five years, and was then ransomed for
about £IOO ; and there were at that time 25,000 captives in Algiers.
A writer says;—“The Emperor Charles in 1535, having defeated the
Sultan of Algiers, set free 20,000 Christian captive slaves.”


A PERSIAN SLAVE IN TARTARY.
As before remarked, a large portion of all the peoples of the world have
been slaves. Probably 500 years ago more than half the entire inhabitants
of the world were slaves: and 100 years ago more than a quarter of them
were slaves or serfs ; but some races by tiieir docile and peaceable disposi-
tion make better slaves than others. The .Europeans tried in St. Domingo,
and elsewhere in America, to make slaves of the Indians, but they were
haughty, stubborn, sulky, and pinedaway in servitude, and made very
unsatisfactory slaves ; seeing this the would-be slave-holders adopted the
African negro as more suitable to their purpose. The following passage
gives a clear history of the change
" The Spaniards, in their American possessions, sought to make slaves
of the Indians ; but the character of the race made it very difficult to en-
slave them. When force sufficient could be brought to hold them in ser-
vitude, they chafed so under the yoke that they soon broke down and
died. In fact, the American Indian, whether of North or South America,
is not of the temper of which slaves are made. Early in the sixteenth
century Bartolorae de las Casas, called “ the Apostle of the American
Indians,” having long witnessed the dreadful cruelties of the Spaniards to
the Indians whom they sought to hold in bondage, earnestly raised his
voice against it. He returned to Spain, pleaded the cause of the Indians
before the Emperor Charles V. in person, and suggested that their places
might be supplied by negroes from Africa. Not only were the blacks at
that time held by Christendom to be under the proscription of their Maker,


but their lot in their native land was so terrible that any change must
be for the better. Thousands of them were taken prisoners in war, and,,
if not sold into slavery, were butchered. So, on the whole, it would be a-
blessing to the Indians to bring Africans to take their places on the Spanish
plantations, and it would furthermore be a blessing to the blacks them-
selves ; it might save them from death, and very likely from tortures
worse than death. The Emperor listened attentively, and was convinced;
and, ere long thereafter, ships were sent down to the coast of Africa, and
the African slave-trade was commenced. The Indians were gradually set
free, and the task-masters found that the change was decidedly for their
benefit ”
Perhaps of all the peoples of the world the Negroes of Africa have made
the most successful slaves, being docile, good-tempered, strong, and hard-
working. From timeira memorial Africa has always been the favourite hunt-
ing and recruiting groundfor slavers. She always supplied slaves for work,
and poor, diabolically mutilated men, called eunuchs, for the slaveholders*
harems. When Mungo Park travelled through Africa 100 years ago he
told us that three out of every four of the entire population were slaves;
and to-day the hot Dark Continent is the last great stronghold of slavery-
on earth. For thousands of years, through this cursed and inhuman slave
traffic, the kind-hearted sons and daughters of Africa have suffered more
than the rest of mankind. During this century the accounts of the
inhuman cruelty and butchery in capturing the slave, driving him from
his home to the coast (frequently in manacles), and carrying him across
the sea in duugeon-ships, have been most harrowing. The record of the
slave-trade in Africa shows us the most inhuman and horrible feature in
the history of mankind, and Dr. Livingstone, who saw much of it, des-
cribed it as “ the great open sore of the world.”
The following are some recitals of the horrors of the slave-trade in
Africa, written principally within the last fifty years as these evidences are
the most easily obtainable; but the earlier traffic was equally inhuman and
revolting.
SLAVERY IN AFRICA.
Professor Drummond, in Scribner's Magazine, June 1889, writing on
" Slavery in Africa,” says:—
“A few years ago the well-known German explorer, Captain Wissmann,
found himself within a few degrees of the equator, in the heart of Africa.
It vras a region of great beauty and fertility, with forests and rivers, and
great and raany-peopled towns. 1 'he inhabitants ivere qmet and peaceable,
and lived alife of artless simplicity and happiness. For generations they had


been established there ; they grew their fruits in their gardens, and ex-
celled in the manufacture of cloth, pottery, ironware, and wood-carving.
No Arab slaver had ever visited this country. Within its borders the
very report of a gun had never once been heard. But as the explorer
walked among the palm-trees and met the kindly eyes of the country-people who
came to gaze upon the white man, his heart sank. This Arcadia could not
last. He knew, from what had happened in adjacent districts, from what
happens every day in Africa, that its fate was sealed.”
“And the sequel showed too clearly that his silent prophecy was right.
Four years passed. The same traveller led his caravan once more across
this sylvan country. ‘As we approached the villages we wondered that no
one came out to receive us with rejoicings, that no merry laughter greeted
out ears. We entered the deep shade of the mighty palms, and to the
right and left were the clearings where our friends had stood. Tall grass
had overgrown all that formerly gladdened us. The crops were destroyed;
■everything was laid waste. The silence of death breathes over the lofty
palms waving in the wind. We enter, and it is in vain we look for the
happy homesteads and happy old scenes. A charred pole here and there,
A few banana trees, are the only evidences that man once dwelt here.
Bleached skulls by the road-side, and the'skeletons of human hands at-
tached to poles, tell the story of what has happened since our last visit.’ ”
ON THE SLAVE MARCH.
The men who appear the strongest, and whose escape is to be feared,
have their hands tied, and sometimes their feet, in such fashion that
walking becomes a torture to them ; and on their necks are placed yokes
which attach several of them together. They march all day ; at night,
when they stop to rest, a few handfuls of raw ‘sorgho’ are distributed
.among the captives. This is all their food. Next morning they must
start again. But after the first day or two the fatigue, the sufferings, and
the privations have weakened a great many. The women and the aged
are the first to halt. Then, in order to strike terror into this miserable
mass of human beings, their conductors, armed with a wooden bar to
economize powder, approach those who appear to be the most exhausted,
and deal them a terrible blow on the nape of the neck. The unfortunate
victims utter a cry, and fall to the ground in the convulsions of death.
The terrified troop immediately resumes its march. Terror has imbued
■even the weakest with new strength. Each time someone breaks down
the same horrible scene is repeated. At night, on arriving at their halting-
place, after the first days of such a life, a not less frightful scene awaits
them. The traffickers in human flesh have acquired by experience a


knowledge of how much their victims can endure. A glance shows them
those who will soon sink from weariness; then, to economize the scanty
food which they distribute, they pass behind these wretched beings and
fell them with a single blow. Their corpses remain where they fall, when
they are not suspended on the branches of the neighbouring trees ; and it is
close to them that their*companions are obliged to eat and to sleep. But
what sleep, it may be easily imagined. Among the young Negroes
snatched by us from this hell and restored to liberty there are some who,
long afterwards, wake up every night, shrieking fearfully. They behold
again, in their dreams, the abominable and bloody scenes which they
have witnessed. In this manner the weary tramp continues—sometimes
for months, when the -caravan comes from a distance. Their number
diminishes daily. If, goaded by their cruel sufferings, some attempt to-
rebel or to escape, their fierce masters cut them down with their swords,
and leave them as they lie along the road, attached to one another by
their yokes. Therefore it has been truly said that, if a traveller lost the
way leading from Equatorial Africa to the towns where slaves are sold, he
could easily find it again by the skeletons of the Negroes with which
it is strewed.
“Ominously prominent among the loads were many slave-sticks, to be
handy if any turned refractory or if any likely stranger were met. Mingling
with, and guarded by them, came the wretched, overburdened, tied-up
slaves. The men who might still have had spirit to try and escape were
driven, tied two-and-two, in the terrible goree or taming stick, or in .gangs
of about a dozen, each with an iron collar let into a long iron chain, many,
even so soon after the start, staggering under their loads. And the
women ! I can hardly trust myself to think or speak of them —they were
fastened to chains or thick bark ropes; very many, in addition to their
heavy weight of grain or ivory, carried little brown babies, dear to their
hearts as a white man’s child to his. The double burden was almost too-
much, and still they struggled wearily on, knowing too well that when
they showed signs of fatigue, not the slaver’s ivory, but the living child
would be torn from them and thrown aside to die. One poor old woman
I could not help noticing. She was carrying a biggish boy who should
have been walking, but whose thin, weak legs had evidently given way;
she was tottering already, it was the supreme effort of a mother's love—
but all in vain ; for the child, easily recognizable, was brought into camp
a couple of hours later by one of my hunters, who had found him on the
path. We had him cared for; but his poor mother would never know.
Already, during the three days’ journey from Liendwe, death had been
freeing the captives. It was well for them ; still we could not help shud-
dering as, in the darkness, we heard the howl of the hyenas along the track/* -


At one time Dr. Livingstone writes:—“Would that we could give
a comprehensive account of the horrors of the slave-trade, with an
approximation to the number of lives it yearly destroys! for we feel sure
that, were even half the truth told and recognised, the feelings of men
would be so thoroughly roused that this devilish traffic in human flesh
would be put down at all risks ; but neither we nor any one else have the
statistics necessary.for a work of this kind. Let us state what we do know
of one portion of Africa, and then every reader who believes our tale caa
apply the ratio of the known misery to find out the unknown. We were
informed by Colonel Rigby, late H.M. Political Agent and Consul at
Zanzibar, that nineteen thousand slaves, from the Nyassa country alone,
pass annually through the custom-house of that island. This is exclusive,
of course, of those sent to Portuguese slave-ports. Let it not be supposed
for an instant that this number, nineteen thousand, represents all the
victims. Those taken out of the country are but a very small section of
the sufferers. We never realized the atrocious nature of the traffic until
we saw it at the fountain-head. There, truly, ‘ Satan has his seat.*
Besides those actually captured, thousands are killed, and die of their
wounds and famine, driven from their villages by the slave-raid proper.
Thousands perish in internecine war waged for slaves with their own
clansmen and neighbours, slain by the lust for gain, which is stimulated,
be it remembered, always by the slave-purchasers of Cuba and elsewhere.
The many skeletons we have seen, amongst rocks and woods, by the little
pools, and along the paths of the wilderness, attest the awful sacrifice of
human life, which must be attributed, directly or indirectly, to this trade
of hell.”
Another writer describes a scene which he witnessed in East Africa:—
“ The keeper of this den utters a hoarse cry (pousse une rougissement} : it is
the order for the merchandise to stand up. But many of them do not
obey. What is the matter ? Our interpreter, who has gone among the
groups, will tell us: listen to him. ‘The chains are too short: the dead
and the dying prevent the living from rising. The dead can say nothing;
but what do the dying say ? They say they are dying of—hunger.’
“ But let us leave the consideration of this trader’s picture as a whole,
and let ss look to some of the details. Who is this creature who holds
tightly in her arms a shapeless object covered with filthy leaves? On
looking close you see that it is a woman, lying in the mud, and holding
her dried-up breast to the child of which she has just been delivered. And
those little girls who totter as they strive to rise, and who seem to ask for
pity, on what are they leaning ? On a dead body. And this man, who is
working with his hands a piece of mud, which he is continually placing on
his eye, what is the matter with him? Our guide tells us :*He is a


troublesome fellow, who set a bad example by throwing himself at my feet
this morning, and saying with a loud voice, * L am dying of hunger’, and I
gave him a blow which burst his eye: he is henceforth good for nothing;'
and he added, with a sinister loch, ' He won’t be hungry long ! ’ ”
Two thousand miles away in the great Saharan desert Monsieur Rohlf
was an eye-witness, during his explorings between the years 1865 and
1807, of these mysteries of crime, which he was thefirst to denounce, and he
describes them in frightful detail. He writes : —“ People who do not know
the way to Bornoa, have nooccasion to ask it; they will be sufficiently guided
by the human bones with which they will find the road thickly strewed
both to right and left At certain points the way across the desert is
literally lovlwei with skeletons. That these are the remains of slaves is
sufficiently proved by their being left unburied ; they lie just whore they
dropped, exhausted with fatigue and consumed with thirst, not worth the
trouble of making a grave for; some of the skeletons still have on the Ratonn
(the distinctive garment of the Negro).” “We need but see,” says the
same traveller in his description of the Southern Sahara, “ one of the slave
caravans crossing the immense solitudes of the desert, unbroken, some-
times, for many days’ journeys hy any trace of water or of verdure, to
understand what the poor slave must suffer who is compelled to track it,
hungry and dying with fatigue and thirst.”
In another place he says; —"The desert with its scorching sands,
devoid of verdure and springs, with its storm-driven dust that buries
caravans, seems more terrible than the ocean, and to cross it requires a
more lengthened period. From the town of Tripoli to the Lake Tchad,
there are nearly twenty degrees—an extent of land more than twice and a
half the length of Great Britain. It is by this route that the convoys of
Negroes are driven by their pitiless masters, condemned, under the burn-
ing sun, to the tortures of thirst, hunger, and fatigue. It is a long funereal
march in the midst of the solitude of the desert. The merchants take a
singular precaution lest the slave should rob them ofa few drops of water :
they place the leathern bottle in such position that the orifice is turned
towards the'head of the camel that carries it. The animal, which is itself
athirst, begins to cry as soon as the precious vessel is touched, and thus
the attempt to partake of its contents would be discovered. Thus thirst,
as well as bodily fatigue, has innumerable victims. When evening draws
on, the miserable groups often have not physical strength to drag their
weaned bodies to the springs that might slake their parched mouths.
Sometimes the wind causes the mouths of the wells to be filled with
sand. When this is the case, some of the negroes, not having sufficient
strength to wait until the needed clearance is made, die; and their com-
panions have barely the strength to remove the corpses.”


Mr. E. F. Berlioux, in a pamphlet entitled, “ The Slave Trade in Africa in
1872,” says: —“ One English officer estimates the annual sale on the east
coast of Africa at not less than 55,000 slaves. Now that we have surveyed
all the known scenes of the Eastern slave-trade, let us make a general
recapitulation. To these 30,000 unfortunate beings contributed to slaverv
by the State of Zanzibar, let us add an equal number of Negroes collected
in the valley of the Nile. Then there are those who cross the Sahara, and
come from the country of the Somalis. If these were equal to each of the
two others, it would amount to the frightful number of 90,000 souls carried
off every year by the slave-trade. In this devastation, which has never
yet been completely investigated, it is difficult to ascertain the exact
number. To be moderate in our calculations, we may compute it at
75,000, or say 70,000. Is not this frightful result enough to raise the
indignation of the civilised world ?
“But it is necessary to add a last sum in order to ascertain the real
number of the victims of this frightful commerce. It is computed by
Livingstone, that for one man carried away there are at least five left
dead; the latter having either fallen in fighting, or miserably perished.
In some instances we are told, by the same authority, that for one who
arrives at his destination, ten are destroyed. If we multiply by five, or by
a number midway between five and ten, the total number of victims of
this new trade will be somewhere between 350,000 and 550,000. Have
the most sanguinary wars been more destructive of human life ?”
Dr. Livingstone estimates that in some parts, nine lives are sacrificed
for every slave that reaches the coast. An Indian Sepoy, who accom-
panied a slave gang of 300 from the interior to the coast, saw no less than
100 of the gang murdered on their march down. He says: —“We wit-
nessed many murders, many deaths; and the path was strewn with the
bodies of those who had been killed. When we passed up with Dr.
Livingstone, the road stunk with the wayside corpses; it was so again
when we passed down. Every day we came upon the dead, and certainly
we witnessed not less than a hundred deaths. I with my own eyes saw
six men (at different times) choked to death ; the victims were forced to
sit leaning against a tree ; a strip of bark or a thong was looped around
the stem of the tree, pulled taut from behind, and the slave strangled. I
saw not less than fifteen slaves clubbed to death by heavy blows between
the eyes (which bespattered their faces with blood) or upon the head-
Children were felled in this way and put out of life by repeated blows
on the head.” —Blue Book on Slave Trade , IS7O.
Stanley, in his book on the Congo, gives a terrible account of how a
horde of desperate slave-catchers, 300 strong, during eleven months


cruelty desolated a peaceful country the size of Ireland, and, in five raids,
captured .5,000 slaves, mostly -women and children, at the awful expense
of 33,000 human lives, and all its attendant sufferings.
SLAVE GANG ON THE MARCH.
The poor mother dying and her child clinging to her, and the bones of others who had died
before on the route.


HORRORS OF THE MIDDLE PASSAGE.
Perhaps the most harrowing and cruel part of the slaving business took
place during what is called the Middle Passage, right across the tropical
part of the Atlantic from Africa to America. The slaves were mostly
crowded into small, incommodious vessels in a most insanitary manner,
breeding disease and death. Many thousands died on the crowded decks
through being exposed without shelter to a broiling sun, others were stifled
to death through being crowded into, and sometimes battened down into,
these floating “ black holes of Calcutta ” According to some authorities, the
loss of slaves was one in five during the passage, but sometimes it was
appallingly higher. The “ Encyclopaedia Britannica ” says that“ At one
time two-thirds of the slaves were murdered on the high seas by over-
crowding.” Sometimes when chased by a war cruiser, the slave-pirates
would throw the slaves overboard, to hide their crime ; sometimes they
would scuttle the ship, drowning all the slaves at once, and take to their
boats to escape.
It is said that as the traveller can find his way across Africa by follow-
ing the skeletons of slaves lying along the slave routes, so he could find
his way across the Atlantic by the skeletons of slaves thrown overboard,
if he could but see them through the water. This must bring a terrible
reflection to the perpetrators of these cruelties. It may not be that,
literally, at a final judgment the sea will give up her dead as evidence
against the sinner; but the despairing groans and beseeching looks of
anguish, in common justice must long remain in the memory of the guilty,
inhuman beings who caused them.
THE 5 LAVE PIRATE.
When swollen with hurricanes the billows rise,
To meet the lightning midway from the skies;
When from the unburthen’d hold his shrieking slaves
Are cast, at midnight, to the hungry waves ;
Not for his victims strangled in the deeps,
Not for his crimes the harden’d pirate weeps,
But grimly smiling, when the storm is o’er.
Counts his sure gains, and hurries back for more.
J. MONTGOMERY.


The Right Hon, William Wilberforce, in a letter to the Prince
de Talleyrand, dated October 14th, 1814, says;—
“And now you see the hitter cup of Africa filled to the very brim.
Vfet, bitter as it is, it is far exceeded in bitterness by the draught prepared
for the miserable wretches whom the slave ships carry away from her
much-injured coasts, by the miseries of the Middle Passage, as it is termed.
So manifold indeed were these miseries, so humiliating, so heart-rending,
that, when the interior of these floating prisons was first opened to the
view, they appeared almost to surpass the possibility of human endurance.
The habit of viewing and treating these wretched beings as articles of
merchandise, had so blinded the judgment and hardened the hearts of the
slave dealers, as to produce a savage brutality of treatment that was
destructive even, of the lives of its wretched victims, in spite of all those
considerations of self-interest which might have been deemed sufficient to
obtain for the slaves all those outward comforts, at least, which might be
supposed conducive to the preservation of their bodily health. Human
ingenuity had almost been exhausted in contriving expedients for crowd-
ing the greatest possible number of human bodies into a given space.
Imagine to yourself a vessel completely filled with these miserable
wretches, never before on ship-board; the men, commonly the greater
part of the cargo, United to each other (for the safety of the vessel) two
and two, sometimes men of different countries and languages, by fetters,
and, when brought on deck, additionally secured with chains 1 Conceive
the flooring of the decks and hold, and of intervening stages or platforms
also, for by far the greater part of the voyage completely covered with
human bodies, so closely as to touch each other and as to be unable of
themselves to change their position; often their limbs excoriated by lying
on the boards, or wounded by the fetters 1 Conceive, what often happens,
the flux, the small-pox, or some other epidemic breaking out among them!
I will not proceed ; I will only state that such scenes take place as are too
nauseously horrible for description, though not too bad for human avidity
for gain to subject fellow-creatures to undergo. The surgeons who have
witnessed these dreadful scenes assure us that the heat and stench are
almost insupportable ; and quite so when the badness of the weather
renders it necessary for the slaves to be closely confined below ; and it is
no uncommon event for slaves to expire by suffocation. But when
brought on deck there is but a poor mitigation of their sufferings. Even
the very mercies of the slave trade are cruel. Sea-sickness and mental
uneasiness must often make them loathe their food and feel averse to
exercise. But food and exercise are necessary to present the animal in
good condition at the place of sale. Eating, therefore, and dancing (as it
is called) in their fetters must be exacted by stripes ; and these vile indig


nities are not seldom practised on men of high spirits, of quick feelings,
sometimes even of literary acquirements. Mr. Park slates that out of 130
slaves which were the cargo—it is humiliating to our nature to use the
•expression—of the slave ship in which he sailed from the river Gambia to
the West Indies, iwentjMive could write the Arabic language. If we
•could doubt the intensity of their sufferings, we have a gauge by which
to measure it in the striking fact that in the very equipment of an African
ship there is a standing precaution against acts of suicide; a precaution,
however, that is often unavailing.”
THE SLAVE SHIP
Deep in the dark and foetid hold
Six hundred wretches wept;
They were slaves, that the cursed lust of gold
From their native land had swept;
And there they stood—the young and old—
While a pestilence o’er them crept.


Crammed in that dungeon-hold they stood
For many a day and night,
Fill the love of life was all subdued
By the fever's scorching blight ;
And their dim eyes wept half tears, half blood.
But still they stood upright.
And there they stood (the quick and dead)
Propped by that dungeon’s wall :
And the dying mother bent her head
On her child —but she could not fall ;
In cue dread night the life had fled
From half that were therein thrall.
The morning came, and the sleepless crew
Threw the hatchways open wide ;
Then the sickening fumes of death up-flew.
And spread on every side;
And, ere that eve. of the tyrant few
Full twenty souls had died.
THE WITNESSES.
In ocean's wide domains.
Half buried in the sands,
Like skeletons in chains
With shackled feet and hands.
Beyond the fall of dews,
Deeper than plummet lies,
Float ships, with all their crews.
No more to sink nor rise.
There the black slave-ship swims
Freighted with human forms.
Those fettered, tieshiess limbs
Are not the sport of storms.
These are the bones of slaves :
They gleam from the abyss;
They cry from yawning waves,
‘ ! AVe are the ]VitJiesscs f ’ ’
LONGFELLOW.


Cooper, in his “ Letters on the Slave Trade,” affirms that, “ For every
slave procured, ten are slaughtered in their own land by man ; a fifth die
on the passage ; and a third in the seasoning.”
RT. HON. WILLIAM WILBERFORCE.
REV. JOHN WESLEY.
Letter from the Rt. Hon. Wm. Wilber force to Prince de Talleyrand, on
the Slave-Trade :
EFFECT UPON AFRICAN RULERS.
“The older writers assure us that the criminal law of Africa used to be
very mild; but by degrees every crime, however trivial, has become pun-
ishable by being sold fora slave, with ail its dreadful consequences; and the
judge who tries the criminal, has commonly a share of the price for which
heissold. . . . Such are the methods by which from 80 to 100 thousands
of our fellow-creatures, a race of people, too, declared by Park, Golberry,
Winierbottom, and other respectable authorities, to be remarkable for
their attachment to their native soil, are annually torn from their country,
their homes, their friends, and from whatever is most dear to them. All
the ties of nature, and habit, and feeling, are burst asunder, and these
victims of our injustice are carried to a distant land to wear away the
whole remainder of their lives in a state of hopeless slavery and degrada-
tion, with the same melancholy prospect for their descendants after them
for ever. ‘Thus,’ as was acknowledged in the Assembly of Jamaica itself
by the historian of the West Indies, Mr. Edwards, though one of our chief
opponents, 'Thus, the greater part of that vast continent is rendered a
field of warfare and desolation; a wilderness, in which the inhabitants are
wolves towards each other; a scene of oppression, iraud, treachery, and
blood Finally, thus the slave trade has become entitled to the pre-
eminence in evil which the sober judgment of a great English statesman
assigned to it in those memorable words which he uttered in the British
Parliament, ' That the slave trade was the greatest practical evil that ever


had been suffered lo afflict the human race.’ Africa is one vast scene of
insecurity anarchy, and terror. That dreadful system of wrong and
robbery, bv so misapplied a courtesy of speech termed the Trade in
Slaves, beeps the vast area throughout which it prevails in a state of con-
stant disquiet and alarm. ”
In the foregoing- pages I hare cited the testimony of eye-witnesses and
others, to prove the extent of the slave-catching in Africa, the driving
them to the coast, and the transporting- them across the Atlantic with all
(he attendant cruelties and mortality. Harrowing and pitiful details might
be given of the cruelties of the slave-holders and the sufferings of the
slaves in the West Indies and other colonies, hut as I shall give exactly
similar facts when speaking of slavery in the Southern States of North
America later on, I shall not give them here. Suffice it to say that the
terrible sufferings became spoken of and thought about, and, with the grow-
ing humanity of civilization, horror at the cruelties and sympathy for the
victims increased until, about the beginning of the nineteenth century,
.a strong and united feeling began to grow into action, just and philan-
thropic men, one after another, gave public utterance to their thoughts
in forcible and eloquent language, and worked with will and energy to put
down this terrible crime against onr common humanity.
William Cowper, Edmund Burke, John Wesley, William Wilberforce,
Thomas Clarkson, Granville Sharp, Zachary Macaulay, Fowell Buxton,
Thomas Chalmers, Samuel Rom illy. Lord Macaulay, Lord Brougham, and
many other eminent philanthropists raised their voice against it.
John Wesley, the great and good, stigmati-zed slavery as “the sum
OF AIL VILLAINIES,”
Cowper wrote :
I would not have a slave to till my ground,
To carry me. to fan me while I sleep
And tremble when I wake, for all the wealth
That sinews bought and sold have ever earned,
No I Dear as freedom is, and in my heart's
Just estimation prized above all price,
I had much rather be myself the slave,
And wear the bonds, than fasten them on him,
George Canning, speaking in Parliament against the arguments of those
who defended slavery, said: —•“ Its infant lips were stained with blood, its
whole existence has been a series of rapacity, cruelty and murder.”
“Wilberforce wrote against it and brought it forward with great ability,
-eloquence, and persistency in the House of Commons, and was un-
doubtedly the principal agent in carrying a Bill for emancipation. He


made it the great object of his life, and he gloriously succeeded. An
authority gays:—“During twenty years he continued to solicit the emancipa-
tion of the negro, by speeches in Parliament; by seeking the co-operation
of the clergy of every denomination; by his own pen and purse, and those
of his friends ; by negotiating with foreign powers, and by conciliating the
support of every public man or minister in his native country. Con-
tinually being disappointed, he was ever ready to proceed with new vigour,
until, after pursuing his philanthropic labours with a persistency and
energy truly marvellous, he saw the hour of his success at hand. In 1807
the abolition bill passed the Lords, and its after progress through the
Commons was one uninterrupted ovation to its projector. Sir Samue
Romilly, after an eloquent speech in favour of the bill, concluded by
‘ contrasting the feelings of Napoleon in all his greatness with those of
that honoured individual who would this day lay his head upon his pillo w
and remember that the slave-trade was no more.’ ”
But Wilberforce was ably assisted in his great and humane work by
many others. William Clarkson ably seconded him. He was educated
for the Church, but resigned to follow his heart’s desire, the
freeing of the slave, and to this end he worked earnestly, long and
successfully. During several years he conducted a correspondence with
upwards ot four hundred persons, and travelled more than thirty-five
thousand miles in search of evidence.
Granville Sharp, sometimes called “ the greatest of all the great aboli-
tionists”, was an earnest and determined actor and writer in favour of the
freedom of the slave. He took up the cases of different negroes, and
courageously fought them in the courts and finally triumphed. “He
defended the cause of the negro slave Somerset, securing the decision of
the twelve judges (1772) that whene cr a slave touches English soiihe becomes free."
Fowell Buxton, not a man of genius or bright as the world reckons,
but a man of invincible purpose —“earnest, straight-forward, resolute,
energetic ”; a man who in the interest of humanity followed out his own
n>axim, one of the best maxims lor progress and success ever uttered by
man, one of those “jewels on the forefinger of time” which help millions
ol other men forward—“ The longer I live, the more lam certain that the
great difference between men, between the feeble and the powerful, tire
great and the insignificant, is energy—invincible determination —a purpose
once fixed, and then death or victory! That quality will do anything that
can be done in this world; and no talents, no circumstances, no
opportunities, will make a two-legged creature a Man without it.”
Lord Brougham denounced this “sum of all villainies” in one of the
finest pieces of eloquence ever uttered in the English language. Speaking


to the question in the House of Commons, in the year 1830, he said :
"Tell me not of rights—talk not of the property of the slaveholder in his
slaves. J deny the right—l acknowledge not the property. The principles,
the feelings of our common nature rise in rebellion against it. Be the
appeal made to the understanding or to the heart, the sentence is the same
that rejects it. In vain you tell me of laws that sanction such a claim !
There is a law above all* the enactments of human codes—the same
t liroughou t the world, the same in all times It is the law written on
the heart of man by the finger of his Maker, and by that law, unchange-
able and eternal, while men despise fraud, loath rapine, and abhor blood,
they will reject with indignation the wild and guilty phantasy that man
can hold property in man ! ’’
At length the healthy public feeling against slavery prevailed, and,
amongst other advances of practical humane action, the British Parlia-
ment voted to buy off and liberate the slaves in the British
colonies. There were at that time in the British Colonial possessions
nearly 800,000 slaves, and in the United States about 2,000,000. If Amer-
i :a had then liberated her slaves on the same terms as the British, it would
h ive cost her only £"50,000,000 ; but this was not to be, and according to
the statistical authorities it cost her 1,400 million pounds sterling, nearly
800,000 lives, and the untold misery and suffering of a terrible civil war.
A SLAVE MARKET IN AFRICA.


Greece.
Day’s wage.
Value.
Labourer ..
6d.
£56
Boatman ..
6d.
£60
Cutler
.. Sd.
£n
Tanner
.. lod.
£ 10 3
Farmer
.. rod.
£™3
Rome.
Day’s wage,
Value.
Shepherd .,
6d
Gardener ..
8d.
£65
Baker
.. ipd.
Carpenter .
.. 2od.
£148
Blacksmith
. . 20d.
/H5
VALUE OF SLAVES.
The value of a human slave is according to circumstances, like other
articles of sale, generally ruled by supply and demand and adaptability to
the purpose of the buyer.
According to standard authorities, the ordinary wages of a slave and his
market value were approximately as follows, in Greece and Rome:
One authority says:—“Some of the wealthy Romans had as many as
10,000 slaves. The minimum price fixed by law was £l6, but after great
victories they could sometimes be bought for a few shillings on the field
•of battle.”
Another says : —“ It is very curious to read in an old Roman history of
the prices paid for slaves in the palmy days of the Empire. As a general
thing, a labourer could be bought for about £l6 of our money, but after a
province had been conquered or a great victory won, hundreds would
sometimes be bought for £1 or £2 each. After the siege of Jerusalem by
Titus, the price of slaves fell to 16s. Skilled labourers and artisans
brought more. A gardener was worth about £6O, a blacksmith £l4O, a
good cook often brought £5OO, an actor or actress £l,OOO, and a physician
£2,000.”
Some years ago Dr. Farr went into careful calculations, and estimated
the value of an English agricultural labourer in his prime (at the age of
2 5) t 0 be £ 2 4°-
An authority, writing of the selling price of slaves in Egypt about the
year 1880, says:—“ Prices range from £lO to £l2 for a black boy or, girl
of as many years old, to £7O or £ 100 for an Abyssinian girl of from twelve
to seventeen or eighteen, and from £5OO to £BOO or even £l,OOO for a
high-class Circassian. Adult women slaves who have already been in
service are cheaper, unless their skill in cookery, needlework, or some
other useful art balance the vice of temper or other defect, but for which
they are rarely resold. The price of males above the age of childhood
varies from £29 or £3O to £9O or £100.”


Mexico, at the Revol
ition iv'2';
Britain
.. 18.54
East Ind ies
.. 1838
Austria ..
.. 1840
Denmark
.. 184S
Germany
.. 1848
France ..
1848
Russia ..
.. i86i
Holland
.. 1863
United States . •.
.. 1863
Portugal
.. 1878
Cuba
.. 1886
Brazil ..
.. 1SS9
Tunis ..
1890
An able-bodied negro in the Southern States of America just before the
war of emancipation was estimated to he worth from /200 to £250, but
sometimes from to £f ,000 was paid by a rich man for a beautiful
mulatto, quadroon, or octoroon female slave
Sometimes the slaves belonging to the various owners and nations were
set free gradually, and sometimes they were totally emancipated at a cer-
tain time. The following are approximately the dates when the principal
slave-holding countries emancipated their slaves:
During the nineteenth century, in all parts of the world, probably 150
mill ion slaves and serfs were set free by their owners or by Government
edicts.
Slavery still exists extensively in Africa, where, according to Mr. Heli
Chatelain (formerly United States Commercial Agent at Loanda),
there are fifty millions of slaves, of whom fifteen millions are within the
British protectorates; and he estimates that half-a-million lives are sacri-
ficed annually.
Slavery is common in Arabia and generally throughout the Turkish
Empire, but even there it is waning before the advancing humanity
of the age. A late writer says : —" With regard to Turkey, the Sultan, in
a firman on the Circassian Slave-trade in 1854, so far from offering any
defence of slavery on the ground ®F the Ottoman Faith, uses these remark-
able words on the religious bearing of the question, ' Man is the most
noble of all the creatures God has formed, in making him free; selling
people ns animals, or articles of furniture, is contrary to the mil of the Sovereign
Creator.' ”
Slavery exists in Persia and Hindo-China. In China proper it exists
extensively. One writer says * —“Slavery still exists in China ; slaves may
he purchased, and the condition is hereditary. Freedom is forfeited by
crime or debt ; but the slaves are not so numerous as to attract much
attention. Needy parents sell their children. In Pekin girls bring higher
prices than boys, varying up to 18 years old from about to/70.”
The Emperor of China is said to possess 230,000 slaves, and slaves some-
times crop up amongst the immigrant Chinese in the United States and
Australia, showing that slavery is common amongst them.


SLAVERY IN SOUTH AFRICA.
After a long study of people of different nations, and different colours,
and different religions, and different tongues, 1 feel fully convinced that
if all the coloured races of the world were suddenly turned white and
learned to speak our language, we should see very little difference
between the great majority of them and ourselves. I have worked with
coloured people, and dwelt with them, and employed them, and traded
with them, and carefully observed their conduct; I have extensively read
about them, and enquired about them, and largely conversed with them;
and I am fully convinced that we are one. and that whatever our colour,
and language, and religious and other prejudices may be, they are
indeed bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh, mind of our mind, and soul of
our soul. Some people, who have not carefully studied the coloured man,
are intensely and unjustly prejudiced against him. A few years ago a
clergyman was travelling through South Africa, and one day was going to
preach at one of the Dutch homesteads; and when the people were gathered
together for service, the clergyman, seeing no coloured servants in the
room, snid to the master of the house: “Had we not better call the
coloured people in ?” The master exclaimed: “Oh! I see what sort of a man
you are! You would call in them cattle! Stop a minute, I’ll bring in my
dogs.’’ Now, the great trouble between the English and Dutch in South
Africa is, that while the English would free the coloured man and
Christianize him, the Boer would make a slave of him and keep him a
heathen. They burnt down Dr. Livingstone’s Mission House because he
taught Christianity to the coloured races. The Boers frequently make
the Kaffir, and theHottentor, and other coloured people work for nothing,
and tie them up and sjambok them if they refuse, and sometimes shoot them
down like dogs. When the English gave £20,000,000 to emancipate the
slaves, there were 36,000 slaves at the Cape, and of course the slaves of
the Dutch colonists had to be freed as well as those of the English
colonists. But the Boer would not have it. “What was he to do? He had
always lived upon the labour of his slaves, and how could he live if he
freed them? They were his property to do as he liked ivith." The Boer
would not work himself while he could make slaves work for him, and
the outcome was that thousands of Dutch Boers took their wives and
families, and cattle, and some slaves, and “ treked 5 ‘ into the Free State, and
Transvaal, and other parts of the interior, to get out of the reach of the
English and their emancipating policy; and from that day to this the
Dutch Boer has tyrannized over the coloured races amongst whom he
dwells, and practically enslaved them wherever he could; and I believe
that if he could get Boer independence and clear the English


out o£ South. Africa, or drive them into the sea, as his boast
and his wish are, he would institute coloured slavery again. In some-
respects the Boer is a very good man, but he thinks coloured slavery is his
right; but, freedom for all is the ruling principle of the British, and the
Boer cannot have his wish. 1 was sorry to see a good man like Mr.
Stead upholding and encouraging the Boers. I think he cannot under-
stand the real cause of the Boers’ hatred of the English, or he would not
favour them. The fearful slaughter and misery caused by the late trouble
in South Africa were deplorable, but it was a far less evil than a perpetual
Boer domination in that country would he. Besides, it is better that these
petty Independent Republics should merge into larger, freer, and more cos-
mopolitanand peacefulgbvernments, like the British Empire or the United
States, than that they should remain narrow, ignorant,obstinate, prejudiced,
and a perpetual trouble-bearing danger to their neighbours, and indirectly
to all humanity. As well might yon allow a couple of small Independent
Republics somewhere in Australia, as to allow them in South Africa.
They would be a source of continual expense, vexation, and trouble to
the rest of Australia, and do no good for themselves. It were infinitely
better that all (the Boer included) should join in the grand South African
Confederation with equal rights to all.
The real cause of the Boer trouble from first to last was the slave ques-
tion. When E lived in South Africa half a century ago, this was clearly
understood. The English, right along from the time of the great emanci-
pation in 1534. have been dead against slavery in any form, and the main,
if not the only condition, made with the Boers in the Sand River, and later
in the Bloemfontein Conventions, was that there tvas to be no slavery.
W r , B. Worsfold, in his concise “ History of South Africa,” says—“ The
right of interference with the internal affairs of the Boer communities,
which England retained under the terms of the Conventions, was that
which was based upon the articles in both the Sand River and the Bloem-
fontein Conventions, which made slavery illegal .”
Conan Boyle, in his "War in South Africa,” referring to the Sand
River Convention, says ‘ • England acknowledged the independence of the
Transvaal Republic ‘ with this single reservation —that there should be no
slavery.'" This reservation, made imperative by the English and hated
by the Dutch, caused the war; and it was the duty of the English, in the
cause of humanity, not to give way but to oppose all attempts at slavery
to the bitter end.
I will now give a few quotations to show the conduct of the Boers on
this question of slavery.


Sir B. C.C. Pine, the late Governor of Natal, writing in the Contemporary
Review of June, 1879, says —“At the time of the Dutch occupation the
southern part of the country was inhabited by Hottentots and Bushmen.
These people were gradually subdued, and large numbers were reduced to
slavery."
Colonel H. Knoilys, writing in Blackwood's Magazine, in 1891, of the
hard conduct of the Boers towards the natives, says—“ As regards a past
which is within easy memory of the living, call into court evidence of the
burnt kraals, the plundered cattle, and the slain bodies of Kaffir men, women,'
and children. With reference to the present, we point to the extortion, the
spurning and hounding, of the miserable natives of the Transvaal, and to
the recognised 1 apprenticeship ’ of the orphans, which is but a flimsy
subterfuge for legalized slavery. If this proof be rejected, there is an end to
the value of all evidence ; and if such deeds may not be called atrocities,
words have no longer any meaning.”
Mrs. Lewis (Olive Schreiner’s sister) writes—“lf ever there was a war
for the Lord of Hosts, if ever there was a war for truth and right, for the
putting down of oppression and wrong, for the deliverance of a people
powerless to deliver themselves, whose wrongs have cried up to Heaven
until the Lord has come down to deliver them, this is that war
For over 2JJ years the progenitors of the Transvaal Republic and their descendants
have crushed, miiltreated. and, as far as they had power to do so, robbed of all
rights belonging to them as fellow beings thecoloured peoples of this land."
Col. H. Knoilys, writing in “ Blackwood’s Magazine ” on the situation,
in May 1891, says:—“ The Boers, compared to us, are as bloody wolves
compared to surly clogs. For years past the whole gist of the policy of
Downing Street, sick of disastrous South African wars, the grave of most
administrative and many military reputations, has been * Peace with the
Boers; rightly if possible —but, rightly or wrongly, peace with the Boers.’
‘ What peace,’ a just man will reply, ‘ so long as the abominations of this
race of hereditary native-slayers are endured, and even connived at ? ’ . . If we
continue to acquiesce in Boer rapacity and cruelty, not only shall we foster
lawlessness to an extent which will be ultimately unendurable, but mean-
while we shall be conniving at a condition of affairs wherein war is a less
evil than peace. Our plain duty is to arrest at all hazards the oppression
of the helpless ami unoffending natives."
Dr. A. T. Wirgman, canon of Grahamstown Cathedral, writing in
the Nineteenth Century, April 1900, says—“l will go straight to the
point of policy upon which Briton and Boer have always stood in irrecon-
cilable antagonism from 1806 to 1899. I will go straight to the real under


lying cause of this war. It is the native question. Here is the true parting
of the ways between Briton and Boer. To the Briton the overwhelming
multitude of natives in South Africa form a subject race bound to him by
the ties of a common humanity. To the Boer the native is a ' zwart
schepsel *, ‘ a black creature ’ who was created to be a hewer of wood and
a drawer of water for his white master. The ‘schepsel’ cannot legally
own land, ought not to be allowed to learn to read and write, must not be
married by a minister of religion in such a way as to claim the recognition
of tlie State for his marriage, like a white man's marriage, and above all
must never under any circumstances be permitted to claim the franchise
as a political unit of the State.' 1
The Bishop of St. John’s, Kaffraria (Dr. Bransby Key), who has worked
in South Africans a missionary for thirty-six years, says—“lt is our pro-
claimed method, our policy towards the natives, from the time of the free-
ing ot the slaves to their admission to the franchise, and the recent advance
among them of education, which has prevented us, Boer and British, from
becoming one nation. If this is to be a war of races through the coionv,
it is not merely a question of franchise to the Uitlanders. It will be, I
cannot hut feel, a holy war. Many as our sins and shortcomings mav be,
it is a war resting on the broad question, *An these natives of South Africa
Id be looJieitipou as beasts of burden or as human beings ? ’ ”
l>r. AVirgman continues:
my own, and to say with him that the British Empire is waging a holy war
for the cause of freedom und justice to the native races of South Africa." Eng-
land protects and assists the coloured races to rise and progress—this
seems to be her mission.
Bishop Key says: “There is a famoiu phrase by the most popular
writer of the day. He recognises that the destiny of the British Empire
is the currying of the white nun's burden ; by which he means the duty which
has been laid upon us of governing alien races for their own benefit, and in
their czvn interests, and not merely for our own. I cannot but feel very
strongly that this idea has its roots deep down in Christianity itself.”
Dr. Wirgman says to this:—“The Boer utterly abhors and rejects the
British ideal of ‘ the white man’s burden.’ The Boer will have none of it.
The black man must carry the Boer’s burden, and think himself highly
privileged that he is allowei to do so.”
The brave but prejudiced Boer, may affirm that the coloured people
have no sonls, and call them “cattle’ 9 ; but great and humane men like
William Penn, George Gatlin, Dr. Livingstone, General Gordon, and
Mungo Park, do not say that. Sir H. H. Johnston, the eminent African


traveller, says: “In the coarse of two or three centuries I believe the
negroes of British Africa will only differ from their white fellow-subjects
in the colour of their skins.”
Jephson, a fellow-traveller of Stanley, speaking of the chivalry of the
negro says: “ Yes! chivalry in a negro as in a European! It may not wear
the same form as ours, but for all that it is chivalry of the truest kind.
Touch that string, strike that chord, and you will be answered by as true
a strain of melody as ever you could draw from a European.’’ Mungo
Bark, who travelled through many African countries, says: “Whatever
differences there are between the negro and the European in the confor-
mation of the nose and the colour of the skin, there is none in the genuine
sympathies and characteristic feelings of our common nature.” And so i’t
is. There are feeling, and intellect, and truth, and goodness, amongst all
the coloured inhabitants of the world, as well as amongst the white, which
enabled George Gatlin to say, after living twelve years solely amongst the
wild Indians of North America, “ 1 look npon the Indians as the most honest
and hononrahle race ojpeople that 1 ever lived among in my life."
Mungo Park, David Livingstone and Henry Stanley, perhaps the three
greatest and most experienced of African travellers, agree that the negroes
when understood are just as good as other people The English, in spite
of their prejudice against a coloured skin, feel in their inmost soul that a
man is a man wherever found, and they act accordingly. In the Cape
Colony, at least, any duly qualified coloured man has a vote in the
government of the country.
Mr. David Wedderburn, writing in the Contemporary Review, July 18S2,
says:—' 1 In the Cape Colony a black man enjoys all the rights of citizen-
ship, on terms of perfect equality with the white man ; he possesses the
parliamentary franchise, if otherwise qualified, and is under no legal dis-
ability whatever on account of his colour, Europeans, Malays, Hindoos,
Hottentots, Fingos, Kaffirs, all have a fair field and no favour, and prosper
according to their industry and sobriety. In no country is equality in the
eye of the law, irrespective of race or colour, more thoroughly established ;
but this is pain and grief to the old-fashioned colonists, who look back
with sincere regret to the days when the ‘ niggers' ’ were not * independent’,
and could he compelled to work, whether they liked it or not." So at length
the educated and otherwise duly qualified native Africans have got
a fair and sensible share in the franchise ; and now as time goes on, and the
colonists of all kinds come to understand and appreciate each other, the
colour prejudice will gradually vanish away.


PARTITION OF AFRICA.
I think that the partition of the vast Continent of Africa amongst the
civilized powers, will be effectual in putting down the curse of slavery, and
bringing the great Negro family into the realm of peace and prosperity:
aud although this God-like philanthropy may be somewhat blended with
commercial and political selfishness, yet it will be at the same time a
prof table and blessed thing for the Negro. African huimnity is so split
up and divided into tribes and peoples—thousands of them —that they
carnno-t act for themselves as a united people. In the Congo State alone, I
think it was, a thousand different treaties were made with a thousand dif-
ferent chiefs! In Africa, with slavery and ignorance prevailing, it is tribe
against tribe, and people against people almost everywhere. Such being
the case, they cannot work out their own salvation, and riot and untold
misery extend over millionsof square miles. I believe, therefore, that it
is the manifest duty of the advanced nations of the world, to take posses-
sion of, govern and exploit the great stricken continent, mainly for the good
of the natives themselves, but indirectly for the good of all mankind; and to
that end not toallow slave-catching, slave-selling,-or slave-holding, nor even
Boer Republics with slave-holding proclivities, to exist. England after
being one of the greatest offenders as a slave-holder, set a good example
by voting 20 millions sterling to emancipate her own slaves. As one writer
said, “A nobler sacrifice of money to humanity and j ustice was never before
made by any nation.” And England, for the last century, has done much by
cruisers and other means, even largely including the Boer war, to put down
slavery ; hut she hasnot always been seconded as she should have been.
A writer says: —"The British nation is the only one that has constantly,
since the early part of this century, made determined and continuous
efforts to destroy the trade in slaves, and whose war-ships arc avoided by
the slave dealers as would be aplague. Curiously enough, it is owing to tin
laxity of the neighbouring State of France that the slave trade in Africa is
not more effectually dealt with than it is. France, almost alone among
European powers, raises difficulties in searching for slaves. The slave
dealers are aware of this, and take advantage of it.’’ This action of
France is to be regretted, as she in other respects has made such great sac-
rifices in the cause of freedom; but that good and earnest man. Cardinal
Lavigerie, by a life’s devotion to the cause, has largely atoned for the
national shortcoming, and France, now, and all the civilised nations are
acting in harmony to put down this great crime against humanity.
Professor Henry Drummond, in his article " Slavery in Africa,” in
Scribner's iMagajsint, June 1889, says: —"The closing years of the nine


teenth century will present to the future a moral phenomenon unique in
history, the rise of a great, unselfish International Movement for the
abolition of a single wrong—a wrong which endangers no international
interests, which affects personally none of those engaged in crushing it,
which is dealt with purely on the ground of humanity and Christianity.
The greater Governments of Europe are just now combined in forming,
not the usual defensive alliance to enrich themselves or diminish the risks
of war to those they love and guard, but an offensive alliance to save the
land of a stranger who has no claim but his utter helplessness.”
INTELLECTUAL CHARACTER OF THE NEGRO.
It is often said that the mental and moral character of the Negro is
altogether inferior to that of the white man, that he is intellectually a fool,
that he is lazy, dishonest, untruthful, and unfeeling. My opinion is that
there are as good people, naturally, amongst the negroes in all these qualities
as amongst the rest of mankind. Stanley, who travelled across and
across Africa, and who knew the Africans well, both in America and in
Africa itself, emphatically affirms that there is no natural difference be-
tween them and other people. This is well shown in the following passage
from his “ Darkest Africa" :
“We hare seen some—a few —who might be said to be well formed.
The little plump beauty we saw with Ugarrowwa —an ivory raider —was
a bewitching little creature, thirty-three inches high. It is possible that this
beauty was due to perfect health and the good food with which she was
fed by the Arab. She was certainly a gem worth seeing, and as calm and
self-possessed as a well-bred lady. Artists would have doated on her, and
sculptors would have paid goodly sums for such a miniature model. She
was young, just at the dawn of womanhood, and her youth and girlish
innocence made-her simply charming.
“ The chief’s wife, captured by Uledi, the hero of the * Dark Continent,*
already mentioned, was also an exceedingly interesting young woman.
She was brought to camp—yellow and shining as the moon—wearing no
garment on her body, but heavily decorated w ith leglets of shining iron,
armlets and bracelets and collars of the same polished metal. Her hair
was short, and her face was round and glistened with the oil of the
castor-plant. She was very quiet, and gracefully complied with her new
duties, and in a short time she became a general favourite. She was as-
signed to a kind and generous master, to whom she became deeply at-
tached, and watched his house with the fidelity of a spaniel.
We had sufficient experience of the pigmies to justify us in the assertion that the very
lowest of African humanity is as capable of improvement as the children of Europeans.


Jr another pla.ce he says : — 1 ‘ Intpvlectually the pigmies of the African
■forest are the equals of about fifty percent, of the modern inhabitants of
anv ereat American citv of to-day.”
The Africans are behind the Europeans in the arts and sciences and
general "knowledge, but in thousands of communities they are ahead of
many of the Europeans who existed 2000 years ago, including even the
English, Irish, Scotch, and Welsh.
Thousands of negro communities in Africa herd cattle, grow corn and
fruit, make cloth and pottery, make many articles of metal, wood, and
other substances, and produce many things for use and ornament.
Of their spontaneous intellectual ability, Sir Richard Burton, the great
traveller, in his “ Wit and "Wisdom of West Africa,” (a book containing
“ 226 S proverbs, idioms, enigmas, laconisms, and words conveying
knowledge concerning the people's habits and superstitions,”) he refers to
M. Koelle, a writer who had collected a large variety of oral tales and
manuscripts, and who speaks of the sea-board and central Africans as
follows :
•“It is hoped that the publication of these first specimens of Kanuri
literature will prove useful in more than one way. Independently of the
advantage it offers for a practical acquaintance with the language, it also
introduces the reader to some extent into the inward world of Negro mind
and Negro thoughts ; and this is a circumstance of paramount importance,
so long as there are any who either flatly negative the question, or, at
least, consider it still open, ‘Whether the are a genuine portion
of mankind or not.' It is vain to speculate on this question from mere
anatomical facts, from peculiarities of the hair, or from the colour of the
skin: if it is mind that distinguishes men from animals, the question can-
not be decided without consulting the languages of the Negroes, for
language gives the expression and the manifestation of the mind. Now, as
the grammar proves that Negro languages are capable of expressing
human thoughts—some of them, through their rich formal development,
•even with astonishing precision—so specimens of their 1 Native Literature ’
show that the Negroes actually have thoughts to express ; that they reflect
and reason about things just as other men. Considered in such a point of
view, such specimens may go a long way towards refuting the old-
fashioned doctrine of an essential inequality of the Negroes with the rest of
mankind, which now and then shows itself, not only in America, but also
in Europe. Such views may, perhaps, be excusable in those who have
never heard black men speak, except in a language foreign to them, and
which they had to learn from mere hearing; but when I was amongst
them in their ijative land, on the soil which the feet of their fathers have


trod, and heard them deliver in their own native tongue stirring extempore
speeches, adorned with beautiful imagery, and of half-an-hour or an
hour’s duration; or when I was writing from their dictation, sometimes
two hours in succession, without having to correct a word or alter a con-
struction in twenty or thirty pages; or, when in Sierra Leone, I attended
examinations of the sons of liberated .slaves in Algebra, Geometry, Latin.,
Greek, Hebrew, etc. —then, I confess, any other idea never entered my
mind but that I had to do with real men."
THE NEGRO WORKS AS WELL AS OTHER PEOPLE,
" ‘ The Kafhrs do all the work, and the overseers do all the swearing and
flogging’, is far from being the whole truth; but there is, at least, an
abstention from modesty when complaints about the reluctance of the
natives to toil come from men who never, in that climate, did a day’s work
in their lives.” — John Macdonell, Nineteenth Century, February 1901.
“An intelligent grumbler, if asked where the country would now be
standing without the black, would confess 1 Nowhere All successful
South African enterprises have been made by black labour. The
Kimberley diamond mines are worked by one hundred blacks to one
whiteman. The gold mines standing to-day, the most successful the
world has ever seen, would not be worth touching without black labour.
The Cape and Natal railways, thoroughly successful enterprises, were
made and are maintained by black labour.” —“British Africa ” quoted in
Nineteenth Century, Feb. 1901.
Another writer, speaking of the negroes of tropical East Africa,
says: —“The Stevenson Road is a thoroughfare from Lake Nyassa
to Lake Tanganyika, made almost entirely by native labour.
Professor Drummond, in his book on Tropical Africa, says:—‘These
savages handled their tools to such purpose that, with only a single
European superintendent, tney have made a road full of difficult cuttings
and gradients which would not disgrace a railway contractor at home.
The workmen keep regular hours —six in the morning till five at night,
with a rest at mid-day—work steadily, continuously, willingly, and, above
all, merrily.’ ”
THE NEGRO IS AS HONEST AS OTHER PEOPLE.
The Rev. Dr. Taylor, speaking of the Kafhrs of South Africa, says :
“Those who know them well say they are industrious, honest, and many
of them are as consistent Christians as can be found among the whites.’*
Amongst them as amongst every race there are thieves, but Dr. Taylor


continues—“ It is a notorious fact, that if you entrust even a kaffir thief
with your property, to the amount of even thousands of pounds, and let
him see that you have faith in him, you may go away where you like and
take your pleasure or your rest, and be sure that your kaffir servant will
faithfully attend to your interest.”
"One day having heedlessly left my small kit spread over the floor of my
leau-to outside room, I found on my return, two hours after, about 30 Zulu
men and women of all ages crowded about the open door, many staring
with curiosity at the collection of flannel shirts and other clothing, boots,
knife, tobacco, and even money. Any one of these naked savages might
with, impunity have helped himself to any of these articles, which would
have been a perfect treasure to him. But the idea never seemed to have
entered their heads —not the smallest trifle was missing. Genuine un-
tainted Zulus are too noble to be thieves. They exult in the possession of a
flannel shirt, they fully appreciate the gift of a shilling; but their native
code of honour forbids pilfering, and property is far more safe in their
midst than if it were deposited in a first-class English hotel, or subjected to
the inquisition of the landlady of a first-class London lodging.”— Col. H.
Kncllys, " Blackwood’s Magazine,” May 1891.
It is said in ■' The Life of Livingstone ” that he was more than twenty
years in Africa before he was robbed by a native.
I do not think we white people can say much about the coloured thieves
while we have such a large proportion of thieves amongst ourselves—
millions of while thieves not caught and yet our gaols full to overflowing!
THE NEGRO AS TRUTHFUL AS OTHER PEOPLE.
Mungo Park, speaking of the kindness of the negro women of Central
Africa and the cate with which they teach their children, says : —” One of
the first lessons in which the Mandingo women instruct their children is
the practice »J truth. The reader will probably recollect the case of the
unhappy mother whose son was murdered by the Moorish banditti at
Funingkedy; her only consolation in her uttermost distress was the re-
flection that the poor boy in the course of his blameless life had never tali
a lie."
“Mission blacks in. Natal and at the Cape arc a byword among the
unsympathetic, but I never saw Moolu do an inconsistent thing. He
could neither read nor write, he knew only some dozen words of English.
Until seven years ago he had never seen a white man ; but I could trust
him with everything I had. He was not ‘ pious ’; he was neither bright
nor clever; he was a commonplace black : but he did his duty, and never


told a lie. The first night of our camp, after all had gone to rest,
I remember being roused by alow talking. I looked out of my tent; a
flood of moonlight lit up the forest, and there, kneeling upon the ground,
•was a little group of natives, and Moolu in the centre conducting evening
prayers. Every night afterwards this service was repeated ; no matter
how long the march, nor how tired the men. I make no comment. But
this I will say, Moolu’s life gave him the right to do it.”
INearly three thousand years ago David ventured the statement " All men
are liars,” and from that day to this men of every race, and country, and
colour, have lied. Amongst us white people, perhaps commission agents,
auctioneers, lawyers, and tradesmen are our greatest liars; but 19 out of 20
people tell lies and act lies. Millions, and millions, and millions of lies are
told by white people in the course of a year. Somebody has said that
millions of lies are told daily in the six words, "I am glad to see you 1 ”
Generally speaking subject people, such as slaves, servants, women, and
children, tell most lies, as a defence against the cruelty of the strong.
Perhaps the most unfortunate people of all are those who lie for the love
of lying and are known as j ack the Liar, Bill the Liar, ]im the Liar.
Lying is a great vice, whether by the white or the coloured ; a liar may be
loved, hut he or she can never lie respected.
NEGROES AS KIND AS OTHER PEOPLE.
” Mr. Jephson's account of his march with the starving column in the
Stanley expedition, is full of vivid glimpses of the hardships endured in
Darkest Africa. His account of the fidelity of the Zanzibaris is very
touching. They were never indifferent to a jest, and always answered it
with a wan smile, even when they were literally dropping to die by the
way of hunger. Mr. Jephson says it was often pitiful to see a man who
was scarcely more than skin and bone, and who was half mad with hunger
himself, bringing us a little store ot toadstools and laying it before us say-
ing, ‘Master, take your share; God is good.’ Toadstools formed a
very large part of the commissariat of the. column.” — Scribner's Magazine.
“A woman,” Dr. Livingstone says, "with leprous hands, gave me her
p u t a nice clean one—and very heavy rain came on. Of her own accord
she prepared dumplings of green maize, pounded and boiled, which are
sweet, for she said she saw I was hungry. It was excessive weakness from
purging she mistook ; hut seeing that I did not eat (from fear of the
leprosy), she kindly pressed me; ‘ Eat, you are weak from hunger; this
will strengthen you!' I put it out of her sight and blessed her motherly
heart.”- -Lije oj Dr. Livingstone.


The following pathetically shows the natural kindness cfthe black man :
“ The gallant devotion of Stanley’s little band of Arab heroes, who, two
hundred strong, heat back vast horde > of cunning arid devilish cannibal:-:,
along a thousand miles of river, or while carrying his big canoes overlanc:
around the Congo cataracts, making roads over mountains and through
jungles, dashing fonhin search of food, forms a tale as pathetic and
beautiful as it is amazing. One incident, however, must be told, if only
for the light it throws on Stanley’s character. He had much trouble with
his men on account of their inherent propensity to steal, the results of
which brought upon the expedition much actual disaster. At last, Stanley
doomed the next man caught stealing to death. His grief and distress
were unbounded when the next thief, detected in a case of peculiar flag-
raucy, was found to be Uledi, the bravest, truest, noblest of his dusky
followers. Uledi had saved a hundred lives, Stanley’s among the number.
He had performed acts of the most brilliant daring: always successful,
always faithful, always kind. Must Uledi die? Stanley called all his
men around him in a council. He explained to them the gravity of Uledi's
crime. He reminded them of his stern decree, but said he was not hard
enough to enforce it against Uledi. His arm was not strong enough to
lift the gun that would kill Uledi, and he would not bid one of them to do
what he could not do himself. But some punishment, and a hard one,
must be meted out. What should it be? The council must decide.
They took a vote, Uledi must be hogged. When the decision was
reached. Stanley standing, Uledi crouching at his feet, and the solemn
circle drawn closely around them, one man whose life Uledi had saved
under circumstances of frightful peri!, stood forth and said: ' Give me
half the blows, master.’ Then another said, in the faintest accents, while
tears fell from his eyes. * "Will the master give his slave leave to speak ? ’
‘ Yes,’ said Stanley. The Arab came forward and knelt by Uledi’s side.
His words came slowly, and now and then a sob broke them. ‘The
master is wise,’ he said. ‘He knows all that has been, for he writes
them in a book. lam black, and know not. Nor can 1 remember what
is past. What we saw yesterday is to-day forgotten. But the master
forgets nothing. He puts it all in that book. Each day something is
written. Let your slave fetch the book, master, and turn its leaves.
Maybe you will had some words there about Uledi. Maybe there is
something that tells how he saved Zaicli from the white waters of the
cataracts; how he saved many men—how many I forget,—Ben Ali,
Mabntki, Ivoni Kusi —others, too; how he is worthier than any three of
us ; how he always listens when the master speaks, and dies forth at his
word. Look, master, at the book! Then, if the blows must be struck,
Skumari will take half and I the other half. The master will do what is


right. Saywa has spoken. ’ And Saywa's speech deserves to live for
ever. Stanley threw away his whip. ‘ Uledi is free, 1 hesaid, ‘ Shumari
and Saywa are pardoned.’ ” —Christian at Work.
That great and humane man., Mungo Park, relates the following;—•
When we arrived at the blacksmith’s place of residence we dis-
mounted and fired our muskets. The meeting between him and his
relations was very lender; for these rude children of nature, free from
restraint, display their emotions in the strongest and most expressive
manner. Amidst these transports, the blacksmith’s aged mother was led
forth, leaning upon a staff. Every one made way for her; and she
stretched out her hand to bid her son welcome. Being totally blind, she
stroked his hands, arms, and face, with great care, and seemed highly
delighted that her latter clays were blessed by his return, and that her ears
once more heard the music of his voice. From this interview I was fully
convinced that, whatever difference there is between the Negro and
the European in the conformation of the nose and the colour of the skin,
there is none in the genuine sympathies and characteristic feelings of our
■ common nature.”
I am sure that Sir H. M. Stanley and bis publishers, on behalf of
humanity, will excuse me for making the following rather long quotation
■from “ Through the Dark Continent" :—•
** A village in Uhombo consists of a number of low, conical huts, ranged
round a circular common, in the centre of which are three or four fig trees,
kept for the double purpose ot supplying shade to the community and bark-
-cloth to the chief. The doorways of the huts are very low, scarcely thirty
inches high. The common, fenced round by the grass huts, shows plainly
the ochreous colour of the soil, and it is so well trodden, that not a grass
blade thrives upon it.
“On presenting myself on the common, I attracted out of doors the
■owners and ordinary inhabitants of each hut, until I found myself the
•centre of quite a promiscuous population of naked men, women, children,
and infants. Though I had appeared here for the purpose of studying the
people of Uhombo, and making a treaty of friendship with the chief, the
villagers seemed to think I had come merely to make a free exhibition of
myself as some natural monstrosity! I saw before me over a hundred
beings of the most degraded, unpresentable type it is possible to conceive;
and, though I knew quite well that, some thousands of years ago, the
beginning of this wretched humanity and myself were one and the same, a
sneaking disinclination to believe it possessed me strongly, and I would
even now willingly subscribe some small amount of silver money for him
who could but assist to controvert the discreditable fact.


“.Biit common-sense tells me not to take into undue consideration their
squalor, their ugliness, or nakedness, but to gauge their true position
among the human race by taking a view of the cultivated fields and gardens
of Uhombo ; and lam compelled to admit that these debased specimens
of humanity only plant and sow such vegetables and grain as I myself
should cultivate, were I compelled to provide for my own sustenance. I
see too that their huts, though of grass, are almost as well made as the
materials will permit, and indeed I have often slept in worse. Speak with
them in their own dialect of the law of meum and tuum, and it will soon
appear that they are intelligent enough upon that point. Moreover the
muscles, tissues, and fibres of their bodies, and all the organs of sight,
hearing, smell, or motion, are as well developed as-in us. Onty in taste
and judgment based upon larger experience, in the power of expression,
in morals and intellectual culture, are we superior.
“'1 strive therefore to interest myself in my gross and rudely shaped
brothers and sisters. Almost bursting into a laugh at the absurdity, I
turn towards an individual whose age marks him out as one to whom
respect is due, and say to him, after the common manner of greeting:
“'My brother, sit you down by me on this mat, and let us be friendly
and sociable ’ ; and as I say it, I thrust into his wide-open hand twenty
cowries, the currency of the land. One look at his hand as he extended it
made me think J could carve a better looking hand out of a piece of
rhinoceros hide.
"While speaking I look at his face, which is like an ugly and extra-
vagant mask, clumsily manufactured from some strange, dark-brown,
coarse material. The lips proved the thickness of skin with which nature
had endowed him, and by the obstinacy with which they refused to meet
each other the form of the mouth was but ill defined, though capacious,
and garnished with its full complement of well preserved teeth. His nose
was so flat that 1 inquired, in a perfectly innocent manner, as to the
reason for such a feature.
"‘Ah ! ’ said he, with a sly laugh, ‘ it is the fault of my mother, who,
when L was young, bound me too tightly to her back.’
" Descending from the face, which, crude, large-featured, rough-hewn
as it was, bore witness to the possession of much sly humour and a kindly
disposition, ray eyes fastened on his naked body. Through the ochreous
daubs I detected strange freaks of pricking on it, circles and squares and
crosses, and traced with wonder the many hard lines and puckers created
by age, weather, ill-usage, and rude keeping.
" His feet were monstrous abortions, with soles as hard as hoofs, and
his legs, as high up as his knees, were plastered with successive strata or
dirt; his loin-cover or the queer 'girding tackle’ need not be described.


They -were absolutely appalling to good taste, and the most ragged British
beggar or Neapolitan lazzarone is sumptuously, nay. regally clothed, in
comparison to this ' king ’ in Uhombo.
“ If the old chief appeared so unprepossessing, how can I paint without
offence my humbler brothers and sisters who stood around us? /Vs
I looked at the array of faces, I could only comment to myself, ugly—•
uglier—ugliest! As 1 looked at their nude and filthy bodies, and the
general indecency of their nakedness, I ejaculated * Fearful ! ’ as the sum
total of what I might with propriety say, and which indeed is sufficiently
descriptive.
“ And what shall I say of the hideous and queer appendages that they
wore about their waists; the rags of monkey skin, and bits of gorilla bone,
goat horn, shells, strange tags to stranger tackle; and of the things around
their necks, brain of mice, skin of viper, ‘ adder’s fork, and blindworm’s
sting ’ ? And how strangely they smell, all these queer, man-like creatures
who stand regarding me ! Not silently ; on the contrary, there is a loud
interchange of comments upon the white man’s appearance, a manifesta-
tion of broad interest to know whence I came, whither I am going, and
what is my business. And no sooner are the questions asked than they are
replied to by such as pretend to know. The replies were followed by long-
drawn ejaculations of * Wa-a-a-antu ! ’ (‘ Men 1 ’) ‘ Eha-a, and these are men !'
“Now, imagine this! While we are loftily disputing among ourselves
as to whether the beings before us are human, here were these creatures
actually expressing strong doubts as to whether we whites are men !
“ A dead silence prevailed for a short time, during which all the females
dropped their lower jaws far down, and then cried out again, ‘Wa-a-a-a-a-
antu !’ (‘ Men!’). The lower jaws indeed dropped so low that, when, in a
posture of reflection, they put their hands up to their chins, it really
looked as if they had done so to lift the jaws up to the proper place, and
to sustain them there. And in that position they pondered upon the fact
that there were men ‘ white all over ’ in this queer, queer world!
“ The open mouths gave one a chance to note the healthy state and
ruby colour of the tongues, palates, and gums, and above all, the admir-
able order and brilliant whiteness of each set of teeth. * Great events
from trivial causes spring,’ and while I was trying to calculate how many
kubabu (measure of two lbs.) of millet seed would be requisite to fill all their
Dutch-oven mouths, and how many cowries would be required to pay for
such a large quantity of millet, and wondering at the antics of the juvei>
iles of the population, whose uncontainable, irrepressible wonder seemed
to find its natural expression in hopping on one leg, thrusting their right
thumbs in their mouths to repress the rising scream, and slapping the
hinder part of the thighs to express or give emphasis to what was speech


'less—while thus engaged, and just thinking it was time to depart, it hap-
pened that one of the youthful innocents already described, more restless
than his "brothers, stumbled against a long heavy pole which was leaning
Insecurely against one of the trees,
“The pole fell, striking one of my men severely on the head.
And all at once there went up from the women a genuine and unaffected
cry of pity, and their faces expressed so lively a sense of tender sympathy
with the wounded man, that mv heart, keener than mv eyes, saw through
the disguise of filth, nakedness, and ochre, the human heart beating for
another’s suffering: and I then recognised and hailed them as indeed my
own poor and degraded sisters,
“ Under the new light which had dawned on me, I reflected that I had
done some wrong to my dusky relatives, and that they might have been
less harshly described, and introduced to the world with less disdain.
Before I quitted the village, they made me still more regret my former
haughty feelings; for the chief and his subjects loaded my men with
bounties—bananas, chickens, Indian corn, and malajn (palm wine) —
and escorted me respectfully far beyond the precincts of the village and
their fields, parting from me at last with the assurance that, should I ever
happen to return by their country, they would endeavour to make ray
second visit to Uhomho much more agreeable than my first had been.”
Another writer says:—“Africa is still so enveloped in an atmosphere of
half-romance,half-mystery, that it is always interesting to meet residents in
that wild and savage country, especially when they represent the civilised,
intelligent, and gentler classes of the population. And a woman of sweeter
disposition 1 han Mrs. Martha Anne Ricks, the negress who had the honour
of being received by the Queen [Victoria], it would be difficult to find. Simple
as a child, yet shrewd enough to manage successfully her coffee plantation in
Liberia and her considerable property on the St. Paul’s River. Mrs. Ricks
is of a nature that makes one understand the New Yorker, who testified to
her affection and admiration of a ‘coloured’ servant by vowing that
she believed we should all be “ black-souled ’ in heaven, as in black people
alone had she met with extreme devotion, gentleness, and fidelity !”
Mrs. H. Beecher Stowe, in her “ Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” says :
" In the town of Brunswick, Maine, where the writer lived when writing
'Uncle Tom’s Cabin,’ may now be seen the grave of an aged coloured
woman, named Phebe, who was so eminent for her piety and loveliness of
character that the writer has never heard her name mentioned except
with that degree of awe and respect which one would imagine due to a
saint. The small cottage where she resided is still visited and looked
apon as a sort of shrine, as the spot where old Phebe lived and prayed.


Her prayers and pious exhortations were supposed to have been the cause
of the conversion of many young people in the place. Notwithstanding
hat the unchristian feeling of caste prevails as strongly in Maine as any-
where else in New England, and the negro, commonly speaking, is an
object of aversion and contempt, yet, so great was the influence of her
piety and loveliness of character, that she was uniformly treated with the
utmost respect and attention by all classes of people. The most cultivated
and intelligent ladies of the place esteemed it a privilege to visit her
cottage; and when she was old and helpless, her wants were most tenderly
provided for. When the news ot her death was spread abroad in the
place, it excited a general and very tender sensation of regret. ‘We have
lost Phebe’s prayers,’ was the remark frequently made afterwards by
members of the church, as they met one another. At her funeral the ex-
Governor of the State and the Professors of the College officiated as
pall-bearers, and a sermon was preached in which the many excellences
of her Christian character were held up as an example to the community.
A small religious tract containing an account of her life, was published by
the American Tract Society, prepared by a lady of Brunswick. The
writer recollects that on reading the tract, when she first went to Bruns-
wick, a doubt arose in her mind whether it was not somewhat exaggerated.
Some time afterwards she overheard some young persons conversing
together about the tract, and saying that they did not think it gave exactly
the right idea of Phebe, ‘Why, is it too highly coloured?’ was the
inquiry of the author. ‘ Oh, no, no, indeed! ’ was the earnest response;
‘it doesn’t begin to give an idea of how good she was!’ ”
Another writes ; —“ Upon the decision of these and the cognate problems
rests the question of the course which trade will take; and upon trade rests
the gradual extinction of that dreadful slave-traffic which Livingstone called
* the open sore of the world,’ an ulcer eating away the life and loveliness of this
wonderful continent. Lovely it is in all its wealth of splendid scenery, its
majestic rivers, mighty inland seas, flowery forests, and sunny mountains ;
nor can any large-minded man doubt that when justice is done to its vast
and patient populations, the entire world will not contribute richer gifts to
humanity than will these industrious, glad-hearted, artistic Africans.”—
Life of Livingstone.
Another writer, speaking of Africa and the Africans, says:—‘‘Living-
stone, whose experience of the negro character was unrivalled,
appears to have come to the conclusion that, after all, the negro is no better
and no worse than the rest of the sons of men. And, indeed, we Europeans
appear to unsophisticated savages a most immoral and wicked people ;
their judgment of us is, in fact, crippled by much the same limitation that
prejudices our judgment of them. There is the same curious admixture of
good and bad qualities in them as in us; it is merely a distinction of kind


:and a question of degree. The negro is, in short, an untrained child of
nature; and want of self-control or of ‘character’—generally the
product of civilization—naturally accentuates his failings. Only those
who have lived with him learn his many excellent qualities of heart and
mind." — AS. White's “ Development oj Africa".
The summary of Dr. Livingstone that “the negro is no better
and no worse than the rest of the sons of men/* 1 regard
as one of the most valuable sayings ever uttered in the cause of humanity:
for Dr. Livingstone knew more of the inner workings of the negro’s mind
than probably any white man that ever lived, inasmuch as for thirty years
he was associated with many of the various peoples of Africa. He lived
with them, preached to them, prayed with them, conversed with them,
travelled with them, ate with them, hungered with them, lodged with
them, jovecl with them, suffered with them, condoled with them, communed
with their inmost souls as protably no other man ever did, and finally
died with them; and then two of them, with fraternal human love, brought
h is d ead body for a thousand miles and delivered it up to his white friends.
NOBLE WORDS BY UNPREJUDICED MEN.
Archbishop Ireland says:—“l am prepared to say there is no such
thing as a colour line except in the minds of those whose intellects are
clouded by unjust reasoning. lam ashamed that prejudices of this kind
should exist, especially in the United States, which so proudly boasts of
being a republic where freedom and fraternity are the foundation stones.
I know nocolour line—l will acknowledge none,’’— NineteenthC entuvy, 1899.
President Roosevelt says:—“l cannot consent that the door of hope is
to be shut upon any man merely upon the ground of race or colour.” —
The Nation, New York, December rS, 1902.
*' Col. R. G. Ingersoll says: —“Allow me to say that I do not believe
any man. ft for the I’residency of this great Republic (United States), who
dscapable of insulting a down-trodden race. I never met a Negro that I
do not feel like asking his forgiveness for the wrongs that my race has in-
flicted on his. I remember that from the whiteman he received for 200
years agony and tears; I remember that my race sold a child from the
agonised breast of a mother; I remember that my race trampled with the
feet of greed upon all the holy relations of life; and I do not feel like
insulting the coloured man; I feel rather like asking the forgiveness of his
race for the crimes that my race have put upon him.”
Rev. Dr. Hall says:—“ 3do not care whether a man is black, or white, or
yellow, or chocolate-coloured, if he has in himself the idea of Christ, of
dcing as Christ did when he sat by the well in this low world of ours. If
he has time to visit the hungry, and the weary, and the sad, he is good
enough for me.”— Arena, 1896.


NEGROES OF AFRICA
Old Hottentot of Pure Blood.
Charles Pamla.
An Amazulu Fingo; an unpaid Wesleyan
Evangelist of South Africa.
Susa.
(Dr. Livingston’s Servant).
Dr. Crowther.
(Bishop of the Niger. Born at Yoruba,
Western Africa).
Tiyo-Soga, a Kaffir.
(College educated at Glasgow.
Missionary to his countrymen).
Chumah
The Servant who brought the news of Dr.
Livingston's death to Lieut. Cameron.


AFRICAN NEGROES.
A Dear Little Dwarf Woman.
Central Africa.
A Girl of Morocco.
(Another type).
A Man of the Shoho Tribe.
(Abyssinia].
A Negro of Senegal.
Western Africa.
A Dear Little African Woman.
An Abyssinian Negro Woman.


A Bechuana Foundling
King Honesty of Old Calabar.
(Educated).
A Girl of the Gaboon.
(Western Africa).
A Make Woman of Central Africa.
A Nubian.
A Kaffir of Damaraland.
(South Africa).
AFRICAN NEGROES.


GROUP OF EDUCATED KAFFIRS


GROUP OF KAFFIR WOMEN.


A President of Hayti
Hon. George L. Knox
Hon. George H. White.
A President of Liberia.
Frederick Douglass.
The amous Mulatta).
Hon. H. A. Rucker.
NEGROES OF AMERICA.


Hon. Warren C. Coleman.
Hon. John C. Dancy.
A Negro-European.
(Grand master of the Brazilian
Freemasons).
Hon. George A. Mebane.
Hon. John Mitchell, jur.
Geo. W. Lovejoy, Esq.
(Attorney).
AMERICAN NEGROES.


Henry McNeal Turner, D.D., LL.D.
Charles W. Gordon, D.D.
Alexander Walters, D.D.
Rev. Henry Garnet, D.D.
(United Stated Minister at Liberia. Born
in America of Mandingo parents.
Charles S. Smith D.D.
James H Garnett, A. B., B.A., D.D.
AMERICAN NEGROES.


Bishop L H. Holscy, D.D.
American Negro.
(Bishop Hawkens).
Rev. Jonah Benson.
(Mrs. Stone's Uncle Tom. Born in
Maryland).
Henry Johnson.
Archdeacon of the Upper Niger, born at
Sierra Leone).
African Negro
Bishop of Liberia.
C H. Parrish, A.B., A.M.
(President of the Eckstein University).
AMERICAN NEGROES.


C. B. Burton, M.D.
Robert F. Boyd, M.D
Geo. N. Stoney, M.D
W. D. Crum, M.D.
Willes E. Sterrs, M D
R. T. Hill, Esq., Banker.
AMERICAN NEGROES.


Peter Jackson,
A Negro Native of the West Indies.
Champion Pugilist.
A Mulattress of Martinique.
A Mulatto Woman
R. C. O. Benjamin,
Journalist.
An almost Pure-bred Negro Woman.
Miss Florence N. Day.
Educator
AMERICAN NEGROES.


Cooler Washington, D.D.
Prof. John H. Poe.
Rev. W. H. Franklin, A.M.
Prof. E.W.B. Curry.
Prof. I. Garland Penn.
Rev. C. S. Brown, A.M.
AMERICAN NEGROES.
PRIXTEU AfA I ISLIIAI I AT COLE’S HOOK Alir.MIE, MKLHOORXE.


