



EASY JAPANESE PHRASES
(To he pronounced as spelt,
Good day
Good morning
Good evening
Good bye
Bring me a cup of tea
Another cup of tea
I like tea very much
Will you take tea ?
I have ordered some
I am very thirsty
Do you like tea.
Yes*
The tea is good.
I’ll come again .
I will come to-morrow
I’ll come back quickly
How are you ? ...
What is the time ?
This is very nice
It is very cold ...
It is very warm...
Are you well 2 ...
I thank you
Is that so
A little ..
Bring it here
Be quick
Wait a little
Make haste
Here it is
It is cold to-day
I do not understand
To-day ...
To-morrow
Yesterday
I understand
I shall go
No more
As quickly as possible ...
.Many thanks for your trouble
I beg your pardon
according to English rules.)
Koneachywa.
.Ohio.
Kom bawa.
. Saryon itra.
Ocha ippai cliodai.
More stutz koo-darsi.
Watarkshe Ocha tuksan sooki.
.Arnartar wa ochar wo,
Watarkshe wa tory osey mashta,
Hidokoo karwaki masu.
.Arnartar wa ocha wo sookimaska.
Hey.
Ocha tucksun yourushe.
.Watarkshe kono, toekorori key-
marsoo.
Alio nichi watarkshe sanjeemasu.
Watarkshe hiarkoo kireemasu.
Ikanga day gozarimars
Nan doki deska.
Koorie tucksun you rooshi.
Tucksun sarin we.
Tucksun otsie.
Arnartar you rushie.
Aring-artoe.
So dcskar.
Skoshi.
Koko motickcmars,
.Hiarkoo.
.Skoshi marty,
Soongo.
Koko nee.
Ivon nichi sarin we.
Warkareemarsen.
Ko nichi.
Mio nichi.
.Sakoo jits.
. W okarreemars.
.Yukeemarsho.
.More you-rooshi.
.Narootarki hiarkoo.
.Gokooro sarin a.
Gomen narsigh.




INTRODUCTION.
Mis. Pemberton W. Willard, the promoter of the Japanese
Village, was fortunate enough to induce the Japanese Government
to interest itself and countenance this undertaking, and all the
natives who people this village were engaged with the approval of
the Government, who drew out their contracts and hold their
salaries in trust. This is the first time that the Japanese Govern-
ment has sanctioned anything of the kind, a sure proof that
they are now fully aware of the great advantage that must accrue
to the Commercial interests of Japan, by this most advantageous
method of enlightening the world as to the use and beauties of
Japanese arts and manufactures.
Great interest is felt at present throughout the civilized world
in the insular empire of Japan. Universal history does not pre-
sent such another instance of so singularly active and progressive
a community, shutting itself up in the strictest isolation from any
point of contact with other nations, living for ages without
either civil or foreign warfare, unknown to the great commercial
communities of the west, and only desirous to remain so. Within
the last few y 7 ears this barrier of isolation has been broken down,
and we are comparatively familiar with what may be correctly
termed the latest and greatest curiosity in the history of civili-
zation.
The Japanese are an active and progressive community,
but being continually thrown back upon themselves by a ripidly
paternal system of government; they have not advanced on all
points with equal speed. In some things they equal, nay, surpass
the most skilled communities of Europe. In other respects they
are so preposterously 7 behind modern ideas, as to suggest a state
of society to be found only the middle or even the dark ages.
In all the elements of material civilization they leave other-
nations at a vast distance. They make swords and cutlery to
rival the best workmanship of Birmingham and Sheffield ; silks
and crapes that will compete with Macclesfield and Lyons. They
launched a steamer without any assistance from foreign Engineers,
having actually constructed a -working marine engine from some
plans in a Dutch work. Yet in rapid locomotion—one of the
greatest triumphs of modern science, so absurdly primitive are


their ideas, that they have no better mode of conveying government
despatches than by a Courier running at full speed, and stripped
of all garments save his loin-cloth. This paradoxical character
of the people shows itself in every relation of life. The Japanese
write from top to bottom, but from right to left, consequently
their books begin where ours end. Their old men fly kites while
the children look on at this solemn amusement of their grand-
fathers. Their carpenters draw the plane to them, and their
tailors stitch from them; they mount their horses from the off
side, while the horses themselves stand in the stable with their
heads where we place their tails. So far from attempting to have
white teeth—ladies vie with each other in imparting to them a
brilliant black. The sexes mingle in the public bath-houses in
a manner indescribable to western readers, being apparently no
more ashamed of mutual exposure than our first parents before
the Fall. Yet if we are to place any reliance on the most
authoritative testimony—the morality of Japan is superior to that
of most Eastern countries. They sleep without beds, and eat
without tables. As a people—they are perhaps the most peac-
able, contented, good-humoured, and cheerful in the world ; yet
the country is without statute law, or lawyers ; but whether this
last peculiarity should be classed under the head of paradoxes we
will not undertake to say. They are at once one of the most
sceptical and most religious people in the world. At times noth-
ing can exceed the austerity of their devotions, but when this
fit of enthusiasm passes away they relapse into a scepticism as
complete as any Positivist could desire. This is particularly
observable in their caricatures, a department of artistic work
in which they particularly excel. The cuisine of Japan is very
varied and quite that of a civilized people, but like other countries,
it has its own peculiarities—first of all butchers meat is not plenti-
ful, but poultry and fish take its place. The poor live entirely
on rice and vegetables, but they manage to make this rather
insipid food quite tasty by seasoning it very strongly with horse-
raddish and capsicum. Fricasseed poultry and chicken soup are
considered to form a very recherche repast, and are reserved for
large entertainments, or great gala days. But in the houses of the
rich as well as the poor, rice forms the staple food, and takes the
place of bread and meat. Tea is the ordinary and universal
beverage, although saki and the sweet Osaka wine resembling
Tokay in flavor are also drunk.


DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES.
No. 1. Two men carrying a kago. It is very light, the only solid
part about it being the contre pole. They are rapidly becoming
obsolete, and are only used at the present time for carrying people
over mountains or where the Jinricksha could not go. It is a
most uncomfortable carriage for Europeans, as they cannot double
their legs up like the Japanese with any degree of comfort, and
if they hang their legs out they strike on the ground, besides get-
ting severely chafed against the sides of the kago.
No. 2. The Jinricksha. This is a modern invention, and is
the only carriage available throughout Japan, and as its name
signifies in Japanese, is drawn by one or two men, who will fre-
quently travel fifty miles a day at an average say of five miles an
hour; cost for two men and a ricksha about six shillings per
day.
No. 3. Daimio Eyahongwa and his wife Kawoyo Gojin—the
hero and heroine of the most popular legend in Japan :
THE 47 LONINS.
An old Daimio named Morono became enamoured of the
wife of Eyahgngwa. This naturally caused great enmity between
these two Daimios, and at a council meeting within the precincts
of the Mikado’s palace, Morono taunted Eyahongwa to such an
extent that in his fury he drew his sword and attacked Morono.
The servitors, however, prevented any serious bloodshed. Foiled
in his object, Eyahongwa returned to his house, and having col-
lected his officers and retainers around him, and made his prepara-
tions for the solemn ceremony of disembowelling himself, he
deliberately performed the operation in their presence, and then
handing the short sword covered with his blood to his secretary,
he laid his dying injunctions upon him, as his liege lord, with
that very weapon to take the life of his enemy. The latter being
freed from his antagonist, seized upon the house and property of
the deceased Daimio, and turned out all his faithful servitors.
These, to the number of forty-seven, became Lonins, under the


command of the secretary, all bound together by an oath to accom-
plish the destruction of their master’s enemy. Accordingly,
choosing their time, they stormed his castle during the night when
they knew he was inside, and entered into a terrible conflict with
all his retainers, amounting to some three hundred, and such was
their desperate heroism that they finally vanquished them, and
proceeded to search for their chief victim. He was concealed in
a secret recess between two rooms with one of his friends ; but
the Lonins had obtained information of the existence of such a
hiding-place, and one of them thrust a spear through the partition.
The blade wounded the Uaimio, but not in a vital part, and as it
was drawn out he took care to wipe it with his sleeve, so that on
examining it, and seeing no marks of blood, the Lonins came to
the conclusion that no one was there, and that he had escaped
their vengeance. Nothing then remained but an act of self-immo-
lation, and stripping off their armour and dress, they were in the
act of performing the Hara Kiri when a stifled cough reached
their from the very hiding-place they had pierced in a vain search.
Satisfied now that their enemy was still in their grasp, they
sprang to their feet tore down the walls, and dragged him
and his friend out, when the secretary, with the very sword which
he had received from his dying chief, struck off both their heads.
Their vengeance thus satisfied, and not a living being remaining
to be slain, they then performed the disembowelling with the
greatest heroism and complacency. They were all buried in one
cemetery in Yedo, and they live to this day in the hearts of all
brave and loyal men in Japan as types of true heroism.
No. 4. A very celebrated archer, named Hoshino Kanzayeo-
mon, a retainer of Owari, who is said to have hit the Bull's eye of
a target 8,000 times out of 9,000. He has on the armour of a
Japanese warrior.
No. 5. A Bonze or Buddhist priest of the Miyoanji Temple.
The priests of this temple are all sons of Kuges, and*belong to the
priestly rank of “ Moudusiki.” The “Komusho,” or wandering
minstrels are of this temple. To obtain permission to wear the
basket shaped hats (tengai) which had small holes in front, but
effectually concealed the face, a tax was levied by the priests.
When the required grant had been obtained, these palmers com-
menced their tour of the country, going from house to house and
town to town, eliciting a series of doleful tunes from a species of
clarionet and receiving the few cash, which was the object of
their call, from hapless inmates who were glad to get rid of them
at any price. They were extremely quarrelsome and if some
close-fisted old gentleman or lady ventured to motion them away
the Komusho instantly pushed back the door, entered the house
and seldom left without receiving a double contribution. If,


when accused of crime they succeeded in gaining the temple no
authority whatever could reach them ; the priests have even some-
times gone so far as to demand the delivery to them of a criminal
Komusho seized by the authorities. If they lowered their head-
dress they could not re-enter the temple. The wearing of the
hats has been prohibited under the new regime, and the
sanctuary of the temple is no longer recognised.
No. 6. A girl playing a koto, a very pretty musical instru-
ment, but unfortunately there are very few who can play the
koto well as it is rapidly falling into disuse.
No. 7. A girl playing the sam sheen (type of the Geisha
■or singing girl of Japan). This is the national instrument, as
almost every female child is taught in its infancy either by its
mother or a professional tutor. They play with a piece of ivory
shaped like an axe.
No. 8 A Dancing Girl.—The forced gestures of these
dancing girls and their extraordinary contortions, harmonise very
little with our ideas of grace, but their supple and precise move-
ments are faithfully adapted to the character of the music, which
is sometimes slow and sad, sometimes bright and lively, also
serves as an accompaniment to a poem recited by the Geisha.
No 9. Type of the ordinary waiting maid and children.


ARTISANS’ HOUSES,
Nos. 1 and 2,
JAPANESE “SHIPPO”
CLOISONNE WARE.
Few of the decorative arts of Japanese manufacture are less
understood or more seldom studied than that of enamelling on
copper, yet none, if any, have produced works of greater beauty
or require more skilful manipulation. The work is simply
wonderful and must be seen and carefully studied in order to
appreciate the very high perfection to which the art has been
brought.
Enamel is the name given to a class of vitreous substances,
transparent or opaque, colored by metallic oxides. When trans-
parent the enamel resembles the glass of stained windows in
appearance and only differs from it in being so constituted that
it will fuse at a much lower temperature. Colourless transparent
enamel is composed of certain borates and silicates fused with
oxides of lead, whilst white opaque enamel, such as is used for
watch and clock dials, is formed with oxide of tin. Both the
opaque and transparent enamelled pastes are coloured by the
addition of one or more of the metallic oxides, according to the
tint required.
In manufucturing the cloisonne, the first process of the
Japanese workman is to bring the vase, plaque, or ornament into
the desirable shape. If a large sized vase is required a piece of
copper, of about 1G by 21 inches, is bent into a tube and then
soldered together so perfectly as not to leave any visible junction.
By means of long continued hammering the tube is bulged out
in the middle and contracted at the top and bottom, until it


assumes the required shape; the bottom is then soldered iu and
the upper edge finished, after which the surface is polished perfectly
bright by acid. Now the artist, who is provided with a drawing
or design, begins to manipulate, and with a fine brush and Indian
ink transfers the design to the vase. The next process, which is
a very delicate one, consists of covering with a certain gum the
whole of the outlines drawn on the vase and to which are fastened
wires (either gold, silver, or copper), something after the manner
of silver filagree work. After tliis, solder is applied and the vase
is taken to a dry fire and the wire carefully brazed on and per-
manently fastened in their places. The next proceeding, one
that requires great artistic skill, is the filling up of the spaces
formed by the wires with the various coloured enamels to com-
plete the design, and during this stage of the process the article
is baked in a furnace six or eight times, according to the
number of layers of enamel applied. The surface of the
article at this stage is rough and uneven and is, therefore, taken
in hand by the polisher, who has to use great judgment in order
to avoid damaging the article, and it rests with his portion of
the business whether the result will be perfect or defective. He
uses a kind of gritty stone, which is constantly wetted, and with
this he grinds down the projections until the surface becomes
perfectly bright and smooth, which process, as may be imagined,
requires a great amount of patience and care. The last or finish-
ing touch is then given by the article being polished with a kind
of cork stick, which produces that brilliant surface so admired by-
lovers of this art. One of the most striking peculiarities of
Japanese cloisonne is its great thinness, some of the finest work
not exceeding the sixteenth part of an inch. Although enamelling
is not of Japanese origin, the art has x-each the greatest perfec-
tion in the skilled and artistic hands of this nation, and it is
doubtful whether such pex-fect specimens of this art existed
previous to its being produced by the Japanese. Specimens of
this work during its various stages may be ixxspected on applica-
tion.


No. 3.
FAN MAKING.
An ancient manufacture of tlie Japanese. The excellence of a kind
of fan “ Ogi,” for which Kioto is celebrated, is said to be owing to
the fact that at one time during the civil wars, the Kuges
attendants at the Imperial court were so badly oil for even the
common necessaries of life, that they were obliged to resort to
manual labour, and they turned their attention to making these
fans. The first process is the handle-making ; the artisan takes
the bamboo and splits it to the requisite thickness ; he then
scrapes it and cuts into the necessary lengths for the outside
pieces, after which the inside pieces are made (the ribs of the fan)
and the whole riveted together; the paper is then manipulated.
It is first cut into the circular shape required and then two
pieces are pasted together (Nori rice paste only being used)
forming the back and front of the fan. This paper is then handed
to the fan painter for decoration ; -when this is finished the fan
maker, with a thin piece of wood, divides the two papers at points
where the ribs are to be inserted. The paper is then folded to its
shape, the ribs are inserted and fixed in their places, the paper
trimmed, and the fan closed ready for sale.


No. 4.
FAN PAINTING.
The almost universal use of fans by the Japanese, and the large
quantities now exported to the West, renders their manufacture
an important branch of industry. Fan painting is consequently
much in vogue; it is a trade, hut it is also an art in which all
the qualities which distinguish Japanese art are combined;
indeed some of these productions are perfect little chef d’cvuvres
in their extreme simplicity; as, for example, a stork with a fish in
its beak skimming along the surface of the waves, the horizon of
the sea being invisible ; or, again, a flock of small birds on the
wing, a vast expanse of sky as the background. These pretty,
graceful subjects are always striking from their originality, and
in contrast between the slenderness of outline of the principal
object and the immensity of the background and border. In
Japan there are no academies or studios. Talent is considered to
be hereditary, and an art is usually transmitted from father to
son for generations in the same families. Sometimes they
exaggerate, but always with moderation, and, invariably, with
good taste. Their work in painting shows that the sole thought
of the artist is to portray the passions of the heart, tranquility,
ecstacy, melancholy, fear, anger, hatred, surprise, gaiety,—but
rarely love. The study of the human frame has no interest for
them; nevertheless—however ignorant they may be of its
anatomy, they succeed in giving it its grandest quality—life : and
the one divine attribute that has never deserted them is good
taste—a God given gift rather than a thing acquired.


WOOD CARVING
This art dates back B.C. GO, and we have several pieces of work
in magnificent preservation of the celebrated carver, Hidano
Takomi, a.d. 3GO; amongst these may be enumerated a large
dragon, now over the door of the Serioji temple (Buddhist), Kioto,
(Built a. D., 987). There is a superstition prevailing among the
priests of this temple, that the dragon used to go into the sea
every night; to prevent this they fastened it to the temple with
a chain, this may still be seen. In the Tenoji Temple, Osaka,
may be seen a carving of a cat (life-size), all Japanese speak
of this with great reference, and firmly believe that it is endowed
with the power of meowing at will. In the Toezan Kageji,
Tokio Wieno, may be seen another of this carver’s masterpieces.
There were two celebrated carvers Unkei and Tanked, about a.d,
1162, who carved 1000 Gods and Goddesses, that may still be seen
in the Sanjiusangendo Buddhist Temple, at Saikio, all in very
good preservation. Another fine piece of work is an Idol in the
Kishi Ilouganji Temple, Kioto, carved by the most skilful work-
man of the age, Kasuga ; the figure is about 3 feet in height, and
is looked upon as a marvel of skill ; in the same Temple is an
elaborate earn ed gate called Chokushimon, designed by the well-
known artist Hidari Jingoro, and which is only opened to admit
the Mikado or his Ambassador. One of the most celebrated of
modern carvers suddenly (about 10 years ago), developed a
religious tendency, and is now known in Japan as the “Hermit
of Kioto,” who seems to have fairly earned the title “par excel-
lence,” both on account of his extraordinary dwelling place, and
the mysterious awe with which he is popularly regarded. The
habitation of this eccentric man is in a nook or cleft of lofty
rock, surrounded by the spreading branches of a tree ; between
the rock and the highway is a pond, which secures him still
further from molestation ; but even Hermits must eat, and to
supply necessities of nature the recluse has a pulley stretching
over the pond and fastened to his den ; and by this means he is
kept in a constant supply of food by the bounty of the citizens,
who send baskets of provisions up the pulley, and receive them
back again when empty.
No. 6.
DOLL DRESSING.


No. 7.
SCREEN MAKING & KAKEMONO
MOUNTING.
It takes the work of several artisans to keep this man employed,
viz., the painter or embroiderer supplying the decorative panels,
the carpenter who supplies the inside frames for screens, and the
top and bottom rollers for kakemonos ; the lacquerer, the outside
frames of the screens ; and the carver the ends of rollers for
kakemonos.
Kakemono mounting. The embroidery or painting on silk
or paper to be mounted, is first strengthened by having paper
pasted on the back; the gold cloth is then pasted on and fixed
with a hot iron, the top and bottom roller is then pasted in, a
piece of tape adjusted for the hanging, and the kakemono is left
to dry.
Screen making. The first process is to strengthen the inside
frames with strong paper and fix the hinges, then paste the
embroidery or painting on the hinged frames, the inside and
outside gold cloth is then pasted and pressed with hot iron to fix,
the outside frames are then attached, and the corner pieces and
ornaments nailed on, and the screen is left to dry.
As paper plays so important a part in the making of screens
and kakemonos, the following description of its preparations will
not be out of place. —The paper used by the Japanese is usually
of a creamy white, and is made of the bark of certain trees boiled
in an alkaline preparation. It next goes through a most delicate
process of washing, on the success of which depends the white-
ness and quality of the materia]; and being then mixed with a
viscous preparation of rice, is reduced to a smooth paste,
sufficiently consistent to be formed into sheets. The moulds
used for making the sheets are of straight laths of bamboos.
The last process is that of drying, for which purpose - the sheets
are placed in piles (each one divided from the rest by a strip of
bamboo) under a wooden press, and the weight is gradually
increased until the water is thoroughly squeezed out. The leaves
are then raised one by one by the bamboo strips and placed on a
rough plank, where they are left to dry in the sun. This is very
durable and is used throughout Japan in place of glass,—it does
not, however, appear to have been used before the Seventeenth
Century,


Nos. 8 and 9.
SILK WORKERS.
These Artisans are very clever and make some really curious
articles in silk, pin cushion’s of fish and fruit, large fish (Tai),
artificial flowers, silk dolls (very superior), chickens and cranes,
very cleverly made with book muslin, portraits of Japanese
musumes (girls) very tastefully dressed, these are made in there
entirety by the young girl, pictures of all sorts including those
made with raised figures in silk, fire screens, small baskets of fish,
paper cases, photograph frames, blotting pads, and a thousand
and one other odd fancy articles.
It is said that the finest silks used by these artisans, are
woven on a small barren island by criminals of high birth, who
are obliged to work for their living. The art of silk-husbandry—
sericiculture, as it is called—was introduced into Japan by the
Chinese and the Coreans about the year 310 and has since in-
creased to a marvellous extent. Towards the end of the six-
teenth century the reigning emperor stimulated his subjects to
increasing industry in this trade, and his injunctions on the
subject do honor to the Japanese Government of that period. He
says ;—“ Give to your silkworms the same tender attention which
parents bestow on their infants ; tend them as your mother tends
her new born child. Cold, damp and heat are alike injurious to
them ; watch carefully, therefore, that they may- always enjoy an
even temperature, and a sufficiency of pure fresh air both day
and night. Nobly born ladies, queens and princesses, have with
their own hands gathered the mulberry leaves, and proved that
the art of raising silkworms is an occupation worthy of their
sex and rank.” The following is a well known legend of Toung-
Young (a silk weaver). *• This youth was a model of filial piety.
When as a child, he followed his mother to the grave, he vowed to


devote all his energies to the care of his remaining parent. As
he grew older, he hired himself as a laborer in order to supply
his father’s wants ; and when at last his father died, he sold him-
self, as his only means of raising sufficient money to defray the
funeral expenses. Having accomplished this filial duty, he pro-
ceeded to the residence of his new master, and when on the road
he met a most lovely maiden, who stopped him and said;
‘ Toung-Young, I wish to be your wife.’ ‘ But,’ replied he, ‘I am
poor, and my body belongs not to myself but to my master, for
I have sold myself to gain the means to bury my father. How
can you wish to become my wife 1 ’ ‘ Because Heaven wills it,’
answered the beauteous maiden. ‘I am clever at weaving, so let
us go together to your master and he will receive us both into
his service.’ Toung-Young dared no longer offer further objec-
tions ; he took the maiden as his wife, and together they were
received into the master’s service. In less than a month the
clever wife had produced more than a hundred pieces of the most
exquisite silk, which she offered to her master as the ransome of
her husband. Surprised and charmed, he gave them both their
liberty. They had scarcely began the journey into their own
country when the wife said to Toung-Young ; ‘ I am the celestial
weaver. Heaven was touched by the sincerity of thy filial piety,
and sent me to aid thee.’ And with these words she disappeared
into the clouds and returned to her heavenly home.”


TEA HOUSE.
The Tea Houses are really tlio pleasure houses of Japan, their size
is reckoned by their number of mats (about G feet by 3 feet),
generally from 6 to 12. In the palmy days of Kioto (Sacred City)
there was, at times, a large floating population of Dahnios
(Princes) and their retainers, and so numerous were the guests at
the principal tea houses, that one yen near four shillings per mat
was often paid. Most of the tea houses are built in the immediate
vicinity of a Temple, and as all the great festivals of Japan are
held in Temple grounds, it follows that the tea houses receive a
large share of the money circulated. In Kioto alone there are
three thousand tea houses ; each house pays a tax of three yen per
month, and the whole of these, taxes go to the Hospital funds. If
the visitor has a taste for the inspiriting strains of the Sam Sheen
or Japanese songs sung by Japanese ladies, he or she can indulge
to the bent of their inclination.
The tea-houses scattered throughout Japan are of two kinds,
the'i'seha-jas and the Joro-jas. The former are considered the
more respectable of the two, are frequented by the best society,
and at the same time afford rest and refreshment to travellers.
They are to be met with in the country as well as in the towns,
and the sites upon which they are built show clearly the prevail-
ing love of the Japanese for the beauties of nature. In all
accesible places where the landscape attracts the eye, a tea-house
invites the passer-by to rest awhile, and enjoy the prospect before
him. Upon frequented roads this establishment becomes a large
hotel, but in more retired places it is simply a minature house,
built of wood and paper, and covered in by a thatched roof. The
traveller is oftentimes also pleasantly surprised, when he has
wandered far into the interior, following the course of rivers, or
penetrating thick groves, where no sign of any human habitation
is apparent, to find himself close to one of these establishments,
naturally a very humble specimen, and probably presided over by
some old woman who offers him for the modest sum of a Zeni—
not quite the hundredth part of two pence—a cup of tea and a
small platter of rice. He is certain gladly to accept the welcome
refreshment, and to smoke several pipes before quitting the
lovely, though solitary spot. In all the tea-houses customers are
waited on by young girls, called Nesans; they are exceedingly
active and obliging in serving each one in turn, according to their
respective wants, with eggs, rice, fish, saki—a kind of brandy
made from rice—or tea, which the guests consume very slowly,
sitting cross-legged upon soft comfortable mats.


THE TEMPLE.
(BUDDHIST),
Built as a Fac-similie op the Kitomidzu Temple, Saikio.
This glorious and venerable spot is the admiration of lovers of
the picturesque and the delight of the multitude that constantly
visit there, whether for worship or pastime. The temple which
is sometimes called Otovvasan Seisuiji, was built by the Shogun
Sakano Uyero Tamuramaru in 798, at the time that Kuwaumu
established the capital. He called it Kuwanonji, in honor of the
goddess Juichimen Kuwanon. In 801 when proceeding by
Imperial command to fight and punish the Eastern Barbarians,
he offered up prayers to the goddess, and having obtained a great
victory, he received permission to build a temple here in the style
of the Shishiden, and attached the former name, owing to the
Otawa waterfall being situated close by, which is celebrated for
its clear pure water. Recently a large stage was added to the
structure, overlooking a depth of about fifty feet. The approach
to the temple is good. To the south-east of the Hondo, there is
a small shrine, dedicated to Yenmusubi-no kami, the patron Saint
of true lovers. In front of this shrine there is a small grating,
to which strips of paper are attached by unmarried people of
both sexes who desire the favor of some sweetheart, it being
considered essential to the success of the petition, that the pieces
of paper he tied to the grating by the thumb and little finger of
one hand. There is a curious superstition connected with this
temple, viz.; that anyone jumping down from the platform (butai)
in front of the Hondo, without being killed, there wish will be
gratified. In former times many persons made the jump, some
being killed, others more or less injured, and some escaping with
only a good shaking. The last case took place about 11 years
ago. A young married woman, whose husband had taken up with
another women, threw herself from the platform, followed by her
faithful maid servant. Strange to say neither were permanently
injured, although they both got a good shaking. The faithless
husband was so struck with the devotion of his wife that he
reformed and led a virtuous life To put a stop to further experi-
ments of this description, the Fu authorities have caused a high
barricade of bamboo to be erected.


Visitors to the Japanese Village -will pass through the inner
doors (very ancient and from the Shinsenyen Temple), and im-
mediately facing them will perceive a small temple, the principal
shrine from Kumano, in connection with this temple tradition
narrates, that Goshirakawanoin suffered from an excruciating
headache, which set the skill of the very best physicians at
defiance. To heal his pains he felt himself compelled to make
a pilgrimage to Kumano, and pray to the God Gongensama.
Whilst performing his devotions at the shrine, the God appeared
to him and said: “In a temple called Inabada, at Kioto, there
lives a skillful doctor, who has just arrived fram Tenjiku ; if you
go and consult him your headache will cease.” He therefore
retraced his steps and hurriedly made his way to the Inabado.
He himself in prayer before the tutelary diety, and
then the God appeared and conferred upon him the title
Shoichi Daijodaijin The God also said to him : “In a former life
you were the priest Rengeibo, who travelled through the country
worshipping all the Gods. I then informed you that in your next
life you would become Tenshi.” When Reugeibo died, his bones
were put into a box and thrown into the river, and in the course
of time everything but the skull rotted away. The skull still
remains at the bottom of the river Iwata in Kishiu. The trunk
of the willow which grows from the river, passes through the
skull, and when the wind blows, the tree moves to and fro, there-
fore causing pain to the skull; it you remove the tree your
headache will cease.” The suggestion was followed out with the
well prayed-for result. Out of gratitude, Gonhirakawanois
built a temple to Kuwanon at Kumano, ( of which this small
temple formed a portion), and placed the skull as an object of
worship in the temple.
To the left of this may be seen the figure of the Goddess
Amida, and on either side of her, figures of Aitta Kashu and
Benzurisan. It is generally believed that if persons afflcted
with pain in any part of the body rub Benzuri, and then the
corresponding part of their own body, they will be immediately
relieved. He is supposed to be especially fond of children, and
devotees frequently furnish him with a bib, which is hung round
his neck. To the right is a large figure of Daibutz, (Buddha),
a fao-simile of the great metal figure at Kara, which is the largest
metal statue in the Empire, being fifty three and a half feet in
height, and its dimensions may be conjectured from the fact that
a full-grown person may crawl through its nostrils into its head.
On either side of Daibutz, may be seen the figures of Fudo and
Yakushibutsu, supposed to have been made by the famous priest
Dengo Daishi, 950 years ago; between these principal figures
there are others Buddhist deities, and some old specimens of
kakemonos (hanging pictures), by celebrated artists, “ the Sarcop-
hagus of Buddha, Festival of Benten, &c., &c.


No. 10.
LACQUER WORK.
This is the most ancient of all Japanese arts or manufactures,
and until recently the secret of preparation was most jealously
guarded, the lacquer itself is a resinous compound obtained from
a tree called the Ureshinoki. The first authentic record of
lacquer work is about a.d. 160, when a man called Ohi Nakana
Mikado made a lacquer box to contain a suit of armour; this was
made for the Tycoon, has the Toka gawa crest, and is in magnificent
preservation. It is at present in the hands of a Japanese dealer
at Tokio, who has refused some very large sums of money for it.
The lacquering processes are as follows: —lst. A layer of silver
on the object to be lacquered, this is put in an oven to dry, then
a thin layer of lacquer ; this takes a day to dry in oven, it is then
polished and another layer of lacquer, when dry is again polished,
and the gold liquid is painted on. This is allowed to dry and then
polished, then another layer of lacquer polished when dry. If
the article has any design, the detail is now filled in, and when
dry, gold dust is sprinkled on for high lights ; when dry, another
layer of lacquer, and the final polishing process. With very good
lacquer these processes are quadrupled, and each lacquering
must be thoroughly dry before another can be laid on—many
pieces of lacquer taking as long as nine months in manufacture,
and as pure gold is used and as it requires the greatest care and
attention while drying after each process, it follows that good
lacquer is one of the most expensive articles that the Japanese
manufacture; a small writing material box 10 in. by 6by 3,
fetching the high price of Ninety pounds. Common articles of the
same size can however be bought, for sixpence.
The preparation of Yreshi or Lacquer when extracted from
the tree is extremely'complicated, and has to undergo a long and
careful preparation before it is ready for use. It is mixed very
slowly and smoothly upon a copper palette with the coloring
matter. The fine operation of polishing is as tedious as the
preliminaries ; this is effected with a stone or polisher of bamboo
and it is by patient labor alone that the varnish attains its
brilliancy. Travellers unanimously aver that the specimens which
are imported into European countries give but a very imperfect
idea of their proficiency in this branch of manufacture as th
most inferior kinds only are sent out of the country.


No. 11.
IVORY CARVING.
This is a very attractive branch of Japanese art; but, owing to
the very excellent finish and fineness of the work, articles turned
out in this branch are very high priced, a pair of carved ivory
tusks about twelve inches high frequently fetching as much as
£lOO, and any work of the famous ivory carver, Gendiyo Sai-
minko, AD. 680, is almost priceless. His speciality was in
carving from the single piece, and without it was absolutely im-
possible to carve from tlm solid, he would never send any of his
work out that had been pieced or joined. An ivory lantern, now
said to be in the possession of the Mikado, was sold for £350.
It is worked as fine as a spider’s web, with sculls on the top and
sides, and frogs and snakes crawling through the skulls; It is
really a chef d'ceuvre of artistic excellence. A popular form of
capital punishment in Japan is crucifixion. The victim is attached
to a cross with four limbs, the arms being extended on the two
higher branches, the two legs on the lower. In this position he
remain* exposed from morning till evening; and at sunset two
executioners, one standing on the right, the other on the left,
each force a long spear from under the armpit out at the nape of
the neck, and the corpse is then left suspended upon the cross for
twenty-four hours. This subject is a very popular one with ivory
and wood carvers of the highest grade, and while in Tokio in
1883, Mr. Willard saw an ivory carving 14 inches high of a man
in the throes of crucifixion that was pronounced by all members
of the medical profession to be anatomically correct. It was pur-
chased by a very rich American for £1,200.


No. 12.
POTTERY.
The great admiration that has Ions: been felt in Europe for Japanese
porcelain, and the further interest recently awakened since the
opening of the ports by the still more original earthenware of
that country, render it necessary to make some observation on the
history of this branch of decorative art.
The Japanese trace several of their improvements to the
teaching of Corean potters, who seem to have settled in the
country at various times, ranging over a long period from B.C. 27
to the end of the 7th century of our era, and, no doubt, they in-
troduced some improvements. The principal fabric, however,
which they had to do with, is the well known one of Satsuma,
where the kilns were built on Corean models, and the potters
formed a class apart, not being allowed to marry out of their own
community. Excepting however the Satsuma ware, the Coreans do
not appear to have introduced any pottery of remarkable excellence,
and we hear nothing of their Porcelain making. Any merit in
Japanese pottery must therefore have originated with the Japanese
themselves, or have been derived from China.
The Satsuma ware, so much esteemed by the European col-
lectors, was made at first in small quantities for the use of the
Prince of Satsuma and his friends. The decoration in colours
was not introduced till the end of the last century, and most of the
specimens sold as old Satsuma, have been made at Ota and Awata
in recent times. The Ceramic wares of Japan, although exhibit-
ing great differences in their composition, texture, and appearance,
may be roughly classed under three principal heads : —(1) Com-
mon Pottery and Stoneware, generally ornamented by scoring and
glazing the surface. (2) A cream-coloured Faience with a glaze,
often crackled, and delicately painted in colours. (3) Hard
Porcelain. It will be with wares of the second class that we
have principally to deal with, viz., Satsuma and Awata.


In the first year of the Emperor Mommu (A.D. 696), a
special officer was appointed to supervise and encourage the trade
of pottery making, and a priest named Giyogi, a native of the
province of Idzumi, invented the potter’s wheel (similar to the
one in which our potter may be seen fashioning his wares), and
instructed the people in the method of using it. Samples of
earthenware, actually made by him, are to be seen in the Shinto
temple of the Todaiji, in the province of Yamato, Japan.
Previous to this, pottery was fashioned by hand. It was placed
in a pit in the ground and covered with timber, which was then
fired ; when the heat had reached a certain intensity, the timber was
removed and the contents covered with dry earth and left to cool.
In consequence of the impossibility of obtaining an equal
temperature through the kiln, there being no draught, articles
from the same baking are often of different colours, from the
time of the advent of the Coreans at Satsuma, proper kilns were
built, and now the amount of spoilage during the baking process is
not more than twenty per cent. The following is the process of
porcelain making: The potter takes the clay in small hard lumps,
and between two grinding stones reduces it to powder ; then,
adding water, rubs it through two sieves (numbers 1 and 2); the
clay is then put in the sun two or three days to dry; it is then
cut into small pieces and rolled and kneaded like dough till a
proper consistency is obtained ; when thoroughly mixed it is
ready for use on the potter’s wheel, and the potter now proceeds
to fashion the articles he wants—vases, plates, basins, bowls, cups,
saucers, etc., etc. After this process, the article is put to dry (out
of the sun) —this fakes from 6 to 48 hours, according to the
thickness of the article—; when dry, the potter pares to uniform
thickness, correcting any blemishes, and the article is then baked
(moderate heat) for 12 hours. It is then, when cool, ready for
glazing, which is done simply by dipping into the glaze—this
glaze takes about twenty-four hours to dry. It is then trimmed to
requisite thickness, and once again backed (this time in a different
kiln, built with four chambers). The article remains in the first
kiln for twelve hours, and in the three remaining kilns two hours
each. This is the final process and the article is then ready for
the decorator.


No. 13.
PORCELAIN PAINTING.
To make clear the motives of decorative ornament among the
Japanese, it is necessary to give some idea of the principles which
guide them, and the influences by which they are governed. There
are two principal religions in Japan, the old national religion (the
Kami worship), and Buddhism—the latter sub-divided into
numerous sects. Of the former we rarely find any representations
on the Ceramic wares, nor, excepting in figures, do we often find
any of Buddha or his followers. There are, however, seven
divinities in Japan who have been partially adopted by the Budd-
hists, and who seem to constitute the real popular mythology of
that country, and these or their symbols are frequently depicted
on pottery, These are the seven Gods of good fortune, of which
the names are as follows :
(1) Fukurokujin, the God of longevity, distinguished by an
abnormal development of head, a long beard, and carrying a rough
staff ; his chief attributes are a sacred tortoise and a stork, and
he is sometimes attended by a white stag.
(2) Yebis, brother of the Sun, the God of daily bread,
represented as a fisherman, occasionally with a large fish attached
to his rod, fish being a favourite food of the Japanese.
(3) Daikoku, the God of riches, a short figure holding a
miner’s hammer, and seated on or near bales of rice; he often
has a large bag, and quaintly enough, is not unfrequently
attended by rats, though they are more likely to impoverish than
enrich the owners of the rice His attributes are emblems of the
great sources of wealth in Japan—rice cultivation and mines. In
former times the wealth of the Daimios was calculated by the
number of kokus of rice their estates produced, and the quantity
of copper and gold obtained from their mines.
(4) Hotei, the God of contentment, a fat old man with a
bare belly, holding a bag and a hand screen. He is often accom-


panied by children -who play all kinds of tricks with this good-
natured Diogenes of Japan.
(5) Jurojin, a dignified figure in the costume of a learned
man, carrying rolls of writing on the end of a staff, and holding a
hand screen ; a young stag follows his footsteps.
(6) Bishamon, the God of military glory, dressed as a war-
rior, and holding a spear and a small pagoda.
(7) Benten, the Goddess of love richly dressed ; sometimes
attended by fifteen boys, her children.
Of these divinities the first four are the most popular, and
few Japanese households are without figures of some of them on
their domestic altars. Notwithstanding this universal cultus,
their devotees are apt to treat them with great familiarity in their
representations, often depicting them in ridiculous attitudes and
costumes. Most of them may generally be recognised as super-
natural beings by a great development of the lobes of the ears.
Historical subjects but rarely occur, and only on specimens
of comparatively modem origin. Scenes from domestic life are
more common. In landscapes the Peerless Mountain, Fujiyama,
may frequently be seen, with its remarkable snow-capped cone.
The beautiful lake and river scenery of Japan furnish the
materials for most of the landscape, decoration, though, as a rule,
preference is given to designs of a simpler character.
We occasionally also find the two animals about which the
Japanese have invented a number of superstitious stories —the
Badger (Tanuko), and the Fox (Kitsune), whose transformations are
the subject of many tales. In their representation of birds the
Japanese are pre-eminent, the Crane, as the emblem of longevity,
is most commonly represented, sometimes in flocks flying across
the sun. We also find eagles and hawks, pheasants, ducks,
domestic fowls, and small birds of various kinds.
The fishes are also excellent in drawing, and we may
especially notice the Tai fish (somewhat like our bream), the
great object of predilection of Japanese gourmets, and the
Koi (a sort of carp), usually represented leaping up a cascade.
Insects occur, but not in great abundance, and are well
pictured.
Before leaving the animals, it should be mentioned that the
Japanese zodiac consists entirely of animal forms, and that the
set is often to be found in porcelain figures.
Of monstrous animals there are five, which are very com-
monly depicted : 1. The Dragon (Rio), borrowed no doubt from
the Chinese, which may be seen among clouds, or rising from the
stormy waves of the ocean. It has not, however, the same
imperial signification that it bears in China. 2. The Phoenix
(Hoho), which, to a certain extent, occupies the place of the
Chinese dragon, being the emblem of imperial dignity in
Japan. This fabulous bird is frequently seen in combination with


other imperial emblems, to which we shall have occasion to refer
hereafter 3. The Kirin (the Kylin of the Chinese), a monstrous
animal with the body and hoofs of a deer, the tail of a bull, and
with a horn on its forehead. 4. A lion monster also occurs
(again derived apparently from the Chinese), and remarkable
for the numerous tufts of curly hair issuing from its body. 5. The
sacred tortoise (Kame) an emblem of longevity, and found
associated with the bamboo, fir, and other objects of long life.
With the exception of a broad hairy tail, it resembles the ordinary
tortoise.
The Japanese are evidently close students of nature in their
representation of trees and plants.
Of the trees, there are three which commonly occur in
combination, and which are special favourites. These are the fir,
the bamboo, and the plum, which are collectively known by a
modification of their Chinese names, as Sho, Chiku, Bai, and
form an emblem of longevity. Anyone familiar with Japanese
porcelain will have noticed the exquisite delicacy with which the
grasses and other flowers of the garden or the field are rendered.
The Nelumbium, or sacred waterlily, as an emblem of Buddha,
frequently occurs ; the chrysanthemum, furnishing what may be
called the imperial arms of Japan; the iris; the peony, of which
innumerable quantities aie cultivated. Gourds also appear, being
connected to a certain extent with longevity.
In simple ornaments, we should call attention to the fondness
of the Japanese for disposing their designs in panels of strange
and irregular shape, often represented overlapping each other, and
without any regard to symmetry.
Any spare spaces, boarders, etc., are filled with Diapers, of
which the variety is endless, all possessing quaintness, and many
of them great beauty. Among these are to be found the Greek
fret and other patterns, which we are apt to associate with classic
times.
Among these ornaments, we occasionally find in a conspicuous
position some of the badges that constitute Japanese heraldry.
The Chrysanthemum, or Kiku-mon, is the badge of the
Empire of Japan. .It is treated in a very conventional manner,
by no means resembling the natural flower The family of the
Mikado (the most ancient reigning family in the world) has, as a
badge, three leaves and flowers of the Paulownia imperialis,
known as the Kiri-mon, also treated conventionally. The later
Shoguns belonged to the Tokugawa family, and therefore bore
their own arms, three mallow leaves within a circle, their points
meeting in the centre. The Prince of Soma had as his cognisance
a prancing horse, tethered, in allusion to his name ( Ma-horse ), as
well as eight balls surrounding a larger central one. All the other
nobles had cognisances of a like character with which they dis-
tinguished their furniture and accoutrements; but they occur less


often on pottery and porcelain, though in some cases they may
have suggested the motif of the ornament.
On receiving the articles to be decorated from the hands of
the potter, the decorator proceeds to clean the article thoroughly
with Tsumi, which removes all greasiness, and then paints accord-
ing to his fancy. The article is then placed in the oven or kiln
to fix the gold and colours, this takes from two to twelve hours
according to the size of article.
In the best kind of decoration the painting and firing process
is repeated three or four times, and as pure gold only is used in
the painting, and the detail in decoration is of the most minute
description, it makes the painted satsuma very expensive ; but it
has the great advantage of never loosing its brilliancy of colour.
The Japanese of late years have sent out a large quantity of in-
ferior porcelain, decorated with inferior gold, which becomes black
and discoloured in a very short time.
After the firing and painting process is completed, according
to the quality required, the gold is burnished with a stone similar
to the agates used by lapidaries, and the article is then ready for
sale.
™* umi£o‘iir


No. 14.
EMBROIDERY WORKERS.
This art is a very ancient one in Japan. Many of the Shinto
Priests have written of some wonderful specimens of tapestry and
embroidery presented to the Mikado by Ashikaga Yoshimitsu,
(Shogun) and which was said to have taken 650 men two years to
embroider. The ultimate destination of these interesting relics
is not known, but it is supposed they were destroyed during the
civil wars. This art has been kept in the same families, and
handed down from generation to generation, it being a very usual
thing to see children of six or seven years of age embroidering
small birds and branches on satin. The artisans working in this
house commenced from their very early childhood under their
father’s tuition, to acquire a knowledge of this very attractive
Japanese art, and are considered to rank amongst the very best
embroiderers of Kioto.


No. 15.
BAMBOO, STICK AND.VASE
CARVING.
The remarks that are made on wood carving apply to these
artisans, as actually it belongs to the same branch of manufacture.
About four years ago a demand sprang up for carved walking-
sticks, and several wood carvers turned their attention with
profitable results to this branch, and twelve months ago a con-
siderable improvement was introduced by a Kobe man, who inlaid
the stick with ivory faces and hands, and metal swords, halberds,
etc., but as there are so few artisans who are able to do this work
with any degree of proficiency, it follows that the supply is not at
all equal to the demand.
As a rule these carvers favour designs of a war-like character,
those with celebrated general’s and fighting Samurai predominating.
Occasionally, however, they carve portraits of favourite Geisha
(singing) and Maeko (dancing girls) with great fidelity.
A very favorite subject of these artists (usually carved on
vases) is a pair of demons jumping out of a basket to the horror
of an old woman carrying it. The following is an explanation of
the subject:—
“THE MAGICIAN IN SPITE OF HIMSELF-”
There was once an old couple, without children, who had a
favorite dog. Now a good spirit had taken up his abode in the
body of this faithful animal. One day the dog conducted the old
man into the wood and showed him a place where a treasure was
hidden. The wife began to talk about the occurrence, and a
wicked neighbour was stirred with envy. He borrowed the dog
from his master, and made the poor animal lead a way to a place
in the wood, but on digging it up he found nothing but stones.
Transported with fury, he killed the poor brute and buried him
on the spot. When the old man learned what had passed he only
asked in his sorrow where the body of his dumb companion rested.


Being informed of this by the wicked neighbour, he went—and
cutting down the tree at the foot of which the dog was buried*
he fashioned from its branches a little chapel in memory of the
faithful animal, while from the trunk he formed a mortar to beat
his rice. Hardly had he began to use that utensil when he found
that it also gave forth gold. The old woman told this too, as a
great secret, to a confidential crone, and the very next day, of
course, the wicked neighbour came to borrow the mortar. With
brotherly kindness, not to be found out of Japan, he lends the
mortar, but the borrower can get no gold out of it, and in another
fit of fury burns it. The old man begged the ashes at any rate,
and having got them, he carried them carefully home. The same
evening he beheld his dog appear to him in a dream who told him
the next day to repair to the border of the highway, and when he
should see the train of a Daimio passing, not to kneel, but if
summoned to do so to tell that he is a magician, having the power
to cause trees that are withered or bare of leaves to burst into
golden bloom. The next day he took his stand as directed hold-
ing in his hands, in a vase, the ashes of the mortar, and soon saw
the train of a Daimio approaching, and heard the terrible word
Shitaniro ! “ kneel down ! ” echoing along the road. Yet he had
the courage to stand firm on his legs. The heralds of the prince
renewed their challenge with their hands laid on the hilt of their
sabres, but learning from the reply of the old man that they had
met a magician, they ran back to their master to see what they
were to do. The prince replied that the stranger was to show
proof of his pretended magic, upon which the old man flung a
handful of ashes against a tree which spread its branches over the
way. Instantly the tree was covered with glittering flowers.
The prince gave orders that the man should be conducted to his
palace, where he treated him sumptuously and sent him away
laden with costly presents. The noise of this wonder having
spread through the country the wicked neighbour again presents
himself and asks for the loan of some ashes, which, in keeping
with his character, the good old man immediately gave him. He
too, armed with the magical ashes, presented himself at the road-
side faced the Daimio’s swash-bucklers, and was asked for proof
of his miraculous powers. Seizing a handful of ashes he flung
them into the air but instead of covering the tree with golden
flowers the ashes were blown by the wind right into the face of
the Daimio who, enraged at such a terrible affront, drew his
sword and cut the fellow down, while his attendants completed
the job by hacking his head off.


No. 16.
KAKEMONO PAINTER.
The art of painting has long been a favorite one with the Japanese
and they are certainly very successful in their treatment of
humorous subjects. At the Jahozan Kodaiji, at Kara, a large
collection of paintings may be seen by the celebrated artists
Tosano Mitsunoho, Kane Yeotoko, and Koi Kiokei, and several
others. Old Kakemonos by celebrated artists are very much sought
after by collectors, and high prices are often paid, the subjects as
a rule are religious. The following story is related of a painting
in the Royal Palace (Omuro Gosho), at Kioto: Uda Tenno
requested Kanaoka, a famous artist, to paint a horse on the walls
of his palace, and so striking was the likeness when finished, it
became animated with life, but showing no signs of this perhaps
through fear of being put to work, the horse kept quiet during the
day and only went out at night, however, one night some farmers
found a strange horse in a field near Omuro, and on trying to
catch the animal it escaped, running into the palace, on reporting
this, search was made in the palace, but no horse was to be found,
during the search, someone happened to notice that the feet of
the horse painted on the wall were covered with mud, the eyes
were then put out, and the horse was never known again to leav
the building.
No. 17.
CABINET MAKING
No. 18.
NTERN MAKING


IX + 8O0S8W 9
NEW SOUTH WALES.
GRAND
SHOW
ON SOCIETY’S GROUND,
]M! C5 O JES* HE3
3E» ies, as:. +*♦
WEDNESDAY , THURSDAY ,
FRIDA K, /I/I/O SATURDAY,
1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th SEPTEMBER, 1886.
F. WEBSTER, Secretary,
Tattersall’s Building, Hunter Street, Sydney.


THE VIENNA CAFE,
56 WltllAßl STREET,
Has pleasure to inform the general Public that he
has secured the SOLE RIGHT to supply’ tho
REFRESHMENT BARS
OF THE
JAPAKBSB fILLASi,
where can be had the Finest
ICES,
PASTRY,
SANDWICHES,
TEA
COFFEE, &c.
'D FRENCH CONFECTIONERY.
> are supplied with the very BEST
(VINES, SPIRITS, and BEERS.
LTFRFR FOR
reakfast®, Baaqiaefs,
tppers, plasers, Plcaics,
SHORTEST NOTICE.
0001
0987
H. Solomon, Carton Printing Office, 247 George Street, Sydney.


?POf?M^f»©oooooooooo«w!»ooooo*»«©o«W9ooe©fle' i >«*'«n«ft«oo©
