

2-1 .■*
j3.7x jlbridgecl Stcztement of events tzczving reference to
Ca,ptoln Hendon's rzliedg ed pzzrctzczse from ttze Crown,
of eigtzty czeres, in Fife A.ngns, in ttze yeczr 1838, wtzietz
sold, eigtzty operas now constitzzte a, portion of ttze site
of ttze town of JPort A.delolde, in ttze province of Sozzttz
A.zzstrcblicL.
Fife Angas, comprising a tract of waste swamp land, which was subject to tidal inundations from the sea, is contained
in the Provincial District Survey A, and was named and particularly delineated in a Proclamation of Governor Hindmarsh.
May 25th
(S. A. Register, 3rd June, 1837.)
The Lands in District A were gazetted as open to purchase, by Commissioner James Hurtle Fisher, Esq., and no part
of Fife Angas, where the present Port Town is situated, was reserved for a Port Town or otherwise.
July 7th.
(Southern Australian, 16th June, 1838.)
On November 23rd, Lieutenant George Beadon, R.N., of H.M.S. Conway, explored Fife Angas in search of a Port,
and reported to the Governor, in the presence of the Colonial Secretary and Colonial Treasurer and others, that it had a ‘ ‘ Firm
Solid Foundation,” and that a road could be made through it to deep water in the Port Inlet.
November 23rd.
On this occasion His Excellency sold Claimant eighty acres of the said swamp, under the belief that Claimant’s views
were chimerical, and that it was, as he expressed at the time, an impracticable, useless, waste swamp, in which opinion all
present concurred.
The conditions were that Claimant should pay the upset price in full of good land to the Colonial Secretary before
H.M.S. Conway sailed on the following day for India.
(Proved by Payment.)
Early in the forenoon of this day, Claimant tendered a Bill on Messieurs Badcock, Taunton, at the Bank of South
Australia, for £BO. The Manager offered to take, as security for the repayment of the amount of the Bill, the land purchased ;
but when the situation was particularly pointed out on a Government map of the period, “ as bounded by the Estuary leading
into the Gulf of St. Vincent, and bearing North-West therefrom distant about 7 miles,” he declared it to be valueless, and
refused to take it as collateral security.
November 24th.
The money was ultimately advanced by the Bank to the Claimant, on the Bill being endorsed by Captain George
Sinclair, of the ship Surrey, of London, who accompanied Claimant to the office of the Colonial Secretary, and witnessed
the payment of the money received at the Bank for the said land.
(See declaration of George Sinclair, 1880.)
On this day Governor Gawler first announced in an Extra “ Gazette,” issued for the purpose, a notice signed George
Milner Stephen, the said Colonial Secretary, and George Hall, that the Swamp of Fife Angas had a “ solid foundation,”
and “ that a Port could be formed lower down the Port Inlet, and a good road could be made from Adelaide to it through the
said Swamp.”
December sth.
(South Australian Register, Bth December, 1838.)
Allotments of land in the New Port Town, which had been previously sold to and paid for in full by Claimant,
r selected by Mr. David Maciaren, the said'Manager of tlieTSduth Australian Bank and Company, and others, from a “rough
sketch” before any regular correct survey was made.
January 18th.
(Declaration of A. F, Lindsay.)
Four days after this selection from a rough sketch, many of the early maps of the Province and other documents, were
accidentally destroyed by an unaccountable fire which occurred at the Crown Land Commissioner’s and Surveyor-General’s
Offices at Adelaide.
January 22nd.
(S. A. Register, 26th January, 1839.)
The Bill for £BO drawn on the “24th November, 1838,” was advised to Messieurs Badcock on the 24th April, and
paid by them to the “ S. A. B. Company” on Claimant’s account.
** Pa vs Riinlr
June 24th.
(Badcock’s Pass Book, 1839.)
New maps were drawn in that year under the especial direction of His Excellency Governor Gawler, who was sole
Resident Commissioner, in which the name of Fife Angas, which had been fixed by Proclamation, and in which the land
purchased by Claimant lay, was omitted, and became from that time extinguished.
(Declaration of A. F. Lindsay, Esq., &c.)
The receipt given by the Colonial Secretary to Claimant on the 24th of November, 1838, which was endorsed by
Captain Sinclair, was lost by the swamping of a vessel in which Claimant was on service, during a tempest off the Island of
Lintin, in China, where some seamen were drowned. Claimant made frequent enquires by letter of the Governor and
Colonial Secretary on the subject of the said purchase, after reports had reached Madras in 1839 of the enormous profits
realised in new Port Adelaide Sections.
f The present Admiral, E. W. Tumour, now living, was
-J Midshipman, was under Claimant’s command at the
( time, and behaved well on this trying occasion.
January 22nd.
All the documents and books in the Colonial Secretary’s Office, where Claimant paid the £BO for the land in 1838, were
destroyed bv fire, under circumstances involving serious charges at the time.
J J tWorsnop’s “History of Adelaide,” page 14, S. A.
1 Register, 26th January, 1841. Despatch of Governor
(. Grey, 14th February, i 842.
On this day, after all evidence of Claimant’s having paid any money for land in 1838 was apparently cut off, as far as
Colonial records could prove, a Colonial Treasurer, named Jackson, gave a Mr. Henry Nixon a receipt for £B3 for land as per
Tender 1994 Mr. Nixon is described on this receipt as agent for George Beadon, Esq., but Claimant had not at this time
authorised any person to act as agent, and had never known or communicated with Mr. Nixon. .
" J ° (Receipt in Claimant s possession.)
March 27th.
The receipt given by the Colonial Treasurer Jackson to Mr. Nixon, in March, 1841, was brought to England by Ex.
Governor Gawler, and given to Claimant by him during the year 1842, at No. 3, Cockspur-street, Spring Gardens, London,
when Claimant repudiated the agency of Mr. Nixon, having paid the money in full for the land he purchased in Fife Angas
himself. Colonel Gawler declined explanation further than that legal difficulties had prevented Claimant from having the
land he had p fid for in 1838.
Claimant said he should hold the 3. A. Government responsible if the land was not so valuable as that he had
purchased, and should hold the receipt merely as evidence that he had paid money to the Government for land.
” ’ (Claimant has held this document since.)
Sometime during the year 1850, or 1851 Claimant represented, through respectable solicitors in London, the particulars
of his purchase in 1838, and transmitted a copy of Jackson’s receipt to Nixon, and received back a Crown Grant for 586 D,
signed “ George Grey,” and dated 9th January, 1844, which is six years after he paid the money, and seven years before he
made any representation on the subject. Representation through agency was useless, personal inspection was required. Claimant
asked permission of the Admiralty to visit Australia, but was refused, he being employed at the time. Claimant took steps
through agents in the Colony to warn off trespassers on 586, and to preserve the property in the same condition as when
forced upon him, but has scrupulously refrained from selling or using, or deriving any profit from the property. The grass
has been oiven to preserve the timber and pay the District Rates, and prevent adverse possession.
Declarations of C. Forbes and J. A. MarcbanL
1852 or 3.
I £ (<


March Claimant having been placed on the retired list of the Navy, and his son, Lieut. Beadon, R.N., having returned
from Vancouver Island, obtained leave from the Admiralty, and proceeded to Melbourne en route for S. A.
(Admiralty letter of leave.)
1375;
j u i y ' Claimant received a declaration from Captain Sinclair, saying that he remembered the payment of £BO in 1838 ; but
Claimant was compelled to go to New Zealand on similar business before he could come to South Australia.
(Sinclair’s Declaration, 1875.)
Claimant first personally inspected 588 D, and instructed Mr. C. C. Kingston to apply to the Government for
compensation, which he did in August of that year, and received a reply from the Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands
based upon erroneous conclusions, that he had employed the Colonial Secretary in 1838 as an agent , and had left money with
him to he invested
Commissioner’s letter, 27th August, 1878.
1879. Claimant, finding from the Hon. Commissioner’s reply, that the Government did not possess any record of the early
history, instituted personal researches, and found there were not any “legal difficulties” which prevented his having
the swamp land he paid for on 24th November, 1838 ; and discovered that his freehold had been illegally diverted to
others, and directed Messieurs Lindsay and Hargrave to make a survey of the land as it existed in 1838, and as improved
and laid out in streets at the present time, the valuation with improvements being £884,361.
Sworn Survey : A. F. Lindsay, Sept., 1879.
1881. Claimant addressed a letter to the Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands at Adelaide, and received a reply dated
February 28th. gj_ g j. March, 1881, stating that the Government had not discovered any further information on the subject than previously
communicated.
Claimant has sent copy of this statement to the Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands with the following letter :
Port Adelaide, 16th April, 1881.
To the Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Lands.—Captain Beadon’s alledged purchase of unreclaimed country
land subject to tidal inundations in 1838.— Sir— In reply to your favor of the 31st ultimo, stating that you are not in possession
of any further information on the above subject than is contained in your letter to Mr. 0. C. Kingston, in August, 1878, I have
the honor to send you, per parcel post, an abridged history of the case which is chiefly derived from evidence discovered since
Mr. Kington’s original application in my behalf. I submit this statement as advised with a view to obtaining moderate com-
pensation prior (if declined! to adopting the unpleasant alternative of bringing the evidence before a jury. I desire respect-
fully to state that I have not any personal wish to prevent a public investigation of the circumstances of my claim, for I feel
that, independent of any loss which I have sustained by I lacking my claim with my money, I am entitled to credit which has
been unfairly suppressed to favor the object of persons holding reserved preliminary rights of selection, which they failed to
exercise until after my money had been paid in full of good land by order of the Governor and Resident Commissioner, under
his belief that it was a useless impracticable waste swamp. By carrying out my idea of exploring the swamp of Fife Angas in
search of a port on the 23rd of November, 1838, and by my reporting to Governor Gawler “ That it had a solid foundation,
and a road could be made through it from Adelaide to deep water in the estuary leading into the Gulf of St. Vincent, where a
port, town, and wharves could be built, I did the province of South Australia vital service at a time when it was contemplated
to make the port for shipping at Glenelg, which could only have been made a tidal port at best, and entailed a vast expenditure
besides. I leave the question to the justice and liberal consideration of the Government of the Province of South Australia
without prejudice to any future action which I may be advised to take in the courts of the colony after submitting the evidence
to counsel in England as 1 have done in South Australia, and obtained favorable views of it. I shall be happy to wait upon
you with original documents. Requesting your early attention and leply, for if the Government do not feel disposed to settle
the affair a commission would most likely be resorted to examine Captain Sinclair and myself, and law proceedings may be
directed from England as well as if 1 remain in the colony, and both Captain Sinclair and myself are old men, and I am anxious
to lose no more time for the sake of my family whilst I live rather than leaving the matter for posterity to settle.—l am, Sir,
your very humble servant, George Beadon.
Some reserved preliminary land order holders now say Governor Gawler had not power to sell the land before it had
been surveyed according to the Act, in marked numbered sections Governor Gawler held large discretionary powers : he pur-
t ( himself park lands to prevent preliminary land or.d from selecting them, and his aota wore confirmed Vy* the
TJrown and Colonization Commissioner. The Act was fulfilled as far as practicable. It never contemplated the absurdity of
surveying in numbered sections waste swamp land subject to inundations from the sea. Whether he had a right or not to sell,
claimant’s money was taken by his order for eighty acres of it.
Claimant submits that unless the Government can show that he ever authorised the tender of Mr. Nixon for
1994, they keep the matter open to litigation sine die. Claimant holds 586 D, as evidence that it is not the article he
paid for.
GEORGE BEADON, Captain, R.N.
Port Adelaide, April, 1881.
S GEORGE SINCLAIR, of Kingston, in the County of Somerset, gentleman, do solemnly and sincerely declare, as
follows :
f 1. In or about the years 1838 and 1839 1 was the Commander of the ship Surrey, of London, belonging to James
Greig, Esquire, of London, and in the months of November and December in that year I was lying in Holdfast Bay, off
Glenelg, in South Australia,
2. Whilst there I became acquainted with George Beadon, then a Lieutenant on board Her Majesty’s ship Conway
Captain Bethune, R. N., commanding, and at that time lying at anchor in Holdfast Bay aforesaid.
3. I well remember during that time accompanying the said George Beadon to the Colonial Secretary’s Office,
George Milner Stephen, to purchase a section of eighty acres of land, situate about seven miles North-West of the City of
Adelaide, such section then being a swamp. A map was pioduced at the time by the said George Milner Stephen, and
the particular section to be purchased by the said George Beadon was particularly pointed out by the said George Beadon,
and the purchase thereof sanctioned by the said George Milner Stephen.
The situation of the section was a swamp, now the Port of Adelaide. The District in which the said section was
situated was then open for purchase. A consultation took place between the said George Beadon and George Milner Stephen
as to the payment of the price The said George Beadon offered his Bill, which the said George Milner Stephen would
not take, and referred him to the Bank of South Australia to get his bill cashed.
4. I, on the same day, accompanied the said George Beadon to the Bank of South Australia, in the City of Adelaide
when he offered the Bank the security of the section he had purchased ; but it being a swamp the Bank Manager made light of
the security, and would not accept it or cash the said George Beadon’s sale bill. Thereupon, I, the said declarant, joined the said
George Beadon in a bill dra vn by him on his English Bankers for eighty pounds, which sum was handed to the said
George Beadon by the Bank, and by him subsequently on the same day paid in my presence to the said George Milner
Stephen, as the purchase money for the said section which he had purchased.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions
of an Act made and passed in the fifth and sixth years of the Reign of his late Majesty King William the Fourth, intituled
an Act to Repeal an Act of the present Session of Parliament intituled an Act for the more effectual abolition ot Oaths and
Affirmations taken and made in various departments of the State, and to substitute declarations in lieu thereof, and for the
more entire suppression of voluntary extra-judicial oaths and affirmations, and to make other provisions for the abolition of
unnecessary oaths.
Declared and subscribed at the City of Bristol, in the County of ) nt-nTimr orxrrir att>
the same city, this twenty-third day of September, 1880, J k
Before me,
HERBERT MEADE KING,
A Commissioner to administer oaths in the Supreme Court of Judicature in England.




20 Opey Avenue
Unley S.A, 1/6/60
Justice J,A,Ferguson.
Dear Mr. Ferguson.
I hope you do not feel that I have neglected to keep in touch
with you for so long . I have however done my best to keep a look out
for anything of Interest . I have succeeded in building up a series of
pamphlets issued by the Pioneers association about 90 in number. May
I ask if you have these in your collection or in that of the National
Library as I have to decide whether I pass them to my son Dr. C.M#
Deland , they being all of specially S.A.lnterest.
I am enclosing herewith a printed statement and map which are
self explanatory as to subject , but are very rare and I do not think
are to be found in any library other than the Royal G-e©graphical Soc.
here in Adelaide and the Archives of the Public Library Adelaide
Historically they are very revealing of the undercurrent of
intrigue and wrong doing current at that time in certain quarters.
These copies came into my hands through Hiss Marchant of Gaw£r
whose parents and mine were friends just as we children were eighty
years ago. Her father and grandfather were the friends of Captain
Beadon in England and here, and it was to Mr. Marchant that Gaptain
Baadon transferred his rights if any when he left Adelaide, The
written letters etc. are now in the Archives for safety.
Captain. Beadon had other interesting experience in the invention
of a method of ship propulsion the printed record of which I have
and which is now on loan to a naval man and when returned I hope to
pass it on to you for final preservation.
I am busy collating my MSS and photos of my brother and my early
lest Australian goldfields experiences to send to the Perth Archives.
lith all my kind regards.
/ '—'
