

DISCOVERY of AUSTRALIA
By DE QUIKROS, 1606.
BY
HIS EMINENCE CARDINAL MORAN.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
[1906]
No. 57 .


(
' Y s'
i am
IT
m
t.
ii free."
of
Preeby-
, v„ jtnat irre-
_ matter
fa fthin the
re ~
jfhe wide
a< (; science,
hf
popular errors about the Faith defend
religion from the attacks of its Coes.
.The Objects of the Australian Catholic Truth Society,
1. To set forth Catholic truth, as it Is taught by the
Church, fn a clear and simple way, and to remove certain
aommoa misconceptions concerning it from oandld minds,
2. To use the printing press and the platform, as far as
■practicable, as potent means for combating the prevailing dis-
belief in revelation, for protecting the Catholic people from
the attacks of here®? and Infidelity, and for fostering an atti-
tude of reverent faith towards God’s holy Word.
3. To carry on a crusade against the license of the age,
against luxury and self-indulgence, and those falsa standards
of life which undermine the moral teaching of the Church.
4. To provide and circulate (more especially among the
poor) bright, healthy, cheap literature, suitable for Christian
homes. The publications will embrace subjects of current
interest In the varied fields of truth, and will include stories
~ of a wholesome and elevating character.
v. - - s


LOUIS GILLE & C.
DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA
BY
DE QUIROS
IN THE YEAR 1606....
i*“ ' Jjj EDRO FERNANDEZ DE QUIROS was the last but not
| PS least ot ’ tbe brilliant galaxy of Portuguese and
| Spanish explorers who throughout two centuries, by
IrJSilgw their maritime skill and enterprise, wort immortal
fame for their respective countries, and extended far :
to the east and to the west the limits of Christian civilisation.
He was a Portuguese by birth, but at the period of which we
treat Portugal and Spain were united under the Spanish scep-
tre, and hence It was under the Spanish flag and by the aid
of the Spanish court that he achieved his discoveries.
The most famous of his expeditions was that which led to'
the discover.? of the Great'Austral Land In 1606. The original
sources, however, which would serve to Illustrate this expedi-
tion were little better than a sealed book to English readers,
till Mr. W. A. Duncan, Fellow of St. John’s College, published
In Sydney, in 1874, the Spanish text and translation of an In-
teresting Memorial, addressed by De Qulros to the Spanish
monarch.' A few years later Don Zaragosa, a distinguished
Spanish ecclesiastic, -published at Madrid in three- volumes the
same Memorial, together with several other invaluable con-
temporary documents Illustrative of De Qulros’s voyage. The
learned president of the Hakluyt Society, Sir Clements Mark-
ham, has published in two volumes in London, for the Hak-
luyt Society, in 1904, a translation of these Important records,
with a valuable Introduction and several interesting notes.
Till within the last few years the opinion very generally
prevailed that the Island of Santo, the chief Island of the New
Hebrides, was the-. Great Land discovered by De’Quiros. In the
History of the Catholic Church In Australia I ventured -to dis-
sent-from that opinion, and since then s
•on the subject have appeared in the and In
Proceedings of the Geographical SocletmsvMelbourne. *f


I propose in the present discourse to submit the claims of
Australia to be the Great Southern Land thus discovered In
160 6 by De Quires, and the better to proceed with order in the
inquiry,' my remarks will be comprised under the following
heads:
I. I will present to you from the original narratives some
extracts descriptive of the Great Southern Land which was dis-
covered by the Spanish explorer.
11. It will readily be seen that the data furnished by these
extracts are inconsistent with the claim of the Island of llWto
to be that newly-discovered land,
111. On the other hand these data are found to accurately
lit In with the claim of Port Curtis and the adjoining Queens-
land coast.
IV. Some arguments shall be considered that seem to
favour the Island of Santo’s claim.
V. The difficulties will be solved that are advanced against
the Australian claim. '
VI. We will thus be free to conclude by presenting some in-
teresting details of the expedition of De Quires and of the fes-
tivities with which he and his companions inaugurated the dis-
covery of this Australian Continent.
I.
1. 1 will take my first extracts from the Bth Memorial pre-
sented by De Quiros to the Spanish King in 1607, published by
Sir Clements Markham. De Quiros thus writes (1.T., 478):
. “The greatness of the land newly discovered, judging from
what I saw, and from what the captain, Don Lulz Vaez de
Torres, the Admiral under my command, reported; to your
Majesty, is well established. Its length Is as much as all
Europe and Asia Minor as far as the Caspian and Persia, with
all the islands of the Mediterranean, and the ocean which en-
compasses, including the two islands of England and Ireland.
That hidden part Is one-fourth of the world, and of such ca-
pacity that double the kingdoms and provinces of which your
Majesty is at present the Lord could fit into it, and this without
any neighbourhood of Turks or Moors, or others of the nations
which are prone to cause disquiet and unrest on their borders,’’
He represents the discovered lands to be “antipodal to the
greater part of Africa, to all Europe, and to greater Asia, The
houses are of wood, roofed with, palm leaves. They use pots
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


oil clay, weave cloths, and have clothing ami mats oC reed. They
work stone marble, and make flutes, drums, and spoons of varn-
ished wood. (Sir Clements Markham has stone and marble, hut
there is no “and” in the original text, p. 480.) “The bread they'
have Is made from throe kinds of roots, of which there Is great
abundance, and they grow without labour, receiving no more
help than being dug up and cooked. These roots are pleasant
to the taste, very nourishing, and keep for a long time. They
are a yard long ami half a yard, thick. The fruits are numerous
and good. There are bananas of six kinds, a great number of
almonds of four kinds, great obos, which are of the size and
taste of peaches, many earth-nuts, oranges and lemons, which
the natives do not eat, and another great fruit; and others not
less good that were seen and eaten, as well as many and very
large sweet canes. The riches are silver and pearls which I
myself saw, and gold which was seen by the other Captain, as
he says In his report. . , , They have goats, and there were
Indications of cows, ... I declare that all that was seen
and has been described is on the sea shore; so that it may be
hoped that in the heart of the country such and so great riches
will he found as are 'foreshadowed hy what has already been,
seen. It is to be observed that my chief object was only to
seek for the great land that I found. ... The comfort
and pleasant life in such a land might be Increased by the
cultivation of its black, rich soil, by the erection of brick
houses, by proper clothing, hy working the marble quarries
from which sumptuous'and elegant edifices could be raised, and
a land in which there is an abundance of timber for all sorts
of work; .where there are sites of plains, valleys and ridges,
undulations, high mountains and thickets; and in which there
are murmuring streams and springs; where might be erected
any number of wind-mills, water-mills, sugar-mills, and other
water engines; salt pits and sugar plantations. The sugar-
canes, which grow to five or six palms and under, and the fruit
in proportion, aro witnesses of the richness cf the soil,. A
slender, hard and smooth stone makes as good flints as can be
had In Madrid. The Bay of S 3. Philip and James contains 20
leagues (60 miles) of shore, and is quite limpid, and is free
to enter by day or night; It, is surrounded by a large popu-
lation ; at a very great distance is seen by day much smoke, and
at night many fires. The port of Vera Cruz (Holy Cross) Is so
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


capacious that it would contain at anchor 1000 ships. Its
bottom is clear, and consists of dark sand. The worm that Is
so destructive to ships was not seen. Ships may be anchored
at any depth from 4 to 4J fathoms, midway between two rivers,
one of them (the Jordan) as large as the Guadalquivir, in Se-
ville, with a bar of more than two fathoms, which frigates and
patamars may cross. Our barques entered the, other river
freely, and took in fresh water, which is delicious in whatever
part, out of the numerous streams there are. The landing place
extends for three leagues and more on a strand of black
pebbles, small and heavy, which would be very good for ships’
ballast. The coast contains neither ruins nor rocks; the herbs
on Its banks are green; you bear not the sound of the tide;
and as the trees are straight and not torn, I conclude there
are no great .tempests in that land. Moreover, this port, besides
being so airy and pleasant, has another great excellence for
recreation, that from the break of dawn you-bear a very great
army of warbling birds, some having the appearance of nightin-
gales, larks, goldfinches, and an infinity of swallows, parro-
quets,'and a coloured parrot that was seen, besides a groat
many other birds of different kinds, and the shrill note of the
locusts and grasshoppers. At morning and evening the sweetest
smells are enjoyed from many kinds of flowers, among which
are the orange and lemon blossoms; and I consider that all
these and other effects are due to the excellence and regularity
of the climate. At this port and bay are many excellent islands,
several of which may be especially mentioned which subtend
200 leagues. One.of them, about 12 leagues distant, is GO
leagues in circumference, and is very fertile and populous. And
in conclusion, Sire, I say that in that bay and port a large and
populous city may be built, and the people who will inhabit it
may readily enjoy all riches and conveniences which my small
ability does not enable me to set forth. ... T do not
exaggerate if I say that'it can maintain and accommodate
200,000 Spaniards.”
He further adds: “The temperature and salubrity of the
air is seen in all that ha's been said, and in this, that we all
being strangers, none tell ill during a time of working, sweat-
ing, and being wet through, without care about drinking water
while fasting, nor about eating whatever the land produced,
nor by the dew or sun or moon. The sun was not very hot
Discover}' of Australia by De Quivos, 1606.


by day, and from midnight onwards woollen clothes were
sought, and very well suffered to be worn. The natives as a
rule are strong and stout. Some are very old."
2, In a further Memorial presented to the King in 1601, he
styles the land he had discovered a great land, "Its double range
of mountains and the Elver Jordan from its size appear to
furnish evidence ot the groat extent pt the land." Besides
.Europe, Asia and Africa, there are only two great portions of
the earth; “The first is America, which Chrlstoval Colon dis-
covered; the second and last of the world is that which I have
seen, and solicit to people, and completely to discover for your
Majesty.”
He wishes It to be added to the royal realms "with the
grand title'of Ausndalla del HspJiltu Santo.”
He ends; "If his suspicions led Christopher Columbus to
complain, for me, what I saw, what I felt, and what I offer,
makes me importunate."
3. One ot the most Interesting documents published by Zara-
gosa and Markham is a. History of the Voyages of Be Quiros
compiled from his diaries by his secretary, Belmonte Bermudez,
but signed and authenticated by De Quiros himself. Prom this
narrative I glean the following extracts;
On the 3rd of May, 1606, "the three vessels anchored In
the port with great joy, giving many thanks to God. . . ,
The Master of the Camp was sent to examine the mouth of the
river, which is in the. middle of the hay, with the launch, a
boat and a party of men. He tried the depth of the river
mouth, and found that there was no bottom, with the length
of an oar and his own arm. He went further up in the boat,
and the view of the river gave much pleasure to those who
were with him, as well for Its olz and the clearness of the
water as for Its gentle current and the beauty of the trees on
its banka,”
They landed and found a small village; "they also found
a flute, and certain small things worked out of pieces of marble
and jasper The bay has a circuit of 20 leagues, at
the entrance four leagues across, ~ . , In the middle there
is a river, which was judged to be the size cf the Guadalquivir
at Seville. At its mouth the depth is two and more fathoms;
so that boats and even frigates could enter. It received the
name of the Jordan. On its right Is seen the Southern Cross
Discovery oF Australia, by De Quiros, 1606


In the heavens, which makes the spot noteworthy. To the
eastward, at the corner of the hay, there Is another moderate-
sized river called Salvador, Into which the boats entered at
their pleasure to get water. The waters of both rivers are
sweet, pleasant and fresh. The one is distant from the other
a league and a half, consisting of a beach of black gravel, with
small heavy atones, excellent for ballast for a sill)). Between
the two rivers is the port. The bread they use is mainly of
roots. . . , The rind Is grey, the pulp murrey colour,
yellow, or reddish; some much larger than others (yams).
There are some a yard and a half hi thickness, also two kinds;
one almost round, and the. size of two lists, more or less. Their
taste resembles the potatoes of Peru. The inside of the other
is white, its form and size that of a cob of maize when stripped,
.. . Our people ate a great deal; and being of a pleasant
taste and satisfying, they left off the ship's biscuit for them.
These roots last so long without getting bad, that on reaching'
Acapulco those that were left were emits good. We hoard,
when on hoard at early dawn, a sweet harmony from thousands
of different birds, apparently buntings, blackbirds, nightin-
gales, and others. The mornings and afternoons were enjoy-
able from the pleasant odours emitted from trees and many
kinds of flowers, together with the sweat basil, A bee was also
seen, and harvest flies were heard buzzing.
“The climate appeared to be very healthy, both from the
vigour and. size of the natives, as because none, of our men be-
came ill all the time we were there, nor felt any discomfort,
nor tired from work, ... I am able to say with good
reason that a land more delightful, healthy and fertile; a site
hatter supplied with quarries, timber, clay tor tiles, bricks for
founding a great city on the sea, with a port and a good river ■
on a plain, with level lands near the hills, ridges, and ravines;
nor better adapted to raise plants and all that Europe and the
Indies .produce, could not he found. No port could he found
more agreeable, nor better supplied with all necessaries, with-
out any drawbacks, nor with such advantages for dockyards in
which to build ships, nor forests more abundant In suitable tim-
ber good for futtock timbers, houses, compass timbers, >heams,
planks, and yards. Nov is there any other land that could sus-
tain so many strangers so pleasantly, if what has been written
is well considered. Nor does any other land have what this
Discovery of Australia by De Quires, 1606.


land has close by, at band, and in sight of its port; for qultd
near there are seven islands, with coasts extending for 200
leagues, apparently with the same advantages, and which have
so many, and such good signs, that they may be sought for
and found without shoals or other obstacles, while nearly half-
way there are other known islands, With Inhabitants and ports
where anchorages may be found. I have never seen, anywhere
where I have been, nor have heard of such adavantages.
It we look round the coast of Spain, so good a port will not
he found. . . ... It is to he noted that a cross, which had
been left on the banks of the river Salvador, was found raised
In its place, and that the natives had put branches and flowers
round it.”
He further writes that having come out from the port for
departure “owing to the force of the wind, the .ship, having
little sail on, and her head 8.N.E., lost ground to such an
extent that we found ourselves 20 leagues to leeward of the
port, all looking at those high mountains with sorrow at not
being able to get near them,'” '
On their return to the port of Acapulco (In Mexico), the
cross of orange wood was presented to the Church of the
Franciscans. It was on the Bth of December, feast of the Im.
Conception, that the captain, “with the greatest, solemnity
possible, took the cross from' the ship to the sea shore and
delivered It to the Father Guardian.” It was fastened to the
high altar, and to mark the occasion there was “ringing of
bells, sthmd of trumpets, and discharge of guns and arquebuses
and muskets by the soldiers. All the people showed their joy;
and not less did the captain, although he desired to go to
Rome and put this cross in the hands of the Pontiff, and tell
him that it was the first that had been raised in those new.
lands in the name of the Catholic Church.”
, 4. De Torres, who was second in command of the expedition
of De Quiros, addressed a letter to the King in 1607, giving
some account of the voyage, and of its various incidents,
Of the Bay he writes; —“This Bay is very refreshing, and
in it fall many and large rivers. In circuit it is 25 leagues.
We' named it the Bay de San Felipe y Santiago, and the land
that of Espiritu Santo.” “At length we sailed from this bay,
in conformity to the order, although with Intention to sail
round this island; hut the season and the strong currents would
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


not allow tins, although 1 ran along a great part of It. In
what I saw there are very large mountains. It has many ports,
though some of them are small. All of it is well watered with
rivers. We had at this time nothing hut bread and water;
It was the. height of winter, with sea, wind, and ill-will (of the
crew) against us. All this did not prevent me reaching the
mentioned latitude- (30deg. S.), which I passed one. degree, and
would have gone further if the weather had permitted; for the
ship was good. . . Going into the said latitude on a S.W.
course, we had no signs of land that way. From thence I stood
back to the N.W. to 111 S. Latitude; there we fell in with the
beginning of N. Guinea. I could not weather theK point, so
I coasted along to the westward on the S. side,”
5. We have also the diary of Gaspar de Leza, who was Chief
Pilot of the expedition, and whose shrewd incidental remarks
are particularly Interesting, He writes that the Bay "received
the names of St. Philip and St. James, the Ist oil May, the day
of discovery, being the day of those apostles. The bay is vary
large and beautiful, and all the fleets of the world might enter
it.”
2nd May, The General said; “that there were signs of
great things in that bay; for although we had been two days
within it, we had not yet seen the end of it, because it was
so large.”
4tli May. “At two in the afternoon our General went,
with the two boats and an armed party, to see the river.
Coasting along It was seen that there were many streams flow-
ing from a beautiful plain, on which cities might be built, tor
it must have been ten leagues in extent. In another part there
were many hills, high and low, with beautiful plains, in most
of those hills, except the main range, one might ride on horse-
back over them.”
sth May. "Our boat went further along the coast and dis-
covered another river, which flows very grandly over the plain,
so that frigates could go up to it. This river flows into the
middle of the bay, about a league from the other where we
were anchored, and there were several streams."
Bth May. "Our tender went to examine the coast, and
reported that they had coasted along and had seen beautiful
plains and rivers that fall into the sea, and that all was well
peopled by natives, who came out on the beach to sea them.
Discovery of Australia by De Quires, 1606.


They seemed to cover the land, for up to the mountain tops
all was inhabited. The land is so fertile that.it yields plenty
of food, and it is so fresh that it obliges a man to cover him-
self with a blanket, a state of things to which we were not at
all accustomed,”
10th May. “We returned to the shore, and, marching in-
land, came to their houses, finding them abandoned. From
the sea, by the inland forest, the distance is about half a
league. Round the houses were many fruit trees, with inter-
twined palisades, by reason of the great quantity of pigs. All
was very well arranged, the houses and yards' being very clean,
We found many fruits and trees of different sorts. . , .
The road is very clean and well shaded, and there are beauti-
ful streams of water. From midnight until morning there is
a pleasant coolness, which makes a blanket welcome.”
11th May, “We found ballast as good as that of Callao,
and just like it, consisting.of small pebbles.”
14th May. Feast of Pentecost. He gives the names of
the municipality and officers appointed for the new city to be
founded.
17th May. “We climbed up a high mountain very silently,
and from the top we discovered a beautiful plain. On descend-
ing to it we found much nutmeg and almonds of a different
kind, for the rind smells like an apple, and another fruit with
smell and taste like a nectarine. Of all these fruits the. woods
were full, and there is scarcely a tree in all this land that is
not of some use, so that here one might live in great luxury.”
19th May. "This day in the morning, and the day before
at night, there were great tremblings of the earth, some of
them lasting an hour, and, we felt them on board our ships,
as if they were bumping on some rock. From this we con-
cluded that where there are such great earthquakes It must be
the mainland, as it also seemed from the mountain ranges.
As soon as we came on hoard, our General wanted a party to
go and fish at the great river, to which the name of Jordan
was given. The river whence we got the water was named
Salvador.”
20th May, “We went to the river Jordan, which Is two
leagues from the port where the ships were at anchor. ....
Our people found great quantities of fruit trees, and much, food
with which these natives are well supplied. Great quantities
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


ol Jlsli were caught. Ships might enter this river, it they were
built like the frigates of Carthagena.”
28th May. “We started in the morning, coasting along
the land to windward, that la, to S.B.- and to make out
for certain whether it waa the mainland.”
29th May, “On account of many of the crows being sick
(from eating poisoned flsh) they returned to the bay, This
was at 7 o’clock in the morning, and by 4 o'clock in the after-
noon the ships had anchored. This was good luck, for the dis-
tance from the entrance to the bay to the anchorage is six or
seven leagues, and the first time we were three days working
up the bay.”
June sth, “We were ready to start next day to examine
200 or 300 leagues ol! coast, surveying all, laying down posi-
tions of ports and anchorages, with soundings, rocks and banks,
and latitudes.”
6. Torquemada, who was Provincial of the .Franciscans in
Mexico, and derived his Information from De Quiros and the
chaplains of the expedition, published in Hitt a lengthened
account of the celebrated voyage. -He attests that the boats
brought the report of “a very wide bay, • sheltered from all
winds. . . . The captain and pilot, having heard the
report on this bay, and of another great bay to leeward, ordered
sail to be set; and so they proceeded, with no small joy, All
had now been accomplished according to their desires, holding
In their hands the most abundant and powerful land eVor dis-
covered by Spaniards. . . . Presently the boat went to
seek a convenient port, and brought news that there was one
with soundings from four to six fathoms, all sand and clean,
between the mouths of two rivers. . . . As it was late they
waited for another day, the 3rd of May, when they anchored,
calling the port Ha Vera Cruz, and the land La Austral del
Tlspiritu Santo.”
“The port is between two rlyers, and they gave one the
name of Jordan, and the other the name Of Salvador. Their
banks are of no small beauty, for they are full,of sweet flowers
and herbs. The beaches of this bay are wide, long and flat,
, . . In all parts facing the sea there are cool and pleasant
groves extending to the sides of numerous hills, and even to
the summit of one which was ascended by our people,. These
hills divide most fertile level valleys, which are picturesque,
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606,


while tlie green Mils are traversed by' various rivers. The
whole is a land which, without any doubt, has the advantage
of America and of the greater part of our Europe.” He fur-
ther assigns the circuit of the Bay as 2 7 leagues, and the en-
trance as having an expanse of eight leagues. *
7. One of the most interesting records connected with the
De Quiros expedition is the memorial of Juan Luis Arias, a
lawyer of Santiago in Chile, addressed to King Philip 111. of
Spain. He derived his information from the Franciscan
Fathers who accompanied the expedition, and his memorial
was written soon after the death of De Quiros in 1615. He
styles the newly discovered laud ‘‘the Austral hemisphere,”
and he describes the harbour in which De Quiros landed as a
magnificent expanse of water. "The land on the side that he
first came upon ran from E, to W. It, appeared to be more
than 100 leagues (300 miles) long’; the country was very
populous, and although the people were dark, they were very
well-favoured. There were also many plantations of trees,
and the temperature was so mild that they seemed to be in
Paradise: the air also was so healthy that in a tew days after
they arrived ail the men who were sick recovered. The land
produced most abundantly many kinds of: very delicious fruits,
as well as animals and birds in great variety. The hay was no
leas abundant In fish of excellent flavour and of all the kinds
which are found on the coast of the sea in Spain, The natives
ate for bread certain roots like the batata (the yam), either
roasted or boiled, which, when the Spaniards tasted, they found
them better eating and more sustaining than biscuit.”
He subsequently states that De Quiros reached the 26deg,
of S. Latitude, and adds; "The land of the Bay of San Felipe y
Santiago showed very great signs of its being the coast of the
southern continent; as much by its great extent as by there
being visible from it, looming at a great distance, cordilleras
of very lofty mountains, of very agreeable aspect; and by the
fact of two rivers falling into the bay, one as large as the
Guadalquivir, and the other not quite as broad'; all signs of
a continent, or at least of a vary spacious and deep country’
approaching to a continent,"
11.
The data which these extracts present cannot be reconciled
with the Island of Santo's claims.
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


1. The dimensions of Santo are given by Findlay In his
“South Pacific Ocean Directory,” published for the Admiralty
in London in 1884. The Island of Santo, lie tells us, Is 6 5
miles in its greatest length, and about half that extent in Its
greatest width. Sir Clements Markham, in his Introduction,
writes that Santo has a big bay, but is a small island. Some
time ago one of our Sydney morning newspapers published
a letter from a Protestant missionary, in which he described
his excursion across, the island from shore to shore In one
day.
Now it is quite absurd to suppose that expert explorers
such as De Quiros and his companions wore would bo stationed
at Santo for 36 days, and some of them for an additional term
of 15 days, without their realising how limited was Its extent.
They describe the discovered land as of vast expanse, larger
than Europe, even with Asia Minor and the Mediterranean
added to it. One of its valleys that was spread out before them
was 10 leagues (that Ib, 30 miles) in extent, They sailed along
the coast for 100 leagues (300 miles), and fait assured, by its
many rivers and well-sheltered ports, and by the splendid cor-
dilleras that were aeon in the distance, that they had alighted
upon a vast continent. No rivers as are described in tlio ex-
tracts can be found in Santo.
2, The Island of Santo Is proud of its “big bay,” but even
this cannot be said to bear any proportion to the vast bay of
SS. Philip and James, which was entered by Da Quiros on Ist
of May in 160 8. The bay thus discovered was 20 leagues (00
miles) in length, and, according to Da Torres, It was 35 leagues
(75 miles) In circuit. One of the narratives gives it a circuit of
27 leagues, that would be 81 miles. The entrance to the Bay
bad an extent of eight leagues (24 miles), and at the entrance
to the port it was four leagues (12 miles) broad. The pilot
enthusiastically cries out that all the ships of the world would
find room in that magnificent bay. How different are the propor-
tions which Santo's bay presents! Findlay writes (p, 748)
that the circuit of the bay of Santo is “about 3 0 miles,” Sir
Clements Markham (I. 373) inserts a report on the bay by Dr,
Corney, a member of the Hakluyt Society, who visited it in
18 76. He writes; “The depth or extent of the bay Itself, from
its chord formed by the Imaginary B. and W. line drawn’
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, i 606.


through Cape Quires, seemed to me about a dozen miles, and
It is of similar width.” ■
Mr. Panton, presiding at a meeting of the Geographical
Society of Melbourne (Yol. xix., p. 80) in 1901, gave some
further details; “I have this day had the pleasure of meeting
with the Rev. Mr. Raton, the well-known missionary of the
New Hebrides, who, during 42 years’ residence in that group,
had often visited Santo. He informed me that the bay is 10
miles In depth, and about four or five miles across at the en-
trance; that it is, surrounded by wooded hills ; that no distant
sierra is to he seen from it; and that the one small river run-
ning into the Bay is named by the natives Yeor.”
The bay discovered by De Qulros afforded safe anchorage,
was “limpid and free to enter by day or by night,” and was
free from hurricanes. In Dr. Conley’s description of Santo
Bay (I. 274) we read: “The west shore of this bay rises steeply
from the. water throughout most of Its extent. . . . The
anchorage is not exposed either from B.N.E. or E. 5.8., but
from N.W. to N. and N.E. it la unsafe.” Findlay writes of
Santo Bay (p. 749); “The appfpach to Santo is not without
its dangers. . . . ■ Hurricanes, prevail during the whole of
the wet season.”
The discovered bay in its wide expanse faced the Bast,
extending from N. to S. On the contrary, Santo Bay faces the
north, extending from W. to B.
3, De Quiros particularly refers to the two rivers which
flow into the hay, adjoining the port, the one as large as the
Guadalquivir at Seville, the other not so large: both navigable,
not to boats only, but to light frigates. Now at Santo there
are several streams, but only one river. In the passage already
cited by Mr, Panton, the Protestant missionary attests that
there Is but “one small river running into the bay.” A
Scotch planter of the New Hebrides, who was shipwrecked at
Santo, and was compelled to spend several weeks ou tlie island,
writes; “Nowhere in Santo are there any' such rivers as are
described by De Qulros in his account of the Tierra Australis;
the tendency of all the streams on this island is to , spread into
shallows near the beach; that was my experience of them, and
I have waded through thenihy , day, and slept on their hanks by
night.” ("Australasian Catholic Record,” January, 1902.)
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


4. What caused Joy in a special manner to the Spanish
explorers was that within the bay they found a splendid har-
bour, to which they gave the name of Vera Cruz, capable of
safe anchorage for 1000 vessels. No such harbour is to he
found at Santo Bay. Findlay curtly remarks: “The port of
Vera Cruz is not to he found in it.” Mr. Collingridge, In his
most interesting “Discovery of Australia” (Sydney, 1895), also
gives the statement of a venerable Marist missionary, who spent
many years in the New Hebrides, that “there is no such port
at Santo.”
5. De Quiros and his associates refer to the fine strand
'connected with this port and extending between the two rivers;
and they make particular mention of the heavy black pebbles
strewn on this strand, “admirably suited for ships' ballast.”
Nothing of all this Is to be met with at Santo.
6. The narratives from which I have given extracts’refer
to the singular healthiness of the newly discovered land. Now
Findlay writes of Santo (p. 749): “The climate. from the
luxuriance of the vegetation and the dampness of the soil seems
much less adapted to European constitutions than the Poly-
nesian islands, whose natives also suffer here from dysentery,
fever'and ague.” The missionaries’ reports confirm this state-
ment, Mr. Sevan, addressing the Geographical Society of
Melbourne in May, 1900, while eulogising the appearance of
Santo, admitted the prevalence of "malaria and perpetual ener-
vating heat,” which made It unfit for Europeans.
7. No large islands, are in sight from Santo Bay, De
Quiros relates of the bay which lie discovered that within view
were seven islands, and midway to them other Inhabitable
islands. The circuit of the seven islands would he about 200
leagues, and one of them was 60 leagues (160 miles) in cir-
cumference, almost as large as the Island of Santo itself. The
precision with which those Spanish explorers set forth the ex-
panse of the islands off the discovered coast Is a sure argument
for their accuracy when they report the, vast extent of the
Great Southern Land.
8. De Quiros writes regarding the resources of the dis-
covered land: "The riches are silver and pearls, which I saw,
and gold which was seen by the other captain, as he says in his
report.” Findlay reports that In Santo there is'nothing to indi-
Discovefy of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


cate any such riches; “no trace has been found of silver or
gold.”
9. The varidus species o£ fishes which were found by the
Spanish explorers are sat forth In detail. Some of these, for
Instance the salmon and the plg-flsh, are not to be found at
Santo, but they have their habitat on the Australian coash
10. Mention Is made of the facilities for building which
the marble quarries of the newly discovered land would pre-
sent. No marble Is to be found in Santo.
11. Findlay writes of Santo (p. 766): “It rather.partakes
of the character of an archipelago than a single island, from
the numerous Islands clustered around its shores.” Such a
prominent feature would not have escaped the careful inspec-
tion of lie Quiros and his companions.
12. In describing the interesting features of the newly
discovered land, the Spanish writers could not but have dwelt
upon the attractiveness and beauty of its coral surroundings,
were Santo the land to which they refer. Santo is justly
classed among “the summer isles of Eden, in dark purple
spheres of sea,” Mr. Theodore F. Sevan, in his discourse al-
ready referred to, at the meeting of the Geographical Society
at Melbourne, In May, 1900, describes the vision that must 1
have presented itself to the enraptured gaze of De Quiros when
approaching Santo: “Ocean floor bestrewn with emerald pearl
and turquoise; rosy, like waking Venus, and after age-long
sleep in blue Pacific depth the Great Cyclades uprose, homage
to pay to their discoverer.” All this could not have been for-
gotten by De Quiros and his companions.
in.
The data furnished by the various memorials of De Quiros
and his fellow-explorers fit In accurately with the claim of
Port Curtis and the adjoining coast to he the Great Southern
Land of their discovery.
1. To the newly discovered land they assigned the dimen-
sions of a Continent. Such is Australia. We must bear in
mind that, believing it to he the long-sought-for Southern Con-
tineht, they would, In accordance with the current ideas in
those days, extend its southern boundary to the Antarctic circle.
With such limits, De Quiros might most justly estimate that
It would exceed Europe even with Asia Minor and p the Medi-
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


terranean superadded, and that it might justly be ranked as a
fourth part of the explored world.
2. The magnificent expanse of water, including Keppel
Bay and Port Curtis, has an extent of about GO miles, and its
circuit along the coast adds at least 15 miles to its length. The
width of Keppel Bay at its entrance is about 24 miles, and that
of Port Curtis is 12 miles. These measurements correspond
in a general way with those that are assigned to Be Quiros’s
discovery.
3. The Boyne and Calliope Rivers correspond to the two
rivers described by De Quiros. Their position “midway in the
ba'.y,” adjoining the anchorage, and the distance of about six
miles between the mouths of the rivers, correspond to the
description given in the extracts. De Torres writes, that other
rivers also fall into the hay, and here w'e have the Pitzroy and
other smaller rivers. It might at first cause surprise that .De
Quiros would not make special reference to so Important a
river as the Pitzroy. But we must bear In mind he was in
search of anchorage and of navigable rivers. The Boyne and
Calliope were just the rivers that met his wishes. The Pitzroy,
with its rocky approaches, repelled the Spanish navigators, and
it-was only when the rocks were cleared at considerable ex-
pense In latter times that It became at all navigable.
4. Port Curtis, or as it is at present more generally called,
Port Gladstone, is precisely such as would captivate the heart
of De Quiros. "A thousand ships could find anchorage here,’’
is his description of the newly discovered port. It will be
remarked as a singular coincidence that some years ago Mr.
Nesbitt, examining the coast harbours on the part of the
Government, officially reported in almost Identical words; “The
harbour of Port Curtis offers safe anchorage for 1000 of the
largest vessels afloat.”
Tn an official despatch of Colonel Barney to the Govern-
ment under date 20th July, 1847; we read: “The position and
extent of Port Curtis, which I take to be the third harbour in
Importance in these seas, inferior only to Port Jackson and
Hobart' Town, must shortly lead to an establishment on its
shores.” .
5. A remarkable feature of the strand at Port. Curtis is
that it is strewn with “black heavy pebbles” such as De Quiros
describes. These are the “Manganese bubbles,” as they are
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


locally designated. The editor of the ‘‘Gladstone Advocate,” in
a letter to me, writes: ‘‘Manganese abounds hr this district.
Fragments of this mineral, black and heavy, are strewn all
over the shore line when the tide goes out,” I may add that
one of the richest mines of Manganese has its opening close
to the present harbour landing place at Gladstone.
C. There is no question as, to the healthiness of the
Queensland coast, and to the invigorating influence of its atmo-
sphere, particularly in the months of May and June, which
was the time of De Quiros's sojourn there.
7. The seven islands within sight, and other inhabited
islands half-way, are a distinctive feature of Keppel Bay, and
Port Curtis. One of the distant Islands, with a circuit of 50
leagues (150 miles), corresponds to Curtis Island. Facing
Island, in front of Gladstone, was Inhabited by the natives till
a comparatively late period,
8. Needless to say that signs of silver and gold are no
strangers along the Queensland coast.
9. I have referred to the salmon and pig-fish, which are
particularly referred to by De Quires, but for which we search
hyvain.at Santo. On the other hand, we find that the Queens-
laid rivers and coast abound with them. All visitors to
Qlieensand are familiar with the pig-fish. As regards the
salmon, an expert correspondent writes to me; ‘‘The most
remarkable fresh-water fish in Queensland is the famous Bur-
nett Salmon (ceratodus Forsteri), , This salmon of De Quiros
belongs to the Dlpnold fishes, of which there are only two other
species In evidence, one In the Amazon,; the other in South
Aiflca. The existence of this fish in the (Islands of the)
Soiith Seas is absolutely unknown to science.” Mr, Stead, in
‘‘Fillies of Australia” (Sydney, 1906), refers to tills particular
spejles of salmon as frequenting the Burnett River, and also
the Mary River, in Queensland.
! 10.'.Marble, and especially building marble, and limestone
are pbundant in Gladstone and its neighbourhood, and also in
soup of the islands off the, harbour.
feeing that the data furnished by the Spanish explorers
fit li in such a singular manner, with the Gladstone district
and |he Queensland coast, we feel justified in concluding that
the treat Southern Land which was discovered by them was
nonepther than our Australian Continent.
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


IV.
Two arguments are advanced in favour of the Santo Island,
which at first seem quite conclusive, but which, when more
closely examined, are found to merit no attention.
1. The first argument Is as follows:—The various narra-
tives assign the Latitude IBdeg. Ismin. South as the exact posi-
tion of the landing place in the newly discovered land, This
leads us to Santo.
We must hear in mind, however, that in those days the
maritime explorers in their published reports were careful to
conceal the accurate latitude and longitude of the lands which
they discovered, thus to lead astray their rival explorers ami
to prevent their appropriating the advantages of their dis-
covery, This ruse of the early Spanish and Dutch navigators
is referred to in the Introduction to the first volume of the
Hakluyt series. Our own Australian Ernest Favenc, In his
excellent “Story of Australian Exploration,” p.'lB (Sydney,
1888 ), remarks that “the jealousy with which the maritime
nations of Europe guarded their discoveries from each other
has been the means of putting great difficulties in the way of
tracing out the early traditions of the great South Land, , ...
The generous emulation in the cause of scientific discovery was
unknown, and the secrets of the sea were scrupulously kept”
Sir Clements Markham also remarks that “the Spanish
Government jealously concealed the knowledge acquired by
their great explorers” (I. xxvill.).
One of my critics has indeed remarked that though such
jealousy prevailed in the early days of exploration, It had
disappeared before the period of which we now treat. Bet It
is quite the reverse, Never, perhaps, were the secrets of dis-
covery more jealously guarded than at this very period.
In the narrative of his voyage, drawn up by his secretary
hut signed by himself, Be Quiros adds, regarding his discovery
(I. 157): ‘‘l beg you to keep It secret, for man does not Inow
what time brings.”
In 'the volumes just published by Sir Clements Marlham
we find (11., 516) a Memorial to the King of Spain accusing
.De Quiros of indiscretion in giving an account of his discoveries,
“a proceeding which may cause serious inconvenience, fron the
information that foreigners may be able to gather, anc thus
send notices of those lands and of the navigation to : their
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


Countrymen.” The King on 31st October. 1610, with his own
hand, gives the order: ‘‘Tell the same Quiros to collect these
papers, and give them with secrecy to the officers of the Coun-
cil of the Indies, for these things are not to pass through many
hands.”
2. The second argument Is one on which our worthy
citizen, Mr. Collingridge, and the secretary of the Geographical
Society mainly rely. The map of the newly-discovered land,
which was drawn by Diego de Prado y Tobar, and was for-
warded by him to the Spanish King from Goa on the 24th
December, 1613, has at length dome to light. It unmistakably
presents to us the Santo Island.";
I at once admit that this map of Prado y Tobar represents
the Island of Santo, and 1 also admit that Prado y Tobar
formed part of the expedition of De Quiros. Mr. Collingridge
styles him the cartographer of the expedition, but of this high
position there Is no mention in the contemporary records. On
the contrary, in two published lists (1., 284; 11., 383) he Is
assigned the office of storekeeper of the projected settlement,
He pursued De Quiros with singular venom and undisguised
hostility. De Torres, in his narrative, finds fault with De
Quiros for his lenity in dealing with offenders. Only two mem-
bers of his company had been punished by him during the
voyage, and he only Inflicted on them the trivial punishment
of transferring them to his .ship when they merited the gravest
chastisement. One of these offenders was Prado y Tobar,
AU through De Qulroa’s subsequent career we find that this
offender pursued him with unceasing- enmity. Sir Clements
Markham describes him as a mutinous officer, and again calls
him the enemy, and the malignant enemy of De Quiros. (1.,
xvi,, xxix., xxxll.).
Two letters of his are published by Sir C. Markham. They
accompanied the. map on which my critics now rely. In these
letters he calls De Quiros an impostor, a liar, and a fraud (11.,
511, seqq.), who discovered nothing “but some reel’s and small
islands,’ 1 and who 'should be wholly discredited in the state-
ments of his Memorials and In his pretence to having found
the great Austral Land. The map which lie forwards is part
and parcel of this attempt to discredit De Quiros. From the
very outsrt similar attempts had been made, On his arrival
in Mexico after his eventful voyage, De Quiros writes (1,, 311)
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, t 606.


that “there were persons who, to gratify their evil passions,
wrote to the Viceroy of Mexico, and sowed many letters all
over the land, trying to misrepresent and discredit the ex-
pedition.” So prejudiced were some members ot the Council
against him that he was regarded “as a very dangerous man
who might sell his knowledge and services to the English.”
(1., XXXV.). i '
That Santo was one of the islands discovered by Do
Quiros is unquestionable, and it is no less certain that the
map forwarded from Goa in 1613 represents the Santo island;
but when Prado y Tobar forwards the map of Santo as proof
that the statements of the captain regarding his discovery of
the great Austral Land were without foundation, 1 cannot but
regard It as an additional argument in favour of my conten-
tion, that Santo cannot be the grand Austral continent of which
De Quiros speaks and of which he claimed to be the dis-
coverer.
V.
Some difficulties that have been urged against the claims,
of Port Curtis now demand our attention.
1. It has been remarked that some of the products com-
memorated by De Quiros, when he speaks of the “yams,
oranges, limes, papans, almonds, nutmegs, mace, ginger and
pepper,” are'not Indigenous to the Queensland coast. We must
bear in mind, however, that De Quiros refers to these as pro-
ducts of the various Islands and other lands which he had dis-
covered, and not as characteristic ot the territory around the
harbour of Vera Cruz, The pioneers who explored the Port
Curtis district in the middle of the last century found abun-
dance of. fruits among the natives. Mr. Friend, who was one
of those explorers, writes to me that around Port Curtis “in
the early days there were yams growing there and many kinds
of wild fruits, even bread-fruit and wild bananas.” Another
expert attests that in the Gladstone district there are three
varieties of the citrus, and that there is also a so-c'all«d wild
plum (solanurn) with a fine bloom on the fruit.- A geatleniau
connected with the Department of Agriculture in Brisbane also
writes; “As to indigenous fruits, the principal one is the Eu-
genia Myrtifolia, which bears a quantity ot fruit. Th« Govern-
ment Botanist here informs me that there are hundreds of these
trees, and some settlers make the fruit into jam,” All this
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


harmonises perfectly with the accounts given by the Spanish
explorers.
2. It has been argued, however, by Mr. Favenc that the
explorers found in the land of their discovery a rich and fer-
tile 'soil and all the requirements for a flourishing settlement.
Now, he says, the territory around Port Curtis is the reverse
of all this. He cites the words of Oxley, who, in 1823, having
anchored in Port Curtis looking for a site lor a convict settle-
ment, reported to the Government as follows: “Having viewed
and examined with the most anxious attention every point that
afforded the least promise of being eligible for the sits of a
settlement, I respectfully submit it as my opinion that Poi’t
Curtis and its vicinity do not afford such a site; and I do not
think that any convict establishment could he formed there that
would return, either from the natural productions of the coun-
try or as arising from agricultural labour, any portion of the
great expense that would necessarily attend its formation.” It
should be a sufficient reply to Mr. Oxley’s report that he. visi-
ted the country under very exceptional circumstances, and that
the Government, as a matter of fact, ignored his report and
proceeded to carry out the c nviot settlement which was pro-
jected there.
Another - critic cites the testimony of “the Police Magis-
trate” at Gladstone, to the effect that, “speaking generally,
there is not n decent piece of land around Port Curtis.” This,
indeed, would not he consistent with the statement of De Quiros
that there was excellent land for every sort of cultivation in
the district which he explored. However, it has been often
remarked that Police Magistrates are not always the best or the
most expert judges as regards the quality of land' in their re-
spective districts; and the present instance does not appear to
bo an exception to the rule. The editor of the "Gladstone Ad-
vocate,” on February’ 16th, 1901, makes short work of the
difficulty. He thus writes;
"It has been said that, speaking generally, there is not a
decent piece of laud around Gladstone. That, we think, is a
question of horizon. If we limit our view to the town Itself,
and a few miles of its environments, the land is only reasonably
good, with only patches of excellent quality. But if we take the
Gladstone district,'generally such a statement is untrue. Ther'e
Is no finer land in, Queensland—-we might say Australia—than
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


that which is to he found along the valleys of the Boyne and
Calliope, It Is marvellously rich and prolific, and suitable for
agricultural or pastoral purposes. The close settlement which
is now going on in the Gladstone district is proof of the ex-
cellent quality of the land.”
in the earlier days of colonisation the same condition of
the country was officially recognised, and 1 will cite one
authority which cannot but be regarded as conclusive in this
matter.
In the “Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake,”
by Macgillivray (published under the sanction of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, London, 18.12), is Inserted
an extract from a despatch of Colonel Barney, under date,
Sydney, 2Otli July, 1847, relative to a proposed settlement at
Gladstone (p. 52):
“The extent of land fit for agriculture, within a few miles
of the coast, far exceeds the expectations I had formed on my
first visit, Timber for dwelling-houses and for ship-building
is abundant and of the best description; and within five miles
of South Shore Head (the best site for a settlement) there is to
be found pipe-clay, brick-earth, Ironstone, freestone, granite,
trap, slato, indications of coal; and, independent of a great sup-
ply of shells for lime on the Immediate site, there Is at the
head of one of the navigable salt creeks a fine freshwater
stream running over a bed of limestone, . . . The posi-
tion and extent of Port Curtis, which I take to be the third
harbour in importance in these seas, inferior only to Port
Jackson and Hobart Town, must shortly lead to an establish-
ment on its shore. . . , The country is capable of afford-
ing all the tropical as well as a considerable portion of Euro-
pean produce, and will be found highly favourable for the
breeding of stock."
3. De Qulros, in bis Memorials to the King, refers specifi-
cally to one feature of the newly-discovered land which finds
no counterpart in Santo or the other Islands of-the New
Hebrides Group, but which is fully realised on the shores of
Port Curtis. This is “the marble quarries,” from which (as
De Qulros adds) "sumptuous and elegant edifices could be
raised.” Now, the most sanguine champions of Santo have
not as yet found the slightest trace -of marble there, whilst
immense beds of marble crop up to the surface along the coast
and in the islands off the coast at Port Curtis.
Discovery of Australia by De Quires, 1606,


As this in such ;i distinctive feature of the explored territory
around the harbour of. Vera Cruz, it may be well to recall a few
passages that refer to it.
fn a village that the explorers visited they found “a (lute,
and certain small things worked out of pieces of marble and
jasper, Again, Do Quiros writes: “It appeared to us that
we. saw there quarries of good marble; I say good, because
several things were seen that were made of It and of jasper.”
Of the natives it is said; “They work stone marble and
make flutes, etc.”
And again we read: “The convenience of such excellent
soil, black, thick, and close, is that tiles and bricks may be
manufactured. This, combined with good quarries, will enable
large and sumptuous edifices to be built, the great abundance
of timber giving help.' Many mills can be erected, the rivers
having such volume, . , . The stone is fine, hard, and takes a
polish. There are also very good quarries as in Madrid,"
Some of my critics have endeavoured to lessen the weight
of this argument by stating that the Gladstone marble is of
inferior quality. “As to the marble or limestone deposits (one
writer states), there is any quantity of it 14 miles from Glad-
stone, but it la not good as a rule, having too much lime scat-
tered through It. It is useless for mantelpieces, headstones,
statues, etc.” Hero, however, it is to be remarked that it
is of marble for building purposes that De Quiros speaks, and
the more lime the marble may have the better will it suit for
such, purposes. All the marble quarries, however, in the Glad-
stone district are not of the same quality. One of them is known
by the name of Carrara, and has veins of the best quality of
marble. An article In the “Gladstone Advocate,” under date
February the 16th, 1901, sets all difficulties at rest on this head,
and proves to conviction that in so far as this feature of the
discovered land is concerned, it harmonises perfectly with the
Port Gladstone district, It Is as follows:
"It will be noticed that the existence of marble Is not de-
nied. But that it is of an interior quality we utterly refute.
We have frequently referred to the marble deposits of .this
district. It. is true that the deposits which form the bed and
steep bank of the Calliope River are inferior to deposits found
In other parts of the district, being, for the most part, a brec-
cia marble, the particles being fastened with an iron cement,
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


but it takes a beautiful polish and has a moat variegated ap-
pearance, These deposits are easily reached by way of the
river. The Calliope Elver crossing is paved with marble.
There are also large deposits on the Boyne River. But the
locality is rich in all varieties of this classic stone, from white
statuary marble almost equal to the finest Carrara, ami the
blackest of Blade marbles, to the most variegated. It 3a not
confined to one spot, but abounds throughout the whole district.
That it Is of good quality, and could be utilised for building,
ornamental or statuary purposes, we can aver, as we speak
with some degree of experience, and have before ua as we
write polished samples of almost every description to bo found
in the district. That it can be used to good purpose may bo
seen at any time if one likes to examine the marble font In the
Presbyterian Church, which ia made from local marble. The
mantelpieces in the Queensland 'Parliament House are also
made from marble from the Gladstone district. A table made
from our marble was sent to the Paris Exhibition, and the
maker was awarded a silver medal. There are also monuments
and tombstones in our local cemetery. There aim polished.,
tablets which have been exposed to the weather since 1858 aa
good In appearance now as they were then, Samples of the
marble and many ornaments made from It were sent to the
Indian and Colonial Exhibition in 1886, and the exhibitor was
awarded a certificate and a modal. This is proof enough,
surely, of its quality. It De Quires or any other navigator
sailed up the Calliope River, the mouth of which is a couple
of miles north of Auckland Inlet, On which Gladstone stands,
he could not miss the marble deposits there, but he might
easily be pardoned if lie did not ascertain if there was any-
thing of a superior quality some distance away, or inquire Into
its quality. The mere fact that there was marble would pro-
bably be sufficient information for him.”
4. Another common difficulty against the opinion which I
have adopted recalls to mind the fact that hitherto every writer
on the geography of the South Seas has regarded Santo as the
Great Southern Land discovered by De Quires, It cannot but
be presumptuous, it ia said, to advance an opinion contrary
to such a consensus of; expert writers. Findlay, however, has
well remarked that in this matter geographers have, as a mat-
ter of course, accepted without inquiry the statements of Cap-
Discovery of Australia by De Ouiros, 1606.


tain Cook. Ho found that the degree of latitude assigned by
De Quiros harmonised with Santo, and he at once accepted Its
big bay as the landing place of the great Spanish explorer.
Probably not one of the subsequent geographical writers knew
anything of Santo except what was set forth by Captain Cook,
for the New Hebrides were outside the ordinary track of navi-
gation, and were but little known till our own day; and, on
the other hand, the original sources of information regarding
the discovery of De Quiros were not available. The mountains
of the Moon bordering on the Sahara in Africa present a simi-
lar instance. A traveller some 200 years ago having referred
to such a chain of mountains, each subsequent geographer as-
signed them their due position In the African Continent, When
Stanley penetrated Central Africa, no such mountain range
could be found, and it at once became evlclent that they were
■ mere moonshine. The Identifying Santo with the Great
Southern Land was no less a delusion.
It is not accurate, however, to state that all geographers
have hitherto been agreed in assigning Santo as the Great
Laud discovered by De Quiros. Our worthy Sydney citizen, Mr.
CollingTidge tp. 305), reproduces the map of that Southern
Land published in 1752 by the geographer to the King of
France, who manifestly had access to original sources not
generally available, His map presents a fair outline of our
Australian Continent, and on Its North-East coast, pretty well
corresponding to the position of Port Curtis, he marks the
harbour of Vera Cruz, discovered by De Quiros.
B. Some critics have remarked that although the Boyne
of the Queensland coast is a fair-sized river, yet it can have
no claim to be likened to the Guadalquivir (the very name of
which implies a "great river’’),' which for CO miles of its
course to the city of Seville ia navigable for the largest vessels.
But we must attend to- the words of De Quiros. He expressly
states that the river which he discovered was as large as the
Guadalquivir at Seville, that Is, 60 miles from its mouth. Be-
yond Seville, the Guadalquivir is navigable only for smaller
craft and little frigates, The Boyne may justly be compared
to it at that stage of its course,
6. It only remains to consider the difficulty advanced by
Mr. Ernest Faveno, who, writing in the “Australian Journal of
Education” (September Ist, '.1904), contends that the data fur-
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


wished by De Torres are irreconcilable with the claim of Port
Curtis. De Torres (lie says) sailed from the newly-discovered
harbour of Vera Cruz on a south-westerly course till lie reached
the 27deg. of S. latitude, and then, veering his course to the
K.W.. came, upon the southern coast of New Guinea, and dis-
covered the Strait that bears his name. It we suppose him to
start from Port Curtis on such a course, he must have sailed
through the Australian Continent. In this statement of the
case, however, It seems to me that Mr. Favenc does not do
justice to the genuine meaning of De Torres’s narrative. 1
interpret him to imply that he resolved to continue the voyage
Where De Quires had interrupted it at the 26deg. South lati-
tude, thus to carry out what he believed to be the royal In-
structions. According to this interpretation, he sailed some
days along the Queensland coast, but finding the winds un-
favourable, proceeded to the latitude and longitude whore De
Qulros had abandoned the southern voyage. Thence Do Torres
sailed towards the south to the 30deg., and even passed that,
latitude one degree on a south-west course. This would bring
him approximately to the longitude IGSdog. as marked on our
maps. Finding no land, he directed his course 'to the north-
west, where eventually lie fell In with the southern coast of
New Guinea. This appears to be the natural meaning of the
words of De Torres, and the course of navigation which he
would thus have pursued is quite reconcilable with the fact that
Port Curtis was his starting point. Mr. Collingridge (p, 234)
calls attention to the fact that De Torres speaks of tho “men-
tioned latitude” and the “said latitude” in a mysterious way,
and remarks that the accurate latitude “was, no doubt, pur-
posely kept secret.”
There is one feature of Mr, Faveuc’s diagram which it
will be well to bear in mhid. He allows De Torres to proceed
only to about the 27deg. on Ma S.W. course from Santo, and then
marks out his N.W. course to New Guinea, But De Torres's
statement must be our guide in marking out the course which
he pursued, and lie tells us that he sailed S.W. till ho reached
the 31deg. S. latitude. Now, following out the diagram of Mr.
Favenc, • this course would inevitably lead him to the Australian
mainland.
7. Someone perhaps will say that there are far more than
seven islands lying off the coast of Keppel Bay, De Qulros,
Discovery of Australia, by De Ouiros, 1606.


however, states; “At, this port and bay are many excellent
islands, seven ot which may he especially mentioned.” Compare
this with, Findlay’s account of the Keppel Bay eo c ast (p. 953).
There is, he tells ais, the Capricorn group with three principal
islands; then the Bunker group, also with three islands. These
“occupy an extent o£ 54 miles nearly parallel with the coast.”
Then conies Curtis- Island, 25 miles In length. All these form
as if the outer barrier of the magnificent bay.
Bermudez further remarks that these seven islands are
“In sight o£ the port;” and that "nearly half-way there are
othdr known Islands.” All this is verified at Port Curtis, for
Facing' Island, eight miles In length, and other smaller islands
stand midway between the port and Curtis Island, and thus all
details admirably fit in with the description given in the
Spanish narratives.
8. There, remains one serious difficulty which affects, not
the territory, but the natives of the discovered land. The
various narratives reckon the bow and arrow and wooden
swords among their weapons of 'war. Such weapons, however,
were unknown to the Queensland' aboriginals when the terri-
tory was visited by Captain Cook and subsequent explorers.
To this difficulty the distinguished Victorian geographer,
Mr. Panton, to whom I have already referred, has replied that
the Spaniards might easily have mistaken for arrows some of
the spears which are still in use among our aboriginals. He
writes: “Anyone who has ever seen a sheaf of reed spears would
look upon them as large arrows. The natives can throw them
some 200 yards, and they might very easily be mistaken for
arrows by Spaniards seeing them for the first time.” This spe-
cially holds good when the natives make use ot the spear-rest.
The same writer adds: “As to wooden swords, I would ask;
Has anyone seen such a weapon In Santo? In Australia some
weapons do resemble swords. I have several in my collection.”:
We may further remark, however, that those who have
made a study of our aboriginals have come to the conclusion
that more than one wave of invasion from the Java and the
Malay Peninsula must have swept over parts ot Australia. In-
dependent even of this, we may readily suppose that during the
200 years that elapsed between the discovery of De Quiros and
the British occupation of Australia, many unrecorded vicissi-
tudes may have occurred. The tribes from, the mountains may
Discovert' of Australia by De Quiros, i6o§.


have pressed upon the natives inhabiting the coast and, com-
pelled them to take refuge in the Islands scattered through-
out the Torres Strait and In New Guinea. In these Islands the
bow and arrow have long been in constant use. Macglllivray,
in “Voyage of the Rattlesnake’’( p. 29G), whan engaged in the
exploration of the Islands of Torres Straits off Cape York, writes
that the natives there “readily parted with the bows and ar-
rows, of which they had a very large supply.” With the vicis-
situdes of the natives, however, we are not primarily dealing
at present. We are considering the unchanging features of the
land discovered by De Quiroa. These are inconsistent with, the
island of Santo, and are found to harmonise satisfactorily with
Port Curtis and the adjacent Queensland territory.
VI.
De Quires had won his laurels as an explorer in the islands
of the Pacific towards the close of the IGth century. And now
one grand project engrossed his thoughts. He would discover
the Great Southern Land, and would rival the glory of Colum-
bus by bringing new nations under the salutary influence of
religion. But how could he secure the approval of the Spanish
Government for a scheme which to many seemed visionary and
elusive?
It was tlie Jubilee year, 1 600. Pilgrims from every part
of Europe were flocking to Rome. He, too, would take the pil-
grim’s staff, and whilst in Rome he might perhaps enlist the
Pontiff’s sympathy for Ills enterprise.
In the volumes of the Hakluyt Society now published by
Sir Clements Markham (London, 1004) wd have from De Quiroa
himself the narrative of his pilgrimage. He landed in the
month of August, 160 u, in the territory of Genoa, and thence,
“dressed as a pilgrim,’' traversed on foot several of the finest
cities of Italy, where he remarks, “there was much to see - and
to notice.” ■ •
Arriving in Rome, he was well received by the Spanish
Ambassador. On the 28th of August he partook of the mid-
day meal with the poor pilgrims, and in the afternoon had an
audience of the Pontiff, Clement VIII., who listened attentively
to his plans and commended his zeal and earnestness.
The most eminent astronomers and geographers in the
Eternal City were invited to consider the project of De Quiroa,
Ip those days, as in later times, the most learned scientists
Discovery of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


of JSuropo made Rome tlioir home. Among them wan the Ger-
man. Christopher Claviua, who taught mathematics in Rome
for 20 years and was employed by Pope Gregory XIII. In the
correction of the Calendar. He. with Toribio X J erez, who had
taught geography at Salamanca, and the learned Jesuit Villa-
pando and others, examined and approved the project of De
Qulros, As a result, Clement VIII. gave him commendatory
letters for the Spanish Monarch, and granted many privileges
and Indulgences to those who would engage In Ms enterprise.
De Qulros refers particularly to a particle of the wood of the
Cross which was given to him by His Holiness, but which, he
tells us, lie obtained with very great difficulty. Sir C. Mark-
ham writes that “the Pope’s Influence secured his success.
Within a year he had obtained a royal order, through the Coun-
cil of State, addressed to the Viceroy of Peru, instructing that
dignitary to lit out two ships at Callao, to enable Qulros to
undertake an expedition for the discovery of the Antarctic
Continent.”
Many difficulties, however, had yet to be overcome, and It
was not till the month of December, 1605, that two ships and
a zabva, or launch, were consigned at Callao to De Qulros for
Ins glorious enterprise. The ship chosen for the captain him-
self was named San Pedro y San Pablo, and was of 100 tons.
The second ship was named Sail Pedro, 120 tons. The launch
was named Dos Tres Reyes.
With the details of the voyage we are not now concerned.
Suffice it to say that on the Ist of May, in 1606, they entered
a magnificent bay, and spread out before them was what De
Qulros believed to he the. grand continent of which he was In
search. Two clays later, as they sailed clown the bay, they dis-
covered a safe port In which a thousand ships could find an-
chorage. It was situated between two rivers, which supplied
them with delicious fresh water, and they called it the port
of Vera Cruz, from the feast of Holy Cross on which It was
discovered. On the following days the coasts were explored, and
the captain used every effort, but in vain, to engage in friendly
relations with the natives.
Pentecost Sunday (lOtli May) was now at hand. On the
eve all was joy and festivity on board the vessels, for next day
would-witness the solemn taking possession of the newly dis-
covered land. A special order of Knights of the Holy Ghost
Discover)' of Australia by De Quiros, 1606.


was instituted in honour of the event, The camp master and
an armed party attended to the preparations on shore. A small
fort was equipped with four pieces of cannon, A temporary
church was dedicated, under the Invocation of Our 1 -ady of
Loreto, and in it an altar with a canopy was erected, adorned
with palm branches and flowers. Masses were said at an early
hour, and. the whole expedition, officers and men, approached
Holy Communion with the intent of gaining the Jubilee Indul-
gence granted them by Pope Clement VIIX. High Mass was
sung by the Father Commissary.
Two special facts are commemorated. The Father Com-
missary and his five Franciscan companions, barefooted and
kneeling on the beach, received, at the hands of .Do Torres, the
second in command, a large cross, “made of the orange wood
of the country,” in which was inserted the Relic of Holy Cross
which the captain had received in Rome. This was borne aloft,
and all In procession, singing the “Lignum Gruels,” advanced to
the church door, where the cross, with all solemnity, was set
.in a pedestal, and the captain announced in six distinct procla-
mations his taking possession of the newly-discovered land in
the name of the Catholic Church, In the name of Hla Majesty
the King, etc.
The second event was at the close of the High Mass. I
will describe it in the words of De Quiros’s secretary; “The
three ensigns, who now held the banners in their hands, in-
clined them to the ground in front of the altar, the Royal En-
sign holding the royal standard. The Commissary blessed them
with great solemnity; and at a certain signal that'was given to
the ships, whose mast-head banners displayed the Royal Arms
and at the sides the two columns (symbols of the Spanish
power) and the plus ultra, with the streamers fluttering, fired
oft all their guns with full charges; the soldiers discharged,
muskets and arquebuses, and the gunners sent, off rockets and
fire-wheels. In the middle of all this noise, all shouted with
almost infinite. Joy, and many times, Long Live the Faith of
Christ. And with this the celebration of the festival came to
an end.”
The next care of De Qulros was to institute and inaugurate
a municipality to control the destinies of the future city. It
is pleasing to find among the appointed magistrates a name
which at the present day is highly honoured throughout
Queensland, Julian Real.
Discovery of Australia by De Quires, 1606.


The festival of Corpus Christ! was kept with due solemnity
on the 21st of May. It was regarded by the Spaniards as “the
first festival celebrated in honour- of the Moat High Lord in
these strange and unknown lands.”
The secretary of De Qulros gives a minute and detailed
description of this beautiful feast.
On the 20th of May. the camp master, with a hundred sol-
diers, went on shore to adorn the church, and to mark out
the streets for the procession. Before daybreak on tbe 21st
all were ashore. The church was “bravely decorated” with
green branches. The altar in particular was richly ornamented;
a large oil-painting of the Crucifixion served as the altar-piece,
the candles were lighted and the Incense burning.
There were three high triumphal arches, enlaced with
palms, branches of fruit trees and flowers; the ground was also
strewn with flowers. The streets were formed with a variety
of trees, and at tvro angles, under two other arches, were erec-
ted two altars of repose with their canopies; on these altars
were the images of St. Peter and St. Paul.
In the church three Masses were celebrated. “The day
was clear and serene, and as the sun rose over the crowns of
the trees, its rays entering through the branches, the difference
in,the fruits of each plant was shown in great profusion.
Here, too, could be heard the persistence with which the birds
sang and chanted; the leaves and'branches were seen to move
gently, and the whole place was agreeable, fresh, shady, with
a gentle air moving, and the sea smooth.”
The order of procession is minutely described. A soldier
went first, holding aloft the heavy cross of orange wood. Next
came a lay brother bearing a gilt cross, attended by Acolytes
and Thurifer, all wearing red cassocks and surplices. Then-
followed the three companies in order, each one hearing its
banner in the centre, with its drums sounding a march. As
was usual in the Spanish processions, there was a picturesque
sword-dance by eleven sailor lads, dressed in red and green silk,
with bells on their feet. “They danced with much dexterity
and grace, to the sound of a guitar, which was played by a
respected old sailor.” This was followed by another dance per-
formed “by eight boys, all dressed like Indians in shirts and
breeches of silk, coloured brown, blue, and grey, with garlands
on their heads and white palms in their hands. Bands of bells
Discovery of Australia by De Ouiros, 1606.


. 'were around, their ankles, and they danced with vary quiet
countenances, at the same time singing their canticles to the
sound of tambourines and flutes played by two musicians.”
Six Magistrates preceded the Celebrant, each, with a lighted
torch In his hand. The Father Commissary, attended hy the
other Priests, officiated; the canopy of yellow silk, six yards
long, was borne by three royal officers and three Magistrates;
and the “Pange Lingua” was joyfully sung. After the canopy the
Royal Standard was borne by the Ensign, attended by two Jus-
tices of the Peace and the chief constable.
As soon as the canopy appeared outside the church ‘‘all
the bells rang, and the people who were looking on attentively
fell on their knees; the Ensigns lowered the banners three
times, the drummers heat the drums for battle; the soldiers,
who had the cords ready, fired off the muskets and arquebuses;
the constables fired off the guns which were on shore for de-
fending the port; and in the ships the artillerymen fired off
the bombards and pieces, and those placed in the launch and <
boats for the occasion. Once more, and once again, they wore
discharged. When the smoke cleared away, there wore seen
amongst the green branches so many plumes of feathers and
sashes, so many pikes, halberds, javelins, bright sword-blades,
spears, lances, and on the breasts so many crosses and bo much
gold, and so many colours and silken dresses, that many ayes
could not contain what sprung from the heart, and they shed
tears of joy. With this the procession returned, the church
being guarded by four corps de garde. The dancers kept danc-
ing to keep up the festival, and remained within; and the cap-
tain at the door said to them; ‘‘All the. dresses you wear, you
can keep as your own, for they are from the Royal Treasury;
1 would that they were of the best and richest brocade.”
To bring the ceremonies to a close a fourth Mass was said
to satisfy the devotion of the sentries “who were posted to
keep a look-out for any approach of the natives, though they
were far oft on the beach and on the hills.”
The narrative adds that, ‘‘having given tliHsoul such sweet
and delicious food,” the tables were now laid under the shade
of tall and spreading trees, where all were gladdened with a
welcome and joyous repast.
Tims were brought to a doss the first --
which marked the discovery of our Auatrjs*aSj. Continent.
►p PATRICK F. CARDINAL muSks,
Archbiilion of Syd4y|<-.^3


f " r— —————— - "=SX
LECTURES AND REPLIES
By Most Rev. Thos. Joseph Carr, D,D. f Archbishop of Melbourne.
'i'hifj Now and Revised Edition of the Arolibisliop’s Lectures is now ready.
The Book, which..contains over 800 pages, includes the Lectures on—
The Church and the Bible, The Primacy of the Roman Pontiff,
The Origin of the Church of England, and Replies to Critics.
The Volume has been printed by Messrs. Bands and McDougall for the
Australian Catholic TruthSooiety, and is handsomely bound. It also con*
tains a Bigned Photogravure of His Grace, Price, Bs., Postage, is. 2d. *xtra.
P. J. KERIN, Manager, 812 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
PUBLICATIONS ISSUED BY
The Australian Catholic Truth Society.
I. The Priests and People of Ireland. A Vindication. By
His Eminence Cardinal Moran, Archbishop of Sydney.
3. Hi s« and Progress of the Church In Australia. By the
Most Rev. Dr. Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne.
3. Mary Immaculate and Democracy. By the Most Key. John
Keane, D.D., Archbishop of Dubuque, U.S.A.
4. Radium. By Monslgnor Molloy.
O. The Drunkard. A Temperance Sermon; first preached In
Australia in 3 83 3. By Archbishop Ullathorne.
0. The Damp of the Sanctuary. A Story. By Cardinal
Wiseman.
7. The Catholic Church and Temperance. By the Very Rev.
P. C. Hays.
8. Modern Astronomy, By Arthur Wadsworth.
». Cordon, the Australian Poet. By Rev. J. .T. Malone.
10. Kendall, the Australian ’Poet. By Rev. J. J. Malone.
It. Xmas Crib, and A Sprig of Holly. Stories.
,12. The Rife of Fr. Mathew. By Very Rev. P. 0. Hays.
13. Holy Week. Adapted from the Clifton Tracts,
14. Is There Salvation Outside the Church? Or, The Doctrine
of Exclusive Salvation. By the Most Rev. T. J. Carr,
D.D., Archbishop of Melbourne.
15. The Blessed Virgin in English Poetry.
10. St. Bright. By His Eminence Cardinal Moran.
17. Si. Coinmhldlle. By His Eminence Cardinal Moran.
18. Little Ernie’s Birthday Gift. By Benjamin Hoars.
19. Louise do la Vollicrc. By the Rev. E. J. Kelly, D.D.
20. The Miraculous Conception and Virgin Birth of Christ.
By A Client of Mary.
21. Info of St, Patrick. By His Eminence Cardinal Moran.
22. On, the Condition of Labour. Encyclical Letter of the
Late Pope Leo XIII.
23. Through, the Furnace. A Story. By Benjamin Hoare.
24. Veneration for Our Dead. By Rev. M. Watson, S.J.
a~. .Socialism.’ By Rev. E. J. Kelly, D.D.
20. Indifference in Religion. By Rev. J. J. Malone.
, 37. St. Francis Xavier. By Rev. J. J. Malone.


■—-—^
Publications Issued by the Australian Catholic Truth
Society .—(Continued.)
38. Catholics and Crime. By Benjamin Hoare,
at). Catholicism in Japan. By Ronald Stewart.
80. Christian Sclf-Sacrillce ami Father I lain ion. By Rev. M.
Watson, S.J.
;si. Slow They Enter (he Coin. By Benjamin Hoare,
33. The Church and the Cine Arts. By J. W. Foster Rogers.
Chris!ian Civilisation and (lie Perils that Now Threaten I(.
By Most Rev. i J . J. Ryan, Archbishop of I* liiladolpliia.
S 4-. Holy Week. Tlie Gospel Narrative of the 1 auahm.
35. Minor Kites and Oiiiees of the Church (Bart I.) By
Card inn 1 Wiseman,
36. Christ inn Marriage and Divorce. By the Most Rev, T. .1.
Carr, [).!.>., Archbishop of Melbourne.
37. The !,o-( Oiiild; A Story. Translated from the German.
3H. Religion and Human Liberty: Or, The Bible tin: Charter
of .Mini’s Bight*. By Rev, J. O'JJwyor, 8.,1.
*m mi... in.......u i (>ll- By Most Rev. Dr. Higgins.
3 1508 00010958 2
dienj. Hoare.
i. By Ronald Stewart,
.Mediaeval Catholicism. By Rov.
I By Very Rev. J. S. Coniuee, S.J.
; A Member of the Executive
Iv. Patrick Dolany, D.D., Hobart,
t’heodorc Katisboime, Pound or of
\ and of the Congregation of the
Slot!.
i By a Sister of Morey,
I By E. H. Hickey,
j; A Tale of the Penal Days of
listralia. By H. G. Bartlett.
- A Story Founded on Fact. By
Benjamin Hoare.
51. The Great Betrayal. (Second Edition). By Benjamin Hoare.
52. Pastoral Better of (lie Archbishop oiul Bishops of the Pro-
duce of Melbourne.
33. Tim Third French Republic and the Church. By Most
Rev. Patrick Deluny, D.D., Hobart.
54. Wattle Branches: A Story for Boys. By Rosario.
53. Spiritism. By Pr. Stanislaus M. Hogan, O.P.
50. The Church's Greatest Treasure: The Adorable Sacrifice of
the Altar. By Rev. M. Watson, S.J.
...37., Discovery of Australia by Do Quires, 1000. By His Emin- „
once Cardinal Moran.
38. Father Burke, O.P. By Pr. Stanislaus M, Hogan, O.P.
AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC PRAYER BOOK —Crown 3 2rno„
160 pages; boards, 3d,; limp leatherette, Is. .Id.; with
Epistles and Gospels, Is. 6d.; do., Superior Binding, 3s. fid.
Advocate Press, 284 Lonsdale St,
