

A FRIENDLY CORRESPONDENCE
WITH
MR. GLADSTONE
ABOUT CREEDS.
BY
SAMUEL LAING,
AUTHOR OF “MODERN SCIENCE AND MODERN THOUGHT, “A MODERN
ZOROASTRIAN,” &C.


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


A FRIENDLY CORRESPONDENCE
WITH
MR. GLADSTONE
ABOUT CREEDS.
BY
SAMUEL LAING,
AUTHOR OF “MODERN SCIENCE AND MODERN THOUGHT,” “A MODERN
ZOROASTRIAN,” &C.
LONDON :
WATTS & CO., 17, JOHNSON’S COURT, FLEET STREET.




A FRIENDLY CORRESPONDENCE
WITH MR. GLADSTONE ABOUT CREEDS.
This correspondence originated from an article of mine*
on the controversy between Mr. Gladstone and Colonel
Ingersoll in the North Avfieviccm Review. Mr. Glad-
stone, having seen a proof of this article, wrote me a
kind and courteous letter, saying that he had read it
with interest, and that it suggested to him to ask me if
I could furnish him with a short summary of the Nega-
tive Creed, or <e body of negative propositions, which had
been so far adopted on the negative side as to be what
the Apostles and other accepted creeds are on the posi-
tive.” He said that “ the negative propositions seemed
to him to lack definiteness, and. to be nowhere collected
as a whole, so that we cannot tell what is the body of
reasonable belief which we are challenged to adopt in
lieu of the body of reasonable belief which we now hold.”
Hence the positive writer is liable to be told that he is
beating the air, and, “ after he has done his best to
deliver his blow, he is cutting through a ghost, and not a
real antagonist.” In short, he wished to see the alleged
contradictions between Science and Orthodoxy fairly set
out in series, **so that, like counts of an indictment, the
* “ Mr. Gladstone and Colonel Ingersoll,” by S. Laing ; Agnostic Annual: iBBg.
(Supplied by the Publishers of this pamphlet, 7>£d. post free.)


whole case may be heard and a verdict had.” And he
was good enough to add that, having read my works on
these subjects with interest, he knew no one who, if so
disposed, would be better able than myself to comply
with his request.
To this I replied in the following letter :
Homburg,
August 20th, 1888.
Dear Mr. Gladstone,
Your letter reached me here. I had no idea that the
publisher had sent you a proof of my article, and was
alike surprised and gratified to find that you had read
enough of my writings on these subjects to make you
think that I might be able to meet your wish for a more
distinct and complete statement of the Negative Creed.
My chief difficulty is that our creed is, to a great
extent, having no creed. We think that many of the
things which are defined in the positive creeds are either
beyond human knowledge, or contrary to the facts of
science, or held on insufficient evidence. But we are not
an aggressive or proselytising race, and have no very
definite scheme of dogmas which we wish to impose on
the world in substitution for the old ones.
In fact, we prefer to wait and trust to the force of
truth to make these dogmas transform themselves or
gradually die out, rather than destroy them at a blow,
even if it were possible for us to do so. However, I have
tried to comply with your request by drawing up a con-
cise statement of what I believe are the principal articles
of our creed, such as it is, with the reasons on which
they are founded.
You will doubtless disagree with many of these; but
I think they will raise a sufficient number of clear and


intelligible pleas to enable you to join issue, come to
close quarters, and demolish them if you can. Of course,
the limits of a correspondence do not admit of anything
more than the most concise summary of these issues, and
when I return home I will send you copies of my two
books, “ Modern Science and Modern Thought” and “A
Modern Zoroastrian,” in which the facts and arguments
for my side of the question are more fully developed.
You say you wish this correspondence to have some
practical issue. If by this you mean in the way of
publication, I shall be most happy to allow my part of
the correspondence to be published, with any refutation
of my conclusions, long or short, which you may see fit
to write. Or, if you prefer it, I would publish it myself,
with your refutation as the last word, under some such
title as “ A Friendly Discussion with Mr. Gladstone as
to Creeds.” But, of course, if you do not mean “ publi-
cation ” by “ practical end,” I shall treat everything as
private and confidential.
I was very glad to find that the labours and respon-
sibilities of political life left you free to give so much
time and attention to a totally different class of subjects.
I heartily wish you may have health and strength
to live to crown the edifice by creating a real union of
goodwill between England and Ireland.
Yours very truly,
S. LAING.
The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone*
[Articles of Negative Creed subjoined.]


ARTICLES OF THE NEGATIVE CREED,
AND REASONS FOR THEM.
Article I.
That the subjects ivhich positive creeds profess to
define are, for the most part, unknowable — i.e., beyond
the scope of human reason or conception.
Reasons.
For the philosophical proof of this see Herbert
Spencer passim; also Huxley on Hume, Kant, Spinoza,
etc.
We cannot conceive the First Cause which lies
behind the phenomena of the universe, which are all
linked together by known or knowable secondary causes
(i.e., by laws or invariable successions), either as being
finite or infinite, conditioned or unconditioned, created or
self-existent. In other words, we cannot conceive it at
all, and therefore cannot either affirm or deny any pro-
position respecting it.
Article 11.
That Darwinism — or, in other words, Evolution by
known or knowable natural laws—affords the true expla-
nation of all that (apart from Revelation) we do or can
know respecting this inscrutable First Cause, its attributes
and relations to man, and such mysteries as birth, life,
and immortality.


Reasons.
See the works of Darwin, Lyell, Herbert Spencer,
Huxley, and Haeckel. And, above all, note the fact
that nearly the whole scientific opinion of the civilised
world has come round, in little more than twenty-five
years, to this view, as completely as it did from the
Ptolemaic to the Copernican Astronomy. Every day
adds fresh discoveries of missing links, and fresh evidence
confirming this theory.
See, for instance, Huxley’s pedigree of the horse,
and Professor Cope’s discoveries of ancestral forms of
almost all the mammalia in the Eocene, Miocene, and
Pliocene strata of North America. Also the similar
discoveries by Falcomer and Gaudry on the Scwalik
hills, and at Pikermi; and the clearly-traced develop-
ment of birds from reptiles, as shown by the archaeo-
pteryx in the British Museum.
The only remaining controversy in the scientific
world is not as to the reality of evolution, but as to the
precise laws and methods of the variations which have
led to it. All agree on the fact of evolution, and all
attribute a principal cause of it to Darwin’s laws of the
struggle for life and the survival of the fittest by
natural selection and heredity. But some think these
laws sufficient, while others, admitting them to be a true
and principal cause, think them insufficient without the
aid of other causes, such as use and disuse, which are
not yet fully understood. But there is no difference of
opinion, as far as I am among competent judges,
as to evolution being the true law of the universe.
Nor is this confined to men of science; it has
become the general mould of modern thought. Bishop
Temple and other eminent Divines practically adopt it,
and when they talk of “ original impress ” they discard
secondary supernatural interference, by what I have


ventured to call elsewhere a “ grandmotherly God,” as
completely as Darwin or Spencer. When Tennyson,’ the
great poet of modern thought, says,
“ Behold I know not anything
and in solemn words,
“ Behind the veil, behind the veil,”
the words come home to us, with almost a thrill of awe,
as the condensed essence of the true truth.
Article 111.
I have said “apart from Revelation,”for a revela-
tion, attested hy prophecies and miracles, is a conceivable
proposition, and might teach us things which, without it
we could never know. But it is a question of evidence,
and whereas every fair-minded man must admit that it
to be extremely strong and almost irresistible, we
find it to be extremely weak and wholly insufficient.
Reasons.
As regards the first part of this proposition, I think
you would agree with me and Huxley. I never could
endorse Hume s theory that miracles were impossible;
but, looking at the thousands, or rather millions, of cases
in which events, formerly accepted as miraculous, have
turned out to be either mistaken explanations of natural
events, as confounding sickness with spiritual possession ;
or subjective converted into objective impressions, as in
dreams, visions, and hallucinations; or else the product
ot superstitious fancies and excited imaginations in
uncritical ages ; I have always felt that the evidence for
anything really miraculous ought to be of the most
cogent and convincing character.
Here, then, we join issue on a definite fact—whether
the evidence for such a miraculous revelation is or is not
conclusive,


Article IV.
It is insufficient, because it rests solely on the assumed
inspiration of the Bible—a theory which breaks down
when tested by the ordinary rules of criticism, and
examined impartially by the light of modern knowledge,
unbiassed by any violent prepossession in its favour from
tradition and authority.
Reasons.
Both Old and New Testaments are, to a great extent,
collections of writings of unknown dates and authorship,
compiled no one knows exactly how or when, but
certainly long after the events they describe, and con-
taining many passages which are mutually contradictory.
For the best summary of this branch of Biblical criti-
cism see Strauss, Kuenen, and Renan.
Article V.
The theory of Revelation breaks down, because an
inspired revelation cannot contain falsehoods, and many
of the statements in the Bible are demonstrably untrue,
genei ally as regards the facts of the universe, and
specially as regards the origin of man.
Reasons.
The account of creation in Genesis is obviously incon-
sistent with the real facts, both as regards the relations
of the earth to the sun, moon, and stars; the crystal
vault separating the waters; the manner and order of
succession of vegetable and animal life, and numerous
other points. It can be defended only on the plea that
the inspired Revelation was not intended to teach ordi-
nary facts, such as those of Astronomy and Geology, but
only the religious facts of the existence of God and of


man’s relations to Him. Taken in this sense, we may
consider it as a poetical and sublime version of the older
Chaldean cosmogony, which it closely resembles, revised
in a Monotheistic sense, and writing “ God ” for “ Gods,”
and as an interesting record of the ideas floating in the
East at an early period.
In this sense it has a great value, and scientific men
like the American you refer to (who, I think, is not
Dana) may say that it is not inconsistent with modern
science. But, if taken as anything approaching to an
inspired narrative, and using words in their natural
sense, the account utterly breaks down, as Huxley has
conclusively shown. But, as a chain cannot be stronger
than its weakest links, I prefer to take as the test of
inspiration, instead of the vague and poetical and there-
fore contestable narrative of Genesis i., those of the
Noachian Deluge and the Tower of Babel, which are
precise and definite statements, forming a part of the
Biblical account of creation, as much as the proem of
Genesis i.
The account of an universal deluge and the destruc-
tion of all life, except that of a few pairs of animals
preserved and living together for a year in an ark of
limited dimensions, from which the earth was repeopled,
involves not only physical impossibilities, but is directly
opposed to the most certain conclusions of geological and
zoological science. The existence of separate zoological
provinces, like those of Australia, South America, and
others, is absolutely inconsistent with the theory that all
animal life has radiated from a single centre, like Ararat,
within a recent period.
Shem, Ham, and Japhet may represent the pro-
genitors of the human races known to the ancient world
of Chaldea and Syria ; but how of the other races—the
yellow Mongolians, the red Americans, the black Negroes,


Agnosticism and Christianity. A Lay Sermon By S. Laing (Author oi
“ Modern Science and Modern Thought” and “A Modern Zoroastnan ). This
booklet is an impartial and vigorous statement of the attitude of Agnosticism
towards Christianity, and sets forth the moral advantages likely to accrue from the
acceptance of Agnosticism. Single copies 6d, by post yd ; 13» 5 s post-free; S°»
18s carriage paid. ’
Thoughtful lucid, practical, liberal in sentiment, and high in moral tone. It is a delightful
little book, which does the spirit and the temper good to read, for it is large in charity, never offen-
sive. and most welcome in counsel full of thought most lucidly expressed.— Secular Review.
The Popular Faith Exposed. By Julian. This is a critical and scholarly
examination of Orthodox Christianity, and is strongly recommended. Single
copies 6d, by post yd ; 13, 5 s P os t ree '■> S°> I^s carriage paid.
This epoch-making little work will rank high among the Freethought classics. Less ambitious
than “ Supernatural Religion,” it is more direct and accurate, and the pale lamp-light glow of erudi-
tion is an added charm to the pages of this trained and cultured rebel against discredited authority.
To the redoubtable pen of another Paine or Junius is allied a loving faithfulness for truth, though it
be naked and unendowed, an infinite capacity for painstaking research, an unrivalled wealth of ripe
scholarship, and an attractive candour and courtliness of manner. The unorthodox brotherhood will
not fail to sensibly mark their appreciation of this enthusiastic missionary of modern thought.—
Watts’s Literary Guide.
Bible Words : Human, not Divine. By Julian. This is a pamphlet setting
forth, in common-sense language, and free from exaggeration and vituperation, the
most glaring absurdities and contradictions of the Bible. Price 3d, by post 3jzd >
13, 2s 6d post free ; 50, 9s carriage paid.
The Excellent Religion. An Essay on the Relations between Agnosticism,
the Polar Theory of Being, and the Higher Theism. By G. C. Griffith-Jones
(Lara). Single copies 6d, by post yd ; 13, $s post free ; 50, 18s carriage paid.
A Heretic’s Belief. By F. Sydney Morris, id, by post ij^d; 13, is post
free.
This is a timely and valuable effort to formulate a faith that shall, to the intelligent and untram-
meled, appear truthful and consistent, and promise to supply the new grounds and incentives to
morality that are to-day acknowledged by the thoughtful to be needed, and are desired by the earnest.
Watts's Literary Guide.
The pamphlet is ; dispassionate and thoughtful, and recognises that the great difficulty to-day is
to formulate a definite faith as a substitute for the faith that is passing away.— Secular Review.
The Confession of Agnosticism. By G. M. McC. Chapter I. Introductory.
Chapter 11. Misconceptions. Chapter 111. Fundamentals. Chapter IV. The
Perfect Life. Chapter V. The Other Side of Agnosticism. Chapter VI. Faith
and Manners. Single copies 6d, by post yd; 13, 5s post free; 50, 18s carriage
paid.
Agnostic Morality. By R. Bithell, B.Sc., Ph.D. Single copies 6d, by post yd ;
13, 5s post free ; 50s, 18s carriage paid.
“ Agnostic Morality ”is excellent Dr. Bithell has a fair grasp of the subject, and much per-
spicacity.— Progress.
Agnostic First Principles. A Critical Exposition of the Spencerian System of
Thought. By Albert Simmons. 2s, by post 2s 3d.
This is a very able summary of Spencer’s philosophy, written for those who have not the oppor-
tunity to read or the ability to follow that great thinker s works, Mr. Simmons is an enthusiast, and
he has evidently undertaken a labour of love A careful and solid performance.— Progress.
Modern Science and Modern Thought,- By S. Laing. Cheap popular
edition, 3yo pp, cloth, 3s 6d.
A Modern Zoroastrian. By S. Laing. Cheap popular edition, 263 pp, cloth,
2s 6d.
London : Watts & Co., 17, Johnson’s Court, Fleet Street, E.C.


TO THE FRIENDS OF THE AGNOSTIC AND
LIBERAL MOVEMENT.
An extensive experience in propagandist work proves that more converts
are made to the liberal movement through the distribution of literature,
expository and defensive, than by any other means. The great majority
of the thoughtful public never attend meetings or lectures, and it is
these people°who must be reached if it is desired to largely influence
modern thought. Where possible, booksellers and newsagents should
be induced to keep on sale the best liberal publications, some friend
guaranteeing the shopkeeper against monetary loss. The advanced
religious preachers of each locality ought to be kept acquainted with
our literature. The leading citizens of every city and village might also
be approached, not personally, but through the post. The local press,
too should be kept supplied with the most recent literature, and, on
appropriate occasions, brief letters might be written to the Editor of the
local journal directing attention to liberal work. The following publica-
tions will be found serviceable to propagandists. Messrs. Watts & Co.,
the publishers, will be pleased to give any information which may e
needed, and will, if requested, circulate literature to the value of any
remittance with which they may be favoured. A good plan is to
instruct that copies of any given pamphlet be forwarded to the leading
clergy and to prominent public men, the names and addresses of some
hundreds of whom, corrected to date, are in the possession of Messrs.
Watts & Co.
Dr. 8n,... Tj -« h'°TEZi <•"-■SCSSS£
Should be‘ SS .oSid“o manor "tai Ik'” rank in life or ,o wha, P«ny .key belong.
SXk - convincing, and » .video, Sri. of i.. i11n..ra.i0.., and
ot »»b,n P e ..’mak.U on. of .he n.«. valuable and fa.eina..„ S
iSl'y Se:.Tfc W S.y° wi' “oil
35 .\Tu”nf.«”..% C «'omi°end ike"book .o .be fa.ourabl. con.d.ra.ioo of o.r reader..
The Future Of Morality, a S Affected by the DecayOf
By M. S. Gilliland. Single copies 4d, by post 4/id , 13, 3 s bcl P ust »
12s carriage paid. . . .
An able argument in support of the contention that morality is not likely to be affected mjun-
ously by the decay of prevalent religious beliefs. -Literary World. rhr : st : an ; tv but which
ha.S£n£^
Literary Guide.


the pigmy Negritos,"the olive-coloured Malays, and other
races, who could by no possibility have been descended
from these patriarchs ?
Again, can any one read Max Muller’s works on the
origin of language and believe that all the hundreds of
different human languages originated from the confusion
of tongues and dispersion of tribes, inflicted as a punish-
ment for attempting to reach Heaven by building a tall
tower in Mesopotamia ?
The origin of man is, however, the point upon which
the radical opposition of the Orthodox and Scientific
creeds comes out most sharply. It cannot be true both
that man has fallen and that he has risen; that he was
miraculously created, quite recently in the world’s his-
tory, in God’s own image, and in a state of high moral
perfection, from which he fell by an act of disobedience,
introducing sin and death into the world ; and, on the
other hand, that he has been evolved, during an immense
period of time, from semi-animal palaeolithic ancestors,
ruder than the rudest savages. The evidence of perhaps
1,000,000 of human implements, found in strata of great
geological antiquity in all quarters of the globe, proves
to demonstration that man’s course has been upwards,
and not downwards, and that the true history of the
human race has been the direct contrary of that given
by the Bible.
Whether man, like other mammals, was evolved
through millions of years from primitive forms may be
as yet uncertain, though every fresh discovery points
that way. But this much is absolutely certain : that he
existed on earth at the least 50,000, and more probably
200,000 or 300,000, years ago, in a state lower than that
of the lowest savages, but already spread over the four
continents, and therefore far from his first origin ; igno-
rant of all arts except fire and the rude chipping of


stones; and that, as ages rolled on, his progress may be
traced, step by step, from rude to finer chipping; to the
hafted celt, the arrow, and javelin ; the barbed harpoon,
the eyed needle, the art of drawing, and finally to
polished stone, pottery, bronze, iron, and the other arts
of civilisation as we find them in full force at the dawn
of history 6,000 years ago in Egypt and Chaldea.
Head Lyells “ Antiquity of Man,” Geikie’s “Pre-
historic Europe,” or almost any recent work on the
subject, and then go to the British Museum and look at
the collection of stone ond other human implements, and
you will see the answer to the question which perplexes
you, why Modern Science and Evolution should be con-
sidered as hostile to Genesis and orthodox theology.
How can these facts be reconciled with the Biblical
theory of Adam’s creation and fall, with its logical con-
sequence of the Atonement and Bedemption ?
As regards the New Testament, it may be true that,
when Strauss and other critics attempt to show a
mythical origin for everything in the Gospels, they go
too far and may be refuted. But their negative and
destructive criticism has never been answered.
It remains true that the prophecy of the end of the
world in the lifetime of the existing generation, distinct
and precise as it is, was not fulfilled; that no one has
been able to show who were the authors of the Gospels
as we now receive them, how much was original from
eye-witnesses, how much compiled from tradition and
older manuscripts, and when and by whom.
Evidently most of the miracles are explicable by
natural causes, related in the language of the day ; and
by far the most important miracles of all, those of the
Besurrection and Ascension, are related with a hopeless
contradiction of place and circumstance. According to
one, they took place in Galilee ; according to another, at


Jerusalem ; while, according to St. Mark (who, if we are
to believe tradition and Papias, comes nearest to the
fountain head through St. Peter), if we omit the verses
at the end which are not found in the oldest manuscripts
and are plainly added, there is positively no mention of
any miracle at all. We are merely told that the women
went to the tomb, found it empty, and saw a young man
in white clothing, who gave them a message, which they
never delivered, being afraid. Would this evidence
prove the signature of a will, much less a miracle ?
I do not, however, myself attach so much weight to
this element of Biblical criticism, which can always be
disputed about, as I do to what seems to me the crushing
and conclusive refutation of the whole theory of the
creeds and orthodoxy by the incontrovertible facts which
have been exhumed from the high level gravels of the
Somme and the Thames, the caves of Devonshire and
Belgium, and the rock-shelters of the Vezere.
Article VI.
Thus far the Articles of the Negative Creed •have
been purely negative, and I believe that all who are
called Agnostics would agree with them. There are,
however, certain positive articles which are generally,
though perhaps not universally, held. For instance, the
denial of Atheism, and of a purely mechanical Mate-
rialism.
Reasons.
If we cannot prove an affirmative respecting these
mysteries of a First Cause and a Personal God, assuredly
we cannot prove a negative. There may be anything in
the Unknowable, “ behind the veil,” for aught we know
to the contrary. All we know is that, in our present
existence and with our present faculties, we do not know


it, and that, as all truth is one, any guess at it, which is
inconsistent with what we really do know, stands, ipso
facto, condemned. Thus, if any one tells me in general
terms that there is a Heaven or Hell behind the veil, I
reply, “It may be so ; I do not know.” But, if he
attempts to define them, and tells me that by going
vertically upwards I shall meet the one, and by going
vertically downwards the other, I reply, “ This is merely
an erroneous guess ; it is simply impossible.”
Article VII.
Morals and Religions are products of Evolution.
Reasons.
Morals can be clearly traced to the “ survival of the
fittest,” of the ideas and rules of conduct which have
proved themselves the best both for individuals, families,
and societies in the “ struggle for life,” and have become
more and more fixed by heredity and environment, until,
in modern civilised nations, they have become almost
instinctive. This is clearly proved by a reference to
history, and by the existing state of morals among races
in different stages of civilisation and with different envi-
ronments. Thus, murder is honourable among Dyaks
and Bed Indians, but is execrable in England. Polyandry,
legitimate in old India (see the Ramayana), and to- this
day among certain rude Indian tribes, is repugnant in
modern Europe. Polygamy, not inconsistent with divine
favour in the days of David, and now thought to be
right by all Mohammedan races, is considered as criminal
in Christian countries.
This shows that morals are not the result of any
implanted instinct or Divine revelation, but rest on a
surer basis—that of heredity and environment, making


it certain that, with or without creeds and dogmatical
religions, the laws of conscience and morality will go
on widening, strengthening, and becoming more and
more instinctive with each generation of civilised
nations.
As to religions, it is even more evident that they are
products of evolution. They are all, in effect, “ working
hypotheses,” by which different generations of men, in
different ages and countries, seek to represent their
hopes and fears, their rude or refined ideas of science
and morality, their aspirations after a future life, and
even their fancies and poetical feelings. They all have,
or have had, some good in them suited to their environ-
ment, and all that have survived have changed with the
changes of that environment, brought about by evolu-
tion.
Christianity is, on the whole, the best of these reli-
gions, as being that of the most civilised and advanced
nations; but it has undergone great modifications, and
must undergo more if it is to remain a tolerable “ work-
ing hypothesis ” under the altered conditions of modern
science and of modern societies. Imprison it in hard-
and-fast dogmatic creeds, and it must wither and perish.
Article VIII.
Polarity is the great underlying law of all knowahle
■phenomena, whether of the inorganic or organic universe,
or of the spiritual world of conscience, morals, free will,
and determinism.
Reasons.
This article is, perhaps, rather one personal to myself
than generally accepted, though partial statements of it
may be found in the works of Herbert Spencer, Emerson,


and other writers. For a detailed argument in support
of it see my “ Modern Zoroastrian.” The following is a
brief summary of it. The material universe- is built up
out of atoms and energies by a first Cause, or, as Bishop
-temple calls it, an “original impress.” How? By a
polarity which makes them combine and pass from the
simple and homogeneous into the complex and hetero-
geneous in a course of constant change and evolution.
is polarity is a part of the “ original impress,” and,
like Space and Time, is what, in Kantian language, we
should term an “imperative category” of human thought
and conception. How or why, we know not, any more
than we know what lies behind the original atoms and
energies. But there it is, and it extends to all the
higher questions of morals and philosophy. Every pro-
position has two sides. Bight becomes wrong and
wisdom^ folly, if pushed to the “falsehood of extremes.”
Determinism, or mechanical Materialism, may seem to
, 6 a necessar 7 consequence of Darwinian Evolution • but
it is only one pole of the truth. There is another pole,
which gives us a conviction of the reality of Free Will. 5
The reconcilement lies beyond our reach, in the law of
po arity, which, in its ultimate essence and origin, is part
of the great Unknown.
So, again, the Christian virtues of meekness, self-
sacrifice, and love, are good ; but so also are the sterner
virtues of self-reliance, courage, and providence; and it
would not work in practice to take «no thought for the
morrow, and, “if smitten on one cheek, to turn the
other. Wise economy and wise liberality are both
good; but the one easily degenerates into parsimony,
and the other into extravagance. Patriotism, pushed
to excess, becomes Jingoism; philanthropy, carried
eyond the mark, lapses into weak sentimentality ; and
$o of all things.


This creed is the only one consistent with facts. It
makes us tolerant and comprehensive, and teaches us to
find—
“ Sermons in stones and good in everything.”
It has approved itself to me as a good “ working hypo-
thesis ” to go through life with, and taught me to try
to stand firm in the middle, not letting myself be
absorbed by the exclusive attraction of either pole,
striving to appropriate all that is true and good, whether
it be in the discoveries of science, the beauties of art
and nature, the calm and serene philosophy of Epicurus
and Confucius, the magnanimous stoicism of Marcus
Aurelius, or the pure morality and gentle virtues of Jesus.
I feel sure that you will applaud the effort, though we
may differ as to the best mode of realising it.
To this Mr. Gladstone replied in a letter which I
should have been glad to publish, as it illustrates both
the candour and courtesy of his nature, the depth and
sincerity of his convictions, and the range and acuteness
of his intellect. But I am precluded from doing so, as
Mr. Gladstone, having no time at his disposal for an
exhaustive reply to my propositions, naturally does not
wish the hasty and discursive remarks which are alone
possible in such a correspondence, to go forth to the
world as containing all that he has to say on the side of
Orthodoxy. I have only to add, therefore, my con
eluding letter, in reply to which he gave me full permis-
sion to make what use I pleased of my part of the
correspondence:—


Hall Grove, Bagshot,
September 13 th, 1888.
Dear Mr, Gladstone,
I received your letter on my return from Homburg
yesterday, and can only thank you for the kindness and
courtesy of its expressions. You are most welcome to
keep, and make any use you please of, my part of the
correspondence, and I am only too glad to think that I
may have assisted you in forming a more definite idea of
the precise points at issue between the Positive and
Negative creeds.
I never expected that you would write an exhaustive
reply to the very wide and varied propositions in my
attempt to summarise the Negative Creed; nor can I
pretend to have sufficient authority to speak for others
who hold, more or less, the same views; and especially
for the far greater men than myself, such as Huxley and
Herbert Spencer, whose works must be studied to appre-
hend rightly their respective points of view and argu-
ments.
Still, I think that my summary conveys clearly
enough what is generally accepted by what I may call
the scientific thought of the present day ; and your
letters, though of course not exhaustive, indicate with
equal clearness the leading lines of thought in which you
and other enlightened believers in the old orthodox
creeds would seek to uphold them.
If I suggested publication, it was only because your
first letter stated your wish that the correspondence
should lead to some “ practical end.” There is no doubt
that, if it were published as it stands, either as an
article in a review or a pamphlet, it would, like your
article on Colonel Ingersoll, excite great interest, and be
very extensively read and commented upon, and thus


forward the cause of truth by making many minds think,
and, as you say, fixing the points at issue more definitely,
and in a candid rather than a controversial spirit.
But this rests entirely with yourself, as I can under-
stand that there may be many reasons why you would
not wish to present your views to the public in the
necessarily brief, incomplete, and familiar form of a
couple of letters. The question of publication is, there-
fore, altogether in your hands. I shall be glad myself to
give publicity to what I am sure would be extremely
interesting to many thinking minds ; but, if you see the
slightest objection to it, the whole correspondence shall
remain strictly “ private and confidentialand I shall be
only too happy if I can think that I have contributed in
any way towards giving more precision and definiteness
to your own individual mind on some of the important
questions which occupy so much of your attention, and
on which, at some future day and with more leisure, you
may wish to give the public a more full and elaborate
exposition of your views.
Yours very truly,
S. LAING.
The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone.
Printed by Watts , &° Co., /?,Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, London, E.C.






CHEAP POPULAR EDITIONS.
Just Issued, People’s Edition, price 2s. 6d.; or Superior Edition,
in i vol., price ios. 6d.,
A MODERN ZOROASTRIAN.
By SAMUEL LAING.
“ We undertake to predict, without fear of future regret for the prediction, that
this work will be acknowledged as the most remarkable scientific and philosophical
book of the year Those who have read Mr. Laing need scarcely be told how
deftly he weaves the web of crushing proof round and round his arguments, or how
skilfully he advances new dogmas, which, on the face of it, are certainly unanswer-
able. There are points in the book of supreme interest to the non-scientific reader,
and, indeed, it teems with topical matter. ” — St, Stephen's Review.
“ The reception given to Mr. Laing’s former work, ‘ Modern Science and Modern
Thought,’has induced him to publish this most interesting and fascinating book,
which will be read and re-read by all students of philosophy and science with avidity
and delight.”— Watts’s Literary Guide.
“ From its clearly-written, able, and sympathetic discussion of so many of the
great problems of existence, the book cannot but exercise a great influence on a large
number of readers.”— Westminster Review.
“ The elucidation and practical application of the great theories handled leave
nothing to be desired. They are sound, sensible, and searching. They are interesting,
instructive, and striking, and they merke science to have a new charm for those who
have shrunk from its study.”— Oldham Chronicle.
F. V. White & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.
By the same Author.
People’s Edition, price 3s, 6d.; or Superior Edition, price 7s. 6d.,
MODERN SCIENCE & MODERN THOUGHT.
Containing a Supplemental Chapter on Gladstone’s “ Dawn of
Creation ” and “ Proem of Genesis,” and on Drummond’s
“ Natural Law in the Spiritual World.”
“ Mr. Laing exhibits with much power and effect the immense discoveries of
science and its numerous victories over old opinions whenever they have had the
rashness to challenge conclusions with it.”— Times.
“ Mr. Laing manages to condense into a few short chapters an amount of salient
information on matters astronomical, geological, archaeological, and historical ; and,
withal, he condenses it cleverly The anxious but unlearned inquirer who really
wishes to know how much recent researches have effected towards undermining the
groundwork of the existing creeds cannot do better than turn to Mr. Laing’s plea-
santly-written pages.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
“From the first page to the last the book is charmingly written.”— Westminster
Review.
London: Chapman & Hall, Limited.
ear Either of the above Works will be forwarded post free at the published price
- Watts & Co., 17, Johnson’s Court, Fleet Street, London, E.C.
