



SIVA SAHASRANAMA STOTRA
SRI NILAKANTHA’S COMMENTARY
ENGLISH TRANSLATION!
R. ANANTAKRISHNA SASTRI,
Translator of T/alild ami Vishnu Balimrannmm, with
tjfomtufniarim.
MADRAS:
PRINTED BY THOMPSON & CO., AT THE “MINERVA” PRESS
33, POPHAM’S BROADWAY'.


PREFACE.
The S'ivasahasrauama Stotra occurs in the 17th
chapter of the A'uus'asanika Parva of the Mahabharata.
This great work is rightly celebrated as the most impor-
tant of all the works of S'ri Vedavyasa. According to a
stanza in the work itself, Vyasa, an incarnation of S'ri
Mahavishnu, came down to inculcate the occult truths of
the Vedas in a way, that ordinary people could easily
understand and realise them; hence the Mahabharata is
generally known as the Fifth Veda.
According to the Tantras, each Vedic deity has its
Mantra, its Stotra, its Gita and its Sahasrauama j and
Vyasa has selected what he considered ttie most impor-
tant of such deities to write Purauas upon. In the
Mahabharata he has introduced the Stotras of some of
his chosen deities, but he recites the Sahasranamas o 1
S’iva and Vishnu only, as being the most important of the
whole lot and as such particularly deserving that
honour.
Vyasa has only one Sahasranama of Vishnu in his
works, whereas he has as many as four or five E'ivasaha-
sranamas. This may be owing to there being a larger
number probably of the followers of S'tva, who is also
worshipped in a greater number of aspects than Vishnu,
This set of Shvasahasrauamas now under publication
occurs in the Mahabharata, while different sets of the
same namus occur in the Padma, and Skauda Purauas, &c.
But there is not the least doubt that this collection in the
A'uus'asanika Parva of the Mahabharata is the most im-
portant of them all and highly venerated and esteemed


throughout all India from Cape Comorin to the Himalayas,
especially as the chanting of it is deemed to be very effica-
cious. This is apparently due to the one view of Vy£sa that
Vishnu and S iva are the principal Vedic deities, and that
as such they deserve a place in the Mahabharata, which
is essentially supplement to the Vedas
There was a long-standing controversy as to whether
the Sahasranamas are original works of Vyasa or mere
extracts collected by him from other sources. This is
once for all settled by Vyasa himself in the present work
when he affirms that this set of names is simply a collec-
tion made by him from the number of names handed
down to posterity by the previous sages who have achieved
success in their several lines by chanting these holy
names. Each devotee in worshipping the Deity, adopts
a set of names lor chanting and contemplation. This has
given rise to several sets of Sahasranamas, each of which
specially blessed by the Deity at the request of the first
devotee who pleased Him with it. This S'ivasahasranama
has the rare merit of having been communicated to the
Lord S'ri Krishna himself by the holy Sage Upamanyu,
who says that it was gradually transmitted to this world
from the Regions of Brahma.
The commentary upon this work is by S'ri Nila-
kantha. According to ‘ Catalogus Catalogorum ’ he re-
sided at Kiirpara to the West of Godavari in the Maha-
rashtra Country. He belongs to Chaturdhara family,
and is the sou ol Govindasfiri and Phullamba. His date
could approximately be fixed at 1650 A.D. He was well-
versed in all branches of S'astras—extoric and esoteric—
as is evidenced by his own stanza, which when translated
runs* thus :~ l I learnt Vedanta from
Purvamimamsa from Karayanatirtha, Tarka from
Dhues'amis'ra, Vyakarana from Pola Gangadhara,
\ edas with their supplementary parts from my paternal


uncle- I got myself initiated in the worship of Dakshiua-
murti by my own father. I learnt S'rauta from Chinta-
mani, and I was attached to king Gopala for attaining
wordly prosperities.’ He was an ardent and devoted
follower of the School of S'ri S'ankaracharya. In
the introductory stansa of his commentary on the Bhaga-
vadgita of the Mahabharata he reverences S'ri S'an-
kara and later on in his commentary on the verse (4-18)
he compares his commentary with that of S 'ankara and
characterises the former as being “ a light which though
sufficient to expel darkness from a cave into which
it may happen to be introduced, is yet not good
enough to stand comparison with the brightness of
the Sun.” He has not commented upon the Vishnu
S’ahasranama but refers the readers to the excellent com-
mentary on the same by S’ri Sankara. He seems to have
been a man of vast and varied learning, a lit commentator
on such a great and difficult work as the Mahabharata*,
According to ‘ Catalogus Catalogorum’ the following
works are attributed to him :
r. M antra Kas'ikhandati ka.
2- Mantra Bhagavata.
3. Mantra Ratnayana and commentary.
4. Mantra S'ariraka.
5. Mahabharata Bhavadipa.
6. Vedantakataka, critical remarks on Sutrabhash-
ya of S'ri S ankara and three his commentators, Sures’vara,
Padmapada and Vachaspati mis’ra.
7. Ganes'a gita tika composed at 1694 A. D,
8. S'iva tandava vyakhya composed at 1681 A. D.
9. Saurapauranika Matasamarthana-
10. Avimukta nirukta sara. (See page six)
He cannot in any way be confounded with other
Nilakanthas whose names appear in the ‘ Catalogus


Catalogorum ’in connection with almost every depart
meat of Sanskrit Literature,
The present work is the third of my series of Saha-
sranamas and the noth of my main series of Mantra
S'astras and I hope that at no distant date I shall be able
to issue the Subrahmanya Sahasranama, as desired
by many of my friends who are all interested in the
publication ol such works.
M yj-apvk,
I-2-1902. ) R. ANANTA KRISHNA SASTRI.


&VA SAHASRANAMA STOTRA.
WITH NI'LAKANTHA’S COMMENTARY.
Vasudeva said ; Then, O noble Yudhislithira, the
Brahmarshi, (Upainanya) concentrated his mind and
with folded hands, recited the collection of names, from
the very beginning. i.
Upamanyn said; I praise him who is renowned
through all the worlds, who deserves praise, the best aitd
the first, capable of conferring Heaven, beneficient to all
beings and who is auspicious, through these names reci-
ted by Brahma and the Sages; these were extracted
from the Vedas and the Vedangas, and were composed
by great beings ; they are true, capable of achieving all
results and are extremely powerful; they were selected
from the Vedas by the Sage Tandin with concentrated
mind.
They were recited by the holy Sages, the Seers of
Truth; they are given out in the Vedas and were brought
to this Earth from the world of Bramha, through them,
pregnant with meaning. I shall praise the Supreme Brah-
man, sung by Brahma, the ancient- 2 to 5,
Listen, thou, the foremost of the Yadu family, with
deep attention; you are his devotee, pray to the Lord
S'ankara, the Supreme Lord. 6-
However, I shall speak to you of that ancient Brah-
man- Numberless years are not enough for one to des-
cribe him completely, nay not even for Brahma who is
endowed with all the divine qualities. Who can adequate-
ly describe, O Madhava, the attributes of Him, of whom
even the very Gods know not the beginning, the middle
and the end. However through the grace of that wise
Being, I shall according to my limited capability, relate


to you the attributes of that Great Lord, in a short and
condensed form. One cannot praise the Lord without
having received his permission. 7 to io-
Only after obtaining his permission, did I praise him
then. I shall, at a guess as it were, give out the names of
that Great One, without beginning and end, the cause of
the Universe whose source is unknown. Listen Krishna,
to the names of that Being who confers all boons, who is
the best, whose form is the Universe and who is
wisdom —the names that were first given out by the
lotus-born Brahma. I cogitated in my mind over
the ten sets of thousand names recited by Brahma,
and have extracted these, their essence, as one would
extract ghee from curds, gold from ore, honey from
flowers, manda from ghee. This (hymn) destroys
all sins, is associated with the four Vedas, is auspi-
cious, confers health, destroys the evil spirits and is
extremely purifying; hence one should, with great
effort, study carefully and retain it in his memory. 11 to 16.
This should be imparted to a devoted and earnest
person, one who believes in the Great One; and never
to any one who has no faith, who is a skeptic and who
has no self-control. 17.
He who hates, the Lord, O Krishna, the cause of
all, goes to Hell with all his ancestors and descendants. 18.
This is meditation, this is yoga, this is the unequal-
led object of meditation. This alone should be recited,
this is knowledge, this the supreme secret. 19
Knowing this, even at his last moments, one attains
the supreme State of existence ; this is purifying, auspi-
cious, holy (as efficacious as sacrifices), confers prospe-
rity (confers the highest bliss), this is unequalled. 20.
Brahma, the grandsire of all the worlds, having
composed this, placed it at the head of all the divine
collections of hymns. 21.


From that time, this has been known in the world
as the “ best of the hymns ” of the Great Lord, and has
been worshipped by the celestials themselves.
This “ best of the hymns ” descended to the world of
the gods from that of Brahma; and since Tam/i got it
first, and it was promulgated by him. 23.
Tandi brought it down to this world from that of the
Gods, —this most auspicious of auspicious things, this
destroyer of every sin. 24.
Great Krishna, I shall narrate to you the best of the
hymns, of Him who is the Brahman of all the Brahmans,
the Supreme of all the supreme objects. 25.
Com : Brahman means the Vedas, hence, the expres-
sion signifies the ‘ speech ’ (Vak), of all the Vedic utter-
ances. Supreme (Para) means the objects of the senses,
mind, intellect, Mahat, Avyakta (unmanifested), &c. ;
hence s he who is beyond all these, the Purusha.’
He is the light of lights (the eyes, See.), the auster-
ity of austerities (the efficacy of all the holy things, as the
Ganges), the calm (salvation) of all calm persons, the
knowledge of all knowledge (the witness of all manifest-
ations of knowledge). 36,
He is the most self-controlled of the self-controlled,
the wisdom of the wise (the practical realisation of it,
the soul); the most venerable of the venerable ; the Rishi
of Rishis (the greatest of authors, since he gave out the
Vedas). 27.
He is the sacrifice of sacrifices (he is the highest of
the beings to whom the offerings during the sacrifices
are made), the most auspicious of auspicious things ; he
is the Rudra of Rudras, is the prosperity of the wealthy.
Com : The word Rudra has many meanings- The
one acceptable here seems to be ; That which destroys


(dra) Ignorance, illusion, sorrow, misery (Rut) —know-
ledge or Bliss.
He is the Yogiu of the Yogins (the creator of Brahma
and the others through an act of his will), the cause of
causes (as the unmauifested ; hence he is without any
parts). From Him proceed all the worlds ; but do not
come out of Him again. * 29.
Listen to me while I recite the thousand and eight
names of S'iva, of immeasurable splendor, the Soul of all
beings ; having heard which, O best of men, you will
attain all your desires. 30.
THE FIRST HUNDRED.
Coni: Among these thousand names there might occur
repetitions of names or meanings, but they should not be
regarded as such. In some cases the meanings may be
the same, but the names may be different ; in other cases
the names may be the same, but the meaning different ;
this is owing to the meaning of “ potential results.” For
example the ‘ potential result 3 (apurva) produced from
the expression ‘ Sarvatman ’ is not the same as that from
the expression “ Vis'vatman.” Or else, the potential
result of the mantra “ Agnaye jushtam nirvapami ” must
be the same as that of “ Vahnaye jushtam, &c.hence
the very words of the original injunction should be used,
for fear the canon of the Mirnamsakas should be vio-
lated. Because a difference of meaning, and the similarity
of names cannot convey a sense of repetition ; for the
word Indra that has another meaning, is used to mean
Fire in the passage, “ Aindrayagarhapatyam upatish-
tate.” We shall illustrate this as we comment on the
names-
1. Firm (Sthirah). Immovable ; the witness, the
Eternal.
2- The Pillar (Sthanuh). Supporting everything as
* Note. —This, passage is. not dear.


a pillar does a house ;as it has been said “ S'iva is the
central pillar of the Mansion of Samsara.”
3. The Lord (Prabhuh). The inner Sou! ; the
ultimate Existence; the PMshioner of the Universe; the
all knowing.
4. Terrible (Bhiraah). The destroyer, he whom all
fear.
5. The best (Pravarah). Sought after by those
desirous of enjoyments and liberation.
6. The granter of boons (Varadah)
7. The all pervader (Varah.)
8. The all Soul (Sarvatma) ; the inner Soul of all
living things; he is the Soul (A'tmanj, as he attains all
objects of desires as his own, possesses everything, enjoys
them and is always of the same nature ; as is said in the
Smriti. “He is called A'tman because he attains,
possesses, and enjoys all the objects of senses, and is
always of the same nature.”
9. Famous every where (Sarvavikhyatah) ; in all
times and places, or as the inner Soul of all beings.
10. The all (Sarvah). Pervader ; as the Eord (Bh,
G. ii- 40,) has said “ you prevail through everything
and hence you are all.”
11. The doer of all (Sarvakarah) ; the Creator of the
Universe- These two names denote his aspects of mate-
rial and instrumental causation.
12. Existence (Bhavah); since the Universe pro-
ceeds from Him who is independent; since it is absorbed
in Him, i. c., He is the Source and the absorption of the
Universe; he is bare existence. 31.
13. With matted hair (Jati.)
14. Covered with skin (Charmi); of the tiger or the
elephant.
15. With tufted locks (S'ikhaudij. His matted


hair is turned and the ends stick out like the feathers of
the peacock.
16. Whose limbs are the Universe (Sarvaugah)
Virat (the universal form).
17. The Creator of everything (Sarvabhavauah.)
18. The all destroyer (Harah.)
19. The deer-eyed (Harinakshah.)
30. The destroyer of all beings (Sarvabhutaharah.)
31. The enjoyer of everything (Prabhuh). 32-
22. Activity (Pravrittih) Manifestation.
23. Rest (Nivrittih) Cessation from activity.
24. The self-controlled (Niyatah); the ascetic who
has subjugated his senses and prevented them from
grasping their objects.
25. The eternal (S as'vatah.)
26. The immovable (Dhruvah.)
27. The dweller in the cremation grounds (S'mas'a-
navasi). S'mas ana means literally the ‘ place where the
disembodied lie down without rising again.’ The expres-
sion, applies to the cremation grounds only figuratively,
since it is no place of rest for the bodies or the souls of
the dead, as in dreamless slumber. The bodies become
dust and ashes, and being inert cannot have rest; the
Souls that inhabited them undergo tortures in Hell and
take fresh bodies, hence do not rest. The real denotation
of the expression is Benares (Varanasi), because in the
work “ Avimukta Niruktasara ” composed by us,
thousands of reasons are given why persons dead in
Varanasi never undergo Samsara.
28. The Eord (Bhagavan). The Smritis say;
“ Wealth, supreme wisdom, fame, prosperity, dispassion
and Taw, these six are named Bhaga,” hence he
who is endowed with all these.
29. Dweller in the Ether (Khacharah) :of the heart,
as is said in the S'ruti (Chch. Up. S-x-x). “In the heart


is the inner A’kas'a, one should seek for what is within
it ” ; “ God S'iva is in the centre of the A'kas'a-”
30. Dweller of the senses (Gocharah); in the shape
of their objects ; enjoying the objects through the organs.
Being the Soul of all, he can be perceived, by all. the
senses; he can enjoy all the objects through the senses.
31. The punisher lArdanah.); of the sinners, in the
shape of Yama. 33
32. Revered ( Abhivadyah.) Worshipped or praised
bv all.
33. Of great acts (Mahakarma.) As the creation,
34. The ascetic (Tapasvi).
35. The creator of the elements (Bhutabhavanah.)
Ether, &c., through an act of His will.
36. Concealed under a cloak of madness (Unmatta-
veshaprachchannah.) Such as nakedness.
37. Lord of worlds and beings. (Sarvalokapraja-
patih) ; inhabiting them. 34
38. Of immeasurable form (MalOrupali.)
39. Of vast body (Mahakayah), as Virfit.
40. The personification of Raw (Vrisharupah.)
41. Of great fame (Mahayas'ah), The great Rord,
as the S'ruti says (S've. Up. 4-19) : “ His name is great
fame/’
42. The high-minded (Mahatma).
43, The soul of all Beings (Sarvabhutatma). Since
they are but the manifestation of his thought, all are re-
sults of his meditation.
44. Whose form (external) is the Universe (Vis'va
rupah). Or he who manifests himself in the Universe.
45. Of great jaws (Mahahanuh). Capable of grind-
ing the Universe. 35.
46. The ruler of the worlds (Rokapalah) ; as Indra
47. Of hidden nature ('Antarhitatraa). His homo-


geneity is concealed by the I-ness produced of nes-
cience, as a rope is concealed by the appearance of snake.
48. Bliss (Prasadah).
49. Drawn by a nude (Hayagardabbib) ; when
driving. We learn from the passages: “ Rudra is verily
this Fire, ” “ through his chariot drawn by mules,
Fire ran very fast,” that the God as Fire is drawn by a
mule.
50. Holy (Pavitram) ; as he protects from the
thunderbolt of Samsara (pavitra : f>avi a thunderbolt
trn, to protect).
51. Worshipful (Mahan).
52. The ordinance (Niyamah), as purity, cheerful-
ness, austerities, study, and devotion to the Ford, since
he is attained through these.
53. Sought through the ordinances (Niyamas'ritah);
the goal or the object reached through them—Nlrayana
or Dakshinamurti. 36.
54. Vis'vakarman ('Sarvakarma); the god of all
mechanical and fine arts.
55. Eternally existent (Svayambhfrtah),
56. The first 1 A'dih); of all.
57. The first creator (A'dikarah), i. c., of Hiranya-
garbha, who as the S'ruti says, “ is the first embodied
one.”
58. The Treasure (Nidhih); as Padma and S'ankha ;
of inexhaustible wealth.
59. Thousand-eyed (vSahasrakshah). Myriad limbed
as we see from the S'astras : “ Feet and hands on every side,
eyes, head and face on all directions ”; or the Indra, since
He is not different from Him; says the S'ruti, “ Brahman
is verily all this.”
60. Large eyed (sr/ised) (Vis'alakshah). Capable of
illuminating the future and the past.


61. The Moon. (Somali ) or the Soma plant used
in sacrifice* as appears from the S'rnti, “ By that Person
as an offering.”
62- The benefactor of the stars (Nakshatrasad-
hakah). According to the S'rnti “ These lights, the stars,
are but the glory of the virtuous Souls ” and he is their
benefactor. Since for those that perform sacrifices, he
obtains radiant bodies in the worlds of the Moon, 37.
63. The Moon. (Chandrah.)
64. The Sun (S uryah).
65. The Saturn (S'anih).
66. The Node (Ketu).
67. Grahah ; Rahn that obscures the Sun and
the Moon.
68. The lord of the Grahas (Grahapatih). Mars or
Kuja, as being the cruellest.
69. The worshipful (Varah). Brihaspati, and also
S'ukra, because the Maitrayanya S'ruti says “ Brihaspati
having become S'ukra. ”
70. Mercury (Atrih.) Budha : as having been born
of Atri, t'.e., he represents all the planets.
71. The adorer of Atri’s wife (Atryanamaskarta) ;
of Anasviya, in the aspect of her sons, Dattatreya and
Durvasa.
72. The shooter at a stag (Mrigabanarpanah). At
the stag, when the sacrifice assumed that form.
73. Sinless (Anaghah). Though he destroyed the
sacrifice, he is sinless, through his effulgence and in-
dependence. 38.
74. Of great meditation (Mahatap&h) ; capable of
producing the Universe, as we see from the S'rntis “ He
thought, let me create the worlds, and he created these
worlds.” (Ai. Up. 1-1.)
75. Of terrible austerities (Ghoratapah) ; capable of


destroying the Universe ; ‘ He who was the source (of all)
is also their destruction ’ says the S'ruti.
76. Of noble nature (Adinah) ; as he gave away
kingdoms to Sugriva and Vibhishana on their merely
taking refuge in him.
77. The assister of the weak (Dinasadhakah.)
By fulfilling their wishes when they seek him.
78. The former of the year (Samvatsarakarah) : the
regulator of the wheel of Time, in the shape of Dhruva
(the pole star) and other luminaries.
79. The mantrah : as the Pranava so called since it
protects [tra) by merely being meditated upon ( man ).
80. Authority (Pramanam) : in the shape of the
Vedas and the Sastras.
81. The supreme meditation (Paramamtapah). The
duty indicated by Yajnavalkya in the words : “This is
the supreme duty—perception of the Self through Yoga.’’
Bs. The Yogi.
83. The object of Yoga (Yogyah). He who is to be
united with Brahman.
84, The great seed (Mahabijah) : the cause of
causes.
85. The great germ (Maharetah). The reflection
capable of conferring manifestation and existence to
Mahat (the non-existing and enert unmanifested).
86. Of great prowess (Mahabalah).
87. Of golden germ (Suvarnaretah) : “In the
beginning he created the waters and threw the germ (or
seed) into them ; it became a golden egg, radiant as
thousand suns.” Says the Skanda ; hence the creator of
the golden egg of Brahma; or Agni.
88. All-knowing (Sarvajnah) : knows everything
through Maya.


89. The unchanging germ (Subijah) : the universal
cause.
90. The dweller of the germ (Bijavahanah). He
who in his migrations in this world and the next uses
his vehicle, the Germ, composed of Ignorance, Desire
and Action ; “ Know the Self as the driver and the body
(the unmanifested) as the chariot ” says the S'ruti.
(Ka. Up. 3-3): 40.
91. Ten-armed (Das'abahuh).
92. Ever-seeing (Animishah). “No loss of the
sight of the seer is observed, since he is indestructible.”
says the S'ruti (Br. Up. 4-5-14. ) ; hence he is not devoid
of sight, even fora moment.
93. Black-throated (Nilakanthah): as the extremely
merciful one retained in his throat the poison Halahala,
that would otherwise have destroyed the three worlds.
94. The lord of Uma (Um&patih): Uma Haimavati,
symbolising Brahma Vidya, as mentioned in the Keno-
panishad (25); hence ‘ the lord I giver) thereof’ ; or the
husband of Uma or Parvati
95. Of universal form (Vis'varupah) : since all the
forms sprang from him.
96. Naturally great (S'vayams'reshthah) : without
any external help.
97- Valiant through his acts (Balavirah) : since he
performed such extraordinary actions as the burning of
the Tripuras.
98. Powerless group (Abaloganah): to move except
upon the instigation of the living beings. According to
the Sankhyas there are twenty-five Tatvas, enert in them-
selves, whose soul He is, as the twenty-sixth. In the
Sankhya Saptati the Tatvas are enumerated as—Uu-
raanifested, Mahat, Egoism, the five Tanmatras, the five
great Elements, and the eleven Senses and the Enjoyer.


99. The creator of the Tatvas (Ganakarta) ;as their
director.
100. The lord of the Tatvas (Ganapatily,
THE SECOND HUNDRED.
ioi. Naked (Didvasah): as when he wanted to fasci-
nate the wives of the sages in the D&rukavana ; in reality
it means “he who covers like a cloth, the quarters,
endless though they be; ” for “ all this in the Universe
is clothed—pervaded by the Eord says the S'ruti (I's'a.
Up. I.)
102. The god of Dove (Kamah): or desire his attri-
bute.
103. The knower of the Mantras (Mantravit): as
“ Ishetva ” both literally and with meaning ; or he who
is known through them for “ He whose meditation con-
sists of knowledge,” (Mun. Up. 1-1-9). “ One who
knows not the Vedas cannot cognise Him, the Great
One,” say the S'rutis.
104. The great Mantra (Paramomantrah) : as the
investigation into the nature of the Soul.
105. The creator of all states (Sarvabhavakarah).
The cause of the Universe. The two names (103 and
104) are apt since he is both illusion and transformation.
106. The destroyer (Harah) : since he is the ab-
sorption of all. Previously he was described in precisely
the same terms in his aspect of Time, as the creator and
the destroyer of everything ; the apparent repetition
here is from the aspect of his relation to the Tatvas.
There are four kinds of Pralayas (dissolutions). Prdkrita
at the end of the life of Brahma, when all manifested
objects up to Mahat are dissolved. Dainandina at the end
of a day of Brahma when the three worlds are destroyed.
Niiya during the dreamless slumber in the case of every
one of us, when everything disappears. These three
have a germ and have origin, A tyaniika, where through


a realisation of the Truth, the cause (ignorance) and its
effects (Samsara) are destroyed and do not come up again.
It is called liberation (Moksha). Thus proclaim the
Sastras. 42.
107- Bearing a gourd The
weapons of the ten arms above-mentioned (91.) are now
described.
108. The wielder of the bow (Dhanvi).
109. With arrows in his hand (Banahastah).
Ixo. Bearing skull (Kapalavan): He cut off the
head of Brahma and carried about his skull,
in. With the thunderbolt (As'am).
112. With the weapon (Sataghni).
113 With a sword (Khadgl).
114. Pattis'! (with a kind of sword.)
Xl5. (A'yudhi) with the trident his usual weapon.
116. (Venerated Mahan.) 43.
117. Carrying a ladle (Sruvahastah) : (a sacrificial
vessel).
118. Of fine form (Surffpah).
119. Refulgent (Tejah).
120. The fountain of effulgence (Tejaskaronidhih) :
conferring splendour on his devotees.
121. Adorned with a turban (Ushnishi).
122. Of handsome face (Suvaktrah).
123. Of unchanging form (Udagrah).
124. Modest (Vinatah). 44.
125. Of great height (Dirghah).
126. Whose rays are the senses (Hatikes'ah): as he
manifests the various objects through the sense ; or the
Trimftrti in one (Hari+ Ka = Brahmi+ I's'a Harikes'a).
127. Extremely holy (Sutirthah). The great teacher
Patanjali 1-24 to 26) says: “The Lord, unaffected by
sorrow, the actions, fruits and deserts, is a peculiar


Purusha. He is the preceptor even of the ancients, for he
is not limited by time. The Pranava is his Symbol.”
128 Krishnah. “ Krish means existence and na
means bliss ; being the compound of the two he is the
Supreme Brahman as Krishna,” says the S'ruti. Or “ I
shall be born in your seventh generation ” says Mahadeva
to the shepherd boy when granting him a boon, accord-
ing to the Brahraottara Khanda; so Mahadeva is himself
incarnated as Krishna.
129. Of the form of a jackal (S'rigalarxipah). In the
Moksha Dharma, (Mahabharata) we read that India
assumed this form to console the Brahraana that resolved
to fast to death, being disgraced by the merchants, and
S'iva is the same as he.
130, With his wishes accomplished (Siddharthah;.
131. With shaven crown (Mundah).
132. BeneHcient to all (Sarvas'ubhankarah); grant-
ing fearlessness to all. 45.
133. Unborn (Ajah). This quality in Brahma and
others as only relative as immortality is with the
gods. “ Hiranyagarbha was born as the first of all
beings and was their sole Lord” : “ Vishnu was also born
thus: be who knows that which is higher than this, attains
the great, the third ” say the S'rutis, and hence we con-
clude that Brahma and Vishnu are subject to birth.
Some one moved by fear takes refuge in him in these
words : “ Oh unborn one, Rudra, protect me with thy
Southern face; ” so it is Rudra alone that has no origin.
134. Many formed (Bahurupah).
135. Covered with perfumes (GandhadhUri).
136. Kapardt. Kapa means ‘ drinking the water ’
referring to the Ganges which was drunk, i.e-, (entangled
in the folds of) the matted hair of S'iva when it fell from
the Heaven ; then Bhagiratha prayed to carry it out
into the world. Ridda means “conferring wealth.”


137 Of unshaken chastity (U'rdhvaretahj.
13S. Of upturned phallus (U'rdhvalingah) : the
reason is that one whose phallus is turned downward,
desires sexual pleasures, but not he whose phallus is
turned upward.
139. Reclining on high (U'rdhvas'ayL: explaining
the above.
140. Living in space (Nabhasthalah). The above
three names show that S'iva was never touched or
influenced by Uma or Parvati ; hence he is unaffected.
His dwelling place is the S'akti named A'kas'a. The
great ones have said : “ S'akti is the divine form ; the
Jnana S'akti is the inner soul ; the Kriya S'akti the
senses and the postures ; the Ichcha S'akti is the wealth,
abode and the covering ; O goddess, what art thou
not to S'iva who has the moon in his crown 46.
141. With three matted locks (Trijati).
142- Dressed in bark (Chiravasah).
143. Rudrah. “ The Pranas are the Rudras, for they
cause all this to cry out ” says the S'niti; hence he is the
life of all.
144. The general of the armies (Senapatih).
145. The Pervader (Vibhuh).
146. The day wanderer (Ahascharah) : the gods.
147. The night-walker (Naktamcharah): the de-
mons.
148. Of keen anger (Tigmaraanytth).
149. Of superior radiance (Suvarchasah) : born of
study and meditation. 47.
150. ' The slayer of the elephant (Gajaha). We
read in theSkanda that “ S'iva once killed an Asura that
wandered in the streets of Benares as an elephant.”
151, The slayer of the daityas (Daityahi).
152. The destroyer (Kalah) (Time); or the year, &c.
153. The Lord of the worlds (Lokadhata).


154. The store house.of all qualities (Gunakarah) ;
such as modesty, mercy, knowledge, wealth, &c.
155- Of the form of the lion and the tiger (Simha-
s'ardillarupah) : of dangerous animals.
156. Clothed in the skin of an elephant (A'rdra-
charmambarivritah). 48.
155. The Yogi that defies Time (Kalayogi).
158. Of great sound (Mahanadah). The sound pro-
ceeding from the Anahatachakra, described in the Ham-
sopanishad.
159. Who is all desires (Sarvakamah) : because he
is all that every one desires. “In him are all the desires
deposited ” says the S'ruti. (Chcha. Up. 3-19-3).
160. Of four paths (Chatushpathah) : for purposes of
worship—Vis'va, Taijasa, Pragna and S'iva Dhyana.
i6x. The night-walker (Nisacharah): as the Vetalas.
162. The companion of the Pretas (Pretachari).
163. The companion of the Bhutas (Bhutachfiri).
164. The great Lord (Mahes'varah) : higher than
the Lords, Indra, &c. 49.
165. He that has become many (Bahubhutah);
according to the S'ruti: “He became sat and fya ...
truth and falsehood ;he became Truth.” (Tai. Up. 2-7.).
166. Bearing much (Bahudharah) : for example the
Universe.
167. The great Rdhn (Svarbhamth) : the principal
ignorance (darkness'.
168. Immeasurable (Amitah) in his glory.
169. The goal (Gatih): attained by the emancipated-
170. Fond of dancing (Nrityapriyah): the deity
Natar&ja in Chidarabara
171. The eternal dancer (Nityanartah).
172. Who causes others to dance (Nartakah).
173. Attached to all beings ( Sarvalalasah). 30.


174. The terrible Ghorah). There are two forms
of S'iva, one terrible represented by hunger and thirst
and the other mild as symbolised by happiness.
175. Of great meditation (Mahatapah) : capable
of creating and destroying the Universe.
176. The noose (Pas'ah) : because he binds through
Maya all beings.
177. Indestructible (Nityah).
178. Seated on the mountain Kailasa (Girirnhah),
179. The sky fNabhah): as unaffected as the ether.
180. Thousand armed (SahasrahastahK
iBr. Victory (Vijayah).
182. Perseverance fVyavasayah). Decision, or
earnestness, the cause of victory.
183. Ever busy (Atandritah). Idleness is the function
of Tamas and prevents activity. 51.
184. Unshakable (Adharshanah).
185. Of fearful shape (Dharshanatma;-
186. The destroyer of sacrifices (Yajnah): since
as Vishnu he destroyed the sacrifice of Bali; or since as
Buddha he put an end to sacrifices. “ The Universe,
the worlds in all their variety, existing and in embryo
all this is Rudra. I salute that Rudra” say the S'rutis.
Here in that sense he is spoken of as an identical with
Vishnu and others.
187. The destroyer of Love (Kamanas'akah) ; or
of the desires of his devotees by fulfilling them.
18S. The destroy ,-r of the sacrifice of Daksha
(Dakshaytgapahari).
189. Beautiful (Susahah).
190. Somewhat handsome (Madhyamah). 52.
191. The absorber of splendor (Tejopahari; ; ex-
tremely cruel.
192. The slayer of Bala . Balaha) ; the Asura, in his
(S'iva’s) character of India.


193. Happy (Muditah): as the cause, he is ever
blissful.
194. The wealth (Arthah).
195. Unconquered (Agitah) :in battles. In the bat-
tles with Banasura, Krishna conquered S'iva only with
the permission of the latter and not through his inherent
valour. We may also quote another instance where
Krishna, to illustrate the power his devotees have over
him, was made a liar by Bhishma to fulfil his vow.
196. The most excellent ' Avarah) sought after-
most.
197. Grandly sounding (Gambhiraghoshah): as the
drum and the ocean.
198. Deep (Gambhtrah): unfathomable in meaning,
as the Vedas.
199, With noble armies and vehicles (Gambhira-
balavahanah't: armies unconquered; or of unmatched
prowess; his vehicle is the bull, the incarnation of the
Law. 53.
200. Of the form of the banyan tree (Nyagrnd-
harupah). The tree of Samsara, since it grows down-
wards “ With roots above and branches down, this
banyan, is ancient’ - say the S'rutis (Katha Up. 6-1).
THE THIRD HUNDRED.
The banyan tree fNyagrodhah).
201. This means Dakshinamurti who taught under
a banyan tree; or Mahavishnu, who was seen by MSrkan -
deya in the great deluge, reclining on a banyan leaf as
Bdlakrishna.
202. Reclining on the ear of the tree (Vrikshakarna
sthitih) : that is on the leaf of it- If the reading be
‘ Vrikshakalpa sthitih ’ the meaning is : From a single
seed springs up a banyan tree; from it drop many seeds,
each, giving rise to a separate banyan; and so on ad


infinitum. This tree of Samsara resembles this and he
is its lord ; the resemblance is not exact, for the seed does
not spring up again when burnt by knowledge, whereas if
it be not burnt, there is nothing avoiding it. In the
episode of Markandeya, Vishnu showed him during the
deluge that in the one Brahman the banyan tree of
Samsara though small was immense in its branches, as
symbolising the nature of his Maya.
Here, “ S'iva, Mahes'vara, Rudra, Vishnu, Grand sire
(Brahmas the friend of (one who is in) Samsara, omnis
cieut, the supreme soul—these eight names specially
denote Him and enable one to reach the great Lord, 5 ’ says
the S'aiva Purana; so S'iva is praised by names indicating
Brahma and Vishnu as these are not different from Him-
In the episode of the journey to the Mount Kaikisa,
narrated in the Harivams'a, “ whatever names,” says S'iva,
“ are attributed to you, O Govinda, in the world are mine
too ; this needs no discussion and admits of no doubt.”
Hence in all the Puranas, the one Lord is praised by the
names indicating Vishnu or S'iva; may the bolts of
Heaven fall upon the heads of those bigots that create a
difference between these and notions of inferiority and
superiority. “ Those whose minds are warped by
bigotry,” says the Suta Samhita, “ look upon Brahma,
Vishnu and S'iva as different and ignore their unity.”
“ Mother, the Supporter, Brahma,” Rudra, many-headed
says the Vishnu Sahasranama, including the names
of S'iva, and Brahma. Again, in the S'iva Sahasranama
we come across such names as “ Mahadeva, un-
decaying, Hari, the lord of the Ganas, Prajapati,” indica-
ting Brahma and Vishnu. The assumption, that these
names might have been used in a primary or secondary
sense, in these places, has been set aside by the examples
cited from the S'aiva and the Skauda Puranas. Also it
clashes with the following Vedic texts : “He who is one


though called by the names of all the gods,” “ Him
whom all names enter into,” ‘‘ They assume that the oue
is mauy,” “ The wise ones speak of the one as many as
Agni, Yama, Air, &c” Hence these theories (of difference
in deity) should receive no consideration whatever. We
have beautifully discussed this point in the introduction
to the A'di Parva.
203. Many, formed (Vibhuh): as that of Hari, S'iva,
Ourga, Ganapati; the Sun, the Fire and the Air, to bless
his devotees.
204. With sharp teeth (Sutishuadas'anah) power-
ful enough to grind to powder mauy Universes.
205. Huge bodied (Mahakayah).
206. Huge faced (Mahananah). 34
207. At whose starting the armies of his enemies flee
away (Vishvaksenah) ; or “ with armies of acknow-
ledged valour.”
208. Harih : since he removed the dangers of the
lord of the elephants (Gajendra): or “ the universal des-
troyer.”
209- The sacrifice (Yajnah); the cause of evolution ;
“ The sacrifices offered up iu the fire,” says the S'ruti
“ reach the Sun ; he sends down rain, from rain is pro-
duced food and from food the beings.”
2io- Having the bull as his flag and vehicle (Sam-
yugapidavahanah); during the battles.
211. Of fierce heat (Tfslmatapah) ; being the soul of
fire-
212. With fleet horses (Haryas'vah j • The Sun whose
Soul He is-
213* The friend (Sahayah): of the Jiva. “ Two birds”
says the S'ruti (Mun. Up. 3-1) “ live associated as compa-
nions.”
214. Cognisant of the proper time for actions
Karmakilavit): as the Dars'a and other sacrifices- 55


215. Propitiated by Vishnu (Vishnnprasaditah) :
when he wanted to acquire the discus.
216. The sacrifice (Yajuah) : which symbolises
Vishnu : ‘‘ Sacrifice” says the S'ruti “ is Vishnu.”
217. The Ocean (Samudrah)-
218. The Badava fire(Badavatnukhah) ; that absorbs
every day the waters of the Ocean.
219. The friend of fire (Hutas'anasahayah) : air.
220. Calm-minded (Prasantat aia): like the waveless
ocean.
221. Fire (Hutas'anah). 56
222. Of fierce splendor (TJgratejah).
223. Of great splendor (Mahatejah) : radiant on all
sides. •
224. Skilled in war (Janyuh).
225. Cognisant of the time of victory (Vijayaka-
lavit); for without this quality, even a valiant man would
be defeated.
226. The science of astrology, that describes the
courses of the stars and the planets (Jyotishamayanam).
227- Victory (Siddhih).
228. Whose form is everything (Sarvavigrahah) :
as Time. If the reading is Sandhi instead of Sarva the
meaning is ; He who is reconciliation, dissention, embassy,
and stability. 57
229. With tuft of hair (S'ikhi) : the householder.
230. With shaven crown (Mundi) : the Saunyasin,
this includes the ever-bachelor- If the reading be
Dandi the meaning is : One wearing a knotted stick of
bamboo or palas'a.
331. With matted hair (Jadi): the hermit.
232. The flaming (Jvali): the bright or the northern
path (Uttarayana) pursued by the house-holders, &c-
333- Embodied (Murtijahy


234. Residing in tile head (Mtirddhajah) ; in the
Sahasrara lotus.
235. vStrong (Bali) :if the reading be Vali the mean-
ing is ‘ wrinkled- -
336- Adorned with the flute (Venavi).
237- Kettle drum (Panavi)-
238. Cymbals, (Tali)-
339- Possessing granaries (Khali)-
240. The enveloper of the euvelopers of Yama
iKalakatamkatah). If the reading be s'a In the meaning
is ; He who envelopes the air, that envelopes the trees,
i.e., He is the ether. 58
241. The astrologer (Nakshatravigrahamatih);
whose calculations are regulated by the course of the stars
and the planets
342- Immersed in sense-objects (Gunabuddhih) ;
the Jiva
243. The place of dissolution (Rayah); of every-
thing.
244. Unshaken (Agamah) : the witness, bare cons-
ciousness- If we xea.&yama, the meaning is :“ He who
attracts all like a magnet-”
245- Virat (Prajapatih).
246 With universal arms (Vis'vabahuh)
247- The individual (Vibhagah).
348. The collective (Sarvagah)-
249 Unhappy (Asukhah) ; devoid of the means of
enjoyments, since he is not the enjoyer 59.
250. Liberator (Vimochanah) : from Samsara-
251- Easily accessible (Susaranah)- If we read
Sus'arana the meaning is “ He. who protects effectually J>
with no chance of returning again to rebirth-
-25- Born in golden armour (Hiranyakavachod-
bhavah j: the body that as a modification of Maya: “ The
face of Truth ” says the S'ruti (IV. Up 16 ) “ is concealed


by a golden disc.” He is born in the body and mani-
fests himself through it-
253. Sprung from the phallus (Medhrajah)
254. Ranger of the woods (Valachari) : the hunter ;
as we find the word Vala used to denote forest in the
Brahmana “ The gods verily perceived the cows in the
forest.”
255. Ranging the earth (Mahichari).
256. Present everywhere (Srntah). 60.
257. Attended by the sound of all the musical in-
struments (Sarvaturyaninadi).
258. With the Jivas as his family (Sarvatodyapari-
grahah).
259. The serpent S'esha (Vyalarftpah).
260. The dweller in the cave (Ghuhavasi) : the
Yogin.
261. Kartikeya (Gtthah.)
262- Adorned with the garland Vanamala. (Mali).
263. Enjoyer of the (wave-like) sensory-objects.
(Tarangavid). 61.
264- Conferring the three states of birth, continua-
tion and destruction (Tridas'hah): upon all living beings.
265. The bearer of the three points of TimefTrikfda-
dhrik). For it has been said : “ The past, present and the
future, the gross and the subtle, the near and the far, the
vestant and the kalpa are all existant in the soul of con-
sciousness, produced by Maya.”
266 The liberator from Karma and the other fetters
(Karma sarvabandha vimochanah.) : Karma, past and
present; “ the fetters” are forged by ignorance and desire.”
267. The binder of the lords of Asuras (Bandhana-
st vasurendranam) : of Bali in his incarnation as Vamana.
The plural is used on account of the various Kalpas.
268. Destroyer of his enemies in battle (Yudhis'atru-
vinas'anah). 62,


269. Readied through Sankhya (Sankhyaprasadah):
that teaches discrimination between the Self and the non-
self ; or Dattatreya, the teacher of Sankhya.
270. Dnrvasah : The brother of the above, born of
the Ams'a of Rudra.
271- Sought by all good men (Sarvasadhuneshe-
vitah). Soma, the king of all the Brahmanas.
372. He who causes (even Brahma and others) to
flee (Praskandanah). <! I think thee as the cause to flee
those who were firm,” say the Mantras.
273. The distributor (Vibhagajnah): of the karmic
results of beings according to their deserts.
274. Unequalled (Atulyah): “ There is none equal
to thee ; whence superior” ? says the Gita (n —43).
275. Cognisant of the mode of distribution of the
offerings in sacrifices (Yajnavibhagavit). 63.
276- Residing everywhere (Sarvavasah).
277. Ranging everywhere (Sarvachari).
278. Clothed in rough skin (Dnrvasfih) : of the
elephant; or he whose covering it is impossible to know,
being infinite.
279. Indra (Vasavahj.
280. Immortal (Arnarah).
281. The immense snow (Haimah) : that is in the
form of the Himalaya.
282. The maker of gold (Hemakarah). We hear in
the Puranas that there is a Jambu tree as a laud mark of
thejambu Dvipa, the juice of whose fruits overflowing
the land becomes gold.
283. Actionless (Nishkarma.)
284. All supporter (Sarvadlifint: the bearer of the
results of all acts.
285. The best of bearers (Dharottamah): himself
unsupported, ha supports the Mundane Egg, along with


the elephants of the quarters, S'esha and the tortoise that
bear it. 64.
286. Red-eyed (Lohitakshah).
287. With great senses (Mahakshah): embracing
the Universe.
288. With victoriouschariot(Vijayakshah).
289. Learned (Visaradah).
290. The collector (Sangrahah): back of his arrows;
or he who accepts his devotees (as his own).
291. The restrainer (Nigrahah): of Indra, &c., when
they go astray.
292. The actor (Karta).
293. With serpents belting his dress (Sarpachirani-
vasanah). 65.
294. Chief (Mukhyah).
295. Inferior (Amukhyah): “ Agni ” says the Brah -
mana “ is the last of the gods, Vishnu the chief, and the
other gods range between the two. The meaning is .S'iva
is all the gods.
296. The body (I)ehah': extremely healthy and
stout.
297. Adorned with Kahala (Kahalih) : a musical
instrument (clarion). Some read “ Dehari ” the enemy
of the body.
298. Granter of all desires (Sarvakamadah).
299. Favourable at all times (Sarvakalaprasadah).
300. Extremely powerful (Sulabah) :to relieve the
suffering of others, i.r., merciful.
THE FOURTH HUNDRED.
301. Bearing the shape of Balarama (Balarupadhrit) :
or of great prowess and beauty. 66.
302. The best of desirable obiects (Sarvakamavarah).
Moksha or Salvation.


303. Conferrer of everything (Sarvadah).
304. Having faces on all sides (Sarvatomukhah): as
an accompaniment to having arms and feet in all direc-
tions.
305. From whom all forms proceed as from the
A'kas'a (A'kas'anirvirupah): as for example the formless,
air, sky, lightning and thunder. ‘‘ These rise from this
A'kas'a, attain the Supreme Fight and unite with their
original nature ; so this Jiva rises out of this body, attains
the Supreme Fight, and unites with his original nature;
he is the highest Purusha,” says the S'ruti (Chcha. Up.
8-3-4.) I and that meaning is embodied here. That is :
Air and the other objects referred to of the same nature
as the akas'a, though formless, separately manifest them-
selves during the rains, and transforming themselves like
an extinguished light, with their soul, the Supreme
Fight- So the Jiva named Samprasada, though identified
with the body and incapable of being distinguished from
it, separates itself during meditation like another body,
transforms itself into its primal nature, of being free from
all sins and (he other seven attributes and unites itself
with the Supreme Fight, the Brahman, free of all limita-
tions, as one with it.
306. Fallen iNipati) into the abyss of the body (as
Jiva) and liable to be identified with it.
307. Powerless (Avas'ah) : to avoid sorrow conse-
quent upon its attachment to the body.
308- The bird (Khagah): residing in the Ether of
the heart, in his pure form. The ether of the heart is
free from all attachment ; that which is within it is still
more so ; but see the power of illusion, he becomes
powerless having been enchained in the body. 67.
309. Of terrible form (Raudrarupah) : as the great
Bhairava.
310, Ams'uh ; a kind of deitv.


311. The Sun (A'dityah) : his companion a god
named Bhaga, says the Brahmana : “ The Ams'u and the
Bhaga proceed from Him.”
312. Myriad-rayed (Bahuras'mih) : the Sun-
313. Of excellent splendour (Suvarchasi.)
314. Fleet as the wind : (Vasuvegah): says the
S'ruti “ Vayu, verily, surrounds all these.”
315. Fleeter than that (Mahavegah.)
316. Fleeter than mind (Manovegahj : “ Heisfleeter
than the mind ” says the Mantra (I's'a Up. 4).
317. Wanderer of the nights (Nisacharah;: enjoying
the sense objects, wrapped in the darkness of igno-
rance. 68.
318. Residing everywhere (Sarvavasi) in all bodies.
319. Associated with S'ri (S'riyavasi)’: t.e., Rik,
Yajus and Baman, the knowledge expounded in the
Vedas, from the passage : “ She is the immortal S'ri of
the wise.”
320. The Initiator (Upades'akarah>
321. The inactive (Akarah) : silent, as he taught
(the Rishis) through silence. For it has been said
“ Wonderful it as to see under the banyan tree aged disci-
ples gathering round a young Teacher; the Teacher
taught by silence and the doubts of the pupils were
cleared.” Vadhva was questioned again and again by
Bashkali; he kept quiet and after the third question, he
said “We are teaching it but you cannot understand;
this Self is calmness.”
322. The silent (Muuih,).
323. He who meditates standing out of the limi-
tations of the vehicles (A'tmaniralokahq
324. Well worshipped (Sammagnahy
325. Couferrer of infinite wealth (Sahasradah). 69.
326. The bird (Pakshi) ; Garuda.
327. Bearing the form of a friend (Paksharupah).


328. Extremely brilliant (Atidiptab) as millions of
suns, outshining his enemies in splendor.
329. Eord of all Beings (Vis'ampafih).
330. The confuser (Unmadah).
33 1. The god of Love (Madanah): the bodiless.
332- The desired (Katnah): as the woman.
333. As'vatthah : the Samsara tree; or the kalpa
tree granting all desires.
334. Conferrer of wealth (Arthakarah).
335. Conferrer of fame (Yas'ah). 70.
336. The lord of all desires (Vamadevah): the king,
their fulfiller.
337. The result of actions (Yamah) : the happiness
resulting from the contact of sense objects.
338. The eldest (Prak) :of all.
339. Skilful (Dakshinah) :in traversing the three
worlds-
340- Vamanah : that subdued Bali.
341. The Siddhayogi: as Sanatkumara.
342. The great sage (Maharshih) as Vasistha.
343. Of accomplished desires (Siddharthah) r like
Rishabha and Dattatreya.
344- The perfect and the aspirant (Siddhasadhakah) ;
like Yajnavalkya who became a Sannyasin after attain-
ing knowledge. 71.
345. The mendicant <Bhikshuh): wearing the
Eiuga external marks ; the Hamsa (in the Sanyasa order).
346. Of the form of the mendicant (Bhikshuru'pah) ;
without any Linga ; the Paramahamsa-
347- Actionless (Vipanah) : without any knotted
stick, &c.
348. The soft-hearted (Mriduh): merciful to all
beings.
349. Unmodifying (Avyayah): free from joy and
sorrow in cases of praise and disgrace.


350. Kartikeya (Mahasenah); the general of the
divine armies-
351. Vis'akhah : sprung when Indra struck with the
Vajra; his friend -
352. The enjoyer of the sixty Tatvas (Shashti-
bagah). These are explained in the Mandnkyopanishad
in the passage beginning with “ with the waking state as
his abode, &c.” They are as follows ; The waking state :
The consciousness is external, the seven objects of the
senses, sound, &c., united with those of thought and cog-
nition, rising out of the conceptions of the Self, make up
nine, the nineteen channels of enjoyment, made up of the
ten sense organs, the five vital airs, Manas, Buddhi, Ahau-
kara and chitta; the gross body, the object of enjoyment,
upon which depend the sensory objects as sound ; these
make up twenty-nine. Similarly the dream state when the
consciousness is internal; the other factors exist as subtle
impressions, altogether coming up to twenty-nine. Then
the dreamless state when the Jiva alone with an extremely
subtle consciousness, exists; making up a total of sixty.
The enjoyer of these objects, is the witness of all this,
of the form of bliss. In this state he enjoys by means
of the extremely subtle functions of the Thinker,
manifested as bliss.
353. The lord of the sense organs tGavampatih); as
their impeller. 72.
354. Armed with the Vajra (Vajrahastah): indra
who cleaves mountains.
355- Vast (Vishkambhi).
356. The paralyser of the armies of the Daityas
(Chamustambhanah).
357. The performer of Vritta and Avritta (Vrittavrit-
takarah). Vritta is making circular evolutions with his
chariot during battle ; Avritta piercing into the army of
the enemy and coming back safe-


358. The knowerof the base (Talah) : or the bottom
ot the ocean of Samsara —its basis the pure Brahman-
359. The spring (Madhuh).
360. Red-eyed like wine (Madhukalochauah) : or
with eyes shaped like the birds called Koyashtika* 73.
361. The family priest (Vachaspatih) :or Brihaspati
is the priest of the gods ; hence any one who performs
the functions. Says the Brahmana “ Brihaspati is
the priest of the gods, the priests of the human kings
do but take after him ”; and the same sense is preserved
in the Mantra “ He who bears the well supported Bri-
haspati.”
362. Vajasanah; the expounder of the so-called
S'akha, the performer of the functions of the Adhvaryn.
363. Always praised by the members of the A'sramas
(Nityamas'ramapujitah).
364. Centered in Brahman (Brahraachari).
365. The wanderer over the earth (Lokachari): the
mendicants who beg in the houses of the Brahmanas and
others-
366. Moving everywhere (Sarvachari) : says the
S'ruti : “ He who knows thus ‘ I am Brahman,’ becomes
all this.” Through the knowledge of Self, he became
the Self of everything.
367 He who knows the course of introspection (Vi-
charavit . 7 a.
365. The Ruler (I'sanah): the regulator and indwel-
ler-
369. The Cord. (I's varah).
370. Time (Kalah) : He who counts up the acts
good and bad of men to apportion the results thereof, i-e.,
Chitragupta.
371- The ranger of the night (Nisacharij : even
during the night of Brahma in the great deluge, he
exists, enjoying individual bliss.


372. Armed with Pinaka (Pinakavan} his bow.
373. Residing in the Daityas (Nimittasthah) : as
their soul.
374. The Daityas (Nimittam): being all.
375. Plenty (Nandih): wealth of knowledge as we
see from the S'ruti: “ This is his supreme wealth.”
376- Conferrer of wealth (Nandikarah).
377. The monkey (Harih) : the help of Rama, an
incarnation of Vishnu. 75.
378. The Lord of Nandin (Nandis'varah): the grottp
of attendants so named or his vehicle.
379. Nandi.
380. Causer of joy. (Nandanah *.
381. Increaser of joy (Nandivardhanah).
382. He who takes away the wealth fßJiagahari) :
of even, Indra, &c.
383. The slayer (Nihanta) :as death.
384. Kalah : the store-house of the sixtv-fonr arts
385. Extremely great (Brahmaj.
386. The grand-sire (Pitamahah) : Vishnu is the
universal father, as we read that his consort Eakshmi is
the world-mother, the father of the above. 76.
387. The four-faced (Chaturmukhah) ; Brahma.
388. With universally worshipped symbols (Maha-
lingah).
389. Of attractive appearance (Charulingah).
390. The master of the symbols (Lingadhaykhshah).
Here symbols stand for various kind of evidence : he
who knows their pros and cons.
391, The ruler of the gods (Suradhykshahl: presi-
ding over the sight and other means of evidence.
392. The ruler of unification (Yogadhyakshahy
Yoga is the process of unifying all the deities in the
ether of the heart, as we see from the S'ruti. “ Here


they all become one.’' Only through His grace is this
realised.
393. The regulator of the cycle of the Yugas (Yuga-
vahah) : Krita, Treta, Dvapara and Kali, that differ in
the proportion of vice and virtue. 77.
394. The regulator of virtue and vice (Bijadhyak-
shah) dispenser of their effects.
395. The creator of virtue and vice (Bijakarta).
396. The aspirant of the science-of the soul (Adhyat-
manngatah).
397, Endowed with fortitude (Ralah).
398. Itihasah : as Bharata-
399. Associated with the rules of sacrifice (Sakal-
pah) : the Mimamsa system.
400. Qautaraah : the promulgator of Logic.
THE FIFTH HT T NDRED.
401. The moon (Nis'akarah) ; who was the head of
a school of grammarians so named (Chandravyakarana).
78.
402. The subduer (Dambhah).
403. Unsubdued of his enemies (Adambhah).
404. The soul of those devoid of pride (Vaidam-
bhah).
405- Amenable to his devotees (Vas'yahb
406. Able to influence others (Vas’akarah) :or the
giver of progeny, if we read (Vams'ya).
407. The fomenter of quarrels {Kalih) : between gods
and demons.
408. Creator of the worlds (Lokakarta): the fourteen
material ones.
409. The Lord of Beings (Pas'upatih): from Brahma
down to the tuft of grass.


410. The creator of the (fi> e) great telements)
(Mahakarta).
411. Foodless (Anaushadhah) :as rice &c. : t-i*., he
is not the enjoyer. 79
412. Undecaying (Aksharam).
413. The Supreme Brahman i Paramam Brahma):
when compared with the relative Brahmans as food
(Annamayakos'a) &c ; pure bliss.
414. Strength (Salavat) : the deity presiding over it.
415. Indra (S'akrah).
416. Punishment (Nitih) : on those that deserve
punishment.
417. Injustice (Anitih).
418. Pure minded (S'uddMtma).
419. Pure (S'uddhahj.
420. Worshipful (Manyah).
421- Cycle (Gatagatah): of Samsara. 80
422. Highly favourable (Bahuprasadaht.
423. Of good dreams tSusvapnahl: also the Taijasa
who presides over that state.
424. The mirror (Darpanah.) : reflecting the Uni-
verse.
425- Conqueror of his enemies (Amitrajit) : external
and internal.
426 The author of the Vedas rVedakamhi : from
the S'ruti “ Rik and the other Vedas are but his breath."
427- The author of the Mantras (Mantrakarah) :
other than those found in the Vedas, those in the
Tantras, Puranas and the languages of the country.
428. The learned (Vidvin).
429. Queller of foes in battle (Samaramardanah). 81.
430. Dwelling in the great clouds (Mahamegha-
nivasi): during the great deluge, as their presiding deity.
431. Extremely terrible fMahaghorah) : as the
author of the deluge.


432- Ruler over all (Vasi).
433. The destroyer (Karah).
434- Flaming as fire Agnijvalah)-
435. With fierce flames fMahajvalah): more terrible
than the above.
436. Very smoky (Atidhumrah) : when he burns
up everything as the great fire of Time-
437- Pleased with offerings (Hutahh
438. Offerings (Havih) : of milk. 82.
439. Virtue (Vrishanah); or the fountain of virtue.
440. The beneficial (S’ankarah).
441. Ever radiant (Nityamvarchasvi).
442. Fire (Dlmmaketanah): clouded with smoke.
443- Blue (Nilah).
444. Remaining (Dinga) in his limbs (Angalub
dhah): blue or otherwise, i.e., ever present in his Dinga.
445. Auspicious (S'obhanah).
446. Free of all obstacles (Niravagrahah) : the
granter of all desires. 83.
447. Conferrer of prosperity (Svastidah).
448. Absolute Being (Svastibhavah).
449. Sharing (Bhagi ) : in sacrifices.
450. Distributor of the shares (Bhagakarah); of
sacrifice.
451. Quick (Daghuh).
452. Unaffected (Utsangah).
453 Of great symbols (Mahangah).
454. The God of Dove (Mahagarbhaparayanah) :
producing everything, as being the womb of every object
and the supreme Goal. 84.
455. Black complexioned (Krishnavarnah); as
Vishnu.
456. White colored (Suvarnah) : as Samba (S'iva).
457. The senses of all embodied beings (Indriyam
Sarvadehinam),


458. Of great feet (Mahapadah).
459. Of great liands (Mahahastah).
460. Of great body (Mahakayah).
461. Of great fame (Mahayas'ah). 85.
462. Of great head (Mahamurdha).
463. Of great dimensions (Mahamatrah .
464. Of great eyes (Mahanetrah).
465. The destroyer of ignorance (Nisalayah).
466. The great death (Mahantakah), i.c., the death
of the death.
467. Of great ears (Mahakarnah
468- Of great lips (Mahoshtah).
469. Of great jaws (Mahahanuh)- 86.
470- Of great nose (Mahanasahj-
471- Of great throat (Mahakambuh;.
472- Of great neck (Mahagrivah).
473. The remover of the bondage of the bodies
(S'mas'anabhak).
474. Of huge chest (Mahavakshah) : if we read
raksha, the meaning is ‘ powerful to protect.’
475. Of great joints (Mahoraskahi-
-476. The inner Soul (Autaratma).
477. Adorned with the deer (Mrigalayah). 87-
478. He upon whom the fruits of the mundane
Kggs hang (Hambanah).
479. Of hanging lips (i,ambi tosh tab) : to swallow
with gust even thing during the great deluge.
480- Of great illusion (Mahamayah): unpierceable
even by Brahma and others.
481. The Ocean of Milk (Payonidhih).
482- Of great teeth (Mahadantah).
483- Of great fangs (Mahadamshtrail).
484. Of great tongue (Mahajihvah).
485- Of great face (,Mahamukhah> 88-


486. Of great claws . Mahanakhah) : as the Nri-
simha (man-lion).
487. Of great hairs (Maharomah): as Varaha ithe
boar).
488. Of great stomach i-Mahakos'ah).
489. Of great matted locks (Mahajadah).
490. Of pleasant aspect (Prasaunah).
491. Favor (of aspect) (Prasadah).
492. Experience (Pratyayah).
493. With the mountain as his bow (Girisadhauah):
in battle. 89.
494 Affectionate (Snehanah) : like the father to all
beings.
495. Devoid of affection (Asuehanah).
496. Unconquered (Ajitah).
497. Extremely silent (Mahamunih).
498. Shaped like a tree 1 Vrikshakarah): of Samsara.
499. Tree-symboled ATikshaketuh) : representing
Samsara. (One cannot possibly know Samsara except
through the body and the organs.
500- Fire (Aualah); that never has enough to con-
sume.
THE SIXTH HUNDRED.
301. With the air as his vehicle (Vayuvahanah) :
lu go from one place to another. qo-
502. Dwelling on hills (Gaudalih,.
503. Residing on the Merit (Merudhama).
504. The Lord of the gods (Devadhipatihj.
505- The Atharvopanishads (Atharvas'irshah) •
506. The Samaveda as his face (Samasyah).
507. The numberless Riks as his large eyes Riksa-
hasramitekslianah ). 91.


508. The Yajus as his feet and arms (Yajuhpa-
dabhujah).
509. The U pan is had sas his secret part (.Guhyah).
510. The exotericism (Prakasah) ; of the ritualistic
section (Karmakanda).
511. The moveable (Jangamah ) :as the king and the
512. Of fruitful request l Amogharlhah i.
513. Compassionate t Prasad ah).
514. Easily attainable (Abhigamyah).
5x5. Of auspicious looks iSudarsanahj.
516. Help (Upakarah).
517. Giver of happiness (Priyah).
518. Proceeding towards (Sarvah ; (his devotees)
5x9. Gold (Kanakab) : and such other desirable
objects.
520. Golden colored (Kanchanachchavih).
521. The navel (Nabhih) t the centre of the Uni-
verse—the sacrifice. Being incapable of producing very-
high results laking one very far, it is called the navel.
522. Cause of plenty (Nandikarah) : in the shape
of the results of the sacrifice.
523. Faith (Bhavah): in sacrifices.
524. The architect of the lotus shaped Universe
(Push karasthapatih).
525- Firm (Sthirah) :as the mountains. 93.
526. The twelfth (Dvadas'ah); Moksha. Humanity
undergoes ten states of existence beginning with gesta-
tion ; the tenth is death, the eleventh is Svarga, (heaven)
and Moksha (Salvation) is the twelfth.
537. The frightful ; (Trasanah); as representing the
intermediary states.
528. The first (A'dyah) : prior to Samsara, pure.
These three names signify that he is the origin, the middle
and the end.


539- The union (Yajnah) : between the Jlva and
the I's'vara.
530. Dwelling in the sacrifice (union) (Yajnasama-
hitah) : attainable through the same.
531. Night (Naktaml : the great Illusion causing
the darkness of ignorance.
532. Kalih : strife the product of the above, mani-
festing desire and hatred.
533. He who brings about the effects of the Illu-
sion (Kalah) : the stream of birth and death.
534. The Makarah : the constellation of S'ims’u-
mara shaped like the Makara or whale —the symbol ol
Time
535. Adored by Death (Kalapujitah)- 94.
536. Surrounded by the groups of Pramathas
iSaganah)-
537. Including others (Bana for instance) in his
suite (Ganakarah).
538. Having as his charioteer Brahma, the guar-
dian of the welfare of the beings (Bhutavahana sarathih)-
539. Reclining upon the ashes (Bhasmas'ayah) :
the Vasishta and the Liuga Puranas say : “The holy
ashes are called Bhasma as they frighten away all sins,
fetters, demons and diseases, O great sage 3 ’; also “what is
the use of the other outward marks of liberations, smear-
ing oneself with Bhasma constitutes the true mark there-
of. One always observing the above, very soon develops
knowledge.” In the Atharvas'iropanishad we read “ One
should take the Bhasma pronouncing the Mantra ‘
&c.’ and should smear the limbs. This is the Pas'upata
vow and rends away the bonds of the Jivas.” One should
also cover himself with them ; says the Vriddha S'atatapa •’
“ One smeared with Bhasma, and reclining on the same
and reciting the Rudradhyaya, is freed from all such


heinous sins as theft of gold, intercourse with the wife of
his teacher, drunkenness, and the murder of a Brahmin.”
540. Protector (of the Universe) through the Bhas-
ma (Bhasraagopta) Rater on we read “ The Bhasma was
given to the world for protection ; auspiciousness, puri-
fication and as a mark.”
541. Formed of Bhasma 1 Bhasmabhutah) : when
the Sage Mankanaka began to dance about on seeing the
juice of the vegetable drip from his hands, S'iva wanted
to stop his dancing and opening his finger, showed him
the holy ashes proceeding therefrom, to prove that his
body was composed of sacred ashes.
542 The tree (Tamil) : Kalpa and other divine
trees.
543. Ganah : such as Bhringi, Riti, Nandi, &c. 95
544. The guardian of the worlds (Rokapalah): four-
teen in number.
545. Transcending the worlds (Alokah),
546. Great souled (Mahatma) : Perfect.
547. Worshipped by all (Sarvapnjitah).
548. White (S'uklah); pure.
549. Threefold white (Tris'uklah) :in bod}3 speech
and mind.
550 Possessed of Kaivalva fSampannah), i-c.,
Moksha.
55 r. Uudefiled (S'uchih); by external impurities.
The meaning is he is unattached.
552. Worshipped by the ancient teachers (Bhutani-
shevitah). 96.
■ 553. Dwelling in the orders (A’s'ramasthah) : four
in number in the shape of Dharma.
554. Dwelling in rituals (Kriyavasthah) ; such as
sacrifices that form the preparatory stage to the practice
of Dharma,


555. The intelligence of Vis'vakartnan (Vis'va-
karraamatih).
556. Who is sought after (Varah '
557. Long armed (Visalakhah)-
558. Red lipped (Tamroshtah).
559. Collection of waters (Ambnjalah) : the ocean.
560. The motionless fSnnis'chalah): as the moun-
tains. 97-
561. Brown (Kapilah).
562. Red (Kapis'ah)-
563. White (S'uklah).
564. Life period (A'ynh).
565. Ancient (Parah;.
566. Recent (Aparah).
567. Gandharvah :as Chitraratha.
568. Aditih : the mother of the gods, as we see
from the S'ruti “ This is verely Aditi ” ; or the Earth.
569. Garuda (Tarkshyah).
570. Known easily (Suvijneyah).
571. Of beautiful speech (Susaradah). 98.
5*72. Armed with Paras'vadha •'Pnras'vadhayu-
dhah).
573. Desirous of conquest (Devah).
574. He who was ready Anukari) : so launch the
Chakra to slay Bhishma.
57 A good friend (Subaudhavah': i.e., to Atjnna.
576 With the Vina (Tumbavina) : called Rndra
Vtns.
777. Of terrible anger ■ Mahakrodhah) : during the
great deluge
57 8 With progeny exceeding the gods in excellence
.'U'rdhvaretah; : Brahma and Vishnu.
579. Residing in the waters (Jalesavah) : Vishnu
reclining on the serpent S'esha- 99


580. Who swallows everything with fierceness
(Ugrah).
581. Who attracts every one (Vas'amkarah).
582- The flute (Varas'ah).
583. The sound of the flute (Yams'anadah).
584. Faultless (Aninditah).
585. Beautiful in all his limbs (Sarvangarnpah ).
586. The great Mayavin (Mayay!): the illusion-
producer ; as we read “ Know the Prakriti as Maya and
the Mahes'vara as the lord of Maya ”
587. The friend (Snhridahi ; who renders help
without expecting any return-
588- Air (Anilah).
589- Fire (Analah).
590. The bonds (Bandhanah); of Samsara.
591. The fashioner of the bonds (Bandhakarta) : of
Samsara
592- The breaker of the bonds (Snbandhanavhno.
chanah); of Maya.
593. Dwelling with the enemies of sacrifice (Sayaj-
narih) : the Daityas.
594. Dwelling with the enemies of Dove (Saka-
marih;: the Yogins.
595. Of great tusks (Mahadamshtrah).
596. Of mighty weapons (Mahayudhah). jor.
597, Variously abused (Bahudhaninditah). When
he went to the forest of Daruka naked, in a fascinating
shape, all the sages there abused him : “ This sinner is
here come to seduce the hearts of our wives.”
598. He who fascinated the sages of Darukavana
(S'arvah).
599. Capable of conferring good even on the above
(S'atnkarah).
600. Destroyer of all doubts. (S'amkarah). The
four names signify that he destroyed all the doubts of


the very sages of the Darukuvana who abused him and
whom he fascinated, by imparting to them, out of his
supreme compassion, the knowledge of Truth.
THE SEVENTH HUNDRED.
601. Poor (Adhanah) as he is naked.
602. The Lord of the gods. (Amares'ah).
603. Mahadevah : worshipped even by the gods ;
“ Since the great one is worshipped by all the gods,
he is named Mahadeva, the word Malm signifying
worship.”
604. Adored by Vishnu tVis’vadevah) : who is
named Vis'va.
605- The slayer of the foes of the gods (Surariha)
606. The serpent S'esha, underneath the mundane
Egg (Ahirbudhnyah) : says the Vishnu Purana :
“ Rndra in his aspect of Sankarshana comes out and
consumes the three worlds.”
607. Of the color of the air (Anilabhah) : just as
the air though invisible, is perceived through touch, so
He is perceived through the experience produced of the
contact of the sense objects : for it is said that: “ The re-
sult that accrues through the experience of external
objects, is the same that is experienced through con-
sciousness, according to the conclusions of the Vedanta.’’
608. With extraordinary powers of perception
(Chekitanah) : He perceives every detail at once.
609. The offering (Havih) : i. e., the object en-
joyed by the consumer of the above. If we read Hart,
the meaning is “ the object appropriated by Hari, i. <?.,
the sacrificial offerings.'’
610. Ajaikapat ; one of the eleven Rudras.
611. The Lord of the mundane Egg (Kapali) ;


formed of the two halves of the skull, i.c., the Earth
and Heaven.
612 ■ With three pegs (Tris’ankuh) : the Gunas,
obstructing his course as Jiva. Says the Gita, “ There
is no object in the Earth, the Heavens or among
the Gods, that is free from these three Gunas, produced of
Prakriti ” (18-40). Hence the meaning is : He is all the
Jivas-
613. Uuconquered (Ajifcah): by those three pegs.
614. Pure (S'ivah) : free from limitations ; says the
Vayu Samhita: “ Purity is the natural state of S'iva.” 103.
615. Dhanvantarih : the great physician. “ I hear ”
says the S'ruti “ Of you as the most excellent physician
of all the physicians.”
616- The comet ( Dhiunaketuh)-
617. Skandah.
6iB- Kubera (Vais'ravanah) ■
619. Brahma (Dhati).
620. Indra (S'akrah)-
621. Vishnuh.
622. The Sun (Mitrah).
623, Tvashta.
624- Dhruvah ■
625. The supporter (Dharah). 104.
626. Prabhavah : one of the Vastly.
627. The all-permeating Vayu (Sarvagovayuh) : the
Thread Soul ; says the S'ruti; “By the Vayu as the thread
is held together this world, the next and all the beings
therein.” (Br. Up. 3‘4).
628. Aryama.
629. Savita.
630- The Sun (Ravih).
631. Ushanguh : a king ;or it may mean ‘of fiery
rays.’ The names Dhanvantari, &c ; , are those of the gods
and apply to Siva,as the Soul of everything. Though repeat.


edly occurring, they have different applications according
to the context and are not repetitions ; even if they be so,
there is no harm since they ax-e laudatory-
632. Protector (Vidhata): in many ways.
633. Mandbata : the meaning of the word is ; “He
who protects the Jiva ”
634. Appearing as the Jivas (Bhutabhavanah) : as
the snakes in the rope by illusion. 105*
635. Manifesting in several forms : CVibhuh).
636. Knower of colors (Varnavibhavi): white, yellow
&c., in their various forms- “ They speak of the white
or the blue in Him,” says the S'ruti- “ Those endowed
with introspection can see this in thecourse of the Xadis.
Another S'ruti says : “ Snow, smoke, sun, air, fire, fire-fly>
lightning, crystal, moon—the above forms precede, du-
ring the process of Yoga, the manifestation of Brahman ’’
(S've. Up- 2 —n).
637. Conferring all desires and attributes (Sarva-
kamagunavahah) : during the same period of introspec-
tion, he enables the devotees to acquire all desirable ob-
jects and attributes—calm, fierceness, stupidity, that form
the obstacles to Yoga , also called as ‘ the taste of bliss,
unsteadiness, and absorption, respectively.
638. Lotus-navelled, (Padmanabhah) ; since the
lotus, the abode of the Universe rests in his navel, in the
Manipuraka Chakra therein, as is plain from the S'rutis,
“Is situated above the navel,” “ The great abode of the
Universe.”
639. Of mighty womb (Mahagarbhah) : Containing
such great Beings as Brahma, &c-
640. Moon-faced (Chandra vaktrahj : beautiful.
641. Air (Anilah).
642. hire (Analah) ; these name were mentioned
before in their aspect of the elements; now they are
viewed as the presiding deities thereof. 106.


643. The strong (Balavan).
644. The calm (Upas'antah).
645. The ancient (Puranah).
646. Cognised through virtue (Puuyachanchuhv
647. Lakshin 1(i ).
648- The creator of Kurukshetra (Kurukarta) : just
as Bhamd indicates Satyubhamd , Kunt here signifies
Kurukshetra■ “ Kurukshetra is Avimukta” says the
S'ruti. There are two well known places of that name,
where acts performed become meritorious.
649. Residing in the Kurukshetra (Knruvasi).
650. The Soul of Kurukshetra (Kurubhutah).
651. The brightener of the attributes (Gunau-
shadhah); such as wealth, knowledge, dispassion, and
virtue. 107-
652- The resting place of everything (Sarvas'ayah) ;
“ Here all things become one,” says the S'ruti. It denotes
Prajna, the resting place of all things during Sushupti
(sleeping state).
653. Consumer of the offerings placed on the sacred
grass (Darbhachari): spread in the sacrificial ground-
654. The lord of all beings (Sarvesham praniuam
patih).
655. The god of gods (Devadevah).
656. Attached to happiness (Sukhasaktah).
657. Effect 1 Sat).
658. Cause (Asat).
659. Possessed of all the precious stones (Sarva-
ratnavit) : the best of their kind. 108.
660. Residing in the Kailasa mountain (Kailasa-
girivasi).
661. Dwelling in the Himalaya mountain (Hima-
vatgiri sams'rayah).
662. The destroyer of the banks (Kalaharit ; as the
great flood that uproots the trees on the banks.


663. The fashioner of the banks (Kulakarta) :of such
lakes as the Puslikara.
664. Cognisant of various sciences (Bahnvidyah).
665. Conferring many things (Bahupradahk 109
666. The merchant (Vanijah'.
667. The carpenter (Vardhaki)
668. The tree (Vrikshah) :• of Samsara to be cut
down by the above.
669. The Vakula tree (Vaknlah).
670. The Sandal tree (Chandanah).
671. The Saptaparna tree (Chchadah).
672. Of mighty neck (Saragrivah).
673- Of mighty collar bones (Mahajatruh).
674. Steady (Alolah).
675. The food grains (Mahaushadhah) : as rice and
bar lev. no
iv. no.
676. The accomplisher of objects of desire (Sid-
dharthakari).
677. The established conclusion with the help of
metre and grammar (Siddharthah Chchandovyakaranot-
tarah) ; after having met all the objections, supported by
the Scriptures and their commentaries.
678. With leonine roar (Simhanadah).
679. Lion-tusked (Simhadamshtrah).
680. Riding on a lion (Simhagah).
681. Drawn by lions (Simhavahanah). in,
682. Supreme existence (Prabhavatma). The S'ruti
says ; The senses are Truth and He is their Truth/
The Meaning is He is the Truth of truths.
683. The devourer of the Universe, and He who has
the above being as his eating plate (Jagatkalasthalah).
684. The benefactor of the world (Lokahitah).
685. The Saviour (Tamil).
686. Sarangah : a kind of bird.
687. The strange swan (Navachakrangahj


688. With shining crest (Ketnmali'j: like the pea-
cock and the cock.
689. Protector of the places of Justice (Sabha-
vanah). 112.
690. The abode of all Beings (Bhutulayah),
691. The Lord of beings (Bhdtapatih).
692. Day and night (Ahoratram).
993 Faultless (Aninditah)- 113.
694. The bearer of all beings (Vahita sarvabhnta-
uam).
695. The dwelling place of all beings (Nilayah).
696. Devoid of any birth (Vibhnh) : unborn.
697. Be-ness (Bhavah).
698- Fruitful (Amoghah).
699. Concentrated (Samyatah) : endowed with the
powers of Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi.
700. The horse (As'vah): Uchchais'ravas : and other
divine ones.
THE EIGHTH HUNDRED.
701. The giver of food (Bhojanah).
702. The Supporter of life (Pranadharanah). 114.
703. Endowed with fortitude (Dhritiman).
704. Intelligent (Matiman).
705. Persevering (Dakshah).
706. Respected fSatkritah): by all.
707. The lord of the Yugas (Yugadhipah) : the dis-
penser of the results of virtue and vice.
708. The protector of the senses (Gopalih)
709. The lord of rays (Gopatih) : the .Sun, &c.
710. Group (Gramah).
71X. Dressed in cow-skins (Gocharmavasanah).
712. The destroyer (Harih) : of the sorrows of his
devotees, 115.


713. Of beautiful arms (Hiranyabahuh).
714. The protector of the body of the Yogins, that
is like a log of wood when they have gone into Samadhi
for a long time (Guhapalah Praves’inam).
715. He who has reduced to nothing his enemies
(Prakrishtarih): i.e., the desires, of the advanced aspi-
rants.
716. Of great joy (Mahaharshah).
717. The conqueror of love (Jitakamah).
718. With subdued senses (Jitendriyah). 116.
719 The Gandharah : the note Mi in the gamut.
720. Possessed of a fine dwelling place (Suvasah) ;
the Kailasa.
721- Devoted to Meditation (Tapassaktah).
722. Joy-producing (Ratih).
723. Virat (Narah): who rules the mundane Egg.
724. The great music (Mahagitah).
725. The great dance (Mahanrityah).
726. Worshipped by the bonds of Apsaras (Apsa-
roganasevitah). 117.
727. Mighty-bannered (Mahaketuh) :in the shape of
the bull.
728. The mountain Meru (Mahadhatuh.)
729- Wanderer over the peaks thereof (Naikasann-
charah).
730. Ever moving (Chalah),
731. Cognisable (A'vedaniyah) : though transcend-
ing speech, he could he explained by the teachers.
732- The teaching (A'des'ah).
733. Conferring at the same time the pleasure pro-
duced by the contact of all the senses (Sarvagnndhasukha-
vahah). 118.
734. The external arch (Toranah): over the gates of
the towns.


735. He who enables (those desirous of victory)
to ward off missiles (Taranah).
736- The wind (Vatah).
737. The fortress \ Paridhih) : enclosed by walls.
738. The lord of birds (Patikhecharah) i.e., Garttda.
739. The fruitful union (Samyogovardhanah) : bet-
ween the sexes. It is said (in the Bh. Giti) : “I am the
progenitor, Kandarpa.”
740, Old (Vriddhah) ; “I am excelling all" in
good qualities such as knowledge and wealth and not in
the signs of old age, as wrinkles ; for it has been said :
“ Superiority accrues in the case of Brahmanas through
knowledge ; prowesses the standard among the Ksha-
triyas : the Vaisyas take precedence through wealth and
the Sudras through age.”
741. Very old (Ativriddhah).
742. Excelling others through his good attributes
(Gun&dhikah). 119.
743. Eternal, with the Self as his companion (Nitya-
matma sahayah).
744. The lord of the gods and the demons <Deva-
surapatih).
745. The Ruler fPatih) :of all.
746. Ready (Yuktahu : for fight.
747. With arms (Yuktabahuh) : powerful enough to
quell his foes.
748. Worshipped by the Indrain Heaven '■ Devodivi
snparvanah). 120.
749. Enabling one to bear everything (A'shadhah).
750. Conferring the same in a limited degree
' Sushadhah).
751. Motionless (Dhruvah'.
752. White (Harinahi ; pure,
753. Armed with the trident (Haraht-
754. The granter of bodies: to those thrown down


from Svarga (Vapuravartamanebhyah). If we read Vasu
the meaning is “ lie who confers wealth on his devotees.”
755. Greater than wealth (Vasns'reshtah); for,
says the S'rnti, “He is dearer than wealth.”
756. The great Path Olahapathah); ?'-e, the rule of
life of the holv ones. 121.
757. He who took off the head, fof Brahma) and he
who considers well rS’iroharivimars'ah). He cut off" the
head of Brahma not in anger, but after deep consideration.
758. Kndowed with all (auspicious) marks (Sarva-
lakshanalakshitah) : according to the Samudrika S'astra
or he who is pointed out through all modes of evidence
—but not realised.
759. The axle of the chariot, connected with the
chariot (Aksbah Rathayogi'.
760. Connected with every thing (Sarvavogi) :as
the Hord.
761. Valiant (Mahabalah). 122.
762. The Vedas (Samamnayah).
763. Other Scriptures (Asamamnayah) ; the Itih-
asas, Puranas and A'gamas-
764. The god of holy places (Tirthadevah).
765. With a mighty chariot (Maharathah): the Earth.
766. Devoid of life (Nirjivah); the soul of the mate-
rial world.
767. Conferrer of life fjivanah); and consciousness
even to the material bodies.
768' The Mantrah : such as Pranava ;or“ he who
gives life to the dead.
769 Of calm looks S'ubhakshah),
770. Very hard ('Bahukarkas'ah'i :ol heart, since
he is the destroyer. 123.
771- Possessed of numerous precious stones {Ratna-
bhutah).
772 Red limbed (Raktangah i,


773. He who dries up the great oceans as a water
trough (Maharnavanipanaviti-
774. The root (Mtilain) of the Samsara tree-
-775. Very radiant (.Vis'alah)
776. Nectar 1 Amritah).
777. Manifested and nnmanifested- (Vyaktavyak-
tah) : as effect and cause.
778. The storehouse of austerities (Taponidhih) :
the great sage. 124.
779. The steps (A'rohanah) :to the Supreme to the
aspirant.
780. One seated therein (Adhirohah >■
781. Of good conduct (S'iladhari).
782. Of great fame (Mahayas'ahi :of pure renown-
783. The ornament of the army (Senakalpah): i-e- ,
valor.
784. With divine ornaments (Mahakalpah).
785. Yogah : restraining the functions of the mind_
786. He in whose hands are the Yugas (Yugakarah).
787. Harih : He who carries the body from one
place to another, the deity presiding over the foot, the
god Trivikrama, 125.
788- Of the form of the Yttga (Yugarnpah) : when
virtue and vice are blended together.
789, Extremely formless (Maharupah)-
790. The slayer of the great elephant t.Maha-
nagahanah): an Asura of that shape (Gajasura).
791. Death (Vadhah).
792. Justly charitable (Nyayanirvapanah): granting
desires without violating justice
793- The object to be attained (Padahj.
794. The learned man (Panditah) : who realises
things indirectly (through books)-
795. The motionless (Arhalopamah): the realiser of
Truth- f 26.


796 Of infinite manifestations (Bahumalah).
797. With garlands hanging down to the feet
(Mahamalah).
798. Whose eye is the moon and calm eyed 1 S’as’ 1
Harasulochanah).
799- Of the shape of the salt ocean (Vistaro lavanah
kupah>
800- The three Yu gas (Triyugah); omitting the
Kali.
THE NINTH HUNDRED.
801. With fruitful results (Saphalodayah). 127.
802. Three-eyed (Trilochanah) : symbolising the
means of knowledge—Scriptures, teacher and medita-
tion.
803. Endowed with the eight forms (Vishannangah):
as the Earth, &c.; though formless, these forms are related
to him in their subtle aspect ; he is the inner soul of
these, the omnipresent one.
804- With [ears pierced to wear ear-rings (manivid-
dhah).
805, Wearing matted hair (Jatadharahf
806. The Anusvara (Binduh).
Soy- Tlie Visargali.
808. With manifested syllables (Sumukhahj
'BO9, The arrow (Sarah).
810. Armed with all weapons (Sarvayudahj.
811- Enduring (Sahah): everything. 128.
Bi 2. Whose knowledge is free of all modifications
(Nivedanah).
813. Who appears as bliss (Sukhajatah): at the end
of all modifications-
Bx 4. Born in the beautiful (fandhara country (Su-
gjindhrirah) : i.e., the horse belonging to that country.


815. ()f great bow (Mahadhanuh) (Pinakahj-
816. Who is the aggregate of the mental impres-
sions of all beings. The Lord (Gandhapapi Khagavan)-
817. The source of all actions (Uttanah Sarvakar-
raanam). 129.
BrB. The great wind that (during the deluge) shakes
up every thing (Manthano bahnlo vayuh).
819. Perfect (Sakalah).
820. All seeing (Sarvalochanali).
821- Having cymbols in his hand (Talastalahj.
822. Using his palms as the eating vessel (Karas-
thalh
823- Of well knit body. (U'rdhvasarahanauah
824- Very tall (Mahank 130,
825- The umbrella (Chchatrain).
826- With a good umbrella (Suchchatrah).
827- Whose light is perceived only in the living
beings (Vikhyatah)-
828. Whose footsteps are the abode of everything
(Sarvas'rayah Kramah): He who measured with his steps
the three worlds, in his Trivikrama incarnation-
829- With shaven crown (Mundah).
830- 111-looking (thereby) (Virupah).
831. Undergoing all changes (Vikritah).
832. With a stick (Dundi)-
833. With a pot (Kund>).
834 Unattainable through rituals. (Vikurvanah).
835. The lion- (Haryakshah).
836. All the quarters (Kakubhah)-
837. Armed with the Vajra (Vajri)
838- Hundred-tongued (S'atajivah).
839- Having thousand feet and thousand head*
(Sahasrapad Sahasramfirdhak
840. The lord of the gods (Devendrah)-


84J. Consisting of all the gods (Sarvadevamayah;.
842- The Teacher (Guruhl. 132.
843. Thousand armed (Sahasrabahuh).
844. Possessing everything (Sarvangah).
845- Fit to take refuge with (S'aranyah).
846- The creator of all the worlds (Sarvalokakrit).
847. Purifier as the holy places (Pavitrara).
848. The mantra containing three prominent fac-
tors (Trikakunmantrahj; i.e„ Bija, vS'akti and Kilaka.
849- The youngest (Kanishtah ): of the sons of Aditi
—Vishnu as Vatnana.
850. Hari and Hara (Krishnapingalah): The
passage Vishnu, Narayana, Krishna shows that the name
Krishna is appointed to Hara ; the Nanartha Kos'a
applies Pingala to Hari. Hence the S'rutis: “ The
Pnrusha who is Krishna Pingala,” “ The poor one,
Nila Kohita ” should he thus only rendered; the pass-
age ‘‘ Black throated, Vilohita ” applies to Rudra.
Some argue that the two epithets apply to S'iva, either
because he was originally red, but afterwards became
black, or that his throat was black and the rest of
his body red, or that his left side was black and his right
was red, or that he was black in his aspect of Prakriti
and red when viewed as the Pnrusha that energises the
former ; now this assumption—whereby words denoting
attributes are made to denote the objects and since they
possess these qualities to represent them at, least in part —is
too far-fetched. We said that the words ViloMta and
Krishna primarily denoted S'iva and Kes ava ; hence Nila
Pingala that arc synonymous with the above stand for
Hari Hara. The two pairs denote only Hart Hara. So
we think that the meaning of unascertained words can
be got through the meaning of words already explained.
Even if it were possible to pul up some shadow of evi-
dence by some far fetched assumption, we need not arrive


at onr conclusions by a crooked way, when the road is
plain before ns- Again since the names ofS'iva and
Vishnu are nsed interchangeably, and since the one
Being manifests himself as two, onr interpretation is the
more consistent- But then why should we not use the
(Dvandva) dual declension as in ‘ Indragri.’ Since, as in
the Tatpnrnsha compounds, the absence of difference be-
tween the two, is denoted by the existing form, we need
not introduce the dual case signifying difference between
Hari and Kara—a question we have already set at rest. 133-
851. The fashioner of the wand of Brahma (Brahma-
dandavinirmata.
852. Armed with Sataghni, the noose, and S'akti
(Sataghnipas'a s'aktiman).
853. Lotns-born (Padmagarbhah) : Brahma,
854. With a vast hollow inside (Mahagarbhah).
855. Pregnant with the Vfdas (Brahmagarbhah).
856. Born in the waters (Jalodhhavah) : “ The one
was seen in waters,’' says the S'rnli ; the master of
Maya. 134.
857. Refulgent with rays (Gabhastih).
858. Author of the Vedas (Brahmakrit)
859. Reciter of the Vedas .Brahmi).
860- Conversant with the meaning of the Vedas
■ P.rah mavit).
861. The Brah manah.
862. The goal (Gatih) ;of the Hrahmanas (kuowers
of Brahman).
863. Of infinite forms (Anantanlpah).
864. Knsonler of many forms fNaikalmaJ.
565. Of unbearable prowess as viewed by Brahma
(Tigmatejah Svavanbhnvab): since S'iva cut off his head.
866. He whose Self transcends (U'rdhvagatma) : the


three vehicles “ Having enveloped the Earth all round,
he stood out ten inches beyond/’ says the S'ruti.
867 The lord of beings (Jivas) (Pas'upatih)
868 Fleet as the wind 1 Vataramhah).
869. Fast as the mind (Manojavah).
870. Smeared with Sandal fChandani).
871. With the lotus springing out of him (lit the
other end of the stem of the lotus) (Padraan&lagrah):
once Brahma wishing to ascertain the end of the stem of
the lotus wherein he resided and proceeding down through
it, could never come to the end. More improbable that
he should ever find the ground out of which this stalk
grows.
872. The degrader of Surabhi (Surabhyuttaranah):
once Brahmfi in pursuance of a wager made with Vishnu
compelled Surabhi or the cow of plenty, Kamadhenu, to
bear witness to his having seen the head of S'iva—a lie.
Out of fear of Brahma, Kamadhenu did so and was
cursed by Mahadeva, “ your pfogeny shall eat unholy
food.’' So he degraded her from her high level-
873. He who cannot find out the end 1, Harah): of
the head or foot of S'iva —Brahma. 136.
874. With a large garland of Karnikara flowers
(Karnikaramahasrigvf).
875- With a crown set with blue stones (Nilamau-
Hh).
H 76. Wielder of Pinaka (Pinakadhrit) : lit ‘ that
which obtained the Svarga for the gods’ when it was
wrested by the Tripnrasura—the Mountain Mem The
essence of Pinaka entered into the Mountain as the essence
of Vajra entered into the foam by which Indra slew
Namuchi.
877. The Lord of lima HJmapatih) : i.e.. the
science of Brahman.


878. Attained by Uma (Umakantah): the knowledge
of Brahman.
879. The bearer of Ganga (Jahnavidhrit).
880. The husband of Parvati. (Umadhavah.) 137.
88 r. The Great Hoar ( Vara varan ah): he who re-
generated the earth in the shape of the boar called Yaj-
navaraha.
882. The Protector of the Universe through mam-
divine forms (Varadah); in his incarnations.
SB3. .Sought after (Varenyah).
884. Of great sound 'Suinahasvanah) ; Hayagrtva
who recited the Vedas.
885. Of great favor (Mahaprasadah.)
886. Worshipped by Death (Damanah)
887. Slayer of his foes (S’atrnha) : desires Yc.
888. White and red (S’vetapingalah): complexion-
ed. The Ardhanari Nates’vara is white on his right
side, and red on his left. Those that desire to make. ‘ S'veta
Pingala’ synonymous with £ Krishna Pingala.’ are great
who can make men black into white. 138
889. Golden colored <Pitat na) : says the S'niti :
“The person who is seen in the body of the Sun, with
hair and down of golden colour all—a golden over down
to the tips of the nails.” {Chcha. Up. 1 6-6).
890- The Supreme A'tman vParamatma). He who
transcends the five forms of A tman —-made up of food,
Prana, mind and cognition, and bliss as the sixth, ab-
solute Bliss-
891. Pure minded (Prayatatma.)
892. Presiding over Pradliana (Pradhknadhirt): the
ignorance, producing the three Gnnas that form the
cause of the Universe.
893. Having faces on all sides (Sarvapars’vamn-
khahl •' in the four quarters and above ; thu» five faced.


894. There-eyed (Tryakshah) : represented by
the Moon, Sun and Fire.
895. Favourable according to the virtue of his
devotees (Dharmasadharanovarah). 139.
896. The soul of the two paths (Characharatina! :
“ There are t-wo heavenly Paths, the fixedand the chang-
ing'’ says the S’rnti, indicating the paths from which
there is return and not. He is the Paths attained
through merit and grace.
897. Too subtle for the above two paths (Sfiksh-
matma.)
898. Devoid of death (desires leading to its the
lord of Dharma (Ararito govrishes’varah,); i. He who
confers the fruits of Dharma practised unpnrposively.
899. The Teacher of the kSadhyas, (Sahhyarshih) :
ihe gods of gods.
900. Yasn, a son of Aditi (Vasuradityah).
the tenth hundred,
901. Endowed with rays, the Sun, the immortal
(Vivasvan Savitamritah) : the rays encompass the Uni-
verse. The Soma juice poured during the sacrifice is
named Aitn'n. as appears from the S'ruti : “O god your
soma is ams'u.” “We drank the Soma and became
immortal,” it is a means of immortality. Hence Soma is
endowed, with rays and with immortality. 140.
902. Vyasah : the another of the Puranas and
Itihasas-
903. His works, brief and enlarged (Sargassusam
kshepovistarah) : Eg. Siitras and commentaries. During
Homa or recitation these names composed of many words
should be thus used ; “ Om Sargaya Susamkshepaya Vist-
araya Svaha; ” or “Om Namah Sargaya Susamkshepaya
Vistaraya Svfiha,” as in the case “ Bhuragnaye Oha Prit-
hivyai Cha. Mahate Cha Svaha-'’


904. The collective aspect of the Jlvas (Paryayo
Narain ; i.c., Vais'vanara.
905. The seasons (Rituh).
906. The year (Samva.tsarah)-
907. The month (Masah).
908. The fortnights iPakshah)-
909’ The close of the above (Samkhyasamapanah) ;
the solstices and the dark and bright fortnights- 141.
910. Kala-
-91- Kashta.
912. Hava.
913. Matra.
914- Muhurta, day and night (Muhurtahahk'shapah)
915. Moments (Kshanah).
916. The universal field (Vis'vakshetram); in
which the tree of the universe grows—absolute Consci-
ousness
917. The genu of beings (Prajabijam) : the uu-
mauitested, the consciousness enveloped by Maya,
918, Mahal (L,iugam).
9 eg. The primal manifestation ; (A'dyah nirgamah;
the tirst superimpositiou as ‘l.’ 142'
920. I'he effects (Sat).
921. The cause (Asat).
922. Perceptible 1 Vyaktam) : through the organs.
923. Imperceptible (Avyaktam): Ignorance, only ex,
perienced and not cognised.
924. The father (Pita).
925- Mother (Mata).
926. Grandfather (Pitamahah).
927- The door to Heaven (Svargdvaram) : Medita-
928. The door to birth (Prajadvaram) ; desire
939. The door to liberation (Mokshadvaramj • dis-
passion.


930. Dharma (Trivishtapam) : that brings about
S varga. 143.
931. Liberation (Nirvanam).
932. The delighter (Hladanah) : “ He, verily causes
delight” says the S'rutb
933 The world of Brahma ißrahmalokah) : called
Satyaloka.
934- , He who transcends the above (Paragatih 1 : the
supreme goal.
935. The Creator of the gods and the demons
(Devasumvinirmata .
936. The supreme goal of the gods and the demons
( Devasuraparayanah). 144-
937. The Preceptor of the gods and demons (IJeva-
suraguruh) ; Brihaspati and S'ukra.
938- Desirous of conquest (Devah).
939- Adored by gods and demons (Devasuranamas-
kritah).
940. The oest of the gods and demons (Devasura-
mahamatrah i.
941. Sought by the hosts of gods and demons (De-
vasuraganas'rayah). 145.
942. The king of the host of gods and demons (De-
vasuragunadhyakshah, : Indra and Virochana.
943. The leader of the hosts of gods and demons
(Devasuraganagramh) ; Kartikeya and the Kes'idaitya.
944. He who shines transcending the senses (Deva-
tidevah).
945. The divine sage (Devarshih); Aarada,
946. The granter of boons to gods and demons
(Devasuravarapradah) ; in the shape of Brahma and Ru-
dra. 146.
947. The inner Ruler ol gods and demons (Dev&su-
resvarali
948. The womb of the Universe (Vis'vahk


949. The great lord of gods and demons (Devasu-
rainahes'varah): of Is'vara, their inner ruler.
950. Comprising all the gods fSarvadevamayali) :
according to the S'ruti, “ Agni is his head, the sun and
the moon are his eyes,” (Mun. Up- 3-4'i.
951. The only one to be meditated upon (Achiu-
tyah.
952- The inner soul of the gods (Devatatma).
953. Self existent (A'tmasambhavah). 147.
954. The trees (Udbhit); as the sacrifice.
955. Vamana (Trivikraraah) : that traversed the
three worlds.
956- Proficient in the arts : (Vaidyah).
957. Unspotted (Virajah
958. Devoid of passional elements (Nirajah;.
959. Deathless (Amarah).
960. Praiseworthy (I'dhyah).
961. Kalahastis’vara (Hastis' - varahthe Vayu Linga.
962. Vyaghres’vara (Vyaghrah) : another Linga.
963. Valiant among gods (Devasimhah).
964- Best of men (Nararshabhah 1 148.
965. Very wise (Vibudhah).
966. He who first receives the sacrificial offerings
(Agra varah).
967. Incognisable (Sukshmah).
968. All‘the gods (Sarvadevah); completely per-
vading every god-
969. Centred in meditation (Tapomayah)
970. Extremely ready (Suyuktah).
971. Auspiciousness (S'obhanah)-
972. Armed with Vajra (Vajri).
973. The birth place of the weapons: as Prasa
(Prasauamprabhavah).
974. Unattainable by unsteady minds (Avyayah)


975. Kartikeya (Guhah).
976. The supreme limit of Bliss (Ka-anlah
977. From whom proceeds all created things (Nijas-
sargah).
978. Protector from the pangs of Death (that re-
sembles a thunderbolt) (Pavitram).
979- The Purifier of all tSarvapavauah) : even
Brahma.
980. The bull (S'ringi)
9 Si. Residing on the mountain peaks (S'riuga-
priyah).
982- Saturn (Babhruh).
983. Kubera (Rajarajah).
984. Faultless (Niramayah). 150.
985- Producer of affection (Abhiriimah).
986. The collectivity of gods (Suraganah).
987. Ivxtreiue quiescene (Viramah).
988. The end of all (Sarvasadhauah); such means
as rituals,, orders of life, &c.
989. Having an eye in his forehead (Ralatakshah).
990. He who plays with numberless worlds (as
with balls (Vis'vadevah).
991. The deer (Harinah).
992. The Brahmic radiance (Brahmavarchasah) :
produced of study and meditation. 151.
993. The Lord of mountains (Sthavaranampatih)
the Himalayas.
994. The Controller of the senses through austere
observances (Niyamendriyavardhanah): coutred in Sama-
dhi, with controlled mind.
995. The aspirant after Truth (Siddarthah) ; who
has forgotten, through Ignorance, the supreme goal,
Moksha, as one seeks for the ornament which he wears
round his neck.


996. Moksha (Siddhabhritarthah) : that once was
his own, but was forgotten and recovered
997. Unthinkable (Achintyah); the Pratyagatman ;
as says the S'ruti, “ Know that alone to be Brahman, and
not this that you meditate upon.” (Kena. Up. 7).
998. The object of all observances (Satyavratah) :
■ t.e., Brahman)-
999. Pure-souled (S’uchih). 152.
1000. The granter of the fruits of the observances
(Vratadhipah).
1001. The supreme. (Paraml : other than the in-
ferior forms of Brahman —Vis'va, Taijasa and Prajna.—
S'iva, the fourth named Tnriya. “ They consider the
fourth as S'iva, the nondnal.” Says the S'ruti. (Man.
Up. 71.
1002. Brahman: unlimited by Time, Space and
Matter; and as Vis'va &c., are unreal, from the S'ruti.
* £ There is no diversity at all here,” (Kath. Up, 4 —ix).
and free from any difference in itself. So it is of homoge-
neous essence. It is Itself.
1003. The last step of the devotees (Bhaktanam
pararaagitih) : who absorb Vis va &c., into the one that
follows through the argument of the block of salt dis-
solved in water —Kaivalya the supreme Peace.
1004. P'reed i Vimuktah): from all limitations of
the body.
1005. Who has castaway the Linga S'arira (Mukta-
tejah) : which brought about liberation.
rood- Possessed of the wealth of Yoga (S'riman).
This explains the previous name, because the Yog
having conquered death, like Bhishma (who can choose
his own time) remains here or goes to the world of Bra-
hma) through the Nad! proceeding from the head; or
having cast off the Linga S'arira here, attains the pure
Kaivalya State.


1007. The nourisher of the Vedas (Srivardhanah)
The above wealth (S'ri) was acquired because he nourish-
es S'ri —Rik, Yajus and Satnan, —according to the S'ruti,
“ She is the immortal S'ri of good men.” Comprising
the sections on rituals and knowledge, through a proper
observance of the acts, enjoined therein.
1008. The Universe (Jagat) : all perishable objects
from the undifferentiated down to the pot. Pradhana too
can be called Jagat (Universe) as it literally ■ means that
which eternally changes its forms, for the system of
Kapila calls it as ‘ changing, producing the gunas.’
Thus He who was named in the beginning firm
(unchanging) is now called the Universe (changing) i.e.
the Universe is imposed by misconception on the un-
changing Consciousness—Brahman. The nonduality of
Brahman is hereby taught, that is indicated by the fol-
lowing passages ; —All this is verily the Self; (Chcha Up.
3-14-7) Brahman is verily this ; Thou art That (6-16-3) ;
I am Brahman. (T>r. Up. 14-10). This Self is Brahman
(Man. Up. 2). 153.
Thus end the 1008 names.
He whom even Brahma, the gods, and the sages
know not, in his real nature, has been praised with
devotion by me. 154 ■
Who can adequately praise the Lord of the Universe
who deserves praise, worship and adoration. The great
Lord of sacrifice, the best of intelligent persons, has
been with great devotion, praised by me, having obtained
his permission. He who with concentrated mind, pure
heart and devotion, praises the god S'iva through these
auspicious names realises the Self. 155, 156, 157-
This is the Supreme Brahman and he attains the
same. The sages and the gods praise through these
names the superme One. 158.


Supreme Brahman ; the knowledge capable of attian-
ing the same.
Thus praised by persons of concentrated mind,
Mahadeva, is favorable to them, as 'he is merciful to his
devotees, self-centred and powerful. 159.
Self centred \ Conferring Moksha that is character-
ised by the above state.
So also, among men, they who are believers, and are
endowed throughout many lives with earnestness, medi-
tate with devotion upon the Supreme God S'iva than
whom there is no other. Through act, speech and
thought, they of immeasurable splendor, take a delight
in meditating upon him, hearing his praises, reciting
them to others, and explaining the same to them, when
awake or asleep, walking or sitting, reclining or sitting
up. 160—163.
The Jiva, after million’s of births in various wombs
of Samsara, is purified of his sins and acquires devotion
towards S'iva. . 164.
A person qualified in all ways, acquires through his
good fortune, devotion unwavering, towards S'iva, the
cause of all. 163.
Unwavering : With the consciousness that he
is one with S'iva; as says the S'rnti “ Now he who
meditates upon another deity, as ‘ I am one, He is differ-
ent,' he knows not. He is as a beast to the Gods ” (Br,
Up. 1-5-10.). Thus meditation in a differentiating spirit is
condemned.
This sort of steady, unobstructed and unswerving
devotion towards S'iva is never attained by gods or
men. 166.
Through His Grace, men acquire devotion by which
they, with souls centred in Him, attain supreme Per.
fection. 167
They who in all ways take refuge in Mahes'vara, are


surely raised from the ocean of Samsara by the com-
passionate Lord. 168
Except the lord who delivers from Samsara, the other
gods destroy the merit of men’s austerities since they
are unable to do any other thing. Thus even the very
gods are unable to bring about deliverance from Samsara
for men ; except the Great Lord, no other Power can
confer the potency of meditation. 169
Thus Tandi, resembling Indra, and of excellent
mind, praised, O Krishna,the elephant-skin-garbed, Lord
of the cause and the effect- 170
Brahma committed to memory this praise of the
Lord and recites it in the presence of S'ankara. So the
Brahma should necessarily know it- 171
This is meritorious, holy, destroys all sins, and
confers yoga, liberation, Svarga and happiness- 172
They who recite this praise of S'ankara with single
minded devotion, attain the goal of existence reached by
the knowers of the S'ankhya yoga. 17^
The devotee who recites this praise in the presence
of S'ankara, steadily for a year, gets whatever he
desires. 17,1
res. 174
This is supremely secret and is preserved in the
heart of Brahma. He imparted it to Indra, who taught
it to Death.
Death instructed the Rudras in it, from whom
Tandi got it. Tandi, after performing great austerities,
acquired it in the audience of Brahma. 176
Tandi, taught it to S'ukra and Gautama. Oh
Krishna, S'ukra of the family of Bhrigu, imparted the
same to the Manuvaivasvata. 777
Gautama taught it to the Sadhya Narayana, the
intelligent, when the latter was in Samadhi. And the
Sadhya Narayana imparted the same to Yama- 178


Yama Vaivasvata taught it to Nachikatas. Nachik-
atas taught it to Markandeya, 0 Krishna. 179
O Janardana, I obtained it, with great observance.
O Slayer foes, I shall impart to you this secret praise.
This confers Heaven, health, long life- prosperity,
and is equal to the Vedas. The DSnavas Yakshas and
Rakshasas obstruct him not- 181.
Nor the Pisachas, Yatudhanas, Guhyakas or Bhuja-
gas. He who recites this for one year with unbroken
steadiness, pure, chaste and with senses under control,
acquires the merit of a horse sacrifice. 182.
Thus ends the .S'iva Sahasranama Stotra in the 17th
Chapter of the A'nus'asanika Parva of the Mahabharata.


(I cTer: waragfai'lt
JTr«rfe: argiqqrqqfasqfmi|q : n \ n
3q*RTSqixf || |
*3?r .fimriwmffl: n \ n
s- re|; wmi i
qictßr n \ h
q q't :3 i qm : qm qfafafq cq q i $ fa; |
sqfaqffaqfa n \s n
C\ \9 ’
i
gtjißqrqfgßmii i
q*q;faqfaq HTfrtcfaqfaw ii «
cW&arefi«qn*r i
II It
qfqqqVatfq i
VS Cv "
i
ll ll
SfftFcWftaqapi q«l^FTltqqWcT : i
«qar«m3ars3fr sRm*3faqw : ll ? ° ||
sa -4 n -‘ •
q^Tefap^frcT; i
HUH


i
M»
SFRFW q?RifR»TF |
qpqrfrrr qnim-. Jl \\ 11
I
rir mwq\m qwmrcqW'? n »» n
o u *
ll j<\ ii
••5* •
siqWßßHffsq •qrfgqqqrfqß i
f?m§w%=K% n u
ISRtßFßjrfsq I
n
t | il
I
=fi?qi3Trtj3[f|TWq; H II
e4®r*fift?Tßs: 1
9#R3RT *T«f& \\ H
9#RqRT cT«ffq h \\
#sr?witrr: i
rarest smmqiffi: n w it
RqtMfsqqißq; I
qcißit; %<v~Vi ii \\
tmmmmM aF^RFimrrCfT; i
eqVnssqrnsq ii \v n


qqormrqqfq* II 11
Srtqqmrqqqq: 1
u n
ctfrfßißftqfcmt qrßqrqrqqTW: i
qfrsrmfqqrqf: fqqrqrqfqqqqq: I
qrrqqmrqqrqrqr I
qqrarqir: gqqr% qqqirrqq: qq- - ll n
f«qrfqffd«iq:|
- S i Zi '
qqrqqirqrqqßqrq i
affllrW: wm-. smq'q.- qqdqpfrq* : |
Rq c fcßrpfq?qj?qfq: qq ; qqq;frqq; || n
qqqrqq; i
|| \\ ||
qqrasjfqqrass |
c c -» '
n \\ n
qq?qwqqrqq: 1
n \v 11
qqrqrfqqqfq: i
iqqmrqqqrrstq; n ll


«55fl$ffaai®raiP «mfaajr?renws: 11
qqgroinqrsqq: |j
nwnqwrq ; 11 \<i,\\
qfjHqisq'mirq[su (
e=j'q''cU;gq C |[ : H^[«Tiqi«sqrsff : 11 ||
nios#is3qrqr%: |
*qqsgr n n
C *■» rsf
rnisfi.-imoiqrarqrqmr: i
n it
|| v\
ediq: |
II S?<\ II
I
v 3
II II
fteismßqrersj 1
gq^9 : II ||
*i«i5 t t?firqiT®r ®terercirgoiiqK: i
wiMfsßrfcT: k »<r n
*si®qf*ifaSßiq:: i
ll asji


eqarsß: l! |j
WRR?mqr ; qrar (
3RqVmqqrcfjr i
V *v -X *V Or-. r“x r\t
gcfis°i???RsNi i, ||
rqGqEf%%Rq?; I
|| (|
fqwnnfl(Mtaf : 1
3Rcf«fßsW«ir I
qqqlqqq'[cTiSl?q?qqIl?Jqijq;3:: 1 l? J qijq;3: : || ||
3q^iqrafq^qT|Tq^[qßqJl[qg ; || ||
ll ll
|
'll (I
2


to to?
; |
n ||
gqigrqrgqw: i
n %% n
gqs[f^s : ®f n n
i
gqsßWqwgq I
|
' -so ~~S .3
qeqjTßlfqqr II II
3q&i«toK: I
wjhhwssr: 11 n
«FJTf3fa?'i:firq > f (I vso |)
fasrffwssnw II II
faf safaf \
*Tsr&tfrq*rrew || n
n n
i
II II


=efgg#fJ|flcs*T |
qrJTßq^rgJiß f: n^n
3 * ’
qrqmqßsnqK: n h
qqilKqiqrqi 1
i vsqji
%fqifq?rct:§srcqr |isltu-qr>Tqri|q: h
q|gqßW*qßi |
RiTqqfqqrqiq I
I
ii a li
miffßrJi^r^f: I
Rißßq*fq q; u <f» n
i
Rfrrarq:qqlßf a: I
Hsnflwsrwsf: II <T<T 11


ll
qKW3T>jir: I
qmqjqwcßfo; n n
\
qffqißwrtcr i
gaqjßießiq: i
nßWrßrisqq: n n
qzßHWwfsm: i
C.
pfWpW^ l || ||
u s.vs
•vs
V> -s' '■£>
Sflrqsiqßl'qqi |
II is
■qaqiqqq-, fi pq s s}y q ] =33 : i
fififfgifisßnii: H ii


fsiRT fcHWff
irl I
3it%|«;qf sftsmsr %fon rqf iraterer i
II \°\ ||
( -qwKrr i
ftsttNgra--iw: n \°% n
gwrqßf7rqratW6fqßtr% : i
v 9
■sa *a » • *'
fsm#rr%flpfß geferwqsq?: i
V 3 vo
qfßT#WSin»l || \°\ ||
qssqiraf'-»sitclSi |
eqfeqKW?? i
q?ssremßqrem 1
\
erwrfrqirsTf ii^oy
rasr^Rii%sFq>3Ci s qrfJioi'ra? : i
(wqfwißr§ q; n \\\ ||
sT«rwrcqisflTcq)Tss:qiT®r®7«Rr|cl?a? : l
|
w; n \\\ |i
3|qrq ; gqfi'[ q fsrjj: qpjjsqr*q ; |‘


vtM&izhyiTf ii \ S 5 ||
r?qf I
JTRRswqress || \ n
qgmmßtgr?Rr i
VC sj£
qgßfßqgrqid n \ n
flqrrqfreiqf; I
-3
<ißOßari<»TraTm: qftqfqfaiN*- n \\t \\
n \ ||
aqiqgß<qfg*: II ii
qqjrqdflrVqr qssigrqgfqq: I
■'O NS
II \\\
sRr#Tjßß«fis- i.
'■O NO
aiftrgoffSßfrgg tfrssißmgrqqir- II
%q[q*qfagrqi# qrtfiqnqßigß: I
NO
qfe^r^^rqq.- 1
SfRISRSW®: II II


JNf C C
Rq<R : Rqrqrff; ||
qqqT#qqqqßqßWqqßqf I
II
ci^Riss ; i
n \\ o \\
|
qqVsfifß'rq# || \\\ ||
q%wp ; i
«B^rf:«#r : II \i\ \\
'•*
faßqsßßqqq: |
NO
grsqnßqrqjqrq || \\\ ||
rrstßotr*: l
II il
qqrqfqqqrqimr «nssrgnqTqq; I
S “\ *s _____ ~
q? o I) sv® li
Sicfrwiqturwra ll \\c n
c c n c T( . 7 ._v Ti .


<mmwjmmm n
f^ j i
ficKflmrftcißs: || |]
(T> C-* » „ , rv
n \%\ ||
|qmßq*ficT; ll ?88 li
' NO s 5 N» *
\qraßqm q: I
n \ (|
:II \ ||
gq%flqii'%3fr |
l^rs'«f[ j WTrsqiar ißieimw; I
«q|q^q*fqq ; II II
gwmtaHqrSsq q; |
jr qjrarfqsrefr qfqqFrqqrqjr: h it
3?fwW:fßofnq*w gqerwq: n \<\° ||
pqrqTrqtqmltqTqqqrgqqqq: II \<\\ II
ftfir4:ftTsf x crrqr Sf%sq;sfsqqa ; sTi%: |
qmf?qq : II \<K\ ||
i


ftjfa&wfr n \\\ 11
tamsqqsq qg =3 I
qqiqfqmfrj: |j \W ||
taarnfaqftrsß: I
i
raq?fqqqeq* i
II n
''Zi \9
N 3
qit;qflqr<R || II
wqmßcßsi e: I
SiqßMrqqroTP-J || ||
sS
SRqcfSlrßq |] ||
qRRRRiRq || ||
cfcUiqilciqiqß |
|| \%\\\
6 nn' || ||


awresna&«i n \%v n
qaqjraqwefs .
qqvfqce#j;q I
qrqq;qfq<¥fqia II ||
*r%«iwr : *ga : swi ai%afinwtar I
*»TW»M«3 || ||
qffra«wi?j4i i
II \\
II «
<?fSs«qw ll n
I
ll
effc-nswswfl I
qjßgrqwma ll ||


rare
qrfaqjcrrqwqr ii \^\\
qr&tqiqqrwfa i
fawTswrafr II II
q qsc!sir%:jircT : |
|| \<?° n
srqfftirjca 3TR^rerqqiqq[sl
qjqiwq
II
