

INAUGURAL ADDRESS -
THE SECOND SESSION
OF THE
s*tret|tl! nf tk pkisf of sgilit^u;
TUESDAY, 30th AUGUST, 1887.
ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.
LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
metropolitan of New south wales, and primate of Australia and Tasmania.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STREET,
Close to the Cathedral.
1887.


f *1 / 0 • .. /


FCfr/ F
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
THE SECOND SESSION
OF THE
|a'|oil of tl|o of
TUESDAY, 30th AUGUST, 1887.
“ Our general aim therefore in this undertaking was, not to gratify this
or that party in any their unreasonable demands ; but to do that, which to
our best understandings we conceived might most tend to the preservation
of peace and unity in the Church ; the procuring of reverence, and exciting
of piety and devotion in the publick worship of God; and the cutting off
occasion from them that seek occasion of cavil or quarrel against the
Liturgy of the Church.”
“ And having thus endeavoured to discharge our duties in this weighty
affair, as in the sight of God, and to approve our sincerity therein (so far as
lay in us) to the consciences of all men ; although we know it impossible
(in such variety of apprehensions, humours and interests, as are in the world)
to please all; nor can expect that men of factions, peevish, and perverse
spirits should be satisfied with any thing that can be done in this kind by
any other than themselves ; yet we have good hope, that what is here
presented, and hath been by the Convocations of both Provinces with great
diligence examined and approved, will be also well accepted and approved
by all sober, peaceable, and truly conscientious sons of the Church of
England.” — Preface to the Prayer Booh.
My Reverend Brethren and my Brethren of the Laity :—•
(I.) The life of our Church cannot be—and we should be false indeed
to the old traditions of the Church of England if we ever conceived
that it could be—separated from the general life of the whole com-
munity. The associations, therefore, which mark this year so strikingly
for all Englishmen in this colony must reflect themselves not indis-
tinctly upon our thoughts and feelings in opening our Church Synod.


Th6 Year lee It is the Jubilee year. In that respect it touches us as free
citizens of the great British Empire, and as loyal subjects of a
sovereign, to whom that Empire owes more than it can ever fully
know, in respect of the marvellous growth, the scarcely troubled
peace, the large measure of material prosperity, the progress of
intellectual, moral, religious civilisation during the last fifty years.
The Synod will be glad to be informed officially, that, before I
left England, in obedience to the united request of all the dioceses
in Australia and Tasmania, I submitted to Her Majesty the
simple but emphatic expression of a loyalty, strong in respect and
quickened by affection.
Th Ce?ebwitioi7 eve ie Centenary celebration, which concerns
the colony, as such, in the independent, self-governed energy
which co-exists so well with membership of the great body
of the Empire ; and this celebration, though it must
measure back the past in retrospect, tracing from humble
beginnings a large and vigorous growth, yet mainly, I think,
suggests rather the looking forward to a greater and maturer
future. As in the individual, so in the community, the birthday
of the young is always tinged with the bright light of hope. I
trust that through the whole of the Christian Church here in all
its branches there will be, either through combined or through
concerted action, a resolution to hallow the celebration univers-
ally by solemn thought and earnest thanksgiving and prayer.
The Centenary Nor should I fail to glance, though it be but in passing, at that
Episcopate. 101 ™ 11 other centenary, less exciting yet not less instructive, which
we have lately celebrated —the completion of the hundredth year
of the Colonial Episcopate, and the growth from the one Nova
Scotian See of 1787 of the 77 bishoprics of our own day—marking
the progress of our Church in America and India, Australia and
New Zealand, Africa and the islands of the great Ocean. While
we thank God for the past, we think in wonder how great must
be the expansion here, under God’s blessing, in the next hundred
years.
The new Synod Then, within the larger circle of these general associations,
Hail. there are some peculiar to ourselves, having the same two-
fold aspect, which we cannot pass by. We meet to-day in
a new Synod-hall —in architectural beauty and, I trust, in
convenience, more worthy of our Synod. As new, it turns
our thoughts onward in prayer, that God’s blessing may rest
upon the deliberations which shall here be held in the
to come : it suggests the newness of thought and action, which is


the essential token and condition of vitality. But it is also a
Memorial, of one to whom I have gladly had more than one occa-
sion to refer with deep respect, and who, I know, to many here
is not a dead but a living memory. In that aspect it teaches the
still higher lesson, not only of our continuity with the past
history of, the Church, but also of our unity, spiritual and
therefore imperishable, with those who have laboured in that past
and are now at rest. Under these associations, we enter, with
perhaps even more than usual of seriousness and high resolution,
on the deliberations of this year.
Some changes, some losses—great, though hardly so great as Changes and
those which last year I had to record—add a keener personal
enforcement to these feelings of solemnity. Among the clergy
we must omit this year two respected names —of the Rev. J. R.
Blomfield, who through ill-health has retired from active work
after a long and faithful service to the Church of 36 years, and the
Rev. T. W. Unwin, who, having exchanged the parish of St.
Luke for a chaplaincy at the Rookwood Cemetery, can no longer
be a member of this synod. Among the laity I know that we
shall all, whatever our special phase of opinion may be, miss
with deep regret the familiar presence of Mr. Shepherd Smith—
that strong-minded and large-hearted churchman, always ready
to aid good Christian work, always recognising by labour and
sacrifice the duty of every Christian to the Master whom he
loved. Not less —though in this case there is no sorrow over
death —shall we miss the aid and counsel of Mr. Thomas
Robertson, the Registrar of the diocese, and here our able and
conscientious Chairman of Committees, even while we may
rejoice to know, that by his change of residence he has been
enabled, as the Bishop of Riverina informs me, to render invalu-
able service to the formation of the Synod of that new but (thank
God!) flourishing diocese. And to one other loss I must refer—
one which concerns me especially, but which we shall all feel—
the resignation of the Chancellorship, and with it of his place in
the Synod by him whom we now rejoice to know as Mr. Justice
Stephen, and whom you will not think that I described here
wrongly a year ago, as “the distinguished inheritor of a dis-
tinguished name.” Too short has been our official connection,
though long enough for valuable service, which I gratefully
acknowledge. But the severance, as it leaves to me the privilege
of private friendship, so in the Synod and in the Church, I am
sure, does not diminish our tribute to him of respect and esteem.


In this connection I must be allowed to express the regret,
which—in common (I am sure) with the whole Synod—l feel in
the continuance of the enforced absence of our respected Dean,
and the earnest hope that, when at the close of the year he
returns to us, the object of his journey be by God’s blessing
attained.
The the (JI.) I turn from this notice, brief but far from perfunctory, of
the changes which have passed over us—and it is singular how
great such changes have been even in the short experience of my
episcopate—to deal, as usual, first with the details of the year’s
history and of the work proposed for this Synod; next, to suggest
to you certain principles, which it is well to remember in dealing
with some of the more anxious problems which just now present
themselves to us. Pardon me if I have to trespass on your
attention at a length, which is to some, I am told, wearisome.
The growing business, the increase of important questions, which
are the sign and the penalty of progress, must plead my excuse.
What points have to be noted in the history of the past year ?
Tll |eacrairy. Ch " First, let me remind you that one old and valued member of the
Synod we welcome this year under a new title. The Eev. Canon
Giinther has consented to give me his aid —and no oculus episopi
could be more truer and more clear-sighted—in the new Arch-
deaconry of Camden. I feel greatly the need of that fuller
organisation of the diocese which archdeaconries supply; and I
trust that at no distant time here, as in other dioceses, such
endowment may be found for them, as may set the holders free,
wholly or partially, from the restraints of parochial charge for
more general service to the Church.
I myabsence! ng The value of this support to the bishop—in whose case the old
Greek maxim, “ Nothing without the bishop,” is here sometimes
carried out with an almost cruel literality —has been brought
especially home to me by my enforced absence—longer than I
wished, although I made it as short as might be during this pas
year. Even though I speak in his presence, I must express not
only my own deep obligation, but also the debt of gratitude due from
the whole diocese, to the Yen. the Archdeacon of Cumberland for
his loyal and earnest, methodical and unwearied, discharge during
my absence of the duties of Commissary. It is by his request that
I acknowledge publicly the aid and sympathy in that somewhat
difficult work, which he has received from his brother-arch-
deacon and the rural deans, from the members of the Standing
Committee, and the many other committees who watch over our


various Church works ; and last, but not least, from our assistant-
registrar, Mr. Atkins, whose valuable services I myself know by
grateful experience. The captain of the ship, in which I sailed
homewards, told us that, if he were disabled, he had at least two
or three officers who could equally well navigate the vessel. It
is my happiness to know that, if for any reason I fail, there are
firm and true hands which, under the guidance of the Divine
compass, will grasp the helm. I trust that I may be pardoned
if I here express to my fellow-churchmen and many of my fellow-
citizens my heartfelt gratitude for the sympathy, which I have
received, as in the sorrowful cause of my absence, so in the
partial relief from its pressure, which by God’s mercy has been
granted to us.
The usual signs of visible progress will come before you to-day. New Parishes
Two proposed new parishes, at Neutral Bay and South Creek, anl Chuiehes-
will be submitted to this Synod, making up the number of 13
since I came here in 1884. New churches have been opened or
foundation-stones laid at St. Saviour's Eedfern, Burrawang,
Bowral, Bexley, Neutral Bay, Broughton Creek, Foxground,
Kenthurst, Otford, Mosman’s Bay. Mission-rooms, which I
greatly value for freedom and elasticity as adjuncts to a parish
for its more evangelistic work, and which I would gladly see
multiplied in number, have been similarly inaugurated in the
parishes of All Saints’ Woollahra, St. Barnabas’ Sydney, St.
Luke’s Burwood, and Castle Hill, and have continued their
useful work in St. Peter’s, Woolloomooloo, Christ Church, and
the Cathedral District. I only regret that, in most cases, these
new enterprises have been begun under burden of debt, some
without what I think to be a matter of imperative duty—a pro-
vision for the gradual discharge of that debt. Blit, in spite of
this, I rejoice, and you will rejoice with me, in these visible
evidences that our work grows, as in this growing community it
should grow, under the call and (as we trust) the blessing of God.
The report of the Standing Committee will have informed you Church Property
of the passing of the Church Property Bill, by which Parliament
under certain conditions leaves to the Synod, as the trustee of
the Church property, the right of turning it to new uses, where
ever, from any cause, the old purpose to which it was devoted
has ceased to be really valuable. The Act will save the money
of the Church and the time of Parliament, while its effect will
be, I believe, the firmer and more sagacious guardianship of
Church property. Perhaps it has a further value as a type of the


general policy, which is, I think, the only reasonable and uselnl
policy—of gaining unfettered liberty for the Church in all that
concerns her resources and her organisation. Under this Act
the aid of the Synod will be sought in more than one case during
the present session.
Higher Church I can heartily congratulate the Synod on the generally flourish*
Education. j n g coll Jition of our institutions for higher Church education. St.
Paul’s College has entered on its new buildings free of debt, and
by extension of its numbers has gone far towards filling them.
Moore College, as its report will show, though its numbers are
still below its accommodation, has increased considerably since
last year, and, but for inadequate preparation or inadequate
means of intending candidates, would be fuller still. The King’s
School, under its new head-master, has more than doubled its
numbers, and shows the greatest vigor and promise. Thanks to
the vote of last year’s session, the Council have been able to
carry out extensive repairs, to add anew hospital and a residence
for masters, and provide new class-rooms. The first stone will
speedily be laid of a school-chapel—that indispensable adjunct to
the life of an English public school—although here the funds
have been already largely contributed, and will, I trust, be com-
pleted by donations, mainly from the old boys of the school,
without trenching on the improvement fund still in the hands
of the council. The Clergy Daughters’ School at St. Catherine’s
has already filled to the utmost its enlarged accommodation. The
number of foundationers is now double what it was when the
present Lady Principal began her work, and the number of non-
foundationers, through whom the school is becoming self-sup-
porting, is largely increased. The Cathedral School, under the
charge, and by the unwearied energy, of our good Precentor, is
flemishing more than ever. Its excellence is proved by the in-
crease of non foundationers from without; while to our choristers
it is simply invaluable, not only for musical instruction but also
for that intellectual and moral training, without which boys can
hardly take an intelligent and reverent part in the daily services
of a cathedral. Everywhere I can chronicle advance; and you,
who know, and I believe sympathise with, my strong sense of the
transcendent importance of higher religious education, will under-
stand with what deep thankfulness I make this announcement
to you.
e coiiege f Two steps ordered by the Synod for the promotion of this
Grammar sSiool § reat cause are > as reports will show you, still delayed. For


the transference of Moore College to Sydney, the trustees have
only been able to prepare by the purchase of an admirable site
in the immediate neighbourhood of the University. As yet the
scheme, by which the parochial authorities and inhabitants of
Liverpool propose to further the utilisation of the buildings for
a new Church Grammar School, still lingers. Till it becomes
effective, it is felt to be hardly safe to complete the transference
of the College. Before next year I trust that this cause of delay
will be removed, The creation of the new Grammar School in
Sydney by the expenditure of the residue (about .£30,000) of the
compensation money for the site of the old St. James’s School,
cannot, in consequence of the wording of the Act obtained since
last session, be carried out till the Synod has elected a council of
management. Meanwhile the Church Property trustees, in
order to save time, have provisionally suggested a site at St.
Philip’s School, and obtained some preliminary designs, which
they will submit to the judgment and determination of the new
council.
The same educational work in its lower and more popular Popular Educa-
branches still goes steadily on. Our own parochial Church* 1011 '
schools still maintain themselves, in spite of difficulties and
the competition of schools far better equipped and organised,
with a success, which shows that there are still very many, who
value the old and unfettered type of religious education. The
instruction in the Public schools continues its large usefulness ;
although again I must tell you, not without some shame, that
its advance has been this year stopped, and even turned back, by
insufficiency of support.
I pass to a brief notice of the one new Organization of the Lay Helpers
Diocese of which I last year announced the inauguration. The Associatlon-
Lay Helpers’ Association is already more than a thousand
strong, promising, I think, much detailed usefulness, but perhaps
having its chief value in its witness for unity and large con-
ceptions of Church work. Each year deepens in my mind the
conviction, of which I spoke last Session, that in our work we are
over-narrowed and over-parochialized. If (as has been, I think,
the case in London) our Lay Helpers’ Association brings out
more clearly the universality of Christian duty, and the need of
a wide brotherly co-operation, it will more than justify our
aspirations and our hopes.
(III.) You will see that some matters of legislation, of a not un- Legislation be-
important but formal kind, are to be submitted to you. The Synod foie us '


will be invited to consider, and, if it approve, to invest with legal
force, the Pension-scheme which last year it entrusted to the
Church Society, and to amend the Presentation Ordinance, in
respect not of principle, but of some technical defects which have
been experienced in practice. There will be submitted also for
acceptance two Determinations of the General Synod —the first
so amending the constitution of the Board of Missions as to give
more of needful independence to its diocesan committees, and
make the Executive Council chiefly a central board of advice —
the other modifying the method of the election of the Metro-
politans, but by a provision from which the case of Sydney is
excepted.
The General I may remark that these Determinations by no means represent
Sj nod. most important work of the General Synod. On some
weighty matters it resolved in its independent character, as
representing the Church in Australia and Tasmania—such as the
establishment of a central examination, on the type of the now all
but universally recognised theological examination in England,
which all candidates for holy orders may have the opportunity of
passing ; the provision, if possible, of means for obtaining for our
clergy theological degrees; the acceptance for general use of
Forms of occasional Prayer to be drawn up by the Bishops, wdiich
will, I trust, be ere long issued. Some it referred to the great
Lambeth Conference of next year—the important question of the
means of securing a freer legal use of the Prayer-book, and the
addition to it by authority of special Services; the still more im-
portant question of approach on the part of the Church of
England towards some greater visible unity with those brethren,
who, on what seem to us secondary points, are separated from
us; the comparatively slight, yet not uninteresting, question of
the attachment of the title of Archbishop to the Primatial See
of this branch, and perhaps by consequence to corresponding
Sees of other branches, of the Colonial Church.
The Divorce Act. On one point the General Synod confirmed by its high
authority the action of this Synod, in its earnest though temperate
protest against the bill for extension of Divorce, now, as we think
most unhappily, passed by the Legislature of this colony, and
submitted to her Majesty for her royal assent. I cannot but
here, in passing, allude emphatically to the deep debt of obligation,
which what we hold to be the cause both of Christian principle,
and of public morality and welfare, owes to that distinguished
member of our Synod, the Hon. Edward Knox, who so ably and


so steadfastly resisted this bill in the Legislative Council, and
reduced the force which there carried it to the insignificant
majority of one. The Synod will, I cannot doubt, approve the
course, which, in common with some of my brother Bishops of this
Province, I have taken, in petitioning the Queen to withhold her
assent, until at least the public opinion of this colony has been far
more decisively pronounced, on a change so momentous in itself
and its consequences, that it ought to be accepted only by a
virtual consensus, or an overwhelming majority, of the whole
members of our Legislature. What may be the issue of this
last protest we cannot tell. But at least, before God and man,
we shall have “ delivered our souls.”
From the General Synod, which is just passed, I turn for a The Provincial
moment to the Provincial Synod, which is to meet this year under Synod ‘
the new Constitution, framed in 1884, and now accepted by all the
diocesan Synods but one, which has not yet met. It is, I think,
not unlikely that it may consider the necessity of applying to
Parliament for such modification of the “ Constitutions,” as will
remove all doubts as to the legal validity of its new constitution,
and, in fact, leave the Provincial Synod itself free to modify its
own organisation from time to time. It may be worth while for
this Synod to consider, whether in that case it may not be
well to apply for a similar freedom as to the constitution of our
own Synod, No one, I believe, doubts that the growing number
of our parishes is already making this Synod too large; for it has
even now more than twice the number of the members of the
Legislative Assembly of our whole colony. No one can be blind
to the misfortune of being precluded from summoning to our
Synod even our highest Church dignitaries, our Dean and our
Archdeacons, if they chance to be without parochial charge. It
seems but reasonable that, as in the diocese of Melbourne, it
should be free to deal in this respect with its own affairs. Who
can suppose that Parliament has either right or desire to regulate
the composition of an ecclesiastical assembly ?
Another important matter will, I know, come before the The Church Act,
Provincial Synod, on which it may please this Synod to make
some reference to it. I mean the position of our present Church
Act. That this Act was wise in the first instance, and that it has
been useful in the past, I can well believe. But it presupposes a
condition of things now largely obsolete ; it cannot be applied
and is not applied, to many of our churches, especially our free
and open churches. Yet at this moment it seems to supply the


only legal status of a church and parish ; and, when I am from
time to time consulted as to the legal rights of churchwardens,
trustees, congregations, in the churches not under it, I am
obliged, after obtaining the best advice, to reply with some
humiliation that I can give no sufficient answer at all. There
are, I believe, various ways proposed of dealing with this
difficulty. But it concerns the good order of the Church, and the
right position of its authorities, that it should be in some way
dealt with.
The hindrances (IV.) The view which lam thus enabled to give of the actual
oi our work. . °
growth of the church in the past year and of the practical work to
which this Synod will be called is, on the whole, full of interest and
encouragement. There is in it achievement, for which we may
thank God; out of that achievement open, as usual, call and
promise for the future. I can see but two hindrances which can
mar our advance—co-existent, though they may seem inconsis-
tent ; for the maxim that “ extremes meet,” under guise of para-
dox, expresses a fundamental and intelligible law. I mean the
undue development of extremes of opinion and party spirit in some,
which is a serious evil, and in others (what is to my mind
infinitely more dangerous) a certain tendency to indolent acqui-
escence, and a shrinking from any active work which may seem
likely to imply conflict. It would be, I think, out of place for me, on
the one hand, to deal with any points of the present controversy,
or, on the other, simply to reiterate complaints, which may well
be thought to have become hackneyed and conventional. But,
it is, I think, not inconsistent with my duty to suggest to you
principles, which underlie all these controversies, and which
ought to help us both to form opinion and to guide action.
The time char- It may seem over simple, but I believe it is true, to say that
acter of the , , J , , , . . , „ . .
Church of the key to the whole position (under, of course, the higher
England. guidance of Christian faith and duty) is thoughtful study of the
principles of the Church to which we belong—a Church in some
points unique, undoubtedly complex in its peculiar character, and
for that reason, to my mind, adapted to the complexity of
human nature.
The doctrine of What the Church of England is in point of doctrine, and how
impossible it is to include the whole of its doctrine under the
formulas of any of the schools —High Church, Low Church,
Broad Church—which divide it, I have, on previous occasions,
suggested to you ; and I need not try to deal exhaustively with
this subject, all important as it undoubtedly is. Yet it cannot be


passed wholly by. Let me but point you to the exhibition of
this truth, as it is plainly visible in our Articles; which, if they
are an authoritative guidance only to the clergy, must have
some instruction to our educated laity, and if, as is historically
the case, they bear the characteristic impress of the thought of
the 16th century, and did not at the time of their composition
claim completeness and permanence, yet have, so far as I may
judge, achieved a measure of both by their own intrinsic merit,
and thus exemplify to us the law of “ the survival of the fittest.”
They at least determine what our Church intended to be as em-
phatically a reformed Church. Like other Confessions of that
16th century, they were designed to be positive even more than
negative—to declare not merely what the adherents of the great
Eeformation rejected, but also what they believed. Pardon me
if I thus point you to what men may think a trite and familiar
document. Without the faintest idea of satire, I cannot but
think that, of many who talk of our Articles, some have never
studied them at all, and still more have never studied them as
a whole.
Look then, at the first five Articles; you will find that
they simply reiterate—with some pecularities of expression, and
with some additions characteristic of Western theology generally,
and of the 16th century in particular—the “ old Catholic faith of
Christendom,” from which the English Eeformation authori-
tively declared that it had no intention to depart. They traverse
again the lines of the ancient Creeds, in the belief in the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost.
The Catholic
Articles.
Pass to the next group of three Articles (vi. —vm.); and you
shall find that in them the Church of England definitely casts in
its lot with the Eeformation, by asserting what under all phrases
was its primary doctrine —the sufficiency of Holy Scripture, as
“ containing all things necessary to salvation while, as common
sense and obedience to the order of God’s Providence dictate,
she accepts, as in the Creeds, the interpretation of the Church
of Christ —the accumulated teaching of historical Christianity—
as an authoritative, though not infallible, interpretation, making
the Church (as is afterwards said) not a co-ordinate authority, but
a “ witness and keeper of Holy Writ.”
The Eule of
Next study that long series of Articles (ix. —xvm.) on what
we now call subjective Christianity—the application to human
nature, as fallen and redeemed, of the great objective truths
and powers of Eevelation. It is this group which bears most
Subjective
Christianity.


plainly the impress of the age. It views the two great Reforma-
tions of the Continent, the German (or Lutheran) and Swiss (or
Calvinistic) reformations—what men then called distinctively the
“Protestant” and “Evangelical” movements —and deals in-
dependently with the great principles giving life to both. On
“ Justification by Faith,” the great watchword of Luther, it
largely sympathizes with the soberer and more guarded form of
Lutheranism, which emerged in the Augsberg Confession. On
the mystery of Predestination and Election, it rigidly confines
itself to unsystematic and purely scriptural language, which would
have failed to satisfy the iron logic of Calvin, as historically it did
fail to satisfy those who understood and loved the hard
symmetry of his system. But on both the Church of England
took up an attitude of discriminating independence. It
sympathised more or less with, but it did not follow absolutely,
the great movements of Continental Reformation.
The Church and Yet more strongly is this independence stamped on the still
the Saciaments. } on g er ser j es w hich follows (xix.—xxxvi.), dwelling on the Church
and the Sacraments, and—sometimes by implication, sometimes
in vehement denunciation—protesting against Romish perversions
of both. Of all the Articles these are most distinctly Anglican.
By the points in which they agree with, and by those in which
they differ from, the many other Confessions pouring in from all
quarters in that century, they bring out that independent spirit
in which (as the famous challenge of Bishop Jewel showed) the
Church of England went back for herself to Holy Scripture and
the teaching of the Primitive Church. Even if they be taken
alone, without the interpretation of our Prayer-book and our
Catechism, you will see how impossible it is to include them
under any one formula. They have been said, as you know, to
keep the via media. But observe —for this is of infinite im-
portance —that they seek to find it, not by balancing between ex-
tremes, but by searching after the true way, which is apt to be
the middle way, simply because it is the characteristic of error in
various forms to diverge from it on either hand.
The Royal Nor is this less true of the short final group of Articles (xxxvn.
Supremacy. .
—xxxix.), which touch on the relation of Church and State, and
especially on what the Royal supremacy was, and was not, in theory
—what it ought, and ought not, to have been in practice. In another
form that truth is important now. The Royal supremacy meant
really the assertion of the ultimate power of the whole Church, of
which the Sovereign was the representative and supreme governor,


and in this the assertion of the rights of the laity, which had
long been overborne. In Church, as in State, sovereignty has
passed from the one to the many. It is important to see what
the Church of England holds as to the reality and limitation of
that sovereignty, and what are the full meaning and necessary
consequences of the declaration, that she gives not to it “ the
ministering either of God’s Word or of the sacraments.”
The object of this brief survey—which I have tried to make as the"
far as possible purely descriptive, and which I willingly leave to the Articles,
critical and thoughtful judgment of men, is not to maintain either
the perfection of the Articles, or the truth of the position of the
Church of England as they set it forth. Ido not deny that, for
myself, I rejoice in the line taken up—comprehensive, because in
the true sense moderate —moderate because scriptural. I prefer
the irregularity of a natural growth to a dead artificial symmetry,
I prefer to the clearness of a narrow simplicity, the balance,
branded by some as “ compromise,” which seems to me in-
disputably the law of human nature, and therefore of truth, as
viewed by and applied to that nature. But my object is to show
that which so many, who, in this party or in that, speak of the
principles of the Church of England, claiming them as ex-
clusively their own, seem to me to fail of discerning—to show,
in fact, not what these principles ought to be, but what they are.
As with the Articles themselves, so with the principles they
embody; some would no doubt read into them, or read out of
them statements, positive or negative, of doctrine ; some
would greatly simplify them, or get rid of them as authoritative
expositions altogether. But meanwhile they are what they are :
and within them I believe that different schools of thought can
find abundant room, if only they will think mainly of pressing
on side by side —each flying, if it will, its own colours under the
common standard —in conflict with sin, and the unbelief which
rejects Christianity altogether, instead of jostling and driving out
one another.
(Y.) But, while I cannot but refer to the principles of the Church Church System,
of England in respect of doctrine, my chief desire is to turn your
thoughts to them, as they bear upon Church constitution and
government. What is the true position of the Church of England
here ?
Now, all conceptions of the Church must, I think, take for
granted, if they rely not on theory, but on actual history from the
earliest times, the existence of a Ministry “ lawfully called and


sent ” (I use the thoughtful and simple words of our Article) “ to
execute the office of public preaching of the Word, and minister-
ing the Sacraments ” —so called and sent “by men who have
public authority given them in the Church ” —set apart by some
form of solemn ordination and benediction—bound by vows
which, not according to the will of the congregation, but accord-
ing to their own conscience in the sight of God, and to the truth
which they have solemnly accepted, they must fulfil. This con-
ception of the Ministry of the Church lies beyond all ordinary
controversies; it is accepted in the main by the great mass of
Christendom. Its full recognition has historically kept pace
with the vitality and unity of the whole body; all attempts to
overbear it, directly or indirectly, have injured both. It must be,
of course, controlled by law; but openly to deny it, or practically
to undermine it, is to revolutionize the Church of Christ.
But, accepting this fundamental fact, there are, it seems, two
theories of the Church—the one corresponding to absolute, the
other to constitutional, government in the State.
' The lutlst The one theory, explicitly or implicitly, assigns to the
Ministry in whatever form—the body of Presbyters, the collective
Episcopate, the Pope, with or without his Council—the absolute
right of legislation, judicial function, executive power—at any
rate in things spiritual, possibly (for it is hard to separate the
two) in things temporal also. This is the theory brought to a
formidable perfection, as it appears to one who looks on from
without, in the Roman Catholic system, especially as we see it
in the present day. It has much of the iron strength and close
organisation of all absolutism, bought though they be at a fatal
price. Under it, in this colony as elsewhere, the Roman Church
is putting forth an energy, bringing out a wealth of resource, com-
manding from her people large sacrifices, which must tell power-
fully on the future. So far as her work is work for Christ,
against the common foes, sin, ignorance of God, unbelief, I
admire it ; so far as it is bound up with what seem to me false-
hoods, usurpations, corruptions, I look upon it with anxiety. But
even in this aspect, I feel convinced that it cannot be rightly
dealt with by legal pressure or disability; it cannot be effectually
dealt with by mere denunciation and barren protest. No doubt
it may need to be opposed, by argument and witness for Scriptural
truth. But mainly it must be excelled—“ out-worked and out-
prayed ” —in what we believe to be a freer and a more excellent
way.


The other theory is what I would call the “ Constitutional.” The Constitu-
It believes that, as the promises of Christ and His indwelling tlonal ldea "
presence are given to the whole body of the Church, so to that
body belong, in things spiritual as well as temporal, law,
judgment, executive authority. Clergy and laity alike have in
all these things their duties and their rights. No man, no order,
no class, is absolute. This was undoubtedly the principle of the
Church of England in the Reformation of the 16th century; it
was this which, not without much exaggeration and tyranny,
was intended to be embodied in the Royal supremacy; in the
throwing off of obedience to Rome, in the establishment of our
Prayer-book, in the enforcement of our Articles, King, Convoca-
tion, Parliament (then an assembly of lay churchmen) all claimed
and had their share. This principle is still more plainly
recognised in the Church here. Our Synods are the governing
bodies of our branch of the Church of England, and in them
clergy and laity have their place side by side. In the Diocesan
Synod, the Bishop holds the place of a constitutional ruler. In
the larger Synods, the Bishops collectively seem to occupy sub-
stantially the same position. Here, as in so many other points,
the Church of England has grown up in the closest likeness to
the whole State of England, In both there is the strength of
the inherent vitality and truth of constitutional government. In
both these are purchased—cheaply purchased, as we think—at
the price of some inevitable drawbacks. It must be ours to
cherish the one, and to minimize the other.
This fundamental principle of Church Constitution we must
all, willingly or reluctantly, acknowledge as plainly embodied in
our system. I, for one, not only acknowledge it, but accept it
heartily: that Ido so I have shown already, by deferring on some
points, where I might have acted independently, to the expressed
opinion of the Synod, even when it conflicted with my own. I
believe the whole body of our clergy are equally ready to
recognise ungrudgingly lay liberty and lay rights.
But, from this conception of the Church, there follow certain Consequences of
consequences—not always so universally acknowledged—without
which it can never work in vigour of life and power. It is to
these that I would pray your attention, and the attention of the
churchmen whom you represent.
The ideal of constitutional system is the supremacy over all of
law, and the free development of that “ liberty within the limits
of law,” which was the watchword of some important Addresses


of clergy and laity, presented to the House of Bishops during the
late session of the General Synod.
(a) Supremacy “The supremacy of law”—not simply submitted to in its
hard, literal and coercive form, but freely and loyally recog-
nised, in spirit as well as in letter, as the guard of liberty,
because the guard against license. Only so can that be true
of human law, which Hooker so eloquently declared of
all law—that “ her seat is in the bosom of God, her voice the
harmony of the world; all things in heaven and earth do her
homage, the very least as feeling her care, the greatest as not
exempted from her power .... all, with one uniform
consent, admiring her as the mother of their peace and joy.”
That supremacy of law—as declared by this Synod, under the
guidance of those Constitutions, which on all fundamental
matters accept for us the law of the Church of England as a
whole—l would gladly see still more fully and practically
recognised, over Bishop, clergy and laity, over ministers and
parishes alike, in order to secure to all right independence, and to
guard in all cases against the conflicts of arbitrary privilege and
power. So far as my experience as yet gone, nine-tenths of the
difficulties and quarrels, which are the chief weariness of a
Bishop’s life, would be prevented by the more effective supremacy
of law. We sometimes feel this, as citizens, for our whole
community; we must feel this still more keenly—for religious
matters are those which touch the soul most closely—for our own
Church.
\nthiQ b “Liberty within the limits of law,” in respect of doctrine,
limits. worship, life—implying necessarily a large measure of variety
—not only concerns the vitality, but is also a necessary
condition of that comprehensiveness, which some think the
defect, but which to my mind is the glory, of the Church of
England. Liberty to individual souls in the conditions of Church
membership—liberty to the clergy in conscientious fulfilment of
their duty—liberty to parishes and congregations in minor
developments of ritual and practice—these things cannot now be
destroyed or impaired by action of law. But they ought to be
equally sacred against the forces of arbitrary pressure and of
intolerance of opinion, wasting time and energy on the infinitely
little, instead of trusting mainly to the positive declaration of
truth, even our own special aspect of truth, as the power which
must prevail against falsehood and error. No doubt, all liberty
must be used with self-restraint—tender of the consciences,


feelings, even honest prejudices of others—caring above all
things, except truth and duty, for the peace and welfare of the
whole body. But its existence, even its occasional vagaries,
are the conditions of vitality. At all costs —within, be it
observed, and not beyond the wide limits of our law—it must be
frankly recognised.
Let me say plainly that I myself shall always endeavour so to own
recognise it. Wherever my attention is drawn to breaches of ICS ° U 10n ‘
law, under the regulations which our Synod has wisely laid down
wherever, even without such information, I think it well to
inquire into such breaches of law motu propria —l shall hope to
do my duty unflinchingly as the guardian of law. Wherever my
advice is asked, or wherever I may feel it right to tender it
unasked for the good of a church and parish—even at the risk
(which is no imaginary one) that it will be lightly regarded—l
shall not omit to give it with such authority as I may. I shall
certainly, in my own practice and in my public teaching, try to
set forth what on these matters seems to me right, and accordant
with the spirit of the Church of England. But it is my fixed
purpose, while X thus carry out what I conceive to be my bounden
duty, to respect liberty, even where it manifests itself in ways, of
which personally I do not approve ; for I conceive that this is
not only accordant with the principles of our Church, but is the
only method by which vitality, sincerity, progress can be secured.
Closely connected with this manifestation of true constitutional (e) Limitation of
principle in the Church is the limitation, which it should impose partyspirit
on the developments of party spirit. I am not about to engage
in the idle task of denouncing parties as such. That there will
be parties in any community, ecclesiastical or civil, which has a
free constitution and a representative system, is shown by all
experience; that, where men are in earnest, these parties must
to some extent come into conflict, and that, in view of such con-
flict, their members must partially merge their own individuality
in them, is to be lamented, but it will never be avoided. But
these parties become what the world calls factious, and what the
New Testament notes as schismatic, only when they seek to
overbear responsible authority, assume a spirit of intolerance
towards all without their pale, and induce practical forgetfulness
of that true harmony of law with liberty which I have sought to
indicate. That the formation within the Church of party
organisations tends at least to this exaggeration and perversion
of party spirit, I cannot doubt. I have seen this plainly in the


Church at home, which has —what we have not —the excuse of
the want of a complete representative system, through which the
will of the whole body may express itself. I should fail in my duty
if I uttered no warning on the subject here. The great correc-
tive force which will prevent or mitigate such evils is, first, no
doubt, the large-heartedness of Christian charity, to which
brotherhood is a living reality, and next the large-mindedness of
right proportion in thought, which can wisely estimate the much
in which we agree, and the comparatively little in which we
differ. But, after these, I repeat, there will be great power for
good in the true constitutional spirit, which is content to see the
whole variety of opinion and feeling within the limits of law
express itself in Church government and Church life. Within our
Synod, for example, such a spirit will show us clearly that our
committees and organs of government, if we desire to make them
representative, ought truly to represent all sections, the majority
and minority in due proportion ; or, better still, ought to be so
chosen, as to include, without respect of party, the men who are
best fitted to do the special work, which to each delegated body
is assigned. Outside our Synod it will keep party action, and
even the assertion of special truths and the protest against
special errors, which is for each party its raison d'etre, in their
right secondary place —infinitely below the general energy of
Church work, and the proclamation of the great fundamental
Gospel truths, which all of us hold as the life of our life. I
confess to some impatience, not so much of indignation as of
sorrow, that, at a time when the war of opinion is between
religion and utter Godless paganism, coarse or refined —when the
question is not of this or that Christian school or Church, but of
the existence of Christianity in its broadest simplicity—-when w 7 e
have to fight a battle of life and death against gigantic forces of
sin—we should be spending so much of our energy on the most
trivial party questions of opinion or practice, as if the shibboleth
of party was the main confession of Jesus Christ.
It has been my experience throughout my life to be unable to
enrol myself in any party, not because I sympathize with none,
bxit because I cannot help finding points of sympathy with all. I
must not recommend the position to any one who wants an easy
life. Those who hold it may perhaps lose some means of
practical power, and will certainly be attacked in turn from all
sides, and strongly defended by none. But what has been
always the choice of temperament is now, I conceive, laid upon
My own
position.
18


me as a sacred duty. So far as God gives me light and strength,
I must be the Bishop, not of any party, but of the whole Church.
If ever I find that I can no longer do my best to feel with, and
to work with, all true work for Christ, which, within the limits of
our Church principles, is going on under any form, I must lay
down my trust, because I shall feel myself unable to discharge
it rightly.
Let me pass to another consequence of this free conception of {d) Universal
the Church—the sacred duty of work and sacrifice which it lays duty of sacnflce '
upon all. The solid strength of absolutism is in the obedience
of its subjects ; the more elastic strength of a free community in
the glad co-operation of its members. Around us, in States and
Churches, we see plainly the former kind of strength. The time
is perhaps coming, when the English people at large, and our own
Church ot England, will be forced by trial to show the superiority
of the other. There is no prayer in our whole Service more
beautiful, more instructive, than that which asks of Him by
"Whose Spirit “ the whole body ” —mark the phrase, “ the whole
body ” —“ of the Church is governed and sanctified, that every
member of the same, in his vocation and ministry, may serve
Him.” “In his vocation to which every member of our
Church is called by Cod, in virtue not only of the fundamental
motives of Christianity itself, but of the special character of the
Church membership which is his. “In his ministry ” —a service
of love, ready, gratuitous, unstinted, and not a matter of taste
or a matter of generosity. The longer I have experience of duty
here, the more I feel the greatness of glorious opportunity given
us, which will bear its fruit not so much in the present as in the
greater future ; and, I am bound to add, the more I feel that it
will be absolutely impossible to grasp it, unless not a few of us,
but all, enter more thoroughly into the responsibility, imposed by
our Church freedom and the diffusion among us of Church power.
Take the common, rough test of money contribution. It is to Money
me an absolute pain to dwell on it; but yet it is, as I have said °° n " U I<m ’
before, the tribute to God of dormant power, which can partly
foster, and partly give scope to, living energy. I hardly know
one phase of Church progress, in which from time to time I am
called to seek for advance, that is not continually cramped by the
want of means. I can hardly bring myself to tell you, for
example, year after year how the work of religious education, or
the duty of Church mission, languishes for want of a few hundreds
or thousands of pounds. Probably the experience is not ex-


ceptional; it may be paralleled in other times and in other
Churches. But it is not on that account the less real or the less
significant. Nor must I, in honesty, conceal the fact that of this
contribution there is much which is not freely and gratuitously
given. What would a Christian of the Apostolic Church think
of the continual begging imposed upon the clergy, not least on the
Bishop, for what ought to pour in unasked ? How constantly
does St. Paul’s injunction sound to a Bishop now-a-days as a
thing too good to hope for—“ That there be no gatherings when
I come!” What are we to say of the devices —always un-
welcome, often miserable devices—to which parishes seem to be
driven —the bazaars, the entertainments, the inevitable collection
at every meeting, even the picnic and the cake fair ? We are so
familiar with the prevalence—is it an increasing prevalence ?
of these things that we fail to estimate their significance—the
terrible light which they throw on the languor of Christian duty
and charity—the scandal which they cause in the eyes of that popu-
lar judgment which, if it does not go deep, is mostly true —the
hindrances which, as I believe, they throw in the way of gaining
for Christianity the allegiance of the great mass of the working-
people. Nor can I refrain from touching on another phase of
this same evil —the tendency to make contribution, not a free gift
of service, but a barter for arbitrary power. As I have said, I
rejoice in the constitutional power of the laity. I view without
dissatisfaction the' free expression of conscientious feeling of the
whole congregation, rich and poor, on the right footing of
Christian equality. But the presence of plutocracy in our
Churches —the estimate of the value of a man’s adhesion, not by
the strength or wisdom of his Christian character, but by the
length of his purse—this is not only a degradation of Church life,
but a serious danger, and another fatal hindrance to the Chris-
tianity of working men. No support of the Church is so good as
voluntary contribution on the right principle ; better, far better,
should I esteem it than the richest endowment. But Ido not
know anything worse or more demoralizing than the idea of buying
spiritual things by temporal—as though the faithful preaching of
Christ, and the grace by which alone it can be ours, could be pur-
chased by money. There is a power which may be too dearly
purchased: for it kills that which it attempts to rule.
What the Church needs is universal support on principle of all
her members—not support given or withheld, according as a
clergyman or a bishop is liked or disliked—not support, which is a


matter of chance or temporary impulse. I hear everywhere just
now, in our own Church and in others, of a serious defect in
Church resources this year, because we have had a succession of
wet Sundays; and the curious thing is that men regret it, but
speak of it as inevitable, just as they would speak of a harvest
spoilt by the rain. Yet does it ever occur to them to think what
it really means ? It means that the old Apostolic command,
“ On the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store
according as God has prospered him,” is largely a dead letter
among us that many members of the Church only give when
they are solicited by the plate or alras-bag going its rounds, and
forget the duty, when they are kept from church by a shower of
rain. Till this precarious insufficiency of discharge of duty is
shamed by some sounder and nobler principle—till we rise at
least to what the old tithe signified, or rather to the higher level
still of free tribute to God, of which the Epistles of the New
Testament are full—our Church cannot in work be worthy of its
glorious traditions, and the freedom of its constitution may be
practically a weakness, instead of a strength.
I have spoken of money contribution because it is, as I Contribution ,
have said, a rough unmistakable test before the eyes of th °work. and
the world. But, though I can .but glance at it, let me here
say once more how much more valuable is the contri-
bution of work and counsel—“ not of yours, but of you.”
Absolutism has its conscription ; a free community must
have its volunteers. The very course of events, political and
ecclesiastical, tends to this —that behind the regular force there
must be a people in arms. Must this be by constraint ? Can it
not be willingly, at least in the army of Christ himself ? Of one
thing I am sure, that we shall never advance, perhaps hardly
hold our own, against the growing forces of antagonism, unless
all our Churchmen, and especially those who fill high places in
the world, who have the privilege and responsibility of large in-
fluence and education, come forward in our parishes, our societies,
our synods, to offer to God the sacrifice of time and thought and
trouble. With some, thank God, this is so. My experience here,
as compared even with experience at home, increases every day
my deep respect for them, my sense of the invaluable service
which they render to the Church, and the cheering help which
they give to its ministers. But is it so to the right extent among
us ? Is it even increasingly so, as the work grows upon us, and
its issues deepen in importance ?
21


Do not think this the language of complaint. I have neither
right nor wish to complain : for I have had much help and
sympathy here. Even were it not so, it must be for those who
are called to the Ministry a duty and a happiness to spend and
be spent in a service, in which they are never alone. But I feel
bound to tell you in all sober earnestness what, as it seems to
me, the call of God requires of all Christians, and what the free
constitution of our Church demands of English Churchmen.
(e) Loyalty to
authority.
On one last consequence of our constitutional system I
hesitate to touch, lest it should seem personal. But I speak for
my office, not for myself. The head of a constitutional system
has little legal power; but may have immense influence, on one
condition —the condition of a loyalty of confidence and support.
Where can we see a nobler and a more signal instance of this
than in our own beloved Queen ? Compared with many of her pre-
decessors in old days, her legal power is greatly diminished, but
what sovereign ever reigned with a more effective sway over the
hearts of the people ? Tour Bishop is something of a constitu-
tional head. His legal power is small, and, I should think,
curtailed from what it once was. You know that he cannot re-
move an unfit clergyman ; he cannot enforce right duty on a de-
faulting parish or even a neglectful trustee. The power lies not
with him, but with the Synod, to create a new parish. To all the
chief parochial charges he is unable to present, or even, as in
some dioceses, to give to the Board of nominators the help of his
presidency and advice : and I may add that, in the parishes to
which he is called upon to present, there is a frequent desire to
relieve him from the responsibility under form of petition. Often,
therefore, he cannot enlist men, who offer themselves to him for
the diocese, even if he knows and trusts them and is sure that
they would do good service. Now of this, once more, Ido not
desire to complain. Whether it is good for the Church or not,
this is not the place to inquire. So long as a Bishop’s properly
spiritual functions are his own before God, he may well be con-
tent to exchange power for influence elsewhere. But the
condition of things makes it more essential that he should receive
what, unless it be his own fault, I doubt not that he always
will receive—the support of a cordial loyalty, and even (I must not
shrink from adding it) of a right measure of respect and deference-
An absolute ruler may stand in cold solidity of strength, though he
be isolated in the loneliness, which is natural to his position. But
this cannot be in one who has to direct the progress of a free


community. No doubt personal qualities will have their effect;
and in this lies the heavy responsibility of leadership in a
sacred cause. But there was something of a true ring in the
loyalty, which declared that it would “fight for the crown, if it
hung on a bush.” In the Church, still more than in the State,
it is the sacred office, not its imperfect holder, which has a right
to command reverence. In any case, one thing is certain—that if
(which God forbid) a bishop here ever loses the confidence and
loyalty of his fellow-churchmen, he cannot hold his place with
any advantage to the Church. Only by these—given fully and
generously, even in spite of inevitable errors and differences of
opinion—can he do the work for God, to which he has been
called.
(YI.) I ask your indulgence once more for this demand on your Conclusion,
time and attention. Even now I must add one word in conelu- Tlie Year™ nial
sion. The year 1888 is the Centenary year of our Church, as well
as of the colony. As you will see hereafter, it has been pressed
on me to attempt the formation of a great Centenary fund for
Church work, and on this matter the approval of the Synod will
be asked. It is a thing, which, I believe, we can do ; it is a thing
in which, if we begin it, we must not fail. But there is a nobler
offering still, which, looking on to that celebration, we can make :
it is to put away all hindrances, all divisions, by mutual forbear-
ance, by a hearty loyalty to our Church, by a higher unity in the
love of our common Master. So to make peace—the peace not of
deadness to principle and zeal, but of a deep sense of brotherhood,
in the Communion of Saints, and in the enthusiasm of common
work and common prayer in the great battle for God and Truth.
Earnestly do I long and pray for approach to an even larger
unity among those who call themselves Christians. May
common religious celebration of the coming Centenary draw
them closer together, and may the prayer of our General Synod to
the great Conference of our own Communion at Lambeth in this
respect be not in vain ! But, if we are to help in the slightest
degree in this greater work, we must have already, by God’s
blessing, conquered in the lesser. Let us join, in this our Synod,
and in our Church at large, not in the mere form, but in the
living intensity of the prayer, that “ God may keep us in the
unity of the Spirit, and the bond of peace.”


■ -.. . ■■ ‘ ..." , .
