

THE
CASE IS ALTERED,
IN a
Letter,
ADDRESSED TO THE
Roman Catholics of Wigan.
BY THE REV. CHARLES PLOWDEN,
President of Stonyhurst College.
Honfton:
Id Duktsl r^ 9 ’r ,t>Fake ' Btreet ’ Red L i«n-*qnare, and Keating &Co
wSr ! lfr V w-| M r rC; SOld also l, y B ™wn, and Ljon,
W i g a ” ’ Ciarfce, Wdcockson, and Whittle, Preston: Clarke
Lancaster; Wdcockson, Blackburn ; Bibby, Chorley *
Cocker, Ormskirk ; Gardner, Bolton ; Gale, and* ’
Roger.son, Manchester; Gore, and Grand,
Liverpool; Haddocks, Warrington ;
Bolland, York ; Simpson, Wolver-
hampton ; and Andrews,
Durham.
Printed by J. Brown , Wigun.
im.


THE
CASE IS ALTERED,
&C.
Gentlemen, ’
TEMPVS tacnndi et tempvs hqnendi. Eccles. 3.
Sr;- '™ 6 ‘° b ? f mt ’ ™ d - a time .peak.
' bl,Ca ,0 ” s meting Committee at Wigan are
benean. „ otT|)e Ihbo „ re( , rf R » y “
, ur r P de": ’ “ ' afe Pam P h, c‘‘ supports their men-
for the 4,l™* a " SW T’ ra ' her fr ° m a ” 0(i - of respect
mS■ ve ' S TT: than from ‘lr ea,l of the strange
.T V' 6 fe Pl ° ased *»««<> » Statement
Mr 11,0 to ,hen " the ‘ ime to s P eak - 'cause, if
. Ihompsons (.berai imputation of unproved crimes
to Ins clerical and catholic brethren should pass unnoticed
*' n " sU be const ™«' into .an admission of „„i if b
persons unacquainted with the immensity of n hieh
he has so indiscreetly brought before the public eye. If
Kev. Genl.eraan had remembered the evano-elica
maxim, - I, tby brother shall offend against thee
rebuke him between thee and him alone,” Mat. 18, V |,e
ntig 1 late arrived at an amicable settlement of differences^


But he openly declared at Wigan, that he would have no.
thing to do with that very President of Stonyhurst, whom,
he has since so publicly arraigned, and condemned to
share with the great bulk of Catholics in Wigan and its
vicinity, the guilt of resistance to episcopal authority. In
repelling this rash imputation, the President of Stonyhurst
feels himself bound to secure his owp character, but not
authorised to utter a harsh word to his assailant. He even
opes, that responsio mollis franqet iram , Prov. 15. that
a gentle answer will cool the boiling zeal of his accuser,
lie means not to take all the advantage which the subject
of Mr. Thompson’s Pamphlet affords, becanse it involve,
matter quite irrelevant to the public: he wishes only to
point out a few misstatements, and establish a few truths,
■which may satisfy the public, that his dreadful accusation,
cannot be supported by facts, that they are light as air.
My first assertion is, that the Pamphlet, and every Iln.
m it, is purely the work of the Rev. Vicar, who here sub-
mits to place himself on a level with his inferiors. Not
one word of it belongs to his Lordship, our respected'
postohcal Vicar. He lias neither signed it, nor avowed
it, nor sanctioned it, nor commanded it to be received a.
truth, as an oracle of episcopal authority. It involve,
much matter of free discussion, dangerous indeed to be
presented to the laity, but which opens a wide range for
private judgment and opinion. It takes in matter of
mere y temporal import, on which indeed the Vicar, like
n old champion, peremptorily decides, but which our
IS op wi infallibly be too cautious to define. To sun.
pose him capable of issuing any mandate that is not strictly
spiritual, would be an insult to him and to his Principal
e Sovereign Pontiff, from whom alone all his authority i,
env«d. From the commencement of the Wigan contro


veray, I have admired the conduct of the Bishop. I have
made inquiries, but I have not yet learned that any spiri-
tual mandate whatever has been issued by the prudent
Prelate; of course none has been resisted. Certainly
none has been announced to me; and therefore none has
been disobeyed by me. The wild charge alleged by the
acting Committee against me, of having employed Emis_
saries to resist the Bishop ; of having paid them a thousand
pounds, &c. might create some indignation, but no sur-
prise. They are known. But that such libellous imputa-
tions should be countenanced by the Reverend G. Vicar,
who can neither prove, nor believe them; that be should
have asserted on Feb. 3rd, that the President of Stonyburst
hdd seconded and encouraged measures, which every in-
different person plainly saw were resistance to episcopal
authority , must be considered by me as a personal injury,
of which I shall expect a disavowal, until the Rev. Gen-
tleman shall have individuated the spiritual mandate duly
announced to me, and shall have demonstrated my resis-
tance to it. On Feb. 3rd, be could not possibly mean bis
own denunciations of the preceding evening from the
tavern table, because it was evident that I could not then
be acquainted with them; and it is equally true, that (his
own fellow guests excepted) no man has yet conceived
that they proceeded from our Prelate. It is a comfort to
know, that they are not adopted, warranted, or sanctioned
by him.
Before this period, my own conduct, that of my friend,
the two Incumbents of Wigan, and again the measn.es of
the undertakers of the new chapel, had proceeded on
principles, hitherto universally acknowledged and follow-
ed, without the appearance of doubt, without question or
offence, by .all English and Irish Catholics, who before and


since the relaxation of the Penal Statutes, have always held
themselves free to accommodate themselves with chapels,
each upon his own premises, and have always been con-
sidered as benefactors to the catholic cause for such
voluntary pious exertions. Amidst a hundred instances of
such conduct, which might be alleged, perhaps there is not
. one, m which the previous licence of the Bishop was
asked, in which a doubt was harboured of the chapel beinw
the private property of the builders. Without ranging
through the four districts, this county alone furnishes
ample proof of my assertion. Twenty new chapels in it,
winch might be named, would be twenty cases in point.
Unfortunately for the peace of the Catholic Public, onr
Kev. Vicar having leagued himself with a small party inte-
rested to disturb the proprietors of Wigan Chapel, in the
enjoyment of their ancient established right, has thono-ht
proper to leach us a new ecclesiastical polity, calculated
indeed to mislead the ignorant, but happily not avowed
hy onr Bishop. It belongs to Mr. Thompson, it will not be
assumed by any Bishop in the Catholic Church. He
overwhelms us with canons of ancient Synods held in days
oi yore, and he infers from them, that no devout British
Catholic can lawfully build, or repair, or rebuild a chapel
npon his own premises, without the episcopal licence, and
mt whatever is thus built, must cede immediately to
episcopal patronage. It will be difficult to convince
„f'! B‘‘ 8 ‘‘ atl,ol '“l tha ‘ ‘hen-private expenditures in the cause
otTho mX" Imri,y1 mri,y inS ' an,ly *° fell “fc A* control
Bilp aid P °"' er ’ Ua ' ler tbe JireCt ‘heir
impronrieiv of' l"'” “ h ' S tIlS P osal - lam sensible of the
mpiopnety or discussmo' onpctinnc • , . .
deuce in pamphlets. bnt V T f f canon,cal J™prn-
I npmeis, but Mr. Thompson’s inadmissible nosi
fions necessitate me to „ posi
say, that the bulk of Catholic


Divines hold a very different doctrine, when they allow the
jus patronatus the right of patronage, to laymen, who are
the founders of churches and chapels, when they allow it
even to women. Students may find this doctrine in almost
every Canonist and Casuist; La Croix, who is now before me,
Lib. 4, N. 250, may alone suffice; but it is of higher impor-
tance to know, that the right of private patronage is at
once acknowledged and regulated by the Council of Trent,
in the 25th Session, chapter 9th, where it pronounces it to
be an injustice to abolish the lawful rights of patronage,
and to violate the pious intentions of the faithful in the in-
stitution of them.* In the received discipline of the Church,
these i ) o hts aie transmitted from Father to,Son; they are
every where held and respected, in spite of the particular
canons either of general or provincial Synods, which in past
ages, agreeably to the circumstances in which they were
enacted, vindicated the whole right of patronage exclu-
sively to Bishops. Disciplinarian canons are essentially
alterable; they are often repealed by subsequent canons,
they more frequently fall into disuse, they become obsolete
by the revolution of years, Avhenever a new mode of disci-
pline is introduced, and regulated by the living voice of the
Supreme Pastor.
If all ancient canons were now to be observed, the 3rd
canon of the first Council of Nice would make it unlaw-
ful for a priest to keep a female servant in his dwelling.
The 18th of the second Council of Nice not only prohibits
women to be in the dwellings of Bishops and Monks, but it
ordains the deposition of the Bishop or Superior of the
monastery, who should transgress this order. The sth
ia*ti^SonT a vi P n w n^ t(ls jUra t0lle ! C ’ p j asque fidelium voluntates in eonuit
uuuiuuone violare sequum non est. Sess. 25, C. 9.


tfanon of Chalcedon forbids Bishops and Clergymen to
remove from one city to another. The sth of the 4th
of Lateran forbids Clergymen to enter public Inns, unless
in cases of necessity, when they travel. These canons, like
those which our Vicar produces, were framed according to
the exigency of the times, and of particular portions of the
Church ; they were never universally accepted or enforced
throughout all provinces or dioceses ; and if ever they were
in' vigour in the English Church, they have long since'
become all equally obsolete, they are abrogated by contrary-
practice sanctioned by the Head of the Church, they are now
of no avail.
And here I must state another principle of canon lawy
which is perhaps little known among the good people of
Wigan, though our Rev. Vicar cannot be unacquainted
with it. To mention it would not have suited his purpose.
It is the general doctrine of Catholic Divines, that pre-
scription against an ecclesiastical law of discipline is
acquired by non-usage within a certain term of years.*
Many Theologians of various schools conceive forty years
to be a sufficient length of time to acquire this prescription;
some maintain that ten years will suffice; so that if a canon
©f discipline has been neglected or disused during forty
years, it loses its force, it infers no obligation; and it must
be allowed, that the ancient canons prohibiting chapels
and oratories to be erected without the episcopal sanction,
are precisely in this category. It were easy to cite Doctors
w o maintained this doctrine: let one stand for all. The
o y Bishop of St. Agatha, Alphonsus de Liguori, who
flounshed in the middle of last century, and was beatified
last year by Ins present Holiness, teaches Lib.T. N. 139.
• is moral theology, which he dedicated to Pope Benedict
X I\. taat a proscription of forty years invalidates an eccle-


siastical law. He cites for his opinion canon law and
Divines of divers religious orders; he even leans to the
sentiment of those, who hold a prescription of ten years to
be sufficient.
Now supposing the canons, produced by the Rev. Mr.
Thompson, to have been maintained in full vigour in
England, (which is by no means the case) down to the
period, when we lost our ecclesiastical hierarchy in the first
years of Elizabeth, the right or privilege of forming orato-
ries and building chapels in this kingdom, has at least been
exercised by Lay Gentlemen, and by Members of religi-
ous orders, more than 250 years, not one of whom ever
solicited a Bishop’s leave, not one of whom has ever been
opposed by a Bishop. In this county alone, twenty new
chapels have been built within the last forty years, by Lay
Gentlemen, by religious Missionaries, by generous Subscri-
bers; and who of all these consulted the Bishop? whom of
all these has the Bishop opposed ? The Rev. Mr. Thompson
is the first and only opponent, because in the case of
Wigan, he had a special interest to disturb the very ancient
right of the old possessors. Every catholic Gentleman has
justly conceived it to be his right to build a chapel, either
in his mansion-house, or adjoining to it, or upon any part
of his estate, which he judged convenient for his family and
tenants; every body of regular Missioners have used the
same right wherever they have obtained a settlement.
Not that they conceived themselves thereby vested with a
strict jus patronatus in the canonical sense of the word ;
for m fact no such thing exists, or can exist among us,
since nothing is, or can be canonically deputed to the
dm"e service, nothing accepted by the Church as an
appropriation: all in such a case, would be liable, under
the actual laws, to be confiscated, as unlawfully destined to
B


Superstitious uses. The general and just idea then, which
transcends, pervades, rules, and comprises the whole
matter, is the idea, the principle of private property,
on which tenure alone every catholic chapel, every
mite of catholic ecclesiastical property is and must be
held. The law of the land cannot contemplate, or take
cognizance of our pious tenements in any other view, than
that of private property . And though there can be no
precise jus patronatus for the reason already given, there
results from the very notion of private property a quasi
patronatus , not to be defeated by the Councils of Favour
and Sens, a right, which has always been respected, of
presenting a Pastor to the Bishop, and of excluding from
private property a person of foreign choice. If the founder
of the chapel made over his right and property to a body of
regular religious men, as happened in the case of Wigan,
the settlement then became a foundation, in the possession
and enjoyment of which, the Sovereign Pontiffhas pronoun-
ced that they are not to be molested.* Indeed these arrange-
ments have hitherto been very amicably conducted. Our
Vicais Apostolic, disclaiming the spirit of lording it over
the Clergy, which is reprobated by the first of the Apostles,
have been the Fathers of their flocks, and their government
has therefore been cherished. They have always rejoiced
to see new chapels rise, and they have accommodated the
owners of them in every way to the extent of their power.
If a secular clergyman was presented, he was granted ;
if a regular, he was not refused. The third rule of the
The Pope s words are “ Pe fnndationibns nihil omnino innovetur;
sea am seen ares quam Regulares in earnm possessione perseverent,
qnas in praesentiarum obtinentWith respect to Foundations, no
alteration w a ever must be made : but secular and regular Priests alike
must be maintained in the possession of those, which at present they
enjoy. Reg. 22, iVUssionis Anglic, prescribed by Benedict XIV. anno
1753.


mission particularly specifics the houses of the gentry, as
stations in which Regulars are to be employed. Certainly
not one of our Prelates has ever shewn an inclination to
deviate from the practice of modern discipline, as it is
established by the Supreme Pastor of our little church.
And if the claim of private property in chapels built by
Laymen, and the consequent right to present Chaplains
has never been contested, it will be difficult for Mr.
Thompson to refuse it to secular or to regular Priests, who
may be the real owners of such property, (though held by
ostensible trustees,) and who, by the express regulation
of the Holy See are not to be disturbed in the possession of
their foundations. Their right arises from the very notion
of private property , the only title, as has been said, on
which any of our chapels can be held or recognised by the
law. No man can be compelled to divest himself of his
just right, in virtue of antiquated canons, which long-
since have yielded to a different mode of discipline; and
since we have all disclaimed upon oath the belief, “ that
“ the Pope or any other foreign Potentate has or ought to
“have any temporal or civil jurisdiction, power, superio-
“ rity, or pre-eminence, directly or indirectly, within this
“ realmcertainly no Prelate will interpose spiritual
authority to impede the lawful enjoyment of temporal pos-
sessions ; certainly no layman, certainly no Priest, (Mr.
Thompson excepted,) will ever allow 7 , that the forgotten
Synods of Exeter or Avignon, or that modern Popes,
Bishops, and Apostolical Vicars, have or ought to have
direct or indirectpporerw r er to defeat the rights of private pro-
perty, sanctioned by long prescription, and recognised by
the law of the land.
In past days, Bishops, Priests, and Jesuits, being more
liable than Laymen, to experience the severity of the Penal


Laws fur greater security vested their little property iu
trustees, who were, and in many places still are, the osten-
siole proprietors in the eye of the law, though certainly
they are not the real owners. The inconveniences attend-
ing this precaution may in future settlements be avoided,
because since 1778,* Bishops, Priests, and Jesuits are dis-
tinctly and by name admitted to the legal right of governing
and boarding youth, of inheriting and purchasing land, &c.
but the ancient mode of tenure still perseveres at Wigan,
as in other places, though it be a certain fact, that the
premises and the original chapel were purchased with the
private fortune of a zealous Jesuit of the ancient family of
Brockholes, and that his representatives have continued to
enjoy the tenement with all its rights, in quiet possession,
until our Rev. Vicar unexpectedly arriving from Nice
and Chalcedon, undertook to transfer it to our Bishop.
Our Bishop is too wise to accept the transfer. The succes-
sive representatives of Father Brockholes were perhaps
ignorant of the peculiar sanctions of old Asiatic Synods,
which the Vicar’s erudition employs, to dispossess them of
their inheritance; but they knew, and they now know, that
infinite changes in church discipline have been introduced
since those early ages; that Regulars, for instance, have
been exempted in many points from episcopal jurisdiction ;
that they have been constituted Missionaries under certain
rules, prescribed by the chief Pastor for their government
and comfort; and their whole ambition is, to rest quietly
under the protection, which these rules afford. One of the
most important among them ordains, that the class of men
called Regular Missionaries , shall not be disturbed in the
quiet enjoyment of their actual possessions. But if the
* See the repealing Act of that year, 18th Geo. 111.


undent founders of Wigan Mission, and their modern repre-
sentatives are debarred from the right of budding, repair-
h " and rebuilding their tenement, it is evident that they
must quickly be dislodged, and the protecting
of Benedict XIV. becomes nugatory and useless. - >
I think, be concluded, that they are perfectly ... rule
when they build, repair, or rebuild their tenement on the
site of their own foundation, and that they are injured y
the man, who can call such deeds disobedience to
authority , which as not yet spoken.
The venerable power of Bishops, at least in this country,
is entirely spiritual, as is the power of the Sovereign
Pontiff from which it emanates. We have all sworn that
this is our belief; we all acknowledge the right, the obliga-
tion of every Bishop to provide, as far as he can, proper
pastors for bis flock, and to satisfy himself of the idoneity of
the persons to whom he intrusts his sacred spiritual
jurisdiction. Whatever greater latitude of choice in the
appointment of pastors may have been attributed to Bishops
by ancient canons, those canons have long since yielded to
a different mode of discipline; they are now of no avail.
The Pope’s power is again spiritual. We know that he is
bound to provide, as far as he can, the best pastors for the
different dioceses of the church. Whatever latitude of
choice he formerly exercised in the appointment of Bishops
the canons, which established it, are now done away ; they
have yielded to the new discipline which recognises lay
patronage. The Pope, for some ages, has admitted catholic
Princes to present subjects for the Sees within their states,
and he has bound himself to accept the royal nominee, as
often as he is satisfied of his idoneity. To appoint to the See
of Lyons or Arles a foreigner, an alien, unknown to the
royal lay patron, would now be an uncanonical obtrusion;


it would be a violation of the concordat. In the more
minute details of discipline, the Pope, on the same principle,
has pronounced, that in our mission, cramped as it has
been by Penal Laws, regular religious men shall be Mis-
sioned, that they shall be allowed to be chaplains in houses
and chapels of private property, for which they must of
course be presented by Laymen; and still more, that
wherever they have obtained a founded settlement, they
shall not be disturbed in it. Here then it appears, that a
restriction is laid on the ancient canons, which attributed
the sole choice of Pastors to diocesan Bishops; and nothing
can be more clearly proved, than that lay patronage is now
a part of ecclesiastical discipline, that the ancient canons
alleged by the Vicar are at present inefficacious, that the
principle of private property in chapels, and the conse-
quent right of presentation pervades all our sacred pos-
sessions ; and as this is admitted by the Head of the
Church, we may fairly trust that it will not be contradicted
by any subaltern ecclesiastical authority. The Vicar in-
deed is bold to assert, that his Lordship, our Apostolical
Vicar has, in virtue of the ancient canons, forbidden the
Proprietors ot Wigan Chapel to proceed in the undertaken
work, and that any encouragement given to such work is
resistance to episcopal authority. But this assertion rests
solely on his own word ; it is not the word of the Bishop.
1 repeat it with confidence, as far as my information goes,
lus Lordship has not issued one single spiritual mandate
in the Wigan cause. None has been intimated to me or to
t le Incumbents of Wigan by his authority; none therefore
has been disobeyed. And because the Vicar maintains
that the Bishop has forbidden us to enlarge our chapel, or
to erect a new one, I here remark that this is a misstate-
ment, which has escaped from his hasty pen. Exact in-
quiry has been made; and though private correspondence


I anr \ n cprular Gentleman will never be
between a Bishop an either to
deemed an that in this
Priests or to Laymen, it n«® , , ,
priests j T taid not one word about
short correspondence bis Lordship sairt noi one
tX ■-w Chapel ; he only signified, w.diout assigning
reason for it, tithe did not approve of enlarging the
old y one. A new edifice was necessary; .» was jnslide o
t very* sound principle; it was conformable W
down by the chief Pastor; it was not prohibited,
T .d that it could not be forbidden. The adv.ce given
believed that it coum no jnsubovd ; lul .
in it cannot interrupt the worK, eye
still accuses them of insubordination, because they do
perform what they cannot effect.
Such are the anomalies of warm characters, but steady
principles must at length prevail. The idea of pnvate
property in all our sacred tenements cannot be worn out
To escape the Mortmain act and confiscation, every c mpe
must be built on land belonging either to a private Gentle-
man, or to a certain number of trustees, or to one or moie
Priests, secular or regular. Mr. Thompson may a low this,
but he will contend from his old Councils, that the patro-
nage and presentation belong exclusively to the Bishop.
Every secular Gentleman will maintain his right of dis-
posal of his own chapel, and the right, which results from
it of presenting to the Bishop a man of his own choice to
be the Pastor. I have called it a quasi patronatus, and it
leaves more in the power of the proprietor than belongs to
lay patronage in catholic countries. It leaves with him the
free power of pulling down his chapel, which has been
often done, and the power of dismissing the Priest from his
premises and of presenting another; nothing of Much* m


regulardisciphnc,is allowable toalayPatron. ThelateMr.'
® d felt himself fully competent to act in this manner. He
bad taken the resolution to dispose of the premises of Weld-
Jjank, near Chorley, in favour of Stonyhurst College.
Vho could have opposed him, if he had carried it into
execution? The present President of Stonyhurst with
•ne i cu ty pierailed upon him to surrender Weld-
f ‘° ‘ he l iartlci,lai ' patronage of the Bishop, because he
oiesaw thattue intended measure would be thought invi-
dious and would displease his Lordship. A case in point
■appeued not long ago at Limerick. The Fathers of St.
omimc’s Order possessed a convent and chapel, both in
ruinous condition, in an obscure part of the city. Their
Prior made a purchase of land in the parish of St. Michael
where he has since completed the construction of themosi
nured Gothic chapel, that Ireland possesses. The parish
‘■est of .St. Michael, who was also Grand Vicar of the
mcese rather more moderate than the Grand Vicar of
b"i r *, n, , e ’ fu * ,y acknowledged his undoubted right to
‘ ” '"ilever he pleased on the site of his old chapel, but
emended °„ our Vicar’s grounds, that he ought' nm ,o
erect a new chapel within his parish. The cause was
.en ed to Rome, from which capital the Prior is lately
re timed enriched with many spiritual giants and privileges
“! " e " r clla P e! ’ beca,lse ‘he ancient canons, which The
J p T alle^‘l ' could “o'- in the estimate of the Court
Rome, debar a British subject from purchasing and e,n-
as be might choose: b «
ouo-ht not Ca,ho ' 10 has sworn, that the spiritual power
■liftin''this realm. W “ h ‘ empora ‘ a “ d dvil
whicb dlspu,es licmonstrate the necessity of a line
winch may ascertain the rights of li t iga llt , p*,


foe drawn by Superior Powers, it may be presumed, that in
the present discipline of our mission, all Gentlemen pro-
prietors of chapels, which they have built upon their own
grounds, will continue to dispose of their property, as their
predecessors have done during 250 years, without any
control or dependance; and all regular religious Mission-
aries, who are possessed of founded settlements, will hold
themselves authorised, under the rule of Benedict XIV. to
enlarge, repair, refit, or rebuild their missionary tenements,
without incurring the guilt of insubordination to spiritual
Powers. Both these classes of men will conceive them-
selves entitled to present persons of their own choice to
their Prelates for the service of their respective chapels,
and will readily acknowledge the grant or the refusal of
the requested spiritual faculties to belong solely to the
Prelate. Such hitherto has been the order of things. Can
any alteration be expected * “ Reddite qua sunt Casaris
Casari, et qua sunt Dei Deo.” Mat. 22.
It may here be remarked, that in Mr. Thompson s very
partial statement of the case, he appears even angry, that
the service of Wigan chapel should be claimed exclusively
for the Members of one particular college. From all tha
has been said, the Public, who know that this mission)
founded by Members of one particular congregation, has
been quietly possessed and enjoyed by their representatives
near a hundred years, are enabled to form a judgment,
whether these Gentlemen are not in strict conformity with
the decree of Benedict XIV. in favouring a new edifice on
the old site, and whether Mr. Thompson has not wrongfully
arraigned them for disobedience to orders, which the
Bishop has never issued. They may further judge, whether
Mr. Thompson with his small knot of associates, have not
rather acted in direct opposition to the discipline established
C


by Benedict XIV. by attempting to raise a chapel so very
near to the ancient ground, that the possessors of the latter
must presently be forced out of their premises, unless they
exercise their hitherto undisputed right of building on their
ancient site. Their opponents, having unwarily refused
to unite with the great mass of the Catholics of Wigan, fore-
saw that their main object of supplanting the ancient Mis-
sioned would be frustrated, if the congregation of Wigan
were permitted to proceed ; and they would naturally wish
their progress to be arrested by spiritual authority, though
such interference might perhaps deprive free citizens of
their temporal right. Mr. Thompson would probably find
resources in his casuistry to justify such conduct; but the
discerning inhabitants of Wigan, who witness the daily
proceedings of his small party, will form their own judg-
ment of it. If on one side they are indignant to be treated
as rebels to their Bishop, for exercising their certain right;
on the other, they will readily detect the misstatements,
the nullity of the pretences, on which the cause of their
opponents is supported; and they are comforted to know,
that their respected Prelate, far from assuming the grounds
of his Vicar, has not yet uttered a single authoritative
word on the whole cause. They know that their Prelate,
free, no doubt, to sanction another chapel, has not ap-
proved of the situation selected for it. It stands upon
irrefragable evidence , that this choice was contrary to his
expectation: and they know that far from opposing the
construction of a chapel, which is said to have his Lord-
ship’s sanction, they would willingly concur to raise it ;
they would think it a blessing to their town, if without
hostile views to their chapel on the ancient site, it had been
placed in a situation favourable to their brethren of luce
and the circumjacent country.


, , here I mio-ht take leave of Mr. Thompson, if the
Jve last pages rf his Pamphlet, though irrelevant to the
Wigan affair, did not seem to require some notice
readers of the Case Stated will have observed, that this
part of the performance is a studied invective again
house which 1 govern, and against its M en. • £
will easily appreciate the spirit which dictated •
them now to remark, that, though it opens /
of matter, to which lam not quite a stranger it still l.t«o
it j ik 0 t)pv Vicar is not the man with
concerns the public, and the • _ t^e
whom I would wish to discuss it. His ig™ r
matter, which he treats, is really too gross to be instructs I,
h“ preiudices too rank to be subdued. Such matter ought
to'be treated only between ecclesiastical personages m
private; and I may here inform him, that it - m con-
templation to present a memorial on this su^ ec
all our Vicars Apostolic, which may bring to their
knowledge truths, which they do not yet possess,
will suffice for Mr. Thompson and the public to know at
present, that Stonyhurst college is a missionary Seminary,
established for a special purpose by the Holy See, furms e
with its own laws, statutes, and privileges, which are clear-
ly ascertained in one special Brief and three Rescripts o
two Sovereign Pontiffs. All this constitutes its spiritual
rights; and though prudence advises the concealment of
such things from the public, it has been a misfortune for
Stonyhurst that they have been hitherto little understood
by the bulk of our clerical brethren, some of whom seem to
have imbibed wrong notions, and, like our Vicar, to have in-
ferred consequences from them, which truth must disavow.
What is here said of Stonyhurst college, is equally true with
respect to the Vicar’s frothy effusions on the case of the
Society of Jesus ; a cause, on which he has not yet the first
elements of accurate information. All that needs to be


said on this matter, amounts to this, “ The survi ving’ ancient
Members of that Society and their associates have no other
ambition, than to be treated, as the Holy See, the Sovereign
Pontiff* may direct”!
Stonyhurst has temporal as well as spiritual rights.
These depend upon the laws of the land. They are ascer-
tained by the two acts of repeal of Penal Statutes, of the
years 1778 and 1791. They are secured to us by the civil
oath of fealty, which we have pronounced, and though this
oath has been thought to contain certain clauses which are
useless and superfluous, yet it presents to us the precious
clause, by which we renounce every pretension of the Spi-
ritual Power to interfere in our temporal and civil concerns.
God forbid that I or any of my friends should infringe this
oath! Never will I submit to answer a question upon such mat-
ters; never will I give an account of the temporalities of my
house to any interrogator, who is vested merely with
spiritual power. Oar Prelates are incapable of requiring
it. Would to God that our Vicar, mindful of his civil oath,
had adopted the same principle! But his anti-Jesuitical
zeal heie exceeds all measure. He produces, p. 23, a
citation, which he is pleased to term a determination of the
Church , in virtue of which he presumes to vindicate
the property of Stonyhurst to the Spiritual Power. He has
not indeed ventured to specify the authority, the instru-
ment, the time, the Council, the Pontiff; by whom such a
supposed determination of the chz rch of God was enacted
or promulgated to the faithful. He leaves us thus free to
suspect the authenticity of his quotation, and to wonder at
the extreme indiscretion of the man, who could advance
such a pretension. What a gulph has he here opened
beneath his feet! To rescue him from plunging into it, I
take leave of him with the following declaration.


of the very moderate temporalities, which Stonyhurst
pn Z, not the value of a single shilling ever was, in any
p of the word, ecclesiastical property-: not a mite of it
"er belonged, even as private property, to the ancient.
Society of Jesuits. The whole is, in the closest meaning of
‘the word, private' property, for the use and appheat.on of
w hich the owners are and will be amenable, only to the laws
of their country. If the Rev. Mr. Thompson will submit to
ponder the few hints which have been here given him, he
Will perhaps be inclined to recoil, and finally to ackuow-
ledffe that mTIT .
the case is altered.
May 18, 1818.
FINIS.
J. BROWN, PRINTER.
