

PSTH piPnn
a,ei-iuioue pans.
Box IO
No. 13.
Eeligiods Science
3. n |l bl)r £ s s
EEY. CHARLES STRONG, H.D.
Delivered at opening of Session, 1896, of the Religious Science
Club, Literary Society, and Ladies’ Reading Club
of the Australian Church.
/I&elbourne:
J. Haase, Printer, 17 Swanston Street.
1 8 9 6.


“ The Australian Church — Its Basis,” being No. S of
this Series, can be had free on application. Also Forms of
Enrolment for those who wish to become members.
THESE Sermons and Addresses are
published monthly by voluntary con-
tributions, for free distribution, and are in-
tended to make known more widely the
teachings of the Australian Church. To
continue and extend this work donations
(however small) are asked for, and may be
sent to the Hon. Secretary of the Church,
Flinders Street, Melbourne. Friends in
the country can have copies forwarded
monthly on application in return for cost
of postage, or donation to the Publishing
Fund.
Australian Sermons, by Dr. Strong—price, 3/6 —at the
Australian Church, Flinders Street. Also, Some Recent
Protestant Theology, being Six Lectures on The Drift of
Modern Thought, as illustrated by Representative
Books of to-day—price, if-; Church Worship —price, 3/-;
and A Book of Religion for Schools and Families —price, 6d.
The Australian Herald, a Religious-Social Magazine,
edited by Dr. Strong. Price, 3d.


RELIGIOUS SCIENCE
One of the societies represented at our meeting to-night
is the Religious Science Club, which has for its aim
the friendly discussion and systematic study of religious
questions.
A few words, therefore, on the subject of Religious
Science may not be out of place.
To many people the combination of religion with
science may seem strange. They can think of science
only as the enemy of religion, and of religion only as
something which has nothing in common with science
—as a matter either of unscientific feeling and emotion,
or of unscientific dogma.
This view alike of Religion, and of Science, seems to
us false and misleading.
The business of Science is to note and classify the
facts of human observation and experience. These
facts may be facts in what we call the physical or ma-
terial world. Or they may be facts in what we call the
mental world—the world of human thought and reason.
Or they may be facts in what we call the moral world
—the wmrld of human will, motive, duty. Or, finally,
they may be facts in what we call the religious world—
the world of the human sense of dependence on and
relation to God—to the Source and Foundation of life,
thought, feeling, and conscience.
Science is thus confined to no one sphere, It is a
means and a method, and may be applied to any depart-
ment of human experience.
.Science is the classification of knowledge under the
categories of cause and effect. It is the tracing of the
development of the different stages through which the
earth has passed on its way fo its present place and
form—of the different stages through which the varie-
ties of plant-life as seen to-day have emerged—of the


different stages through which the forms of beasts and
man have passed on their way to what they now are
—of the different stages through which language
has passed from the first imperfect utterance of the
savage up to the wonderful development of the highest
and most cultured expression in language to-day—of
the different stages through which art has passed from
the first rude attempt of the savage to sing, or paint,
or carve, up to the finest works of art to-day—of the
different stages through which political and social life
has passed, on its way from the tribe and the primitive
family up to the highest form of social and political
life known to-day—of the different stages through
which the idea of moral obligation has passed on its
way to the highest sense of duty to be found to-day—
of the different stages through which philosophical
thinking—thinking on the great problems of human
life and being—has passed from the earliest times to
the present—of the different stages through which the
conception of the “ Power not ourselves ” has passed
on its way from the wonder and fear of the savage
bowing before a fetish, up to the thought of the most
spiritual natures to-day.
Science is knowledge of relations. These may be
the relations between chemical atoms, or between the
different parts of a plant, or different plants; or be-
tween the different parts of the human body, or
different animal bodies ; or between the different parts
of a moral conception, or of a philosophical conception,
or different conceptions.
Every department of human experience may thus be
treated scientifically. (Note, however, that Science does
not create experience.) And Religion is no exception
to the Rule. Just as you have a physical science, and
a historical science, a science of language, a science of
art, and a science of morals, so you have also a Re-
ligious Science.
It is the recent discovery that Science, as a method,
can be applied to Religion, which has revolutionised
Theology.
This discovery does not necessarily do away with


Religion, as some people seem to suppose. Science, they
imagine, supersedes Religion. But why should it do so ?
When I study the earth’s geologic strata scientifically, I
have not abolished the earth or my experience of a material
world. When I study plants scientifically, I have not
abolished plants or myexperience of that marvel—plant-
life. I study man’s development scientifically, but man
remains still, and this great fact of experience has not
been explained away. Scientific knowledge of art, of
how one school of music has flowed out of another,
of the conditions under which the phenomenon of sound
is experienced by us, or the impression of colour is pro-
duced in a thinking mind, does not destroy the fact of
poetry, or explain away the Beautiful as an element in
human nature. May we not, in like manner, say that
man’s sense of the Infinite, man’s feeling of relation
to a Power not himself remains, even when we have
classified and traced the evolution of the different stages
through which that sense of God has passed ?
What Science, then, is opposed to, is not Religion, but
the unscientific presentation of Religion. For instance.
Suppose I declare that the form of Religion known as
Christianity is perfectly disconnected with the forms of
Religion preceding it, and that it is a purely miraculous
fact, Science, historic science, would at once rightly
oppose me.
And if I further maintained that such a view of
Christianity was an essential part of it, Science would
then have to declare that my Christianity, at least,
could never be reconciled with it.
It is largely in this way that the quarrel between Re-
ligion and Science has arisen. Utterly unscientific
views have been set forth as being of the very essence
of Religion, and Science has quite naturally taken the
professor at his word, and declared Religion to be an
exploded fallacy or superstition.
But a truer conception of what Religion is seems
gradually to be taking possession of men’s minds. We
know that physical life has many forms, that intellectual
life has many forms, that moral life has many forms.
Life is more than all or any of its forms. So we seem


to be coming to the conclusion that spiritual life may
manifest itself in many forms—that the sense of God,
and of our relation to the Supreme, is more than all or
any of the forms which it has assumed. Between
Science and Religion the opposition then vanishes, and
the Scientific Method becomes a means to the study
and elucidation of Religion.
I have said that it is this comparatively recent dis-
covery that Science as a method can be applied to
Religion, which has revolutionised Theology.
Let me illustrate.
Theology used to start from certain miraculous!}'
communicated premises. A verse drawn from the
Bible was supposed to be foundation enough for an
argument to rest upon. Religious Science begins by
placing Religion before the Bible, and teaches that the
Bible rests on the fact of man’s religious nature, and is
an expression of man’s religious nature.
Science further treats the expression of man’s religi-
ous nature from the point of view of development.
Man, it says, grows, and as he grows his religion grows
too.
Thus Religious Science takes the verse of Scrip-
ture, and puts it in its place in religious develop-
ment. It looks at the Religion of a race as growing,
as well as at the Religion of each individual as
growing. It looks at all the Religions as so many
branches of the one great living tree—as so many
varieties of the same great species. It takes the Litera-
ture of each Religion and studies it, shewing how it has
grown. It takes all the religious Literatures, as it
takes all the languages, and compares them, and shews
their relation to one another, wherein they agree,
wherein they differ, and how this variety has sprung up
in one country, and that variety in another.
And then Religious Science leads us not only thus
up the stream of history, teaching us to trace all the
Religions from their first appearance and the course
they have followed from age to age, but it takes us
back, also, into the hidden depths of human conscious-
ness, and tries to show us how of necessity the Idea of


God, and of our relations to Him is embedded in our
every thought, and presupposed in all our knowledge.
It thus takes us back to the ultimate fact of our own
rational being, and shews us this great Stream of
Religion issuing from our own mysterious nature, and
flowing deeper, broader, and clearer, as, through grow-
ing thought and experience and all the stimuli of his
varied history, man realises the meaning of himself, and
at length emerges on the stage of the distinctively human
life. Here is an utterly new theological point of view.
In our Religious Science Club we try to treat Religion
thus scientifically—to trace it from its transcendental
root in the human mind, through all its divers forms—
to compare these forms, to analyse each religion into
its elemental idea—and to follow Religion into the
future, shewing what the lines of development are
likely to be, along which we should press.
We claim that this Science is the Science of Sciences
—that it includes all others and is the supreme study
—a study demanding not only that we keep our intellect
keen, but that we also keep our heart pure. For
rightly to appreciate Religion we need not merely sharp
analysis, but broad sympathy to enter into the deepest
thoughts and feelings of which a human being is cap-
able. We must ourselves have some Religion in our
hearts to understand the Religions of the world, and
the phases of the soul in its long, toilsome, yet noblest
search after the living God.
The Book to be studied by the Club this Session is “ The Evolu-
tion of Religion,” by Edward Caird, LL.D., D.C.L.


Books recommended : —“ Evolution ” : A Primer by
Edwin Clodd; and “The Childhood of Religions,” by
the same; “ Manual of the Science of Religion,” by De
La Saussaye ; Kuenen’s Hibhert Lecture ; Max Muller’s
“Introduction to the Science of Religion.”
The Religious Science Club meets on alternate Tues-
days. Subscription, entitling to use of library, 1/- per
annum.
