







THE
CASE FOR FREE TRADE
BT
JOHN M. ROBERTSON
LONDON
A. and H. B. BONNER, i & 2 TOOK’S COURT, E.C
1904


CONTENTS.
PAGE
§i. The Conflict of Protectionist Doctrines .. .. .. 5
$2. The Consensus of Protectionist States 7
$3. Why Free Trade is Won Slowly 9
$4. Free Trade Historically Considered 13
§5. Protection Historically Considered .. 20
§6. Protectionist Hallucinations 27
§7. The Argument from "Dumping” 34
§B. Protectionist Pretences 39
§9. The Effects of Protection as to Food 43
§lO. The Effects of Protection as to Manufactures .. 48
fn. Protection is Parasitism.. 53
$l2. The Final Futility of Protection 59
§l3. Constructive versus Destructive Policy 70
The Need for Education .. .. .. .. .. .. 76
APPENDIX : Protectionist Fables 79


PREFACE.
The excuse for the present addition to the mass of Free Trade
literature, on the whole so excellent, is the need for a general
view, in short compass, of all the prominent facts and theories.
It is not, indeed, a compilation from the existing literature;
it even introduces some historical and statistical considerations
not there dealt with; and it submits in conclusion a constructive
policy on which all Free-traders, perhaps, will not agree. It is
occupied also, to a considerable extent, with an examination of the
more competent as well as the more popular propaganda on the
other side. In checking my deductive arguments, however, by
those of the leading advocates of Free Trade, I am glad to find
that they are often identical, as they should be, and that there are
no vital differences to solve. In this respect, Free Trade pro-
paganda offers a pleasing contrast to that of Protection.
I have only to add that students who have not yet read widely
and wish to carry the investigation further into detail will do well
to turn (i) for statistics, to the valuable “Handbook for Speakers
on the Tariff Question,” issued by the Free Trade Union (6d.),
and to the admirable pamphlet by Mr. L. G. Chiozza-Money,
4 ‘Through Preference to Protection” (same publishers, 3d.),
wherein statistics and argument are furnished in equal fulness;
(2) for special studies of the problem from political and economic
points of view, to the volume “ Labour and Protection ”, edited by
Mr. Massingham (Fisher Unwin, 65.); (3) for special information
as to the fortunes of various industries, to the volume “ British
Industries and Free Trade”, edited by Mr. Harold Cox (same);
(4) for a special study of the action of foreign exchanges, to the
luminous pamphlet of Mr. Ewing Mathison, “ The Principles of
Foreign Exchange” (Spon, Ltd., 3d.); (5) for an acute survey of
the wider political problem, to Mr. G. H. Perris’s “The Protec-
tionist Peril” (Methuen, is.); (6) for a comprehensive and search-
ing criticism of American Protection, to Henry George’s “ Protec-
tion or Free Trade” (6d. reprint by the English League for the
Taxation of Land Values) ; (7) for a fuller general survey than
the present to Mr. Chiozza-Money’s “Elements qf the Fiscal Pro-
blem” (King and Son, 1903, 3s. 6d.); (8) for a masterly expert
treatise on the theoretic issues to Mr. A. C. Pigoji’s booklet, “ The
Riddle of the Tariff” (Brimley Johnson, 1903, is.); and for critical
accounts of the history of the Free Trade movement, to the works
of Mr. Mongredien and Mr. Armitage Smith, cited in the follow-
ing pages.




§i. The Conflict of Protectionist Doctrines.
That there is something wrong about the ■principles of
the present assault upon Free Trade in this country may
be at once seen by any one who will coolly compare the
positions of Mr. Balfour and Mr. Chamberlain. The former
professes to think that universal Free Trade would be the
best order for the world ; and he avows his belief that the
policy of Protectionist countries is “ doubtless costly to
them,” though also injurious to us.* Mr. Chamberlain on
the contrary (though he also says "I am a Free Trader”)
professes to feel that the consensus of most nations in the
policy of Protection raises a presumption that theirs is the
right course; and he further proposes as his ideal a system
of exclusively imperial trade, in which Protection is an
essential element. On the question of the advantages of
Protection he is reported as thus speaking at Greenock on
October 7th, 1903:
“We are a great people; but, after all, I have never been
able to believe all the wisdom in the world was absolutely domi-
ciled in this country. (Laughter and cheers.) I have a certain
respect for our American cousins. (Cheers.) I have an idea
that if you wish to deal in the most friendly spirit you had
better not shut your eyes. I have some considerable respect for
the German people. I recognise that they have been, and still
are, the most scientifically educated people on the face of the
globe. I have the same respect and friendship towardst our
neighbours, the French. I think they have done immense
service to knowledge and civilisation in our past history. I do
not believe that all these people are fools, and when I find that
they absolutely refuse to adopt the Cobdenic principle and to
accept Free Trade as the model and example which it was repre-
sented to be, I say to myself, ‘lt is worth thinking over. I have
* “ Economic Notes on Insular Free Trade,” pp. 23, 14. Mr. Bal-
four, it is true, speaks elsewhere (p. 17) in a contrary sense, but that
is a constant feature in Protectionist propaganda.
+ “ I have a great regard for,” in reprint of speeches, p. 48.
THE CASE FOR FREE TRADE.


perhaps been wrong to be so certain as I was of the wisdom of
our policy,’ but that alone would not have moved me. If in
spite of my respect for Americans, French, and Germans, I
found the facts were against me; if I had found that they were
being ruined because they had adopted Protection, and that
we were progressing enormously because we had adopted Free
Trade, then I should have stuck to Free Trade in spite of the
majority being against me. (Cheers.) But now what has been
the policy of these other nations ? It has been not a haphazard
policy, but a policy deliberately adopted and deliberately pur-
sued. It is a policy to use tariffs to increase home trade, and,
if you like, to exclude foreign trade. All these nations to which
I referred, and every other civilised nation on the face of the
earth, have adopted a tariff with the object of keeping the home
market for the home population—(cheers)—and not for any want
of friendship to us. I do not believe they have been in the
slightest degree actuated by ill-feeling towards Great Britain;
but because they thought it was necessary for their own security
and prosperity they have done everything in their power to
shut out British goods. They have passed tariff after tariff.
They began with perhaps a low tariff, and they continued it as
long as it was successful. If they found it ceased to do what it
was wanted to do they increased it, and what it was wanted to
do was to exclude foreign manufactures, and, above all, to ex-
clude manufactures of this country, which at one time held the
supremacy of trade in the world, and which was the greatest
centre of industry in any part of it. Now that was a deliberate
policy. Has it succeeded? (‘Yes.’) It has, whether it was
right or wrong
I do not remember that Mr. Chamberlain professed to
have any of this respect for foreign opinion during the
period 1899-1902, when that opinion, in Europe, was some-
what markedly hostile to his policy and his character. He
then credited foreigners neither with a dispassionate atti-
tude towards Great Britain nor with a large share of good
sense. Now he implies that his own countrymen are the
only people in the world foolish enough to pursue a policy
which injures them. But for the purpose of the present
argument we may waive the question of Mr. Chamberlain’s
sincerity. The main issue is that of the logic of Free Trade
and of Protectionism ; and the first datum, as we have seen,
X Vol. of speeches on “ Imperial Union and Tariff Reform,” 1903,
pp. 48-9. Compare p. 30; “ America has profited enormously under
it.” Elsewhere (p. 178) the orator says of the countries in question:
“ I do not say they have progressed in consequence of Protectionbut
this is one of his daily self-contradictions. His general argument af-
firms that or nothing.


is that what is ostensibly the joint policy of two leaders is
advocated by them respectively for reasons which destroy
each other. If either of the two positions under notice is
right, the other is wrong. Yet the Protectionist movement
is being furthered by the concurrent use of both doctrines,
and many Protectionists appear to harbor both: even as
Mr. Chamberlain alternately asserts that Free Trade would
be good for all, and that Protection is a source of prosperity.
The more scientific Protectionist positions, that for strictly
social reasons a given community ought to support new or
other industries at a sacrifice, and that agriculture should be
protected for military reasons, are not avowedly held by any
British propagandists to-day, Mr. Chamberlain’s abandoned
doctrine of sacrifice having been put on merely sentimental
grounds.
§2. The Consensus of Protectionist States..
Let us first consider the doctrine of Mr. Chamberlain—
that Protection is advantageous. At the outset we must
put aside as clearly irrelevant his language about “ ruin.”
In no reasonable sense of the term can a nation as such
ever be said to be “ ruined ” by mere fiscal policy,
even the most vicious. There is no case of such
national “ ruin ”in written history. Fiscal vice certainly
hastened the military “ ruin ” of the Roman Em-
pire, and the general decadence of the Spanish Empire in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; and it obviously
keeps Turkey backward now. But the direct result of the
most vicious fiscal policy, as such, is simply to increase
greatly the total amount of distress in a nation by checking
the production and distribution of wealth, thus making it
unprosperous relatively to other nations. And seeing that
the prosperity of nations varies in respect of their natural
resources as well as of their fiscal systems, and that re-
sources vary greatly to begin with, it is only by a careful
analysis that we can determine how far even relative dis-
tress is the result of fiscal policy. The same country, under


the same fiscal system, may be “ prosperous ” in one year
and distressed in the next. To say then that mere avoid-
ance of national “ ruin ” raises a presumption of wisdom in
any fiscal policy is idle. The problem is, whether any given
policy in any country promotes or hinders the production
and distribution of wealth. No fiscal policy can make Iceland
relatively rich. And no fiscal policy can alone “ruin” the
United States, or even the United Kingdom.
We have simply to ask, then, whether Protectionism
maximises or minimises the production and distribution of
wealth. And at the outset we have to note that, by the
nearly universal consent of the “civilised nations,” Free
Trade within the limits of a nation is highly advantageous
to its people as a whole. Certain tolls or octrois are in-
deed retained in certain European countries as means of
local revenue, but nobody pretends that they directly help
industry; and the United States and united Germany alike
practise Free Trade as between States composing their
a ff§ Te ff a l es - It is there universally admitted to maximise
the production and distribution of wealth.
If then it is not practised as between France and Ger-
many, the United States and Canada, the reason can hardly
be that Protective tariffs are known to have such a maximis-
ing effect on either side. If it were heartily believed that
of the two States, Saxony and Prussia, either had gained by
a tariff against the other, the one which believed itself to
have gained would surely denounce the resort to Free
Trade. But no such protest is heard. It is not now pre-
tended that either State is making a commercial sacrifice for
the sake of non-commercial benefits. Nobody believes,
again, that trade on either side of the Thames, say,
would gain by setting up reciprocal customs duties at both
ends of the bridges which cross it in London. All men
admit that the total volume of trade would thereby be
lessened, both sides suffering. Thus Protectionism, in the
terms of the case, admittedly minimises the production and
distribution of wealth.
But even if the North American and German States, or


any of them, did believe that by accepting internal Free
Trade they were individually sacrificing a commercial
advantage in order to secure some other, no one State can
affect to believe that the advantage had been reciprocal.
If Prussia believed that she gained by setting up tariffs
against Saxony, she could not well believe that Saxony
gained also. On that view the tariffs should have been re-
tained, whereas the majority in each Protectionist State to-
day welcome the lowering of a tariff against them. That
is to say, in terms of their general doctrine, all Protectionist
States axe checking each other’s production of wealth.
Either they are right or they are wrong in their theory.
And either way, what is to be said of their collective
wisdom ? Wherein does it differ from the folly of two liti-
gants who “ ruin ” each other in sheer revenge ?
Evidently, as between Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Balfour,
we must thus far side with the latter. To argue from the
general resort of the nations to Protection, that Protection
is advantageous, is to commit logical suicide. On the face
of the case, all believe that they are successful in injuring
each other, and that the success of each involves its suf-
fering corresponding injury at the others’ hands. How
then can it be pretended that their agreement in the manner
of their action ought to make us suppose that they are
wise ? As well say that because all the members of a
given family are always fighting, a solitary neighbour ought
to doubt the wisdom of his peaceful life. On every prin-
ciple of sound reasoning, the fair presumption is that Pro-
tectionist nations are collectively wrong. They collectively
raise that presumption by their very doctrine.
§3. Why Free Trade is Won Slowly.
Before we come to Mr. Balfour’s position, however, it
may be well to deal historically as well as critically with the
view adopted by Mr. Chamberlain—that so many civilised
nations would not adopt Protection unless it did them
good. This view is comparatively the commonest on the


Protectionist side; and those who hold it are in a manner
kept in countenance by the fact that Cobden, before the
repeal of the Corn Laws and the general removal of the
British tariff, predicted that such reform would be followed
by a speedy approach to Free Trade by other nations.
“ You see,” his critics comment, “ he was quite wrong there.
The other nations thought otherwise. Wrong there, may he
not have been wrong, and they right, on the theoretic ques-
tion ?”
Certainly Cobden miscalculated the rate of rational pro-
gress, though not to anything like the extent urged by
recent Protectionists. * Such miscalculation has been a com-
mon mistake among optimistic reformers ; and the chances
are that they have been the more successful in carrying
their reforms because of their optimism. But it is for us,
looking back on their struggles, to learn to calculate more
cautiously without working the less zealously. Realising
that reform has always been slow, we had need work ail
the harder to remove the ignorance which is visibly the
hindrance. Cobden did not realise the significance of the
fact that it took seventy years of powerful propaganda to
make possible the decisive act of Free Trade legislation in
Britain.
Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations” was published in
1 776. It was not, by a long way, the first promulgation of
Free Trade doctrine even in this country; for we actually
find a free-trading law made in the reign of Elizabeth
when it was recognised that embargos on foreign goods
had greatly injured trade; and from the Restoration on-
wards there were always some Free Traders in England.
But Smith’s book was the first powerful preaching of the
principle by a notable author. Yet only after seven years
is any mention of it to be traced in Parliament, t and though
the younger Pitt so far acted on Smith’s teaching as to
conclude in 1786 a most useful treaty of commerce with
* See the facts set forth in the Appendix. Mr. Chamberlain’s mis-
statements on this head are among the worst.
f Buckle, “ Introduction to the History of Civilisation in England,”
ch. iv, note 60.


France, with the result of doubling the trade of the two
countries in three years, and so setting France upon making
similar treaties with Holland and Russia, the whole reform
fell to the ground on the outbreak of the wax against the
Revolution in 1793- The Constituent Assembly in 179 1
had been strongly in favor of a low tariff; but the war
temper, significantly enough, swept away the Free Trade
movement in both countries.* A lesson partially learned
was thus lost; and Smith’s influence had to be built up
afresh. Not till twenty-one years from the date of the
issue of his book, after a good many Parliamentary refer-
ences, is the financier Pulteney found quoting in the House,
with approval, the saying that Dr. Smith “ would persuade
the present generation and govern the next.” * A few
years later we find opponents speaking of Smith as one
whose doctrine some proposed to make a basis of legisla-
tion. t Yet, though Huskisson in 1825-29, and Peel in
1842 and 1845, effected many tariff reductions in directions
in which there were no great vested interests to fight,
it was not till 1846 that there was effected (for 1849) the
repeal of the landlord-made Corn Laws. And it
was notorious that the consummation was hastened by
the pressure of special distress from a bad season, which
moved Sir Robert Peel, probably always a Free-trader in
theory,H to give up the corn tariff after having declined to
do so in 1842, when he removed the duties on a multitude of
other articles. Seeing that at that time seventeen taxed
articles, out of many hundreds, produced per cent, of
the total customs revenue, § corn was the vital article from
the Protectionist point of view, and the reforms of 1842 did
not seriously touch the Protective principle. And seeing
that Lord Palmerston, a professed Liberal, was still in
t Cp. Armitage-Smith, “ The Free Trade Movement,” and ed., 1903,
P- 4°-
* “ Parliamentary History,” xxxiii, 778, cited by Buckle,
t E.g. in the treatise “ Gnomia, or the Science of Society,” 1801.
H This was Cobden’s view. See Mr. Morley’s “ Life of Cobden,”
i» a 37-
§ Id. p. 236. Note.


favor of a permanent duty on com, it is clear that the
battle of Free Trade even in 1846 was far from having been
won on the merits of the principle. Had not the harvest of
that year been ruined by rain, and had good years followed,
the repeal of the Corn Laws might have been delayed for
another generation. *
There is nothing historically surprising, then, in a simi-
larly slow or even much slower rate of conversion in other
countries. In Britain the principle of Free Trade stood in
1845 somewhat as it now stands in Germany, where
it is upheld by a strong and intelligent minority,
who won many seats in the last Reichstag elec-
tion; and resisted by an interested majority, eked
out by some disinterested doubters. But in Britain
m 1845 there was one great force which is less
effective to-day. Neither in Germany nor in the United
States, confessedly, is there anything like the acute distress
from Protectionism that existed in Britain and Ireland in
1846. Our distress rose specially out of lack of food, where-
as America has a great supply of food, and Germany
suffers mainly from comparative dearness of beef and
wheaten bread. Why then should it be held to tell against
the abstract rightness of Free Trade that these countries
have not yet adopted it ?
The conversion of masses of men to a novel rational
principle, apart from any sharp pressure of need, is in the
nature of things always a slow process. What we have to
consider is whether the principle of Free Trade, once estab-
lished as a result of special pressures, is for us worth main-
taining. The backwardness of other nations to follow us is
beside the case. Such backwardness is to be explained in
their case as it was in ours, by the play of vested interests.
In Germany the agrarians and the manufacturers play into
each other’s hands, each granting “ Protection ” to the
other; whereas in England in 1846 the manufacturers op-
posed and defeated the landlords. In the United States,
* See Appendix, iii.


capitalists in effect bribe the Legislature. No man now
affects to doubt that the non-taxation of the nobles and
the Church in France before the period of the Revolution
was a monstrous political error as well as a gross injustice.
Yet the most modest proposals to tax the two privileged
orders were by them indignantly and successfully resisted
for whole generations before either could be carried out.
Self-interest may presumably operate now as it did then,
in Germany as in France.
§4. Free Trade Historically Considered.
Let us come, then, to the merits of the rival principles.
They are to be tested in either or both of two ways —by an
appeal to direct experience, and by an appeal to deductive
and critical reasoning. As the former is much the more
commonly followed, it is proposed here to lay special stress
on the latter; but inasmuch as some readers are apt to
suffer from a preliminary error as to the actual facts of' ex-
perience, and to crave for a prima facie case on that side,
it may be well to set forth briefly the main historic facts.
i. All direct experience of Free Trade in developed
States has told in favor of a continuance of that policy.
One of the most surprising passages in Mr. Balfour’s
pamphlet is that in which he asserts that
“ Other nations have in the past accepted the principle of
Free Trade; none have consistently adhered to it. Irrespective
of race, of polity, and of material circumstances, every other
fiscally independent community whose civilisation is of the Wes-
tern type has deliberately embraced, in theory if not in practice ,
the protectionist system. Young countries and old countries,
free countries and absolutist countries, all have been moved by
the same arguments to adopt the same economic ideal.”t
As we have seen, Mr. Chamberlain makes the same
assertion: “ All these nations . . . and every other
civilised nation on the face of the earth have adopted a
tariff.” “ The United Kingdom,” he says, in another
speech, “ is the only country where [dumping] can be carried
on successfully, because we are the only country that
t “ Economic Notes on Insular Free Trade,” 1903, pp. 8-9.


keeps open ports. §" The statement is categorically false. +
Mr. Balfour himself proceeds to speak of “ the large pro-
portion of the earth’s surface where Protective tariffs are
still, to all intents and purposes, unknown,” going on to say
that “ these Free Trade countries consist either of countries
which are Protective in theory but not in practice, where
the absence of manufactures makes importation an impera-
tive but unwelcome need ( e.g ., the States of South America
and the small non-manufacturing States of Europe)” ; or of
controlled States (as Turkey and China) or dependencies of
Britain.
Whence Mr. Balfour derives his information, and what
countries he refers to as Protectionist in theory but not in
practice, it is impossible to guess. We can but say that
his data are in keeping with the absurdity of his language.
The States of South America are one and all heavily
tariffed. Chili, Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, Paraguay, and
Uruguay raise their revenue mainly from customs; and
Brazil puts high duties on many imports, including cotton,
though those on machinery and tools are low. In Europe
the only free-trading States besides ourselves are Den-
mark (as to food) and Holland ; and in regard to these Mr.
Balfour’s language is equally meaningless. He appears to
reach his statistics a priori , arguing that the South Ameri-
can States must have free imports because we send them
more than they send us; and his theory of European trade
is seemingly reached in the same way. At every point he is
hopelessly wrong. Portugal, Servia, Montenegro, and
Greece are small non-manufacturing States with tariffs;
§ Speeches, as cited, p. 125. Cp. p. 156.
X Even Professor Ashley, in his carefully written work on “ The
Tariff Problem” (King and Son, 1903), says we now have “one
country completely free, and the others barred by high tariff walls”
(p. 29). It is somewhat astonishing that such a student should not
have remembered the special economic need which evolved Free, or
nearly Free, Trade in corn alike in Holland and in Britain, and which
has led to the same policy in Denmark. It is further surprising that
he should speak of all other countries as “ barred by high tariff walls,”
as if Belgian tariffs were high. Professor Ashley, however, expressly
points out that “ dumping” was a few years ago commonly practised
by England against Protectionist countries.


Italy, exporting l few or no manufactures, has high tariffs;
Denmark, mainly an agricultural State, has heavy tariffs on
manufactures and free imports of food; Holland, a manu-
facturing State, has only non-Protective revenue duties on
certain imports; Belgium, a manufacturing State, has low
tariffs. The suggested cause of differentiation is thus
beside the case. And if Mr. Balfour means to suggest that
the people of Holland mournfully dispense with Protective
tariffs while collectively conscious of an unsatisfied yearning
for them, he is but adding a flimsy fiction to his previous
denial that any civilised countries dispense with tariffs at
all.
Modern Holland is no more Protective in theory than in
practice. In point of fact, Republican Holland long pre-
ceded Britain in the Free Trade experiment, to the extent
of putting minimum duties on imports; and in the seven-
teenth century its commercial success was so signal as to
set up among other nations a common belief in a special
Dutch genius for trade, and a certain hopelessness about
competing with it. * The first serious falling away of the
prosperity of Holland can be shown to have been set up (1)
by the resort of her capitalists to the methods of monopoly
in connection with her East Indian Empire ; and (2) by the
great increase in all her industrial costs resulting from the
immense additions to her debt and her taxes by her great
wars with France; t even the protective policy of the
English Navigation Act having failed to damage their
trade as it was meant to do. + Dutch trade, however, was
* See the testimonies of Sir William Petty and Sir Josiah Child,
cited in the author’s “ Introduction to English Politics,” 1900, pp. 322-3.
f See Note XI in McCulloch’s edition of Smith’s “Wealth of
Nations.”
X Professor Ashley writes (“Tariff Problem,” pp. 35-36): —“It is
amusing to see how the extreme Free Traders have hastened to declare
that Adam Smith was quite mistaken, and that the Navigation Laws
did nothing for English shipping,” citing only Thorold Rogers. If
Professor Ashley had gone back to McCulloch’s Note -on the Navigation
Laws he would have seen, with or without amusement, the testimony
of Roger Coke in 1671 that by the operation of the Navigation Act
England lost within two years the greater part of the Baltic and Greenland
trades-, and that Sir Josiah Child in 1691, while approving of the Act,
corroborates. Child, in fact, testifies (1) that the former English trade


further relatively distanced in the eighteenth century by
the commercial growth made possible in this country by
our much greater natural and Colonial resources, under a
much lighter burden of taxation; and it was no doubt the
measure of success then attained by our commerce without
freedom that so long delayed British acceptance of the
principle. All through the period of agitation the British
advocates of Free Trade seem to have refrained from
pointing to the Dutch example.
Yet Holland, after her period of retrogression, has
latterly subsisted in otherwise inexplicable prosperity § pre-
cisely because of her virtual Free Trade, which at many
points has been continuous. In the seventeenth century it
was noted that, without timber to build ships, she had the
greatest body of shipping in the world, and that while un-
able to produce the food for her own mouths she had at
Amsterdam the greatest stores of grain in Europe. Only
Free Trade could have made possible such success. And
within the past generation, remaining faithful to Free
Trade,* she has prospered much more, according to the
with Russia has gone to the Dutch, and (2) the Greenland trade to the
Dutch and Hamburghers; (3) that the East-country trade has fallen
by more than half in England, while in Holland it has increased ten-
fold ; (4) that the Dutch have won from England the trade in Spanish
wood with Bilbao, the East Indian spice trade, the trades of Scotland
and Ireland , and a great part of the plate trade with Cadiz ; (5) that
England has further no share in their trade with China and Japan
and Surinam. (Pref. to 2nd and later eds. of the “ New Discourse of
Trade.”) Professor Ashley has indeed shown elsewhere that the Act
stimulated shipbuilding and seafaring in the American Colonies ; but
the later great increase in English shipping was demonstrably due to
other causes. (Cp- the present writer’s “ Introduction to English Poli-
tics,” p. 493.) Smith himself, though ill-informed as to the facts, ad-
mitted that the Act “ must ” restrict British commerce, and his eulogy
of the Act was put with a “ perhaps,” on the score that “ defence is of
much more importance than opulence.”
§ As to the relative wealth of the Dutch in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centures, compare Smith, “ Wealth of Nations,” B. 11, ch. y,
end; McCulloch, “Treatises and Essays,” 2nd ed., 1859, p. 363; Armi-
tage Smith, “ The Free Trade Movement,” 2nd ed., 1903, p. 63. It is
true that in a time of shrinking industry a large annual income from
foreign investments, such as was long received by Holland, is not the
most wholesome form of national wealth (Cp. Laing, “ Notes of a
Traveller,” 1842, p. 10), but the period of shrinking industry in Holland
is now past.
* As to Protectionist misstatements on this head, see the Appendix V.


Exports. (In kilogrammes.)
Imports.
1872 ..
... 2,956,000,000
6,451,000,000
1898 ..
... 15,612,000,000 24,074,000,000
igoi ..
... 17,764,000,000 26,221,000,000
Goods in Transit.
1887 ..
2,375,000,000
kilogrammes.
1891 ..
3,175,000,000
n
1901 ..
.. 5,949,000,000
very tests insisted on by Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Balfour,
than any Protectionist country whatever. This may be
proved even if we set out from Mr. Chamberlain’s test year
of 1872, which was one of inflation for Holland as well as
for Britain. Dutch exports and imports, fortunately, are
measured not merely in the fallacious terms of prices, but by
actual weight; and we can accordingly note the real pro-
gression of Dutch commerce. It is as follows:
No Protectionist country whatever shows such progress
within the period; and as the exports have increased more
than sixfold while the imports have increased only four-
fold, it is obvious that either raw produce or manufacture is
•on the increase. The statistics show that Holland exported
to Britain alone in 1891 £1,050,455 worth of iron and steel
goods; in 1898, £1,133,928; in 1901, £1,379,815; and of
woollen and cotton manufactures in 1891, £3,443,698; in
1898, £3,588,327; in 1901, £3,714,793. In the same
period the number of ships which cleared Dutch ports has
risen from 8,642 in 1891 to 12,367 in 1900; and the number
of Dutch vessels in the carrying trade between foreign
ports from 2,177 in 1890 to 2,318 in 1900 ; while the number
of factories using steam has risen from 3,722 in 1891, with
4,435 engines, to 4,787 in 1901, with 6,728 engines.
We can now weigh aright Mr. Chamberlain’s proposi-
tion that “ Holland tried, in the time of her greatest pros-
perity, to retain her command of the sea, her position as
carrier and merchant of the world. She tried to maintain
it without productive capacity. She tried and failed, and
you, gentlemen, cannot be more successful than she was.” t
f Speeches cited, p. 148.


As against this confused sophism, which virtually alleges
that Britain is without productive capacity, let us put the
relevant facts.
1. Holland is to-day, as in the past, a carrier and mer-
chant for central Europe, and is constantly increasing her
activity as such.
2. Whereas Mr. Chamberlain implies that Protection
would promote our shipping trade, it is historically certain
that it has strangled that of the United States;, which in
iB6O bade fair to overtake rapidly that of Great Britain.
The figures are:
iB6O. 1902.
U.S. tonnage (regd. for oversea trade) 2,546,000 ... 882,000
British ~ 4,658,000 ... 10,054,770}:
3. In asserting that lack of “ productive capacity
caused Holland to fail, Mr. Chamberlain quashes his own
case. He has been arguing that she failed through Free
Trade. All the while her carrying trade and transit trade
are increasing yearly in virtue of her free imports.
4. Finally, Holland profits at points by the Protec-
tionism of her chief neighbour, Germany, several Dutch in-
dustries being promoted by the German practice of selling
certain raw materials cheaper in foreign than in German
markets — i.e., “ dumping.”
The experience of New South Wales, again, down to-
the Act of Australian Federation, which imposed on her a
Protective tariff, is decisive as to the expediency of Free
Trade. Since 1866 Victoria has been Protectionist, and
New South Wales practically the contrary.§ The following'
figures tell the story:
X An attempt has been made to prove British retrogression relatively
to Germany by citing the figures of foreign and British tonnage cleared
out of British ports in igo2. In that year many British vessels were
withdrawn from commerce for war purposes, and their place had to be
taken by foreign ships. Protectionist statistics appear to be normally
selected in this fashion. In the years 1890-98 foreign shipping cleared
from our ports increased by 6,436,000 tons ; British shipping so cleared
by 10,244,000. In the same period for Germany, the German increase-
was 2,759,000 tons, the foreign increase 3,670,000 tons. (Letter of Mr.
Carlyon Bellairs in “ Daily News.”)
§ A revenue tax in 1891 of per cent., in 1898 of 5 per cent., was
levied on the total value of imports in New South Wales. In Victoria.


Population in
Victoria.
N.S. Wales
1866 ...
636,982
431,412
1901 ...
... 1,200,914
...
1.359,943
Revenue in
£
£
1866 ...
... 3,079,160
• ••
2,012,079
1901 ...
... 7,460,855
...
10,794,233
Imports in
£
£
1866 ...
... 14,771,000
...
9,403,000
1901 ...
... 18,301,811
• ••
27,561,071
Exports in
£
1866 ...
... 12,889,000
...
9,913,000
1901 ...
... 17,422,552
...
28,164,516
Here we find exactly the kind of results that the
theoretic Free Trader would anticipate. The Protectionist
Colony i$ not “ ruined,” but its total trade increases only by
about a third in thirty-five years; its population is barely
doubled; and its revenue little more than doubled; while
the free-trading colony increases nearly threefold both
its exports and its imports, and more than trebles its popu-
lation. Further, the free-trading colony does its much
larger trade with 3,077 factories and 60,779 workers as
against the 3,097 factories and 64,207 workers of Victoria,
the reason being that it has adopted much better machinery
and resorted much less to female and juvenile labor, its
workers’ wages being in consequence higher, and the capital
invested in manufactures greater. And whatever be the
explanation, the imports of Victoria have fallen from
£24,402,760 in 1889 to £18,301,811 in 1901 ; while its ex-
ports in 1889 were rather lower than in 1866. Gold-
mining in both cases has played a large part in the total ex-
ports ; but for many years the much more valuable yield of
wool has in New South Wales greatly exceeded that of
Victoria.
For the rest, it has been repeatedly shown in regard to
British trade that the “ stagnation ” in exports alleged by
Mr. Chamberlain is wholly imaginary, being made out by
such devices as (1) starting from the year 1872, when prices
were enormously inflated; (2) starting -from the period
1870-75, which included that and two other years of infla-
there was all along a heavy tariff on the most important imports, ex-
cepting wool for re-export.


tion; (3) excluding from the sum of exports the capital
items of coal, machinery, and ships; and (4) ignoring the
increasing work done by our shipping. At the prices
of 1872, the much larger amount of exports in 1902 (ex-
cluding ships) would have amounted to £418,000,000 (in-
stead of the actual £277,000,000), as against the
£256,000,000 of 1872; while the imports of 1902, at the
prices of 1873 would have been valued at £792,000,000 (in-
stead of the actual £528,000,000), as against the
£371,000,000 of 1873. * Falling off there has indeed been
in certain industries, and with this we shall have to deal
later; but the Protectionist argument appeals to the total
figures, and by these it is rebutted, as we have seen.
§5. Protection Historically Considered.
The same truth is revealed even by the relative pros-
perity of some Protectionist countries as compared with
others. It is noteworthy that the claims made for Protec-
tion are for the most part supported solely, or mainly, by
the instances of two Protectionist countries—the United
States and Germany. Mr. Chamberlain adds Sweden; but
he has been so flatly gainsaid by Swedes that his claim is
not pushed by his coadjutors. Closed factories, low wages,
and immense emigration tell the tale of Swedish Protec-
* In the fifth chapter of his “Tariff Problem” Professor Ashley
starts from the misleading figures of 1872, and throughout the chapter
he never once explains that 1871-5 were all, broadly speaking, years of
inflation. He oddly argues (p. 61) that “any objection to the selection
of 1872 as the year of departure will be dispelled ” when it is seen that
“ there was a rapid upward sweep from 1869 to 1872, and another from
the depression of the Cotton Famine up to 1868.” Clearly, a special
upward movement was set up in 1870 by the effects of the Franco-
German war. What then? Professor Ashley’s tables show that the
value-figures of 1870 (199 millions) were not re-attained after 1876
till 1880. Admitting (p. 61) that: “ Values alone are of course evidently
misleading,” he can argue only that “ quantities also have moved
slowly since /<?<?<?.” But quantities of cotton goods moved very slowly
from 1872 to 1879, and values fell by twelve millions; and the 1858
quantity of cotton yarn and twist (200,000,000 lbs.) was not re-attained
till 1872 —a period as long as that taken by Professor Ashley. In 1880
the export of cotton yarns and twist exceeded that of 1858 by only 15
million lbs. The case for Protection on the basis of export trade was
thus as good in 1880 as to-day.


tion, which has wholly failed to further the export of manu-
factures. Germany and the United States accordingly are
the favorite examples. This limitation of the claim is in
effect a confession of its theoretic falsity. If Protection as
such be the source of prosperity, why are not Russia,
France, Spain, Italy, and Austria equally to be cited in
proof?
Mr. Chamberlain, it is true, alleges that “ these 99 out of
the IOO —those other countries, our German competitors,
our French competitors, our Italian competitors, our Russian
competitors, our Swedish competitors—are all doing very
well.” f But better-informed people are aware that Italy,
Russia, Sweden, and France are not “ our competitors ” at
all in the markets of the world, save inasmuch as Sweden
exports ore and pig iron, and France woollen textiles and
about one-eighth of our quantity of cottons. Russia,
always exporting much more than she imports, and heavily
tariffed, yet sends out very little manufactures; Italy prac-
tically none. “ Name to me,” cries Mr, Chamberlain.
‘‘ one single Protectionist country which at the same time
that it has built up its own markets has not been able to
increase its foreign exports.”* I name him eight—
Italy, Greece, Russia, Austria, Sweden, Switzerland, Por-
tugal, and Spain—which have either not steadily increased
their exports of manufactures at all or have increased them
much more slowly than Britain has done. As we shall see
more fully later, a restraint of imports tends to increase ex-
ports to a certain extent; but it will not secure the senti-
mental gain of triumph in the way of manufacturing com-
petition. The increased exports are loss, which is paid in
raw material.
Austria-Hungary in 1883 exported 92 millions of florins’
worth of hardware; in 1891, only 21 millions’ worth; and
for later years there seem to be no quotable figures under
this head. In 1883 she exported 26 million florins’ worth of
woollen goods; in 1891 only 17 millions’ worth; in 1897
only 7 millions’ worth; in 1901, on a rise, 22 millions’
f Speeches as cited, p. 160. t Speeches as cited, p. 147.


worth. In 1883 she exported 2\y millions worth of glass
and glassware; in 1898 only n millions’ worth; in 1901
only millions’ worth. Of wood and woodwork she
exported in 1883 80 millions’ worth; in 1897 only 62 mil-
lions’ worth; in 1898 only 76 millions’ worth. In 1900
this export rose as high as 177 millions; but in 1901 it fell
as low as 22 millions ( = ,£1,828,000). It is true that in 1883
Austria had to import much extra grain, which had to be
paid for by special exports; but since 1891 her grain im-
port has in several years greatly increased, and the exports
do not similarly increase. The one great improvement,
apart from bounty-fed sugar, is in eggs. Felix Austria!
In the Italian statistics of 1891 there stood 15 million
lire§ of exports of silk manufactures ; in 1898 and 1901 there
is no entry large enough to be worth citing in the hand-
books. Of exports that compete with those of Britain there
is no trace. Straw-plaiting exports have indeed increased
from millions to jy 2 ; and manufactured coral from
1 7% to 24 millions; but these items had fallen in 1901 to
6 y 2 and 23 millions respectively; and the only other
noticeable increases are in raw material and food, including
eggs. In passing, we may note that the Italian tariff war
with France ten years ago wrought untold misery and
impoverishment, involving much crime and disorder.
Greece again exports, beyond raw material and fruit and
foodstuffs, only some small amounts of soap, cement, and
gunpowder.
Russia with all her tariffs has increased her total ex-
ports only from an average of 675 million paper roubles in
1886-90 (falling to 628 millions in 1891-95) to a total of
732 millions* in 1898, and 716 millions in 1900. The
exports of manufactured goods to Europe in 1887-9 stood
at nearly 18 millions of roubles; in 1896 only at 12 mil-
lions, even with the Caucasian trade on the Black Sea fron-
tier and that of Finland added; in 1898 only at 21 mil-
* An record in the same handbook gives 710 millions for
1898.


lions, with all these thrown in; in 1899 at 17 millions; in
1901 at 22 millions. On the Asiatic frontier the progress
is no greater. The main increase of Russian exports is in
naphtha and eggs!
Switzerland indeed has done better. In 1887 she had a
total export of 660 millions of francs; in 1897 a total of
682 millions—a total increase in ten years of only 22 mil-
lions of francs=£Bßo,ooo. Latterly the amount has
been much greater (818 millions in 1900 and 1901), chiefly
by reason of the diversion of English productive power
during the war period; but as to special manufactures, her
output of cottons fell off in value from 1891 to 1898 by
18 y millions; and in 1901 had advanced on 1891 by
only $ millions (£200,000). Woollens fell off from 1891
to 1898 by 1 million; and in 1901 had recovered by only
half-a-million (£20,000). Chemicals fell off from 1891
to 1898 by jy 2 millions, of which only 4 millions had been
recovered in 1901. Quantities , of course, may tell a different
tale from values ; but I cite the only figures at hand; and
it is by values that our Protectionists always count. And
while Switzerland’s exports of machinery from 1891 to
1898 increased considerably, the imports of machinery in-
creased in exactly the same proportion. Only in 1900- 1
was there an important net increase, due to the pre-occupa-
tion of English makers with war material. Even the staple
Swiss export, clocks and watches, rose only from 100 1 / 2
millions in 1891 to millions in 1897, 109 millions
in 1898, 122 millions in 1900, and 130 millions in 1901
an increase of £1,200,000 in eleven years. The mam in-
creases are in foodstuffs and spirits, silks, metals, condensed
milk, clothing, colors, and other articles not enumerated ;
and the whole progress is incomparably less than that of
free-trading Holland, less even than that of Belgium, whose
tariffs are much less.
Swedish exports of textile manufactures in 1900 were
only 1y 2 million kroner t against 734 millions in 1890, and
f 18 kroner = j£i.


Million Pesetas.8
Million Pesetas.
i88; ...
... 722
1896 ...
895
1888 ...
763
1897 ...
97 2
i88g ...
896
1898 ...
814
1890 ...
937
1899 ...
724
1891 ...
946
1900 ...
753
1895 ...
692
1901 ...
692
millions in 1889. Exports of metal goods and
machinery stood at millions in 1890; at nearly 20
millions in 1897; and at 25 millions in 1900; but the
imports of these articles stood at 35 millions in 1890; at 74
millions in 1899; and at 65 millions in 1900. Here it is
that, with her mineral resources, Sweden might be supposed
to compete most seriously with Britain; yet while British
exports to Sweden rose from £2,768,369 in 1889 to
£4456,959 i n Jpoi, Swedish exports to Britain (mostly
timber and iron) rose only from £9,207,047 in 1889 to
£9,839,146 in 1901 + —63 per cent, increase on our side;
7 per cent, on theirs. The Swedish expansion has been
mainly on the side of minerals, timber, woodwork, and wood
products; the attempt to develop manufactures by Protec-
tion has utterly failed.
Spain and Portugal have the same tale to tell. Here
are the figures of the total Spanish exports in the years.
1887-91 and 1895-1901, including bullion:
—a repeated fall in values below the level of 1887. Much
of this is due to the greatly lessened export of wine; but
in the staple articles of stone, minerals, glassware, pottery,,
and metals there has been no great total rise from 1898 to
1901. Cotton exports rose somewhat from 1891 to 1898,.
but have since fallen nearly to the former figure; and even
foods (including wine) were in 1901 nearly 90 millions
below the figures of 1898.
Portugal, raising nearly half her revenue by customs
duties, attains expansion on the side of foreign trade nq>
li: After a fall on both sides from 1900. Our exports to Sweden m
1900 were more than double the amounts of 1887 ; while Swedish ex-
ports to Britain had increased only about 20 per cent.
§ 25 pesetas = j£i.


Million Milreis.t
Million Milreis.
i88; ...
28
1896 ...
29
1888 ...
32
1897 ...
29
1889 ...
S 2
1898 ...
33
1890 ...
32
1899 ...
30
1891 ...
3i
1900 ...
32
1894 ...
27
1901 ...
28
1895 ...
29
more than does Spain, as appears from the following figures
of her total exports, including bullion:
Portuguese exports, finally, are mainly of foods (in-
cluding wine), animals, and raw materials; her small ex-
port of “ various manufactures ” ranging from I millions
in 1897 and in 1898 to and in 1900 and 1901.
To all this it may be added that whereas the industry
of flax-spinning has fallen off in Britain for various reasons
since 1874, the fall in Ireland, the chief centre for the United
Kingdom, has been only 9 per cent., whereas in Austria and
Germany it is per cent., and in France nearly 40 per
cent. And while Russia has forced up her produce of linen
for the home market by prohibitive tariffs, she has not simi-
larly increased her linen exports.
All along this line, then, Mr. Chamberlain’s claim breaks
down. Broadly speaking, two out of three of the Protected
States of Europe show no noteworthy commercial pro-
gress ; some of them almost none ; and three out of the five
mentioned by Mr. Chamberlain are certainly not “ doing
very well ”as regards external trade in manufactures. Ob-
viously, then, there must be special causes at work in Ger-
many and the United States, and on analysis these causes
are found to be (1) coal and iron resources such as have
built up the wealth of Britain, and (2) forces of the nature
of freedom in trade. German expansion in the last genera-
tion is most notable because (1) since the memorable col-
lapse created by capitalistic over-production after the re-
ceipt of the war indemnity, the advantages of the Free
Trade newly set up as between the constituent States of
the new Empire have told in favor of industry on all
f Milrei = 4S. s%d.


hands; just as the freedom of trade throughout England
and Scotland in the eighteenth century promoted our in-
dustry in comparison with that of France, where the burden
of customs between districts at last aroused a “ Free Trade ”
movement.
Other influences, such as technical education, have come
into play in Germany; but the main force of expansion is
precisely internal Free Trade. Even there, all the while,
wages remain much lower and hours much longer than in
Britain* as is shown by the “Inquiry” Blue Book, to which
Mr. Chamberlain refers, I think, only once in his whole
propaganda. France, in comparison, remains heavily bur-
dened by taxation for debt. The United States, in turn,
have latterly derived special industrial advantages (i) from
the Free Trade within their immense area, now that that is
becoming populous enough for proper exploitation ; (2) from
the substitution of free for slave labor in the Southern
States since the Civil War; and (3) from their relatively
slight burden of taxation since the war debt was reduced
by one half and the population doubled. Finally, as will
be shown later, import duties to a certain degree actually
force exports, but at a loss instead of a profit. The measure
of a nation’s well-being must always be internal distribu-
tion, never mere exportation, which, so far as it goes, is
simply a removal of wealth.
Once more, if Protection were really a means of increas-
ing wealth production, the principle ought obviously to be
set up as between State and State within the German Em-
pire and the United States. The fact that neither the
individual States nor the aggregates dream of so setting it
up is a sufficient proof that the practice roots either in an
irrational instinct which is not brought into intelligent rela-
tion with general practice, or in the mere predominance
of certain powerful interests in the central legislatures of
the two countries, or in both factors. Both are in the
• Mr. E. Bernstein sums up that five-eighths of the workers in Ger-
many earn only a year or less. Compare the Blue Book, pp.
271-291.


ordinary way of human unwisdom; and to cite the mere
practice as a certificate of its own fitness is only to give one
more illustration of the same fatality.
§6. Protectionist Hallucinations.
Coming to the question of principles , we have first to
-deal with the inveterate Protectionist delusion as to excess
of imports over exports. Many, including even public men,
such as Mr. Seddon, hold the absurd belief that such excess
is paid for annually in gold at the rate of “ 150 millions of
golden sovereigns.” One such payment would strip Britain
of sovereigns once for all. t A reference to the official
figures of exports and imports of gold and silver will reveal
the fact that they fluctuate by a few millions, the import
generally exceeding the export. Gold is, in fact, imported
■or exported according as bank rates make either course
profitable to the money-dealers.
The actual figures of exports and imports of goods, on
the other hand, are somewhat misleading. Exports are
-entered at their value “ free on board (f.0.b.), whereas their
selling value in the receiving country will include not only
the cost of freight but the intermediate traders’ profits on
their handling. Those profits and costs will be represented
in the returning imports, which are entered with their
f Prof. Ashley (“ Tariff Problem,” p. 23) imprudently suggests that
“ there is some little excuse even for the much ridiculed recent remar
of a Colonial Premier; circumstances might really arise in which Eng-
land paid (for a time) for her surplus of imports with c golden sove-
reigns. 5 But there is very good reason for believing that England has
not yet done so ; and this is the same reason as convinced Hume, viz.,
that the excess of imports has been incomparably greater than the
whole coinage of the country. 5 ’ How there here arises any excuse,
however little, for the assertion that 150 millions of golden sovereigns
are paid away annually it is impossible to discover. Professor As ley s
“ for a time ” may mean anything or nothing; and he may be defied to
reduce his proposition to precision without leaving- it insignificant.
While Professor Ashley thus sets up a possible mystification, the
average Protectionist appears to cling to the old delusion. As is re-
marked by Mr. L. L. Price: “It is scarcely possible to read a Pro-
tectionist pamphlet, however able and well-informed, without finding
the old mistakes about money making their re-appearance in some
cunning disguise.” (“ Economic Science and Practice,” 1896, p. 293.)


freight-cost added. Yet further, ships built for foreigners
were not included in the figures of exports before 1899, and
are accordingly excluded still in comparisons of subsequent
with previous years. Above all, the figures of our total im-
ports include much that comes for re-exportation; where-
as the re-exported goods figure in separate returns. When,,
therefore, we appear as exporting in 1902 £277,000,000 and
importing £528,000,000 we have to remember that the ex-
cess includes
1. Value of ships built in Britain for foreigners
millions);
2. Profit of traders on f.o.b. prices;
3. Payment for freights both ways in respect of work
done by British ships.
4. Cost of insurance both ways when it is undertaken in
Britain.
Further, as all payments between nations are substantially
made in goods, we receive in imports,
5. Interest on British investments abroad ;
6. Profits from British commercial establishments-
abroad; and
7. Pensions due to retired Anglo-Indians from India.
Finally, we have to add to our exports £66,000,000 of
re-exported goods, making our total exports (with ships)’
£348,000,000, or else to deduct £66,000,000 from our total
of imports. The “ excess ”is thus much reduced.
But all forms of “ excess,” however arising, are in the-
nature of pure gain or surplus to the nation at large, inas-
much as they mean increased supply and lowered prices of
imported goods and foods. If, indeed, the receiving
country has no mineral resources, and the economic rent in
town and country is not taxed by the State, or the proceeds-
productively employed, the result may be for a time an
increase alike of millionaires and of paupers. In such a
case the true remedy would be, not Protection, which would
only make matters worse, but a system of sound taxation
and municipally promoted industry. But apart from such
a state of misgovernment as that last described, the only


case in which an excess of imports can tend to a nation’s
disadvantage is that in which imports represent foreign
capital entering for investment. If the investments pay,
the result will be increase of exports, with a relative decline
in imports. In such a case, Protectionists would infer im-
provement in trade, whereas there would really be beginning
a process of virtual tribute-paying. Such a process may
actually have begun in respect of American investments in
Britain. In that case Protectionists may be gratified ere
long by an increase of British exports to America, and a
fall in our imports thence. They will, however, be rejoicing
over a process in which their own country is the loser, inas-
much as the lessened imports of food will mean raised prices
(with or without tariffs), while the increased exports will
relatively decline in value. Hitherto the United States has
in large measure been enriching other countries out of her
great natural resources, wastefully exploited through Pro-
tectionism* Britain can much less afford such a drain.
The Protectionist hallucination has gone so far in some
quarters that the imports which represent interest on our
foreign investments are objected to as “ giving no work in
this country.” A little reflection will show (1) that they
are economically equivalent to a spontaneous yield of new
fruits, foods, and goods, by our own soil; and (2) that
they nevertheless do employ labor from the moment they
are set in motion. On the Protectionist principle, the
manna said to have been bestowed on the children of Israel
in the wilderness would have been deleterious to industry.
Were such a saleable supernatural food, however, to fall on
any given area to-day, that area would promptly rise in
value, and the produce would speedily be owned by a
syndicate, which would employ labor (1) to collect, store,
and transport it; and (2) to build barns for storage; while
* Mr. Ewing Matheson, in his valuable pamphlet on “ Foreign Ex-
change ” in the tariff connection (Spon, 1903), meets the fallacy of Mr.
Bonar Law by stating that “ profit, and not bankruptcy,” accrues to
America as well as to England (p. 39). Elsewhere, however, he rightly
notes (pp. 37, 41) that we, and not the Protectionist countries, make a
net gain, that the United States prosper by natural resources, and not
by exchanges, and that Germany is “ living on her own vitals.”


(3) other labor would be stimulated by the raised demand
of the laborers thus advantaged.
That the same principle holds in respect of all imports
may easily be seen by noting what would happen if an in-
dividual Briton who has invested £5,000 abroad should re-
ceive his interest in the shape of a shipload of oranges.
For orangeless Britain, that is so much “ manna.” The re-
cipient, however, must employ labor to unload his oranges,
to store them, and to transport them to the shops, where
labor is employed in selling them. Supposing the whole
procedure to be carried out by way of barter, the dockers
and carters would be paid in oranges, and the shopkeepers
would pay for the oranges with other goods; or the indi-
vidual buyers would pay either to the consignee of the cargo
or to the shopkeepers in boots, hats, clothes, and so forth.
By the intermediation of money, equivalent exchanges do
take place all round. At every step labor is evoked and
paid for. This is indeed not the ideal way of promoting a
nation’s industry, inasmuch as it conserves a large idle class ;
but when the only proposed alternative is Protection, it is
relatively beneficent, inasmuch as it actually does create
employment. The only limit to perpetual employment on
these lines is the normal need to check consumption by
saving money for investment But this drawback in turn
(which we shall have to consider later) is not in the slightest
degree lessened by Protection, which would only hasten the
arrest of demand. On the Protectionist principle, the
strictly logical course would be to throw the foreign oranges
into the sea and encourage home capitalists to grow oranges
under glass, thereby employing some labor in the most un-
economical way, in order to spite the foreigner, and check-
ing the easy employment of much more labor on the line of
spontaneous exchange. On this line the Protectionist case
ends in the conclusion that a good harvest is a calamity
inasmuch as more food is produced than in a bad year,
with no greater expenditure of labor.
On the Protectionist principle, again, any country which
exports more than it imports must be for that reason pros-


perous, since labor is needed to work up the exports, and
the balance is on that side. Two notable countries are in
this position, India and the United States, one the poorest
country in the world, the other perhaps the richest. Ob-
viously the excess of exports over imports cannot be the
cause of both the poverty and the wealth. The simple
solution is that India, the physically poor country, is further
impoverished by the annual British drain on her total re-
sources, while the rich United States, exporting chiefly
from its great annual surplus of food and raw material,
has a great home industry, and remains relatively rich while
paying away as interest on foreign investments, and as a
result of Protection, great masses of real wealth which are
annually reproduced. In fine, if mere exports, and not im-
ports, be the measure of national wealth, the proper course
is not to check imports but to pay bounties on all exports.
It would really be the cheaper course, from the consumer’s
point of view. Until it is realised that exports are to be de-
sired only for what they bring in , and that imports are
the real measure of gain, all reasoning on trade is but a
series of fallacies.
Another inveterate Protectionist hallucination is the
belief that our exports to any nation represent the total
trade we do as against our imports from it. Most of the
writers on the Protectionist side appear to be entirely
ignorant of the elementary fact that international trade is to
a large extent roundabout, the differences as between
nation and nation being balanced by circular exchanges,
settled by an international circulation of bills of exchange.
From free-trading Holland, for instance, in the years
1894-98, we imported on an average about £28,000,000,
exporting to her in return on an average only £8,000,000;
so that even when we make freight allowances the excess
of imports is very great. With Belgium, which has low
tariffs, our trade is in similar case, the excess of imports
being however somewhat less. But in both of these
cases, as in others, the excess must in the nature of things
be balanced by ( a ) remittances of interest made to us


through those countries, and ( b ) British exports to other
countries, which directly or mediately trade with them. It is
for such reasons that we export to India, China, Brazil, Italy,
Turkey, Japan, Java, Foreign West and East Africa,
Austria, Uruguay, Mexico, Venezuela, Persia, and other
countries, more than we import thence.
When this is recognised, it will be seen that the main
plea of Chamberlainite Protectionism proceeds on an
ignorant misconception. It is constantly assumed that
our exports to India and our Colonies are the direct return
for our imports thence, whereas they are to an indefinite
extent equivalents for imports from other countries which
trade with India and our Colonies. What Mr. Chamber-
lain ignorantly takes for inter-imperial trade is in large
part international trade. What is more, much of our ex-
port to the Colonies stands for capital, a good deal of it
destined to be lost, much of it to remain colonial. Yet
even so qualified a controversialist as Professor Ashley
recognises neither export of capital nor circular trade.
Referring to the small number of whites in our “ pos-
sessions,” he claims to turn the tables on those who had
stressed this, by saying, “ The surprising thing is that
so few should have bought from us so much.”+ The “so
much” (£105,000,000) includes £35,000,000 sent to British
India, with its population of 294,000,000. That export, as
against an import of £27,000,000, might have made obvious
to an economist, or even to an Imperialist, if he could but
remember the existence of India, the element of extra-
imperial exchange involved; and might have suggested
similar and other elements in the export to the Colonies.
But even in noting that “ during the last forty years the
export of British products, to foreign countries on the one
hand and to British Colonies and possessions on the other,
has grown in much the same proportion,” Professor Ashley
draws all inferences save the right one. When we have
exported to Natal £8,284,691, and get back only £530,138,
X “Tariff Problem,” p. 141.


he not only supposes the eight millions to have been
“ bought ” by the Natal population§—when in reality most
of it was either war material or capital for Johannesburg, or
else provision for restocking the Transvaal—but treats the
imaginary transaction as a profitable one. There can come
no sound prescription for imperial trade from imperialists
who thus misconceive alike trade and empire.
If the reader has any difficulty in following the deduc-
tive argument as above, he has but to note the unquestioned
fact that while our exports increase at a given rate, the mass
of incomes which pay tax, and the total wages of the
workers, increase at a considerably greater rate; and the
volume of banking transactions at a greater rate still.
In 1871, the total business done in the Clearing-House was
£4,826,000,000; in 1902 it was £10,029,000,000. The
total incomes within the survey of the Inland Revenue have
at the same time increased from £445,000,000 in 1871 to
£867,000,000 in 1901.* In no way can this increase be
accounted for save by recognition of a proportionally in-
creased volume of home trade; and as our primary re-
sources do not noticeably increase save by the increased
output of coal and iron, the agricultural yield being nearly
stationary, it is impossible to explain the increase in home
trade save through the increase in imports and the conse-
quent multiplication of manufactures.
The breakdown of the Protectionist argument thus far
forces some comparatively candid disputants to another
theory—namely, that our “ excess ” of imports is being
annually paid for by an export of capital securities (stocks,
bonds, etc.), which do not appear in the trade statistics.
This is the contention of Mr. G. Byng,t from whom Mr.
Chamberlain appears to have taken the majority of his
ideas, albeit he destroys one of Mr. Byng’s central theses by
an inconsiderate allegation of his own. The sole difficulty
§ Id. p. 144.
* As to Protectionist misrepresentations of this fact, see Appen-
dix, V.
t “ Protection: the Views of a Manufacturer,” Eyre and Spottis-
woode, 1901, p. 94 sq.


in dealing with Mr. Byng’s doctrine as to exports of scrip
is to gather at what time he asserts the drain to have
begun. As he shows, our imports of goods have exceeded
our exports in an almost continuously increasing degree
ever since Free Trade began, the surplus being all along
described by him as an “ adverse trade balance.” At the
outset of his treatise, however, Mr. Byng represents that
we had nothing but advantage from Free Trade from 1846
to 1875 ; and an exact balance of advantage and disadvan-
tage from 1876 to 1900; since which year we are reaping
unalloyed disadvantage, with the predicted result of a total
cessation of trade about 1912 in the event of our not adopt-
ing Protection.
It is in some aspects a pleasingly symmetrical thesis;
but inasmuch as it implies a continuous export of our
securities since 1846 at least, while Mr. Byng explicitly
alleges (and this on the bare authority of an unnamed “ old-
established stockbroker ”) only an export beginning within
the past twenty years, the symmetry is confined to the sur-
face. In any case, it suffices to ask Mr. Byng how, when
all our securities are going abroad, and we thus stand bound
to receive much less interest from abroad than formerly,
and to pay increasing sums in interest every year, we can
possibly go on importing an ever-increasing mass of goods,
without exporting goods in return ? At what point, if
ever, are our imports going to decline? When all our
securities are gone, and we can buy no imports, must we
not perforce export more and more goods to pay the in-
terest we owe ? In which case, will not his ideal of multi-
plication of exports and cessation of imports be happily
realised ? Where then, for him, is the harm ?
§7. The Argument from “ Dumping.'’
Once more the Protectionists’ position becomes so ab-
surd that Mr. Byng in turn is repudiated by many of them
as an excited and exaggerative gentleman, who injures the
cause. Recoiling from the theory of secret export of


securities (in which, all the while, there may be some grain
of truth, though Mr. Byng cannot draw the proper infer-
ence) they fall back on the inviting general principle that
Protection is required merely to save us from “ dumping ”
—the selling of foreign goods in our markets under cost
price by protected foreigners who (while ruining their own
home customers by charging them too much) ruin our pro-
ducers by charging our consumers too little.
As it happens, Mr. Byng puts that thesis also; and
whereas he asserts a constant or normal practice among
foreign producers of dumping goods below cost price in
England, Mr. Chamberlain expressly declares that “ ‘dump-
ing ’ only takes place seriously where the country that has
recourse to it is in a state of depression.”* Then if foreign
dumping be now constant or normal, as Mr. Byng alleges,
the -protected foreign industries (which , he says, alone
dump) are in a constant or normal state of depression.
Thus do Protectionists corroborate each other—and them-
selves. Mr. Chamberlain says that the fact he states “is
a curious thing which Mr. Asquith does not seem to appre-
ciate —a curious thing to him, but not to us.” It is to be
feared that Mr. Chamberlain has ceased to “ appreciate ”
either facts or fables; for after upsetting Mr. Byng he re-
verts to Mr. Byng’s theory. He has himself repeatedly
asserted that Protectionist countries have “ prospered
enormously ”, and that their trade goes on expanding while
ours is “ stagnating ”. How then can they have been so
habitually depressed that their dumping as he alleges is
a serious injury to us? According to his own further ex-
position, the Germans have “ seriously injured ” the glass-
bottle trade and the wire trade, and “ annihilated ” the
plate-glass trade,§ they doing all or nearly all the trade.
X Speeches, as cited, p. 126.
f Speeches, as cited, pp. 157-8. The facts are that exports in plate
glass have fallen from ,£190,000 in 1890 to £108,112 in 1902; in flint
glass from £261,000 to £248,000; while the export of glass bottles and
common glass has risen from £433.°°° ( in i 894, £3 0I > 000 ) to £47 I >°°°;
and that of “ other sorts ” from £lBO,OOO to £270,000. To “ save ” such
a trade we are invited to burden the population at large.


That is to say, in virtue of their own continual depression
they are continually prosperous!
It seems unnecessary to demonstrate that the facts
cannot be as Mr. Chamberlain states, and that a statesman
who thus flatly contradicts himself on the most serious
commercial issues is unqualified to frame a commercial
policy. Having contradicted himself once, Mr. Chamber-
lain finds his sole solution in contradicting himself yet
again. After having declared, as above, that “ dumping
only takes place seriously when the country that has re-
course to it is in a state of depression ”, he elaborates a
fresh argument to the effect that protected countries “ can
afford to dump because it does not cost them anything.
. . . . Dumping is not a loss to those foreign countries.”'’
Then they will practise it habitually and ad libitum.
With this argument we shall deal later. Meantime we
have to note how the Protectionist case, as put by its
leading champion, varies from day to day and from week
to week. Converts to such pleading are certainly not pro-
cured by argument.
Argument, no doubt, there is from other quarters. Pro-
fessor Ashley deals at some length with the subject of
dumping, and as he is an economist, capable of conducting
an argument, he is worth attending to on this as on other
topics. But Professor Ashley, who admits freely that
dumping is not an American but a British invention, wholly
fails to show how Mr. Chamberlain’s proposals can bring
about what he wants. While bringing some very insuffi-
cient evidence to show that American steel and iron pro-
ducers make it a habit to dump here in order to keep their
works going with a large output,t he also adduces evidence
to show that those producers are able, or ere long will be,
to undersell us in the ordinary way of business. He cites*
* Speeches at Cardiff on November 21. Daily News report, Novem-
ber 33.
t It is certain that much American talk of this kind is “ bluff,” such
proclamations having of late been speedily followed by a wholesale re.
striction of production.
J “ Tariff Problem,” pp. 94*95.


from Mr. Guthrie, President of the American Steel Hoop
Company, the avowals (i) that the American aim is to
dump “ not especially in Germany and England, but in their
Colonies,” and (2) that
M the great advantage is the raw material. England’s coal
price is U- 50 and coke $5.50; our coal price is $1.50 at Pitts-
burg, our ore costs less, and transportation rates on the lakes
are lower than anywhere else in the world.”
These figures, I think, are hardly accurate for the pre-
sent time; but supposing them to be even approximately
so, it is tolerably clear that our iron producers would be at
a disadvantage should the American home demand so far
slacken as to let the American producers get far ahead of it.
Talk of “ dumping ”is thus beside the question. Nothing
short of an enormously high tariff could avail against a
combination of such natural advantage with a policy of
under-selling; and, what is more, it would be visibly im-
possible for British producers to compete with the Ameri-
can on ordinary lines in other markets, even those of our
own Colonies. A preference of 33 per cent in the latter
would not avail.
As against such competition, the Professor proposes to
have the Government tax dumped imports at its discretion
—that is, withhold cheap goods from twenty industries to
help one. The scheme is ill-considered at best; but in the
case put it is futile. To be effective for its purpose, the
Chamberlain tariff would require to be Protectionist pure
and simple, not a mere check to dumping; and it would
wholly fail to promote exports. All the while, Canada her-
self is paying bounties on exports of iron, which are largely
dumped in Britain —a circumstance not noted by Mr. Ash-
ley. He however fully admits that “if there are any Eng-
lishmen so foolish as to suppose that an arrangement can
be made whereby all English manufacturers will be able to
find a market in the Colonies, the sooner they are disabused
of that notion the betterand while he holds out a
significantly faint hope that the Colonies may consent to
§ P. 157-


a certain slackening in their manufacturing
he does not suggest that they will slacken in developing
their output of iron and steel. He even becomes so nebu-
lous as to suggest that the Colonies may hold their hand
because the manufacturing countries, Protectionist and
Free Trading alike, “have not been so brilliantly success-
ful in the social results of their policy as to encourage un-
limited imitation ” —this when Canada is actually outgoing
all other countries in forcing her iron export by means of
bounties. The entire argument has thus collapsed.
Let us now come to the vital issue.
Either American iron-makers will in future dump syste-
matically all round or they will not. If they do not, the
argument from dumping is irrelevant, and that part of the
case for British protection is gone. If they do, it is clear
that they must undersell us in foreign markets ; and that to
keep them out of ours we must impose tariffs which will
immensely raise the cost of iron. This would infallibly
burden our manufactures all round, and so, instead of help-
ing our export trade, doubly restrict it. Thus, whatever
happens, Protection cannot help us; and Professor Ashley,
while arguing that there are dangers ahead, makes no at-
tempt to show that it can, save in putting that faint hypo-
thesis of help from Colonial markets. The sufficient answer
on that head is that the Colonies all round will certainly
not agree either to pay double prices for their iron, or to
restrict their own iron output, for such a trifle as a prefer-
ence of 2s. per quarter on wheat*—a small boon to a single
Colonial industry. Professor Ashley’s exposition has hardly
the semblance of relevance to Mr. Chamberlain’s policy.
Should such competition arise as he fears, British in-
dustry must simply undergo further adjustments, taking
IT This is all that is now left of the confident expectation which was
at first expressed by Mr. Chamberlain, and which he now denies having
ever held out. It will be found in the original reports of his Glasgow
speech of October 6th, 1903. His words were:—“ There are many
things which you [the Colonies] do not now make. . . . Leave
them to us, as you have left them hitherto.”
* Roughly about 7 or 8 per cent.


advantage, as in the past, of cheap imports to gam in other
forms of production. And while Professor Ashley, here
diverging widely from Mr. Balfour, asserts an increase ot
unskilled labor, he entirely omits to note that large con-
tinuous imports of cheap iron would mean a transition from
less skilled to more skilled labor if they were to be utilised
at all. He too, in short, fails wholly to erect the argument
from dumping into a tenable defence for Protection; and
while he escapes the utter self-contradiction of the platform
Protectionists, he has produced no coherent theory that can
bear the test of practice.
§B. Protectionist Pretences.
Unfortunately Mr. Chamberlain is able, now as in the
past, to trade upon blind passions; and those who sympa-
thise with him are content, after every one of their economic
arguments has been answered, to repeat the mere angry
cry of retaliation. “ Hit back” ; “ don’t take it lying down”,
treat them as they treat us ” —such are the watchwords
with which Mr. Chamberlain spreads his gospel of Imperial
Unity.
It lies on the face of the case that such appeals are made
because it is felt that no others will avail. To tell a man
that you are proposing to him a highly profitable course of
action, as against one which is ruining him, and in the
same breath to seek to put him in a rage, is to exhibit a
perfect consciousness that the first proposition is false. Re-
sentment is not needed to make a business man choose a
gainful policy as against a losing one. Mr. Balfour, while
avowing that the policy of Protectionist countnes is
« doubtless costly to them,” is content to appeal rather to
fear than to anger —fear of a possible decline of prosperity
in the future after half a century of gainful Free Trade
while admitting that “ both the total wealth and the dif-
fused well-being of the country are greater than Biey have
ever been. We are not only rich and prosperous in appear-
ance, but also, I believe, in reality. I can find no evidence


that we are ‘ living on our capital V’t As against alike the
appeal to resentment and the appeal to fear, it is the busi-
ness of rational men to weigh the proposed policy on its
merits, economical, political, and even sentimental.
What then is to be gained, from any of the various
points of view taken up by Mr. Balfour and Mr. Chamber-
lain, by a resort to import duties (i) on food, and (2) on
manufactures ?
Mr. Chamberlain at an early stage of the discussion
asserted that a rise in the cost of food would be followed by
a rise in wages. Later he explained that under his scheme
there would be no rise in the total cost of food.}: He had
explicitly promised, also, that the revenue from food taxes
should go to providing Old Age Pensions. Now there is
to be no such revenue. But wages, he predicts, will still
rise, because under his policy there will be more employ-
ment.§ How, then, is such an increase of employment to
arise ?
The Protectionist answer is that many articles now im-
ported will under Protection be made at home, native labor
being thus employed where formerly it was not. But the
excluded articles must be either {a) goods now sent hither
in payment of British services or as interest on British in-
vestments, or (d) goods now paid for by exports. In the
former case the services or loans in question must, in terms
of the argument, go partly unpaid; and the labor formerly
employed in distributing and in earning the imported
articles now excluded will go unemployed. In the latter
case, the labor formerly employed in making the goods
which used to be exported in payment for the imports
will cease. Finally, as the articles now to be made at
home will in the terms of the case be dearer than formerly
the demand for them will tend to be less, and thus the whole
volume of industry will shrink. How then can there be
an increased employment for labor? Forgetting his pre-
tence that labor in Protectionist countries is well off, Mr.
f “ Economic Notes,” p. 28. X Speeches as cited, pp. 37,
S Id. pp. 130, 138, 139.


Chamberlain tells us that we import sweated goods, with
which our better-paid labor cannot compete. If then our
wages rise still further, how can we possibly compete as
before in neutral markets ?
Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Balfour seem alike unable to
make up their minds as to whether increase of exports is
the supremely desirable thing, though both speak in that
sense. Mr. Chamberlain condemns the buying of tram-
rails from abroad, on the score that the making of them,
even if more costly, would have employed British labor.
But British labor has actually been employed to make the
goods which go to pay for the imported rails; and those
exported goods figure as exports; whereas, had the rails
been made at home, our exports would have been so much
less; and Mr. Chamberlain would have continued to argue
that, the less our exports, the worse is our industrial con-
dition. What would he finally have ?
Mr. Balfour is no less incoherent. He admits that even
a country with vast natural resources “ would no doubt
suffer some economic loss ” from diminution of exports;
and he goes on to say that such a country as our own, “if
it found itself confronted with a universal system of aug-
menting tariffs,” would be not only “ incomparably worse
off ” but “ worse off than it would have been had it never
adopted the Free Trade policy”; and this because, “while
large imports are a vital necessity, the exports required to
pay for them are not of a kind which other nations—all, by
hypothesis, Protectionist—are obliged to take.”* Now, as
Mr. Balfour calls for Protection, he is proposing a course
which (save in one contingency) must on his own showing
lessen exports, inasmuch as it will in his opinion lessen im-
ports to begin with. The one conceivable cause to the con-
trary would be a decision of the Protectionist countries to
lower their tariffs when we put one on. But Mr. Balfour
goes on to argue that though it would be obviously against
the interest of foreign Protectionist countries to cut down
their own export trade by lessening our buying power, they
* “Economic Notes,” pp. 12-13.


would not see it! " However sound be the economic doc-
trine, .... it is not one which will easily appeal to Pro-
tectionists. They would not be Protectionists if it did. t
And again: “If argument failed before powerful vested
interests were created, it is hardly likely to be effective
now.”+ Then from Mr. Balfour’s point of view there is
little or no hope that the foreigners will lower their tariffs.
It is true that all the while an alleged decline in our exports
is the very reason he gives for turning Protectionist him-
self—the very reason that is urged by his fellow-Protec-
tionists for their policy. But it is not our business to find
a reconciliation between Mr. Balfour’s self-contradictions.
What we have here to note is that while he thus avowedly
does not expect foreign Protectionists to lower their tariffs
when we import less from them, because the argument “is
not one which easily appeals to them ”, he finally tells us
that this very argument is an inducement “ which they
thoroughly understand,”l and that therefore we are to
check their exports to us by putting on retaliatory duties!
In the gift of self-contradiction, Mr. Balfour must be
admitted to be Mr. Chamberlain’s equal, perhaps his supe-
rior. Probably no other modern statesman, certainly none
with Mr. Balfour’s repute for intelligence, ever put forward
in justification of a policy such a series of self-stultifications
as we have been considering. Having taken note of the
absurdity, we can but put it aside for what it is, and go on
to ask whether there are any grounds on which we may
expect foreign Protectionists to lower their tariffs if we put
one on. On the widest survey, there is none. As Mr.
Balfour and Mr. Chamberlain both avow, they are proposing
H to do to foreign nations what they always do to each
other.” That is to say, foreign nations (the Protectionist
nations, that is) simply go on retaliating, go on raising their
tariffs against each other ; and we are to join in the process.
On this view, the case is hopeless. It is true that there are
growing movements for Free Trade in many if not in all
Protectionist countries. The German Socialists, in par-
t id. p. 14. t id. P- 30- * u - P- 3o-


ticular, are determined Free-traders; and ere long they
may carry their point. But there is not the least reason to
suppose that our resort to a tariff would help them: on the
contrary, it would be cited by the German Protectionists
as a proof that all trading countries now realise the right-
ness of Protection.
We come back then, having cleared the ground, to the
question, How will Protection help our commerce and our
industry ?
§ 9. The Effects of Protection as to Food.
There are two policies before us: one which proposes
to tax only manufactured imports (Mr. Balfour’s); and one
which proposes to tax both food and manufactures (Mr.
Chamberlain’s). No one proposes to put a tax on “ raw
material ”; and as the bulk of our imports from our Colo-
nies arc admittedly raw material, it is thus clear that the
pretence of seeking l primarily to benefit them is mere de-
ception. Mr. Chamberlain’s policy would do nothing for
the Canadian timber trade or the Australian and South
African wool trade—the chief trades in those Colonies.
Instead, therefore, of securing a sentimental or “ imperial ”
gain it would at once, in the terms of Mr. Chamberlain’s
own argument, set up a powerful force of disintegration.
The Colonies, he tells us, will break away if we do not give
them a preference : he has given them their cue. Thus the
majority of our colonists are in effect told that they axe
expected to break away, since they are to get no preference.
If Mr. Chamberlain’s doctrine be true, that majority, see-
ing only a minority gaining from the British connection,
will be newly moved to dissolve that connection. If Mr.
Balfour gets his way, there will be no preference even for
the minority; in which case Mr. Chamberlain will be in
duty bound to denounce him as an empire-wrecker and a
Little Englander.
Those of us who reason otherwise than by series of self-
contradictions may for the present take leave to assume
that if we continue to trade freely the Colonies will con-


tinue to trade with us very much as they did, save that they
will go on developing their iron trade. Mr. Cham-
berlain alleges that they are increasing their commerce
with us; and he has officially put it on record that he was
thoroughly disappointed with the results of their actually
tried preferential tariff in Canada, as well he might be,
seeing that alongside of the nominal preference to British
goods there is an actual bounty on exports of Canadian iron.
We may be content, then, to do without preferences,
knowing that the Colonies certainly will not refrain from
forcing their own industries for the sake of ours. In an
early speech, Mr. Chamberlain in effect asked them to do
this, with the result that indignant questions were put in
the Canadian legislature. He has accordingly deleted the
passage from his collected speeches, and now denies that he
said anything of the kind. On this view, he has no hope
of developing the inter-imperial trade as he professed to
hope to do.
There being no hope, then, of a sentimental or political
gain from taxing food, what is the chance of a material
gain? If we put a tax of 2s. a quarter on com, the price
will either rise to that extent or not. Mr. Chamberlain
says it will not; and he resorts in an obviously haphazard
way to the abstract economic argument that import duties
are paid by the consumer only in the proportion the taxed
produce bears to the total supply. But if the price of wheat
does not rise by 2s. per quarter, Canadian corn-growers in
the terms of the case will not gain 2s. per quarter; so that*
in Mr. Chamberlain’s own view, even that amount of profit
is not to be guaranteed to our colonists! All the while, he
declines to put any tax on raw material, so that he obviously
believes such a tax would have the effect of raising price.
If this would happen with raw material, it must certainly
happen with food.
Strictly speaking, the question is one of intensity of
demand and supplement of supply. If we tax an imported
article which consumers can partly do without, and of which
our home product can be readily increased, the price will


certainly not rise to the full amount. But corn is of all
imports the most indispensable ; and a tax of 2s. per quarter
would do little or nothing to stimulate home or even Colo-
nial supply. In point of fact, despite Mr. Chamberlain’s
denials and Professor Ashley’s arguments, we actually see
the Continental price of corn at a given moment, as com-
pared with British prices, frequently raised by more than
the sum of the tariff,* though the leading Continental coun-
tries all raise much more wheat per head than we do. See-
ing that the largest item in our home produce of cereals is
not wheat but oats, it may well happen that prices will rise
at different rates, wheat probably rising most; and in view
of the whole circumstances the chances are that our wheat
prices will in general rise to the full amount of the duty,
and frequently to a good deal more. Seeing, moreover, that
Mr. Chamberlain’s Birmingham friends talk of a duty of
“ 2s. or 35.” per quarter, we may fairly reckon on a 2s. rise
of price.
Of this increased price the Treasury would receive only
the tax laid on non-Colonial imported corn. In 1902 we
imported about 132 million cwts. of foreign corn (i.e., wheat,
barley, rye, and oats, excluding maize); and 28 million
cwts. of Colonial and Indian; and we ourselves in Great
Britain and Ireland raised about 158 million cwts. of
cereals.! On such a foreign supply the proposed tax would
yield to the revenue £3,300,000; and the Colonists and
Indian growers would receive a profit of only £700,000;
but the consumer would pay in all over £8,000,000 extra;
* For the averages of 25 years’ prices and duties in Germany, see
Mr. W. H. Dawson’s paper in “ Labour and Protection,” edited by Mr.
Massingham, 1903, pp. 270-1. The figures for other countries are
given in the “Inquiry” Blue Book, pp. 119-126. For a careful state-
ment of the abstract argument cp. J. A. Hobson’s essay in “ Labour
and Protection,” pp. 76-77, and Mr. C. A. Pigou’s “ Riddle of the
Tariff,” pp. 77-82, and article in Fortnightly Review , January, 1904.
f I follow here the high authority of Mr. L. G. Chiozza Money,
Home crops are stated in bushels, and under our medieval system
there are still six different bushels. Working out the averages for the
different crops, I get about 135,000,000 cwts., but prefer to adopt Mr.
Money’s figures. On Colonial supplies I follow official figures, which
differ slightly from his.


and the balance of £4,000,000 would go into the pockets
of British landlords. Indeed, even the rise on Indian
wheat will go mainly into the pockets of British capitalists ;
and in the Colonies the chief gainers will be the richest
farmers and the landlords. That is the financial essence of
Mr. Chamberlain’s scheme so far.
Exactly the same thing will take place with butter,
cheese, and eggs (unless in this case the consumption should
fall off). Of the quantity consumed by us in 1902,
£26,000,000 worth came from foreign countries, and only
£7,000,000 from the Colonies. A tax of 5 per cent, on the
foreign supply would yield £1,300,000; and the Colonists
would get £350,000 of extra profit. But if our own produce
of the same articles amounted to the same sum—and it is
supposed to be a great deal more—the price of that will rise
equally, and the extra £1,650,000 would go to “the agri-
cultural interest,” that is, to the landlords.
So with the proposed tax on foreign meat. In 1902 we
imported £27,000,000 worth from foreign countries, and
only £7,500,000 from the Colonies. Unless the consump-
tion should fall off —which, of course, is very likely—a 5 per
cent, tax would yield £1,350,000; and the Colonial traders
would at most get £375,000 of extra profit. Of our own
produce of meat we have no statistics, but, taking it at the
low estimate of £45,000,000, we should have to pay
£2,250,000 extra for that, and the gainers would again be
the landlords.
We say advisedly, the landlords; for the effect of all
extra profit in agriculture, under our system of taxation,
is simply to enable the landlord to pocket more rent. In
fine, Mr, Chamberlain is proposing yet another “ dole ” to
the landed interest; this time to the tune of something
between £7,000,000 and £10,000,000. The one national
offset worth discussing is the conceivable extension of
agriculture under the proposed tariff. But an extension
which puts all the extra profit into precisely the pockets
that receive most at present is not the species of improve-
ment that will be acceptable to a democratic nation. Agri-


culture must be promoted, and may be promoted, in a more
equitable fashion.
As regards, finally, the direct effect of food taxes on the
consumers, Mr. Chamberlain’s proposal is the most grossly
impolitic that has ever been made in modern times. He
professes to leave the total burden of taxation on food
unchanged inasmuch as he reduces the duties on tea, sugar,
coffee, cocoa, and tobacco. It is difficult to overstate the
effrontery of the pretence here made to offer a quid pro quo
when all the while the Government are bound in common
honor to take off the extra taxation they put on some of
these articles during the war. But even if that be waived,
the proposal is monstrous. It is astounding that it should
be necessary to point out that the alleged equalisation can
take place only in households where the consumption of the
relieved articles is equal to that of those newly burdened.
But such an equality is precisely what no wise statesman
would seek to secure or preserve. In no workman’s family
should it take place. By common consent our town popula-
tions, and even part of our rural population, are physically
degenerating, and the only way to arrest such degeneration
is to send people back to the land and to improve housing
and feeding. For housing, Mr. Chamberlain’s policy will
do nothing; as to feeding, it will tend to limit the con-
sumption of bread, butter, cheese, eggs, and meat, and to
promote the consumption of tea, coffee, tobacco, and sugar.
Of the first and third, if not of the second, we certainly
consume too much already.
The one gain would be on sugar, which is an important
food for children, and the cheapness of which is important
to a whole series of subsidiary industries which Mr. Cham-
berlain professed himself willing to sacrifice in order to pro-
tect the very much smaller industry of sugar-refining. And
in view of the outcry which that industry will assuredly
make if it fails to receive the protection given to others, we
may put it as morally certain that under a Protectionist
system the import duty on sugar would speedily be raised
to its former figure, with Mr. Chamberlain’s full consent.


The things left cheaper would be precisely those which
should be cheapened last, not first It is astonishing to find
that Professor Ashley, who sees in the degeneration of our
town-dwellers a reason for “regulating” industry, should see
in the cheapening of tea as against the raising of the price
of bread an unobjectionable fiscal expedient. +
Above all, as regards tobacco, Mr. Chamberlain’s plan
is nothing short of iniquitous in respect of its incidence on
women. Under its operation, the hundreds of thousands of
women who support themselves singly, or fatherless chil-
dren or brothers and sisters in addition, will have to pay
more for bread, butter, eggs, and meat; and they will gain
nothing from the rebate on tobacco, which in the working
classes is almost entirely a man’s luxury. Their sole com-
pensation will be a lessened price for tea, of which they
had better consume less in any case; for coffee and cocoa,
of which they consume little ; and for sugar, of which, after
all, they may expect to see the price soon raised on them
again. As for the pretence that bacon is spared as being
“ food of the very poor,” it is notoriously false. There is
almost no article more habitually consumed by the middle
class; and to drive the poor from eggs and fresh meat
to salted meat is merely to further their physical deteriora-
tion.
The whole scheme, in fine, is an unscrupulous return
to the aristocratic policy of taxing food, as against the
democratic policy of taxing unearned incomes and economic
rent. Workmen who vote for it, and workmen’s wives who
welcome it, must indeed be under a “ strong delusion.”
§ 10. The Effects of Protection as to Manufactures.
It remains to consider the effects of taxing our imports
of manufactures. Here the first problem is to decide what
is “ raw material ” and what is not. One of the imports
most complained of is that of iron in bars or ingots—
certainly a manufactured article as compared with raw ore,
* “Tariff Problem,” pp. 186-194.


but equally a raw material for those whose business it is
to make iron into tin-plates or into machinery. As is
well known, such cheap imports have done much to restore
to prosperity the tinplate industry which was so hard hit
by the McKinley tariff. Similarly, our shipbuilders have
secured contracts in virtue of their command of “ dumped ”
■German steel; and have even beaten German competitors
in engineering contracts on the Continent, through being
able to. buy German steel cheaper than it is sold to Ger-
mans. Nottingham lace-makers, again, use as the basis of
their silk and linen lace a cotton net (afterwards chemically
removed) which is clearly a manufactured article, and which
is imported for the purpose.
To tax imported iron, then, or steel, or cotton net, is to
tax the “ raw material ”of three important industries; and
•so with a hundred other imports. The tax will raise the
price of the higher manufacture, by way of protecting the
home manufacture of the lower; and the net effect will be
to force some labor from the higher to the lower industry,
and to throw more labor absolutely idle. Nothing is more
certain than that rise of price normally checks demand, not
only for articles which can readily be dispensed with, like
lace, but for all products not absolutely indispensable ; and
lessened demand means lessened employment* Under
Protection the tinplate factories which now thrive on im-
ported German iron will be unable to export as they now
do to the United States in the teeth of the tariff; and if
some extra employment is obtained for the iron forges, it
will be heavily over-balanced by the labor thrown idle
through the stoppage of the whole of the exports which
now go to pay for imported iron. Imports mean demand,
either ( a ) for exports, or ( b ) for home labor which is the
price paid for sharing in the goods imported in payment
of interest on investments.
This home trade is habitually ignored—sometimes, as
we have seen, condemned —by Protectionists, though all the
+ J. S. Mill’s argument to the contrary is a confusion, now aban-
doned by nearly all economists.


while it is an increase of home trade that they profess to
desire. The expansion of the building trade, which is one
of the most satisfactory features of all, is either ignored, or
mentioned only to lament that the exporting industries do
not expand at the same rate. Mr. Chamberlain insists
that we shall make our own watches, rails, and bottles,
thus exporting less of other products, and so reducing still
further that export trade which he avowedly takes as the
real measure of our industrial prosperity, but on the other
hand, it is hoped, increasing our home trade. As a matter
of fact the home trade would not be increased: the general
demand would fall off with the rise in prices; and many
constructive enterprises which are undertaken because prices
are low would simply be abandoned.
But Mr. Balfour, on the other hand, avowedly sees
nothing desirable in the increase of the home trade, fie
expressly admits that it is gaining ground proportionally to
the lessened rate of expansion in export trade ; and he does
not deny, further, that while the larger “ staple ” industries
do not expand as formerly “ this is more than made up for
by the variety of goods we now manufacture for the
foreign consumer.” But, he adds, “ from neither circum-
stance can I derive much satisfaction. These are precisely
the signs which would accompany the struggle of a Free
Trade country so to modify its industries as to pierce the
barrier of foreign tariffs.” Exactly! And was there ever
an idler answer ?§ When such “ staple ” industries as coal-
mining, ship-building, and machine-making, are found to
increase their export, Mr. Balfour finds that also an evil!
Nothing, apparently, will content him but increased export
of cheap cottons and woollens.
For such a position there is neither social nor economic
justification. Free modification of industry from staple to>
new forms means the elevation of labor from simpler to
more complex activities —an evolution upwards. When
done without injury to consumers or to other industries—
S “Notes,” p. 31. The rest of Mr. Balfour’s answer is beside the
case and indicates an entire failure to understand the issue.


as happens under Free Trade, but not under Protection—
it is a social gain. And while Mr. Balfour thus recognises
and disparages such evolution, other propagandists in Mr.
Chamberlain’s train are telling the workers that Free Trade
means the reduction of industry to the lower forms.
Even Professor Ashley thus argues* that our industries
are tending to decline from skilled to unskilled forms,
offering as his proof (i) the increased exports of coal, clay,
and spirits, and (2) the decrease in values of exports of
cottons and in quantities of exported woollens, while unable
to deny ( a ) the increased quantities of cottons (piece goods)
exported, and paying no heed to (d) the immensely in-
creased home consumption of woollens and other articles of
manufacture, or (c) the continual increase in ship-building,
and in the numbers of men employed in and through that
great industry. At the same time, when he deals with one
of the most skilled industries, that of machine-making, he
does it only to deplore, with Mr. Balfour, that in that
matter we are enabling foreign nations to compete with
us in the use of machines, as if that were not a less skilled
form of industry than the making of them! On the other
hand, he takes no note of the obvious tendency of Protec-
tion to force the home manufacture of such low-grade
articles as cotton-net.
As regards the hardware and cutlery trade, finally, I
am unable to reconcile Professor Ashley’s figures with those
of the Board of Trade. He representsf the annual export
of “ Cutlery and Hardware of British and Irish Manufac-
ture” as falling steadily from £2,508,556 worth in 1882 to
;£953>695 in 1902. The Statistical Abstract, 1888-1902,
on the other hand, gives the export values of Hardware and
Cutlery for 1888 as £3,168,403, against £1,834,481 in 1894,
and £2,177,524 in 1902. Here indeed there has been a
falling off, beginning before the McKinley Tariff, and only
partly reversed since ; while since 1897 the imports of hard-
ware and cutlery have nearly doubled, rising from £710,886
to £1,402,532. In this case it is certain that the superior
* “The Tariff Problem,” ch. iv. f As cited, p. 82.


quality of American tools has much to do with the im-
ports; and that until that is competently competed with
they will continue. Still, the condition of the Sheffield
workers to-day is immensely better than in the past*
In the same fashion, Professor Ashley deplores the in-
creased export of coal, on the score that “in exporting
coal, Great Britain is evidently living on her capital, for it
can never be replaced ”; § yet all the while he cites as a
discouraging proof of arrested industrial growth the
decline since 1882 in quantity; and since the in-
flated year 1873 in value —of exports of iron and
steel and the simpler manufactures of these* ( e.g .,
rails) as apart from machinery and ships. Iron is
just as much “capital”, and just as irreplaceable, as
coal; and it takes two tons of coal to smelt one ton of iron.
Yet in the latter case we are to exult over increased export,
though our iron will be done before our coal! To complete
the inconsistency, we find the Professor treating the positive
“ dumping ” of American and German iron and steel—an
exporting of irreplaceable capital below cost -price —as
symptoms of American and German industrial progress;
though at the same time he reluctantly admits that ‘the
iron ore deposits of the United States are not inexhaus-
tible, and that the Steel Corporation is reckoning on their
lasting only from 75 to 100 years”! The argument seems
to be: “Heads, Protection wins; tails, Free Trade loses.”
On the other hand, Mr. Byng, heedless of the crowd of
new industries that have risen by the help of “ dumped ”
sugar alone, alleges that in this country there has been “ no
new industry ” for twenty years past!H Thus, wherever we
take up the Protectionist case we find it riddled by vital
contradictions. That increase in the home trade which is
♦ See the paper of Mr. Callis in “ British Industries Under Free
Trade.”
§ P. 104. Mr. Ashley does not deal with the fact that the great
bulk of our coal export is destined to fuel our own ships (see the essay
of Mr. Thomas, M.P., in “British Industries Under Free Trade,
edited by Mr. Harold Cox, 1903, pp. 3^9*37°)•
* P. 65. + P- 117. IT “Protection,” pp. 23, 25, 128.


the sole measure of national prosperity is by one Pro-
tectionist leader ignored in the act of calling for it, and is
by another disparaged as undesirable. The workers in
particular will do well to take note that Mr. Balfour cannot
“ derive much satisfaction ” from a multiplication of home
industry which means an increased distribution of wealth.
His policy and that of Mr. Chamberlain converge clearly at
one point—in their disregard of the interests of the masses,
and their concern for the interests of the classes.
And the more disinterested argument of Professor Ash-
ley yields no better prescription. His plea for “ regula-
tion” of industry would lead logically to Socialism, but
instead of a Socialistic control in the interests of all he
proposes mere Protectionism —the subsidising of the few
at the cost of the many —without even offering a reasonable
proof that Protection will “ regulate ” the sweated industries
of which he desires the restriction.
§ ii. Protectionism is Parasitism.
We have already seen in part that every protected in-
dustry, insofar as it thrives, does so at the cost of others,
and of the nation at large. Only a minority can in any
country be protected by tariffs, t That is the formula of
all Protection; and nowhere is the fact clearer than in re-
gard to that very “ dumping ” to which our own Protec-
tionists now point as a main justification for their doctrine.
It is not true indeed that, as Mr. Chamberlain asserts,
only Protectionist countries “ dump,” or that it is only
free-trading countries that are dumped on. As Professor
Ashley admits, dumping was, not many years ago, a com-
* For instance, the amount of imported wool retained for home
consumption increased from 200,000,000 lbs. in 1874 to 410,000,000 lbs.
in 1898; and the home consumption of cotton in a similar proportion ;
while the population had increased only some 25 per cent. Broadly
speaking, the people had more than half as much' again of clothing.
And this improvement continues.
f “ In the United States, where Protection has been carried to the
utmost, the census returns show that not more than one-twentieth of
the labor of the country is engaged in protected industries.” Henry
George, “ Protection or Free Trade,” ed. 1903, p. 227.


mon British practice ; “ indeed, a German economist, writing
in 1897, before we in England had begun to complain of
being dumped upon ourselves, expressly designates the
policy of low foreign prices as ‘ the German-English
system The Professor further tells how, after English
manufacturers had led the way, dumping was resorted to
“ later by German manufacturers to secure sale in Russia ”
—a Protected State; and he sums up that the policy of
high tariffs has been generally adopted because of “ a feel-
ing of international resentment ” —resentment, that is, of
British dumping to begin with. Thus Mr. Chamberlain’s
repeated assertion that this country alone can be dumped
upon is flatly contradicted by his only important economic
authority. It is in fact notoriously untrue; dumped Ger-
man iron has gone in abundance to America as well as to
England in recent years; and it was upon protected coun-
tries (the United States included) that our ironmasters
used to dump.
In any case, what happens under a policy of protected
dumping is that the manufacturers who dump are im-
poverishing their own countrymen to benefit aliens. It
matters not if they also injure some aliens : inevitably they
injure their own people, which is simply bled in order to
enable them to gain further profit by helping other nations
to produce certain articles much more cheaply than the
protected country itself can. Whatever some English iron-
masters may suffer from the dumping of German iron, Ger-
man manufacturers suffer much more, while English manu-
facturers greatly gain. We have noted some cases. An-
other typical case has been pointed out in a consular report.
German producers of tin have been in the habit of dumping
tin in Holland till certain German makers of tinned goods
can no longer sell them in the Dutch market, and have
actually had to transport their works to Holland to be able
to compete with the Dutch makers who buy German tin so
much cheaper than Germans can at home.
+ Ashley, “ The Tariff Problem,” p. 70, citing Oldenberg, Deutsch-
land als Industriestaat, p. 25. Cp. p. 96.


Thus the protected industry is made a mere parasite on
those which cannot be protected—and these are always the
majority. A peculiarly memorable illustration is that of
the American tinplate industry, as forced into existence
by the McKinley Tariff from 1891 onwards. Sir John
Jenkins, one of the chief authorities on the subject, has
told§ how, firstly, the agitation for and announcement of
the tariff in advance so raised demand and prices that
between October, 1890, and July, 1891, " the American cus-
tomers had to pay on account of the prospective establish-
ing of the tinplate industry in their country 6,191,471 dol-
lars, not a cent of which went to the American Treasury.”
Secondly, when the Tariff was in full operation, “out of
every 100 dollars paid in the United States in 1892 for tin-
plates, 45 dollars were paid for tariff ” ; and by September
of that year it was reckoned that the total extra cost to con-
sumers had been 25,000,000 dollars. The effect was, that
“ the wrappers to preserve the farmers’ or pro-
duct cost as much as the contents.” So desperate was the
case that the House of Representatives in 1892 by a large
majority passed a Bill reducing the tariff on tinplates
from 2.2 cents to 1 cent per lb. But the Senate, the
chosen home of class interests, threw the Bill out, refusing
to discuss it.
Meantime the damage to other industries went on in-
creasing. The chief “ consumers ” of tinplates were the
sellers of canned fruits and vegetables, whose industry em-
ployed in all some two millions of people, as against the
1 6,0 CX) employed in the tinplate trade. “ One of the re-
sults of dear tinplates was that millions of bushels of vege-
tables and fruits were allowed to rot because it did not pay
to can them.” The new tinplate trade was in fact “ a leech
sucking the blood of creatures larger and -more valuable
than itself.” At last, in 1894, the Senate had to consent to a
reduction of the tariff by one per cent per lb.'(Wilson tariff).
By this time, however, the McKinley Tariff had had
§ln the Westminster Gazette, November 20, 1903. Cp. Mr. W. L.
Williams’ paper in “ British Industries Under Free Trade.”


the effect of greatly expanding the food-canning trade in
Central and Southern America, Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand. In the closing months of ißgi the British
export of tinplates to those countries increased by 146,000
boxes; and the trade with them has flourished ever since.
Thus one protected American industry inflicted on other
American industries much more damage than it did to the
rival British industry, and raised up against those American
industries new and permanent rivals; destroying in the
process an incalculable amount of real wealth.
The total effect of the McKinley Tariff was to bring
about for the commercial life of the United States, in ißg6,
“the Worst Year on Record.” The years ißg3 and ißg6
showed the largest number of business failures in the
history of the States ; the figures for the first nine months
of the latter year being 11,280, an increase over 1895 of
21 per cent, with an increase of 56 per cent, in gross liabili-
ties. On the approved method of political quackery, the
tariff which had originally done the harm was again raised,
tinplates among other things being catered for! And after
all the waste and destruction of wealth thus wrought, Welsh
tinplates are to-day exported in large quantities to the
States, where they are used as packages for export pur-
poses, the exporters receiving on this score a rebate of
gg per cent, of the tariff. It is estimated that with the extra
outlay thus caused the United States “ could have paid
twice over all the cost of erecting the existing tinplate mills,
and handsomely pensioned for the full length of their em-
ployment every one of the 15,000 people now engaged in
the American tinplate industry.”
The Welsh industry, on the other hand, certainly suf-
fered heavily—that is, the workers did | the employers hav-
ing made great profits in the “boom year”. Such dis-
placement of labor is truly a serious matter; and we shall
consider later the problem of its scientific treatment. But
it is an evil which Protection could not have cured; since
no protective duty could have set up any extra home de-
mand for tinplates. On the other hand, the unprotected


trade has in course of time so recovered that in 1902 its total
production was the largest in its whole history.* While the
American demand fell off, the other foreign demand
steadily increased. Above all, the home demand has in-
creased from million boxes in 1892 to million
boxes in 1902 —a result due, among other things, to the
greatly improved economy of production in the tinplate
mills, of which a smaller number can now produce a larger
amount than formerly.
In 1890-1, the expectation of the McKinley tariff had
led to the rapid erection of many mills to meet the tem-
porary demand, and the consequent employment of much
extra labor. Warned by their subsequent sufferings, many
workers in 1899 refused to leave other employments to re-
turn to the tinplate trade when it needed more hands. Thus
for those who remained there was the advantage of raised
wages—an imperfect compensation for past loss, but still
one that only Free Trade could have obtained for them in
the absence of special State provision. In the United
States, meanwhile, Protection has totally failed to secure for
the workers the steadiness of employment at fair wages
which they desire. Not only did industry in general suffer
there under the McKinley tariff as we have seen, but since
1897 there have been more strikes and stoppages of works
in the American tinplate industry than in the Welsh.
All the while, the protected American industries in
general have lived parasitically on the largest industry of
all—the agricultural, which cannot be protected, because it
has to sell a great surplus product. Save in the best years,
the great mass of the independent agriculturists of the
United States live far more poorly, and work far harder,
than the artisans in the towns. The misery of the lives of
western farmers’ wives has been the theme of much litera-
ture, their numerous suicides having in many years attracted
much distressed attention. On great areas of the land of
“ the richest country on the earth ”, the bulk of the popula-
* Statement of Sir John Jenkins. Mr. W. L. Williams (as cited,
p. 175) makes it only “almost as great as it was in 1891. **


tion fare about as ill as the poorest agricultural laborers in
England; and a succession of a few bad years reduced
them to a state of indebtedness from which it takes them
many more years to escape, t Meantime they have to pay
enormous prices for their implements and their clothes, the
profit going to the protected native producers of these
things—above all to the employers—and to the national
revenue, which raises nothing from incomes or economic
rent. Protection in America, in short, is as essentially anti-
democratic as it was and would be here.
In Canada, in the same way, what the farmers suffer
from is not the competition of foreign wheat in our markets
but the burden from the duties laid on imported manu-
factures by their own Government. In our free market
they could compete perfectly well if their fellow-colonists
would let them. While Protectionist statesmen here talk
loosely of “ the Colonies ” as being wholly Protectionist,
there is in Canada as in other colonies a strong party
opposed to Protection; and naturally so, seeing that Pro-
tection means for the farmers and foresters of Canada the
paying of exorbitant prices for every tool, implement, and
garment that they buy, while they in turn sell the bulk of
their produce in free markets elsewhere. Thus throughout
North America the farmers are taxed to support a section
of the manufacturers, even as in Britain before 1849 the
whole public was taxed to keep up land-rents; while in
France and Germany land and capital combine to tax the
remainder of the nation.
In fine, the end of a Protectionist policy in Britain
is (l) to enable our large producers to treat our consumers
and secondary producers as German and American pro-
ducers treat theirs—that is, to sell cheaply to foreigners
while selling dear at home, so making their own countrymen
bear the total burden; and (2) to enrich landlords and one
section of capitalists at the cost of the mass of the people.
+ Compare the testimony of Ralph Lane, in “ Patriotism Under Two
Flags ” iqcn, pp. 2=52-6. The present alternative to this poverty-stricken
life is that of ihe great capitalistic farms, as to which see J. Graham
Brooks’s “ Social Unrest,” 1903, pp. 188-9.


The pretext of “ giving work ” is the merest pretext. There
would be less work, less wages, dearer food, reduced prices
for exports, and, what is much worse, permanently reduced
and dearer imports.
§ 12. The Final Futility of Protection.
It has already been shown that Protectionism, while
enabling certain groups or classes to thrive at the expense
of a plundered majority, constantly fails to secure the gene-
ral benefits which its advocates promise. But it may be
well to note precisely wherein and why it thus fails.
1. It invariably injures many more industries than it
helps, thus doubly burdening consumers.
2. It fails permanently to increase exports of manufac-
tures. Where such increase occurs, it is due to special
causes. The great majority of protected countries expand
their export only in food and raw material. Even the United
States latterly export nearly thrice as much of food and raw
material as of made goods. In the cases of the States and
Germany, too, it is quite uncertain how much of the ex-
ports is (a) payment of interest on foreign investments, or
(b) export of capital for investment abroad, or (c) payment
for British shipping-work.
3. It does not necessarily prevent increase of imports;
it only makes imports dearer. American iron and steel im-
ports rose from £3,375,000 in the fiscal year 1901 to
£10,323,000 in 1903. Germany in 1880 imported for home
consumption £141,000,000 worth of articles of all kinds;
in 1890, £288,000,000 worth—a much greater increase than
has taken place in England. But for those imports Ger-
many has paid very disadvantageously, much of the pay-
ment being in sugar sold abroad much below the home
price. Dumped iron comes under the same description.
Therefore Germany has had no such national benefit from
increased imports as accrues in Britain. Naturally, there-
fore, her artisans work much longer hours, for much less
wages, and with dearer food, than those of British work-
men.


4. Protection wholly fails to prevent such fluctuation in
■ prices as is complained of under Free Trade; and it is not
even pretended that it can save traders or producers from
(a) the common experience of “ undercutting ” —that is,
home dumping —by their home competitors, or ( b ) from the
effects of a new invention which enables those who first use
it to revolutionise a method of production.
5. It equally fails to secure steadiness of employment:
depressions and disputes are at least as common in Ger-
many and the United States as in Britain; and more com-
mon in protected trades than in others. A comparison of
the recent statistics of unemployment in France and Britain
shows more trouble there than here.
6. When the Corn Laws were in full force in England,,
farmers were ruined in great numbers, the only steady
gainers being the landlords. When great scarcity had
forced foreign imports, the foreign supply tended to persist,
and so forced down the price in good years. “1 he periods,
of scarcity starved the laborers with high prices, and years
of plenty ruined the farmers with low prices.”*
y. When import duties are set up on the plea that “ in-
fant industries should be protected ”, the protected indus-
tries are found to be infantine in helplessness after a hun-
dred years.§ The only great industries which are known
to have ultimately become even temporarily independent
of tariffs are some of the departments of the iron trade in
the United States, which work on immense natural re-
sources. It has taken more than a century, however, under
Protection, for those industries to reach a footing of equality
with ours.* And still they require Protection as regards.
J Armitage-Smith, “ The Free Trade Movement,” 2nd ed., 1903,
p. 57. Cp. pp. 58-59. .
§ This is virtually admitted by Professor Ashley, p. 25. the plea in
question is the only reasonable one ever made for Protection, and it
would be valid if it could be consistently acted on. This, however, it
never has been. Protected industries always become forces of political
corruption.
* “ Our deposits of coal and iron are larger, better, and more easily
worked than those of Great Britain ; and before the Revolution we were
actually exporting iron to that country Henry George, “ Protection or


tinplates. The German iron trade has prospered by reason
not of Protection but of chemical discoveries by which
certain kinds of iron formerly unsuitable for many industrial
purposes were made workable. These and other foreign
developments have at times depressed the British iron
trade, yet under Free Trade it has always recovered its
volume.
8. It is the invariable history of Protection that the im-
port duties first asked for are found insufficient to do what
was hoped for; and tariffs are raised as far as the sufferers
will endure. The protected industry is thus seen to be
weakened in point of enterprise from the start.
9. The Protection of one set of industries invariably
leads to appeals for similar Protection from others. Thus
the protection of manufactures in Canada has actually led
to a request (albeit by only a minority of middlemen and
politicians) for preference in British markets for the corn
raised on some of the richest soil on the planet. They tell
in the United States how a deputation of fruit-growers once
waited on the President to appeal for a protective duty on
bananas. “ But gentlemen,” he replied in astonishment,
“we do not grow bananas. Where would the protection
come in?” “It is this way,” was the explanation: “we
are in the orange trade; and we feel that when a man is
filled up with bananas he has no room for oranges.” If
it be a myth, it is a luminous one.
10. Tariffs notoriously force up opposing tariffs. The
tariff wars which ensue are compromised, like other wars,
only after enormous loss has been incurred, with no advan-
tage whatever. France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and
Russia have in late years destroyed untold possibilities of
trade in this fashion; and the compromises finally leave the
lowered tariffs visibly checking trade still.
Even all this, however, is not the whole of the rebuttal
of Protectionism. That policy involves a certain process of
Free Trade,” p. 205. Cp. the essay of Mr. Hugh Bell in “ British In-
dustries Under Free Trade,” p. 275.


compensation which does not meet the eye, and is not
allowed for in the ordinary abstract argument on the Free
Trade side. On grounds of observation as well as of com-
mon sense we can all see that a country’s imports and ex-
ports are the whole of its real wealth-accounts, extra bul-
lion being no equivalent for goods from the point of view
of the general well-being, even if (what is not the case) bul-
lion were imported when goods are excluded. Exchanges
must equate. But it is not so easily realised that when a
country checks imports by tariffs it is raising the real price
it pays for what it does import, and lowering the real price
it receives for what it exports.
In one of his alarmist passages, Mr. Balfour, as we have
seen, sketches a possible state of things in this country in
which, “ while large imports are a vital necessity, the ex-
ports required to pay for them are not of a kind which
other nations—all, by hypothesis, Protectionist—are bound
to take.” Here, as usual, the Protectionist assumes that all
international trade is by way of direct exchange—that when
A imports from B it can pay only by exports direct to B.
The facts being quite otherwise, the argument is worthless.
But even on the face of it, it is a fallacy. For unless we
make the further assumption that the foreign nations are
unwilling to sell , the danger in question is a chimaera; and
if it were otherwise, Protection would obviously hasten the
harm by prompting the unwillingness. Mr. Balfour, like
Mr. Chamberlain, never seems to bring his various argu-
ments into coherence. And while he thus makes our
alleged necessity a reason for trying tariffs, Mr. Chamber-
lain assures his hearers that “ when it comes to retaliation,
we stand in a better position than any other nation on the
face of the earth. Our market is a necessity to them. Their
market is very desirable, but they are not a necessity to us.
They have not got colonies behind them. We have, and an
Empire.’T
This in turn is claptrap : the needs on the two sides are
reporf eC ° nd at Lee( * s 011 December 1903. Daily Telegraph


of the same order; but the truth lies between the two
mutually destructive doctrines of the Protectionist leaders.
The desire to sell is practically permanent; and, this being
so, whatever the selling nation may wish as to imports, it
must either import freely or get less value for its exports.
A certain measure of choice, of course, it has. Nation
A, as we saw, may export to B and receive payment
from C, which in turn imports goods from D, which imports
from A. Thus India annually exports in all more than she
imports, while Britain, which really receives the bulk of that
annual drain, exports to India more than she receives
thence. The explanation is that India sends to nearly
every other country on her trading list more than she re-
ceives from it, and their debts to India are paid through
Britain, which pockets a profit on the transaction, over
and above the Indian “ tribute ” of dividends and pensions.
In the same way, if the American exports to Britain be not
balanced by the sum of freight charges, dividends due,, and
imports, the difference may be met by American imports
from India, or Mexico, or Peru, or from any other country
in our debt. But in so far as all such imports are protected,
the net result is that what is received is over-priced, while
what is exported is under-priced.
If, for instance, France puts a heavy tariff on British
wares while selling us vegetables and fruit, she tends
primarily to make French bills of exchange on London
more numerous relatively to British bills of exchange on
Paris. The French bills then will tend to sell at a heavy
discount, the British at a premium ; + and the French seller,
getting less for his produce, will have to send more to obtain
the same return , while the British seller gets his former
price for a less export.
In actual fact, far more bills are always drawn by
foreigners on London than by Britons on foreigners; § and
X The British exporter, of course, need not draw a bill on France,
but may take in payment a French bill on London. For this, in the
terms of the case, he will give less goods, which comes to the same
thing.
i G. Clare, “The A.B.C. of the Foreign Exchanges,” 1893, p. 12.


normally a good bill on London fetches a good price. The
reason is that foreign Governments and others who have to
pay interest to British investors, or freight-costs to British
shippers, want such bills as well as do the foreign importers
of British goods. But at all times the trade between any
nation and the rest of the world is tending to an equation;
and any fresh disturbance of that equation (such as an
import duty) which temporarily causes a country to owe less
nominally than is owed to it, will primarily have the effect of
lowering the value of the bills drawn by its traders on the
country to which it is seeking to pay less; and the traders
of that country accordingly can obtain the bills drawn by
the first at a lower rate in goods, or drawn on it at a
premium.
In the case put, accordingly, France as a whole will
stand to receive less real payment, and Britain will
stand to receive more. The British seller is thus so far
enabled to “ dump ”if he will; but whether he does or not,
the French buyer is forced by his tariff to pay an extra
price; and thus in buying and selling alike the people of
the protected country are at a disadvantage. Since, how-
ever, the total buying and selling on both sides must equate
either directly or mediately (i.e., through trade with other
nations), the equation is effected through the protected
country giving more and receiving less, its consumers thus
suffering in both directions from relative scarcity=higher
cost.*
What is more, Protection, by limiting imports, obviously
injures the shipping trade of the protected country. Inas-
much as it takes back less in quantity than it sends out, its
ships tend to lack return cargoes — e.g., those of the United
States, whose exports in any case bulk much more than
their imports—while the Free Trading country has always
an abundance of return cargo. The ships of the latter,
accordingly, tend to drive those of the former from the
whole trade, as has actually happened in the competition
* J. S. Mill has an argument to a contrary effect, which will not
bear the test of experience. See it discussed in the Appendix, IV,


of British and American shipping; and the Protectionist
country has finally to pay, by increased exports, for the sea-
carriage of the whole goods exchanged, besides losing one
great industry in forcing up a number of small ones. Only
the stress of the hallucination under which men take ex-
ports as the measure of a nation’s prosperity could cause
such an essentially losing process to pass for the reverse.
We now reach the explanation of the fact that a rise in
exports ultimately followed on the McKinley Tariff in the
United States —a fact which our tariff propagandists so
characteristically fail to comprehend. Mr. Vince, for in-
stance, triumphantly points to the following figures, show-
ing the average annual exportation of manufactured goods
from the United States in five years some time before, and
the five years after the imposition of the Tariff :
1883-1887 £ 2 9,000,ocx)
1896-1900 £ 66,000,000
These figures are supposed to prove that the McKinley
Tariff benefited the United States. It will be seen that Mr.
Vince is careful not to cite the years 1887-1890, before the
tariff, or 1891-1895, which were the first five years of the
tariff’s operation. Such devices of omission and commis-
sion appear to be normal in Protectionist propaganda.
The complete figures would have shown that the total
exports had risen from 683 million dollars in 1888 to 872
millions in 1890-1, without the tariff; and that in 1890-91
the export of manufactured goods was 168 million dollars,
and in 1891-92 only 158 million dollars; though the export
of merchandise rose from 703 to 857 mil-
lion dollars; and that the total imports fell in the latter
year from 844 to 827 millions —the manufactured imports,
of course, falling further still. Further, the total exports fell
from 1,015 millions in 1891-92 to 793 millions in 1895-6,
failing to recover till 1897 ; and as we have already seen, the
year 1896 has been thus far “ the worst financial year on
record ” in the United States.
What then happened ? This. Importing at first less
manufactured material under the McKinley Tariff, the con-


sumers of the States had actually to pay more for the
lessened quantity (unless the difference were exports of
capital); and the exports for the same reason had to in-
crease, though the real price had in the terms of the case
fallen. At the same time, the American shipping trade
was freshly injured, and further exports had to go to pay
for the services of British shipping. The supplies imported
in anticipation of the tariff, however, were soon exhausted;
the tariff then wrought its effect of paralysing the industries
which preserved in tin cans beef, salmon, fruit, and vege-
tables, by making tinplate so dear that vast quantities of
food had to be allowed to rot on the earth ; and other indus-
tries dependent on protected manufactures were paralysed
in the same way, the whole volume of trade thus falling.
When the due bankruptcies had taken place and industry
was resumed at lower levels, the exports had to rise to make
good the exchanges; and the increase which Mr. Vince
cites as a triumph is simply the record of a process of paying
out American real wealth very much faster than real wealth
comes in, and fully as fast as it is obtained from the annual
yield of the soil. With an intention the reverse of cosmo-
politan, the United States legislature has contrived to share
the natural wealth of the land with other peoples to the
utmost extent possible. The irony of the situation is com-
plete when their exploit is pointed to as a triumph of self-
enrichment, to be emulated by poorer nations.
The sole gain that has accrued so far to the people of
the United States is, as aforesaid, some increase in the num-
bers of artisans employed in the protected trades, and a
great increase in the number of millionaires, at the cost of
the comfort of the great mass of workers and consumers,
especially the agricultural population. The case for Pro-
tection consists in limiting attention solely to the element
of selfish gain, and wholly disregarding the immense
amount of hardship to the losers ; and thus it is that among
ourselves a large part of the middle class, and of the mis-
cellaneous workers who depend on that class, are led to
believe that Protection will help them. In London, the


ideal of the average “ city man ” is to become a millionaire ;
and, lacking alike economic knowledge and reflective capa-
city, he looks simply and solely to the phenomena of capi-
talism in one or two protected countries which owe their de-
velopment either to great natural resources or to great culti-
vation of scientific method. He does not realise that the
business men of the United States work far harder than
those of London, having much longer hours and many fewer
holidays; and he perhaps would not greatly care if he did
realise that the workers of Germany have at once longer
hours, lower wages, and dearer food than those of Britain;
and that the workers of America, with their higher wages
and higher cost of living, are sooner superannuated than
any others. It is for the scientific economist to point out,
however, that these things are the price of Protection.
In view of all this, it has been argued that it is a posi-
tive advantage to a free-trading country as a whole that
•other countries should be Protectionist It is certainly true
that it is relatively advantaged by their policy: that is to
say, they cripple themselves for competition, and they give
it more than they take from it. As Mr. Henry George has
argued, Free Trade would have preserved and developed
American shipping where Protection has strangled it.
Furthermore, under a system of Free Trade the immense
coal and iron resources of the United States would in all
likelihood have been developed to the present point a
generation ago. It is the stress of home competition that
has finally forced them on, and similar pressure would have
been supplied by free imports. In that case, it may be
argued, this country would have been less prosperous. But
such reasoning overlooks the considerations (i) that all Pro-
tection checks wealth-creation, and (2) that all produc-
tion tends to further international exchange. Thus the
forcing of French exports by restraint of imports is less
fruitful than would have been their encouragement by in-
creased imports, inasmuch as it is secured at the cost of long
hours and pinching for the mass of the workers. Abund-
ance of exchange promotes consumption, which promotes


production, and so increases total wealth and well-being.
And if American shipping had developed step for step with
British, while the latter would indeed have missed “ supre ■
macy ”, other industries must have gained—up to the point,
that is, to which the natural resources of the country, under a
given system of control, enable it to maintain population.
Protectionists always, and even Freetraders sometimes,
appear to forget that no country can go on gaining faster
in wealth and population than others save in respect of
some conditions of real advantage. The conditions in favor
of Britain during the greater part of the past century have
been (i) possession of coal and iron ; (2) internal peace ; (3)
free labor; (4) internal Free Trade ; (5) free or nearly free
imports during half the century; (6) a comparatively un-
burdensome military system; and last, but not least, effici-
ency of labor. In so far as other countries possess or attain
to all or any of these factors, and in addition agricultural ad-
vantages which we do not possess, it is folly to suppose that
they will not approximate to our success ; and it is a fallacy
to suppose that by increasing their wealth they will decrease
ours so long as they do not surpass us in the sum of real
advantages. If, however, they actually gain on us in the
exploitation of the resources which have stood us in best
stead, it may be that we shall be unable to specialise as for-
merly ; and that instead of being in the main a hive of
manufacturers, importing our food, we shall have to revert
largely to food raising, exporting less. That no Protective
devices could avail to the contrary, theory and history alike
prove, as we have seen. And if revived agriculture should
raise a healthier and happier population, there would be an
advance and not a falling away in well-being. As it is,
revived agriculture on a sound basis would advance well-
being now; and the final count in the indictment of the
Chamberlain policy is that on that side it would mean not
a healthy agricultural revival, but, if anything, mere land-
lordism, the profit going not to the nation but to the land-
owners.
On the other hand it remains thus far certain that rela-


lively to many countries we still retain several of our ad-
vantages, to wit, (i) abundant coal and sufficient iron; (2)
complete internal Free Trade —as compared with octroi-
ridden France, Austria, Italy; (3) free food imports —not
•enjoyed by Germany, France, or Italy ; and it remains to be
seen whether we cannot retain the immensely important ad-
vantage of specially efficient labor. Before the repeal of the
Corn Laws Cobden pointed out how British labor, man for
man, was worth more than any other. The Committee on
Machinery in 1840, he notes,
“ reported that labor on the Continent was actually dearer than
in England in every branch of industry. Spinners, manufac-
turers, machine-makers, all agreed that one Englishman on
the Continent was worth three native workmen, whether in Ger-
many, France, or Belgium Let us go to any populous
place, from Calais to Vienna, and we should not visit any city
with 10,000 inhabitants, without finding Englishmen who are
earning thrice the wages the natives earn, and yet their em-
ployers declare that they are the cheapest laborers.”t
Some of this superiority was doubtless due to industrial
habit, which other nations can acquire; but if, as there are
other reasons for thinking, + it is partly due to climate and
food, it only needs that the sanitary, fiscal, and educational
//Ladvantages under which our populations labor should be
cured, in order that they should continue to hold their own
in industry and in well-being.
As for the argument that coal is irreplaceable capital, and
should be saved, it tells, as we have noted, equally against
iron exports and against home consumption. Long ago this
very argument was forcibly used by Mr. Gladstone against
all increase of the National Debt; but no heed is ever paid
by the Protectionist school to that side of the question.
They heap up debt as if the nation’s special resources were
infinite. In any case, it is clearly vain to check output on
economical grounds, seeing that the exhaustion of the
supply is only a question of time. One day another source
of power —for example, the tides —must be found if the
t Speech of February 24, 1842.
+ Compare Lord Brassey’s “ Foreign Work and English Wages,”
1879, ch. viii; and J. S. Mill, “ Principles of Polit. Econ.,” B. i,
ch. vii, § 5.


nation is to continue to manufacture on a large scale. If
a check be inevitable, it matters little whether it comes a
generation sooner or later; and a new resource is obviously
likelier to be found in a State going at high pressure than
in one anxiously and hopelessly hoarding the remnant of its
coal supply.
§l3. Constructive v. Destructive Policy.
Throughout this discussion, thus far, we have been
forced to meet the Protectionist theory by pointing out its-
false assumptions and its fallacies, and showing the greatly
superior efficacy of Free Trade for the production and dis-
tribution of wealth. The rebuttal is now complete. One
result of such rebuttal, however, is that some Protectionists
accuse Free Traders of heedless optimism, of indifference
to the hardships of labor, and of inability to offer any plan
of social betterment.
This charge is of course as baseless as the Protectionist
doctrine itself. As a matter of fact, the great majority of
the advocates of constructive and democratic social reform,
in this country as in Germany and the United States, are
Freetraders; and their representations of the need for
reform were mostly disregarded by the Protectionists until
the latter saw made for them an opportunity to turn social
needs into an argument for the aggrandisement of certain
capitalistic interests. It is well, however, in the interests
of Free Trade, to add now to the rebuttal of Protectionism
a brief sketch of the true policy of collective social better-
ment. It diverges at every point from the Protectionist
scheme.
Improvement in the condition of the mass of the people
depends (i) on abundance of employment, (2) on better
and cheaper housing and feeding, (3) on the just incidence
of taxation, and (4) on restraint of unproductive national
expenditure. With these factors we may deal in their
order.
Abundance of employment, as we have seen, is furthered
by free imports. It tends to be relatively checked, how-


ever, by the common necessity of restricting personal con-
sumption in order to provide an income from investments
in old age, and so escape ultimate penury. Such provision
for the future is often spoken of as “ delayed consump-
tion ”; but that phrase obscures the fact that the process
always involves preliminary arrest of production, and so
lessens the total wealth to be consumed. The only way
in which any community as a whole can counteract this
drawback is by somehow relieving the bulk of its population
of the necessity to abstain from wholesome demand ( i.e .,
demand for food, clothing, furniture, art products, etc., as
distinct from demand for alcohol); and in the present state
of society the community can best do this by providing Old
Age Pensions. The need for these is now widely ad-
mitted, even among those who reject the above-stated
reason for instituting them ; and few deny that such Pen-
sions would greatly help the mass of the workers. That
then is a means at once of lessening distress and of increas-
ing employment, since the greater spending power of the
pensioned workers would alone increase the demand for
labor. Mr. Chamberlain, after twice suggesting Old Age
Pensions, has now, as we have seen, for the second time
dropped the subject. It is in fact offensive to most of those
who follow his lead on Protection.
It has often been pointed out on the democratic side
that an increase of 10 per cent, in the spending power of the
mass of our own workers would mean a greater expansion
of our markets than could conceivably take place in all our
foreign trade. Protection, we have seen, cannot so increase
spending power. But it may be increased alike by Old Age
Pensions, by a lowering of rents, by abolition of taxes on
food, and by a constructive as against a destructive direction
of national expenditure.
The problem of better housing involves the third factor,
just taxation. Rents in our cities are exorbitantly high by
reason not only of the crowding of population thither from
the rural districts, but of the holding of building land idle
by landowners waiting for a rise in values. They can so


hold it because it is untaxed. On every principle of equit-
able government, such land should be taxed at its market-
able value ; and for the same reasons land held for pleasure
or sport should be taxed at special rates where it is not open
to the public. At the same time, however, the whole fiscal
system should be so adjusted that the incidence of the land
tax shall be on economic rent —that is, the extra or un-
earned value accruing ( a ) in towns from mere increase of
population and trade, and ( b ) in the country from advan-
tages of soil or situation, as distinct from owners’ or tenants’
improvements, or ( c ) from the fertility or situation of mines
and quarries.
The effect of thus systematically taxing land values
would be (i) to lay on unearned income a burden of taxa-
tion now laid on industry (as in the taxing of machinery)
and on the workers; and (2) to force building land into the
market. This alone would greatly promote better hous-
ing ; but it should be followed up by a systematic improve-
ment of cities under municipal control. Such a policy
would increase the demand for unskilled labor to an extent
not hitherto seen by employing extra hands in building and
sending many more back to the land;* and such an in-
crease would mean in the first place a great improvement
in the wages of the classes now “ sweated ” ; in the second
place better and cheaper housing for all; and in the third
place greatly increased demand for manufactures. If neces-
sary, further provision could be made for putting unculti-
vated land at the disposal of those willing to cultivate it,
the State or the local authority in such cases becoming the
landlord; and special measures may similarly have to be
taken to permit of additional house-building in villages
which are now prevented by their landlords from expanding.
Were the population thus enabled to find an outlet
on the land, the ups and downs which are inevitable in ail
competitive industry would cause much less distress than
* The high money wages of American labor are due in the main to
the access of the whole population to land. Cp. Henry George, “ Pro-
tection or Free Trade,” ed. 1903, pp. 227-9.


they do at present. Lack of cheap surplus labor would be
a check on sudden inflations; whereas Protection would
give no such check. The fluctuations of employment in
towns are of a kind that Protection rather worsens than
cures; and at any moment the introduction of new
machinery can derange an industry much more completely
than dumping has ever done. Where workers are thus
thrown idle, the State might fitly make temporary provision
for them. As Mill put it long ago :
“ Since improvements which do not diminish employment on
the whole, almost always throw some particular class of laborers
out of it, there cannot be a more legitimate object of the legis-
lator’s care than the interests of those who are thus sacrificed to
the gains of their fellow-citizens and of posterity.”f
And if dumping should ever be found to act in the same
way, the workers who so suffer are equally deserving of
State help, inasmuch as the nation gains where they lose.
But Protectionists are never found proposing to do anything
for the men thrown idle by new inventions; and it is
obvious that their demands, as against dumping, are made
in the interests of capital, not of labor. As we have seen,
too, it was the very class of capitalists now complaining
of dumping who by their own dumping abroad provoked
high tariffs and invited retaliation.
Given, however, the constructive reforms above specified,
all non-employment caused in the ordinary way of indus-
trial progress would tend to be remedied much more rapidly
than ever before, by reason of the new openings for labor,
and State provision would be much seldomer necessary.
4. Just taxation and wider opportunities having been
thus far secured, the lot of the industrial (i.e., service-render-
ing) population could be further bettered by relieving from
income tax all incomes under and increasing the tax
gradually on incomes above £ 1,000. But the provision of
Old Age Pensions will probably not be possible without a
rational retrenchment of the present insensate expenditure
on armaments. The distress that is now+ prevalent in
t “ Principles of Polit. Econ.,” B. i, ch. vi, § 3.
£ Winter of 1903-4.


the ranks of industry is largely attributable to the enormous
and wholly unproductive outlays of the South African war,
which destroyed fully fifty millions’ worth of fixed capital
in the war area; turned to mere transport and the produc-
tion of mere explosives much British labor and capital that
might otherwise have been producing real wealth; and
finally returned to industry large numbers of maimed and
weakened men, when all the while the restriction of real
wealth output was causing a shrinkage of values such as in-
variably leads to lessened consumption, and consequently
still further lessened employment. The owners of the
Consols which have so greatly fallen in value, for instance,
are unable to make the same economic demand as before.
All civilised nations alike, however, are burdening them-
selves even in times of peace by their monstrous arma-
ments ; and there can be no great increase in the world’s
well-being till these are checked, and the labor thus
wasted is turned to constructive account. Those publicists
who, clamoring always for such armaments, at the same time
go about to seek the good of their countrymen by way of
Protectionism, are misleaders in a double degree. They
do not understand the social forces they discuss.
It is not unlikely that, should the present distress
worsen, they will charge upon Free Trade an evil that
Free Trade actually alleviates. The more competent and
more scrupulous will make no such pretence: we have the
admission of Professor Ashley that “ considering the omin-
ous situation in the United States and Germany, it is im-
probable that the world (and England with it) is about to
enter into another period of depression.”§ If there is any-
thing reasonably predictable as to that future, it is that
British workmen will not incur the worst hardships. The
five-eighths of the German workers who in good times earn
only £4O a year or less, living largely on black bread and
horse-flesh, will not be helped by Protection in bad times.
As regards the United States, even our Protectionist pro-
fessor notes “ the streams of French Canadians, and more
§ “ The Tariff Problem.” p. 56.


recently of ‘ Assyrians ’ and miscellaneous people from the
Levant, who now enter the cotton mills of Lowell, in New
England,”*
“ Before we had any tariff,” writes Henry George, “ wages
were higher here than in Europe, and far higher, relatively to
the productiveness of labor, than they are now, after our years
of Protection It is notorious that wages in the pro-
tected industries are if anything lower than in the unprotected
industries,t and that, though the protected industries do not
employ more than a twentieth of the working population of the
United States, there occur in them more strikes, more lock-
outs, more attempts to reduce wages, than in all other industries.
In the highly-protected industries of Massachusetts, official re-
ports declare that the operative cannot get a living without the
work of wife and children. In the highly-protected industries of
New Jersey, many of the ‘protected’ laborers are children whose
parents are driven by their necessities to find employment for
them by misrepresenting their age so as to evade the State law.
In the highly-protected industries of Pennsylvania, laborers, for
whose sake we are told this high protection is imposed, are
working for 65 cents. [2s. Bj£d.] a day, and half-clad women
are feeding furnace-fires.
A still more recent testimony comes from the well-
known American publicist, Mr. Wilshire, who is not given
to understating American advantages. Discussing German
life as seen (pretty favorably) at Munich, he asks :
“ How does the European laborer, getting such low wages,
and at the same time paying such high prices for food, still keep
himself and his family in as good, if not better, physical
condition than the American, and quite as well dressed, who
with twice or three times the wages has practically no margin
for saving ?” §
The true answer is perhaps not wholly a financial statement.
An American workman has much higher costs with his
higher wages ; but there are rational economies, arts of life,
which in the American race for mere nominal wealth are
little considered. Still it is clear that on the whole the
American worker has little financial advantage from the
natural wealth of his country. The cause is, as we have
* Id. pp. 81-82.
f If this has been remedied since Mr. George wrote, it has been
through the united action of the Trade Unions, fighting the capitalists.
t “ Protection or Free Trade,” pp. 229-230.
§ Wilshire's Magazine , November, 1903.


seen, the Protectionist policy of his masters, in which he
acquiesces. And if this be true in the United States, so
little burdened with debt and armaments, so advantaged by
nature, the same policy in Britain would assuredly strip the
worker of what advantages he has.
As I write these lines, the news comes that the United
States Steel Trust is lowering its wages-bill to the extent of
£3,000,000 per annum. Shortly before, the wages paid by
the railroads had been similarly reduced. A word to the
wise worker.
§l4. The Need for Education.
Of the needed measures of constructive policy, finally,
one is so profoundly important that it may be well to state
it separately, so as to emphasise and exhibit its economic
significance. The present Protectionist campaign has ap-
parently been entered on for a variety of reasons, not the
least pressing of which seems to be the need felt in certain
quarters to thrust into the background the question of edu-
cation. After a measure designed to throw the whole con-
trol of national education into the hands of Conservative
bodies, especially those of the Church of England, it is
sought to distract the nation with an issue which may con-
ceivably divide the forces of reform. If, however, Free-
traders think out their position, they will speedily realise
that a vital reform of education is essential to their future
fiscal security inasmuch as on it depends that betterment
of industrial life which alone can make the security com-
plete ; and no serious educationist, whatever his fiscal
theories, will dispute that popular well-being is essential to
good education. The cause of democracy is thus vitally in-
volved in both of these.
Education advances industry in three ways: (i) by
developing intelligence, and consequently skill and pro-
ductiveness ; (2) by fitting workers to pass more easily from
one trade to another in case of need ; (3) by improving their
habits. As regards the employment of skilled English
workers abroad sixty years ago, concerning which we have


noted the testimony of Cobden, it is on record ( a ) that their
higher efficiency was largely a matter of specialisation,
other workers showing a more general adaptiveness; (£)
that they were in general, in the words of one Swiss em-
ployer, “in conduct the most disorderly, debauched, and
unruly, and least respectable and trustworthy of any nation
whatsoever whom we have employed ”; while ( c ) on the
other hand, “ the better educated workmen [English in-
cluded], we find, are distinguished by superior moral habits
in every respect”! These facts are the gist of the proof of
Mill’s well-grounded contention as to “ the economical
value of the general diffusion of intelligence among the
people.”
Thus far the English people have never been educated
for their own sake: at present they are being educated in
the interest of the Church of England.! In Germany,
where the workers are on the whole best educated, they
form the most effectively organised democratic party in- the
world; and they have long seen clearly that Protection is
for them a bane. In Holland, where they are hardly less
well schooled, they support Free Trade. In the United
States, though the play of anti-European prejudice and
political corruption keep their representatives Protectionist,
the workers are none the less advantaged by their good
schooling. The one respect in which American industry
gains on British, apart from natural resources, is the adap-
tiveness and inventiveness of the skilled artisan. This is
seen not only in the more rapid development of machinery,
much of which is due to workmen’s inventions,
but in the much commoner capacity for making delicate
and in the now undisputed superiority of
American tools. That there has been in these matters a
f See the testimony of M. Escher, of Zurich, quoted by Mill, B. i,
ch. vii, § 5. M. Escher testified that English manufacturers on the
Continent were the loudest in their complaints of the English labor in
question.
£ See the previous pamphlet in this series, “ The Church and Edu-
cation.”
§ Photographic apparatus, for instance, is latterly being imported in
Britain from the States in large quantities.


lack of enterprise and alertness among English employers
is indeed certain; but better all-round schooling for the
men will force on the masters *
If the latter in the mass had any scientific grasp of the
conditions of their own prosperity they would long ere
this have realised that popular education is the on§ form of
State interference it behoves them to demand. Some even
of the Free-traders among them are so slow to learn the
lesson that they still deprecate “ general ” education of the
workers, and crave only for their better training in the use of
tools. That is, they desire to multiply the merely speci-
alised and unadaptable workman of the past, himself only
a superior machine, and as often as not a hard drinker. If
masters cannot see the error of this ideal, the thinking
workers surely must It is for them, then, to fight for good
schools as the one part of the human heritage through
which they may hope to make good any other part, realising
that the cause of education is the cause of democracy itself.
* On the retardation of the cutlery trade in the past through ignor-
ance, see Mr. Callis’s paper in “ British Industries Under Free Trade.”


APPENDIX.
PROTECTIONIST FABLES.
In addition to constant self-confutation in argument, the
Protectionist leaders are guilty of a series of historical
misstatements for which there is even less excuse. Some
of these have been noticed in the foregoing pages; but it
may be well to expose separately others, the discussion of
which would have unduly loaded the main argument
I.
In one of his later speeches! Mr. Chamberlain makes
this assertion:
“ Mr. Cobden based his whole argument upon the assumption
which he made in all good faith, that if we adopted Free Trade
it would mean free exchange between the nations of the world;
that if we adopted Free Trade, five years, ten years would not pass
without all nations adopting a similar system.”
The italicised phrase is so utterly false that it might alone
serve to discredit the cause in which it is used. The sole
passage which the Protectionists are able to cite from
Cobden as to his hopes of the adoption of Free Trade by
foreign nations is this, from his speech of January 15th,
1846 :
“ I believe that if you abolish the Corn Law honestly, and
adopt Free Trade in its simplicity , there will not be a tariff in
Europe that will not be changed in less than five years to follow
your example.”
This was said only in the very last year of the Anti-
Corn-Law struggle; and there is not the slightest trace in
that or in the rest of Cobden’s speeches of -his ever once
having “based his argument” for Free Trade on the
“assumption” alleged by Mr. Chamberlain. Nor is that
t Reprint above cited, p. 184.


assumption made in the passage before us. Cobden pre-
dicts simply change of tariffs in the direction of Free Trade ,
and this change he maxes contingent on the adoption by
England of “ Free Trade in its simplicity.” When was that
attained to ? Strictly speaking, it never has been ; but the
last process of tariff reductions did not take place until
iB6O, the very year in which Cobden effected his Commer-
cial Treaty with France. And in 1864, so far was Cobden
from a firm faith in the fixity of even tariff reductions in
France that he writes to M. Chevalier :
“ I confess I am not satisfied that you do not continue to make
further reforms, if only to guard against reaction in those already
made. Time is passing. It is now four years since we arranged
your tariff. Are you sure that in 1870 you will be so completely
under the Free Trade regime as to prevent the Government of
that day (God knows what it may be) from going back to Pro-
tection after the Anglo-French Treaty expires ?” f
All the while Cobden remained a convinced Free-trader.
Neither he nor any of his colleagues ever dreamt of arguing
that the value of Free Trade for us depended on its adop-
tion by other countries, though they naturally hoped that a
good example would be followed. Doubtless they failed in
1846 to realise that other countries must go through just the
same sort of battles against class interest as they themselves
had fought in Britain. But their most optimistic forecast was
prudent in comparison with the wild promises of Mr.
Chamberlain, who, in language that no rational or scrupu-
lous statesman would venture to use, has “ pledged him-
self that if his policy be adopted, nothing but beneficial
results will follow. And while Cobden was hopeful, Peel,
who had carried measures of tariff reduction years before
he repealed the Corn Laws, expressly avowed that he did
not expect foreign nations to follow his example promptly.
He carried his measures on the score that they would bene-
fit Britain, whatever course other countries might take.
I am aware that in the leaflets of the Protectionist
party there is this further assertion;
“On another occasion Mr. Cobden said: 1 You might as well
X Morley’s “ Life of Cobden,” ii, 449.


tell me that the sun will not rise to-morrow as tell me that
foreign nations will not adopt Free Trade in less than ten
years from now.’”
For this quotation no reference is given , and until it is
established we may safely decline to believe that Cobden
ever used any such expression. In his speech of July 4, 1846,
he predicted a general evolution of Free Trade “at no very
distant period ”, but specifies no number of years. At an
early stage in his campaign Mr. Chamberlain charged on
Cobden that in the Treaty of iB6O with France he set aside
his Free Trade principles. That assertion was as false as
the one now under notice, the Treaty having simply
pledged Britain not to impose new import duties during its
subsistence.
In the same speech in which he misrepresents Cobden
as above, Mr. Chamberlain goes on thus:
“ Mr. Cobden said that the United States of America, if
Free Trade were adopted, would abandon their premature manu-
factures —(laughter)—that the workmen in their factories- would
go back to the land—(laughteri—and—now I am quoting his
exact words—that they would ‘ dig, delve, and plough ’ —
(laughter and cheers) —for us.”
Again he has resorted to gross misrepresentation. What
Cobden really said was this:
“ The Atlantic States of America are increasing, and con-
suming more and more of the corn of their interior; and we offer
them no inducement to spread themselves out from the cities —
to abandon their premature manufactures —in order to delve, dig,
and plough for us; and they are more and more in a condition
to consume all that we produce.” §
What he was discussing was the actual smallness of the
world’s surplus of corn in 1845 as compared with 1839:
there is no such supply available now”, he declares; and
he puts the case in regard to Europe as well as to America.
Not once does he predict that the Americans will totally
abandon manufactures if we freely import their corn: he
merely says, what is perfectly true, that such importation
would be an inducement to them to employ labor in fresh
cultivation rather than in manufactures. And in expressly
§ Speech of June 18, 1845.


calling their manufactures “ premature ” he explicitly ex-
cludes the suggestion that they will never be ripe. When
therefore Mr. Chamberlain goes on to say that “ The Ameri-
cans have not so conceived their national destiny ” as to-
limit themselves to agriculture, he is fathering on Cobden a
view Cobden never held.
11.
And still the process of fabrication goes on. In the
next breath Mr. Chamberlain continues:
“What happened when Free Trade was adopted in this-
country? Foreign countries which, as I have said, were back-
ward in those days, were not manufacturers. Their Govern-
ments put on tariffs against our manufactures.” Previously he-
had said; “ Und'w a system of Protection in the years of which
I have spoken, before the repeal of the Corn Laws, we had
secured a supremacy in the world’s markets.”
Again, what are the facts? It was one of the specific
arguments of the Free-traders against the Corn Laws that
by putting import duties on corn our Government had
actually forced Germany and the United States to put
duties on our goods and to develop their own manufactures
in self defence. In the words of Mr. Morley: “It was the
corn laws which nursed foreign competition into full
vitality.”* Why was it precisely the manufacturing
class that above all demanded Free Trade in Britain?
The very reason on w r hich they grounded their
agitation, as Cobden repeatedly declared, was their
need to extend their trade. Opponents, as Cobden ob-
serves in his speech of 25th August, 1841, told them that
their object “was to reduce wages, so as to enable our
manufacturers to compete with foreigners”. Cobden an-
swered : “ I maintain that we now do compete with them;
that we now sell our manufactures in neutral markets in
competition with other countries ”; but he never once
* “ Life of Cobden,” i, 142. Cp. Armitage-Smith, “ The Free Trade-
Movement,” 2nd ed., p. 63, as to the argument of Bowring that “ in
Hungary, not being able to sell their corn in England [in 1838], the-
people are turning their capital to manufacturing their own cloth.”


talks of British “ supremacy What he claimed for Bri-
tish labor in 1842 was superior efficiency to that of the
labor of the Continent. And in 1838, as Professor Ashley
notes,f the manufacturers of Manchester had petitioned
Parliament, pointing with alarm to “ the rapid extension of
foreign manufactures. The several nations of the Con-
tinent, they declared, “ not only produce sufficient manu-
factures for their own consumption, but they successfully
compete with us in neutral markets.” It was probably
their Protectionism that year by year neutralised their ad-
vantage of cheap food.
If Mr. Chamberlain had taken the slightest pains to
acquire elementary information on the matters on which he
undertakes to educate and guide the nation, he would have
known that evidence was given before the 1840 Commission
on Import Duties to the effect that the protective system
was not on the whole beneficial to the protected manufac-
turers themselves. The whole duties levied to protect
manufactures did not amount to I and even of the
few manufacturers supposed to gain, some were quite ready
for abolition. The duties on cotton goods yielded only
some £B,OOO or £9*000; while raw cotton was burdened to
the extent of £680,000 of revenue ; so that the cotton manu-
facture, one of the greatest of all, owed absolutely nothing
to Protection.
As to foreign Protectionism, finally, Cobden’s speech of
December 11th, 1844) tells how in the last presidential elec-
tion in the United States Henry Clay had been run as ” the
author and father of the protective system in America ”, and
the war-cry of his party was “ Protection to native industry”.
He was beaten; but American Protectionism was there all
the same. And in a letter from Berlin dated August 5 th,
1847, Cobden tells how
“ The former system of Frederick the Great, which had lasted
for upwards of half a century, was one of the -most prohibitive
in respect to the importation of foreign goods ever enforced.
.... Yet the manufactures of Eastern Prussia continued to
t “The Tariff Problem,” p. 45.
§3
THE CASE FOR FREE TRADE.
