

REPORT
ON
Survey of Native Affairs
1948
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
BY
F. E. A. BATEMAN.
No. 19.
Approximate Cost op Paper:
Printing (400 Copies) £125.
Presented to both Souses of Parliament by His Excellency’s Command.
[SECOND SESSION OF THE NINETEENTH PARLIAMENT.]




SURVEY OF NATIVE AFFAIRS.
I have the honour to report that in accordance
with the instructions in your letter of the 21st July,
1947, to carry out a survey into native affairs
throughout the State, I commenced my inquiries on
4th August, 1947. You will recall that after my re-
turn from the Murchison district shortly before
Christmas, 1947, I was recalled to the Police Court
Bench in Perth, where I carried out Magisterial
duties until Ist April, 1948, when I resumed my in-
vestigations into native affairs.
During the course of my inquiry I have seen at
first hand the conditions under which the aborigines
live and are employed in almost every part of the
State. With two exceptions I inspected all native
institutions, including missions, throughout the
State.
The first exception was the United Aborigines
Mission situated in the Warburton Ranges some
hundreds of miles east of Laverton. In view of this
mission’s comparatively recent origin and its inac-
cessibility, I considered that the expense involved
in making a visit to it would be out of proportion
to the value derived therefrom and consequently I
omitted it from my plans.
The second exception was the Tardun Mission
near Mullewa which at the time of my visit to the
Murchison district had not commenced its activities.
The arrangements for my road transport in the
North, North-West and Murchison districts, were
in the hands of Inspectors Jensen, Rhatigan and
Martin respectively, of the Native Affairs Depart-
ment and I wish to record my appreciation of the
services and kindness received from these officers.
I also desire to thank all station owners, man-
agers, farmers, police officers, missionaries, pro-
tectors and all persons with whom I came in con-
tact, for the kindness and hospitality extended to
me in conducting this survey.
To Mr. H. A. Jones of the Native Affairs De-
partment, who acted in a secretarial capacity, I owe
a debt of gratitude, his knowledge of the Depart-
ment’s activities being of untold value to me.
As the motor vessel “Koolinda,” upon which
vessel I sailed for the. North, proceeded direct to
Darwin after leaving Derby, I was able to take the
opportunity of visiting the Bagot Half-caste Camp,
the Berrima Compound and the new De Lissaville
Settlement at Darwin. These visits were made pos-
sible by the courtesy of the Director and Staff of the
Native Affairs Department, Northern Territory, to
whom my thanks are due.
By F. E. A. Bateman.
The Hon. the Minister for Native Affairs, Western Australia, —
The terms of reference submitted to me were as
follows: —
A. Make a survey of existing native institutions
as defined in the Native Administration Act,
1905-41.
B. Advise as to the present and future value of
such institutions.
C. Advise whether any new institutions are desir-
able and if so the nature thereof and the ob-
jects to be served by them.
D. Make such recommendations as may seem
proper to advance the education and welfare
of natives generally, including their employ-
ment and vocational opportunities.
E. Make such recommendations as may seem
proper as to existing laws of this State relat-
ing to natives and any amendments thereto.
F. Inquire into and report upon such other mat-
ters, if any, as the Government may later de-
sire to refer to you for your consideration.
In your accompanying letter of 21st July, 1947,
the above terms of reference were subjected to
greater detail as follows:
With regard to our native institutions including
missions, the statistical position in each case show-
ing the natives at the institutions, the natives not
in the institutions but in contact with them, staffs
and their number and duties, area of land, produc-
tivity, situation, present value of the institution,
prospects of future utility, approximate cost of
establishment and approximate coit of further in-
stallations for effective working.
In relation to the pastoral industry, wages and
nature of rations and other provisions for natives
in the several districts, living accommodation and
amenities, and occupations in which natives are
employed.
Health and disease of natives, particularly in-
cidence of leprosy and whether stationary or in-
creasing.
The system of protectors and whether police
should be retained as protectors.
Provision for education of native children.
Distribution of tribal natives and their number.
Number and distribution of other than tribal
natives.
Number and distribution of natives in categories
of the full blood, half-caste and less than half-
caste.


The position of natives in towns.
Crafts and vocations for which natives are best
suited or into which they might be encouraged to
enter.
Particular inquiry into the prospects of the em-
ployment of natives in fishing and pearling indus-
tries and any methods of training natives for such
pursuits and in what localities they could best find
employment in such pursuits.
The administrative system of the Department and
any directions in which its effectiveness might be
improved.
Any legislative amendments that might assist ad-
ministration and native welfare.
I feel that it is unnecessary to add anything fur-
ther by way of introduction and will now proceed to
deal with the matters referred to me in the order
submitted.
A.—EXISTING NATIVE INSTITUTIONS AS
DEFINED IN THE NATIVE
ADMINISTRATION ACT.
In dealing with this subject I have endeavoured to
refer to the various institutions with as much brevity
as the circumstances permit. It has not been pos-
sible in every case to ascertain the exact duties of
each individual member of the staff as in some in-
stitutions, mission workers are not limited to any
set duties but assist generally in the working of the
mission.
Where possible I have given the approximate an-
nual cost of the establishment but this figure cannot
be regarded as accurate as in some cases the Super-
intendents of the missions concerned were not able
to supply accurate figures.
I also regret that I have not been able to supply
any approximate cost of future installations for ef-
fective working in the case of the various institu-
tions. Costs vary from day to day and of course
differ according to locality and my attempts to ar-
rive at approximate estimates only convinced me that
any amounts specified by me would be more in the
nature of guesswork and accordingly of little value.
I respectfully suggest in regard to this aspect that
if necessary, accurate estimates could be obtained at
a later date.
With regard to population figures at the various
missions, I have used in the main those figures sup-
plied to me at the time of my inspection. These
figures, in many cases, vary considerably from the
figures shown on the mission returns lodged with the
Department last June, and even allowing for fluctua-
tions in the native population it appears to me that
greater accuracy in rendering these returns is called
for on the part of many missions. It is quite possible
too that the staff position at the various institutions
has altered since my figures were collected, but this
is only to be expected and my information on the
matter can only be treated as approximate.
In commenting on future installations for effective
working, I am of the opinion that in all the larger
institutions electric light is badly needed. Those
which are endeavouring to make do with kerosene
lamps and the like are faced with many difficulties
and inconveniences and the task of the mission work-
ers, an arduous one in the best of conditions, is made
all the more intolerable. So much more can be
achieved with good lighting and wherever possible
it should be installed even to the extent of foregoing
other requirements.
It is perfectly obvious that the standard of effi-
ciency of any establishment depends largely on the
staff. Government institutions are constantly ex-
periencing great difficulty in obtaining and retaining
staff and after inspecting these institutions I have
no doubt that the unsatisfactory conditions on the
settlements contribute in no small degree to this
state of affairs.
The installation of electric light, while being an
enormous step forward in the progress of the institu-
tion would at the same time'provide a much needed
convenience for the staff facilitating the performance
of their duties and alleviating discontent.
Missions are conducted by religious organisations
throughout the State but mainly in the isolated and
marginal regions. Usually they are situated in Gov-
ernment reserves in isolated areas or on the fringes
of settled areas. In the former case they serve the
purpose of preparing the aborigines for the usually
inevitable contact with white civilisation while in
the latter they act as buffers between the black and
white civilisations.
I will proceed first of all to discuss the various
missions which I inspected during the survey.
Forrest Rive,r Mission.
Mission Body—Australian Board of Missions —
Church of England—Area of Reserve —99,000 acres.
This mission, as its name implies, is situated on
the Forrest River which flows into the Cambridge
Gulf about 10 miles north of Wyndham. The only
accessible route to that town is a long journey by
water a total distance of something like 30 miles.
One of the greatest handicaps with which the
staff of the mission has had to contend during recent
years was the lack of a seaworthy launch. lam
glad to hear that since my visit a new launch at last
has been acquired after so many set-backs in the
past.
At the time of my visit there were 150 natives at
the institution including 85 children. In addition
there were another 63 bush natives in contact with
the mission. The staff consists of a Superinten-
cnt, who is also the Chaplain, an Assistant Super-
intendent, a Matron, two School Teachers, both un-
qualified, and a Launchman.
The productivity of the mission is confined to
cattle raising and a small amount of agriculture.
About 800 cattle are being run on the property and
IV2 acres are under cultivation in the form of a
vegetable garden, the usual varieties being grown in
season.
A number of the inmates have married and have
been provided with huts for the use of themselves
and their families. These natives are employed
about the mission, being supplied with their food
and lodging in return.


Children on the mission are being taught ordinary
school work to about the fourth standard. The boys
gain a certain amount of practical experience in
stock work, gardening and also in the handling of
the launch, while the girls are given tuition in weav-
ing and general needlework.
A number of the inmates later find employment on
the cattle stations south of Wyndham.
The annual cost of Forrest River Mission is in
the vicinity of £4,000. This mission, due to its iso-
lation, is confronted with many difficulties and heavy
expenditure. Transport costs of course are tremend-
ous and the lack of an adequate water supply to-
gether with the nature of the country mitigates
against its ever being self supporting.
The provision of a water supply would undoubt-
edly improve the prospect of this mission and allow
full development of the soil. The cost involved
however would be enormous, at the very least £B,OOO,
and possibly in the vicinity of £20.000, and in my
opinion would not be justified.
There are indications that the number of natives
in this area is on the decline. The Departmental
records show that in 1932 there were 260 attached
to the mission, in 1937 the number was 250 and last
year there was a further decrease to 188. However,
apart from these figures it cannot be ignored that
the full-blood natives of the north are rapidly de-
creasing and sooner or later this factor will affect
the future plans of this mission.
Many of the buildings leave much to be desired,
several having dirt floors. Ido not feel that it is
necessary for me to submit a detailed report on the
buildings. It is sufficient I think to say that many
of them require attention. In particular the dor-
mitories are not provided with flooring and the
children sleep on the ground in much the same man-
ner as their parents before them did in their bush
surroundings. It seems that if the uplifting of the
Australian aborigine is to be accomplished, one of
the first matters requiring adjustment is his stand-
ard of living. This involves getting him off the
ground and accustomed to using beds.
So far as the adult native is concerned, little
success is likely to be achieved in this direction
but there is no reason why the children should not
respond to this training. It is imperative both
from this view-point and also from a health aspect,
that the children should be taught as early as pos-
sible to use beds and all missions and institutions
should make this a matter of paramount import-
ance.
Forrest River, like most of the other missions, is
hindered in its progress by two other impediments,
malnutrition and a lack of any fixed policy pre-
scribed by the Government. I will have more to
say on these matters at a later stage of this report
but if both these factors can be remedied then there
is no reason why the mission should not play its
part in the future development of the aborigine.
At the moment I consider the matters requiring
most urgent attention at Forrest River to be as
follows —installation of lighting plant, provision of
flooring, bods and bedding in the dormitories, reno-
vations and additions to certain of the buildings,
construction of two further earth dams to augment
the present water supply.
Drysdale River Mission.
Mission Body—Benedictine Community of W.A.
Area of Reserve —150,000 acres.
Drysdale River Mission is perhaps the most
isolated and inaccessible of all missions, being situ-
ated in the extreme north of the State just south
of Cape Londonderry and nearly 200 miles from the
nearest town, Wyndham. This mission, like For-
rest River Mission, is in contact with some of the
most primitive of our natives. The annual cost of
the institution is approximately £2,600.
The staff includes a Superintendent, three
Fathers, one Brother and three Sisters. There are
about 150 natives at this mission and about another
100 are in contact with it. These numbers, however,
fluctuate considerably. Twenty children are ac-
commodated in the dormitories while a number of
working natives and their wives are 1 housed in small
huts erected by the mission. Many bush natives
camp on the fringes of the mission proper.
The children receive the ordinary school training
by the Sisters, the girls in addition being tutored
in sewing and domestic work, but no specific voca-
tional training is provided for the boys.
A variety of tropical fruits and vegetables are
grown while small numbers of cattle, pigs, goats
and fowls are reared. The produce is all for home
consumption and no trading is indulged in now.
The children are well fed and in addition indigents
from the bush are provided with rations. Working
natives are also fed but only if they work, laziness
not being encouraged.
There arc no adjacent station properties in this
area and consequently there is no form of employ-
ment for these natives other than that existing at
the mission.
The natives are full bloods observing their tribal
customs and laws and are spiritually tied to this
section of the country. As they will not leave
this area and as there is no employment here for
them it is difficult to see what practical good can
be accomplished at the mission.
Efforts to christianise them are not likely to
prove very successful although naturally I am not
opposed to those efforts. The Drysdale natives are
an entirely different type from the Cowal Creek
natives in Cape York Peninsula where the natives
maintain a village and carry on agricultural pur-
suits. The Drysdale type conform to the standard
pattern as far as Western Australia is concerned.
They are not agriculturists and every effort to
change them from food hunters to food producers
has failed.
In view of the primitive type of native in contact
with this mission and the fact that rarely do they
come in contact with white civilisation, it does not
appear that any attempt to educate them to our
standards would produce any tangible results.
The mission acts as a buffer, teaches Christianity
and looks after the material welfare and health of
the natives in this area. To attempt anything
further, in my view, would be merely a waste of time
and effort. There is nothing urgently required in
the way of future installations.


Kunmunya Mission.
Mission Body—Australian Presbyterian Board of
Missions, Sydney.
Area of Reserve —245,000 acres.
This Mission formerly known as Port George IV,
is another isolated institution of the north, being
situated on the coast to the west of the Prince Regent
area.
The staff consists of a Superintendent and his wife
who is also the Schoolteacher and an Assistant
Superintendent. The annual cost of the establish-
ment is approximately £l,BOO. There were approxi-
mately 70 natives, all full bloods, in contact with the
mission, including only 10 children, at the time of
my inspection.
About 300 head of cattle, 100 donkeys and 60
goats are run on the property and agricultural pur-
suits include the cultivation of peanuts in a small
way and vegetables.
The isolated regions of this mission places it in a
similar category to the Drysdale River Mission
although perhaps to a lesser extent. Some of the
natives are found employment at the mission in return
for food and clothing supplied but there is practic-
ally no avenue of employment open generally to the
Kunmunya natives. This mission serves the same
purposes as Drysdale, acting as a buffer, preparing
the natives for eventual contact with civilisation and
in the meantime teaching the Christian doctrine and
acting for their welfare generally.
The erection of small dormitories for the children
and a suitable hospital building appear to me to be
the most urgent requirements of this mission.
It may be added that Kunmunya relies for its
supplies and communications on lugger transport
from Derby. This is far from satisfactory and a
regular air service is badly required.
Beagle Bay Mission.
Mission Body—Pious Society of Missions, Broome.
Area of Reserve —700,000 acres.
This mission is situated about 80 miles north of
Broome. The staff comprises of a Superintendent, a
Father in charge of the boys, 8 Brothers whose
duties cover transport, gardening, stock-work,
butchering, carpentry and blacksmithing instruc-
tion, a Mother Superior and 5 Sisters whose duties
consist of schooling, housekeeping and nursing.
There are about 170 natives on the mission includ-
ing 100 children. About 50% of the inmates are full
bloods and the remainder mixed.
The annual expenditure on Beagle Bay is in the
vicinity of £2,800 but it must be remembered that no
salaries or wages are involved.
About 1,000 head of cattle in addition to goats
and pigs, donkeys and fowls are raised. An excellent
garden is also under cultivation providing a plentiful
supply in season of tropical fruits and vegetables.
I found this mission to be well equipped in every
way with pleasing buildings set in refereshing sur-
roundings, the feature being well grassed lawns.
The dormitories presented a clean and tidy appear-
ance with beds provided for all the children. Due
to the excellent productivity and staff the diet is
exceptionally good and the inmates appear to be in
good health. It is evident that the physical welfare
of the natives is well catered for at this establish-
ment.
Carpentry and blacksmithing are taught to some
of the boys who show aptitude while some gain
experience in the mechanical field on the mission
vehicles. Domestic training is provided for the girls.
Most of the boys furthermore, gain some practical
knowledge of stock-work, gardening, windmills etc.
and many are absorbed into employment at Broome
or Derby or on the cattle and sheep stations in the
district. Some also prove to be excellent motor
mechanics and are employed in garages at Broome
and Derby.
During the war a number of natives, about 30 or
40, mostly full bloods, were evacuated to the mission
from the Broome area. These natives are housed
adjacent to the mission in small huts and are
rationed by the Civil Defence Council. Most of these
natives are elderly and incapable of employment.
There appear to be some however who are capable of
work but are either disinclined to return to their
former habitat or are being kept at the mission at
the request of the Department. Those capable of
employment should be removed to Udialla and made
to work for their subsistence.
The installation of electric light, construction of a
community hall and the extension of the present
water scheme to provide showers for the boys are
the most urgent requirements of this mission.
Lombadina Mission.
Mission Body—Pious Society of Missions, Broome.
Area —37,865 acres.
Lombadina Mission is really a branch of Beagle
Bay, lying some 50 miles north of it.
The staff includes a Superintendent and 3 Sisters,
one of whom is a trained schoolteacher. One Sister
carries out the duties of Matron and the other house-
duties.
There are 103 natives including 28 children, living
at the mission and the annual cost is about £1,200,
but again no salaries or wages are involved.
About 300 head of cattle together with goats and
donkeys are run on the property while 15 acres of
tropical fruits and vegetables are under cultivation.
The natives are mainly employed on stock-work
and in the garden and no specialised vocational
training is supplied.
This mission is not as well equipped as Beagle Bay
and some further buildings are necessary, notably
a boys’ dormitory and community hall. Again a
small electric light plant would effect a big improve-
ment.
Pallotine Mission.
Mission Body—Pious Society of Missions, Broome.
Area of reserve —1,000,000 acres.
The Pallotine Mission lies about 200 miles south
of Hall’s Creek on the northern edge of the desert
and caters for the primitive type of native who has
had little or no contact with white civilisation.


The institution is only in its infancy. Practically
the only buildings so far erected being the Mission-
ary’s quarters, storerooms etc. The staff consists of
a Superintendent and two Brothers. There are no
natives accommodated yet but there are about 70
within the mission influence.
No cultivation has been attempted to date as the
water problem has not yet been satisfactorily solved.
There are, however, approximately 900 sheep and a
number of horses and donkeys and goats on the
property. It is not possible at present to give an
estimate of the likely annual cost of this mission nor
would it be wise to attempt to recommend further
installations until the activities of this mission have
continued for a further period.
Sunday Island Mission.
Mission Body—United Aborigines Mission of W.A.
Area of Reserve —Island 3% miles by iy 2 miles.
This mission is situated on an island at the en-
trance of King’s Sound not far from Cape Leveque.
The staff includes a superintendent, an assistant
superintendent, two schoolteachers and a mission
worker who instructs the girls in needlework. There
are about 170 natives at the mission including 42
children. I was unable to ascertain the annual cost
of this mission.
The island is extremely rugged and cultivation,
except for about one acre which is under vegetables,
is impossible. There are about 50 goats running
on the island.
The mission possesses a powered landing barge
and a lugger and the main source of employment
for the natives, and incidentally the main source of
income, is derived from the gathering of trochus,
tortoise and pearl shell. The natives are paid 3d.
lb. for trochus shell, 9d. lb. for pearl shell and 6s.
lb. for tortoise shell, by the mission, while a few
casuals are paid 10s. weekly. None of the natives
have bank accounts and they mainly collect their
earnings in the form of stores at the mission store.
Schooling of the children has been rather broken
owing to the lack of staff and the present school-
teacher as a matter of fact is untrained. Dormitories
are badly needed and were in course of construction
at the time of my visit. The natives live in native
hutments erected by themselves on the island. No
vocational training is provided. A certain discontent
exists among these natives, who complain that they
receive little from the mission in return for their
work. Another cause of complaint is the fact that
no tobacco is allowed on the island by the super-
intendent which means that the natives are debarred
from tobacco except when they pay occasional visits
to Derby on the barge or lugger.
Sunday Island is a barren piece of rock which
offers no scope for cultivation of any type. Its only
advantage is that it is isolated but that very isolation
has in itself many objectionable features. Any offi-
cial visit must depend entirely on the goodwill of
the mission as there is no means of transport to it
other than by the mission boat. A better site for
this mission would appear to be on the mainland
opposite the island in the vicinity of Molumba Bay.
As the native camps are better constructed and
cleaner than the usual type, I believe that these
people would respond to better living conditions.
It is therefore desirable that huts be erected for these
people at an early opportunity. I do not consider
however that any new installations are desirable im-
mediately as the possible advantages of changing
the site of this mission should be given further con-
sideration by the Department.
Jigalong Mission.
Mission Body—Aborigines Rescue Mission, Mel-
bourne.
Area of Reserve—l6,ooo acres.
Jigalong Mission is situated almost 300 miles south-
east of Port Hedland on the western edge of the
desert, and the mission staff comprises a superintend-
ent, a matron, a schoolteacher and two mission
workers.
The mission has only recently commenced activities
and the buildings have not yet been completed, but
considering its recent formation the staff are to be
complimented on the work already done.
There are about 180 natives including 50 child-
ren in contact with the mission and all are full blood
desert natives. The children are already being
tutored in ordinary school work but still reside with
their parents in the camp about three miles away.
When the buildings are completed they will be
housed in dormitories and the process of gradually
weaning them from the aboriginal way of life will
be carried a stage further. In the meantime the
children are well cared for in the way of diet and
medical attention at the mission.
This mission, I believe, will serve a good purpose
as these desert children will no doubt become the
station employees of tomorrow and the mission can
do much to mould their character and to fit them
for their future life.
I was informed that the capital cost has already
exceeded £7,000 and that the estimated annual cost
of this mission is £1,200. Again it is difficult to
comment, in this case, on the necessity for future
installations until the present programme of build-
ing has been decided upon and completed.
Carnarvon Mission.
Mission Body—Federal Aborigines Mission Board
W.A.
Area —70 acres.
This mission commenced operations about 18
months ago and in this limited period has made
rapid progress in the building line. There were 31
children at the mission and the staff consists of a
superintendent and three assistants, and the annual
cost is estimated to be £1,200.
At the time of my inspection the children were
being schooled at the State School, Carnarvon which
already was overcrowded. Since my visit a native
school has been erected adjacent to the mission and
the children are being educated here by a qualified
teacher of the Education Department,


The mission authorities were obliged to purchase
their own land for this venture, the price being
£5OO. In my view the site is too close to Carnarvon,
being approximately 10 miles from the town, but
with the developmental work having progressed to
its present stage it would be difficult to change it
now.
It is the ultimate intention to train the children
in motor-mechanics, woodwork and domestic science.
Whether the land can be cultivated successfully is
doubtful as the water located on the property so
far has proved to be salty.
I believe it is too early as yet to comment further
on this mission but the superintendent and staff
appear to be well equipped to carry out their policy
and good results are likely to be achieved.
Mt. Margaret Mission.
Mission Bodv —United Aborigines Mission of
W.A.
Area of Reserve —210 acres.
This mission is probably the best developed mis-
sion in the State and appears to be achieving en-
couraging results. The staff consists of a super-
intendent, a matron, two school teachers and eight
mission workers. There were about 150 natives at
the institution when I visited it, including about 60
children. The population included both full blood
and caste natives and the approximate annual cost
of the institution is about £2,000.
The natives appear healthy and well nourished
and quite happy. The children are housed in ade-
quate dormitories and the general appearance of
the mission is pleasing, everything being orderly
and tidy.
The girls are taught raffia and poker-work, spin-
ning and weaving, dressmaking and general domes-
tic duties. The boys receive a little tuition in car-
pentry, motor mechanics and painting. In addi-
tion the ordinary schooling is provided, the children
being given concentrated teaching in the value of
money and its purchasing power.
Many of the inmates have married and have
been encouraged to purchase material and ierect
their own homes on the mission property, a small
prize being awarded weekly for the best kept home.
The scheme apparently has produced results because
at the time of my inspection they all presented a
clean and tidy appearance.
The married men secure employment on the sta-
tions in the district, leaving their families in the
home on the mission, returning to them at the com-
pletion of the employment. Many of the married
women and single girls are employed by the mission
on raffia and needlework, being paid piece rates for
their services.
A well equipped store at the mission provides the
natives with practical experience in the spending of
their money.
Music is encouraged, many of the children play-
ing such instruments as violins, banjos, trumpets,
drums etc. and the singing and orchestral work of
the children is very creditable
The hospital is of a higher standard than I saw
on any other institution and the mission authorities
are to be commended on it.
There is no crop under cultivation as the water
supply is inadequate but income is derived from the
sale of arts and crafts work and from the sale of
goatskins. Formerly there was some alluvial gold
prospecting but at the time when I was at Mt. Mar-
garet this activity appeared to have ceased.
In the way of future installations, workshops for
vocational training are required and the installations
of a water supply and electric light would be advan-
tageous.
Norseman Mission.
The Mission Body—Federal Aborigines Mission
Board, W.A. Area of Reserve —Approximately 20
acres.
This mission is situated about 10 miles from
Norseman and caters for children only. There were
27 accommodated at the mission, many of whose
parents reside on the native reserve in Norseman.
The staff includes a Superintendent and two
assistants, one being a school teacher. The annual
cost of maintaining this institution is approximately
£1,400.
A small vegetable garden is under cultivation but
it was evident that this mission was operating on a
small scale and suffering from lack of staff and fin-
ance. There is little to be said about this establish-
ment except that more institutional buildings are
necessary.
Kellerberrin Mission.
Mission Body—United Aborigines Mission of
W.A. Area of Reserve —15 to 20 acres.
This mission, situated adjacent to the native re-
serve, merely consists of a mission home. A small
school is erected next door and the schooling of the
children who live with their parents on the reserve
is provided by the Education Department. The
mission intends to build dormitories when possible
for the purpose of housing the children but as it is
only in its infancy there is little to report on this
mission at the present time. The equipment at the
school is inadequate but this appears to be a matter
for the Education Department.
Badjaling Mission.
Mission Body—United Aborigines Mission of
W.A. Area of Reserve —1,066 acres.
The Badjaling Mission is situated at Quairading
adjacent to the native reserve and operates on a
small scale only. It comprises a school, a clinic, a
small maternity room and the missionary’s quarters.
The staff consisted of a Superintendent only at the
time of my visit and no schooling had been provided
for the previous two or three months.
Very few natives are left in the district, most of
them having evacuated to Tammin, Kellerberrin and
Bruce Rock. Those who have remained occupy huts
dotted around the reserve. They earn good money
around the district but seem disinclined to improve
their lot.


There appears to me to be no justification for
future installations on the mission. Although the
superintendent maintained that there were 30
children attending school when it was functioning,
it was apparent that many of these had moved
on with their parents to other districts.
Gnowangerup Mission.
Mission Body —United Aborigines Mission of
W.A.
Area of Reserve —29 acres.
The Gnowangerup Mission, situated at Gnowan-
gerup on the native reserve, caters mainly for mixed
bloods. The staff consists of a superintendent, two
teachers and a sewing mistress. There are norm-
ally 150 to 280 at the mission, with perhaps a fur-
ther 100 to be found temporarily at the institution.
The children attending school number 60. Build-
ings consist of two mission houses, storeroom and
school and several sheds and 25 small wooden huts
occupied by native families. This mission is a
faith mission and I was unable to ascertain the
annual cost of the establishment.
No cultivation is attempted at the mission. The
huts are of a poor type, the majority being without
flooring of any description. Apart from the ordin-
ary schooling the only vocational training provided
is needlework for the girls. The children reside in
the huts with their parents who obtain casual em-
ployment on the farms in the district and in the
town of Gnowangerup.
If one excepts the christianising aspect, the only
good purpose that this mission appears to serve is
that it houses the native a little better than he
would be normally and provides elementary educa-
tion for the children. I favour the abolition of
this mission and the substitution of something better
in its place.
lioelands Mission.
Mission Body—Native Missions Council Inc., Mt.
Lawley.
Area of Reserve —1,500 acres.
This mission is situated at Seven Hills, Roelands,
in the south-west, in rich country with a permanent
water supply and is ideally located for its purpose.
The staff consists of the superintendent, matron,
nurse and two teachers, cook, farmworker and four
assistants. The mission caters for children only,
there being 55 children accommodated when I made
my visit. The annual cost of this institution is
approximately £2,400.
The children are housed on the cottage system,
a mission worker being in control of each cottage.
The boys obtain practical training in dairying,
poultry fanning, orchard work and gardening,'
while the girls receive excellent tuition in domestic
science including cooking. In addition ordinary
schooling is provided for both sexes.
An interesting feature is the employment of a
native girl on the teaching staff, named Gladys
Vincent, who is a fully accredited missionary. She
is 21 years of age and has already proved an out-
standing success as a teacher and is very popular
with the children. A small group photograph of
Gladys and some of the children is attached hereto
as a matter of interest.
The richness of the soil allows of intense culti-
vation and a particularly fine grapefruit orchard is
operated on a commercial basis, resulting in a sub-
stantial return from the sale of the fruit. In ad-
dition, other fruit and vegetables are grown in
abundance and a dairy herd and pigs and fowls are
run on the property. The mission boasts an up-to-
date milking machine and an electric light plant
which according to the Mission Council has proved
well worth the expense involved in its purchase.
This productivity results in the children receiving
the best of food and I would say that no other insti-
tution approaches the standard of diet provided at
this mission.
The children are not in touch with any adult
natives, many of them being orphans and there is
consequently not the attraction in the way of
parents and relatives to draw them back to the
native camps when they leave the mission.
The mission has not been long in existence, the
property formerly having been developed under the
Chandler Boys’ Scheme and it is only within the
last 12 months that trainees have been placed in
employment. It is thus too early to ascertain how
these children will respond to this training but from
the favourable reports so far received from the em-
ployers of those already in employment there is
bright hope for the future. It will be very interest-
ing therefore to watch developments of this mission
during the next few years.
I noted, however, a few near white children at
the mission and in my view it is regrettable that
they are not accommodated at Sister Kate’s Home,
where their future would be more assured.
I would like to see a community hall and better-
sporting facilities provided at this mission in the
way of future installations.
' New Norcia.
Mission Body—Benedictine Community of W.A.
Area of Reserve—29 acres.
The mission consists of an institution housing 41
male and 41 female children, including 14 full bloods.
The staff includes a superintendent, six fathers, two
brothers and eight sisters. The annual cost of the
mission is approximately £4,500. The buildings and
appointments are excellent, in particular the dormi-
tories, which compare with those of oar public schools.
The bedding is spotlessly clean and the flooring
highly polished and one could not but help contrasting
the bedding here with that seen in many other in-
stitutions where the pillows and mattresses were
stained and discoloured with dirt and grease. The
children arc well fed, well housed and educated.
Ordinary schooling is imparted to both sexes and
in addition the girls receive some domestic training,
particularly in the laundry, while the boys gain a
certain amount of experience in sheep and farming
activities. There is, however, room for improvement,
as on all other institutions, in vocational training
facilities.
After receiving their education and training at the
mission, the children leave and usually obtain em-
ployment in the rural districts. Those with parents
return to them wherever they may be and in most
cases the education and training is immediately
undone.


Other than the provision of improved vocational
training there does not appear to be anything ur-
gently necessary in the way of future installations.
Wandering Brook Mission.
Mission Body—Catholic Church in Archdiocese of
Perth.
Area of Reserve —9,670 acres.
This mission has not yet completed its building
programme and consequently has not commenced
operations. Nevertheless I feel that I should include
particulars concerning it as I believe that when
completed it will be the finest mission in the State.
First of all, for practically the first time a mission
is being established to a proper plan and with a
long-term policy in view. Money is not being stinted
and the building plan provides for good, substantial
and adequate institutional buildings with playing
fields and sporting facilities.
The mission will cater for half-caste children only
and the education and training will be designed to
fit them for useful citizenship. Infants will be ad-
mitted to a foundling section where they will be under
the care of the Sisters of St. John of God. A
kindergarten will be established for their training
until they reach school age when both sexes will re-
ceive ordinary schooling under the sisters until they
attain the age of 9 or 10 years. At this stage the
boys will be transferred to the care of the priests
and brothers of the Pious Society of Missions and
the girls to a junior section in the Nuns’ Orphanage.
Both sexes will continue their schooling but in each
case the institution will be divided into junior and
senior sections. This is very important in my view
and the same principles should be adopted in all
missions and institutions.
When the girls have completed education to about
the sub-junior standard they will be taught domestic
science and will assist the sisters in the laundry, dairy,
orchard and in the poultry farm and also in pre-
serving and pickling, etc.
The boys will be similarly educated, but if any-
thing, to a higher academic standard. Having reached
a suitable age they will assist in and study all types
of farming, stock-raising, quarrying, timber-milling,
blaeksmithing, metalworking, etc., each following his
own particular bent.
Having completed their training the mission hopes
that many will marry and take their place in the
white community as useful citizens, but should they
desire to remain on the mission, suitable dwellings
will be provided for them.
Besides the usual ovals for sport, a combined play-
house and picture theatre is planned and also a
general store and post office.
I believe this mission will be operated on ideal
principles and it is certain that it will play a major
part in the uplifting of the half-caste population
of the south.
The Future of Missions.
There are many who denounce the missions claim-
ing that mission trained natives are spoiled and
cheeky and generally unsatisfactory workers. To a
certain extent this is true but the complaint that
mission trained natives are not satisfactory was not
as general as I anticipated, in fact there were several
employers who expressed complete satisfaction with
such employees. It seems unwise therefore to con-
demn all natives so trained and denounce all mis-
sions accordingly. Nevertheless it seems to me that
there is room for further improvement in all the
missions.
There is certainly a tendency on the part of some
missions to encourage idleness. This is probably due
to the fact that they are unable to absorb all the
natives in regular employment on the mission. This
is to the liking of the native who characteristically
will accept all the benefits possible at the same time
giving little in return. The missions should only
retain those adult natives whom they can employ, the
remainder after completing their education and train-
ing should be compelled to earn their own living
instead of idling on the mission. This policy how-
ever could not be effected in all missions, notably at
Drysdale or Kunmunya, but there is no reason why
it should not be carried out on most missions.
The causes mitigating against the missions achiev-
ing successful results in my view are twofold. Firstly
there is an absence of policy and secondly a shortage
of money. It appears to me that if missions are
to play their full part in the uplifting of the native
race then the first essential is for the Government to
lay down a positive policy to which they must adhere.
The day of evangelising the natives unaccompanied
by other activities to uplift them has gone. Some-
thing more than religious training, accompanied by
elementary teaching of the 3 R’s, is necessary. The
need for the teaching of hygiene and the imparting
of technical knowledge and training in handcrafts
must be concurrent with evangelism. Education is
of paramount importance but it must be practical in
nature and designed to raise the living standards of
the aborigines and to fit them for future citizenship.
This envisages adequate training of mission workers
and the co-ordination of all missions within a definite
policy.
Mission workers should be carefully chosen and the
Superintendent if possible should have anthropologi-
cal training. Teachers including educational, tech-
nical and agricultural, nurses, etc., should he special-
ists and not as at present obtains in some instances,
persons of poor capacity who have heard the call
and find something agreeable to them in mission
activity.
The statement that a mission having commenced
activities assumes all responsibilities for the teaching
and training of the inmates is not convincing. It is
unquestionably a national responsibility and it is
only just that missions, providing they comply with
the policy laid down by the Government should
receive Government assistance. It must be realised
naturally, that the change-over cannot take place
overnight but once the missions are aware of what
is expected of them there should be a steady effort to
attain the required standards.
It can hardly be expected, however, that mission
bodies would be prepared to incur the extra expendi-
ture that training on the suggested lines will involve
unless they have some guarantee of more financial
assistance from the Government than is the case at
present, In the more settled areas no mission should


be permitted to commence or continue operations
unless it abides by the Government policy. In the
more isolated missions however this policy necessar-
ily would require to be relaxed to a certain degree.
It is important I believe, that greater attention
should be given to recreational activities. Generally
speaking there is no organised activity to fill in the
hours of leisure in the various missions and insti-
tutions.
At nightfall the boys and girls are usually herded
into their separate dormitories and expected to go to
bed and sleep. With very young children there could
be no objection to such a practice, but it is unreason-
able to expect the older children to retire so early.
Older girls at an institution upon the occasion of
a visit of an Inspector once protested against this
practice by singing the “The Prisoner’s Song” over
and over again for hours. One could hardly blame
them for their attitude and it is only natural that in
these circumstances the boys and girls will get up
to some mischief. It is this system of locking them
in dormitories without lights almost as soon as day
has gone which I believe is the cause of so much van-
dalism in the dormitories.
There should be community halls on all the mis-
sions and institutions, providing sporting and recre-
ational facilities for the children in the leisure hours.
Magazines, books and comics, etc., should be made
available to them and would encourage them to read
more. Tennis courts, cricket pitches and playing
fields should exist on all institutions. It is just as
important to look after this side of the native child’s
education as it is to teach him to read and write.
The saying that the devil finds work for idle hands
is particularly true when applied to the native.
Some missions attempt to exercise control over
the movements and employment of natives on com-
pletion of their mission training. This practice
should cease. When the native passes out of the
mission there should be no attempt on the part of
the mission to interfere with the employment of the
native. If there is ground for the belief that the
native is being exploited or is not receiving fair treat-
ment, then the mission should refer the matter to
an Inspector or Protector whose duty it is to safe-
guard the natives’ interests. Missions which lay
down conditions of employment for their trainees
and attempt to exercise dominion over their move-
ments are assuming a responsibility which rightly
belongs to the Department and any action in this
respect only tends to create friction between em-
ployer and natives. It is not intended to convey
by these words that a Children’s Mission such as the
Roelands Native Farm should be discouraged in
attempting to place their trainees in the best homes
possible.
With the object of implementing the suggestions
above made, I recommend that the Government lay
down a policy for missions on the lines referred to
above, that increased subsidies be granted to missions
conforming with the Government policy and that all
missions be compelled—
1. To lodge with the Commissioner a detailed
statement of policy with annual reports
on progress.
2. Advise the Commissioner of all changes of
staff, disclosing qualifications of new
appointees.
3. Furnish to the Commissioner for approval
block plans of the mission and plans of
all buildings thereon.
4. Submit to the Commissioner for approval
plans and specifications of all proposed
new buildings.
5. Furnish to the Commissioner annual fin-
ancial statements relating to the mission.
G. Comply with the instructions of the Com-
missioner in respect to education, diet,
housing and medical treatment of in-
mates.
7. Comply with all other matters necessary for
the purpose of implementing the said
policy.
I will now discuss the various institutions under
' Government control.
Moola Bulla Native Station.
Manager: Mr. A. George.
Area of Reserve—l,llß,473 acres.
This settlement is ideally placed for the training
and development of the Northern natives, being
situated in the heart of the Kimberleys in good
cattle country. The staff includes a manager, book-
keeper, head stockman, mechanic, cook, stock camp
cook, general hand and five native general hands.
There were about 200 natives on the institution in-
cluding about 50 half-castes. The children numbered
approximately 50 and it is a regrettable fact that
no schooling lias been provided on the settlement
since about 1943. It was explained to me that since
that time the Department has not been able to
secure teaching staff. According to figures supplied
to me by the Department, the cost of maintaining
this institution during the year 194 G-47 was £8,606,
the revenue derived during the same period mainly
from sale of cattle was £8,467, so that the institu-
tion was practically self-supporting for that year
at least.
There are about 25,000 cattle on the property in
addition to 400 horses and a number of mules, don-
keys and goats and fowls.
To refer to Moola Bulla as a native institution
in its present run-down state would be palpably
absurd. Beyond the fact that dormitories are pro-
vided for a number of children, there is nothing to
distinguish this station from any other station in
the North.
The main objective in the establishment of Moola
Bulla in the first instance was to reduce cattle kill-
ing by the natives but it may be assumed that an-
other objective was the advancement and develop-
ment of the Kimberley natives and there was every
reason to anticipate beneficial results in this direc-
tion. Unfortunately however it has not been de-
veloped in the manner designed and in recent years
it has suffered a regrettable decline. The failure
of Moola Bulla to progress according to plan un-
doubtedly is due chiefly to the war and its after-
math but there appears to have been a certain
amount of lassitude on the part of the Department
also. At the time of the present manager’s appoint-
ment in 1941 he reported to the Department on the
unsatisfactory state of affairs then existing. As


a result inspections were made by other Govern-
ment officials who supported the new manager’s com-
plaints. The war circumstances at that time of
course prevented any action being taken to improve
Moola Bulla but it is surprising that some attempt
has not been made during the last two years to ef-
fect some improvements.
The lack of institutional buildings is as extra-
ordinary as it is regrettable, not even a school-room
or a dining-room existing. In fact, other than the
two dormitories, no institutional buildings exist at
all. Many of the buildings on the property are in
a bad state of repair and require either demolishing
or repairing. The manager’s residence is over 30
years old and is rapidly reaching a state when reno-
vations will be uneconomical. Some of the stall
quarters consist of small unventilated rooms with
earth floors while the structure which serves the
dual purpose of a store and office is positively dis-
graceful.
Actually th e present site is not satisfactory and
perhaps this is the reason why the Department has
been disinclined to spend money in effecting im-
provements. The site would be much better changed
and the institution rebuilt according to a proper in-
stitutional plan. This would involve the expendi-
ture of a great deal of money which may not be
available. Alternatively the present settlement
should be re-organised and a careful examination of
all buildings should be made and those beyond re-
pair should be dismantled and the remainder re-
paired and modified where necessary. A certain
number of new buildings will have to be erected and
provision should be made for schooling and train-
ing facilities, and in addition adequate staff accom-
modation.
If the Department desires to obtain and retain
staff of the right type, then something much better
in the way of accommodation is necessary. If one
excepts the verandahs of the girls’ dormitories, no
accommodation is provided for many of the work-
ing natives.
The Department has circularised all stations in
the North requesting them to provide better housing
for their working natives. While this action may
be commendable in itself, it is a strange request
coming from an authority which has made no effort
itself to provide housing for many of its own native
inmates.
I believe there is a good future ahead of this
institution, but it should be developed along insti-
tutional lines and not merely as a cattle station.
Udialla Native Station.
Manager—Mr. L. Buckingham.
Area of Reserve —approx. 3,000 acres.
Udialla Station is situated on the Fitzroy River
about 60 miles south of Derby and was purchased
by the Department in 1945 for the purpose of estab-
lishing a native institution to provide facilities for
the training of native children. The land adjacent
to the river is specially suitable for vegetable grow-
ing and tropical agriculture. In the past the pro-
perty has carried about 3,000 sheep continuously and
as a result about one-third of the land is denuded of
all growth. This presents a problem in itself and
will materially affect the carrying capacity of the
property. However, about 1,200 sheep are being
grazed at present.
The war has interfered with the development of
Udialla, but there is no reason why a start should
not be made now. It is true that a staff consisting
of a manager and two assistants is already on the
property and that a number of natives have estab-
lished themselves there, but nothing in the way of
institutional buildings has been attempted as yet.
The staff quarters have been erected in the main
from bush timber and other material with the aid
of native labour, and obviously can only be of a
temporary nature.
The institution possesses practically nothing in the
way of farming implements, and although vegetables
are being cultivated it is plain that everything is
being done under great difficulties. It is unfair
to the staff to expect them to live under these
primitive conditions indefinitely. Adequate living
accommodation and the necessary farming imple-
ments should be provided without delay and in due
course the necessary institutional buildings and
facilities should be constructed.
Munja Native Station.
Manager—Mr. E. Smith.
Area of Reserve —756,000 acres.
This station is situated on the extreme north-
west coast on the Walcott Inlet about 60 miles south
of Kunmunya Mission.
The staff includes a superintendent, stockman,
general hand and a cook. This latter position how-
ever was vacant at the time of my visit. The
native population on this station numbered 94, 93
of whom were full bloods and included 14 children.
No schooling or vocational training is provided.
According to the manager, there were only about
600 head of very wild cattle on the property al-
though the station books showed 2,000 as the figure.
At one time peanuts were successfully grown at
Munja Station but in recent years this has fallen
away, last year the total production being confined
to a few bags. Munja Station costs about £3,000
per annum to maintain and the income derived
from it is negligible. The station is merely a feed-
ing depot and a holding place for lepers occasion-
ally brought there by the police.
I was informed that negotiations between the
Presbyterian missionary authorities and 'the depart-
ment' have been proceeding for some months with
the object of Kunmunya Mission taking over Munja
Station. In my view this would be a most desir-
able move as there does not seem to be any justifi-
cation for two institutions in this area.
The number of natives at Kunmunya Mission and
Munja Station together totals about 160 and it is
obvious that there is no need for two institutions
to cater for this small total. According to Dr.
Musso, who made a close examination of the posi-
tion in 1944, there would be no tribal difficulty in
the amalgamation of these natives. In that yen”
he estimated the number to be 280. According to
the doctor approximately 40 per cent, of this number


were elderly and likely to die within five years and
he estimated that leprosy and disease would claim
a further 70 natives during the same period, leav-
ing about 100 natives all told by 1949. With the
present population of 160 it will be seen that Dr.
Musso has not been very wide of the mark in his
predictions. With this rapid decline which shows
no signs of abating, as there are only about 20
children in all at both centres it is evident that
the Munja Station is not serving any good purpose
and plans should be made to discontinue its activities
if the present negotiations break down.
Moore River Native Settlement.
Superintendent—Mr. S. Currie.
Area of Reserve—l 2,629 acres.
This settlement is situated some miles west of
Mogumber in country which from a productivity
aspect is of little value. The staff consists of a
Superintendent, matron, farm manager, two nurses,
two attendants, manual instructor and an assistant.
The number of natives at the institution was 260
including 160 children. The approximate annual
cost of this settlement is £12,000. The stock on the
Ist July, 1947, comprised one bull, four cows, three
heifers, 12 calves, nine horses, 56 pigs and 609 fowls.
Another property consisting of 873 acres of suit-
able farming land situated about 11 miles from the
main settlement was acquired a few years back.
Upon this property chaff, hay and vegetables are
cultivated.
The schooling of the children has been taken
over by the Education Department which provides
three qualified teachers. In the way of vocational
training the boys are given instruction in carpentry
and the girls are taught domestic science and
needlework.
Even a cursory inspection of Moore River will
convince anyone ‘that the outlook from an institu-
tional view-point is absolutely hopeless. The vari-
ous attempts during the last 150 years to educate
and train the native race has demonstrated beyond
doubt the difficult nature of the task. The results
so far obtained have been anything but encouraging
and even where the best of conditions and cir-
cumstances exist all kinds of complexities arise. In
the conditions which exist at Moore River there
can be no possible chance of success and its con-
tinuance without a drastic change of policy repre-
sents a waste of money and effort.
There are three main types of natives admitted
to the settlement. Firstly, children of both sexes
for education and training, secondly, delinquent
natives for what is described as disciplinary cor-
rection and thirdly, natives suffering from venereal
disease for medical treatment. Furthermore a
number of indigent natives reside on the property
in typical native camps a few hundred yards from
the main ‘settlement. All of the inmates mix quite
freely and it is not surprising therefore that over
the years many of the school girls have become
pregnant. In view of the ample opportunity for
sexual intercourse which exists during the hours
of daylight, opportunity of which advantage is
taken,' one wonders at the incongruity of locking
the girls in dormitories at night. It may be likened
to bolting the stable door after the horse has gone.
Any advantage that the children may obtain
from their schooling is immediately nullified by the
contact with the undesirable adult population of
the institution. Education in these circumstances
beyond teaching the children to read and write is
a complete waste of time, in fact it is doubtful
if a worse method of training these children could
be devised, for in fact they are gathered up and
placed in a settlement which forces them to asso-
ciate with some of the worst types of natives. As
a policy it is not only stupid but also futile. It is
only fair to add that the present administration is
fully aware of the undesirable conditions existing
at Moore River and has advocated a drastic change
in the present policy.
It is abundantly clear in my mind that the only
chance of successfully training the children is to
segregate them from the adults. In certain parts
of the State this may not be possible but where
possible institutions should be provided for children
only. The children at Moore River, in my opinion,
should be removed from the present contaminating
influences to a children’s institution and Moore
River should be retained only for the adult natives.
The buildings at Moore River in general present
a dilapidated appearance which is accentuated upon
entering them. A great number offer a sad spec-
tacle of decay and neglect. The walls, almost with-
out exception, are dirty and in some cases have
partly crumbled away. A few of the buildings are in
good condition but many have fallen into a state
of disrepair, and some are probably beyond reno-
vation.
The gaol at two o’clock in the afternoon was almost
pitch dark inside and this should be remedied
immediately.
Sanitation and hygiene are merely words without
meaning at Moore River, the lavatory, bathroom and
laundry conveniences being not only primitive but
in some cases disgraceful. The bedding in the
children’s dormitories was filthy and it was evident
that a preconceived idea that native children can-
not be expected to be clean was being fostered.
With the removal of the children many of the
present buildings would not be required. If this
recommendation is followed the settlement would
require re-organising and many of the buildings at
present in such a bad state of repair should be de-
molished. Drainage, sanitation and laundry facili-
ties should be overhauled and a necessary standard
maintained.
Carrolup Native Settlement.
Superintendent—Mr. G. Clune.
Area of Reserve—4,976 acres.
This settlement is I think, the best of the Govern-
ment settlements being situated in fair country
about 30 miles from Katanning in the Great South-
ern area. The staff includes a superintendent, mat-
ron, first assistant, storekeeper, nurse, farm manager
and general assistant.
The population mainly mixed bloods was 163
including 103 children. The stock at the Ist July,
1947, was as follows: —One bull, nine cows, four
heifers, six calves, five horses and about 700 sheep
and 400 poultry. The annual cost of Carrolup is
approximately £7,000.


Last year 205 acres of oats and 91 acres of wheat
were sown but the crop was a failure. This year it
is proposed to sow about 400 acres of wheat and
oats and with a newly appointed farm manager
better results than last year may be anticipated.
Only about a third of Carrolup land is cleared and
the cleared portion has not been fully developed.
According to the Assistant Superintendent of Farm-
ing, further clearing and developmental work would
undoubtedly raise the carrying capacity to four or five
times the number at present being carried. In order
to develop the property to the full, a progressive
plan of clearing and pasture development should be
carried out.
The school is staffed by Mr. and Mrs. White, both
qualified State School teachers of the Education De-
partment. The teaching here has attained a standard
not seen elsewhere in the native schools and is
largely due to the excellent methods adopted by Mr.
White. About half a dozen children are in the 6th
standard and I understand that their work is equi-
valent to that of white pupils in the same class in the
State schools. The art work, however, is remarkable,
being very much advanced on white standards. No
vocational training unfortunately is provided on this
settlement. It is a matter of regret that the good
work Mr. and Mrs. White are doing among the
children is largely wasted because of the undesirable
associations entered into by the children after school
hours. Similar conditions to those existing at Moore
River exist at Carrolup inasmuch as delinquent
natives and natives suffering from venereal disease
are sent here too. In the same way they are a con-
taminating influence on the children. I believe that
similar action to that recommended in regard to the
Moore River children should be taken in regard to
the Carrolup children.
The buildings on this institution are a big improve-
ment to those on Moore River but a fair amount of
maintenance work requires attention. In this direc-
tion improved hospital accommodation is the most
urgent required. An electric light plant is badly
needed on a settlement the size of Carrolup, as is
also an improved water supply. The installation of
a pump, together with overhead tanks, would enable
the settlement to be developed on attractive lines and
an adequate water supply would allow more fruit
and vegetables to be grown which in turn would
greatly improve the diet of the inmates. Similarly
the acquisition of a few more cows should result in
plenty of milk and butter being available.
La Grange Feeding Depot.
Superintendent—Mr. D. Barker.
Area of Reserve —450 acres.
This Depot situated about 200 miles south of
Broome caters for about 60 natives. There are a
number of goats, fowls and pigs at the centre and a
small vegetable garden which could be developed
on a good scale with a better water supply. Two
wells on the property have been neglected and re-
quire cleaning and repairing. Some one inch piping
and a small centrifugal pump or a windmill is
needed and should be provided, to enable the garden
to be developed and the diet of the natives improved.
A baker’s oven is also required. Mr. Barker is a
new superintendent but is very keen and if provided
with the above requirements I feel sure he would
develop the depot on attractive and beneficial lines.
Cundeelee Ration Repot.
Officer-in-Charge—Mr. C. A. Carlisle.
Area of Reserve—2Bo,ooo acres.
This depot is situated about 30 miles north ol
Zanthus on the Trans-Australian Railway Line. II
was established originally with the object of restrict-
ing the begging activities of the natives along the
railway line. Insofar as achieving this objective it
may be said that Cundeelee is a failure. The only
justification for its continued existence is that a
number of iruligents and children who might other-
wise starve are rationed from this centre. The-
Offieer-in-Charge of the Depot is a married man with
a wife and three young children.
The quarters can only be described as shocking
and it is amazing that this officer has continued in
office under such conditions. When questioned by
me he informed me that except for one visit from
a Departmental Inspector a few weeks before my
visit, no one from the Department had ever seen the
Depot. This obviously explains the poor quarters,
for I cannot imagine that anyone in authority having
once seen them would not have had the position
remedied. The building, which consists of three
rooms, all earth floors, was constructed by the pre-
sent officer’s predecessor, who, incidentally, was his
father, from bush timber and iron. The iron has
been stretched from one post to the next and nailed
and so on while the roof is of corrugated iron nailed
to bush timber. There are no internal doors in the
structure, which is unlined and not one piece of
sawn timber has been used in its erection.
Inside the building in the winter months it is im-
possible to escape from the bitter cold draughts and
it must be extremely unhealthy. The wife of the
Offieer-in-Charge told me that the children always
have colds in the winter and I do not wonder that
this is so. In addition to the already intolerable
conditions no bathroom or wash-house is provided.
I would like to see Cundeelee abandoned but if there
are children and indigents in this area requiring
assistance it would be difficult to adopt this course.
There is good soil at the Depot but money would
be required to provide a small dam if vegetables are
to be grown with any success.
The Officer-in-Charge informed me that he would
be prepared to erect suitable quarters with native
labour if the necessary material was provided. If
the Depot is to be continued these materials should
be forwarded without delay.
Cosmo-Newbery Native Feeding Depot.
Superintendent—Mr. A. J. Donegan.
Area of Reserve—339,64s acres.
This Depot which is situated about GO miles east
of Laverton in particularly isolated country, shows
signs of developing into a native settlement in which
case it will be necessary to extend its activities and
increase the staff. Developmental work including
the Officer-in-Charge’s residence has been completed
almost entirely with native labour under the super-
vision of Mr. Donegan, to whom all credit is due.
The lawns, fruit trees, vegetable gardens, fowl runs,
stockyards, are particularly fine and present a most
pleasing appearance. The Department is very for-
tunate to have an officer of Mr. Donegan’s ability
and type in charge of this Depot.


I’his centre is situated in good grazing country and
according to Mr. Donegan is capable of running
1,000 head of cattle. At the time about 160 head
of cattle were being reared and it is advisable that
the herd should be built up by the inclusion of fur-
ther cows and heifers.
The number of natives being rationed fluctuates
but averages approximately 80. No schooling facili-
ties exist at Cosmo-Newbery and this has resulted
in a drift of some of the natives to the Mission at
Mt. Margaret where their children can be educated.
This depot with advantage could be developed into
a small settlement, providing schooling and other
facilities for the full blood natives of this area. Mt.
Margaret Mission should then be encouraged to
cater for mixed bloods mainly, leaving Cosmo-New-
bery to accommodate the full blood population.
An engine to provide lighting and which could
also be used for water pumping is also needed for
future installations for effective working. The depot
as I have before stated is in an isolated posi-
tion. The road between the depot and Laverton, the
nearest town, is a very bad one and it is a very
rough and long drawn out journey in the motor-
truck. It is desirable that either the telephone be
connected to the depot or a motor utility be pro-
vided to overcome the present isolation.
There are three other institutions which, while not
native institutions within the common meaning of
the term, nevertheless require consideration. They
are the Holy Child Orphanage, Broome; Sister
Kate’s Home, Queen’s Park, and the Native Girls’
Home, East Perth.
The Holy Child Orphanage.
This institution which is a girls’ orphanage was
established in 1941 with 15 children from the town
who were either orphans or children who could not
be supported by their parents. In 1942, owing to
the war situation, the ' orphanage was moved to
Beagle Bay Mission. There were then 22 girls
accommodated at the orphanage, but when its activi-
ties recommenced in Broome in 1945 this number had
increased to 45. The girls are cared for excellently
in every way at the orphanage and are educated at
the Broome Convent. It is plain however that the
locality of this institution, is undesirable, being in
the heart of Broome, and would have been much
better situated in a more remote locality.
Sister Kate’s Home.
This institution cares for the quarter-caste and
lighter native children and serves an excellent pur-
pose. The children are educated at the State School
nearby and are housed on the cottage system in
pleasing conditions. Many of these children are so
near white as tc pass for white children and their
employment after leaving the institution does not
present the ordinary difficulties. Children from this
home enjoy a good reputation and many have found
a place in the white civilisation. The administrators
of the institution are to be congratulated on their
excellent methods and results achieved.
The East Perth Girls’ Honie.
This institution, which is under the control of the
Department, is used principally as a vacation centre
for native girls employed in the country. The
scheme is a commendable one for it is very desirable
that native girls should have some satisfactory home
in which to spend their holidays. Without some
such centre there would be the danger of some of
these girls living on the native reserves during their
holidays, a danger which should be avoided at all
costs. The home is also used as a temporary home
for girls during breaks in their employment and also
as a training centre for the young girls from the
settlements, prior to their being placed in employ-
ment. A matron is in charge of the home and the
annual cost is £7OO.
It is a pity that the home is not located in a 'more
suitable district and is not of larger proportions to
cater adequately for the girls. I understand, how-
ever, that the Department lias secured a suitable area
of land in Victoria Park and that in due course a
more suitable building will be erected. T'ac new
buildings should be planned on modern lines and
make provision for bedrooms for the girls in lieu of
the present dormitory system.
IN RELATION TO THE PASTORAL INDUSTRY:
WAGES AND NATURE OF RATIONS
AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR NATIVES
IN THE SEVERAL DISTRICTS: LIVING
ACCOMMODATION AND AMENITIES: OC-
CUPATIONS IN WHICH NATIVES EM-
PLOYED.
Kimberley District.
Except in isolated cases wages are not paid to the
full blood employees engaged in the pastoral industry
in this section of the State. On the other hand, mixed
bloods in the main receive payment for their
services, the wages ranging from about £1 to as much
as £2 15s. Od. per week in some cases.
In order to retain the services of the full bloods,
the stations are obliged to feed and clothe the work-
ing natives and their dependents. In addition
tobacco rations are usually issued periodically to all
natives on the station.
The method of feeding the natives differs on the
various stations but frequently the working natives
are fed from the kitchen while the remainder are
supplied with dry rations.
The non-payment of wages in the Kimberleys for
our full blood natives has resulted in much criticism
overseas, particularly in London. It is a factor
which is seized upon to illustrate in somewhat
extravagant terms that the natives of the north are
virtually slaves. As far as I can ascertain the Kim-
berley District is the only one in Australia where
natives are not paid for their services. It is be-
coming increasingly apparent, even to Kimberley resi-
dents, that this state of affairs cannot continue
forever. Sustenance in return for service is not in
accord with modern civilisation and the payment of
wages eventually is inevitable. If it is inevitable as
I believe, then it is necessary to plan ahead so that
when the time comes the native will be able to appre-
ciate his earnings and to spend them wisely and to
the best advantage.


The obvious method is to train the children in the
value and use of money so that at some time in the
future they will be able to appreciate and benefit
by the payment of a wage.
Schooling in the north should not aim at a high
standard of education, the emphasis should be placed
on reading and writing, simple arithmetic to include
money values, weights and measures etc., and par-
ticularly on hygiene and improved living standards.
Missions and institutions should establish small
stores and the children should receive pocket money
periodically and under benevolent supervision be
allowed to spend their money in the stores.
Any system of payment of wages must be intro-
duced gradually. A sudden decision to pay natives
in cash would not be in the best interests of the
natives themselves. The present generation have no
sense of money values whatsoever and they would
become a prey to the unscrupulous hawker who
would persuade them to spend their money on useless
articles. It would also encourage drinking and
gambling and would have the effect of throwing
many of them out of employment, because the stations
would very probably be obliged to employ only the
efficient workers and the remainder being destitute
would become dependent on the Government.
Furthermore, experience in the past has demon-
strated that the natives fall a ready prey to the evils
associated with drinking and having once sampled its
pleasures and realising that money would provide
these it would not be unlikely that the money possi-
bilities of their lubras would be exploited. There is
no doubt in my mind that the premature cash pay-
ment to natives before they have been educated
properly in its use is one of the greatest factors in
their degradation.
The fact that in this year of 1948 the Kimberley
native has no idea of the value of money and no
knowledge of its real functions is really an indict-
ment against ourselves. It is obvious that unless
some steps are taken to educate these people not only
in money values but in other matters also, then as-
suming that they do not die out in the meantime,
the state of affairs which exists today will be exactly
the same in 50 years’ time. A start must be made
in the advancement of these northern natives and
the sooner the better.
The transition period between their stone-age
civilisation and our 20th century standards cannot
b e unduly hurried. Of necessity the change must
proceed gradually and anyone who imagines it can
be done without great difficulties presenting them-
selves from time to time and without many dis-
appointments and failures and even despair at times
does not fully appreciate the problem. It may well
be that before the process has been completed the
full blood may be extinct, on the other hand the
adoption of different methods in their treatment and
training may arrest the present decline in the race
but in any event there can be no justification for a,
policy which allows them to drift into extinction with-
out any serious attempt to uplift them.
There are many stations which treat their natives
liberally with regard to food and clothing and which
in addition organise picnics and sports meetings for
them when all and sundry receive gifts of beads,
razors, sweets, belts, etc. On those stations the pay-
ment of wages to the natives would not be of any
real benefit to them at present. Naturally, however,
there are other stations where the native is not So
well treated and others again where his conditions
are far from satisfactory.
The payment of a small wage of say 2s. 6d. or
ss. a week to each male and female worker, not in
cash, but by way of a credit on the station books,
would improve conditions considerably for these
latter natives and would do much to ensure some-
thing approaching a standard for all the natives
employed in the pastoral industry. In addition the
stations should continue to feed and clothe the de-
pendents as in the past. Surely this is not too much
to expect for a race of people upon whom the
pastoral industry is entirely dependent.
It becomes necessary at this stage to make refer-
ence to the system of travelling inspectors. The
present number of inspectors is totally inadequate
and the districts they are required to patrol are too
vast by far. One inspector should be engaged full
time in the Kimberleys, in which case he would be
required to inspect each station every three months,
or more often if practicable. It would be his duty
to supervise the spending of this credit in the station
store and where the station managers are willing
to co-operate, an arrangement could be made whereby
natives themselves would be enabled to draw upon
their credit under the benevolent supervision of the
manager. In such cases it would be the duty of the
inspector to examine all such transactions.
I believe in a few years’ time wdien the children
at present in missions and institutions have com-
pleted their training and providing that that train-
ing is more extensive than at present, consideration
will then have to be given to prescribing a definite
scale of wages or at least a definite minimum wage.
As far as mixed bloods are concerned, I favour
a definite minimum wage at present for all employed
in the pastoral industry throughout the State. The
more capable ones should be paid according to their
worth, but in fixing a minimum wages for the ordin-
ary worker provision must be made for the non-
efficient worker who otherwise would be thrown out
of employment altogether. I feel sure that if repre-
sentatives of the Department and the pastoralists
were to confer on this point a definite agreement
could be arrived at as was done in the Northern
Territory in similar circumstances recently.
I do not support the contention that the mixed
bloods should receive the same rate of pay as the l
white man where they perform the same services.
It is obvious that their living conditions cannot be
compared with those of the white man who is a unit
in an elaborate social structure and who must re-
ceive a comparatively high wage to live up to the
required standard. The basic wage of the white is
fixed by judicial authority and is based on the cost
of maintaining a home and family. The white man
has to make certain provisions regarding old age, sick-
ness, education of his children, etc. None of these mat-
ters concerns the average native. Neither his living
conditions nor his commitments are comparable
with those of the white and in my opinion these
facts should not be lost sight of in fixing his wage.
Furthermore too much money in the hands of the
native is not good for him. He is not yet civilised
enough to appreciate its uses and too much is often
more harmful to him than too little. In the usual
case he makes no provision for tomorrow and too


much money encourages him to indulge in gambling
and drinking and instead of advancement for him
it has a detrimental effect on him.
Accommodation for the natives on the stations
in general does not exist if one excepts the non-
descript bush mias erected by the natives themselves
from discarded materials. These are always un-
sightly and usually filthy, the surroundings being
littered with bones and rubbish. In some cases
the managers insist on a periodical clean-up but
the natives’ habits are such that in a short time
things are just as bad again. In general no ameni-
ties are provided on the stations for the natives
in the way of lavatories, bathing or washing facili-
ties. For the most part the station managers con-
sider that something more in the way of accommo-
dation and amenities is required and some have
already made a start in this direction. One large
station has installed showers and a row of lava-
tories on the Army system.
As I have remarked earlier it would be foolish
to believe that the natives can be raised to the
social plane of the whites overnight, but it was
generally conceded by the station people, that much
more could be done to improve their living condi-
tions and amenities. Indeed, it is not only due to
the natives as a right but it is also highly desir-
able in the interests of the health of the employer
and his family and white staff who depend on these
people from the unhygienic camps for the domestic
services in the homestead. Furthermore, it is use-
less to try and educate the children at missions and
institutions if when they leave the mission or insti-
tution concerned they are forced by circumstances
back to the native camps on the stations. It is
only logical that there must be a general move to
improve living conditions for the natives including
the provision of huts, lavatories, showers and wash-
ing facilities. The provision of these amenities
without the strict supervision on the part of the
station managers at first would be merely a waste
of time and money but with the co-operation of the
pastoralists there is no reason why beneficial re-
sults cannot be obtained.. It would not be unduly
arduous for the station manager or one of his white
employees to ensure that the huts and surround-
ings were cleaned at least once a week and with
regular visits by the departmental inspector the
natives would soon became accustomed to their
new facilities.
It is commonly said that they will not occupy
huts even if they are provided and while this may
be universally true as far as the older natives in
the Kimberleys are concerned, I( do not believe it
can be said of the younger generation. In the
course of my travels I have seen many huts oc-
cupied by natives. In those cases it rvas necessary
at first to train and supervise them in the use of
these huts but this only indicates that with super-
vision and perseverance they will in time avail
themselves of these facilities. They probably will
not sleep in them in the hot weather but it is the
white practice also to sleep outside during the sum-
mer months and in any event they would be avail-
able for them for storing their belongings and
would be readily used in the wet weather.
I do not advocate that time and money should be
wasted on improving the accommodation for the
older natives as it is extremely unlikely that there
would be any response from them. Improved ac-
commodation and amenities should be provided in
the main for the younger natives especially those
who have had mission or institutional training so
as to prevent their slipping back to the bush camps
as has happened so often in the past. These
younger natives who have been trained to use beds
should bo provided with beds on the stations and
not compelled to sleep on the ground as is the case
on so many stations at present. The type of hut
must be of simple construction yet suitable. Un-
ventilated, windowless tin huts of approximately
six feet by six feet as seen on some stations are
not suitable. This type of hut is frequently pointed
out as evidence that the natives will not occupy
huts. If huts of this nature are erected for them
it is not surprising that they are not used. The
huts should be constructed of material readily
available, with wooden or concrete flooring, roof
of iron or waterproof thatching and for single em-
ployees the size should be about six feet by eight
feet and for married couples about 12 feet by 12
feet and each building should be provided with a
lean-to verandah about six feet wide.
The nature of rations issued to the natives in the
Kimberleys is far from satisfactory. It is not that
they do not get enough to eat but they get so little
variety and so few of the vitamins considered to
be necessary in the case of whites. Those natives
fed from the station kitchens no doubt fare better
than those on dry rations. Dry rations consist
mainly of meat, tea, flour and sugar, which conforms
substantially with the standard of dry rations issued
by the Department itself to indigents.
Medical men have expressed the opinion to me
that generally speaking the native diet is deficient
and that an improvement would result in reduced
susceptibility to disease. In the Kimberleys the
natives’ diet consists practically of meat and bread
and tea three times a day: dairy produce, fruit and
vegetables being almost unknown to them. On many
stations the white manager’s food is very little differ-
ent so that it is difficult to insist on better food for
the natives in such cases. However, the fact that a
manager is willing to live frugally is no argument
for providing inadequate food for the native em-
ployees. The isolation of the Kimberley stations
creates difficulties in the food supply but some sta-
tions in season cultivate fine vegetable gardens and
the natives employed on these stations enjoy a certain
benefit therefrom. But here again a further obstacle
is encountered, this time from the natives themselves,
who frequently will not eat vegetables other than
onions. There can be no doubt that the natives’
diet is deficient in fats and vitamins and that some
improvement is necessary. How to effect that im-
provement, however, presents many difficulties.
More frequent visits by the Departmental Inspec-
tor to the stations would enable him to discuss this
diet question with the various managers with the
object of improving the standard and it is certain
that an appreciable improvement could be antici-
pated.
The North-West including the Pilbara, Ashburton
and Gascoyne Districts.
The natives of the North-West as far as living con-
ditions and wages are concerned are much better off
than their brothers in the North, yet strangely


enough it is in the North-West rather than the North
that there is discontent over their conditions among
the natives themselves.
Prom Broome to as far south as Carnarvon the
natives generally are not badly treated both in re-
spect to wages and food, although I do not say that
there is no room for improvement. As I proceeded
south from Broome I noticed that the wages gradu-
ally increased from about 10s. or 15s. a week on the
stations adjacent to Broome, to as much as £2 a
week in the Gascoyne district. The mixed bloods
usually receive higher wages than the full bloods, in
some cases receiving the equivalent of white stan-
dards and, moreover, on many stations are provided
with adequate accommodation.
Working natives are mainly fed from the kitchen,
the dependants receiving dry rations. The discon-
tent referred to earlier in this section exists in the
Port Hedland-Pilbara districts. Some COO natives
in all, including women and children, the majority
of whom previously lived and worked on the sta-
tions, at the time of my inspection were congregated
in two groups, one 12 miles out of Port Hedland
and the other at Moolyella near Marble Bar. They
were generally referred to as “the strikers” because
some two years ago they walked off the stations
where they were employed because they were not
satisfied with their conditions. There can be no
doubt that Communistic influence brought about the
position but it is equally obvious that there was a
certain amount of fertile soil in which to sow the
Communistic seed. These natives were not rationed
by the Department but fended for themselves on a
community basis, their main source of income being
derived from surface mining, shelling, kangaroo
hunting and dogging.
A great deal of friction was apparent between the
pastoralists and the natives and it seemed quite
certain that only a percentage of them would ever
regain their former employment. The attitude of the
pastoralists was that in future they would only em-
ploy the efficient ones and all in all it seemed that
the natives had lost more than they were likely to
gain from the strike.
On their part the natives demanded better wages,
better food and accommodation. It is difficult to
foresee the outcome of the Pilbara situation. Many
thought in the early stages that the natives would
soon capitulate or that there would be some com-
promise effected within a short time. After two years
however the rift appeared to be wider than ever with
little hope of early settlement. A disturbing factor
is that the effects of this state of affairs is being felt
in Derby. During my visit to that centre natives em-
ployed in the town informed me that they also
intended striking for better treatment. It only
required Communistic influence to bring about the
same state of affairs in Derby. Great vigilance should
be exercised by the District Inspector to forestall any
such influence and it will be necessary to adopt firm
action at the first signs.
It seems to me that the present system of super-
vision, or perhaps I should describe it as lack of
supervision, has been largely responsible for the state
of affairs at Port Hedland. The natives maintain
that until they struck they rarely saw anyone from
the Department with whom to discuss their griev-
ances. When it was too late they received frequent
and abortive visits from Departmental officers. Their
complaint is that the Department prior to the strike
was disinterested in their conditions and on the rare
occasions when an Inspector did visit their place of
employment, according to them, he spent most of his
time with the manager and had little to say to them.
This last allegation may be an exaggeration but it
is quite evident that an Inspector who has to patrol
the whole of the state north of Onslow, not only a
vast area but an area over which transport is impos-
sible at certain times of the year, obviously cannot
visit each district more than once or twice a year
at the most. It is equally obvious that upon his
infrequent visits to the various centres he could not
possibly visit all the stations. Had the Pilbara
district been adequately patrolled by an Inspector
acting in the interests of the natives and one who
had their confidence, it is probable that their
grievances would have been discussed with their
employers and a satisfactory settlement reached.
Unfortunately it appears that too little notice was
taken by the Department of their conditions, which
in many cases required improving. Steps should be
taken immediately to avoid any repetition of strik-
ing by the natives in the North-West and the North.
It is essential for the Department to know the con-
ditions under which all natives are employed and
to be in a position to insist that they receive fair
treatment.
This can only be effected by adequate supervision
which in turn means the appointment of more In-
spectors with smaller districts to patrol. The em-
ployers must have some standard set down by the
Department with which to comply. At present it is
the employer who pleases himself as to what wages
are to be paid and whether or not accommodation
or any other amenities are to be supplied. Such a
system can only lead to unsatisfactory consequences,
for despite the fact that the majority of stations
treat the natives reasonably well there is always the
small percentage who do not. Some stations in the
Pilbara district were paying their natives 10s. a
week and keep and they were expected to purchase
their clothing, which in effect amounted to working
for clothing and keep, and frequently, instead of
having a credit at the station store, they were in debt.
In my opinion a minimum wage for native workers
engaged in the pastoral industry in the North-West
should be fixed. Provision should be made for the
non-elficient workers and also for the domestic female
servant who may not be worth the full minimum
wage. Th e better workers should receive a wage
above the minimum based on their ability. It is
advisable that the stations should be compelled to
supply clothing in addition to wages and this factor
should be considered in fixing any minimum wage.
Where necessary accommodation in the way of huts
and amenities should be improved.
I am convinced that on the majority of stations
the food position is not as bad as the natives make
out. I believe that most of them are treated reason-
ably well in this direction although on some stations
no doubt there is room for improvement. The most
satisfactory method I believe is to leave the food
position to the Inspector who could discuss the mat-
ter with the stations where he considered an improve-
ment was necessary.
If these suggestions are carried out there is no
reason why many of the present strikers should not
be re-engaged on the stations. The position of those


natives who may not regain their former employment
on the stations would be better left in abeyance until
the effect of the above suggestions, if adopted are
perceived.
Accommodation in the north-west is much the same
as that provided in the north except that a greater
number of stations have already made a move in pro-
viding huts. In most cases the natives occupy these
huts and they are certainly a big improvement on the
usual native camps with all their attendant filth.
There is a definite need for a concerted effort by the
stations throughout the whole State to eradicate these
native camps. With the active co-operation of the
stations I believe it could be accomplished in less than
20 years, probably a good deal less. Surely this in
itself would be a worthwhile objective and one well
worth a little trouble and inconvenience. During
the 150 years of white occupation of Australia the
native has continued to live in filthy squalid humpies.
It would be a worthwhile achievement to end all this
and it would do much towards solving the native
problem.
The Murchison District.
The natives in this area include a large percentage
of mixed bloods. Here again the wages vary consid-
erably on the different stations, ranging from £1 to
£4 per w T eek. Here again there is also the need for
considerable improvement regarding accommodation
and amenities and although some stations have al-
ready made a move in this direction, others have done
nothing.
Tho feeding of the natives appears to be reason-
ably adequate and they seem quite happy rvith their
lot, although there is a certain percentage of them
with town experience who fail to settle down on the
stations and frequently cause discontent among the
station natives. This does not appear however to be
due to any complaint against the treatment received
on the stations but rather is due to the greater attrac-
tions offered by the towns.
The Eastern Goldfields. ■
Similar conditions exist in this area as in the
Murchison. The most urgent needs here also are
better accommodation and amenities. More frequent
inspections are advisable for the purpose of seeking
co-operation from the stations in improving the liv-
ing standards and diet of the natives.
Occupations in which Natives are Employed.
Natives are employed in the pastoral industry
mainly as station hands. As such their duties include
work among the stock in which they are most profi-
cient. In addition many of them become quite expert
in windmill maintenance and repairs and others carry
out blacksmithing and mechanical work. The females
are employed as cooks and in general domestic work.
With the idea of giving effect to my views it is
recommended that regulations be framed provid-
ing:—
1. For the payment of a small wage to be drawn
in the form of goods through the employers
for permanent full blood employees engaged
in the pastoral industry in the Kimberley
district.
2. For the provision of a minimum wage for all
full bloods employed in the pastoral indus-
try, other than those employed in the Kim-
berley district, with special provisions for
the inefficient workers and domestics.
3. For the provision of a minimum wage for all
mixed bloods employed in the pastoral in-
dustry throughout the State, with special
provisions for the inefficient workers and
domestics.
4. For the Department to prescribe a standard
of accommodation under regulation 81 to be
observed by employer’s of native labour.
HEALTH AND DISEASES OF NATIVES, PAR-
TICULARLY INCIDENCE OF LEPROSY
AND WHETHER STATIONARY OR IN-
CREASING.
So far as occasional inspection may reveal, the
health of the natives throughout the State appears
to be good. Appearances, however, are often decep-
tive and many complaints such as leprosy, tubercu-
losis and venereal disease are not discernible by
casual inspection.
The appointment of a travelling medical
inspector some years ago w’as an important
step forward in the medical welfare of natives but
unfortunately the position of Medical Inspector
has been vacant since Dr. Musso resigned some 18
months ago and consequently no thorough inspections
have been carried out since.
Formerly the Medical Inspector was under the
control of the Commissioner of Native Affairs but
recently there has been a change in this matter and
now the Medical Inspector comes under the jurisdic-
tion of the Commissioner of Public Health. I under-
stand that under the new organisation District
Medical Officers in the North-West and North will
carry out the medical inspection of natives in their
separate areas in conjunction with their normal
duties. It is too early yet to ascertain whether the
new system of control will operate as successfully as
the old but in principle it seems to be the logical
course. It appears to me that the medical care of
natives should be the responsibility of the Depart-
ment of Public Health which already provides a
similar service for the white population. The Com-
missioner of Native ■ Affairs is not a medical man
and has not the expert knowdedgc required to exer-
cise a competent supervision over health matters.
The North and North-West are exposed to both
endemic and epidemic diseases such as malaria, hook-
worm and dysentery. Hookworm and dysentery are
conditions which may be spread by bad sanitation.
In the Fitzroy Basin in 1934, 150 natives and 16
whites died from an epidemic, at the time thought
to be influenza but which was later diagnosed as
malignant malaria. It seems to me therefore to
be desirable that the Department of Public Health
should have some greater control over natives regard-
ing health matters than in the past.
Furthermore with the advent of air travel there
is the danger of quarantinal diseases such as cholera,
yellow fever and small-pox being introduced into
Australia at any r time. The outbreak of any of these
diseases would be a national calamity and in its event
it would be imperative for the Commissioner of


Public Health to exercise temporarily all the powers
which the Commissioner of Native Affairs now holds
in regard to the Northern and North-West natives.
Effective practicable legislation to provide these
temporary powers would probably present many
difficulties but in any event in my view they should
not be necessary. There is no reason to suggest that
there would be anything but co-operation between
the Commissioner of Public Health and the Com-
missioner of Native Affairs in the event of such an
outbreak and with the control of the medical services
in the North and North-AVest now vested in the Com-
missioner of Public Health, no difficulties should be
experienced.
The administration of the native hospitals situated
at Port Hedland, Broome, Derby and AVyndham,
however, remains the responsibility of the Depart-
ment of Native Affairs. This is in my view a pity
as I believe the interests of the natives would be
served better if they were under the control of the
Department of Public Health also. Not one of these
hospitals can be said to be satisfactory.
The Derby and Broome hospitals in particular
present dismal pictures. There are two wards at the
Derby establishment, each 16 ft. x 16 ft., one for
each sex. During the period of my inspection one
was occupied by eight female patients suffering from
venereal disease and the other by an accident case.
There were several other patients but due to the lack
of accommodation their beds were in the open.
Lawns or gravel were non-existent but dirty sand
there was in abundance and of necessity these beds
were propped up in the dirty sand. It is interesting
to note that the Derby Native Hospital averages 40
patients. AA T hat was described to me as a native
kitchen consisted of an oven with no protection
other than a few sheets of iron. It was necessary to
remind oneself that this establishment really was
intended to be a hospital.
The Broome hospital is little better, the wards con-
sisting of three small iron buildings containing about
eight beds. There were no verandahs or windows in
two of these buildings and it is amazing that such
unsuitable wards were ever erected in the first place
in a town noted for its trying summer heat.
The hospitals at AVyndham and Port Hedland,
while presenting an improvement on those at Derby
and Broome, are far from satisfactory. AVith the
exception of that at Port Hedland, all of them are
ill-planned and it is most unlikely that they were
ever subjected to approval from any medical source.
Periodically some additions or improvements of some
sort receive official approval but frequently months
pass before the Public AVorks Department proceed
with the work. AVhen at AVyndham I saw a rain-
water tank in sections lying in a shed and awaiting
erection at the Native Hospital by the Public AVorks
Department. I was informed that it had arrived
from Perth over 12 months previously but the Public
AVorks Department had not been able to find time to
erect it. AVhatever the cause, the fact that such
delays occur is a disgusting state of affairs and if
the Public AVorks Department cannot carry out the
work within a reasonable period then private labour
should be employed.
In my opinion there is room for a major base
native hospital in the Kimberleys, and Derby
appeals as the most suitable location for it. The
existing hospitals at Broome and AVyndham could be
utilised mainly as casualty clearing stations. The
existing site of the native hospital at Derby was
badly chosen and the hospital itself is so poorly
equipped regarding buildings that it is doubtful if it
is worth patching up. There is no electric light laid
on and no water supply during the hours of dark-
ness. If my suggestion that a Base Hospital be
established is adopted, the Commissioner of Public
Health should be the authority to plan the design.
The possibility of re-organising the existing native
hospital at Derby and with the aid of additions
converting it along the desired lines should not be
overlooked and here again the Commissioner of Public
Health is the proper authority to make this decis-
ion. Consideration should be given to establishing
at the same time a small_laboratory which is badly
needed in the North.
As far as actual disease among the natives is con-
cerned the greatest scourge and most dreaded of all
is leprosy. As previously mentioned there has not
been any organised inspection of the natives for
about 18 months and consequently I am unable to
provide facts or figures to support the general opin-
ion that it is on the increase. Patients admitted to
the Leprosarium in Derby in 1942 number 33, in
1945 38, and in 1947 41. There were 32 discharged
as cured in 1945, 30 in 1946 and 31 in 1947. During
these last three years there were 35 deaths.
There does not seem to be any doubt however that
leprosy is on the. increase. Both Dr. Cook, the Com-
missioner of Public Health, and Dr. Hertz, the Dis-
trict Medical Officer at Derby, are emphatic on this
point. Dr. Cook says the leprosy now has such a
heavy incidence in the North that it compares with
the highest endemic areas in the world. He main-
tains that it is increasing in the East Kimberleys
and that from formerly being a disease confined to
the full blood it is now extending to the half caste
and there is a decided risk that it may be transmitted
to the white population. It is interesting to note
that of the 228 patients in the Leprosarium at 30th
June, 1947, 25 were half castes. Dr. Herz describes
the Prince Regent area as a hot bed of leprosy.
It is apparent that the periodical inspection of as
many natives as possible should be re-introduced
without any undue delay. I do not believe that the
District Medical Officers in the North and North-
AVest will be able to tackle this big and urgent under-
taking successfully and in my opinion the appoint-
ment of a special Medical Officer, under the direction
of the Commissioner of Public Health, to undertake
these inspections would be the most suitable arrange-
ment. However the Commissioner of Public Health
would be better qualified to advise on this point
after the present system has had a fair trial.
Before leaving the subject of leprosy I would like
to refer briefly to the Leprosarium at Derby. This
establishment is worthy of the greatest praise and
I cannot speak too highly of it. The buildings are
substantial and eminently suitable for their purpose.
The most modern treatment is provided and it speaks
volumes for the organisation and staff, that the
native patients appear to be reasonably contented
despite the fact that many of them are away from
their own country and are virtually isolated. It
would bo impossible to express adequately the ad-
miration that one feels for the devoted and self
sacrificing nursing staff who uncomplainingly give
their services without reward in the interests of
the natives. There are some people who are under


the misapprehension that the leprosarium is con-
trolled and financed by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment, but this is not so. The State Government is'
responsible for this fine hospital and deserves every
credit for it. The annual cost of this establish-
ment is in the vicinity of £IO,OOO.
Other than leprosy the most common diseases en-
countered in the north and north-west are Granu-
loma and other skin and eye diseases and venereal
disease. It is probably that a certain amount of
malaria exists along the Fitzroy River but only
regular medical inspections can determine this.
Yaws is not so frequently met with but it cannot
bo said to be uncommon. I ascertained that many
natives in the vicinity of Pardoo Station become
blind at the comparatively early age of 45 years
and this requires investigation. In the southern
part of the State venereal disease and eye diseases
are the most prevalent, while throughout the whole
State the natives are very susceptible to influenza
and the common cold, and it seems that they possess
no resistance whatever against any form of chest
complaint. Although it can not be established
definitely without medical examination and perhaps
N-ray, there are good grounds for suspecting that
tuberculosis has a stronger hold among the natives
than is generally realised. Most medical officers
in the north and north-west confirm this suspicion
and there are in fact five or six sufferers from this
complaint at present in the Broome Native Hospital
where it may be added no proper facilities for
treatment exist.
The health of the natives living on the fringe of
the towns in the southern portion of the State, ac-
cording to medical opinion, is inferior to that of the
white people. It would hardly be expected other-
wise when it is realised that they have no sense
of food values and their diet must necessarily suffer
accordingly. Add to this factor their appalling liv-
ing conditions and one wonders why their health
is not poorer than it is.
Hospitalisation of natives varies according to the
accommodation available at the various hospitals.
In many instances natives receive treatment under
similar conditions to whites. On the other hand
there are a number of hospitals with insufficient
accommodation to provide an adequate service for
the natives. The native section of the Roeboume
Hospital, for example, is very badly planned and
is totally unsuitable from the point of view of both
the patients and the staff. Similarly at the Bev-
erley Hospital, sick natives are housed in a tent
on the hospital grounds, which is most undesirable
from all aspects.
Where half-caste natives are living under good
conditions and are clean in their habits there is no
reason why they should not use the same accommo-
dation provided for the whites but where they come
from filthy insanitary conditions, as they frequently
do, one cannot expect anything but complaints if
they are accommodated with the white patients.
In those areas where the circumstances warrant it,
and where provision does not already exist, all Gov-
ernment Hospitals should be provided with adequate
accommodation for native patients as soon as prac-
ticable. Where necessary other hospitals should be
required to furnish suitable accommodation for them.
Another matter which requires consideration is
the position of medical practitioners treating sick
natives. At present the sick natives fall into three
main classes: —
A. Indigents.
B. Those covered by the Medical Fund.
C. Those capable of paying their own accounts.
Medical practitioners who treat natives coming
within the first class may be recouped for their fees
by the Department of Native Affairs. The doctors’
accounts in respect to natives treated and coming
within the second class are met by the Department
from the Medical Fund in accordance with the pre-
scribed schedule of charges. Medical practitioners,
however, who treat natives coming within the third
class have little or no prospects of collecting their
fees.
Many of these natives earn reasonably high wages
and are quite capable of paying their way but in
the majority of instances they evade their responsi-
bilities wherever possible. Their nomadic habits
make it practically impossible for a doctor to re-
ceive payment. One cannot but agree with the
B.M.A. that this burden is unfairly falling upon a
few doctors who happen to be practising in districts
frequented by natives. The schedule referred to
above was drawn up in 1938 and in view of the
increase in costs since then it is only reasonable that
the charges laid down in the schedule should be
reviewed, providing the Medical Fund is to be con-
tinued. I intend, however, to recommend later that
this fund be abolished.
Suggestions by the B.M.A. that the Department
of Native Affairs should meet the accounts of those
natives falling within the third class and reimburse
itself from the natives concerned would be most un-
satisfactory from the departmental point of view.
Anyone who has any knowledge of natives will real-
ise the difficulties which would be experienced in
attempting to collect debts from them. Later in this
report I intend to recommend that a percentage of
all wages due to natives should be withheld and paid
to the Department to be held in trust for them. The
Department should be authorised to settle any lawful
debts incurred by the natives from these funds. If
this scheme is inaugurated medical practitioners who
treat natives coming within the third class would
receive payment in the majority of cases for their
services.
Although perhaps not as urgent as medical inspec-
tion, there is also an immediate want of urgent
dental examination. There are hundreds of natives,
including children, all over the State, requiring im-
mediate dental treatment.
It is a regrettable fact that there is no dentist
permanently located north of Carnarvon. The white
population of the north and north-west is to a cer-
tain extent catered for by regular visits to the north-
ern ports by a dentist from Carnarvon. It would
be impossible of course for him to give treatment
to the innumerable natives who are in need of it.
Actually a travelling dentist is as urgently required
as a travelling medical officer for the welfare of the
natives.


With the introduction of the Commonwealth Bene-
fits Agreement Act, 1945, and the proposed Free
Medicine Scheme the need for the Medical Fund is
being largely superseded. Hospitals other than nat-
ive hospitals which provide accommodation for
native patients are being recouped by the Common-
wealth and the Medical Fund accordingly is not
providing the full benefits originally planned. If
the control of the Native Hospitals is transferred
to the Department of Public Health these hospitals
most likely will become registered hospitals within
the meaning of the Hospital Benefits Agreement
Act and thus entitled to financial assistance under
that Act. At the present time these hospitals are
not recognised under the Act and receive none of
the benefits.
Again, natives covered by the Medieal Fund in
effect are debarred from the benefits under the
Workers’ Compensation Act. I can see no good
reason why natives in employment should not come
within the scope of this Act.
Furthermore the provision requiring employers to
contribute to the Medical Fund is having a detri-
mental effect upon the employment of natives in
certain parts of the State. In the south I heard
complaints voiced repeatedly by employers that it
was too expensive to employ a native for a day or
two on work of a casual nature, because of the re-
quirement to contribute to the Medical Fund. In such
cases it is cheaper to employ white labour when
available. Employers frequently engage a native
for a short period and after obtaining a permit and
paying the Medical Fund contribution, find that the
native deserts his employment after a day or two,
leaving the employer in the unenviable position of
having paid over his money in return for almost
nothing. If the employer has to engage another
native to complete the work he is required to make
a further contribution to the fund.
In my opinion the time has arrived when the
Medical Fund should bo abolished and employers
compelled to effect cover under the Workers’ Com-
pensation Act for native employees in the same
manner as they do for white employees. This no
doubt would require an amendment to the Workers’
Compensation Act and should provide for compen-
sation payable to a native to be paid to the Com-
missioner of Native Affairs in trust for the native
concerned, and for a special schedule to cover native
cases.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That the native hospitals be brought under
the control of the Department of Public Health and
improved to a standard prescribed by the Commis-
sioner of Public Health.
2. That a Base Hospital with a small laboratory
be established at Derby.
3. That a travelling Medical Inspector and Den-
tal Inspector be appointed as early as possible, such
officers to be under the control of the Commissioner
of Public Health.
4. That where necessary additions to Government
Hospitals be effected to provide adequate accommo-
dation for sick natives including maternity cases and
that where necessary other hospitals be induced to
provide similar accommodation for native patients.
5. That the Medical Fund be abolished and that
the Workers’ Compensation Act be amended by the
insertion of a special schedule for native cases and
to provide for compensation payable to natives to be
paid to Commissioner of Native Affairs to be held in
trust for such natives.
6. Schedule of fees payable to doctors for treat-
ment of natives be revised.
THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTORS AND
WHETHER POLICE SHOULD BE RETAINED
AS PROTECTORS.
Under the Native Administration Act, the Minister
is empowered to appoint protectors and it is appar-
ent that without this provision the administration of
the Act would be virtually impossible. Of the hun-
dred or more protectors appointed under the Act by
far the greatest proportion of them consists of
police officers.
A police officer is not a protector as of choice, he
is appointed not because he possesses any special
qualifications or experience, but merely because he
happens to be the police officer stationed in the par-
ticular district concerned. He receives no extra
remuneration for acting in this capacity and it is
therefore not surprising that in many instances he
has no real interest in his work.
There are several police officers who have proved
to be excellent protectors but generally speaking the
system is a bad one and has been condemned by
various Royal Commissioners and investigators into
native affairs throughout the continent during the
last 30 years.
The usual objection raised to the employment of
police as protectors is that the two duties are incom-
patible and cannot properly be performed by the
same person. The police officer in his dual position
is required to prosecute a native and at the same
time defend him. This objection is so obvious and
so well founded as to require no further comment.
There are however other objectionable features to
the system, not so obvious perhaps but equally valid.
The aborigines are as a rule in fear of the police and
this in itself is an inherent weakness in the system.
Moreover in the isolated districts the police officer
wields a great deal of pow T er. His word is law and
if he happens to be unsympathetic towards the
natives then it is a poor look-out for them.
Apart from the fact that many police officers are
suitable and efficient protectors, it cannot be denied
that others are totally unfitted for appointment.
There are some who adopt an extremely harsh atti-
tude towards the natives, some who fail to discrim-
inate between the good and the bad and some with
no understanding of the natives who err on the side
of leniency towards them. This of course is inevit-
able in such a system but although it is universally
condemned, no satisfactory alternative seems to be
apparent.
To maintain a staff of official protectors other
than the police would undoubtedly be more suitable
but unfortunately would not be practicable as it
would be impossible to secure the right types and in
addition would seriously increase the cost of the
administration.


Reallocation of the present districts and the
appointment of more inspectors, enabling them to
patrol their respective territories with greater regu-
larity, would do much to remove the present disa-
bilities. Consideration should also be given to the
payment of a small remuneration to police pro-
tectors as an incentive to carry out their duties with
greater zeal and in order to give the Department of
Native Affairs some greater control over them than
exists at the present time.
PROVISIONS FOR THE EDUCATION OF
NATIVE CHILDREN.
This matter is perhaps the most important referred
to me for the native child is the adult of tomorrow
and his future and the future of his race depends
largely on our educational policy today.
In dealing with this question it is convenient first
of all to set out what is being done at present to
educate the native race. The children may be divided
into three main classes, those reared on pastoral
properties, those brought up in the towns and those
located at Missions and Government Settlements.
The first class, which includes a high percentage
of full blood children, are to be found mainly in the
Kimberley, Pilbara, Ashburton, Gascoyne and
Murchison Districts. A great number of these
children receive no schooling whatsoever owing to
their isolated existence. Many of the stations in the
Kimberleys, for instance, are hundreds of miles from
the nearest State school. White children placed in
similar circumstances obtain their schooling by means
of correspondence courses, which, however, are de-
pendent upon supervision by the parents or some
other responsible person. It is obvious that this
method of tuition would not be practicable in the
case of native children as the necessary supervision
would not he available. It is true that some of
these children find their way to the Missions usually
as a result of departmental action but in the main
they do not leave the stations and consequently re-
ceive no schooling at all.
The second class of native children are in a much
more favourable position regarding education than
their less fortunate brothers and sisters on the sta-
tions. In practically all the towns educational facili-
ties exist in the w r ay of State schools and in some
eases convents and mission schools also. Native
children are admitted to all State schools and may
only be excluded on the grounds that they are suff-
ering from any contagious, offensive or infectious
disease or are habitually of unclean habits. The
policy of non-segregation has at various times and
in various towns raised storms of protest from the
white parents. When one visits the native camps
and perceives the squalid, filthy conditions under
which the average native child is reared, it is not
surprising that the white parents feel so strongly
about the matter. When white children become in-
fected with serious eye and other diseases commonly
associated with native children, there is every justi-
fication for white parents bitterly resenting the
policy which exposes their children to infection.
There are some persons sympathetically disposed to-
wards the natives who are intolerant of white pro-
tests and who argue quite reasonably that a black
skin in itself is insufficient reason for excluding the
native children from the State schools. A great
many of such persons are not parents themselves or
if they are they do not fully appreciate the position
in some of the country towns. It is my opinion
that the root of the objection is the lamentable home
conditions and environment of the native children
and not so much the colour of their skin.
It is unarguable that the environment of the native
camp can only result in a low code of morals, bad
habits and serious exposure to infection. In these
circumstances it is not a strange phenomenon, but
only a natural consequence that parents of white
children object to their children being compelled to
associate with children reared in such an environ-
ment.
My views on this question are contained in an
interim report in connection with the Carnarvon
State School. Since that report was submitted a
native school has been erected adjacent to the mis-
sion and a difficult matter has been settled to the
satisfaction of most persons concerned.
My views have not altered and I still hold the
opinion that the policy of non-segregation should
not be fixed but administered according to the par-
ticular circumstances of each case, but the general
policy should not be administered loosely and there
should be substantial reason before the policy is
changed in any particular ease. The interim report
referred to above was as follows: —
Honourable Minister for Native Affairs'.
Pursuant to your letter of 21st July, 1947, requesting
me to conduct a survey into native affairs, I have the
honour to submit an interim report relative to the
schooling of native children from the Church of Christ
Mission, Carnarvon, at the State School, Carnarvon.
The Mission was established early in 1947 and
shortly afterwards arrangements were completed for
the inmate children to attend the State school in Car-
narvon. From the outset there was intense opposition
from the white residents to the proposal to educate
native children side by side with white children. Dur-
ing recent months this opposition has in no way abated,
but rather has developed into bitter antagonism and
has reached the state where white parents are openly
threatening to restrain their children from attending
school.
Apart from the ordinary school work taught in the
schools, some of the aims of education of native child-
ren may be stated as follows—
to inculcate habits of personal hygiene and cleanli-
ness;
to establish an improved moral standard;
to promote honesty and thrift aud care of personal
and public' property; and
to cultivate the correct attitude towards each other,
to their parents, white persons and to authority
generally.
Generally speaking I believe that the policy of non-
segregation in the schools assists materially in teaching
native children these fundamentals of good citizenship
and that viewed from this aspect only, the segregation
of native children from white is not in the best interests
of the natives.
In my opinion, however, there are other matters re-
quiring consideration and for this reason I believe that
any policy laid down, whether one of segregation or
non-segregation, should not be rigid but elastic, in
order to suit particular circumstances. The general
policy regarding education of native children is, and
has been for some time, one of non-segregation. As a
general policy I support it, but I am of the opinion
that in certain circumstances, segregation may be more
desirable.


The circumstances existing at Carnarvon in my view
come within this category.
The children from the Mission number approximately
thirty (30) and prior to the formation of the Mission
lived with their parents on the stations, mainly in primi-
tive and unhygienic native camps. Owing to their
background and environment the morals of these child-
ren leave much to be desired. Since entering their new
life they have learned to sleep in beds, to use eating
utensils and to keep themselves moderately clean and
generally to conform to white standards of living. But
it is asking too much, I think, to expect them to acquire
permanently these desirable characteristics in a matter
of a few months and although on the surface they may
bo responding to the teaching in a most encouraging
manner, there is little doubt that at the present time
they would lapse if the opportunity occurred.
It is most likely that the period of training which
they have undergone is so short that they are not yet
fitted to take their place alongside white children. It
could be argued, liow'ever, that that in itself would not
be sufficient grounds for segregation, but there are addi-
tional matters which in my opinion justify the intense
public 1 feeling in Carnarvon.
The school is already shockingly overcrow'ded and
although the Government has already intimated that a
new' school of adequate size is to be erected the present
shortage of labour and materials will necessarily delay
this project for some time yet. The commencement
of the new school year will bring a further influx to
the school of about twelve (12) native children, .in
addition to the normal number of new white pupils and
the accommodation, which is already strained to break-
ing point, -will be unable to cope with thisi increase.
During my survey, practically all teachers have in-
formed me that the average native child cannot bo
educated beyond the fourth or fifth standard. In addi-
tion, many native children are unable to assimilate
knowledge as quickly as the average white child so that
it is likely that the presence of so many native children
in the school will have the effect of retarding the learn-
ing of the W'hite children.
Moreover, the school bus, which transports the Mis-
sion children and the white children from the banana
plantations to school already has to make two trips to
cope with the numbers. One white parent complained to
me that hi 4 child had to leave home at 7.30 a.m. and did
not arrive home again until after 5 p.m. With the
additional children requiring transport this year it may
be necessary for the bus to make three trips, thus mak-
ing an extremely long day for many of the Children.
During the past year an eye epidemic broke out in
the school and many white children, in addition to
native children, became afflicted. The epidemic was of
such a serious nature that the Commissioner of Public
Health arranged for an ophthalmic nurse from Perth to
spend two months in Carnarvon to give the necessary
treatment to these children. Although the allegation
made to me that the native children were responsible
for, or aggravated, this epidemic, Cannot be substan-
tiated, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that
this is so, when it is realised that native children are
most susceptible to afflictions of the eye.
In addition, the openly expressed hostility of the
white parents has in some instances been transmitted to
the children and the hostile atmosphere created cannot
be in the best interests of the native children them-
selves.
For these reasons, I believe that these native children
from the Mission should bo segregated and receive
their schooling at the Mission itself. The native child-
ren resident in and adjacent to Carnarvon itself should
Continue to attend the State school and my remarks
regarding segregation are not intended to them, but to
the Mission children only.
I therefore recommend that a school be established
at the Church of Christ Mission, Carnarvon, for the
schooling of children attending the Mission and that a
qualified teacher from the Education Department be
appointed for the purpose of educating the children of
this school.
F. E. A. BATEMAN,
RESIDENT MAGISTRATE.
9th January, 1948.
So far as the native children attending the State
schools are concerned, it is to their credit that they
are usually clean in appearance, courteous, obedient
and equally as well, if not better behaved than the
white pupils. They are accepted by the white child-
ren who play quite freely with them in the play-
ground. The fact that native children often excel
in the sporting field tends to raise their status with
the white children. I noticed, however, in several
instances that away from the'precincts of the school
the native children tend to segregate themselves.
This did not appear to be due to any design on the
part of the white children and it may be that the
native children realise that outside the school they
have nothing in common with their fellow pupils
and probably an inferiority complex causes them
to withdraw from their company.
Scholastically they hold their own with the white
pupils until they reach the 4th or sth standards.
In fact, up to the 3rd standard they often excel
but from then on they gradually fall away and a
comparatively few only are able to attain the stan-
dards of the sth and 6th classes. There are some
who maintain that the half-caste child has equal
ability to the white but this is not borne out by
facts. Practically every teacher I have discussed
this matter ivith held the same view—until the
3rd or 4th standard they hold their place but from
then on a gradual slipping back occurs. This cir-
cumstance may possibly be explained by the fact
that their attendance at school is rarely regular and
in many eases their tuition commences compara-
tively late in life. It is by no means uncommon to
see native children of II or 12 years of age in the
3rd of 4th standards side by side with white pupils
eight or nine years old. This, of course, is not in
the best interests of either class of children.
Furthermore, no one will deny that home environ-
ment plays a vital and major part in the training
of the child. The home environment in the case of
our own children in the majority of cases is favour-
able to them but the opposite obtains in the case
of the native children. Their home environment is
all against their climb to future citizenship and is
a heavy burden rather than an assistance to them.
Whatever be the explanation it is interesting to
note that encouraging and surprising results have
been obtained at the Carrolup Native Settlement
School. Here some native scholars have attained
the 6th standard and I w T as informed that their
work was up to the ordinary State School standard.
The art work of these pupils is outstanding and far
and away ahead of white standards. The results
are uncommon and are due, I believe, to two rea-
sons. Firstly, the exceptional qualities of the
teachers, Mr. and Mrs. White of the Education De-
partment, who seem to be peculiarly fitted to the
task of teaching native children; and secondly, the
small number of scholars. In the 6th standard the
number, about six or seven, enables a certain
amount of individual tuition to be given and Ido
not believe that these results could be expected if
these six or seven were being educated in a white
class of say 30 or 40 white pupils. This indicates
that native children can attain higher standards
provided the right methods are adopted. The right
method appears to be to segregate these children
into separate native classes above the 3rd standard.


Smaller classes consisting of native children only
would allow greater individual tuition than at pre-
sent and results comparable with those at Carrolup
would probably be achieved.
The third class of natives has already been re-
ferred to previously in this report and there is little
than can be added in respect to them. They are
given an elementary education on the missions and
in most cases are provided with some form of voca-
tional training which, in my view, is not wide
enough in scope to fit them for their future life.
Insofar as the natives on the pastoral properties
are concerned, there does not appear to be any pos-
sibility of providing schooling for them all at pre-
sent. The Government Settlements at Moola Bulla
and Udialla and the missions at Forrest River and
Beagle Bay and the new Pallotine Mission should
be able to provide education for many of these Kim-
berley children. If the school at Moola Bulla is
re-opened and a new school is inaugurated at Udialla
then there is every hope that a great number of
these children should receive schooling. Beyond this
there does not appear to be any practical method
of overcoming the difficulties associated with their
isolation. A mission recently commenced at Carnar-
von is providing schooling for a number of native
children who formerly resided on the Gascoyne
stations with their parents. There arc many other
children in the Pilbara, Ashburton and Murchison
districts for whom the outlook is not encouraging.
In regard to the pastoral districts generally, in
my view it is most undesirable to remove the native
children from the stations to the towns for school-
ing. The influence of the towns spoils the native
for future employment on the stations and they
should not be encouraged to enter the towns if it is at
all possible to educate them otherwise. The pas-
toral industry is an important one to the economy
of the State and it is almost entirely dependent on
native labour. So long as the natives receive fair
treatment on the stations it is in their best interests,
as well as the State’s, that they should be employed
in the pastoral industry.
The native children receiving education in the
towns become wedded to the town life and on matur-
ing are disinclined to accept employment on the
stations. When they do they are often unsatisfac-
tory workers and cause trouble and discontent
among the other natives. It is obvious that all
natives cannot become concentrated in the towns but
if the children on the stations are brought into
the towns for education then this concentration in
the towns will result.
I consider that as far as the children in the Kim-
berleys are concerned the full bloods should be
educated at Moola Bulla or at the new Pallotine
Mission and the half-castes at Udialla. To take
Kimberley children to Beagle Bay, which is situ-
ated too close to Broome, is in my opinion a step
in the wrong direction. For this reason I also be-
lieve the Carnarvon Mission is too close to Carnar-
von but the mission authorities are in no way to
blame for this as every effort was made to secure
a more suitable site but without success.
As far as the Murchison district is concerned, I
believe it would be possible for an approved mission
body to establish a school and dormitories for the
education of the native children in this district on
one of the central station properties. Some of the
pastoralists are in favour of such a scheme, which
would have much to commend it. The parents of
the children would be able to see them periodically
and the children would thus he educated in their
own district and free from the contaminating’ in-
fluence of the towns. Such a scheme, if tried and
found to be successful in the Murchison district,
could be extended with advantage to other pastoral
districts. For the present, this education should not
aim at high standards, the objective being to teach
the children to read and write and, in addition, to
inculcate habits of personal hygiene and to estab-
lish a higher moral code.
Up to this point I have endeavoured to deal with
the schooling of native children throughout the
whole State. I intend now to discuss what I con-
sider to be the major native problem, the future
education and training of the half-caste population
situated in the more closely settled areas of the
State south of Geraldton, and particularly in the
Great Southern regions. I use the term “half-caste”
for convenience, but include all mixed bloods in the
term.
Before considering this matter in detail it is first
of all necessary to determine future policy to be
applied to this section of the community and,
secondly, having arrived at the policy, to search for
the best methods of implementing it.
Dealing with the policy aspect first, it is my opin-
ion that there can be only one policy and that is
one of assimilation. This policy, in fact, has been
agreed upon in principle by all the Governments of
Australia, the alternative one of segregation having
by now been almost abandoned. It is perhaps un-
fortunate that many people misapprehend the term
assimilation as applied to the aboriginal race. The
term does not mean advocacy of inter-marriage be-
tween blacks and whites, as some people seem to
think. In actual fact, there are comparatively few
marriages between black and white and in the vast
majority of cases the natives marry amongst them-
selves, the half-castes having a tendency to look
for their mates among the lighter castes. The term
assimilation does not intend to alter this state of
affairs but merely aims at educating and training
the natives in order to fit them to enter our own
economic and social’ life. There is no reason why
the half-castes with proper training should not be
absorbed into our own economic and social struc-
ture as carpenters, blacksmith, painters, farm
workers, housemaids, cooks, nursing assistants, etc.
In India and Ceylon there are hundreds of coloured
shop assistants in the large stores and no one
thinks anything of it, yet in our own State the
employment of a half-caste in a store would pro-
bably result in a considerable loss of trade to the
store concerned. Is this due to the prejudice against
the black skin of the native, or does it go deeper
than that and result from the characteristics of the
native himself ? I personally believe it is due to
the latter reason rather than the former. If we
analyse the average native we find that he lives
under the most filthy and primitive of conditions
and that he is unclean in his habits, idle and un-
reliable and addicted to gambling and drink when
he can get it. If, on the other hand, he were clean,


tidy, industrious and reliable and lived under condi-
tions similar to our own, I firmly believe that the
prejudice would be largely broken down and the
native problem would be well on the way towards
solution.
Assuming then that assimilation is the national
policy, how can it best be effected 1 ? Among the
half-castes there is a vast store of potential labour
only waiting to be trained to fit it into our civilisa-
tion to the mutual advantage of both races. A
failure on our part to provide this training is likely
to have serious implications in the not too distant
future. In the settled areas of the south there exists
at present all the seeds of racial hatred. It is in our
own interests to see that these seeds do not germinate.
In the south of the State there are approximately
3,500 half-castes, presenting an ever-increasing
problem from day to day. They are rapidly increas-
ing in number and promise in time to develop from
a state of being a mere nuisance as at present to be-
coming a definite menace. The problem has to be
faced resolutely. There can be no partial methods,
for the longer any complete plan for their develop-
ment is delayed the more difficult the problem will
become and a solution will be virtually impossible.
The time has arrived I believe when we must pursue
a positive long-term policy as opposed to the nega-
tive protective measures of the past.
Education then must be made to fit these people
into our own economic and social structure. They
must be changed from a nomadic, idle and discon-
tented race to a settled, industrious, contented sec-
tion of the community.
It is simple to state this objective in words but
far from easy to define the best methods to achieve
the desired results. Most writers on the subject
impress the need for a long-term policy but few of
them discuss the question sufficiently in detail to
demonstrate how the policy is to be effected.
In examining methods .adopted in the past it
seems that all these methods have attempted to
educate the native child in accordance with our own
standards but at the same time preserving native
family life. It cannot be denied that the native
family life and our own standards are as wide apart
as the poles and are completely and irrevocably in-
compatible. To attempt to raise -the status of the
children in such circumstances is absolutely hopeless.
Attempts on such lines will only prolong the native
problem for generations. Any tendency towards up-
liftment, which may be achieved during the day at
school, collapses immediately the children return to
the native camp and the parental association is
renewed. It is a sheer delusion to think otherwise.
How possibly can children progress when after the
day’s schooling is over they are forced to return to
the disgraceful verminous conditions of native camps,
where six or seven children together with their
parents and perhaps an adult relation or two and
more often than not a dog, occupy on a communal
basis a shack, inadequate in size and constructed of
old kerosene tins and bags. Can it be wondered if
their moral codes are low? This hove] which is never
weatherproof but full of draughts and leaks is their
home, the only one they have ever known. Is it not
the natural consequence that these children, reared
in such conditions, will grow to be counterparts of
their parents, unclean, idle and useless creatures; in
fact there is every possibility that they will develop
into lower types than the native adults of today.
It would appear that the normal action to take to
end this shocking state of affairs is action to ensure
. an immediate improvement in the living conditions
of the natives. Even if the present economic condi-
tion was such as to make this possible, there is con-
siderable doubt as to whether this would bring about
a satisfactory solution.
A great number of the adults of today appear to
be beyond redemption and it is unlikely that they
would respond to any change for their welfare.
These types if provided with a new home would have
it as filthy as a native camp in a matter of weeks.
Vandalism would occur and it would be only a
matter of time before half a dozen families would
bo sharing the accommodation. The home environ-
ment of the children of these types would be little
better than before.
These remarks, however, do not apply to all
natives. There are many who would respond to
better housing and would endeavour to uplift them-
selves and their families. These types I consider
should be encouraged and given every assistance pos-
sible to improve themselves and their conditions.
The answer to this problem of child education and
training I believe is to make the native population
subject to our own law regarding neglected children.
If white parents neglect their children the children
are removed from their control. The same action
should be adopted ;in respect to the native children.
The welfare of the children is the only thing which
should be considered and the fact that the parents
are likely to be heartbroken for a few weeks should
not influence the administration any more than the
fact that white parents in similar circumstances suffer
grief. Those native parents who will not make any
effort to improve their conditions and help their
children are not fitted to retain them. I feel sure
that the fear of losing their children would be a tre-
mendous spur for those borderline cases to move
themselves out of their lethargy and compel them
to do something for themselves and their children.
There arq dozens of native parents who are
directly responsible for the neglect of their children.
They are distinterested in their schooling, keeping
them home on the slightest of pretexts. Many of
them wander from town to town quite careless as to
whether their children attend school or not or
whether they have any shelter at all from the
weather, exposing them to all kinds of harm.
Furthermore the children are more often than not
underfed and ill-nourished, the child endowment
money being frequently wasted in gambling and
drinking. These children are neglected a thousand-
fold more than many white children deemed to be
neglected under the Child Welfare Act. I believe
it is our duty to these children and the future of this
State to put an end to this neglect.
Neglected children should be placed in children’s
institutions and given every opportunity in the way
of education and vocational training to fit themselves
to take their place in the white civilisation. It is
important in my view that these institutions should
be restricted to children only and the ideal would be
to segregate the sexes into separate institutions. If


this is not possible there should be isolation facili-
ties within the settlement in order to segregate the
sexes at night. The practice of meeting this require-
ment by locking the girls’ dormitories at night is an
undesirable one and something more satisfactory
should be provided in its place. It would be in the
best interests of the children to isolate them com-
pletely from all adult natives in order that the
younger ones would grow up with no knowledge of
the native camps whatever.
Realising that there is a vast difference between
native and whites in tradition, outlook and inherent
ability, I favour a special curriculum for native
children in these envisaged settlements. Higher
education is unnecessary except in rare cases and the
objective should be to eradicate laziness and indo-
lence and replace them with industry and consistent
effort.
The education should aim to inculcate habits of
cleanliness and promote the desired moral and
spiritual values. Both boys and girls should be
kept in the settlements to the age of at least 16, the
last two years being devoted to vocational training.
For the boys trades such as carpentry, cabinet
making, plumbing, blacksmithing, mechanics, sheet
metal work, leatherwork etc., should be taught and
as soon as possible they should be applied to making
useful articles for the settlement and employed on
maintenance work. For the girls training to include
domestic science, cooking, laundry, washing, polish-
ing, scrubbing and cleaning floors, cupboards, etc.,
setting tables, care of rooms, needlework, sewing,
knitting, etc.
The adequate facilities in the way of workshops
and domestic science rooms must be provided to
carry out these plans but after the settlements have
been established a great deal of work could be ac-
complished by the senior boys of the manual classes.
The objective should not be to produce skilled trades-
men or super-domestics, but the training should fit
the children for situations in which they will be
placed in after life.
I feel that it would be advantageous for all native
children to spend some time at these children’s
institutions for vocational training. Those children
residing with their parents in satisfactory conditions
would continue to attend the State schools. After
passing out of the fourth standard however they
should be sent to these institutions for higher educa-
tion. These children would be in the same position
as white children at boarding schools. During holi-
days they would be free to return to their parents
and their parents would be free to visit the school
and see the children at reasonable periods.
The settlements should be established in good
farming and grazing country if possible and not
situated at too great a distance from Perth. After
leaving the schoolroom and during their vocational
training the boys, under competent supervision,
should be able to make the settlement partially self-
supporting by growing crops and vegetables and
by raising sheep.
Sporting facilities should be provided on a similar
plan to our colleges, in fact the settlement should be
described as a college and the boys encouraged to
take a pride in their school. In this manner football
and cricket matches should be arranged against white
teams and effort should also be made to encourage
tlie children to read. Reading is of immense value
to a child and I have noticed that the present native
children have no inclination or ability to read in
their leisure hours. The cost of establishing a small
college library would be negligible and this aspect
should be more thoroughly concentrated upon. It is
evident that educational and vocational training
alone will not give the half-caste a proper footing in
our civilisation. There will always be a certain
amount of racial prejudice to delay and hinder his
uplifting but this, as I have previously pointed out,
can be largely minimised by his own character and
conduct.
Training on the above-mentioned lines will do
much towards this end but there must be co-
operation from the white community. Once an ex-
periment on the above lines is commenced the public
must become interested. The work of the pupils
should be exhibited and sections of the community
encouraged to visit the college and become interested
in the children. A preliminary football match be-
fore one of the league games, between a team from
a native college and a white team, would create a
good impression. Obtain the public interest and
beneficial results will follow for the children.
The new Wandering Mission will operate some-
what on the same lines as I have suggested and will,
when functioning, accommodate 500 children. I
would prefer to see two Government institutions
established in addition, one for the boys and one for
the girls and these establishments should be able to
cater adequately for the remainder of the children
in the south. The institutions must be well planned
and equipped with reasonably substantial buildings
and should not be inferior to the Wandering Mis-
sion. I strongly urge that the institutions should be
established on the right lines as I believe that if the
schemes are cut down by economy too much, it will
endanger the whole project. A few of these native
' children may possess the ability to proceed beyond
the sixth standard. If so, consideration should be
given to awarding a Government scholarship to
those exceptional children who should be given the
opportunity of carrying their studies further.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That Moola Bulla Native Settlement be devel-
oped to cater in the main for the full blood children
of the Kimberley District.
2. That Udialla Native Settlement be developed
to cater for the half-caste children of the Kimberley
District.
3. That a special native curriculum be used in
native schools on Government settlements and mis-
sions.
4. That where possible schooling be provided on
Government institutions by qualified schoolteachers
of the Education Department.
5. That two new children’s institutions, to be
known as colleges, be established in the south to
provide education and vocational training for the
native children of the south.
6. That legislation be enacted to provide for the
removal of neglected native children from their
parents by the Commissioner of Native Affairs, to
these institutions with a right of appeal to a Magis-
trate by aggrieved parents.


7. That children at Moore River and Carrolup
native settlements be removed to these new institu-
tions when established.
DISTRIBUTION OF TRIBAL NATIVES AND
THEIR NUMBER. NUMBER AND DIS-
TRIBUTION OF OTHER THAN TRIBAL
NATIVES. NUMBER AND DISTRIBUTION
OF NATIVES IN CATEGORIES OF FULL
BLOOD, HALF-CASTE AND LESS THAN
HALF-CASTE.
For convenience I have considered these three
matters under the one heading. The number of tribal
natives for some years now has been estimated at
10,000. It is a figure which has been carried forward
year after year in the annual reports of the Com-
missioner of Native Affairs and has not taken into
consideration the known decline in the native full
blood population. It would be impossible of course
to furnish the exact number or even the approximate
number of these myal natives but it seems certain
that this figure of 10,000 is greatly exaggerated.
During my travels I discussed this matter with many,
including police officers, missionaries, protectors,
station managers and others, and all agree that
10,000 is an exaggerated figure. From my conversa-
tions I would say that 6,000 would be a more accurate
estimate and one which is on the liberal rather than
the conservative side.
The tribal natives are concentrated mainly in the
following areas. In the extreme north in the vicinity
of the Drysdale Mission; in the Prince Regent area
between Munja Native Station and Kunmunya Mis-
sion ; south-west of Hall’s Creek in the vicinity of
Mount Erskine and Minnie Range; south of the
Pallotine Mission in that area between Lake Mackay
and Lake Haslett; south-east of the McLarty Hills
in the vicinity of Discovery Well; an area east of
Murramunda Station taking in Mount Sears, the
Wells and Emu Ranges and Lake Disappointment;
in the Warburton Ranges and that section of the
State extending east from Mount Cox and Mount
Gordon to the IJawlinson Range and Mount Russell
near the Northern Territory boundary and south to
Mount Squires.
In ascertaining the figures relating to natives other
than tribal natives, I have been unable to .segregate
the half-caste from the less than half-caste. This is
due to the fact that none of the Departmental popu-
lation returns or records make this distinction. These
returns and records merely divide the natives into
two classes, the full blood and the other than full
blood. It will be realised that these returns for the
most part are compiled by police officers and mis-
sionaries who would have little or no means of dis-
tinguishing between the half-castes and others closely
allied to the half-castes but possessing a preponder-
ance of white blood.
In order to furnish the information required under
these headings in as convenient a form as possible,
I am submitting herewith statistical population figures
and a map of the State showing the areas where the
tribal natives are mainly congregated. It will be seen
from these figures that the South-Western Division
contains 3,637 mixed bloods out of a total population
of 5,896. The greatest number of mixed bloods to
be found in any other division is 779 in the North
(Kimberley) Division. This North Division natur-
ally contains the largest number of full bloods, 5,104
out of a total full blood population of 10,338 (ex-
cluding tribal natives), while the South-West Division
includes only 384 full bloods. The statistical in-
formation herewith was compiled by the Department
and for that reason the population figures of the
full blood tribal natives is still shown as 10,000.
NATIVE POPULATION—DISTRIBUTION AS AT 30TH JUNE,
ESTIMATED POPULATION.
1947.
Fullblood
Other than Fullblood.
Total.
Grand
Total.
M. -
P.
C.
M.
F.
C.
M.
F.
C.
Albany
1
1
1
2
3
1
1
5
Badjaling Mission
40
35
56
40
35
56
131
Balco Mission (Billiluna) ...
18
18
20
2
2
4
20
20
24
64
Bassendean
...
Beaconsfield ...
1
3
4
5
4
4
5
13
Beagle Bay Mission
36
48
38
20
34
57
56
82
95
233
Bencubbin
4
1
1
1
1
1
5
2
2
9
Beverley
I
1
19
12
18
20
13
18
51
Boddington
12
13
12
12
13
12
37
Boyup Brook
10
11
30
10
11
30
51
Bridgetown ...
7
7
7
Brookton ...
I
1
24
11
21
25
12
21
58
Broome
290
190
ioo
165
126
90
455
316
190
961
Broome Native Hospital ...
6
3
2
3
3
3
9
6
5
20
Broomehill
2
3
6
2
3
6
11
Bruce Rock
3
5
6
3
5
6
14
Bunbury ...
3
I
33
21
35
36
22
35
93
Busselton
1
16
18
37
17
18
37
.72
Camamah
4
2
6
4
2
6
12
Carnarvon
40
36
43
30
24
98
70
60
141
271
Carrolup Native Settlement
28
18
10
23
34
75
51
52
85
188
Causeway
6
5
7
6
5
7
18
Claremont
1
5
1
5
6
Claremont Mental Hospital...
6
5
8
5
14
10
...
24


NATIVE POPULATION—DISTRIBUTION AS AT 30TH JUNE,
ESTIMATED POPULATION.
1947.
Fullblood
Other than Fullblood.
Total.
Gran n
Total,
M.
F.
C.
M.
F.
C.
M.
F.
C.
Collie ...
10
9
6
17
15
28
27
24
34
85
Coolgardie ...
9
8
4
3
1
13
11
1
25
Corrigin ...
1
1
1
Cosmo Newbery Feeding
Depot
16
23
9
16
23
9
48
Cue ...
8
12
2
6
5
24
14
17
26
57
Cundeelee Native Feeding
Depot
103
31
9
5
8
108
31
17
156
Cunderdin
5
7
8
5
7
8
20
Dalwallinu
7
5
3
7
5
3
15
Deaf and Dumb School,
Cottesloe ...
1
1
1
Derby
260
200
04
4
7
8
264
207
72
543
Derby Leprosarium
115
80
2
10
14
1
125
100
3
228
Derby Native Hospital
16
17
6
16
17
6
Donga ra
Dowerin ...
4
2
4
p
6
Bumbleyung
11
9
11
11
9
ii
31
Drysdale River Mission
130
130
1
1
130
131
i
262
East Perth Girls’ Home
...
. . .
7
o
7
2
9
Esperance ...
1
3
2
1
3
3
4
3
10
Fitzroy Crossing
538
376
200
10
8
11
548
384
211
1,143
Forrest River Mission ■
67
59
57
1
2
p
68
61
59
188
Fn mantle
9
15
i
24
1
25
Gascoyne Junction
37
40
27
18
15
18
55
55
45
155
Geraldton
3
1
25
OP
38
28
23
38
89
Goomalling
5
3
9
5
3
9
17
Gnowangerup
10
10
30
62
03
130
72
73
160
305
Grtenbushes
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
Guildford
2
2
6
17
26
27
19
28
33
80
Hail’s Creek ...
315
186
32
5
315
180
37
538
Harvey
...
1
1
7
1
1
7
9
Jigalong Mission
33
41
34
33
41
34
108
Kalgoorlie
81
70
19
10
8
12
91
78
31
200
Katanning
40
35
33
40
35
33
108
Kellerberrin ...
3
30
25
30
33
25
30
88
Kojonup ...
36
24
47
36
24
47
107
Kumnunya Mission ...
31
40
49
31
40
49
120
La Grange Bay Feeding Depot
219
154
56
10
4
229
158
56
443
Lakewood
3
1
3
1
4
Laverton
170
34
39
170
34
39
243
Lawlers
17
7
8
1
1
2
18
8
10
36
Leonora
60
20
56
14
116
34
150
Lombadina Mission
25
40
14
2
6
13
27
46
27
100
Marble Bar
260
165
36
27
15
9
287
180
45
512
Maylands
5
4
12
5
4
12
21
Meekatharra
20
18
18
90
8.5
74
110
103
92
305
Menzies
21
17
21
17
38
Merredin
9
7
10
.4
4
21
13
11
31
55
Midland Junction
1
1
p
P
Mingenew
7
5
0
7
5
6
18
Moola Bulla Native Station ...
59
52
27
29
16
21
88
68
48
204
Moora ...
5
3
125
75
103
130
78
103
311
Moore River Native Settle-
ment
23
21
21
38
58
105
61
79
126
266
Mt. Barker
2
I
2
27
22
41
29
23
43
95
Mt. Magnet
29
24
9
64
43
63
93
67
72
232
Mt. Margaret Mission '
50
50
40
30
30
70
80
80
110
270
Mullewa
14
14
12
37
31
48
51
45
60
156
Munja Native Station
39
43
10
39
43
10
92
Murrin Murrin
75
60
50
• 15
10
20
90
70
70
230
Narambeen
4
4
4
4
4
4
12
Narrogin
2
25
33
65
27
33
65
125
New Norcia Mission
2
2
9
37
41
00
39
43
69
151
Norseman
33
11
3
2
35
11
3
49
Norseman Mission
9
16
25
25
Northam
46
27
55
46
27
55
128
Northampton
6
14
10
83
20
16
83
119
Nullagine
184
183
90
4
3
13
188
186
109
483
Nungarin
7
3
3
4
o
10
7
2
19
Onslow
140
80
90
25
20
15
165
100
105
370
Perenjori
4
2
8
6
8
12
8
8
28
Perth Institutions
2
1
1
1
5
p
2
6
10
Pingelly
1
18
12
32
18
13
32
63
Pinjarra
1
...
14
12
32
15
12
32
59
Port Hedland
125
157
31
40
34
73
165
191
104
460
Port Hedland Native Hospi-
tal
5
6
1
2
5
8
1
14


NATIVE POPULATION—DISTRIBUTION AS AT 30TH JUNE, 1047— continued.
ESTIMATED POPULATION— continued.
Fullblood
Other than Fullblood.
Total.
Grand
Total.
M.
F.
C.
M.
F.
C.
M.
F.
C.
Quairading
26
20
26
Ravensthorpc
4
2
2
4
2
2
8
Roebourne
141
105
117
24
19
50
165
124
167
456
Koelands Mission Farm
11
11
18
11
11
18
40
Sandstone ...
1
1
1
1
o
1
1
4
Shark Bay
7
10
15
10
10
22
20
10
52
Sister Kate’s Children’s Cot-
tage Home
115
115
115
Southern Cross
8
0
1
1
2
9
7
2
18
Sunday Island Mission
30
37
37
3
7
17
39
44
54
137
Tambellup
2
1
7
5
13
9
6
13
28
Three Springs
3
10
5
13
13
5
13
31
Toodyay
4
2
1
4
2
1
7
Trayning
O
2
2
Turkey Creek
235
234
58
0
9
241
234
60
535
Udialla Native Station
33
40
22
33
40
22
95
Wagin ...
17
10
24
17
10
24
51
Wallai Feeding Depot
10
1
10
1
11
Warburton Range Mission ...
190
142
70
190
142
70
402
West Perth ...
o
4
11
o
4
11
17
Wickepin ...
6
5
8
6
5
8
19
Williams
24
19
46
24
19
46
89
Wiluna
177
129
03
8
4
5
185
133
08
386
Wongan Hills
1
2
2
1
' 2
2
5
Wyndham ...
149
90
31
18
11
20
167
101
51
319
Wyndham Native Hospital...
16
17
4
5
9
16
22
13
51
Yalgoo
25
21
17
14
10
31
39
31
48
118
York ...
1
58
32
55
59
32
55
146
Totals ...
4,881
3,678
1,779
1,816
1,488
2,592
6,697
5,106
4,371
16,234
Unclassified ...
10,000
4,881
3,078
1,779
1,810
1,488
2,592
6,097
5,106
4,371
26,234
NATIVE POPULATION-
Western Australia,
-DISTRIBUTION FOR YEAR ENDED 30th JUNE,
1947.
Full Bloods.
Half Castes and Less Bloods.
Grand
Division or Zone.
Totals.
Males.
Females.
Children.
Total.
Males.
Females.
Children.
Total.
South-West Division
169
106
109
384
1,041
885
1,711
3,637
4,021
Eastern Goldfields
Division ...
837
483
256
1,576
120
68
134
328
1,904
Murchison Division
260
205
110
575
183
147
197
527
1,102
North-West Division
1,191
977
531
2,699
193
146
286
625
3,324
North (Kimberley)
Division ...
2,424
1,907
773
5,104
273
242
264
779
5,883
4,881
3,678
1,779
10,338
1,816
1,488
2,592
5,896
16,234
Unclassified beyond
the confines of
civilisation
10,000
10,000
4,881
3,678
1,779
20,338
1,816
1,488
2,592
5,896
26,234


.. Lon3itude__l2j.° East of Greenwich . 123*


POSITION OF NATIVES IN TOWNS.
This matter must also be considered in two sec-
tions, the circumstances in the north and tho north-
west being entirely different from those existing in the
southern portion of the State. In the north in such
towns as Broome, Derby and Wyndham, a number of
natives including full bloods are employed in the
towns. Speaking generally the mixed bloods re-
ceive wages comparable with the white standards
while wages earned by the full bloods range from
15s. to £3 per week approximately.
According to figures provided by the Acting In-
spector of Natives in the north-west there are nearly
200 natives in Broome of which number about 100
are full bloods. There are in addition other mixed
bloods in the town who do not come within the
meaning of the term “native” as defined in the
Native Administration Act.
The full bloods are employed in shops, meat-
works, cordial factories, slaughter yards and as gen-
eral labourers, house-boys and domestics. The mixed
bloods find employment mainly as truck drivers,
garage hands, labourers and domestic servants.
In Wyndham, Derby and Port Hedland similar
conditions obtain. The natives in other towns in
the north and north-west are not so numerous but
here again the conditions of employment are very
much the same as those in Broome.
It is quite impossible for me to deal in detail with
the many problems associated with the natives in
the various towns. The drink problem is one com-
mon to all but this can only be minimised by strict
supervision and heavier penalties. Each town pos-
sesses its problems and it is difficult to formulate
any scheme which would be appropriate to all. The
most apparent matter requiring attention is the hous-
ing of the native employees. Complaints were made
to me also that in some instances natives were com-
pelled to work long hours and were not receiving
adequate wages. If there is any truth in these com-
plaints the district inspector is the one to whom
they should be made for it is his duty to prevent ex-
ploitation and to ensure that the natives receive fair
treatment and reasonable wages.
As far as housing is concerned I believe the best
plan would b e to compel all employers of native
labour to supply adequate accommodation. If the
Inspector discussed this matter with the employers
pointing out that it was the policy of the Depart-
ment to improve the living conditions of all natives
and requesting their co-operation, I feel sure that
a great deal of improvement could be expected.
There were many who suggested that the natives
in the towns should be compelled to reside in com-
pounds out of the town, being allowed into the towns
during the day only. This suggestion cannot be
lightly discarded but if adopted generally would
cost a great deal of money and furthermore the
present shortage of materials and labour would pre-
vent any effective implementation of this scheme
for some years.
At one time it was the policy to discourage natives
in the towns. Any such policy, however, in my
opinion could be only a temporary expedient. It
was inevitable that many of the natives would event-
ually migrate to the northern towns and there is
nothing that can be done about it now. In fact they
have become necessary units in some of the towns
by engaging in employment where white labour is
unprocurable.
Broome is a town which requires special considera-
tion. The presence in the town of indentured and
exempted Asiatic labour has added to the normal
difficulties and made the administration of the De-
partment particularly onerous. The Asiatics have
always associated with the native women in the town
and the result is a polyglot population of many
colours. The degrading conditions of China Town
where the majority of the Asiatics reside, in many
cases openly with white women of low morals from
the Eastern States causes one to wonder whether
the revival of the pearling industry was not after
all a bad thing.
The establishment of a compound out of Broome
would no doubt bring about some improvement but
would by no means completely answer the problem.
There are many mixed bloods who do not come
within the jurisdiction of the Department and these
could not be forced into a compound. Again there
are a number of exempted natives and others with
citizenship rights who similarly could not be con-
trolled. In my opinion a compound which would
cost money and require supervision by a superin-
tendent would not bring about a sufficient improve-
ment to justify its establishment. If anyone should
be compounded it should be the foreign element and
not our own natural born subjects. From whatever
angle the subject is approached there does not ap-
pear to be any ready solution. I can only suggest
that greater supervision by the Department in the
Broome area would relieve matters. In a few years’
time there will be about 50 native girls passing out
of the Broome Native Orphanage. Placing these
girls in suitable occupations in these unsatisfactory
conditions is going to present another difficult
problem.
There are so many problems in the North in re-
gard to native matters that I consider the opening
of a branch of the Native Affairs Department at
Broome to be an urgent necessity. I will say more
on this matter at a later stage in this report under
the heading of administration.
In the Southern portions of the State from Ger-
aldton South it is the half-caste, and I use the ex-
pression to include the various mixed bloods, who
predominate. The Southern problem is entirely
different from that in the North. It is a major
problem, the solution of which is most difficult to
arrive at.
The average half-caste in the towns is an unde-
sirable type, idle, unreliable, fond of drinking and
gambling and generally useless. In liquor they are
noisy, obscene, disorderly and often violent. In the
majority of instances they move from town to town,
never remaining settled in one spot for very long
and living on the various native reserves adjacent
to the towns. It would be pnfair to class all half-
castes in the same category and I repeat that my
description is intended to apply to the average
only. There are many others who live decent lives,
who are industrious and clean and who have up-
lifted themselves. They deserve only credit and
praise, but unfortunately they frequently have to


suffer slights and injustices because the white popu-
lation as a whole is inclined to class all natives alike
as idle and dissolute. It is a great pity that the
small minority of good natives has to suffer for the
undesirable majority.
The native camps Avhere the majority of the half-
castes are to be located are not only offensive to
the sight but are also a source of infection. Many
of the reserves were badly selected in the first place,
often being adjacent to sanitary sites or rubbish
tips with no water laid on and no provisions in the
way of lavatories or washing facilities. It is my
opinion that these native camps should be abolished
and the natives placed in settlements where they
should be compelled to work. From the settlements
they should be encouraged to proceed to employ-
ment on the farms, or elsewhere, but always return-
ing at the completion of the employment, to their
homes on the settlement. The reserves would
have to be retained but natives should not be
allowed to reside permanently on them in degrading
conditions as at present. The purpose of the re-
serves should be to provide an overnight camping
site for natives travelling to and from the settle-
ments in respect of their employment. One or two
small huts could be erected as an experiment on
some of the reserves to provide shelter for such
travelling natives. It would be necessary though
for the protector in such cases to take care that the
huts were not abused and to prevent any attempted
permanent occupancy.
It may be that the children of some of these
natives would not be deemed neglected and if this
is so they would have to accompany their parents
to the settlement. I personally do not favour insti-
tutions catering for adults and children together, but
unless all the children now living with their parents
on the native reserves are removed from their
parents, there does not appear to be any alternative.
However, where the children are removed with
their parents to settlements, the children should be
segregated into dormitories and kept apart from the
adult population as far as circumstances will per-
mit. A school would be required for the education
of these children but on passing out of the 4th
standard they should be sent to one of the children’s
institutions referred to in the previous section of
this report. Beneficial results from such action
would be apparent in a few years’ time and would
more than offset any present criticism.
On no account should the parents tbe allowed to
take the children with them leaving the settlement
for employment as this would immediately result in
a repetition of the native camp conditions and would
deprive the children of regular schooling. The pres-
ent settlements at Carrolup and Moore River should
be re-organised to make provision for these displaced
natives.
I believe that a Housing scheme would be a worth-
while experiment for selected families. There are
many who, if given the opportunity, would respond
to better housing but they are unable to progress in
this matter without assistance. I would suggest that
the Government erect, as an experimental venture, a
small number of adequate houses on approved sites
for a few specially selected families. These sites
should be selected after consultation with local
authorities and should not be on the present reserves.
It would be undesirable to make the natives a gift
of these quarters as they must be taught to assist
themselves. They nearly all earn good wages now
and are in a position to pay a small rental. If they
do not respond they should be returned or removed
to a settlement and another family provided with the
accommodation. This would probably serve as an
incentive for them to better their conditions and
improve their lot. Such a scheme may not be prac-
ticable at present but should be instituted when
possible.
Special consideration should be given to the
district embracing Gnowangerup, Borden and On-
gerup. A large number of natives, approximately
400, move backwards and forwards in this area. A
big percentage of them make their Headquarters at
the Mission at Gnowangerup. Their nomadic habits
together with their manner of living create a great
deal of dissatisfaction amongst the white population
in this area. Some of these natives may be capable
of making an effort to uplift themselves but the
majority of them I fear would not and should also
be removed to a settlement.
The present native settlement at Carrolup would
not be sufficiently large to eater for this big influx
and moreover would be too far away from this area.
A new settlement to take the form of a farm settle-
ment is required to absorb this large native popula-
tion. I was informed that there is plenty of good
farming country in this area including crown lands
available for such a project.
It is immaterial in my view whether such a new
institution is a Government establishment or under
mission control, so long as the policy in training is
in accordance with the Government’s wishes. Natives
placed on this settlement should also be encouraged
to take seasonal employment on the farms in the
district, leaving their children at the institution dur-
ing their absence. These children, after passing out
of the 4th standard, should also be removed to a
children’s institution for advanced training. The
present mission at Gnowangerup would be unsuitable
for such a scheme and would have to be discontinued.
The Murchison district also requires special con-
sideration. Here most of the towns experience
similar difficulties to those in the south. Natives
will congregate in the towns, working when only
absolutely necessary. One of the main attractions
is undoubtedly the fact that in the towns they can
procure drink. It is most difficult to decide on
what action should be taken in these towns. The
establishment of a settlement would probably not
be justified in this district. If these natives will not
bestir themselves and improve in their behaviour
they will have to be removed to a southern settle-
ment. The removal of one or two of the more
troublesome families would perhaps effect a big
improvement in their conduct.
The housing scheme previously referred to should
be extended to the Murchison District in due course
and perhaps the best suggestion would be to set
aside areas in or adjacent to the towns for the
erection of native dwellings.
In the metropolitan area and in particular at Bas-
sendean, there are some natives who have acquired
their own blocks of land. Those who are worthy
of assistance should be helped to erect homes of
the required standard. Those who are not worthy
of help and all those who camp on reserves should
be treated similarly to those in the south. These


reserves around the metropolitan area should be
abolished and the natives placed in settlements.
Natives who have no permanent place of abode in
their own interests as well as in the interests of
the white community should be removed to settle-
ments.
In regard to the town of Geraldton, it would
be difficult to recommend the abolishment of the
reserve here as there is no settlement in this area
and the establishment of a new one would hardly
be warranted. The site of the present reserve
should be altered to a more suitable locality and
the small huts existing at present re-erected on the
new site. It is a fact that the natives -who con-
gregate in the town of Geraldton use many of the
amenities of the town provided with ratepayers’
money to the exclusion of the whites. This situa-
tion is not peculiar to Geraldton but is apparent in
other towns also. It is difficult to suggest any
remedy for this state of affairs other than denying
the natives the use of the town. As many of them
are employed in the district such action would be
rather arbitrary. The only practical remedy seems
to be greater supervision and a discouragement of
natives loitering about the towns.
It is necessary to refer here to the type of native
who is continually before the Police Courts. This
type of native is not only a continual pest to the
white population but also has a detrimental effect
on many of the better type. Imprisonment seems
to have no effect on him. In fact in prison he makes
the acquaintance of the undesirable white, who
later often provides liquor for him. This type of
native should be removed to some penal settlement
for the good of the remainder of the natives. Un-
fortunately there is no such penal institution in
Western Australia and the establishment of one
would require money more urgently needed in other
directions.
The department is considering establishing of
Cosmo-Newbery Rationing Depot as a place of
detention for these undesirable types. This depot
is in an isolated part of the State and pjerhaps
would serve the purpose. At all events such an
arrangement should be given a trial before being
condemned.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That natives permanently residing on re-
serves be removed to settlements and that
the existing settlements at Moore River
and Carrolnp be re-organised to ac-
commodate these natives.
2. That a housing scheme be proceeded with
when practicable for the erection of ade-
quate houses for specially selected fami-
lies.
3. That a new farm settlement be established
in the Gnowangerup-Borden area to
absorb the large number of nomadic
natives in this area.
4. That inspectors of the department investi-
gate the conditions of employment of all
native employees in towns with the object
of improving conditions including ac-
commodation where necessary.
5. The establishing of Cosmo-Newbery Ration
Depot as a place of detention for
delinquent natives.
CRAFTS AND VOCATIONS FOR WHICH
NATIVES ARE BEST SUITED OR INTO
WHICH THEY MIGHT BE ENCOURAGED
TO ENTER.
This has been to a certain extent dealt with in pre-
vious sections of this report hut I will now collate
my impressions in greater detail.
In the pastoral regions of the State the natives
both full blood and castes should be trained with
the object of fitting them for employment on the
stations. This is the work for which they show a
special aptitude and which at the same time admir-
ably fits in with the economy of the State. The
pastoral industry as a whole is entirely dependent
on native labour and the natives should be encouraged
to regard employment in the industry as their main
source of employment. The pastoralists in their
own interests should eo-operate to this end by gradu-
ally improving conditions on the stations for the
natives. Work on the stations among the stock is
work which the natives like, it is something akin to
his natural mode of living and provided he receives
reasonable treatment he is happy and contented.
Many in the north and north-west have shown
that they have the ability and initiative to become
good motor mechanics, windmill repairers, truck
drivers, etc. The children should be given training
in the simple trades such as carpentry, blaeksmithing,
tinsmithing, plumbing, motor mechanics, etc., to pre-
pare them for future employment in this field. There
is a serious shortage of all tradesmen in the north
and there is likely to be for many years to come.
This being so, there appears to be every reason
to endeavour to train these natives to fulfil this want.
There may not be the facilities to produce skilled
tradesmen but even with a limited knowledge they
can become a decided asset to the north and I have
no doubts that there would be many who would
become good tradesmen.
The education of the native in the north and north-
west and in the Murchison and Eastern Goldfields
districts should not aim at too high a standard. It
is desirable that natives should be taught to read
and write and to have a knowledge of money values
and weights and measures. They should also of
course be trained in habits of cleanliness, thrift and
social behaviour but apart from .this the education
should be mainly practical and designed to fit them
for rural pursuits. There will be many naturally
who will secure employment in the towns as motor-
mechanics, truck drivers, labourers, etc., and later
probably as tradesmen and shop assistants, but all
natives cannot concentrate in the towns and the
land will always provide the main avenue of employ-
ment for them.
In the south the natives have been employed almost
exclusively on the farms and orchards. Many of
them engage in contract work such as clearing, fenc-
ing, potato digging and shearing, while others obtain
seasonal employment from time to time. There are
some who engage in rabbit trapping and odd ones
are employed in timber mills, factories and in the
railways.
It is a mistake, I believe, to assume that the mixed
bloods in the south arc fitted only for rural pur-
suits. Few natives in the first place have any interest
in the land. The Australian full-blood aborigine


never has taken kindly to agriculture and in fact
practically every effort in the past to train them
into agriculturists has ended in dismal failure. With
the mixed bloods nevertheless there is reason to hope
for more encouraging results. There are many who
carry out their farming duties to the complete satis-
faction of their employers but at the same time there
are others who do not give satisfaction and require
supervision all the time. It may be that these types
have inherited the lack of interest in the land of the
full bloods and that this is the reason for their
poor efforts. lam inclined to the opinion that many
of the poorer classes of workers would show more
interest in other spheres of employment and give
greater satisfaction.
I know of one case where a half-caste is employed
in a timber mill and another employed as a ganger
in the railways. My informants claim that the em-
ployers in these two instances give both natives
excellent reports. For this reason I feel that we
should not attempt to draft them all on to the land
as it is often against their will and inclination. In
these circumstances it is not surprising that they
are unsatisfactory.
Notwithstanding these opinions it is plain that
the main source of employment for the mixed bloods
of the South will be on the land but I urge that the
training of the children in the institutions I have
mentioned in another part of this report should aim
at something more than making them farm labourers
and domestics. Train them more thoroughly and
there will automatically be other avenues of employ-
ment for them such as in the trades, factories, rail-
ways, stores, etc. There is little doubt that in due
course some of them will be fitted for appointment
to the staff of native settlements where they should
be of invaluable assistance to their own people.
So far I have confined my opinions to the male
natives. Generally speaking the females are best
fitted for employment as domestics, cooks, house-
maids, etc., and this applies throughout the State. In
future however there should be attempts to fit some
of them for something higher. There seems to be
no good reason why many of them should not become
nursing assistants, dressmakers or even typists. I
know of one half-caste girl who has passed the Junior
Certificate and would be an asset in any office in the
city. Girls of this type should be given a chance
to become something more than a domestic servant.
With better education and training I feel certain
that other avenues of employment will become avail-
able to the girls in the same way as they will for
the boys. If the present children are given voca-
tional training on the lines that I have suggested
the time will come when employment in the metro-
politan area will be open to many of them. There
can be no doubt that a certain amount of racial
prejudice will be levelled .against them and one direct
result of this will be a dearth of available accom-
modation. In planning for the future therefore
the Department should make provision for the
establishment of two hostels, one for each sex, to
surmount this accommodation difficulty. These hostels
should provide board and lodging for the natives
employed in the metropolitan area and at the same
time provide a home for them in cases of necessity.
They would be required of course to pay a reason-
able sum in return for this board and lodging.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That in the North and North-West the educa-
tion and vocational training aim to fit the
natives mainly for employment in the
pastoral industry.
2. That in the settled areas of the South the
aim be mainly to fit the natives for em-
ployment in rural pursuits but that the
training be specialised to fit a percentage
of them for employment in other direc-
tions.
PARTICULAR INQUIRY INTO PROSPECTS
OF EMPLOYMENT OF NATIVES IN FISH-
ING AND PEARLING INDUSTRIES AND
ANY METHOD OF TRAINING NATIVES
FOR SUCH PURSUITS AND IN WHAT
LOCALITIES THEY COULD BEST FIND
EMPLOYMENT IN SUCH PURSUITS
As far as the pearling industry is concerned my
inquiries resulted in the firm conviction that at the
present time at least there is no possibility of the
native population entering into the pearling in-
dustry. It was hoped by the Department at one
time that th 0 mixed bloods domiciled in the Broome
area would eventually replace the indentured labour
in the industry. Experience, however, has shown
that those few mixed bloods who have been em-
ployed on the pearling luggers since the resumption
of pearling have not proved satisfactory. Pearlers
inform me that these natives possess no aptitude for
diving but some of them give reasonable satisfac-
tion as members of a crew. There are many how-
ever who do not give satisfaction even in this
respect.
One of the main reasons for this appears to be
the fact that luggers frequently remain at sea for
long periods and this is an aspect which the native
finds disagreeable. Many of them who have ob-
tained employment as a member of the crew on a
lugger have no inclination to repeat the experience.
It appears to me therefore that there is no possi-
bility of natives being employed in this direction
except perhaps in isolated instances.
There also seems to be little prospect of their
entering into any organised fishing activities. Few
of our native tribes in W.A. have any inclination
towards the sea —notable exceptions being the Sun-
day Islanders and perhaps some of the Beagle Bay
natives and coastal natives further north. I believe
that the Sunday Islanders would prove successful
in both pearling and ordinary fishing activities pro-
vided that these undertakings were run on a modi-
fied scheme and as a mission or community venture.
They probably would not like going to sea for
months on end but if a mission or community
scheme were instituted, long periods at sea very
probably could be avoided.
Before proceeding with any scheme it would be
necessary to ascertain whether these natives possess
any aptitude for deep sea diving. If they do not,
any scheme to enter into pearling activities would
have to be abandoned. There is no reason however
why they should not prove successful in ordinary
fishing activities.


Most of them can handle a boat a good deal bet-
ter than many white men and in addition they know
every inch of the dangerous coastline and waters in
their area. I can see no reason why they would
not respond to community fishing ventures equally
as well as some of the Queensland coastal natives
have. They already have had plenty of experience
in dry shelling, skin diving and in pearl and troehus
shell gathering with the mission boats.
I have already suggested earlier in this report
that consideration be given to changing the site of
the Sunday Island Mission. Until this matter is
finally decided no scheme can be proceeded with but
if any scheme is attempted in the future I favour
one on a community basis similar to some of the
Queensland schemes.
THE ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM OF THE
DEPARTMENT IN ANY DIRECTION IN
WHICH ITS EFFECTIVENESS MIGHT BE
IMPROVED.
In my view the administration of the Department
in the past has not been entirely satisfactory. This
is due to a variety of reasons but probably the main
one is that insufficient money has been expended on
native affairs in this State.
This. State is in the unfortunate position of not
only being the largest State and most sparsely popu-
lated one, but also of possessing the largest abori-
ginal population. The administration of native
affairs is consequently a more costly proposition in
W.A. than in any of the other States.
The recommendations contained in this report re-
quire the spending of money and it is unlikely even
if these recommendations are accepted that the State
Government will be in a position to provide the
necessary finance. It is plain therefore that unless
the Commonwealth Government can be induced to
assist there can be no substantial advance in the ad-
ministration of native affairs.
The problem is a national one. In my view the
ideal arrangement would be for the Commonwealth
Government to assist the State financially, leaving
the administration of the policy to the States con-
cerned.
The administrative head of the Department of
Native Affairs is the Commissioner. It would be
advantageous for this officer to possess some anthro-
pological training hut it must not be overlooked that
he is responsible for the administration of a large
Department and it is essential that he should possess
sound administrative ability. I am aware that the
position at present is vacant and in my view it would
be a calamity for a technical person without practical
administrative responsibility to be appointed to this
position. As I have already observed the ideal
would be an officer of sound administrative experi-
ence possessing anthropological training. If this
type of officer is unavailable then one possessing
administrative ability should be preferred to one
possessing academic qualifications only. There are
likely to be many pseudo anthropologists in Austra-
lia whose academic views regarding the treatment of
natives would be disastrous if adopted and whose
administrative efforts would result in chaos.
Thu Commissioner should pay frequent visits to
the institutions under his control and also inspect
periodically, as many missions as possible. The
officers in charge of the Cundeelee and Cosmo-New-
bery Ration Depots informed me that the Commis-
sioner had never visited either of these Depots up to
the time of my visit, despite the fact that both had
been in existence for some years. An administrative
head at the very least should know his own institu-
tions and his duties should be so arranged as to
enable him to carry out these necessary inspections.
The Acting Commissioner of Native Affairs has
told me that in order to keep up to date with his
office duties over the last 12 months it has been
necessary for him to work overtime to the extent of
about 5 nights a week. If this is really necessary it
is obvious that he is applying himself to too much
routine work which properly should be performed
by other officers. It appears to me that many of
the duties now performed by the Acting Commis-
sioner should be carried out by the Deputy Commis-
sioner and if this officer is unable to cope with the
volume of work, the appointment of a further
administrative officer should be made.
As previously indicated in this report I am of the
opinion that there should be a Branch of the Native
Affairs Department established at Broome. When
in the north I frequently received complaints that it
took weeks and sometimes months to obtain decisions
or finality from Perth in respect to native questions.
The problems in Broome itself, apart from all the
other complexities of the north, demand the appoint-
ment of a Senior Officer in this town. In the north
it is the police who administer native affairs and this
is entirely wrong in principle. The appointee should
be a Senior Officer with wide authority and for pref-
erence should occupy the status of a Deputy Com-
missioner. It is very desirable that this officer should
possess anthropological training as his duties largely
would be among the full bloods.
The field staff of the Department other than those
employed on institutions at present consists of four
inspectors. One of these inspectors is stationed at
Broome and his territory includes the northern por-
tion of the State between Wyndham and Onslow.
Another inspector is stationed at Carnarvon and is
responsible for that part of the State extending from
approximately Roebournc to Shark Bay. A further
inspector has his headquarters at Geraldton and
patrols the Murchison District while the fourth
inspector, stationed in Perth, has for his territory
that part of the State south of Perth and extending
to the South Australian border. In addition an offi-
cer stationed at head office carries out inspectorial
duties'in the metropolitan area.
In a territory of 975,920 sq. miles, with an
aboriginal population estimated at 20,000, it is plain
that effective supervision cannot be given with the
present administrative machinery. The present dis-
tricts require to be reduced and more field officers
should be appointed. At least two additional officers
are required in my opinion, one to be stationed at
Port Hedland and another at Narrogin.
In my view the appointment of Field officers
should be on similar lines to that existing in New
Guinea and the Northern Territory. The cadet sys-
tem should be established and officers carefully
selected, should be given 12 months trial in the field.
If they prove satisfactory they should be sent to


Sydney University for a short course in social
anthropology. Here again, however, the greatest
care should be exercised to ensure that appointees
possess practical common sense and not merely per-
sons with academic testimonials. A better title for
these officers would be patrol officers in lieu of the
present term inspector.
It seems to me that insufficient care has been
exercised in the past in the selection of the staff for
the Department of Native Affairs. There is no other
section of the Public Service which presents so many
difficulties and has so many ramifications. Other
nations throughout the world possessing native popu-
lations have realised long ago that the problems of
native administration require the best brains available.
Apparently that fact has not been recognised in
W.A. There has been a regrettable tendency in the
past to appoint Police Officers to the Department
and at the moment there are six or seven holding
senior positions. Th e practice has been to appoint
Police Officers to th e positions of inspectors in the
field. By reason of the classifications of these positions
such officers are able to attain the senior administrative
positions in the Department after very little service
and without any administrative experience whatever.
By this means many officers in the Head
Office of the Department have been deprived of their
natural line of promotion. Such a practice can only
result in a discontented and eventually an inefficient
staff.
It is not my intention to criticise Police Officers
personally. Many of them have made good in the
Department and I have no argument with them. It
is the system which I oppose. Natives usually fear
the Police and the appointment of Police Officers as
travelling inspectors is not a wise move. The fact
that an inspector has once been a Policeman is not
likely to be forgotten by the natives and they are
most unlikely to give him their complete confidence.
Where an ex-Poliee Officer is acting as an Inspector
in the district where he formerly acted as a Police
Officer he should be transferred to another district
where he is not known by the natives to have pre-
viously been a member of the Police Force.
The practice of appointing officers outside the
Native Affairs Department to field positions and then
transferring them to the senior administrative posi-
tions is a most undesirable one which should cease.
Most natives live from day to day and only in
rare cases do they make provision for tomorrow.
Frequently their earnings are wasted in drinking
and gambling with the result that their families
have insufficient money for food and clothing. The
provision of child endowment has not relieved the
position of these families to any great extent, for
the child endowment payments are often similarly
wasted. It is by no means uncommon for the whole
family to proceed to town on child endowment day
when the endowment is spent on all kinds of rubbish
and often used for gambling and drinking. Although
it may be said that the children are probably bet-
ter clothed than before, the child endowment money
generally speaking is not being used for the pur-
pose it is granted. It has encouraged idleness, for
many of the lower types are contented to sit down
and live on the endowment rather than work. As a
general rule I feel that child endowment payments
should be supervised and that orders for food and
clothing should be issued by the protectors instead
of a money payment as at present. If, however,
most of the natives on the reserves are removed to
settlements this supervision would become unneces-
sary as the only natives outside of settlements would
be those capable of managing their own affairs.
The Commissioner, by virtue of Regulation 85,
may direct that a specified portion of the wages of
any native not exceeding 75 per cent, of the total
shall be paid to him in trust for such native. This
power is at present exercised in a comparatively small
number of cases. In my view it should be exercised
to a greater extent, particularly in the Southern
areas of the State.
Few of these Southern mixed bloods are able to
manage their own affairs and it would be in their
own interests to enforce a deduction of about 20
per cent, of their wages in the form of compulsory
saving. Moreover a great many incur debts often
with no intention of repayment and because of
their nomadic habits and lack of acquisitive charac-
teristics the creditor rarely receives payment. With
money in the bank these natives could be encour-
aged to make useful purchases from time to time.
The Commissioner also should be empowered to dis-
charge any lawfully incurred debts of the natives
from their trust accounts.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That in order to provide more effective ad-
ministration for the North and North-
West a Deputy Commissioner of Native
Affairs be appointed and stationed at
Broome.
2. The appointment of further Field Officers
and the reduction of the present dis-
tricts to enable more effective super-
vision.
3. The establishment of a cadet system for
field officers on similar lines to that in
operation in the Northern Territory and
New Guinea.
4. Except in approved cases the child endow-
ment payments to be controlled by the
Department.
5. That except in approved cases 20 per cent.
be deducted from the wages of all native
employees in the South in the form of
compulsory saving.
ANY LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENTS WHICH
MIGHT ASSIST ADMINISTRATION AND
NATIVE WELFARE.
The Native Affairs Act was passed in 1936 when
the previous Act of 1905 was revised and brought up
to date. The present Act taken as a whole operates
satisfactorily and covers most phases of the native
question. In my view however there are certain
provisions which with advantage could be reviewed.
The Section and Regulations dealing with permits
to employ require consideration. I have already
recommended the abolition of the Medical Fund in an-
other part of this report and I believe that the permit
system would be greatly simplified while at the
same time preserving its basic principles by the
substitution of an annual license or permit to employ
natives. The permit should enable the employer
described therein to employ any number of natives


throughout the year and would overcome the incon-
venience of employers having to notify the nearest
Protector and take out a permit on every occasion
that they employ a native in casual employment. Tho
other provisions of the Act and Regulations not
repugnant to this amendment should be retained.
It is desirable that the consort of an accused
native should be placed in a similar position as
regards competency and compellability as a witness,
as the legal wife or husband of an accused person.
The Government for some years has been opposed
to native wives giving evidence against native hus-
bands and vice versa and in fact there has been no
attempt to my knowledge for many years to call
upon such wives or husbands to give evidence in any
proceedings. Nevertheless I believe that the Evi-
dence Act should be amended to give statutory effect
to this policy.
Section 38 is a section prescribing the procedure
to be adopted against alleged fathers for the pay-
ment of maintenance in respect of children who arc
the offspring of a native and some person other than
a native and who are being maintained in a Native
Institution. The section is unwieldy and where the
child is not being maintained in an institution the
Department is forced to take proceedings under the
Child Welfare Act. In my opinion the section should
be amended to allow the Department to take proceed-
ings against the alleged father whether black or
white of any native child and irrespective of whether
the child is in an institution or not. Moreover the
section does not provide for a default to be made
at an original hearing and where an order for weekly
payments is not obeyed a fresh complaint in writing
and on oath has to be sworn and the defaulter
brought before the Court again. The Court at the
original hearing has the power to order confinement
expenses and part maintenance, but strangely enough
there is no provision in the section whatever to deal
with the defaulter who fails to obey the order in
respect to confinement expenses and past maintenance.
The section obviously requires amending by adding
provisions to cover such defaulters.
The Commissioner of Native Affairs has power to
fix the charges for inmate children at institutions in
accordance with the scale of wages under regulation
157, Second Schedule. This Schedule fixes the maxi-
mum charges for children between 2 years of age
and 12 years at 2/6d. per week and for children over
12 years of age at 5/- per week. Accordingly where
a court orders a father to pay for example 10/- per
week for the maintenance of his child the Commis-
sioner is only entitled to collect an amount up to 5/-
per week for the child’s maintenance at an institu-
tion the balance being paid into a trust account for
the child. This appears to me to be wrong in prin-
ciple and I can see no good reason why the full
amount paid by the father should not be credited
to the Departmental revenue. In my view the scale of
charges in the second schedule should not apply to
maintenance cases and the money so paid in should
be credited to revenue.
Section 64 of the Act provides for the establish-
ment of Courts of Native Affairs for the trial of any
offence committed by a native against another native
and give exclusive jurisdiction to such Courts in such
offences. This means that any trivial offence committed
by a native against another native should be heard be-
fore a Court of Native Affairs, which in my view is
absurd. The provision was introduced mainly for
the purpose of' dealing with offences of tribal
natives arising out of tribal customs. There prob-
ably are some cases not within this category which
would be more suitably heard in a Court of Natixe
Affairs rather than in a Police Court, but the number
of such eases would not be great. In my opinion
this legislation would operate more satisfactorily if
Courts of Native Affairs were established for of-
fences other than offences arising out of tribal cus-
tom only on the recommendation of the Minister.
Furthermore as the section stands at present a Court
of Native Affairs in the case of a conviction for an
offence not arising out of a tribal custom is compelled
to sentence the prisoner in accordance with the pro-
visions of the Criminal Code, thus in the case of a
conviction of wilful murder or murder the Court
is obliged to sentence the native to death even though
the sentence is unlikely to be carried out. I doubt
very much if the legislation ever intended such a
Court to have the powers of pronouncing the sen-
tence of death and I believe that the section should
include a penalty clause for offenders convicted of
an offence not arising out of a tribal custom and
that the penal provisions of the Criminal Code should
not be applicable to these cases.
Probably the legislation subjected to the greatest
criticism is that dealing with citizenship rights which
came into operation in December, 1944. There are
many who hold that the Act was premature but I
do not subscribe to this opinion. I believe, however,
that the Act should be administered strictly and that
only natives of a high standard should be granted
these rights. Under the present legislation this pre-
sents difficulties as the standard required is likely to
vary in accordance with the opinion held by the
various Courts which hear these cases. This feature
of course, is not peculiar to citizenship cases. Again,
the Commissioner of Native Affairs, although per-
fectly aware that a particular applicant is not a
suitable subject for citizenship, may not be able
to produce proof in the way of evidence to that
effect to the satisfaction of a Court. It so happens
that some natives who have been refused exemption
by the Minister have been successful in obtaining
citizenship rights. This is not intended as a stricture
against some magistrates but is merely stated to
demonstrate the difficulties which arise under the Act.
In my opinion the department is in the best posi-
tion to say whether or not an applicant in any par-
ticular case is fitted for citizenship. There are some
natives of the highest standard moreover, who con-
sider it degrading to appear before a Court to ask
for citizenship rights and as a result never receive
this status. The Act could be given effect to more
satisfactorily. .1 believe, if the Minister were em-
powered to grant citizenship rights in the same way
that exemption is granted at the present time. In
order to combat any suggesion of Departmental bias
towards a native unsuccessful applicants should be
granted a right of appeal to a magistrate. I con-
sider also that the provisions of the Act requiring
applicants to be free from syphilis, granuloma and
yaws be repealed.
Section 10 of the Native Administration Act
creates certain restrictions against natives travelling
within the State. The expression “boundary line”


as used in the section means the 20th parallel of
south latitude. The purpose of these restrictions
is to prevent the spread of leprosy within the State
and the effect of the section briefly is to prohibit
any native who lives north of the said boundary line
or any native who at any time passes north of the
line from proceeding south of the line except where
as a result of mental infirmity or insanity the trans-
fer of the native to a mental hospital is necessary
or where a native requires specialised medical treat-
ment which is available only at a place south of the
boundary line. The purpose of this legislation may
be defeated in the case of a native granted exemp-
tion under the Act or citizenship rights under the
Natives Citizenship Rights Act, 1944. Such natives
even though they formerly may have resided in a
leper area are quite unrestricted in their move-
ments. In order to safeguard the objects of
section 10 I consider that in the case of
natives residing north of the boundary line such
certificates of exemption or citizenship rights should
be conditional upon such natives remaining north of
the said line. A strict compliance with Section 10
frequently results in great hardship as natives re-
siding adjacent to and south of the line sometimes
move across the line quite innocently, being in com-
plete ignorance of the provisions of the Act. In this
way a husband may become separated from his
family who may be loath to join the husband and
thus restrict their own movements. I believe a pro-
vision in the Act empowering the Minister to grant
a permit for a native who'has not associated with
lepers to return south of the line in cases of extreme
hardship, would not defeat the objects of Section 10
and would alleviate thejrosition satisfactorily.
Another provision of the Native Administration
Act which is subject to some criticism is Section 13,
under which the Minister is empowered to cause a
native to be removed to a settlement. The criticism
results from the fact* that natives are removed under
the section to an institution without trial, and it is
contended that the provision is open to abuse inas-
much as an innocent native may be removed on a
biased report of a police officer or protector.
Whether or not such abuses occur I am unable to say
but if they do then I believe they wrnuld occur in
isolated instances only. An alternative to the pres-
ent procedure and one which would remove all such
criticism would be to amend the section to provide
for the removal of natives to an institution only
upon a Court Order after due enquiry by the Court.
Such an amendment however would create undue
delays and in practice very probably would not
operate satisfactorily.
In my view the Department requires this power
of removal and any alteration in the present pro-
cedure would be likely to result in a great deal of
inconvenience and undue delay which would outweigh
the present risk of injustice. A more effective super-
vision resulting from the appointment of more field
officers should reduce this risk to a minimum.
Another legislative provision which requires con-
sideration is section 49 of the Native Administration
Act, which forbids the supply of intoxicating liquor
to natives.
There are two lines of thought to this question
of whether or not natives should be restricted from
drinking. One section of the public urges that the
present restrictions do not prevent the natives from
obtaining liquor but result in their being supplied
with inferior wine by low class whites. It is con-
tended by this section that if the natives were per-
mitted to drink they would not be forced into
consuming inferior liquor and would be able to drink
reasonably and without becoming noisy and trouble-
some. The other viewpoint is that natives cannot
“hold” drink and that the above section of the Act
should be amended by increasing the minimum
penalty to a term of imprisonment.
There is no doubt that this section of the Act does
not prevent the supply of intoxicating liquor to
natives. This is due to the fact that there are many
white men without scruples who stoop to the practice
of supplying natives with drink at a price greatly in
excess of its cost. It is regrettable that it is often
impossible to detect this type of offender and for
every one apprehended and convicted there are
probably another dozen or more who escape detec-
tion.
In my opinion, it would not be feasible at the
present time to remove these restrictions against
supplying alcohol to natives. There can be no doubt
that drink brings out the worst in the aborigines and
is almost invariably responsible for their appearance
in the Police Courts.
I doubt very much, however, whether the provision
of a minimum penalty in the form of a gaol sentence
would result in any material reduction in this class
of offence. The minimum penalty already is a fine
of £2O, and in most cases the Courts inflict a
gaol sentence. There may be some features in
connection with a particular case which would
make it undesirable to imprison the offender
and I believe that the section is better left as it is.
If my recommendation that the natives on the reserves
in the South be removed to settlements is adopted,
then as far as this section of the State is concerned,
the drink problem will largely disappear as also would
the need for prohibited areas and permits.
There are also certain anomalies existing under
the Commonwealth Social Service Legislation as ap-
plicable to natives. For instance a native who pos-
sesses a preponderance of native blood is ineligible
to receive an old age pension and similarly a female
native with a preponderance of native blood is in-
eligible for a widow’s pension or a maternity bonus.
This class of native, however, is eligible to receive
child endowment benefits.
I do not think I am required to investigate Com-
monwealth legislation, however, and merely refer to
it in passing. It would appear nevertheless that
more uniformity in this legislation is desirable.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That the Medical Fund be abolished and
that the provisions of the Act and regu-
lations be amended to provide for an an-
nual registration of employers.
2. That the Evidence Act be amended to pro-
vide that the consort of an accused na-
tive be placed in the same position as re-
gards competency and compellability as
a witness as the legal wife or husband of
an accused person.


3. That Section 38 of the Native Administra-
tion Act be amended to allow the De-
partment to institute proceedings for
maintenance and confinement expenses
against any father of a native child and
whether that child is in an institution or
not and for the Court at the original
hearing to make a default order in ac-
cordance with the Justices Act.
4. That the scale of charges under Regulation
157, second schedule should expressly ex-
clude money payments made under Court
orders for the maintenance of children.
5. That Section 64 of the Act be amended to
provide that Courts of Native Affairs for
offences other than those arising out of
tribal custom should only be established
on the recommendation of the Minister
and that a special penalty provision be
inserted to be applicable to this class of
offence.
6. That the Native Citizenship Rights Act be
amended to provide that an application
under this Act may be granted by the
Minister with a right to appeal by any
aggrieved native to a magistrate and that
the provisions in the Act requiring an ap-
plicant to be free from syphilis, granulo-
ma and yaws be repealed.
7. That Section 10 of the Native Administra-
tion Act be amended to grant the Min-
ister power to issue a permit to natives
to cross the “boundary line” in cases of
extreme hardship.
CONCLUSION.
In this final phase of ■ this report it is only fair
that I should state that some matters I have recom-
mended have already been suggested by the Depart-
ment but that for various reasons they have not been
put into operation. While I have not been con-
cerned with the financial aspect I have endeavoured
not to be too extravagant in my recommendations in
order that this report should he of some practical
value.
It seems to me that in dealing with the aboriginal
question as a whole there is a danger of becoming
too idealistic. While admitting that the aborigines
have been badly treated in the past and that our
treatment of them today leaves room for improve-
ment, I believe that it is important to realise their
limitations and to ■ approach the problem in a prac-
tical way. The Full Bloods and even the Mixed
Bloods are still a primitive race and it is unreason-
able to expect them to advance to the white stan-
dards in a matter of a generation or two. A little
over 150 years ago these people were living in the
Stone Age. In fact some authorities contend that
their standards were hundreds of years before the
Stone Age, so that it is plain that the upliftment of
the aborigines is a matter which must be considered
in terms of generations rather than years.
Unfortunately the results of any new methods for
.their betterment cannot be foreseen with any cer-
tainty. It is necessary to wait until the next genera-
tion in order to ascertain the full effects of any new
methods adopted and it is this feature which makes
the problem so difficult. As will have been gathered
from the tenor of this report, I believe that these
people can attain a standard equal to our own—in
time. Just how long the process will take, time
alone will tell.
During my investigations I have heard expressions
of opinion from all sections of the community. The
lack of unanimity of most aspects of the native
question was most noticeable. In compiling the
report I have endeavoured to be practical and can
only hope that my views on this most difficult
subject will be of some assistance to the Govern-
ment and will bring some benefits to the aborigines
themselves.
Yours obediently,
(Sgd.) F. E. A. BATEMAN,
Resident Magistrate.
4th June, 1948.
