

FEDERATION
At a Conference of the Prime Ministers of Australia certain Amendments were suggested to be
made in the Bill to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Parliament of Tasmania
having decided to submit the Bill as amended to the Electors of Tasmania, the following
explanation of the effect of the several Amendments is given
Clause 7 —( 2'he Senate).
The amendment of this Clause provides for the division of Queensland for the purpose of
electing Senators, and does not affect Tasmania.
Clause 57 —(Disagreement between the Houses).
This Clause provides that if, after joint dissolution of both Houses, the Senate and House of
Representatives cannot agree, the disagreement shall be submitted to a joint sitting of both Houses.
In the original Bill it required “Three-fifths of the Members present and voting thereon ” to carry
any resolution, and it is now proposed that any such resolution may be carried by “an absolute
majority of the total number of the Members of the Senate and House of Representatives,” and
not by any majority of Members present.
For example, take the total number of Members of the Senate and House of Representatives
at 110, of which an absolute majority is 66, and that number (56) must, to carry any measure
under the amended Clause, be present and vote. 56 would be three less than total number of
Representatives of New South Wales and Victoria together, supposing those two States combined
against the small States. No absent Representative could make his vote effective in such a
division. A three-fifths majority of. the Senate and House of Representatives silting together
would, if all the Members were present, be 66, or 10 more than the number required for an absolute
majority ; but as this majority was only required of Members present, a much smaller number even
han the absolute majority of 56 might have carried a question against the smaller States.
Clause 87.
It is proposed that this Clause, which is known as the “ Braddon Clause,” shall continue
“ During a period of Ten years after the establishment of the Commonwealth, and thereafter until
the Parliament otherwise provides.” In the Bill, as passed, this Clause was made permanent, and
couldpiot be altered without amendment of the Constitution.
New Clause to follow Clause 95.
The following New Clause is proposed to be inserted, and will explain itself; —
“ During a period of Ten years after the establishment of the Commonwealth, and thereafter
until the Parliament otherwise provides, the Parliament may grant financial assistance to any State
on such terms and conditions as the Parliament thinks fit.”
Clause 1 2,^—{Seat of Government).
This Clause originally provided for the Seat of Government being determined by Parliament ;
but a new Section is proposed in lieu of it, which declares that the Seat of Government shall be in
New South Wales, and be distant not less than One hundred miles from Sydney. It is also
declared that the Parliament shall meet at Melbourne until it meets at the seat of Government.
Clause 127 —(Mode of Altering the Constitution.).
This Clause, as originally passed, provided for the submission to the Electors of any proposed
law, passed by both Houses, altering the Constitution, and the Amendments provide that in
addition thereto, upon a proposed law altering the Constitution being passed by either of the Houses
twice under certain conditions by an absolute majority and not agreed to by the other House, such
proposed law may be submitted to the Electors by the Governor-General and dealt with in the
same manner as if it had been passed by both Houses. By this an absolute majority of the Senate,
representing the smaller States, may, without consent of the House of Representatives, cause a
proposed law to be submitted to the people : and, as in the original Clause, the ultimate decision
rests with the people to whom that proposed law is submitted.
JOHN VAIL,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.
national übrarv
° h AUSTRALIA
