

AUSTRALIA
AND NAVAL DEFENCE.
BY
-SENATOR MATHESON
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE
MARCH 10th, 1903.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF ABERDEEN, G.C.M.G.
IN THE CHAIR.
\Reprinted by permission froyj t)ie-J Proceedings' of the Institute . ]




AUSTRALIA AND NAVAL DEFENCE.
BY SENATOR MATHESON.
“ All defence—whether it is purely defensive or whether it is of the
offensive-defensive character —ought to be based on some intelligent
appreciation of the power of the adversaries to be faced ; and if those
adversaries cannot be exactly defined, then it must be founded on the
actual strength or the probable action of those who may be adversaries.”
—Morning Post Leading Article, February 17, 1903,
Before proceeding to the subject of my Paper, I should like to
explain how it is I stand before you to-night prepared to lecture on
Australian Naval Defence, My first impulse, when it was proposed
that I should do so, was to decline emphatically, and I pointed out
that the room would be full of professional naval and military
men, all prepared to unite in destroying the civilian and his theories,
however much they might differ among themselves. The reply
was that hitherto the Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute had
only had the professional view put before them ; that it would
be of some interest to even the professionals to listen to a state-
ment of the case as it strikes the politician and business man;
that the “ Journal ” of the Institute had a large circulation
throughout His Majesty’s dominions ; and that, by removing any
misapprehensions as to her attitude, I could help materially to
justify Australia in the eyes of her sister Colonies ; and, in short,
as another friend said, it was my duty to take advantage of the
A


opportunity. Probably the public hardly realise the extent of
accurate knowledge that is expected of a legislator in Australia.
No matter what he may be by profession, he is expected by
his constituents to master and speak intelligently on every subject
with which Parliament has to deal; nothing is too small for his
attention, and no subject too great: he must be acquainted with
the ms and outs of every trade within the Commonwealth to
regulate the Customs tariff; he must be prepared with all the
assurance that he can to argue points of law with Mr. Deakin or
.” a ‘°. r ?AT 0 V ‘° CoDtest lhe P™ ci P'es of political economy
ivith Sir Tf illiam Lyne ; anfl. finally, to discuss points of war and
naval and military defence with Sir John Forrest. It is under
such circumstances as these that I have been obliged to study
t e question ot Australian Naval Defence from any sources of
information at my disposal. My views have been formed after
most careful consideration of what has been written on the subject
generally by recent authorities, but, as is only natural, with special
consideration tor what appear to me to be the reasonable national
aspirations of the country I have the honour to represent I
submit my views with the greatest diffidence, and at the conclusion
i shall welcome the most caustic criticism, as I recognise that mv
personal profit will be the opportunity I shall have of modifying
my views before I express them in the Senate, if I find they need
modification. J
My Paper, then, must not be taken as in any sense a lecture on
deface hut rather as a statement of the various considerations
that lead a large number of the inhabitants of Australia to bold
the views we do on this important question; and perhaps I had
better commence by explaining bow it is that the question of naval
defence has recently come to the front as one of considerable public
interest, both in Australia and here in England.
Cause of Controversy.
•
Last year the Premiers of the self-governing Colonies were in
London enjoying the Coronation festivities, and Mr. Chamberlain
took advantage of their visit to bold a Conference, at which, among
other topics, those of the military and naval defence of the Empire
were discussed, with the result that Sir Edmund Barton undertook,
on behalf of his Ministry, to submit to the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment a proposal that the existing subsidy of £lOO,OOO, paid


annually by Australia towards the upkeep of a separate squadron
for the protection of floating trade in Australasian waters, should
be increased by £94,000, to £200,000 in all. This by no means
represented the original views of the Admiralty, who had proposed
£890,000, but was the maximum sum for which Sir Edmund Barton
cared to accept any responsibility. The Admiralty also sought to
have the whole subsidy diverted from the maintenance of the
squadron for trade protection to that of a squadron of the British fleet,
and therefore required an alteration in one of the principal clauses
of the existing agreement, under which the Australian Colonies in
the past, and the Federal Government as their present representa-
tive, exercised a control over the movements of the subsidised
squadron. They laid papers before the Conference in support
of their contention that the real defence of Australia in time of
war might be found in offensive operations carried on by the
British fleet in waters thousands of miles from Australia; and a
memorandum, dated March 15, 1902, addressed by Sir John
Forrest to Sir Edmund Barton, strongly supporting this view, was
also circulated, and appears in the official report of the proceedings
of the Conference, though it is now understood that the paper .in
question was a confidential one, and not intended for publication.
The greatest secrecy was observed in Australia as to these negotia-
tions. Questions asked by myself and others in the Senate and
House of Representatives after the Conference had broken up
elicited the reply that the Government were fully informed as to
what had been agreed to, but did not propose to inform Parliament,
and eventually both Houses adjourned in October, 1902. Shortly
afterwards Sir Edmund Barton and Sir John Forrest arrived in
Australia, and the proceedings of the Conference became public
property. Sir John Forrest’s memorandum was received with
almost universal disapproval, and the proposal to increase the
annual subsidy while dispensing with all Federal control, though
receiving a very guarded support from a small section of the Press,
was on the whole condemned. “ The Age,” a Melbourne news-
paper, published some excellent articles and letters on the subject
from the Australian point of view; and these being 11 commented on
unfavourably in England by the “ Times ” and by certain rather
dictatorial writers, mostly styling themselves Imperialists, a con-
troversy ensued, as a result of wdaich I received the invitation from
your Council to address you to-night.
The position, put briefly, is as follows. The Admiralty and these
Imperialists claim—
a 2


1. That the British fleet, controlled by the Brr.ish Admiralty,
and cruising in every sea, provides the only form of naval defence
on which Australia should depend, or t 3 which she should con-
tribute.
2. That local naval defence must be considered a thing of the
past.
8. That, therefore, no squadron or ships of the Brit-sh fleet
should necessarily be retained in Australian waters in time of war
to protect floating trade.
4. That a squadron or fleet of Australian-owned ships for the
defence of floating trade would be an absurdity.
5. That the necessity for providing for the naval defence of
Australia (included with the other Colonies) is an “ intolerable
and unnatural burden ” on the British taxpayer; “an inordinate
sacrifice,” which cannot continue.
6. That, und-r these circumstances, Australia should increase its
subsidy to the British Navy, and that the amount of the payment
should be a “ due proportion,” calculated on a basis either of the
white populations of Great Britain and the self-governing Colonies,
or of their respective volumes of trade.
Australia, on the other hand, while fully admitting the benefit
she will derive in time of war from the offensive operations of the
British fleet in foreign waters, maintains —
1. That the British fleet cannot safely be treated or considered
as her sole line of defence.
2. That local naval defence is no more a thing of the past for her
than it is for England, Cochin China, or the United States.
8. That for efficient defence of floating trade a squadron of
cruisers operating in local waters is essential.
4. That, admitting the inadvisability of placing any restriction
on the movements of the British fleet, or squadron, an Australian-
owned squadron for local defence is the only alternative.
5. That the benefit she derives from the operations of the British
fleet is practically accidental, arising from the necessary protection
of purely British shipping and commerce, and she denies emphati-
cally that the British ratepayers’ burden could be reduced one penny
if there was no Australia to defend to-morrow.
6. That her duty to the Empire is to provide to the best of her
ability for the security of her coast and ports ; the naval base from
which the British fleet in Australasian waters will carry on offen-
sive operations against an enemy. That she can see no reason why,
on a population basis, the coloured races in the British Empire,


from whose protection Great Britain derives great trade advantages,
should he omitted. And in respect to the volume of trade basis,
that in time of war it is the mercantile navy that requires pro-
tection, not the commerce; that, for instance, wool from the
Argentine in British ships would require British protection, though
by classification it would be foreign commerce, while wool from
Australia in, say, German or French ships would pass free, and
require no protection, though classified as Australia’s commerce
with foreign countries.
I shall have no time to-night to deal with numbers 5 and 6.
They would require a paper to themselves, and can, moreover, only
be logically discussed in connection with some scheme of Imper.al
Federation by which Imperial burdens and Imperial respon-ibility
would be equitably apportioned, and no such scheme has at present
been submitted for discussion by the British Government, I pro-
pose, therefore, to confine myself to the first four problems, and to
deal with them step by step, my object being to convince you that
a small fleet of ships for the local defence of floating trade is
essential at the present moment, and will remain so in the future,
and that the aspiration of Australians to have a small navy of their
own for the purpose is a natural one.
Area to be Defended.
In the first place, then, Australia, as you know, is a large con-
tinent with a coast-line of, roughly speaking, 8,850 miles. The
island of Tasmania lies at its southern extremity; Thursday
Island, in the Torres Straits, at its northern extremity ; and to the
north east the Federal territory of British New Guinea, which has
but recently been handed over to the Commonwealth by the
Colonial Office, and consists of about 88,000 square miles of
tropical country, or about one-third of the island of Few Guinea,
the other two thirds being owned in about equal proportions by
Germany and Holland. From a defence point of view the coast is,
fortunately, very uninviting, while the principal harbours are
already fortified, though for the most part inefficiently. We have
for some time been able to boast of two Federal forts, the cost of
maintaining which was defiayed by assessments on the Colonies
prior to federation, but is, of course, now borne by the Federal
Government. One of these —Thursday Island lies in the lories
Straits, a channel about seventy miles wide separating New Guinea
from Queensland, but obstructed throughout its whole width by


numbers of islands and sunken reefs, through which navigation is
extremely dangerous. Running south from this channel, and
extending for about 1,300 miles from New Guinea along the coast
of Queensland, lies the Great Barrier Reef, a natural protection to
the trade-route between the Eastern States of Australia and Asia,
and through the sheltered highway thus formed the whole of the
traffic converges at Prince of Wales Channel in Torres Straits, as
it were at the neck of a bottle ; this passage is about ten miles long
by one mile wide, and lies a little to the north of Thursday Island,
from which it can be kept under observation, but not controlled ;
there are, in addition, other channels farther to the north, which by
careful sounding could be used during moderate weather. The
position is of the utmost importance to British commerce, as a
single armed merchant-vessel belonging to an enemy might inter-
cept at this spot the whole traffic between Asia and Eastern
Australia. Thursday Island, however, even if efficiently armed,
could not control the channel without the assistance of a naval
force of some sort.
The second Federal fort is to be found at the Port of Albany, or
King George’s Sound, a natural harbour of great importance at
the south-west corner of the Continent, and commands the trade-
routes between Australia and Europe either via the Suez Canal or
the Cape ; it is impossible to over-estimate its value as a coaling
station to vessels employed upon the Cape route, while in the
hands of an enemy it would form a convenient base from which
the whole trade between Europe, Africa, and Australia might be
intercepted ; its efficient defence is therefore of singular importance
to British commerce.
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, is the headquarters of
the British Naval Squadron in Australian waters ; a depot for
naval stores and a dockyard for repairs are located there, and the
Heads at the mouth of the harbour are fortified. It would, however,
be possible for an enemy’s ships to lie off Botany out of range of
the guns in the forts, and from there to shell and destroy Sydney,
the dockyards, and the shipping in the harbour.
Other centres of trade are Melbourne, the capital of Victoria;
Brisbane, the capital of Queensland ; Hobart, the capital of Tas-
mania ; and Adelaide, the capital of South Australia. All these
cities are provided with defence works ; none of them, however, of
any value except those at Queenscliff, the entrance to Port Phillip
Bay, on which stands Melbourne ; while Fremantle, the chief port
of Western Australia, is without defences of any kind, either land,


submarine, or naval. The harbour, created at great cost in the
estuary of the Swan Eiver by dredging and the construction of a
breakwater, is rapidly gaining importance as a coaling station for
all vessels trading between Europe and Australia vid the Suez
Canal, and is the landing-place for the cable from the Cape to
Australia. It therefore directly invites attack, as do the cable
stations atEoebuck Bay and Port Darwin. An important harbour
is that of Newcastle, the port for the coal-producing districts lying
to the north of Sydney, in New South Wales ; while farther south
on the same coast we find excellent harbours at Jervis Bay and
Twofold Bay. The former lies 100 miles south of Sydney, and is
frequently used by His Majesty’s ships; it is a splendid harbour,
ten to twelve miles long by two miles wide ; the latter is 240 miles
south of Sydney, and thirty miles from Cape Howe, at which point
all the coastal traffic of Australia converges prior to passing into
Bass’s Strait. It is about equidistant from Sydney, Melbourne,
and Hobart. Both these harbours are entirely undefended, and
would form convenient bases and temporary places of resort for an
enemy’s ships. There are, of course, numerous other towns and
other harbours on the Australian coast, but in this short sketch I
have only attempted to enumerate the most important and most
vulnerable points as briefly as possible, and I can now proceed to
consider the nature of possible attacks on Australia.
Nature of Attacks.
Authorities fortunately all seem to agree as to the class of attack
that Australia would have to anticipate in time of war. They assume,
in the first place, that England holds the complete command of
the sea. This is the basis on which they build all their arguments ;
it is the basis I propose to adopt; and it is of the utmost import-
ance that you should keep these premises in mind, because I
gather that many experts, and certainly the Navy League, assert
that the absolute supremacy of the sea has not at present been
secured. Quoting from the “Navy League Handbook ’ of Decem-
ber, 1902, I find that they consider that in ships alone, apart
altogether from a large shortage in crews, the British Navy requires
the following additions over and above those for which the con-
struction has been already provided, but which are not as yet
complete or available for service—viz. twenty-one battleships,
forty-six cruisers, and thirty torpedo-boat destroyers. Even if these
additional vessels were provided immediately, Great Britain would


only have secured the lowest margin of superiority, and they point
out that a modern ironclad requires two or three years to complete,
while Admiral Fremantle goes further still and asks for 160 more
cruisers.
This general view of the position receives official confirmation in
the address presented to the Conference of Premiers by Mr.
Brodrick, the Secretary of State for War, when he alluded in so
many words to “ the possibility of our at any time losing the com-
mand of the sea ” ; and I consider, therefore, that under these
circumstances it is quite fair to assume as certainties in any war
in the immediate future those risks of attacks on Australia that
experts admit as possibilities, even under the most favourable
assumption that the British Navy will be able to secure and retain
the absolute control of the sea. I now propose to allude briefly to
my authorities, that their status and the official nature of their
views may be incontestable. They commence with Sir William
Jervois, who in 1877 considered that the enemy
“ might, no doubt, despatch one or more cruisers to operate against our
maritime commerce or make a descent upon any of our Colonial pos-
sessions ; and the Australian Colonies, owing to their wealth and
prosperity, would, if undefended at certain points, be tempting objects
of attack. A squadron intended for such an operation might consist of
some three or four vessels. Eluding our cruisers and appearing suddenly
before Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, or in Moreton Bay, it might capture
the merchant vessels lying in the harbours, intercept any of the numerous
vessels conveying valuable shipments of gold, or, under threat of bom-
bardment or after actually firing into one of the large towns, demand and
obtain a payment of many millions of money.”
Sir "William is followed by Sir Peter Scratchley, who in 1876 had
been appointed by Lord Carnarvon to act as joint adviser to the
Australian Governments upon the best means of defending the
Colonies. He had had some previous experience of the Colonial
defence question from 1860-63, during which time he had devised
a system of defence for Victoria, and was therefore specially
qualified for the appointment. He considered that the Australasian
Colonies were exposed to attacks from one or more cruisers, as a
maximum a squadron of four, which, eluding the British cruisers,
might capture merchant ships in harbour, demand from our
capitals payment of many millions of money under threat of
bombardment, secure supplies of coal, blockade the entrance to
ports, and intercept ships conveying gold and Colonial or British
merchandise.


Admiral Wilson, while doubting whether it was probable that a
squadron of frigates could evade the fleet and make a raid on
Australian coasts, though it was of course possible, admitted that
the class of vessels to be expected in time of war, and which the
Colonies should be prepared to meet, are armed merchant vessels
possessing great speed and coal capacity; such vessels might do
immeasurable damage to shipping, and could easily evade our
cruisers, while from their coal capacity they might be fitted out at
remote ports and pass unobserved, disguised as traders, over half
the world.
Sir Frederick Weld also, when Governor of Tasmania, speaking
at Launceston in the same strain, alluded to Paul Jones, and to
the damage done by the Alabama to the commerce of the Northern
States before she was captured, though several vessels were solely
occupied in her pursuit.
In 1889 Major-General Sir Bevan Edwards reported officially to
the Governments of the Australian Colonies on the organisation of
their forces. In April 1891 he addressed an audience in this room,
and was emphatic on the same points. He said:
“ If we are found WITHOUT a decided naval superiority we shall again
see attacks made upon our stations and bases in all parts of the world.
If we HAD this undoubted superiority the Australian Colonies need only
be prepared to resist the attacks of stray cruisers which would make a
raid upon stations where coal is to be had, or to extract a ransom from
some of the towns on the coast by threat of bombardment. The large
ocean steamers, which all maritime nations now possess, would, under
such circumstances, make a descent upon the distant shores of Australia
not an impossible undertaking. You may say that this is not probable,
but still it would be an unpardonable risk not to make a provision against
such a contingency.”
So speaks the Imperial officer with experience gained upon the
spot; yet to-day we find this very course of action jeered at by a
service paper as “ parochial defence,” “a fallacious doctrine of the
local press ” which Admirals and Governors should expose!
In 1896 we have Sir George Clarke addressing an audience in
this room as follows :
“ Small expeditions directed, not to effect territorial conquests but to
destroy national resources, may, nevertheless, as in the past, evade a
superior navy. Such expeditions are of the nature of raids. Wherever
national resources necessary for purpose of war are accumulated local
means of resistance against a raid are needed. AVherever valuable
property easily accessible from the sea is gathered together local pro-
a 3


tection may be desirable. Thus is justified the fortification of certain
harbours by a Power which depends for existence on naval supremacy.
Local protection in this case is evidently a measure of insurance which
each Colony is bound to take into consideration.
These views of Sir George Clarke’s are the more valuable on
account of the palpably grudging manner in which their author
finds himself compelled by the force of logic to admit the necessity
for local defence, while urging throughout his whole address that
the navy is the “real defensive force” and “prime condition of
security,” and Sir George is now the Governor of Victoria—one
of the Governors, in fact, on whom the “ Army and Navy Gazette
relies to counteract the “heresy” and “short-sighted craze for
local defences.”
Passing on to 1901, I reach what may be considered the most
official expert and up-to-date opinion that is at my disposal—
namely, that of the Colonial Defence Committee of (Treat Britain.
In their excellent letter of advice, dated March 30 of that year,
after premising that the maintenance of British supremacy at sea
is the first condition for the security of Australian territory am
trade in war, and that the Admiralty have accepted the responsi-
bility for protecting all British territory abroad against organised
attack by sea, they go on to recognise that, while His Majesty’s,
ships are engaged in destroying or disabling the enemy s squadrons,
they may not always be in a position to prevent raids by hostile
cruisers, their objects being to destroy shipping or other accessible
proper-y of value, especially naval and mercantile marine resources,
such as docks, repairing shops, storehouses, jetties, cranes, and
coaling appliances; to seize coal or stores which might be urgently
required; to levy a money contribution ; or even merely to create
alarm and obtain the prestige which might appear to attach to an
operation of no real military importance whatever The destruction
of the shore ends of ocean cables is another possible object for the
attack of a hostile cruiser. The action of fast cruisers or armed
merchant auxiliaries against Australian trade on the high seas
constitutes a far greater danger than attacks upon Australian
ports as it involves much less risk to the enemy, and can be made
to return no less profit, while, except indirectly at mercantile
strategic harbours near points of convergence of ocean routes no
protection can be afforded against it by expenditure on land
defences. .... . .
Here we have a candid admission of the special risk against
which Australia desires to insure—namely, the danger to British


commerce at points where ocean routes converge—and an equally
candid admission of the impotency of land defences to meet that
risk; yet our Imperial critics would deny our right to supplement
those ineffective land defences with an effective naval force, because,
forsooth, “ the sea is one, and the British navy therefore must be
one.” So, to clothe a catchy phrase with some semblance of reality,
they would debar Australia from doing for herself what expert after
expert has admitted the British navy cannot undertake to do for her.
There only remains one last authority. In 1902, in a report
dated April 7, Sir Edward Hutton repeats in short the views I have
already quoted, and so brings the subject up to date. I fear the
recapitulation of these expert opinions may have been tedious, but
it is essential that I should thoroughly convince you, as an incon-
testable fact, that, even under the best of conceivable circumstances,
Australia in time of war will be subject to raids. I hope I‘have
succeeded, and that if anyone gets up later on and says that for
his part he considers the risk from raids is exaggerated, and speaks
with fluency of the incapacity of raiding vessels to carry coal and
ammunition, or the distance of an enemy’s base of operations, you
will bear in mind that the highest authorities to which reference
can be made have considered all these points and many others, but
are still of the contrary opinion.
Locae Defence Enjoined.
My next step will be to show that these same authorities have'
consistently instructed Australia that it is her duty to provide for
her local defence and to prepare in time of peace to repulse the-
raids which she has to expect in time of war. Her original
advisers in these matters were, as I have already explained, Sir
William Jervois and Sir Peter Scratchley, between 1877 and 1888,
As a result of their reports, the forts at present existing in the
Eastern States were erected and military forces were organised*
It is unnecessary, therefore, to quote these authorities to show that
Australia’s responsibility for local defence was thoroughly impressed
on the various States; the defence works, erected at great expense,
are standing evidence. In 1882 these defences formed the subject
of a report by a Royal Commission sitting in London under the
chairmanship of Lord Carnarvon, from which I extract the
following ;
“ The general principle upon which Sir W. D. Jervois based his plan
of the defences of the Australian Colonies has been clearly stated by
A.- 4


ki m __ v iz. ‘ that whilst the Imperial Navy undertakes the protection of
the British Mercantile Marine generally, and of the highways of commu-
nication between the several parts of the Empire, the Australian
Colonies themselves provide, at their own cost, the local forces, forts,
batteries, and other appliances requisite for the protection of their prin-
cipal ports. Each harbour so protected will become a focus of refuge and
action when required for British men-of-war, and at the same time will
be secured against the attack of such cruisers as may not have been in-
tercepted by Her Majesty’s ships.’
“We think this principle is upon the whole sound, and that the above
statement fairly represents at the present time the relative position and
duties of the Imperial and Colonial Governments.”
In 1889 we have Sir Bevan Edwards making a general inspec-
tion and report on the defences of all the States, and calling
attention to the defenceless condition of Western Australia, Port
Darwin, and Tasmania.
“If an enemy” (he writes) “was established in either Western
Australia or at Port Darwin you would be powerless to act against him.
Their isolation is therefore a menace to the rest of Australia. The
position of Tasmania is still more dangerous, situated as it is within
3 days steaming of Adelaide, 1 from Melbourne, 2£ from Sydney, and
4 from New Zealand.”
In 1890 and 1895 we have reports from the Colonial Defence
Committee commenting on and revising the Australian scheme of
defence, and in 1897 their general views were laid before the
Premiers’ Conference in London. Local defence is throughout
recognised as Australia’s duty ; nor do we find the position changed,
or the official recommendations less emphatic, when we turn to the
Colonial Defence Committee’s memorandum of 1901, or the report
of Sir Edward Hutton in 1902. We find the Committee advocating
a -well-organised military force, armed with long-range weapons,
using smokeless powder ; fixed defences consisting of shore batteries
and submarine-mine fields —the former to deter the enemy’s vessels
from approaching within the range at which his fire would be
effective at such objects as docks, naval stores, or shipping, which
might easily be destroyed, as they explicitly point out, with a small
expenditure of ammunition by hostile cruisers. Above all, they
emphasise the necessity for efficiency, and, in conclusion, they urge
that “ the defence requirements of Australia are not satisfied by the
provision of troops and woiks for the passive defence of the centres
of strategic and commercial importance: each colony should also
provide an adequate fiield force which should be capable of taking


effective action against a hostile force attempting to occupy any
undefended portion of the coast line.
Turning to Sir Edward Hutton’s report, we find the
following :
“ Australia must be prepared not only to protect the naval base of '
Sydney and to make secure the important strategical positions at King
George’s Sound and Thursday Island, so as to enable the navy to have
all that it needs for free action at sea, but the great trade centres also,
such as Sydney, Melbourne, &c.,must further be rendered secure. . . . It is
necessary to deny access to all cities, towns, and harbours of commercial
importance, and to make it impossible for a hostile expedition to establish
itself upon Australian soil. To this end careful arrangements must be j
made to concentrate on any threatened point as many available field
troops as circumstances may render necessary. It is hoped that the con-
templated extension of railway communication between South Australia
and West Australia may be accomplished at an early dale, as without
such extension West Australia is always liable to isolation in time of
war.”
Due notice should be taken here of the importance always
attributed to means of railway communication in any scheme of
defence, and especially to the urgent necessity for connecting
Western Australia with the Eastern States. The construction of this
strategic line was strongly urged by Sir Bevan Edwards in 1889,
and the belief that its construction would follow immediately on
Federation largely influenced the heavy vote given in Western
Australia in favour of the Union.
The keynote of Sir Edward Hutton’s report may be said to be the
paramount necessity that the defence system, whether on a large
or small scale, should be thoroughly efficient.
We are now, therefore, face to face with this fact that from 1877
to the present date the necessity for efficient local defence has
been year after year impressed upon the people of Australia, not by
the “Man in the Street,” not by “brilliant Colonial editors,” and
not by mere politicians, as various Service papers have suggested,
but by the best informed and most highly qualified experts available
in the British Empire.
There is, however, a class of critic whose objections I must still
be prepared to meet, and I will deal with them now the man who,
with some slight and superficial knowledge of the question, derived
often from magazine articles, takes hold of a few sentences of a
single writer and builds on them a theory of up-to-date defence :
to such a man the counsels of the paid advisers of the Empire are


as naught compared with the theories he builds for himself on the
ill-digested and misconstrued writings of his favourite author.
This happens particularly to be the case with the works of
Captain A. T. Mahan, an undoubted authority, and a brilliant writer
on naval defence. He has written, it appears, that Australia should
frame its scheme of defence on sound lines by “recognising that
local safety is not always best found in local precaution ” ; that
“ victory must be sought by offensive measures, and by them only
can be insured ” ; and that “ it is hard to silence the clamour for a
simple local security, which is apparent, but not real.”
On sentences such as these our critic forms a theory of defence
for Australia entirely his own, and would have us consider local
defence a thing of the Dark Ages. I propose, however, to quote
his favourite authority in justification of the British expert, and
because Captain Mahan, in dealing with the question in general
terms, has specifically described a position that coincides with the
one Australia wishes to take up. He writes :
“ Every w r ar has two aspects, the defensive and the offensive. ... A sound
defensive scheme is the foundation upon which war rests ; but who lays a
foundation without intending a superstructure ? The offensive element
in warfare is the superstructure, the end and aim for which the defensive
exists. .. . Offence, therefore, dominates, but it does not exclude. The
necessity for defence remains obligatory, though subordinate 1 ; the two are
complementary. It is evident, also, that offensive action depends for
energy upon the security of the several places whence its resources are
drawn. These are appropriately called ‘ bases,’ for they are the founda-
tions, severed from w’hich vigour yields to paralysis. Still more imme-
diately disastrous would be the capture or destruction of the base itself.
It must be secured at all hazards.”
Here, then, we find, in language on which it would be impossible
to improve, a clear definition of the part Australia should take in
the scheme of Imperial defence. It is hers to provide for the
“foundation” in the Pacific, for the security of the “base.” It
is for Great Britain to provide the superstructure—provision for
offensive action on the high seas. By thoroughly providing for
the security of the foundation, Australia will comply with all
reasonable existing obligations to assist in Imperial defence, filling
a separate and subordinate position, while the British Navy will
provide for the complementary but equally separate necessity for
offence. To use Captain Mahan’s words ; “ She can supply a very
important factor that will go far to fortify the whole British position
in the Ragf.”


So much for our critic. I leave him now to reconcile as best he
may Captain Mahan’s views as to the absolute disaster that would
attend the capture or destruction of a “base,” the safety of which
must “ at all hazards ” be secured.
My object in making these references has been to satisfy you
that the question of local defence, as complementary to Imperial
defence, has always been considered by Australia’s professional
advisers a subject of paramount importance; and having reached
this stage, I at last find myself in a position to touch on local
naval defence, and to consider whether any scheme of defence can
be efficient which does not provide for a squadron of effective
seagoing cruisers working in Australian waters.
To Protect Floating Trade.
Reverting once again to our expert advisers, and in particular to
Sir William Jervois, we find that in 1879 no doubt was entertained
as to the necessity for supplementing the local land defences with
an Australian naval force. Sir William had strongly urged the
New South Wales Government to purchase an ironclad ship, partly
for the protection of local commerce and the minor harbours along
the coast, and partly with the object of securing Sydney from
bombardment from a ship lying outside the harbour defences ; and
proposed that she should be manned by a small permanent naval
force, supplemented in time of war by men drawn from the
Volunteer Naval Brigade. In 1877 a resolution was adopted m
Parliament directing the Government to arrange for obtaining and
maintaining at the cost of the Colony an ironclad for local defence.
However, nothing further was done in the matter, and in 1879
Sir William again drew attention to the necessity for the provision
of local defence by naval means.
Victoria, under similar advice, had acquired the “Cerberus m
1866, and organised a permanent naval force of 217, a full
complement for the “Cerberus,” with a naval brigade of 227 m
reserve.
To South Australia Sir William recommended the provision of
a powerful ship of war to supplement two batteries for heavy
guns on shore. This Colony has a seaboard of 1,500 miles, and
Sir William proposed that its defence should be provided by naval
means. He wrote ; “ The main defence of Adelaide and its port,
as well as of the coast and commerce of the Colony generally, must
be a vessel of war,”


Queensland was advised to procure for the general defence of
the coast a swift steamer carrying two 64-pounder guns ; and
smaller torpedo-boats and gun-vessels for her rivers and harbours,
and so on. It was made amply clear to the Colonies that these
vessels would be all they had to look to for the defence of the
floating trade in Australian waters during time of war ; and par-
ticularly that the ieal defence of Australia as part of the Empire
would be effected by the action of the British fleet in the China
Seas, the Eed Sea, or at the Cape of Good Hope.
The most modern theories of naval defence were therefore fully
recognised at that dae, and the Australian Colonies were advised
to secure fleets of their own, with a complete recognition of the
same conditions as those that prevail to-day.
Commodore Wilson, at that time in command on the Australian
station, went farther still, and recommended the Victorian Govern-
ment to provide two squadrons—one of four armed merchant
auxiliaries to operate along the coast for the protection of floating
trade, and the other of six gunboats to protect Port Phillip.
The views held by Sir William Jervois were repeated, for the
most part, by Sir Peter Scratchley in 1881. He reported more fully
on Western Australia, and urged that no scheme of defence for
that State could be considered complete that did not include
auxiliary Colonial naval defences. In general terms he urged that
any vessels bought should possess sea-going qualities to act on the
offensive and pursue hostile ships along the coast; and he laid
particular stress on the importance of their being armed with the
most modern guns capable of piercing the armour of any ironclad
then afloat. The result of these reports was that the Eastern
Colonies for the first time thoroughly realised wbat their position
would be in time of war, and that the British fleet could not be
expected to protect their coast-line and floating trade from chance
raids.
They also had before them proposals that each Colony should
organise and maintain separate vessels of war; but it was felt that
this would be an inartistic method of dealing with the question,
and, in view of the possibility of arranging for some joint action in
the matter, a Military Conference was held at Sydney in 1881,
which, however, only resulted in a resolution that, while land
defences were the special charge of the Colonies, naval defence
should continue to be the exclusive charge of the British Govern-
ment, who were, moreover, called on to strengthen the British fleet
in Australian waters forthwith. This resolution failed to receive a


favourable reception, and the matter was allowed to rest until 1885,
when a most important development took place.
The Admiralty in September of that year instructed Admiral
Tryon to put forward on their behalf a proposal that the Australian
Colonies should purchase a fleet of their own, the object being “ to
provide efficient protection to the large floating trade in Australasian
waters ’’—these being their very words. They suggested that the
squadron should consist of five “ Archers ” and two torpedo-boats,
the officers and crews to be provided from the British Navy and to
be changed every three years, the control to be entirely in the
hands of the naval commander-in-chief on the station, every
expense to be defrayed by the Colonies, and at the end of ten years
the vessels were to become their absolute property. Meanwhile
no reduction of the British fleet on the station should take place.
In a memorandum which he furnished in support of the
Admiralty proposal, Admiral Tryon expatiated on the damaging and
lasting effect of the destruction of commerce afloat by enemy’s
cruisers. He alludes to the “ Archers ” as cruiser-catchers, and
emphasises the point that they would form an Australian fleet, “ a
naval sea going force localised to the Australian seas, a force
additional both as to personnel and materiel to the fleet of the
Empire as voted by the Parliament in London.” A majority of
the Premiers of the various Colonies concerned, feeling that
difficulties would arise at the end of ten years if seven States,
including New Zealand, had to divide five cruisers and two torpedo-
boats equally and amicably amongst them, suggested that an
annual payment of 5 per cent, on the cost of the squadron ought to
satisfy the Admiralty, and that at the expiration of the agreement
the vessels should remain the property of Great Britain. Further
discussion ensued, and finally, with that amendment and a few
other minor alterations, the Colonies agreed to accept the Admiralty
scheme in 1887. „
The original Admiralty proposal had been five “ Archers,
steaming seventeen knots, 1,680 tons displacement, 225 feet in length,
8,500 1.H.P., armed with six 6-inch B.L.R. guns; and Admiral
Tryon had laid special stress on the value of these guns. A 5-inch gun,
he stated, would not be of sufficient power. The vessels contracted
for were to be of an improved type— eighteen knots full speed,
and with the same aimament; as supplied they can do 16| knots,
1 Article V. Notwithstanding the establishment of this joint naval force,
no reduction is to take place in the normal strength of His Majesty’s naval
force employed on the Australian station, exclusive of surveying vessels.


are 2,575 tons displacement, and 265 feet in length. No 6-inch
quick-firing guns were supplied, and on Admiral Tryon’s own
admission their armament has from the very first never been
efficient; they each carry eight 4'7-inch guns. The agreement
entered into in 1887 is still in force, and the “ squadron for the
protection of floating trade in Australasian waters,” to give it its
full official title, still consists of the five “ Archers ” and two
torpedo-boats.
It is interesting after the lapse of fifteen years to study the
motives and hopes of the high contracting parties. The Admiralty
undoubtedly at that time anticipated and desired the gradual
formation of an Australian navy as a necessary complement to
any scheme of local defence. For ten years the process of education
was to be carried on under the Admiralty aegis, and at the end of
that period the fleet, as constituted, was to be handed over to the
Colonies. The Admiralty wished to feel that if the main forces of
the country were not successful in limiting the area of mischief,
the Colonies would be well able, at any rate for a time, to take care
of themselves, so Admiral Tryon told them in his memorandum ;or
as Sir Henry Holland told the Premiers in 1887 —-
“ The Imperial Government has now given this undertaking (that the
Australasian squadron should always remain in Australasian waters), and
we consider that the mere knowledge of this fact will definitely reduce
the risks of attempted aggression in Australasian waters.”
The Colonies, on the other hand, saw difficulties in two direc-
tions, both arising from the want of Australian Federation. In the
first place, they could raise no collective fund to purchase their
fleet, their credits being separate ; and in the second place, a diffi-
culty would arise in dividing the squadron after the ten years had
elapsed ; they, therefore, as has been seen, suggested the payment
of a yearly amount sufficient to cover interest and sinking fund. A
further reason given for this course, and an eminently practical
one, was that improvements in naval construction, armour, and
guns might render it desirable that the type of vessel employed
should be changed from time to time. No change has, however,
been made in our five cruisers ; never from the first efficiently
armed, they are to-day, to quote Sir Edward Hutton on inefficient
armaments, a “ mischievous delusion ” ; they are both useless and
delusive, giving an appearance and feeling of security that is not
justified.
For years it has been recognised officially that they are structur-


ally quite unsuited to the work for which they were designed;
deficient in length, they are quite unable to make anything like
eighteen knots in a head sea, and are, therefore, useless for com-
merce protection. This, however, is no question of a vessel
becoming obsolete—they were unsuitable from the day they came
out; and in spite of any reasonable expectation to the contrary,
they have been retained on the station, though the Admiralty have
been fully aware of their defects. Each Colony naturally expected
to receive frequent visits from the ships of their own squadron , it
was believed that the maritime spirit, on the cultivation of which
Lord Selborne laid so much stress in 1902, would be appreciably
excited by the frequent presence in the ports of each Colony of the
vessels of war for which they paid ; every grade of society would
vie in entertaining the men on whose courage they had to rely for
the direct protection of their floating trade in time of war, and a
keen interest would consequently be felt in local naval affairs.
These expectations have, however, never been realised. Sydney,
the headquarters of the British fleet, has almost monopolised the
Australian squadron ; fleeting visits have been paid to New
Zealand, Victoria, and South Australia; Tasmania has benefited
by their presence when the dancing season was on and the heat of
the Australian summer sun rendered Sydney Harbour undesirable;
but Western Australia has rarely, if ever, been honoured with a
visit. The blighting influence of direct Admiralty control on local
aspirations is beyond dispute, and its clearest evidence can be
found in the fact that in New South Wales alone of all the States,
though provided with one of the most magnificent harbours in the
world, with a population crazy on yachting and boating, and with
the headquarters of both British and Australian squadrons, the local
naval forces have been pronounced a farce. I quote from Sir Villiara
Lyne, till recently Premier of New South Vales, and now federal
Minister for Home Affairs, who, speaking of the naval brigade of
his own State in Parliament, said as follows :
« I do not know whether the members of these forces were ever on the
water ; there is certainly no provision for a ship. It is ridiculous to have
so-called Naval Volunteer Artillery and Naval Brigades which are
practically land forces,”
And so on. Could one find a more striking commentary on the
present position, or a greater justification for Australia s dissatis-
faction at the result of her annual expenditure of X 106,000 ?


£1,878,000 spent to date (1902) and not a single trained Australian
sailor in return !
The Australian squadron for protecting floating trade being in
this condition, the Conference of Premiers was held in 1902. Several
incidents upon which I need not touch had occurred to make the
question of naval defence a prominent subject for discussion, but
the influences at work with those concerned were entirely in
conflict. I deal, of course, solely with Australia and the British
Government. On the one hatid, w r e have the Australian elector
intensely dissatisfied with the inadequate result of his twelve years’
expenditure, and with the knowledge that year by year he was pay-
ing a premium of £106,000 on a policy which was to all intents
and purposes a valueless one. An annual premium to secure, under
a specific contract, a specific measure of trade protection which the
fleet supplied was notoriously incapable of affording, the question
of whether such methods of protecting floating trade were theoretic-
ally sound or unsound being quite outside the issue while the
contract stood. The elector was represented by the Federal Parlia-
ment, who, in its turn, sent as a delegate to the Conference Sir
Edmund Barton, their Prime Minister, not to commit Parliament
in any way, hut to consult, and thereafter to report.
On the other hand, we have the British Government, represent-
ing the British elector, and anxious to reduce that elector’s naval
burdens, frankly indifferent to the specific protection of floating
trade in Australian waters, and solely concerned to secure an annual
subsidy from Australia in reduction of the cost of the British Navy,
some £31,000,000.
I do not propose to discuss the general principle involved—that
would require a paper to itself; but I will explain the method by
which it was hoped that the object in view would be attained,
while Australia’s loss of her squadron for the specific protection of
floating trade in Australian waters was obscured by applying the
title of “ The Improved Australasian Squadron” to the section of
the British fleet stationed at Sydney,
I have so far only casually alluded to this section of the British
fleet, I must now explain that it consists of one first-class cruiser,
the “Royal Arthur,” unarmoured, but furnished with a protective
deck of from 1-inch to 5-inch steel; three third-class cruisers; two
gunboats ; and a sloop ; and is, I believe, quite as incapable of co-
operating effectively either for offence or defence with other sections
of the British fleet in Chinese or Indian waters as the Australian
squadron is for trade protection.


For instance, the “ Royal Arthur ” has but one 9‘2-inch gun ; the
bulk of her armament and that of her consorts consists of 6-inch
quick-firing guns of, I am told, an old mark and low penetrative,
power. One Russian cruiser, the “ Gromoboi,” lately on the
Australian coast, could have sunk the lot almost with impunity,
being protected with a belt of 6-inch Harveyed steel and armed
with four 8-inch quick-firing guns behind the same armour.
Recent additions to the strength of the Russian and French
fleets in Eastern waters have, it appears, rendered it essential that
the British fleet in those waters should be considerably reinforced,
if any semblance of supremacy is to be maintained. Moreover,
Mons. Lanessan, late Minister of Marine in France, just before
resigning office, reorganised the French fleet in Eastern waters
into two powerful squadrons, each consisting of one swift first-class
armoured cruiser and five protected cruisers, to operate between
three fortified bases—namely, Noumea, in New Caledonia, off the
coast of Australia ; Saigon, in Cochin-China ; and Diego Suarez, in
Madagascar ; against either of these squadrons the present British
fleet at Sydney would, of course, be helpless, and the proposals of the
British Government therefore took the shape of requesting Australia
to provide for the maintenance of an efficient British squadron for
offensive purposes in any waters, under the semblance of incieasing
the annual subsidy of £106,000 to £200,000. The fact that the
present payment provides for an entirely different service was care-
fully kept in the background ; in general terms, any retention of
the fleet in Australasian waters for the defence of floating trade
was deprecated, and the important clause providing that no reduc-
tion should take in the strength of the separate British
squadron was entirely omitted.
The Government proposal meant, in fact, not only a complete
reversal of all the principles of defence which Australia for many
years past had had impressed on her officially ; not only an
abandonment of a class of defence for which she was still willing
to pay, and possibly at an increased rate for increased efficiency—
but actually initiated an entirely new burden to be undertaken, and
an entirely new political principle to be accepted. Australia then
is face to face with the fact that her delegate has apparently
failed to appreciate the full bearing of the British proposals ; while
her Minister of Defence has, in a memorandum laid before the
Conference, disclosed some confusion of ideas on the subject in
general; an apparent want of acquaintance with the data I have
placed before you to-night, and an obvious desire to place the


question of an Australian-owned squadron in as disadvantageous
a light as possible. I make this latter observation advisedly, as,
while Sir John Forrest, seeking, in March 1902, to prove that an
Australian-owned squadron is impossible, quoted in extenso Sir
Lewis Beaumont’s memorandum of July 16, 1901, which deals
solely with the additions that ought to be made to the British
fleet at Sydney for offensive warfare in any part of the world, and
based his arguments on a force far in excess of any local require-
ments for protecting floating trade, he omitted all reference to
Captain Creswell’s official report, laid on the table of the House in
February 1902 —a most able treatise, setting out all the arguments
in favour of an Australian naval force.
Now a curious point arises right here in connection with Sir
Lewis Beaumont s report. That gentleman considered that the
British fleet in Australasian waters, to be efficient, should consist
of the following ships in commission: Two first-class cruisers,
8,000 tons each ; four second-class cruisers, “ Highflyer ” type ; and
in reserve two second-class cruisers, same type. The Admiralty,
however, in their first proposal reduced the effective strength of
the squadron materially, as follows ; In commission, three second-
class cruisers, 5,600 tons ; in reserve, two second-class cruisers,
5,600 tons ; and based their claim for subsidy on the maintenance
of that force, together with a naval reserve of 1,100 seamen and
400 stokers. The squadron they now propose to supply for the
£200,000 subsidy consists of one first-class armoured cruiser, two
second-class cruisers, four third-class cruisers, and four sloops, of
which three (undefined) are to be half-manned and one held in
reserve. The question then directly arises, Can this be considered
an efficient British fleet in Australasian waters ? Apparently Sir
Lewis Beaumont would say that it was not.
A thoroughly illogical position is developed by the attempt to
make it appear that the proposed £200,000 subsidy to the British
fleet is simply an increase or improvement in the terms of the
existing Australasian naval agreement. To do this it was necessary
to allocate the new payment to the support of a specific group of
vessels, and an absolutely wrong principle had to be introduced in
consequence—a principle which, if adopted, may lead to endless
difficulties in the future. Clearly, even those who are opposed to
subsidising the British fleet at all would agree that if it is to be
done it should be done without restriction on either side ; the
subsidy should be to the British fleet as a whole, or, as it would
then become, to the fleet of the Empire, and the responsibility for


efficiency would lie with the Admiralty. General naval defence on
the basis advocated by Lord Selhorne in address to the
Premiers’ Conference cannot in fact be ladled out in spoonfuls at so
much the £I,OOO subsidy !
Australia’s Choice.
Australia has now to choose between three alternative courses,
one of which is at present inadmissible ; the choice will he between
the other two.
The Admiralty scheme is impossible because it abandons all
thought of local protection to floating trade. Your experts will
immediately reply, as they have already done in the Press, that
floating trade must care for itself, that losses must occur, and that
trade will find its general protection in the great victories of con-
centrated squadrons, concluding with a sneer or two at my
parochial theories of defence, and at the ships I would tie to the
coast. But what do you propose for yourselves in England ? Why,
the very thing we advocate for our Australian trade, only you do it
on a larger scale. Where we talk of our five or six cruisers for
local trade protection, you have your Channel Fleet, your Home
fleet, your cruisers, “ to work within a sixty-mile radius from the
Lizard and the Smalls, keeping the water within the circumference
of the circle free of the enemy and safe for the lines of ocean
traffic that there converge towards the English, Bristol, and Irish
Channels,” and actually your vessels in reserve for coast defence.
{Vide “ Brassey’s Annual,” 1902.)
Does anyone suppose that a Government would be tolerated
for an instant in Great Britain that avowed its intention to send
the entire fleet on an offensive expedition against a foreign port,
leaving the British coast and commerce in-the Channel unprotected
except by fortifications? and if local naval defence is desirable at
Home and for the Mother Country, why should it be condemned
when Australia is concerned ? Take, again, the example of France,
and its proposals for the defence of Cochin China. M. Lanessan’s
scheme provides armoured ships specially designed for the protec-
tion of its rivers and coasts, and in addition for torpedo-boats and
gunboats, in order that the actions of the offensive squadron may
be absolutely free and its base as secure as possible. If this is
desirable for the Cochin China coast, why not for the Australian ?
It must be remembered, too, that M. Lanessan’s programme is
based on all that is most modern in theoretical naval defence, the


very school of which Captain Mahan is the apostle. Why, what
does Caplain Mahan himself say cn the question ? He writes as
follows :
“ San Francisco and Puget Sound, owing to the width and great depth of
the entrances, cannot be effectively protected by torpedoes, and, conse-
quently, as fleets can always pass batteries through an unobstructed
channel, they cannot obtain perfect security by means of fortifications
only. Valuable as such works will be to them, they must be further
garrisoned by coast-defence ships, whose part in repelling an enemy will
be co-ordinated with that of the batteries. The sphere of action of such
ships should not be permitted to extend far beyond the port to which
they are allotted, and of whose defence they form an important part,
but within that sweep they will aways be a powerful reinforcement
to a sea going navy when the strategic conditions of the war cause hostili-
ties to centre round their port. By sacrificing power to go long distances,
the coast-defence ship gains proportionate weight of armour guns—
that is, of defensive and offensive strength. It further adds an element
of unique value to the fleet with which it for the time acts.”
Again, the late Admiral Sir Anthony Hoskins says, “ Approaches
to poits must be kept open to merchant ships by cruisers on the
offing,” and yet you tell mo that the days of ships for coastal
defence and local trade protection are gone.
Do many of you realise in the least what our position will be at
Fremantle, Albany, Cape Howe, Sydney, or Thursday Island—at all
those points, in fact, where steamer traffic is bound to converge
from every point of ocean —if we have no cruisers for coast defence ?
Let us take a case in point. Imagine war declared with France and
the British offensive fleet in Australian waters on their way to
checkmate M. Lanessan’s new eastern squadron advancing on
Singapore from Saigon to intercept our China commerce. The
Messageries Maritimes steamer lying at Noumea would in three or
four days be able to steam out of that port a fully armed auxiliary
of high speed, with ample stores of coal for, say, thirty days, ready
to intercept the P. and 0. and Orient mail steamers every week off
the Leeuwin, and the Commonwealth would be helpless to resent the
insult or protect its commerce within sight of shore for want of a
local fleet! The same course would be taken with the next Mes-
sageries boat, and for weeks the coast of Australia would be at the
mercy of the enemy, who would keep carefully out of the range of
our fortress guns, and would also probably lift and cut our tele-
graphic-cable lines. All this may be taken as forming part of
M. Lanessan’s scheme, and is not altogether a fancy picture. Ample


provision exists, I believe, at Noumea for putting it into practice,
and as far as I know no provision of any sort exists for arming
P. and 0. or Orient liners in the same way at Sydney.
Or, again, we have Captain Creswell’s illustration; “ The
spectacle of some 5,000,000 Anglo-Australians, with an army
splendidly equipped, unable to prevent the burning of a cargo of
wool in sight of Sydney Heads is only the ordinary consequence of
a policy of naval impotence.” Why should you in England
suppose that we in Australia are less sensitive on these matters
than you are yourselves ? Your own feelings are clearly expressed
by Mr. Herbert W. Wilson, a member of the Executive Committee
of the Navy League and Editor of their Journal.” I find in
their new handbook dated December 2, 1902, the following under
his name, being an extract from the report of the Committee on
Naval Manoeuvres :
“ There should always be an effective reserve squadron, ABSO-
LUTELY CONFINED TO HOME WATERS, sufficient to hold
the Channel and protect the coasts and commerce of the United
Kingdom, in addition to the coast-defence ships which would be
required for active local defence.” Mr. Wilson comments on this
paragraph as follows : “ The experience of the Spanish-American
War has shown that public opinion will always clamour for a home
squadron. We had a squadron in the Channel all through the
Trafalgar campaign ; ” and further on he urges “the provision of
a North Sea fleet ALWAYS CRUISING IN BRITISH W ATERS.
For like reasons we in Australia must also have our local fleet in
local waters. It seems to me a matter of such palpable necessity
that it is difficult to realise how anyone who gave the subject the
least consideration could doubt it.
The choice, then, lies between a subsidised British squadron under
Admiralty control, but confined to Australian waters, or an
Australian squadron manned by Australians and under Australian
control.
It would not be difficult to give a long string of reasons that
influence Australians in deprecating a continuance of Admiralty
control, partly sentimental, partly caused by neglect in the past,
which could of course be rectified in the future, and partly due to a
conviction that the entire organisation of the Admiralty is out of
date and wants readjusting to deal with modern needs in modern
ways. To judge by the English Press of to-day, Australians
are not alone in this belief. Twelve years’ experience of the
system under which the present subsidy is spent lias satisfied us


that the result of local control could not at any rate be worse, and
might possibly be better. It will be pointed out that the Admiralty
now propose to institute a branch of the Royal Naval Reserve in
Australia for 725 men and officers, that three vessels are to be used
as drill ships, and one other vessel is to be manned as far as
possible with Australian seamen, paid at special rates. This is, no
doubt, a tardy step in the right direction, but it does not go far
enough. With the same money, as I will show directly, we might
have at least three cruisers manned by Australians, both officers
and crew, and a large naval reserve of our own, whose services
would be invaluable for manning merchant auxiliaries ; while the
Admiralty offer us one ship only, and that not necessarily even a
third-class cruiser—they might select one of the sloops.
Endless difficulties would also arise in connection with the
special rates of pay to Australian seamen in the British Navy,
especially when a ship so manned moved to other stations, as Lord
Selborne suggests and desires. Vice-Admiral C. C. P. Fitzgerald
fully endorses this view. He writes :
“ It would be subversive of all discipline, contentment and good fellow-
ship to have two sets of men doing the same work, holding the same
nominal rank, and yet receiving two totally different scales of pay on
board one of His Majesty’s ships. We could not, in justice to our own
men, permit such a thing, save, perhaps, as a very temporary expedient.”
The “ Age ” deals with this question effectively, and I tabulate
their figures:
Rate of Pay per Diem
British Australian
Able seamen from 1/7 5/- ('Vic.)
to 2/6 5/6 „
Petty officers from 2 2 6/6
to 3/3 71-
Stokers from 2/- 5/-
to 5/ 7/-
The Australian rates are those actually paid to the permanent
men in Victoria, while the highest British rates quoted are above
anything I can find in the Navy List.
It is also worth while to note the following rates in the British
Navy:
Sub-lieutenant .... per diem 5/-
Midshipman „ 1/9
Cadet 1/-
We should, therefore, have in Australia British sub lieutenants


drawing less pay than their petty officers, and midshipmen worse
off than the lowest-rated seaman.
It is probable that the Admiralty were not aware of the actual
rates of local pay when they made the suggestion.
I do not intend, however, to embark on a general denunciation
of the Admiralty ; I will only say that in Australia skill in marks-
manship is considered far above all things else of vital importance
in war, and I gather from English newspapers that under the
Admiralty naval gunnery and marksmanship meet with no
encouragement; our flagship on the Australian station, the “ Royal
Arthur,” being singled out with one or two others for specially
unfavourable comment. Mr. Arnold White may here be quoted
from the “ National Review ” of February, 1903 :
“ One of the principal reasons why gunnery is defective in the navy is
the senseless adherence to obsolete and futile regulations and routine. It
is not too much to say that it is impossible for a ship under existing con-
ditions to attain gunnery efficiency if the Admiralty regulations are
literally obeyed ! ”
“ No one outside the service has any idea how hidebound the regula-
tions are.”
Such a condition of affairs would not be possible for long under
Federal control. Public opinion and the Press can never be ignored
by an Australian Government, and such a custom as throwing
ammunition overboard sooner than use it at practice —a fact that
Mr. White has substantiated before an arbitrator —would have led
to the instant dismissal of all concerned.
The arguments used by those who are opposed to the idea of an
Australian-owned squadron under Australian control may be sum-
marised as follows :
1. That an Australian navy adequate to defend the coast-line
would be out of all proportion to the number and means of the
people of Australia.
This contention is based on a misconception of the duties to be
performed by ships intended solely for the protection of floating
trade, and also on an exaggerated idea of the class of vessel required
for the purpose.
2. That it would take time to create such a navy.
The answer to this is that two years from the end of j 903 must
elapse before the existing subsidy of £106,000 can be terminated,
and that during that time much could be done by way of a start


with the £94,000 additional subsidy now proposed by the Federal
Government, and therefore I presume not beyond our means.
3. That the boats and their armament would rapidly become
obsolete.
The case of the “ Protector,” as quoted by Captain Creswell, proves
the contrary. He states that if both a vessel and her armaments
are up to date at the time of purchase they will hold their own for
many years. Changes in arms and machinery are gradual. The
“ Protector ” was built in 1884 and armed with breechloaders, and
four years later she could outrange the “ Nelson,” the flagship of the
Australian station. In 1901, seventeen years later, she is com-
mented on in China as an effective warship requiring but little to
place her in the front rank of her order.
4. That Australia has no trained men or ofticers to man her
fleet. Asa matter of fact, there is in Victoria a highly trained and
most efficient force of permanent and partly-paid men ; the “ Pro-
tector’s ” cruise to China speaks for itself; and in Queensland the
Naval Brigade is also an efficient body. These together form a
nucleus, already existing, available for manning at least a couple of
cruisers wilh an Australian crew as soon as they can be secured,
and on which an efficient body of reserves could easily be built up
sufficient for all contingencies.
5. That the creation of a Commonwealth navy would be tanta-
mount to a declaration of independence.
This is a purely English objection fathered by Mr. Arnold White
in the “ Daily Chronicle.” It tacitly underlies the views expressed
by several recent writers, and springs from an insular inability to
appreciate that the Colonies are no longer the “ King’s Planta-
tions.” It requires no comment here.
We have now to consider what should be the main qualifications
of the vessels comprised in such a fleet. They must be sea-going
vessels of sufficient tonnage to maintain a high rate of speed in
heavy seas, and their speed should, if possible, be equal to that of
the merchant auxiliaries, with whom they would have to contend ;
they must also be armed with guns of as heavy calibre as any-
thing likely to be brought against them in a foreign cruiser.
Captain Creswell sets this out most ably. He proves the prin-
ciple by comparison between a vessel of 960 tons (the “ Pro-
tector ”) and a less powerfully armed vessel of 2,500 tons (the
“Wallaroo”). He acquiesces in limiting the field of action, and
appears to suggest 3,000 tons as the tonnage of his proposed special
type of cruiser, but suggests £BOO,OOO as its cost, which is prac


tically the cost of a 5,600 ton vessel, or second-class cruiser of the
“ Highflyer ” type. Speed is an essential. Sir Edmund Fremantle
alludes to German subsidised ships that have an average speed of
235 knots, and could probably keep at sea for six weeks without
coaling, and he states that the British Navy has no cruiser that
could catch them ! This exactly describes the class of vessel we
should have to fear, and against which we should have to provide
in Australia —commerce-destroyers able to outpace any cruiser in
the British Navy.
On the question of armour, it is clear that these commerce-
destroyers would not be armoured, and, as shown already, the
enemy would, nine times out of ten, be of that class. 1 fail,
therefore, to see why protected vessels of 3,000 tons, or more,
armed with the most modern 7'5-inch or 6-inch quick-firing guns,
and costing, let us say, £150,000 each, should not be sufficient for
our needs. Such ships would require a crew of about 280 men all
told, of which a portion could be men belonging to the Naval
Brigade or partly paid force in each State.
In dealing with the annual cost of maintenance, I fortunately
have figures showing the actual cost of maintaining in commission
three ships of the present Australian Squadron during the year
1899-1900, amounting, apart from wages, to £10,500 each ship.
Wages were, of course, on the British scale, but on the Victorian
scale would work out as follows, the figures being actual payments
made in Victoria :
18 permanent staff (Yic. 1901-2) . . £4,532
110 permanent men (Vic. 1902-8) . . 10,884
152 partly paid men (Vic. 1902-8) . . 1,800
Maintenance as above (British scale) . 10,500
Interest at 5 per cent, on cost, £150,000 . 7,500
£35,216
The annual cost, therefore, of maintaining such a vessel on a
Colonial scale would be about £35,200, including interest. I have
assumed that the British Government would be satisfied to lend
cruisers to Australia on these terms, if the scheme they have put
forward falls to the ground. Their proposal is to hire out cruisers
and men to Australia; our proposal is that Australia should rent
the cruisers, and herself provide the men.
To meet this expenditure we have the proposed increased subsidy
of £94,000, with the amount provided in the 1902-3 estimates for
the naval forces in the various States —viz. £46,524, or £140,524


■0
in all; and this sum, while providing for the maintenance for three
cruisers, would leave about £34,000 available for interest on the
cost of their armament, for the payment of further naval reserves at
an average of £lO per man per annum, and for the support of
naval depots in each State. In three years time, on the expiration
by notice of the present subsidy, £106,000 would become available
for the. rental by Australia, and commission with Australian crews,
of three more cruisers hired from the British Government.
Meanwhile it would appear that under the existing agreement
we must continue to pay £106,000 a year for the services of our
present useless squadron armed'with 4-7-inch guns.
I have gone into the question of cost and finance in detail, and
have defined with some care the class of cruiser we require, because
the hostile critic, keen to throw ridicule on what he resents,
persists in suggesting that we desire to create a navy of ironclads,
and quotes Sir Lewis Beaumont’s memorandum as to the force re-
quired on the Australian station ; but Sir Lewis, I must again
repeat, does not deal with the question from the point of view of
protection to local floating trade.
The system of providing supplementary crews of partly paid men
is one that has for years been in practice in Victoria, and works
well. The “Cerberus” is manned by 115 permanent and 152
partly paid men and officers, and her crew never fail to receive
most flattering reports of efficiency.
Lord Selborne lays stress on encouraging the cultivation of a
maritime spirit. No feeling of this sort, as twelve years’ experience
has proved, can develop in Australia under the present Admiralty
regivie ; everything is centred at Sydney, the naval tone is
exclusively British, and damps rather than excites local naval
aspirations. Under Australian control each State will demand and
be accorded equal treatment in effective sea-training for its naval
forces; each State might easily take a special interest in a special
cruiser, as it is suggested will be the case in England with your
“ County ” class ; and only under Australian control will a naval
career ever come to be reckoned among the leading Australian
professions.
I shall not touch upon the sentimental arguments in favour of
an Australian Navy; of the extent to which Australians would
desire to see their money spent in providing education in naval
matters for their own sons ; nor shall I attempt to draw any com-
parison between the value to the Empire of a contribution from


Australia of trained seamen (a commodity the Empire lacks), as
against mere cash, of which it has abundance.
In conclusion, I must Express regret that the time-limit available
has made it deal with the question of a contribution
to the British Navy from its generalised and more debatable
aspect. I have confined myself closely to the Government proposal
actually before Australia, and to that only. I hope, therefore,
that the discussion will be confined to the subject I have handled,
and will not wander into the hypotheses of Imperialism.
All I have endeavoured to do to-night is to prove, and I hope
successfully, that Australia’s first duty is to provide for the absolute
security of the “ base,” and that a local fleet is as essential to such
security as forts or land forces. The question of subsidising a
British fleet of offence may well be considered hereafter, when the
defences of the base have been amply provided for, and when some
equitable proposal has been formulated by the British Government
for an Imperial control of Imperial politics.
PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODH AND CO. LTD., NEW-STREET SQUARE
LONDON








