

JOHN FLYNN
By Rev, H, S. McPheet
Address to the Presbyterian Historical
Society of New South '^lTales
c, 1965
Transcribed by the National Library of Australia
1967


Mrs* Flynn never got that far, as living in a house by
John Flynn, hut I did, so that*s one advantage I have. Twenty squares with
the great wide verandahs that are in the hush.
Now Mt. Isa began its history when Joini Camphell Miles stubbed
his toe on a rich piece of ore, back in 1923* By 1957 it had thousand
people and the Mine employed 4i thousand men. Mt. Isa had become one of
the world ranking copper mines and, of course, its future is still assured.
Geologists tell me that it has at least a hundred years lying ahead of it
and they still haven*t located all the ore bodies that are there. Its
quite a fascinating, thriving, international place, is Mt. Isa;
as hot as the Opposition could wish and yet very apathetic.
Now, I*ll say a quick few words about this, not because they
are related to Johm Flynn but because it is our starting point. I was
sent to Mt. Isa as an AIM Padre to do two thingsi first, to bring this
infant, as it was then, to maturity, and sanondly, to leave it as a
sanctioned charge in the Presbyterian Church of Queensland* Mt* Isa had
a very delicate beginning, doubtless due to its heat; there was also a
suspiciously large consumption of alcohol and because of this it hadn't
been independent. Well, that was our task I
One of the most fascinating things in Mt. Isa is ministering
to the miners. They had barracks with 1,200 single men and occasionally
I used to go down underground - the 13 levels you go down in the bowels
of the earth a couple of thousand feet and of course on the bottom you
see the mighty Underlander, this great old engine chuffing about;’
gelignite explosions at embarrassing intervals. I can still remember,
Mr. Perkins, a trip I did down there with the Moderator of .the Presbyterian
Church of Queensland, Tom Watson, I know whether:you- know him or not*
But yihen you go underground, of course, you'll be behelmeted, you'll be
gowiied and you'll be booted and down you go these endless ladders. Now,
this Moderator was a charming gentleman, very short and rotund. I, of
course, had a certain attenuated appearance and some rather classical wit
underground remarked about the peremptative vulgar fraction that was
moving around underground in the mine. Anyway, he was a nice chap, and
we amused the miners if we didn't enbrute them.
Mt. Isa of course, is divided into two parts, and is
split by the Leichhardt River, named after Ludwig Leichhardt whose bones
of course, have never yet been discovered, the German explorer who perished
out in the bush. Vance Palmer came up to Mt* Isa, the Melbourne journ-
alist, and he described this river very inelegantly for a literary man.
as a series of scummy pools. This is in the worst Shakespearian trad-
ition. The locals claim that the Leichhardt has a tremendous advantage
in that you can divert it if necessary through a 4-inch pipeline. This
makes, it quite imique among Western rivers.
One other thing before we leave Mt.; Isa, just a few sidelines
on it. We built a church there, with a copper roof made by the Mt. Isa
Mine. This generosity, of course, was matched by a sneaking'idea of
advertisement, but still they built this copper roof for us. In the
course of construction, two exigencies. One was a cyclone, or the
nearest thing to a cyclone Mt. Isa had ever had, which sent most of our
good Mt. Isa copper all over Mt. Isa, and the second thing was a bank-
ruptcy which was rather unique, I feel. Our builder went bankrupt in
no mean fashion and we discovered subsequently that the bankruptcy was
due to his following the horses at Eagle Farm with singular lack of
success. But the irony of course, was that the worthy Presbyterian
Committee of Management was doubtless riding, whether it knew it or not,
on some of those horses at Eagle Farm. They would mount up like the
Melbourne Cup favourites. Anyway, that is by the by and the Church
is built and it will be there. Some architect tells me, that it sits
like the latest thing in Polynesia, which shows we are really moving.
Mt. Isa. is independent and shall be leader with its fine new mine and
get back on the rails.


Now let's move 100 miles due east to Clonourry. Cloncurry, its
even most ardent devotee would not claim is an attractive city at this
jiincture in time. had a most picturesque past, as many of these
Queensland towns have. A thriving town way back in the early copper rush
days, today il?s very quiet. Indeed, ifs even lost its Civil Aviation
Centre, even the Flying Doctor Service is bizarre in Cloncurry. To drive
in there at mid-day on a summer's day, is to know how Dante felt when he
was sketching something of the Inferno. The most lively inhabitants, I
say this with all due charity, are frequently, the goats. But Cloncurry
for all that, tired as it looks, hot and dry as it is, has a tremendous
history, of course, as far as John Flynn was concerned in the A.I.M. Here
in 192?) he and Alf Traeger came along to have some of their early experi-
ments and Clondirry had been selected as the pioneer base of course, for
the Flying Doctor Service. For this reason alone it deserves a good
healthy chapter in Australian history. Perhaps you are aware of some of
the early experiences they had. They took the Presbyterian Church in
Cloncurry, a weatherboard building and they turned the vestry into the
base station VJI. It was opened with a mammoth crowd for Cloncurry - 300
souls mustered on a fiercely hot day for the christening of VJI and too,
the incident is fairly famous about the first pedal radio transmission
from Augustus Downs.
Visiting Augustus Downs, I was talking with the manager and he
in turn passed it on as folklore, the famous incident of the first trans-
mission. I think I have recounted it in the biography and others have
too. If you have read it let me repeat it to you. Mrs. Rorey, the wife
of the manager was entrusted with the job of transmission and of course
at this stage, this was quite a complex set up. Traeger had his pedals
to generate power and this required a certain output of energy and of
course, you also had to tap Morse Code; which reminds me of some of the
stunts that school children get up to with one hand going one way and
another hand going the other way. Anyway, she was instructed in Morse
Code and of course, how to manipulate the pedals. She sat on an onion
case, not elegant but serviceable and she transmitted the first telegram
and you may recall in the Cloncurry vestry at the base, Harry Kinzbrunner
was sitting waiting for the message at a pre-determined time. She was
terribly nervous and she turned to Traeger before the time came to trans-
mit and she said "What will I send?" and Traeger said, "Well, anything.
Hello Harry". And you can recall perhaps, the frank advice that hit
poor old Harry Kinzbrunner- "Hell - 0 Hell - 0 Hell - 0 Harry". The
exigencies of radio transmission! Augustus Downs, however, did redeem
itself and did send quite an coherent telegram and so its
got its place in history too. And so as far as the AIM are concerned
then, Cloncurry had quite a colourful beginning.
In Cloncurry, too, of course, in 1928 Dr. St. Vincent Welch
began his first, inaugural flights. These were made in a Qantas air-
plane a De Havilland 50 and in those days, I can't recall very clearly,
but perhaps some of you can, aeroplanes were box-kites with propellers
in effect and to ride was a singularly, well, apprehensive experience.
You had goggles to put on, you were strapped in, you were exposed to
the air and this made it quite a degree of excitement. As far as the
first Flying Doctor was concerned his pilot had no maps, he had no
radio and most of the airfields had little embarrassments in them.
For instance, I have spoken to some of the early pilots. You were
coming in to land and you were given endless orders to please drive
the truck flat out up and down the landing strip to make sure there was
nothing there, but the truck had broken down, someone had not driven up
and down, and you were coming in just ready for a perfect landing when
you see 3 big ant heaps in front of you or a log had been carelessly
left across the runway. This turned the landing into something more
exciting than you thought and you were lucky to come out with your
life. Well, this is the sort of pioneering experience I guess. The
pilots navigated largely by instinct, when they could see they navig-
ated by rivers and by fences and by general landmarks round the place.


You needed 400 yards to come down and take off with a DH 50 and sometimes
couldn't even manage that. But by and large they did remarkably well.
Everybody of course co-operated and Vincent Welch and Arthur Affeck his
pilot had a very successful first year. Of course it wasn't all dramatic.
This is the sad thing about the Plying Doctor. The poor fellow has been
glamourized out of all possibility of reality. But still it did have its
moments and if you read all the reports as I had to do it is quite ocas-
sionally you come upon a piece of real drama. Mostly, it wasn't
it was routine. But still it inaugurated a new era as we now
know in inland Australian history. And you can see from the shaded area
and Mrs. Flynn, I am sure could tell us a lot about how John Flynn loved
his maps and this sort of thing was his great passion and that is the
type of shading he used to use to delimit the area which would be affected
by a Flying Doctor. You can see from Cloncurry right down to Birdsville,
way up to Dunbar, way over into the Northern Territory. This man at last
could conquer distance and nothing could stop him; and this was something
brand new in Australian history.
Well, lath forget St. Vincent Welch. I went on a number of
flights from Cloncurry in a much more modem plane, a later De Havilland
with 3 motors. The pilots weren't too happy with that model. One pilot
told me the central motor was built in head wind, but I'm not an aero- ’
nautical expert and I wouldn't know, I did go with him on a number
of his clinical flights, that is to say, a three day journey dropping
down at various homesteads round about, calling in at Momington Island
and then coming right back to their main base. Every time you came down
at a station or the clinic of course all the aboriginal children are
there with their match-stick legs and running noses (I'm sorry to be so
realistic) all the women are there - anyone who is sick is there and they
get their immunizations etc. etc.
Nowadays of course, its just more or less routine. All the
homesteads or most of them have their transceivers, this of course is
an Alfred Traeger production and they handle them like telephones.
Throughout the bush today, I would imagine there are about 80 hundred
of these. Prospectors use "them, engineers use them, everybody pretty
well has his transceiver and, of course with the aid of these you can
contact any base and you can get help if you need it.
While I was in Cloncurry, I met Dr. Neil Duncan who was the
Flying Doctor of that period and I can still remember a talk we had
one night under the stars. A beautiful part of a hot western day is
the night of course, and he told me that when he left Cloncurry, he
thought he'd go and see the Duke of Edinburgh, the Moderator of the
Presbyterian Church, (l think he must have come first) and then the
Archbishon of Canterbury. And he wanted to see them because he felt
that Nigeria should'have a Flying Doctor Service. A big wild of empty
space, scattered people - why not? It was the set up. Well, it seemed
rather romantic and quite impossible sitting in Cloncurry and thinking
of a person seeing the Duke of Edinburgh, but as you may know he's done
precisely that. When he finished his term he went back to Great Britain
presumably he saw all those people. At this point in time he's in
Nigeria and the Flying Doctor Service has been inaugurated. So there
it is a reduplication of the Australian pattern and this incidentally,
is of course, a world first for Australia. We can't claim too many but
we can legitimately claim this. Before the AIM Services began there
had been instances of doctors using aeroplanes of course before, in
Texas, in United States, in other countries, that had been random
flights - mercy flights. But there had not been any organised inte-
grated broadly based service and this was Flynn's achievement. It
became something permanent, something very soundly conceived.
Well, perhaps we can leave Cloncurry. I think a lot of AIM
members have nostalgic recollections of Cloncurry, the poor little place
is just gasping these days. But it*s had its great days.
Letb move back through to Mary Kathleen which is now in moth


"balls - the uranium town. It had a shorter life expectancy than was
anticipated. VThen I was there we were told 14 years. I think it was
only 8 or 9 finally. The AIM had its hospital there hut Mary-K. is
Just waiting until uranium is wanted more desperately than it is now.
It paid off the £l4 millions spent on it and now it's waiting for the
future. Right back through Mt. Isa lets move westwards along two
main bitumen arteries of the inland, probably the two finest legacies
of the last war, first the Bark2a»s"'ghway through to Toriant Creek and
then we'll Join the Stuart Highway which goes between Barwin and Alice
Springs both fine bitumenized roads, built of course during the war,
as I said. We'll move through into the Northern Territory and come to
Tennant Creek. When I was last there it was Bill Bates' territory.
Bill Bates, possibly known to some of you. At this point in time he's
on the Melbourne, I believe, the Aircraft carrier at someplace and soon
to have £2 million spent on it. Well, Bill was looking very much
different from a Naval Padre when I saw him out here at Tennant Creek.
He patrolled all round the place. Tennant Creek Base is the ugliest
main street in the West I read somewhere and this is I am sure a
dreadful cal\imr-y« The competition is fierce. Tennant Creek is quite
a little place with peta gold mining and the AIM has its welfare club
there, things are really looking up. I think the latest AA Manse has
a lawn and this is something quite catastrophic and futuristic for
Tennant Creek. Well, we'll leave there and Join the Stuart Highway
between Alic^^Springs and Darwin - a thousand miles and the road is
kept in pretty fair repair because nowadays much transport is made by
road train. These massive road trains, you can see at very regular
intervals. The poor old drover is Just about a creature of the past
and now aeroplanes and mechanical transport are putting him out of a
Job. Well,now, as we move along this Stuart Highway I can't forbear
to mention something of this fantastic little Scotsman - McDouall Stuart.
I've read lost of stories of explorers, of various countries I still
don't think I've read the equal of the prodigy of will and sheer stamina
of this little man when he tracked down here way up to here and this is
a long, long time ago. One of the main articles of course - horseshoes.
They had to turn back several times because they ran out of them
those flat old gibber plains the horseshoes went like tissue paper.
I think it was five different times he made the attempt and finally he
succeeded. McDouall Stuart. Interestingly enough, a good Christian
man and this I suppose the supreme payment of the human species, he
was a Presbyterian Christian man. It is interesting to read in his
Journals the way Stuart, without any sense of embarrassment or diffidence
will say how he prayed. He wasn't adverse to wading his port with
Judicious cars nor was he adverse to p>raying. Incidentally, another
good Scotsman, a good Presbyterian and a good Christian was John McEonlay
after whom the little town of McKinlay is named. I was reading the
other day a story of how he carried his, as the Americans would say,
"beat up Bible" in the sense of veiy much worn, through this country
when he was looking for a capital of the Northern Territory. Before
his man lay down at night he had a prayer meeting. This probably
doesn't fit the popular image of the Australian explorer but its true.
Two good Christians, McKinlay and McDouall Stuart were explorers.
Well now, following then, the path of this intrepid little
fellow, we’ll mov6 up at many times his speed up to Tennant Creek through
Maranboy, founded in 191? a hospital was built there, through to
Katharine. When I visited Katherine, Stewart Lang was there, he's been
in a lot of places since then, and with Stewart Lang we visited the
points of interest around here. Many of them, of course, have become
famous through "We of the Never Never", Mrs. Aeneas Gunn's book. I
visited for instance the hut where Mine Host presided when Mrs. Gunn
cameout as the little Missus, I think round about 1900 to the spot
on the Katherine River where she was more or flying across the
river, I wonder if you can remember the story. The Telegraph Office
is still there - or the ruins of it and this was Just as Mrs. Gunn
had described it way, way back when she first came to the bush.
We went to a Race Meeting in Katherine. Stewart Lang was there
4


so I was in the best of company. It cost 15/- to get in. Of course
if you want to see anything in the bush you®ve just got to go to a
Race Meeting. Apart from that there are no other real social high-
lights still, in many places. Everyone goes and you get the most
glorious cross-section; and I was able to pick up a few white-haired
characters who could reminisce about the past and so that was our Race
Meeting in Katherine. We didn''t see any horses. We didn't have a bet
Stewart Lang might have, but he's got such naive face, but I am sure. ,
We left Katherine then, and up to Darwin. Darwin of course
first visited by John Flynn in 1912 was vastly different from what it
is today. Poor old Darwin is always in a state of being built and
being demolished by white ants. It’s a sort of constant agent, and of
course the Japanese helped the white ants at one point ox time in
1942. When Flynn arrived it was a pretty unlovely looking place on
a beautiful harbour - still a fine harbour although now its strewed
with some-of the wrecks that are still the. e since the Japanese
bombing occurred I think it was 92 Japanese bombers came on one fine
morning in '42.
When Flynn came it was a quite smallish town but massive by
proportionate length and he investigated round this area not the very
big extensively geographical area but sufficient to give him a lot more
clues than he already had. Now this is one of the early myths about
John Fl-mn that I think has been abolished. Earlier writers uncritic-
ally mentioned that Flynn reached Darwin in 1912 after a quite extra-
ordinary marathon camel ride right up through here. Well, actually
this of course didn't happen. He came round through Darwin by ship.
A little more convenient and a little less dramatic but that’s how
he got to Darwin. He did have a camel ride or several camel rides
mainly from Horseshoe Bend up to Alice Springs. But we won't go into
the historical details of this or we would be here until after 10.
Can we just leave Darwin then, pausing to mention that it was Flynn's
report in 1912 down here in Melbourne, in a West-Melboume Church
that I now think is the Church in Melbourne - it has been
shifted stone by stone - it was that report that launched his mission.
Well, let's move back quickly down on this bitumen highway again -
we'll pass very smartly through Batchelor, Rum Jungle, Uranium back
through Katherine dovm through Tennant Creek down to Alice Springs.
Well, in Alice Springs one's treading on much smoother soil these
days» When I was there we went out to Chasm to see the Chasm
and in this remote vastness of inland Australia we couldn't find a
parking spot. This just shows that in the inland every tourist under
the sun had come. Its lost a little, perhaps, of its strangeness but
its still a very fascinating part of the world to live in. Increasing
tourists are going there in the winter time and you can be guaranteed
a veiy, very interesting holiday indeed if you go. Well, now, what
need is there for me to elaborate on what you already know of the AIM
in Alice Springs. You've all seen pictures of the Flynn Memorial
Church, doubtless some of you have been there and put your autograph
in the book there. You know about its imique design, the imagination
that has gone in to it, the stressing of water, the symbolism, its
sort of right through the whole building. Next door of course, the
famous nursing home that John Flynn helped build in '2s> '26.
This wasn't the happiest period in his life and that's understandable.
He got his supplies by camel pack from down here at Oodnadatta and
this wasn't exactly fast which reminds me a bit of the Queensland
trains - or what they used to be. As someone said you don't only
admire the scenery, you can pick samples of it as you go. Well,
these camel trains nearly drove the builders crazy, as you can imagine.
You could wait months and months for the material and when it did come
you had a freightage charge which made the original cost look sick and
for almost 18 months, not very happy months, John Flynn, (he wasn't at
all well) he was working hard and he had a lot of worries on his mind.
But finally, the hostel was there. It was opened - a couple of the
doors weren't in place when it was opened but everyone was pretty
happy.


Ironically, some of the early citizens apparently reckoned it
was too good for the 'Centre' hut not for very long. I do believe the
two most vocal critics were the first two patients and this talked their
fangs out.
Well, Alice Springs has the Old Timers* Homes, these still
growing beautiful in the shadow of Mount Blatherskite where they have
this glorious public sensitivity out there. Well, you also find Nanny
®oat Hill - this is also another piece of Shakespearian tradition and
oohn Flynn timed this in 1913 with his camera - which, of course he was
never without and he took a very good photograph which shows Alice
Springs - or such of it as there was there, the Todd River and the white
gums there, the sand and the Macdonnell Ranges as a great amphitheatre.
A very fine photograph. Well, I climbed there and looked at Alice
Springs, from Nanny Goat Hill back in 1960.
Where can we move from here? Let's move westward to Hermams-
burg which is a Lutheran Mission Station. Flynn pushed the old Lodge
out there in 1926 with Traeger and they had half a ton of big copper-
oxide battery cell. This was always the dogeared problem - how to get •
the power to get your electricity output, but this was before Traeger
had got his bicycle pedals set up. I spoke to Pastor Albrecht who was
the Superintendent there, when Flynn went out in 1926. He reminisced
about it. You can still see the table at which Traeger sat with his
earphones on and had some of his early experiments and they'll show
you the aerial mast which you can pull up and tell you how the natives
who were fascinated by the magic, would put their ears to the aerial
mast and then in their shrewd way they'd nod strangely as they thought
they had detected a message. That's not a bad piece of psychic
phenonomen really. Another thing I was told that is very interesting
I'm sure it was Pastor Albrecht who mentioned this with a slight
Germanic smile, he was a very kindly chap but not given to a kind of
rambunctious humour. He tells me how the camels first affected the
native tribes when the first came out there. Now the Aborigine of
course is born to study nature and the Aboriginal piccanniny can read
signs in the ground where a white child would read nothing. Well,
these imprints appeared on the dusty ground - the imprint of camel
pads. They had never seen the animal - all they saw was the pad -
the strange marks. And the story goes they mustered all their wise
men to try and diagnose what it was that made these extraordinary
indentations. And the story goes that one was much shrewder than
the others finally came up with the answer. He said that a new
tribe of native iiave entered this area and this tribe was legless.
Well, now if you've ever seen a camel pad and you could imagine a
legless native then the chance that you'll understand that that was
a pretty shrewd diagnosis of what caused the camel pad.
Well, we'll move now back to Alice Springs from
and from here I went out to Arltunga. I also, to give it more space
flew from Alice up here to the Kimberleys. This stretch of
country - Track as it has gone dom in history - one of the
early gold treks where you can still stop at the grennups and see
the workings and various other spots. A character down here in
Sydney heard about the gold in the Kimberleys. He was a shrewd
fellow; he understood that you needed a lot of water when you went
'bush' so the stopy goes he left Sydney with a wheelbarrow and 2 4-
gallon dioims of water. But alack or alas, that wasn't enough and
he wasn't heard of again. But that's something of the crazy gold
fever you read about in Australian history often. I suppose you've
read these prodigies - the amazing hysteria and panic that can be
aroused with the aiscovery of a precious metal. I mean the most
ridiculous things, setting off without food or water or money to
go thousands of miles and many of course paid the price of their
folly. Up here in the Kimberleys, these tumultuous red ranges.
Hall's Creek, founded 1918, I haven't time to retail the Darcy
story, doubtless you've read of - quite a dramatic one. Jimmy
Darcy's grave you can still see in the cemetery near Hall's Creek.


When I was there a couple of sisters had just taken over. They were still
mastering the intricacies of making bread although their predecessors had
to put up with much more than simply that. Down Hall's Creek to Fitzroy
Crossing and back again to Alice Springs.
And now let us come down smartly south where we have to call at
Ayer's Rock® Every tourist does - here again it is almost a question of
getting parking space. I had to meet Bill Harneyidio writes endless books.
If you've ever spoken to Bill Harney and he has a magnificent control -
a mastery really of the Australian bush vernacular - if you ever hear him
speaking, you can't know, he's no longer with us, but if you heard him
speak and then read his books you'd appreciate how judicious an editor
he must possess® Bill Harne was of course a mine of information about
the Inland® He had been everything in his day, swagman, etc. etc. and
he and the Aboriginal folk and he really knew all about them. Well from
there down to Ernabella, one of o\ir own Aboriginal Mission Stations,
spending a few days there and then across to Oodnadatta.
Well, Oodnadatta is one of the great towns in AIM history, in
fact that's one of its few claims to greatness. It's still much as I
guess it was on its flat gibber plain with the shimmering heat haze
around it but the hospital or hostel is still there, the first one
that Flynn helped build in 1911 before the AIM was started, and still
it's with us® It's running and still as busy as ever. The main interest
of Oodnadatta to me was apart from seeing the present alterations was an
imagination of joining Bruce Plowman the first Padre when he set off on
his camel. Now I had the chance of meeting Plowman in Melbourne and
had many discussions with him® He's the sort of historians dream. A
man who’s no longer young but has an articulous memory, a vivid sense
of imagination and a rare ability to get himself across. This isn't
surprising when he's written 3 books about his experiences and I guess
his subconscious retains a lot of it. Well, he tells you how in 1913
he came to Oodnadatta not knowing a thing about camels, naturally enough
he had been brought up in Melbourne and not even Melbourne knew camels,
I guess.
He came to Oodnadatta. John Flynn gave him £l6o I think - a
cheque and told him to buy 'some camels and find out what to do and do
it which is as concise & brief as anyone could want. Well, he relied
on Harry Jeff, one of the store-keepers to get him his camels and Jeff
got him this string - if I can remember their names, its so long since
I thought of them: Shah, Cabool, Ameer, Doctor and Robin and Pup a
cattle dog and with these had set off on his crazy patrol and mastering
the camel itself is something of an art but after a while he told me iie
was shouting "hush, hush, aba" Afghan style. He had a few experiences
with camels apparently they had rather a nasty nature, some of them and
they are quite capable of severing a person's arm rather coquettishly
when you think they are chumming up to you. This makes it an interesting
joke. Plowman set off with his -5 camels on his patrols - some of his
patrols 5 months - and he covered an immense area from here right up
through Hatches' Creek and a sort of rectangle round the centre - an area
of considerably larger proportion than the British Isles and his total
parish number was 400 so there was plenty of space between them and this
did mean too when he visited someone the visit was a real visit. Still
today, I think, padres find the easiest way visiting a homestead is to
get there, the almost impossible thing is to get away from there. Well,
finally, of course. Plowman had this parexcellence when he visited with
camels, particularly some of these lonely settlers who never saw anyone
or very very few people, and just someone with a head and two legs was
sufficient to put them into ecstasy. Well Plowman then made his trails
for 3or 4 years up here in the North. The Kitish Natives were rather
ill-natured natives® They vary of course, some are very genial, some
have out-going temperaments, these ones seem a little giggley ~ I guess
there are certain counter-parts when my wife's species are about. Well
they caused Plowman some trouble and he used to have a revolver, although
he never


used it and he had one or two sleepless nights but unfortimately for the
historian there were no sort of thrilling stories that one can pin dov/n.
Sill, it was lonely enough.
He had Dick Gillen as his camel boy and in Alice Springs I
spoke with Dick Gillan. Dick was then 65, I think. We looked him up in
a little shanty outside Alice Springs and he told us what he'd done since
he left Bruce Plowman and Coleige Harland, who had followed him. He'd
done all sorts of things. He had been a jockey over here in Queensland
and fought on bad times and now he was back in Alice Springs. The way
he joined Howman is interesting. Plowman came into Alice Springs and
called at the school house and the school was nm by Mrs. Ida Stanley,
after whom is named, and according to Gillen, this fellow
came down and said "I want a boy to be my camel boy"* and I said*
"How come you were selected?" He said: "Aw well, I was the biggest
kid in the class" and that was how he got it. He was also a good kid.
He was very much appreciated by Plownan and when they met, as when they
did at the opening of the Flynn Memorial Church, I believe there was a
very emotional scene. It was 40 years, I guess, since they last met
together; and here were these two men, time had done a lot to both
of them - meeting in Alice Springs. Well, that's Dick Gillen; named
of course after Mount Gillen but no genealogical collection. It was
a sort of geographical contingency.
Well, where were we - down here at Oodnadatta and we mentioned
Bruce Plowman and he, of course, stands out because of the romance of his
camels - he wasn't the only one who used them - Coledge Harland used them
Skipper Partridge used the same camels.
Let's come down from Oodnadatta and we'll come swiftly down
here to Adelaide coming through Coober Pedy, Andamooka, where currently
the AIM are thinking of putting up a Nursing Home and here we are back
in Adelaide.
Now in Adelaide are very interesting people. First and
foremost, Alf Traeger. When I was there still he's manufacturing radios
eversince 1928, he's been doing nothing else. He's got his factory -
a galvanised iron factory with about 18 men and he chums out these
Traeger transceivers. Of course they're very sophisticated productions
nowadays, with transistors and heaven-knows what else but he's still
making them. I also spoke with his Accountant and his Accountant tells
me that Alf Traeger is a brilliant electrician - period. He's not an
accountant. However, he is clairvoyant and this is all Alf cares
about. He doesn't seem to be in his element unless he is fiddling with
his complex type of wire. Apart from that he's very, very shy although
he has a sort of bubbling, almost gigg ling sense of humour but a very
kindly natural sort of chap. His shyness I think I can illustrate by
saying when I was there they were saying in Alice Springs they were
going to name a Traeger Park in his honour and Alf told me this was
very great and thought he'd go to hospital round about that date. I
guess that's what he did - a very shy man but of course, he played a
very big part in this whole story. He tells me that he's still a bit
embarrassed when people come up to him and they start to enthuse like,
I the Americans do over their film stars; and people look at
him with calf-eyes and say "Mr. Traeger you were so brave to go out
in the early days", and Alf got the present day movie star complex
and says "Well, not really, I was interested in the bush - so I went".
Well, I think poaeibly, the truth is pretty close to that; but he
was a Lutheran of course, his parents - farmers, from dovn in the
Southern area but his future, whether he knew it or not then, was very
closely intertwined with that of John Flynn of the AIM and there is
no need for me to go into the whole chronicle of how degree by degree he
evolved the radio set that was needed, cheap enough for everyone to buy;
easy enough for a child to handle, tough enough to withstand white-ants
and the propitious little figures of black and white to fill these things
in the homesteads. So it was an amazing achievement and we give him full
credit for it.


Also in Adelaide, I met up with Dr. Duguid who struck an inter-
esting note. He of course, was the moving force behind Ernabella Mission
with a passionate concern for Aborigines. He had a few semi-critical
things to say about some of the Padres. We haven’t time at this juncture
to go into all the historical perplexities of this lot. I think, however,
it has to be realized, two things really. First, that the AlM’s Commission
from the General Assembly was to care for the white folk of Inland Aust-
ralia - that was the prime cause, not through any discrimination because,
of course, complementing it was the Aboriginal and Foreign Mission. These
two missions work side by side with different charters so to say. The
second thing, of course, is that in fact the AIM through its nursing service
and Flying Doctor Service has treated more aborigines than anyone else.
So its a ridiculous claim to claim that it is discrimination. Well so
much for this subject.
I also met Mr, H. J, Bird the manager of Kidman Estates and
he was interesting because Sid Kidman was another of John Flynn’s assoc-
iates. I wonder if you’ve read the story of Sid Kidman. He seems to be
like an Australian Carnegie. V/hen Carnegie arrived in Hew York with
what was it S 5 ii© tiad. - most American millionaries arrive someplace with
ss* Actually, I think he arrived and in the course of some time he
turned this into millions - Well Sid Kidman set off from Adelaide Sale
Yards at the age of 13 as I read, on his solid horse Cyclops which he had
bought for 30/- and needless to say it had only one eye and was as old as
he was, a gallant steed and he rode.north to make his fortune in the wild
blue yonder. He had a brother, apparently on a station out here. He had
5/- in his pocket, this is the part of the real romance of the story, and
he spent 4/“ the first night. I/- as I recall for supper, I/- for bed,
1/- for breakfast and 1/- to give poor old Cyclops a house for the night.
So he went on the second day with I/- in his pocket but still as brave as
ever. Well its a long story -he made good, that chap, he really made
good. In the course of time Sid Kidman, Sir Sidney, as he became had a
controlling interest in 100,000 square miles of Inland Australia. I
believe this was a larger portion of country than any other British cit-
izen of his day. He also had a controlling interest in 100 sheep and
cattle stations, so he wasn’t exactly poverty-stricken| this same little
Sid and he took a sympathetic interest in AIM work, contributed towards
some of the hospitals and he was a great friend of John Flynn. Mr. Bird
tells me that John Flynn had a singular tact when approaching people.
This was part of his genius in human relations and if a man was as busy
as Sid Kidman was, then the last thing Flynn wanted to do was interrupt
him in the middle of business 1 I am sure that a lot of executives would
appreciate that sort of consideration; so what he did was to ring his
manager and find out just how the land lay and if things were a little
rugged, then of course, he wouldn’t go at that period. Now this was a
very artful in the best sense, way of promoting public relations.
When Sidney Kidman saw John Flynn it was at a propitious time. Flynn
had already discovered that he would not be occupied, that he was in
a congenial mood and so he met him at that time. So Carnegie could
take note of that one.
That was in Adelaide. Also Skipper Partridge, of course.
was there. Skipper was looking lost down at Victor Harbour. A lean
leathery looking AIM fellow who belonged to the bush and looked as
though he belonged to the bush and he certainly didn't look as though
he belonged to the sea gulls down at the seaport. Still, he was there
and he wasn’t too well and, of course, he served John Flynn longer,
I guess, than any other Padre. In fact, they met up in Tasmania in
1913 when Partridge was at a SCM Conference at Brown's River and four
years later he met Flynn and he was asked would he take over this
patrol, which he did in 191?; he took over the camels.
One thing I didn’t mention. A month ago I was in Tasmania
giving a speaking tour of the North and I met Sister Bett - I can't
remember her married name. I was quite fascinated with this Sister
Bett • I was just catching the aeroplane and Bob Hatford the minister
there, said; "There’s someone here who wants to see you. She’s been


an AIM Sister." Well, I went into the ward and here was this very frail
old lady and I discovered to my amazement that this was Sister Bett who
was really the pioneer amons: the AIM Sisters, certainly among civilian -
case Sisters. Way back in the early 1900’s she pioneered up here at
Oodnadatta. She was a remarkable little person. Robert Mitchell, who
was also another remarkable minister down here, called her the little
angel of the North. He was a Scotchman - he got away with it. Well,
he was pretty right, with Sister Bett.
Now, can we move quickly, because our time's running out; /
through from Adelaide and down to Melbourne and in Melbourne, of course,
still more identities. Can I whip them off? Dr. George Simpson, I
think must be mentioned. "Jordie" as he was affectionately known to
his friends, a doctor very highly esteemed in professional circles in
Melbourne. A quiet man, a very kindly person who became very close to
John Flynn in his lifetime. These two thrashed out plans quite often.
I am not quite sure how the pattern went, I think it was Mrs. Simpson
who made the tea and Mrs. Flynn who did the typing. But this foursome
in Adelaide worked on early constitutional draft etc. etc. George
Simpson was a wonderful person to know and we were all, I think, shocked
and grieved to learn of his passing not long after that. He's being
remembered as he must be, there's a memorial organ now in the John
Flynn Church and there will be other memorials to this man and someday
I hope someone writes a monograph on him as he certainly deserves it.
George Simpson. The other person I mentioned was Bruce PlowTnan - I
wont go through Bruce's strange story again.
I met of course, Mrs. Aeneas Gunn. I called out at Hawthorn
and knocked on the door of this dilapidated house and it was opened by
this tiny, little, frail woman with snowy-white hair and the most deeply
indented forehead I have ever seen, and she ushered me into a room and
there was this big settee there, that looked equally historic, I almost
disappeared in it. But she was then 92 years old. Her memory wasn't
as bright as it had been. She gave me a couple of books about the First
World War which, I guess, she thought were the latest best sellers, more
or less, but she was very charming. She mentioned how, way back in
1908 John Flynn had written letters to her and asked to send him poems
and recipes for a little book called "Women Contented" he was intending
to write. Well, they exchanged letters for years and in our Flynn
collection of data which Sir John Ferguson and others have compiled
we've got some of their letters.
Well, let's leave Melbourne and come up to Sydney, the
home country and here of course, we have some magnifleant historical
I was going to say "specimens" but I mean sources. We have Mrs. Flynn
who is with us right now. You can hardly get a better source on anyone
than someone as close as a wife. Fred McKay of course, is there, that
civilized product of the Australian Church - John Flynn's successor and
a Padre; and he too, is able to help from first hand acquaintance.
Over at Qantas, Sir Hudson Fysh put his shoes up on that
expensive table that ne has in his Managing Director's office and pulled
out a pipe and reminisced about 1928. I got the feeling that perhaps
he would have been more 'at home' back there at Cloncurry than he felt
in that office. Qantas is another fantastic story - the wide
Australian international airline and its tiny little humble origin in
Cloncurry and Normantown, when, I think, there was one little 'plane
(it wasn't too solid) and Hudson Fysh and Paul Mclnnes shared the •
flying between them. They did a bit of stunting; they did a bit of
mail delivery and this was the beginning of Qiantas. Well, Hudson
Fysh, of course had all his documents photostated - this is what you
can do when you sit in this sort of office, and he was a mine of
information on early flying days, pioneering days. He was full of
the stories about the Metrepole Hotel. You know that to John Flynn
this was his Mecca in Sydney for many a long year and Hudson Fysh
of course worked in Sydney at the airport down there. I hope our
Assembly delegates realize how historic is the Metrepole. John


Flynn was at his and best, I am sure Mrs. Flynn would
agree with me, at 11 o'clock at night. This was when he really
sparked up and his first interview with Hudson Fysh was set
strangely enough for 11 o'clock. He explained sensibly enough
that the place would be quiet then. Well, fair enough, it was
and so Hudson Fysh recalls how they had their first yarn, John
Flynn of course was almost buried in maps that he'd brought in and
these were tossed down in the writing room in there and they put
some on the floor and then they would get to work by working out
where they would put their bases and where all the stations are
and the radios are etc,, etc. Well, that was Qantas and Qantas
played a big role in the Flying Doctor Story, Now I think
perhaps I have gone on long enough on this.
I would like to just mention that after seeing all
these people and dozens of others who we haven't time to mention
historically, of course, and this is an historical society; this
is when you get down to the hard, dry as dust part of what I've
said and that is getting buried in all the documentary sources.
In Flynn's case there is an embarrassment of riches in sources.
Not only have you got all the massive files of the AIM - literally
I was going to say millions - certainly it seems like that - all
the correspondence of all the years and not only have you got all
the material that Sir John Ferguson and his helpers collated over
a period of years in addition to that if you are going to know
the Flynn story you have to get the total Australian backdrop to
it. You have, for instance, to understand something of what other
Churches were doing; what governments were doing; what departments
of governments were doing; you have to get all the forces that were
bearing on this aviation, medical, sociological, industrial, primary
industrial and so on. It becomes a massive thing when you start to
put any one unit into its total complex set up, I suppose history
teaches anyone it makes one aware of simplification of how many
items are involved in one apparently simple incident or one appar-
ently simple personality. All we do is mention that, the massive
sea of documentary evidence which is there to be ploughed through
and sifted and l've split it down through three processes
when I wrote about it. The scientific discipline of collating
material and sort of assessing it and then the imaginative or
speculative discipline of gathering this into form and into
sequence and then the literary discipline of weaving all this into
a coherent and balanced and one vastly interesting story. The
historian has all these arts which he has to observe: scientific,
imaginative, and literary. Unfortunately, some are better at
some than at others. The*Germans, I think at the scientific,
the English often at the literary the Americans of course at the
imaginative as with theology in a certain sense perhaps as with
a calumny the adage of theology created in Germany, corrected
in Scotland and corrupted by our American cousins. That isn't
fair, really, at all.
Can I just finally, because time has really gone I think
can I finally make a few general appraisals?
First, the measure of Flynn's achievement. Now it
can be split obviously into two major avenues. The first, is
the creation of the Australian Inland Mission, Now this was
certainly Flynn's brainchild while others influenced in his
early years he was the one to conceive or apply a total pattern in
to unknown country in Australia. I think there is
no question then, that we can say that this is true’*, that this
is his creation. Certainly they were identified for years at
least, therQ were just a confusion together. We can say too,
that Presbyterian-wise the AIM did the first regular work
among white settlers in the inner regions of Australia, Bruce
Plowman was the first Padre in many parts here. Now this isn't
always true in other areas because other Churches were in a


marginal area but it still remains true, even today, I believe, that
the AIM has the most systematic and comprehensive coverage of this
total area. We find Anglican Bush Brothers who move through the
Western areas, Methodist Inland Mission Society started 1927» a
Roman Catholic Priest in Alice Springs around 1920, other areas are
moving in and the marginal areas, the Church of England has more
men certainly than the rest of us, it still remains true that as a
total strategy for Inland Church Work, the AIM has still the Master
plan. Now we haven’t time to go into the details of this. The
philosophy of Mission is a very sound one. I don’t think John
Flynn was ever a theologian, I don’t think he's ever claimed to be.
He wasn’t the sort of person who sat down and figured out precisely
all the reasons why he was doing something. George McLeod does
for those who are concerned with theology and he has enunciated an
incarnational theology. Flynn never did that. I think as far as
he was concerned the need was there and he just sensed the response
to the need and went out and did it. So what is an incarna.tional
theology? It believes giving a cup of tea to a sick person is
very much Christian work which is in a sense sacramental; it
believes that identifying oneself with the welfare of people is
really Christian and compassion. It sees no inconsistency between
inventing radios with flying aeroplanes and preaching sermons and
I think this essentially is a New Testament teaching; this is
the Word becoming flesh. So I think while it wasn't a conscious
incarnational theology it was an implicit and unconscious one, and
I think it was a very sound one for Inland Australia. This was an
area which had had no Church contact and if you try to meet it with
conventional means you would get no place. Coming as a quick
parallel: Sir Grenfell found precisely the same kind of thing in
Laborador. It wasn’t sufficient just to talk; when people were
dying you had to give them hospitals; when they were illiterate
you had to educate them, not because this was something you added
to your Gospel, but because this was part of it. And so I think in
that sense we have a very profound theological compulsion to work
in Australia. Now that's so much for that aspect.
The Flying Doctor Service of course, I’ve already men-
tioned is unique in the world. Today there are 13 bases and
again this is the brain child and the achievement of Flynn. Of
course hundreds of people helped him in both cases. One of his
most remarkable talents was to get people to work with him. He
had a disarming manner and in many cases he got his position by
atrophying the opposition. Sir Arthur Fadden, I think it was
used fairly intelligently to get a pre-arranged telephone call
when John Flynn had to come and see him. He was fearful yet
beyond a certain point he was brave. About the Flying Doctor
Service I think there is so much known that I don't need to
emphasise it.
Nigeria has got it; Canada, I believe is to get a
centre and here ds an interesting parallel. Of all the areas
of the world that would suggest themselves as parallels to the
needs of the Inland Australia - Canada - its prairie provinces
would be a natural. You've got a big area, you've got a scat-
tered population - there is no reason why this sort of service
should not have originated in the Western prairie provinces of
Canada. Why was it then that it appeared in Australia? Well,
here I think you have the element of the creator in Flynn.
A man appeared , and idea appeared and so history was changed.
And this I believe, don’t you, is how God often works. At
the crucial time, the man appeared. Whether it's a Paul, or
a Luther or a Wesley or a Chalmers or another sphere, a
Flynn. A man who has the creative initiative to put before
people something new. This, I think is the uniqueness of the
Australian situation. Well, so much then for those few
achievements and we haven't time to go into all the com-
plexities of them.


Finally, I want to just sketch for you what I feel are some
of the salient factors of John Flynn himself. The easiest way to do
this will be to itemise them I think. Could we start by calling
visionary. A visionary in the sense of someone who has this
rather innate mysterious capacity for projecting himself into the
future. Early he said he would like to see the other side of next
Christmas and thats a fairly quaint way of putting it. Not many
people are like this. Most of us are rather too prosaic and flat
and tame for this. Society gets us and puts us in a little mould
and there we are. We don't sort of project ourselves very far at
all and if we do iifs more or less an idle daydream. Flynn's unique-
ness lay in the fact that he was able to conceive something way
ahead of everyone else. Apparently fantastic, yet not really.
Though I suggest this visionary capacity is a legitimate attribute
of Flynn and a pretty rare thing in history.
The second thing he had of course was the ability of a
stateman. Now you might think this is a rather grandiose des-
cription but I don't think it is within its limits. When Flynn
saw Inland Australia the first thing he did was to get maps and
then he started to think of it in strategic terms not vaguely
but practically. He split it up into areas just as its split up
here. He worked out all the physiological and other factors that
were bearing on it. He studied its geograpphy, and its kEstDry.-
He studied very much its communications, its telegraph systems
and absence of them. He got a total informed picture then he
split it up into workable units. He worked out strategies and
policies that would be applicable. And so you get this sort of
comprehensive and quite convincing, I think, presentation of the
situation.
In 1912 Flynn was 31 at that time and as a young man
he was given an extraordinary job and I think the reason why the
Assembly gave it to him was that his report was so convincing.
It wasn't vague, it was quite practical. It was illustrated with
maps, it was also accompanied with statistics and other inform-
ation. I think the Assembly felt that this man is young; we
don't know very much about him, but this to us looks pretty
convincing and I think this was early an evidence of statesman-
ship. Surely the Church needs a heck of a lot more gut than it
has now. This is the way of seeing a total picture in a creative
progressive sense. A visionary and a statesman and then a
certain practical ability too. This of course is the way of
getting your dreams down onto the ground and this implies a lot
of the hard unromantic part of the life of men like Flynn.
Sure, after he became famous everybody idolised him in a sense
but his best work I think was really done before that. It was
the long, patient year after year of quite unglamorous foundation
buirding'.' It was the years when he handled all correspondence
by himself; when he worked with a very thin budget and when he
almost had to gather his troops around him. Now this essentially
was a test of a man's practicality even more so of a man's will-
power. Perhaps the biggest paradox in Flynn I thinkwas the fact
that he always seemed so easy-natured and yet underneath he was
quite immovable. He had a disarming way of keeping around the
subject but never of leaving it. When asking Hudson Fysh at
one stage what impressed him most, he said "I would say without
hesitation his will". And, I think hereagain you've got another
key of the creative personalities in history. A quite phenom-
enal will. If you studied the life of Adolf Hitler you would
find a quite fantastic will of a beat-up Austrian painter and
how he becomes head of a cultivated nation largely because of
imagination and this extraordinary rather frightening will.
Well, I think Flynn had that same sort of capacity consecrated
in another direction.


And a last analysis a visionary, a statesman, a man of
action and a man of God, Now I don't think Flynn ever claimed to have
any sort of profundity of religious experience. Certainly in his life
time as I understood it there were no spiritual crises that sometimes
affect very sensitive people. When he was at college and theological
college he didn’t seem to tear himself apart as perhaps some of us
have done on several doctrines of the Church. He did have his
problems, but none of them critical. His main problem I think was
bo sort of reconcile his instinct to the practical things, but an
almost equally strong instinct to read. He liked reading but he
liked organising too. I think the two of them sort of got all mixed
up and made him not particularly successful as a student while he
was a very intelligent person. No, he wasn't I believe a profoundly
religious man. I don't believe in the sense that he was a prophetic
man in the biblical sense. I think his faith was very simple and
very genuine. I don't think he explored the implications of his
faith tremendously. It seems to me that God is our Father, Christ
is our Master and Saviour; this was all he needed. 'lo ' *r.
I think too, can I recall a few records which occur to
me. Factors in Flynn that account for his success. Sinceri-by,
most people would agree, a whimsicality of humour which makes it
attractive. I think any personality without humour is rather
devastating. This, I think was one of the weaknesses in the great
English Statesman - Gladstone. Queen Victoria he used to
address her as though she were a public meeting. I think this’is
through a lack of humour. Sincerity and humour, this ability to
make friends which was, I think, axtless and quite genuine; a
certain series of idiosyncracies which I suppose people found
alternatively exasperating and humorous. He had too, this quite
fundamental conviction of the reality of God and God's mandate
that we must love one another as Jesus loves.. He wasn't a man
without his weaknesses, and I’know Mrs. Flynn would be the first
one to concede this. If there is a man without weaknesses, he
doesn't exist; there has only been one who has been perfect.
Flynn had his weaknesses. I think that in certain other spheres,
her certainly wouldn't have succeeded as he did. To me the
principal' thing to me in Flynn's life is that he was put in this
situation at just this time. I sometimes wonder what would have
happened if say he had appeared a couple of decades later or even
a coupld of decades earlier. See, here radio was just then
beginning; just when the flying was becbmijig practicable, just
when the Australian situation demanded. There is a certain
providential timing in the appearing of John Flynn and I believe
God was working in him.
But now for facts and figures. The best epitaph for
Flynn was I am sure. Skipper and surely the senti-
mentality I think, gets pretty much to the heart of it. When his
ashes were buried in the shade of Mount Gillen, remember Skipper
Partridge's words:
"Across the lonely places of the land he planted kindness and
from the hearts of those who called those places home he gathered
love".
And I say short of any sentimentality this is the
epitaph of a man of God.
