

COLONY OF FIJI,
1880.
(jjfoHfmittee to jitroiiiofc the
of life golomj
AT THE
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.
*
» <
• • •
*
LcsuttLa :
/.m FEINTED BY G. L. GRIFFITHS, BEACH-STREET.
December, 1880.
uecemoer,




COLONY OF FIJI,
1880.
jsJfe sonjmittee to §ronjote the §qyresenfatioti
4 tfi* §<>i™n
AT THE
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
Lwtiha :
PRINTED BY G. L. GRIFFITHS, BEACH-STREET.
December, 1380.


-i.


COLON Y OF FIJI.
H 8M —SKfesJPI? — y&t
(governor.
SIE AETHUR HAMILTON GORDON, G.C.M.G,
THE HON. GEORGE WILLIAM DES VCEUX,
C.M.G.
Executive Council.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR.
The Honourable the COLONIAL SECRETARY.
„ the ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
„ the RECEIVER-GENERAL.
„ THE COMMISSIONER OF LANDS.


fegiMm §amctl .
The GOVERNOR.
The Honourable JOHN GORRIE, Chief Justice.
The Honourable JOHN BATES THURSTON,
C.M.G., Colonial Secretary.
The Honourable W. McGREGOR, M.D., Receiver-
General.
The Honourable P. S. SOLOMON, Acting Attorney-
General.
The Honourable CHAS. W. MITCHELL, Commis-
MISSIONER OF LANDS.
The Honourable JAMES COBBAN SMITH.
ROGER BECKWITH LEEFE.
JOHN HILL.
VICTOR A. WILLIAMSON.
JAMES E. MASON.
ALEXANDER BARRACK.
NATHANIEL CHALMERS.
GEORGE McEVOY.


(Committee
(APPOINTED TO PKOMOTE REPRESENTATION OF COLONY IN MEL-
BOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION).
His Excellency the GOVERNOR.
The Honourable the CHIEF JUSTICE.
„ the COLONIAL SECRETARY.
„ the ACTING ATTORNEY-
GENERAL.
„ the RECEIVER-GENERAL.
„ theCOMMISSIONEROFLANDS.
~ R. B. LEEFE.
„ JOHN HILL.
„ JAMES E. MASON.
„ ALEXANDER BARRACK.
„ NATHANIEL CHALMERS.
„ GEORGE McEVOY.
WM. HENNINGS, Esq.
G. MORGAN, Esq.
C. D. ST. PINNOCK, Esq.
HENRY CAVE, Esq.
RUPERT RYDER, Esq.
HERBERT LEVICK, Esq.
A. EDWARDS, Esq.
D. WATERSTON, Esq.
C. W. DRURY, Esq.
T. M. BROWER, Esq.
DAVID WILKINSON, Esq.
WALTER HUNTER, Esq.
E. GRAHAM, Esq.
A. B. JOSKE, Esq.
C. W. EMPSON, Esq.
Executive in <sjselhourne.
W. K. THOMSON, Esq.
gfoint
JOHN LANGFORD, Esq.
GEORGE SMITH, Esq.
MS3SS/FI 02Q2t
19 5 ' r V


mTmmmtam,:
This Pamphlet has been compiled by the Committee in
Fiji appointed by the Governor of the Colony to undertake
the representation of the Colony in the Melbourne Inter-
national Exhibition of 18 80. The principal chapters inserted
have been written by those members of the Committee who
were most conversant with the special subject treated of. The
work may therefore be accepted as an authentic account of
the Colony at the present time, but like all young colonies,
the progress made from year to year is so great as to modify
very rapidly the aspect of affairs at any given date. While
the Pamphlet has been passing through the press, a change
of Governors has taken place, and Sir Arthur Gordon, who
has done so much for the organisation of the Colony, has
been transferred to New Zealand. The probabilities of a
speedy removal of the capital to Suva, and the growth of a
considerable town in that locality, are much greater and
nearer than they were, and as a consequence, the influx of
a larger amount of capital to promote the trade of the Colony.
In all likelihood the transfer of the Governor to New Zealand
may also be the means of increasing our communication
with that Colony, and thus materially add to the traffic,
which has already begun to develope itself in a very marked
degree. Altogether the present position of the Colony may
be regarded as satisfactory, and its future progress assured.
The more important chapters of the work contributed by
individual members of the Committee are as follows:


I.—HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL,
By the Hon. J. B. Thurston.
lI.—GOVERNMENT AND LEGISLATION,
By the Hon. J. H. Garrick and the Chief Justice.
lII.—TITLES TO LAND.
By the Chief Justice.
IV.—AGRICULTURE,
By the Hon. P. S. Solomon,
From contributions by the Hon. John Hill, Hon. Geoege McEvoy, James E
Mason, Esq., Dr. Beowee, and others.
V.—CLIMATE AND POPULATION,
By D. Wilkinson, Esq.,
YL—LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION.
By the Hon. W. McGregor.
YIL—EDUCATION AND RELIGION,
By C. W. Drury, Esq.




Ipistorj).
The Fijian Archipelago was discovered on the sth
March, 1643, by Abel Jansen Tasman, the famous
Dutch navigator. So far as can be conjectured, for the
track shown upon the chart does not agree with the
day’s navigation as recorded in the log, Tasman
entered the group from the eastward somewhere
betweeen the 16th and 17th degrees of south latitude,
and not finding anchorage worked his way northward
among the islands and reefs lying off the coasts of
Taviuni and Vanua Levu. After many risks of ship-
wreck he cleared the islands by way of Undu Point
and Thikombia, naming the group so far as then
discovered, “ Prins Willhems Eylanden.” Captain
Cook, more than one hundred years after, lay-to one
night off Yatoa or Turtle Island. Captain Bligh upon
his memorable voyage in the launch of the Bounty,
sighted a part of the group in 1789, and subsequently
(in 1792), while commanding the “ Providence,” made
further observations, some of them remarkably accu-
rate. Captain Wilson, in the Mission ship “ Duff,’’
is said to have followed Tasman’s course, but less
fortunate than his predecessor, he struck (Sept. 13’
1797) on the outlying reefs of Nukubasanga, very near
to the scene of Earl Pembroke’s disaster in the
“Albatross” (October 21,1870.)
The early history of the contact between Fijians
and Europeans is involved in obscurity, and though
it is not improbable that some of the seventeenth
century navigators, who sailed from the west coast
of South America and were never heard of, visited the
group, nothing definite was known of the islands
or its people until the beginning of this centnry,


■when an occurrence happened which brought them
under the notice of the Governor of New South Wales.
The Rev. Thomas Williams (“ Fiji and the Fijians ”)
thus describes the event.
“ About the year 1804 a number of convicts escaped
from New South Wales and settled among the islands
Most of these desperadoes lived either at Mbau or
Rewa, the chiefs of which allowed them whatever
they chose to demand, receiving in return their aid
in carrying on war. The new settlers made themselves
dreaded by the natives, who were awed by the
murderous effects of their firearms. The hostile chiefs
seeing their bravest warriors fall in battle without an
apparent cause, believed their enemies to be more
than human, against whom no force of theirs availed,
whose victory was always sure, while their progress
invariably spread terror and death. No thought of
improving and consolidating the power thus won
seems to have been entertained by the whites. Had
such a desire possessed them the absolute government
of the entire group lay within their reach ; but their
ambition never rose beyond a life of indulgence and
an unrestrained gratification of the vilest passions.
Some of them were men of the most desperate
wickedness, being regarded as monsters even by the
ferocious cannibals with whom they associated. These
lawless men were twenty-seven in number on their
arrival; but in a few years the greater part had ended
their career, having fallen in the native wars, or in
deadly combat among themselves. A Swede, named
Savage, who had some redeeming traits in his
character, and was acknoAvledged as head man by the
whites, was drowned and eaten by the natives of
Weilea in 1813. In 1824 only two, and 1840 but one
of his companions survived. This last was an Irish-
man named Connor who stood in the same relation to


the King of Kewa, as Savage had done to the King of
Mbau. His influence among the natives was so great
that all his desires, some of which were of the most
inhuman kind, were gratified. The King of Kewa
would always avenge and often in the most cruel
manner, the real or fancied wrongs of this man. If he
desired the death of any native the chief would send
for the doomed man and direct him to make and heat
an oven, into which when red hot the victim was
cast, having been murdered by another man sent for
the purpose. Soon after the death of his patron, Paddy
Connor left Kewa. He was thoroughly Fijianized,
and of such depraved character that the white resi-
dents who had settled in the islands drove him from
among them, being afraid of so dangerous a neighbour.
At the close of his life his thoughts seemed only occu-
pied about rearing pigs and fowls and increasing the
number of his children from forty-eight to fifty.”
It was through the influence of these men that
Mbau and Kewa first assumed a position of superiority
over the other islands of the group ; a position which
the former still, in some sense, although under entirely
new conditions, retains.
The vague, but always magnificent accounts which
about this time began to find their way to the mother
colony of the Australias, caused the islands to be
visited for the purpose of trading for sandalwood,
beche de mer, and tortoiseshell for the China market.
The masters of vessels fitted out for this purpose
found trading, though very hazardous, extremely
profitable. It was not safe for men to go on shore
unless in parties, and well armed. Vessels occasionally
got lost on treacherous reefs, and sometimes the crews
were massacred. Many an antiquated gun and anchor
still lying in Fijian towns bears silent witness
to the wild events of bygone days. When oppor-


tunity offered there were severe reprisals, and the
stories of old traders (now deceased) recalled to mind
the old buccaneering times as told in the stirring
narratives of Darnpier and Drake. The white popu-
lation slowly increased and, about the year 1835, and
chiefly in consequence of the friendly disposition of its
chief, a small settlement of white men was established
at Levuka. Considering the origin of this community ?
the absence of all restraints and the frequently wild
and dangerous life its members led, it must be
admitted that they compare favorably with men of a
similar class who settled on other islands of the Pacific.
They traded in cocoanut oil, beche de mer, pearlshell,
and anything they could pick up from the natives
Some of them settled down as carpenters, boatbuilders
and blacksmiths, and the leading person among them,
one Daniel Whippy was, though uneducated, certainly
a superior man, and did much to preserve good oidei
Captain Wilkes, who arrived at Ov alau in May, 1840.
says, “ Ovalau is the principal residence of the white
men in the group, to whose general depoitment and
good conduct I must bear testimony. I found none
better disposed throughout the voyage than were
found there.” In 1851, the gold discoveries of
California gave rise to considerable traffic between
Sydney, Melbourne and San I rancisco, and many gold
seekers calling in at Fiji charmed with the aspect and
freedom of the country returned to it when it was no
longer easy to make rapid fortunes at the mines.
In 1859, Mr. Pritchard, then British Consul at liji
being impressed with a conviction that it could be
be made a great cotton producing country, exeited
himself to direct attention to its advantages as a field
for emigration. In 1861 the European population
numbered 166 adults, a large proportion of whom were
highly respectable people. An impression ha\ ing


gone abroad that the British Government had
determined to take possession of the islands, new
arrivals from New Zealand were frequent at this
time. Some brought with them small cutters and
remained in the group to trade, but the majority of
the new comers on discovering that the Imperial
authorities had declined the proffered cession of the
islands returned.
The circumstances which led Thakombau to desire
the British Government to take possession of the
islands are as follows. On the 4th July, 1849, while
the late Mr. J. B. Williams, then American Consul
was celebrating his national anniversary by the firing-
off cannons and letting off squibs on the island of Nuku-
lau, his house took fire and was burnt to the ground-
Subsequent to these events complaints were made
against Thakombau, and numerous losses ascribed to
him. Claims for damages were then made by the
American citizens through their Consul and Thakom-
bau was saddled with the whole responsibility though
there was no evidence whatever to show that he had
been instrumental in causing the losses complained of
After some preliminary investigation on the part of the
United States Government, Commander Boutwell was
sent to Fiji, in the year 1855, to inquire into the
claims; the result was that the American citizens
were awarded about £9OOO, Thakombau being quite
unable to satisfy this demand, he in 1858, offered to
cede the sovereignty of the islands to her Majesty on
condition that he should retain the rank and title of
Tui Yiti (King of Fiji) which had been accorded to
him by the American Government, and that in con-
sideration of his ceding 200,000 acres of land .her
Majesty’s Government should pay the American claims
for him.
A deed of Cession signed by Thakombau and the


leading chiefs, was accordingly conveyed to England
by Mr. Prichard in the early part of the year 1859.
Great interest was felt in the colonies in the proposed
cession, and some exertions were made to induce the
British Government to entertain the proposition favor-
ably, as good proof had just been obtained of the
capabilities of Fiji as a cotton growing country, while
the supply of that staple for the home market had
been greatly diminished. Some months later
Colonel Smythe, E.A., was appointed to proceed
to the islands as a Commissioner to inquire
into the state of affairs and report as to the advis-
ability of accepting the proposed cession. At the
same time the military difficulties in New Zealand
was causing very serious embarrassment and the
Imperial authorities having quite enough to do with
one native war on hand were in no humour to accept
the responsibility of managing Thakombau’s unruly
subjects. The Commissioner’s report, as might have
been anticipated from the circumstances, was against
the acceptance of the offer, and it was accordingly
declined.
From this time forward various attempts were made
at the instigation of white residents to establish a
regular form of government, they being disappointed
that the result of Colonel Smythe’s mission had been
unsuccessful. From one cause and another, however,
but principally in consequence of the mutual suspicion
and hostility of the leading chiefs every such attempt
failed.
In the early part of 1871, a more ambitious effort
was made. Thakombau with the assistance of Messrs.
Woods, Sagar, Burt and Hennings made an attempt
to form a Government for the whole group, and
delegates of both races were invited to meet in
congress to discuss and frame a constitution. In


August, 1871, these delegates met in formal conven-
tion, and after much deliberation, agreed to a
constitution for the “ Kingdom of Fiji,” and to
regulations and conditions under which the govern-
ment of the Kingdom should be carried on. The
House of Delegates having performed its functions it
was in due course dissolved, returning officers ap-
pointed, and writs issued for the election of members
to serve in the Assembly of Fiji. These elections were
duly carried out, and the first Fijian Parliament met
(1871) under the Speakership of Mr. Butters, formerly
Mayor of Melbourne,
The Constitution Act framed by the House of
Delegates provided for a Government of the whole
group, and the establishment of a Constitution from and
after October 1, 1871. It also provided that the form of
Government should be Executive, Legislative, and
Judicial. The Executive to consist of the King and
the Ministry; the Legislative of a Privy Council and
House of Representatives. The Judicial was invested
in a Supreme Court, consisting of a Chief Justice and
two Associate Judges, one of whom was to be a native,
whose decisions were final. The Privy Council was
composed of the native governors of the provinces into
which the Constitution Act directed that the Kingdom
should be sub-divided. The House of Representatives
was formed of members returned by the electoral
districts proclaimed throughout the islands. All
measures passed by the House of Representatives were
to be submitted to the Privy Council, which had not,
however, the power of vetoing any measures not
meeting with its approval, but simply of returning
them to the Assembly from which they originated
for reconsideration. The number of members were
limited to forty, and not less than twenty. The
qualifications of an elector were payment of taxes,


six months residence, and that he should he a
male subject of the Kingdom, not a minor.
Without entering too much into detail it may
be stated that such a system of Government was
utterly unsuited to the condition of the country. It
was cumbrous, expensive, and placed all political
power in the hands of white settlers, leaving the
natives, who numbered ninety-nine hundredths of the
entire population, with the merest shadow of influence.
Moreover the Assembly and the Ministry did not
agree very well. As in colonies not remote from Fiji
the first half of each session of the Assembly was taken
up by efforts on the part of the leaders of the Opposition
to change places with Ministers of the Crown. The
most serious difference, however, arose upon the ques-
tion of electoral franchise, the settlers arguing that
the franchise was confined to the whites solely, and
Ministers disputing the point.
Matters soon came to a crisis through the King
refusing to accept the resignation of Ministers who
had been defeated “ constitutionally ” by a large ma-
jority. The Assembly was dissolved in consequence
in the middle of 1873.
A new Constitution was framed by the Government
conferring upon the natives a large share of power and
providing for a Legislative Assembly, consisting partly
of nominee and partly of elective members. It was,
however, though assented to by the King, never put
in force as it was strongly opposed by Commodore
Goodenough and Mr. Consul Layard, who arrived in
Fiji at the close of 1873 with instructions to inquire
into the condition of the islands with regard to
annexation, in response to a proposal made by
the Fijian Government to re-open the question of
annexation to Great Britain. It was agreed that,
pending the question of cession to her Majesty, the


status quo should be observed. The Commissioners
add ressed a letter to the King on the 17th January,
1 874, telling him the object of their mission, visited
several of the islands and collected a mass of
information which, on being laid before Parlia-
ment, was somewhat severely criticised by Mr.
Gladstone. At the end of February it was announced
that the King and chiefs were about to summon a
great meeting to decide upon the question of ceding
the country to Great Britain. At this meeting, at
which the Commissioners attended, the King and
chieis decided against the cession, whereupon Minis-
ters resigned in a body, and immediately afterwards,
on Mr. Thurston attempting to form a Ministry, every
obstacle was put in the way. The Commodore and
Consul proclaimed the bankruptcy of the King’s
Government, warned all British subjects against
giving the Government any credit, and threatened
with the penalties of the Foreign Enlistment
Act any of them retaining posts as officers in
the Armed Constabulary. This completely paralyzed
any further attempts at self-government, and acting
upon the principle that an honorable capitulation
should be preferred to the destruction of a weak
garrison the King’s adviser strongly recommended
a reconsideration of the question of annexation.
Thakobau thereon reassembled the chiefs and on the
20th March a formal offer of cession was made to-
gether with a number of conditions which, when
considered by the Imperial Government, were pro-
nounced to be unacceptable. On the 17th July, in the
House of Lords, Earl Carnarvon stated that the Cabi-
net had resolved upon deputing Sir Hercules Robinson,
K.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales, to proceed
to Fiji and acquaint the King and chiefs that if they
wished for annexation it must be unconditional. Sir


Hercules Robinson arrived at Levuka on the 23rd
September, 1874, and, after several interviews of a
most satisfactory nature with the Kings and chiefs, they
made a formal and unconditional cession to her
Majesty of the sovereignty of the islands. The King
and chiefs were made fully aware that while the
acceptance of the conditions attached to their oiler of
cession was quite impossible as tending to fetter the
action of her Majesty’s Government, such an intimation
of the tendency of their wishes in regard to their
country and people would not be without weight, but
that if the offer of cession v/as to be accepted the
natives of Fiji must trust implicitly to the honor and jus-
tice of the Queen. The personal manner of Sir Hercules
Robinson inspired the chiefs with a confidence before
wanting, as it also did those who had been trying
to form a Government, At the time of the cession
a Provisional Government was in operation, in
which Mr, Thurston held the office of Chief Secre-
tary and Mr. Ryder that of Minister of Finance.
Arrangements were made by Sir Hercules Robinson
after the formalities connected with the transfer of the
sovereignty had been completed, for the temporary
government of the islands until the arrival of
a Governor appointed by her Majesty. These
arrangements were the appointment of an Executive
Council under the presidentship of Mr. Consul Layard ;
the other offices being filled by Mr. (now Sir) J. G. L.
Innes without office, Mr. Thurston as Colonial Secre-
tary, Mr. Horton as Treasurer, and Mr. Swanston as
Secretary for Native Affairs. Among these last three
gentlemen were distributed the supervision of all the
administrative and judicial departments of the Go-
vernment. He further appointed Mr. Garrick todischarge
the duties of Judge of the Central Court and chief
magistrate of the colony, in the room of the Chancel-


lorsliip and Justiceship formerly existing, and
four European Stipendiary Magistrates, whose office
was the trial of European and mixed cases throughout
the group. For the efficient administration of native
affairs he next divided the islands into twelve
provinces over each of which a provincial chief—
styled Roko—and native Stipendiary Magistrates
were appointed. These provinces were subdivided
into eighty two districts in charge of Mbulis, each
Mbuli being placed in the first, second or third class
according to the number of villages under his control.
The authority of these native officers extended to
natives only.
These provisional arrangements on the whole
worked well though the colonists naturally looked
forward to the arrival of Sir Arthur Hamilton Gor-
don, K.C.M.G., who soon after the receipt in
England of Governor Robinson’s despatches was
appointed by her Majesty the first Governor of
the new dependency.
Sir Arthur Gordon arrived at Levuka in H.M.S.
“Pearl ” on the 24th June, 1875, and landed officially
on the following day. It was expected that his Ex-
cellency would at once assume the administration of
the Government, but as the Chief Justice, the Attor-
ney-General and other officers appointed to be mem-
bers of the Executive had not then arrived, and the
i mmediate promulgation of the Royal Charter erecting
the island into a British Colony would, without the
concurrent enactment of several legislative measures,
have produced much confusion the provisional state
of things was for a short time continued.
The delay, however, was not of long duration. On
the Ist September, 1875, the administration of the
Government of the Colony was formally assumed by
the Governor, and the Charter of the Colony and His


Excellency’s Commission were read in the presence
of a large concourse of people assembled at Nasova.
The interval between His Excellency’s arrival and his
assumption of office had been fully occupied. One of
the first steps taken in June was to send off medical
succour to the natives of the out-lying districts still
suffering from the effects of the fatal visitation of
measles, introduced on the return of the ex-King from
Sydney, and which had carried off approximately
40,000 of the native population. Much useful infor-
mation was also acquired by the Governor during this
period as to the state and condition of the country be-
fore commencing the detailed duties of administratioh.
The peaceful course of events was, however,
soon interrupted. The heathen tribes of the interior
of Yiti Levu had for some time indicated symtoms of
disquietude, and, as in the old days prior to annexa-
tion, threatened with aggression the more peaceful
and Christian natives of the coast.
On the 12th April, 1876, four or five defenceless
villages on the borders of the Nadi and Nadroga
vinces were suddenly attacked and burnt. At the
same time an attack was made upon Christian vil-
lages, situated on the Siga Toka River, and on the
village of Satubu. In these forays some peaceable
and well disposed natives were killed. These out-
rages were but the precursors of others still more
violent, and by the end of the same month a formid-
able combination of the heathen mountain tribes had
been entered into. It would be impossible in this
hasty sketch of events to enter into an account of the
measures promptly taken for the suppression of this
violence and the restoration of order.
Suffice it to say that a native force was rapidly en-
rolled and placed under the command of Captain L. F.
Knollys, the Governor’s aide-de-camp, and that after a


brief and arduous campaign, in which he was ably-
assisted by Mr. A. J. L. Gordon (His Excellency’s
Private Secretary), Mr. Walter Carew, Mr. Le Hunte,
and other civilians in the service of the Government,
the aggresors were entirely defeated and disarmed.
A permanent station was then formed on the hills at
a place called “ Fort Carnarvon ’’which has since been
occupied by a small force of Armed Native Constabu-
lary. Resident Commissioners were appointed to the
mountain districts, which for executive convenience
were divided into “ Colo east ” and “ Colo west.” The
prompt and successful manner in which this perplex-
ing and dangerous event was met and disposed of gave
confidence and satisfaction both to settlers and the
civilized natives of the colony.
At this time (October, 1880) there is not a more law-
abiding native community in the islands than these
erstwhile savages. Justice has been administered
among them, and churches and schools been
built. Confidence in the Government has grown up,
and it is not improbable that peace among the high-
land tribes will for the future be undisturbed.
During the five years ending December 1879 the
Colony has made very great progress. The supply of
immigrant native labor has equalled the demand. Steam
communication is now regular between the Colony and
Sydney, Melbourne and Auckland, with each of which
ports there is a twenty-eight day service. Steam com-
munication with the Friendly Islands (Tonga) has been
initiated, and will shortly be extended to the Navi-
gator Islands (Samoa). The intercommunication be-
tween the islands of Fiji itself is provided for by two
excellent and well-found steamers constantly running.
Business, increasing steadily and therefore more surely,
is conducted upon sounder principles than formerly.


Capital has been invested in the products of sugar,
coffee, cacao, cinchona and other tropical productions,
and there is every reason to hope for a certain and
regular improvement in the social and industrial
affairs of the islands. The commercial state and
progress of the group will, however, he described in a
separate chapter.
Ckagraphtj.
The Colony of Fiji comprises the islands lying be-
tween the parallels of latitude of fifteen degrees south,
and twenty-two degrees south of the equator, and be-
tween the meridian of longitude of one hundred and
seventy-seven degrees west and one hundred and
seventy-five degrees east of the meridian of Greenwich.
This area may be described as contained in a square
the sides of which are four hundred and forty geo-
graphical miles in length. It is distant from Sydney
about 1,900 miles and from Auckland 1,200 miles. It
lies north-east of Tonga 300, and south-west of Samoa
500 miles. The French colony of New Caledonia lies
to the. westward about five hundred miles. The num-
ber of islands has been variously stated at from 200
to 250 ; but this must include mere uninhabited rocks
and islets.
The following are the principal inhabited islands
with their area approximately in square miles.


Name.
Square Miles.
Yiti Levu
4112
Vanua Levu
Taviuni
2432
Kadavu
Windward Isles
Goro.
Ovalau
Moala *
Rabi...
Qamia
Yanua Balavu
Yatu Lele
Ono ...
Beqa...
Yadua
Lakeba
Matuku
Totoya
Mago
Cicia...
Nairai
Laucala
9
9
Kioa...
Naitamba
Kanacia
Mokogai
Batiki
Yasawas and other isles, probably
Total square miles
Total acres ...
7424
...4,751,360
The total area is therefore slightly larger than the
principality of Wales, which contains 4,734,486.


The principal island, Viti Levu, may be compared
in size to the collective areas of Kent, Sussex, Surrey
and Middlesex, andYanua Levu is only a little smaller
than the county of Devon. To give an idea of the
magnitude of the larger islands by comparison with
other tropical possessions of the Crown, it may be
said that Yiti Levu alone is nearly as large as Ja-
maica, twice as large as Trinadad, and six times as
large as Mauritius. The aggregate area of the whole
group is greater than that of all the British West
India islands put together.
The more important islands are hilly and mountain-
ous, rising more or less abruptly from the shore to a
height of about 4,000 or even 4,500 feet.
These hills are generally of a grand and picturesque
outline, being composed for the most part of old
volcanic lavas, basalt, trachyte, trap, and conglomer-
ate.
Upon the south-eastern or windward sides
the islands are covered with dense forests con-
taining numerous varieties of large and valu-
able trees, among which may be enumerated not
less than eight cone bearers, consisting of Damara,
Dacrydium and Podocarpus. Also the "V aivai
(Serianthes Vitiensis ), the Yesi ( Afjelia Bijuga), the
Damanu ( Cclophyllum Burmanni ), and many others of
much beauty and utility. The lower lands are more
lightly timbered, and apparently have all been under
cultivation at a not distant period when the native
population was much larger. The soil is almost every-
where deep, easily worked, and, as shewn by recent
analysis, especially rich in humic acid.
The northern and north-western sides of the larger
island, that is to say the leeward sides, are character-
ised by a comparative absence of forest lands. The
hills or plains are covered with long reeds or


grass, and dotted with clumps of Casuarina and
Pandanus. Upon the borders of rivers and s+reams,
and in sheltered dells collecting the drainage from the
surrounding hills, the ordinary fruit and forest trees
of the country grow well.
Fiji is essentially a well-watered country. Frequent
rains keep alive the sources of the thousands of small
affluents feeding the main rivers. Of these rivers,
both for size and facility of navigation the “ Rewa ”
stands first. It is navigable for boats, punts, or flat-
bottomed steamers, for a distance of forty or fifty
miles from its mouth, if not further. Several large
streams, notably the “ Waimanu,” the “ Waidina” and
the “Waimala,” fall into it. The sources of these streams
and of the “ Waibuka ” lie in the high mountains of
the interior three or four thousand feet above the level
of the sea. Besides these the “ Sigatoka,” the “ Nadi”
and “ Ba ” rivers, with many others, drain the princi-
pal watersheds of Yiti Levu. In Yanua Levu the
rivers are not so large, though they are nearly as
numerous. The more i mportant are the “ Dreketi,”
the “ Lambasa,” the “ Wailevu,” and the “ Wainunu.”
Almost every valley in the group has its brawling
stream or brook, from which the native occupants
irrigate their plantations of “dalo” {calocasia escu-
lenta).
Fiji is as rich in harbors and roadsteads as it is in
rivers. Each island is surrounded by a barrier reef,
and, with few exceptions, is accessible through pas-
sages usually found opposite to the most considerable
valley or river. Between this reef and the shore ships
lie safely at anchor protected by an indestructable
natural breakwater.
In concluding this brief sketch of the geographical
aspect of the islands it may not be out of place to


sketch the probable origin and present state of the
native population.
The Fijian, with an admixture of the Malayo-Pcly-
nesian (or Amphinesian) element, chiefly observable in
the upper classes, may be considered as a branch of
the Oriental negro or Kaloenonesian stock, having a
close affinity to those aboriginal black races still found
in India, the jungles and heights of Ultra-India, Mal-
aya, Luzon, Sumatra, and as far east as Japan. It is
probable that this race one e occupied a vast area ex-
tending from Madagascar all through the coasts of the
Indian Ocean to the most eastern part of the Pacific,
but were separated by geological convulsions and the
pressure of pre-historic events. The Macedonians were
astonished, on their great march to the Hydaspes, at
meeting with no curly-haired oriental negroes. And
Ptolemy, in his map east of the Golden Chersonesus
of Malaya, has a country of negro fish-eaters. But
this archaic race, the Indo-African, preceded the later
East-Asian who developed the Malayo-Polynesian and
who in time were also subjected to the pressure of immi-
gration, the immigration of the Aryans. The black and
curly-haired stock had either b een killed off or driven
from India long before the Macedonian era, or had scat-
tered in hidden and almost unknown retreats where
they have existed through all the vicissitudes of the
Great Indian Empire down to the present day. Traces
of the race are still found in Madagascar, and in the
low islands of the Paumotas. Fiji and Madagascar
have names in common for the cocoanut, the yam, the
plantain, the esculent arum and many other edible
roots and fruits. The “ Casuarina is “ filau or
“ velau ”in both places. Remnants of this early
race are still to be found in Sumatra, Celebes,
Ceram, Buro, and other Malayan Islands, and
in the Golden Chersonesus (the Malayan Benin-


snla) itself. The Rev. P. Favre writes of them ;
“their hair, though black and frizzled, has not the
crispness of the Kaffirs. The Semangs Orang Binua
men of the soil or land, were seldom seen by the civil-
ized.” Pere Bourien speaks of the men of the forest,
and Orang Bukit, or men of the hills. “ They eat
anything, have frizzled hair, yield a strong smell, and
tell the truth.” They once occupied New Zealand,
Tonga, Samoa, the Society and Sandwich Islands, and
in company with the ZEpyornis, Dinornis, Casuarius,
Bennettii, and other extinct and extant struthious
birds were left stranded and isolated upon the high
lands when their original homes on the old southern
continent were submerged.
Much mental ingenuity has been wasted over the
question of the migration of these early people, but if
doubts and difficulty envelope the subject as regards
the comparatively recent Malayo-Polynesian, what can
be said of the original home and history of the Keloe-
nonesian or Melanesian. It is probable that long after
their original migration, if there was one, the great
convulsion began to affect the land they occupied.
Mount Erebus, 12,000 feet high, rose in the south. The
great ranges of the Himalaya were thrown up. The
region of the Palm, the Bamboo, and other gigantic
grasses, w T ere upheaved and became the home of the
arctic lichen, and the abode of eternal snow. By the laws
of compensation a corresponding region was depressed.
The present waters of the Pacific and Indian Oceans
rolled in and covered the old continent. Highways of
tribes were covered by eddying currents. Forests were
engulphed in the waves. Hills sank to ocean beds,
and the former mountains only furnished a retreat and
[Note.- — The Fijian scholar, in the words Binua and Bukit, will
recognize the Fijian vanua land and buke hill.]


saved the remnant of the people. How vast the num-
bers perishing in the floods, or hungered to death in
wastes, or killed in ruthless wars for land and food,
such pre-historic times can never tell.
if, as it has been thought, this lost southern conti-
nent flourished when most of Europe, Asia and North-
ern Africa knew only the sound of roaring waves, how
ancient is this Melanesian race. Beneath their palms
and their banyan trees they struggled and survived
while the pyramids were being raised, while the rudest
hu ts of Nimrod rose by the Euphrates, and while the
ancestors of Pericles ate their acorn suppers.
In Fiji the fern tree valleys and the coral girt shore
still echo the laughter of the tribes, and every effort is
beingmade in the first Polynesian possession of Great Bri-
tain to raise the intellectual and social standard of the
race and save them from the gloomy fate which has
overtaken so many other inhabitants of the dark corners
of the earth.
The Fijians are a well-made, stalwart race, differing
in color according to the situation in which they live.
The mountaineers are darker than their brethren on
the coast where the Malayo-Polynesian element is
often strongly apparent. The predominant hue is a
red-brown. In character they have been described as
“ full of contradictions, sometimes kind and tractable,
at others relentlessly cruel and obstinate. Not a
brave people, very unforgiving and ungrateful,
lazy and treacherous, but withal manageable
with tact and firmness.” This description is
partly true and partly a libel. It would perhaps be
useful and interesting to read the description of a
white man given by a discerning and thoughtful
Fijian. Much of the contradictory, intractable, and
obstinate, in the native character may be set down to
a misunderstanding of, and a disregard for, Fijian


ignorance and habits of thought. When following
their chiefs or European leaders in action they have
shewn themselves brave, loyal and faithful to death.
But in this as in other things, they must follow their
chief. They have no individuality.
In their own way they are industrious people. They
dislike prolonged and sustained work, but it must be
remembered that hitherto sustained work has not
been necessary to their existence. There has been no
need for unremitting exertion, and therefore they
have not adopted the severe labour of the white man
spurred on by love, hunger, or the pursuit of honour.
Some of those who have known them long and well,
and who have had experience of semi-savage life else-
where, have pronounced them to be the kindest and
best-hearted native race in the world, and have
advanced as an argument that in no other country in
similar condition have Europeans mingled with the
people, settled down in isolated spots, and possessed
themselves of the ‘eyes of the land, without the
necessity of holding their position by the strong hand,
and without a large amount of bloodshed on both
sides. Unlike the Melanesian of the New Hebrides, the
Fijian always dwelt in good houses built on raised foun-
dations. Their inner town was usually surrounded
with a bank and moat. In time of war a fence was
added, and at night the people retired within the line
of defence. Their laws were, and to some extent still
are, partly patriarchal and partly feudal. Their
former religion was the worship of ancestors. Many
of their former rites and ceremonies were among the
most ancient in the world. Monoliths were to be seen
at, or near, every heathen temple, they practised cir-
cumcision, and they saluted a person sneezing. The
unit of society was and is still the mataqaii or family,
an association of mataqalis, or families, forms the qali,


or gens, and the union of the qali constitutes the
matanitu, or tribe. Service, not unlike the Rajah
Kariya of Ceylon, was paid to the chiefs and over-
lords. Sometimes this service was rendered in the
form of personal and domestic supplies, and sometimes
in the form of service in war. The qali rendering this
last description of service were termed the Bail
At the present time the head chief of a Matanitu
(now constituting a Province) is styled Roko, and has
under his executive control the Bulis or chiefs of qali.
These again have under them the heads of the mata-
qali who are generally ' turacja ni Iwro ,’ or chiefs of
towns. The Rokos are responsible directly to the
Governor. The elders and smaller chiefs meet fre-
quently to discuss their local affairs, and Provincial
Councils, at which the Bulis, Magistrates, and sub-
ordinate officers of districts attend, meet every three
months. A Great Council of Chiefs, consisting of the
Rokos of Provinces, and their officers meet annually
for the discussion of native affairs throughout the
colony. At this Council each chief reports the state
of his district or province, and submits for considera-'
tion any suggestions or proposals he may with to
make. The Governor opens this Council, and at its
close receives the reports and suggestions of the chiefs.
These latter he approves, modifies, or reserves for con-
sideration, as may seem proper. He also at this
Council makes known to the chiefs and people any
directions he may have to give for the coming year.
The object of the Government has been to adopt
and improve the original, social, and political organiza-
tion of the people, and to administer the native laws
and regulations through native agency. It cannot be
denied that instances occur in which a native official
makes a mistake, but it cannot be denied also that it is
better that a class of men so capable of improvement


as the Fijian should have an opportunity of learning
than that they should be denied the opportunity for
doing so which is afforded by permitting them to take
a share in the administratiion of government among
their own people.
In a country like Fiji it would be expensive, if not
impossible, to replace the services of natives in au-
thority by white officials solely, and the attempt might
not be without danger, for the non-recognition of the
leading chiefs’ position would not abate one jot or
tittle of their influence among the people ; while it
would, in place of the cheeiful and loyal assistance
now rendered to the Government, have provoked
suspicion and discontent, self-respect would have
followed the loss of position, and there would have
been a failure of the understanding and promises made
to the natives at the time of Cession.
So far this system of governing the natives with
and through the natives, which will be described more
minutely further on, has worked economically and
well. The Government succeeds in doing what other-
wise could not possibly be effected, and the people
feel, to use their own expression that they are still “ a
voice in the land,” that they are not to be degraded
and their chiefs ignored as an outcast, alien, and subject
race. There still remains much to be done for the
native. The women must be raised to a higher
domestic position. Industrial schools for the rising
generation must be established. Sanitary laws have
to be promulgated and enforced, and the introduction
and regular use of grain, milk, and meat as articles of
food must be attempted.
The population, numerically, is either stationary or
slightly increasing, and under a wise system of govern-
ment, the maxim of which in regard to natives,
should be feslina lente , it may be hoped that an in-


teresting and fine race of people will be preserved from
destruction, and that for once there may be shewn an
exception to the alleged rule that wh ere white and
black come into contact the latter surely decay and
disappear.
Cjobtrnnu'ut ant legislation
The Colony of Fiji is a Crown Colony, the affairs of
which are administered by a Governor and Executive
Council. The laws are prepared by a Legislative
Council, of which the Governor is chairman, and the
Chief Justice and the members of the Executive
Council, official members, and there are, in addition, a
certain proportion of unofficial members, nominated
by the Governor and appointed by the Queen.
At present the Council consists of thirteen members,
of whom seven are official and six nominee, or un-
official members.
The form of legislation is similar to that adopted in
constitutional colonies, all laws being contained in the
Ordinances passed by the Legislative Council, or in
matters of minor detail in proclamations or regula-
tions prepared by the Governor with the advice of the
Executive Council and laid before the Legislative
Council, when such a mode of procedure has been
authorised by an Ordinance.
The Ordinances have legal effect from the date of
their passing, or other date fixed for their coming into
operation, but the Queen may refuse assent to any
Ordinance, or may require amendments to be sub-
mitted to the Legislative Council.
On the institution of British authority in the Fiji


Islands the Acts of the Parliament of New South
Wales were as far as applicable to the circumstances of
the colony temporarily adopted as the laws of the
colony of Fiji, but in the Ordinance erecting a Supreme
Court it is provided that the law of England is to be
taken wherever no other provision has been made by
the local law, to be applied in a manner suitable to
the circumstances of the colony.
The fact of the Colony on its creation being practi-
cally without any system of legislation has enabled
the Crown to initiate laws affecting the great interests
of the colony, which might not have been possible
under other circumstances. In a subsequent chapter
the very important matter of Land Titles will be
treated, and it may be sufficient to mention here some
of the other more important measures which have
become law.
A system of registration of deeds, writings and docu-
ments prevails by which, in addition to Land Titles,
all deeds whatever may be registered for preservation.
A mode of enforcing the execution of deeds has been
provided, the idea being taken partly from the French
and partly from the Scotch systems, by which it is
not necessary to have recourse to the Courts of law
when the party bound by a deed has failed to perform
his part thereof: The creditor or the party in whose
favor the obligation was undertaken may obtain a
Warrant of Execution from the Registrar-General
which has all the effect of a judgment of the proper
Court, and may be enforced by the Sheriff in the usual
way. This throws the onus of having recourse to the
Courts of law upon the debtor, who may take out an
injunction to stay the proceedings of the Sheriff, But
to obtain this he must set forth good and sufficient
reasons to satisfy the Court either that the obligation
he undertook has been paid or satisfied, or that it


ought not be enforced for some special reason advanced.
The much greater hold thus given to the creditor has
an especial value in inducing Credit Companies and
Capitalists to be liberal in their advances to planters
and others for the development of the colony. In the
same way it is not necessary to have recourse to the
Courts to enforce payment of Bills of Exchange, The
extended protest of the Notary Public is registered
and a warrant of execution obtained from the Regis-
trar General which may be put in the hands of the
sheriff.
The Cash Credit system which has done so much to
develop the prosperity of Scotland has also been intro-
duced, under which a Bank, upon the security of one
or more guarantors, may advance money to a third
person on an account to be operated on by him up to
definite amount, he and the guarantors being jointly
and severally liable for the balance due at any time
the Bank may desire to bring the account to a close.
Here again there is no necessity for an appeal to the
Courts, but a Warrant of Execution may be obtained
by the Bank on the registration of the Cash Credit
Bond.
The Bankrupty Ordinance of the Colony has some
new features. The most notable perhaps is that while
all persons, whether traders or not, may apply to be
made bankrupt (there is no separate system of insol-
vency) a non-trader can only do so if a writ of arrest is out
against him for payment of a debt of £SO or upwards,
and the definite adjudication is not granted until the
applicant has passed a public examination. If any
suspicious dealings should be discovered the adjudi-
cation would be refused, and the creditors left to their
remedies, including imprisonment of the debtor. A
trader may apply if he is in a state of pecuniary
embarrassment—but where he does so of his own


accord the public examination must be passed before
adjudication. Where the application is reasonable
and proper the system of the Ordinance is to regard a
dividend of 10s. in the pound as satisfactory, entitling
the debtor to a first class certificate without further
trouble, but where a less dividend is paid, or is likely
to be obtained, the discharge will, in the general case,
be only qualified and the debtor required to pay
from his future earnings as much as will make up a
dividend of ten shillings in the pound to the creditors.
As might have been expected the bankruptcies are
very few. The remedy of imprisonment for debt
exists, and is frequently employed for the recovery of
small sums. The debtor may apply for his release on
giving up his property, or by undertaking to pay the
debt by instalments, with or without security as the
Court may allow.
By a law passed at a very early period of the exist-
ence of the Colony the judgments of the Courts of the
Australian colonies may be enforced in Fiji, but these
colonies have, up to the present time, failed to give
the same facilities to judgments of the Supreme Court
of Fiji.
For the purpose of encouraging all kinds of lawful
enterprise the Partnership law has been codified, and
various improvements introduced which have not yet
been adopted in England. The partnership, for
example, may sue and be sued in its own name as if it
were a person, and foreign companies may sue or be
sued in the same manner on the name of their resident
manager or other officer being registered. A planta-
tion may be carried on in partnership and the real as
well as personal estate be held in the partnership
name. There may be not only unlimited partnerships
and limited companies, but the continental system of
having limited partners in private partnerships has


also been introduced. By this means a plantation or
other business may be carried on by an individual or
by two or more partners, they being liable to the full
extent of their means, while friends who may have
confidence in them may go in as partners to a definite
amount, drawing whatever proportion of profit may
be stipulated, but not being liable beyond the original
amount contributed by them. Creditors are notified
of the nature of such partnerships by the registration
of a summary of the articles of partnership and the
disclosing of the sums advanced in this manner, but
not the names of the limited partners which, contrary
to the continental system, may be kept secret.
Much of the early legislation was necessarily taken
up with the subject of native laborers, Fijians and
imported Polynesians and coolies. Full details of the
system at work will be found in another chapter,
but it will readily be admitted that the difficulties of
adjusting a legislative system which will ensure the
protection and encouragement of the various classes of
laborers named, with the demands of the white settlers,
is no easy task, and must require much careful watch-
ing and improvement from time to time.
The Ordinances providing for a Supreme Court, for
civil and criminal procedure, and the appointment of
Stipendiary Magistrates, embrace many improvements
which it would occupy too much space to enumerate.
Suffice it to say that pleadings are brief, and that
cases are heard within a very short period after the
service of the Writ of Summons. Both facts and law
are determined by the Court. An appeal is allowed
to the Privy Council when the value in dispute is
£SOO or upwards. In criminal cases the accused is
permitted to make his own statement or answer
questions put to him by the the presiding Judge. In the
trial of native cases the Judge has the assistance of


Assessors, and this system, is also adopted where whites
are accused of doing injury to natives. In other criminal
cases trials are by jury. A cheap and speedy system
is in operation for the recovery of debts up to £SO,
these cases being taken in the different districts by
the Stipendiary Magistrates as Commissioners of the
Supreme Court which revises the decisions before
execution is granted in cases above £lO value.
A law has been passed providing for the govern-
ment of towns by means of a Warden and Town
Board, and elaborate bye-laws have been framed under
the powers of the Ordinance for the conduct of the
municipal business of Levuka, the chief town. An
education law has been passed under which a flourish-
ing public school has been established in Levuka, and
a High School is in contemplation at no distant date.
The public health has been duly provided for by
means of Local Authorities in the different districts,
although the want of medical officers is a serious
drawback to the efficient carrying out of any sanitary
laws.
Altogether it may be fairly said that during the
years of Sir Arthur Gordons administration the laws
which have been already passed, and the codifying
Ordinances of various parts of the law which are now
before the legislature, place the legislation of the colony
in a position which might afford a model to many
older and richer countries.


titles ttr 3£mt'D.
The white settlers who have proved the bona fides
of their claims receive a Grant from the Crown which
thenceforward becomes the basis of the title. This is
issued in duplicate under the seal of the Colony, one
copy being retained for registration, and the other
delivered to the grantee. A plan of the land by the
Crown Surveyor of the Colony is delineated on the
Grant. All the mortgages and encumbrances on the
land are also entered thereon by the Registrar of
Titles, so that the Grant not only shows who is the
grantee, but also the condition of the land as regards
indebtedness. When a grantee sells he must use the
form of Transfer provided by the Real Property
Ordinance, 1876, printed copies of which are publicly
sold, and which may easily be filled up by any intelli-
gent person. If a solicitor be employed his remunera-
tion is regulated according to a moderate scale of
charges contained in a schedule to the Ordinance, and
the fee thus allowed covers all professional work in
connection with the Transfer. The Transfer is, in its
turn, registered by handing in a duplicate for the
purpose, and the Registrar of Titles then issues a
Certificate of Title which is practically a renewed
Crown Grant to the purchaser, with all the mortgages
and encumbrances marked thereon as in the case of
the original Crown Grant. A new Certificate of Title
is granted as often as the property is transferred, so
that the title consists of one deed simply and is always
kept clear and distinct without any accumulation of
papers and deeds so puzzling to non-professional per-
sons, and so fruitful a source of expense in lawyers’
charges and otherwise. It is provided that the original
Grants, and all Certificates of Title granted upon
Transfer, aie indefeasible. An exact reproduction of


the Title is kept in the volumes of the Registrar of
Titles and the Registrar has ample powers to deal with
any of the ordinary accidents which may occur in
regard to documents. Where any question of import-
ance arises, for example, whether a particular caveat
or mortgage should be inscribed first, the Registrar of
Titles has power to refer, in a summary way, to the
Supreme Court, and the Court, after hearing parties,
can give directions.
The whole system of Land Titles is based upon
registration, so that the Transfer or Mortgage only
becomes effective when registered. In place, there-
fore, of the Transfer conveying the property when
signed and delivered, as would be the case in England,
the Transfer is rather the warrant to the Registrar to
change the title to the new name. Again, in order
that there may be no mistake as to the time when a
document concerning land, whether mortgage, transfer
or encumbrance, is handed in, a book is kept called the
Presentation Book in which all documents are entered
the moment they are presented for registration. The
hour and minute of presentation is at once inserted in
the appropriate column and that date, so fixed, is the
date of registration which is thereafter marked on the
deeds and rules the rights of parties.
The only property in land which is recognised by
the law is that of fee simple, so that the whole of the
perplexing conveyancing law of England in regard to
limited and conditional fees, and fees tail is inapplic-
able to the colony. When a proprietor desires to make
a provision for his wife and children he may set forth
his wishes, for example, in a Trust Deed, which may
be registered as such in the Register of Deeds, but any
provision to affect the land must be done according to
the forms in the Real Property Ordinance, and the
purposes of the Trust are not allowed to encumber the


title to land or the Registry of Titles. If the proprie-
tor should desire to limit his own right in the land to
a life rent and to transfer the estate to the Trustees
for the purposes of the Deed or Settlement, he must
create an Encumbrance of his own life rent, and
execute a transfer to the Trustees of the fee
simple. A certificate of title will then issue to the
Trustees as proprietors of the fee simple until they in
their turn transfer, with the life rent of the Truster
marked on the Certificate of Title as an Encumbrance.
The Title will thus be kept clear even in those cases
where proprietors wish to tie up their own hands from
dealing with their own property, but which can only
be done to a limited extent as there must always be a
living proprietor in fee simple entitled to deal with
the land subject to the mortgages and encumbrances.
A mortgage is defined to be a pledge of the real
property for the purposes of security only. If the
money borrowed be not paid, the mortgagee —the
holder of the pledge—may, after sufficient intimation
of his intention, apply to the Court to order a Sale.
Precautions are taken to prevent the property being
sacrificed at a moment inopportune for sales of land.
The mortgagee cannot enter into possession of the
property in the old way, for the purpose of holding
and working it by means of his own capital, and then
long years afterwards be called by the mortgagor to
tile his accounts and redeliver the lands. This system
of the neighboring colonies, so prolific of embittered
law-suits, is inconsistent both with the only idea of
property in land which is recognised in our law, viz.,
that of fee simple, or with that of a forfeited
pledge, which, if forfeited, ought to be sold under
regulations. The mortgagee in the case of an
entry upon the lands would not be proprietor in
fee pimple, and thus the clearness and simplicity of


title on the Register, which has been the aim of the
Real Property Ordinance, would be interfered with by
one person being the virtual proprietor for a time, and
another the legal and registered proprietor. When
the land, which has been given in pledge, is sold, the
Court distributes the price among the mortgagees and
encumbrancees according to the order of their priority,
handing over the balance, if any, to the mortgagor.
The purchaser obtains a title by the issue of a new
Certificate of Title by the Registrar in his favor,
purged of all previous Mortgages and Encumbrances.
Thus again is the title kept clear and the value of the
landed property in the hands of the purchaser by so
much enhanced, which, in turn, ensures the highest
market price being obtained for the property at the
sale.
Leases are treated as Encumbrances, and to be valid
must be registered if they are for more than one year’s
duration. As Encumbrances they are entered on the
title, so that when a proprietor of land applies to
a banker or capitalist for an advance, he shows his
Crown Grant, or Certificate of Title, upon which is
entered all the mortgages affecting the land, all the
Encumbrances of every kind such as provisions for
children, and all the leases. The banker may not be
unwilling to make the advance desired, and if it be
for a temporary purpose only, for which it is not con-
sidered necessary to draw out a mortgage, the title
may be deposited as an Equitable Mortgage. This
may be protected by a caveat entered on the Register
which prevents all dealing with the land to the preju-
dice of the holder of the Equitable Mortgage. The
land may be sold for the sum found to be due under
the advance when judgment has been obtained, but
within a shorter space of time than where there is no
Equitable Mortgage.


It will thus be seen that the European Titles to
Land in Fiji are absolutely secure, each Crown Grant
or Certificate of Title upon Transfer, which is in effect
a new grant from the Crown, being indefeasible, and
that everything has been done which experience ol
the systems adopted in other countries rendered pos-
sible to keep the title from confusion, to make mort-
gages secure, and to enable money advanced upon
land to beatcommand forre-paymentwithout the lender
subjecting himself to onerous responsibilities, or the
land itself rendered unsaleable and out of the circle of
credit, by the title being weighted with uncleared
encumbrances from which no one could derive any
possible benefit.
-iiJi —5i — MSH
xtraliE ant dtommem.
The geographical position of Fiji with regard to
other groups of islands in the South Pacific is so ad-
vantageous that it can be assumed time is only
necessary to make it a grand central commercial depot
of them all, and it affords satisfaction to the colonists
to see that Fiji is gradually taking up that position.
In judging of the indications of prosperity presented
by the figures which follow, it is necessary to keep in
view the extreme youth of the colony. The planta-
tions of the white settlers are only very partially
developed, arrangements for the introduction of
machinery, such as sugar mills, are only beginning to
be made, and the natives, who will ultimately become


both considerable producers and large consumers of
imports, have only began to taste the benefits which
industry and a system of exchange of products, can
bring in their train. To the colonists of Australia and
New Zealand the figures which we can at present
show are small indeed compared to the magnificent
returns of our neighbors, but these ought to be looked
at as the mere germ, the early promise, of what will
eventually be a flourishing growth.
It was unfortunately necessary, as the only possible
means of raising sufficient revenue to carry on the
work of Government, to lay customs duties on imports,
varying in amount for different articles, but bearing for
all articles not specially assessed an ad valorem duty
of ten per cent. It would be absurd to suppose that
the hurtful effect of such duties upon the trade of a
rising colony is not as well known to the Government
as to the merchant or trader, but as the only alterna-
tive must be a direct tax upon income and property,
which the settlers, only beginning to bring- their
estates into cultivation, or the commercial classes or
employes of the Government could ill bear, it was
impossible to proceed upon opinions of what was
theoretically the best system of taxation. Any break
down of revenue would have destroyed the confidence
of the Home Government in the success of the experi-
ment, and given a handle to all those who were
opposed to the annexation of Fiji to work against its
best interests. Now that the worst of the danger is
past, and a very considerable revenue may be expected
not only from the system of native taxation, but from
stamps, succession duties, office fees, and various
internal taxes, it may be confidently anticipated that
the tariff will be simplified, and duties upon all the
necessary articles of consumption modified, as rapidly
as the exigencies of revenue will admit.


General Trade.
The official returns that have been issued for the
last four years show that the Exports and Imports
have increased from £198,264 in 1876 to £311,252 in
1879, or about fifty-seven and a half per cent, in
three years, The amount of produce raised in the
colony has increased during the same term from
£80,786 to £132,512, or fully sixty per cent.
Imports.
As a British possession Fiji well sustains its com-
mercial connection with its sister colonies and the
mother country, for the same returns shew that the
value of the Imports in 1879 from British possessions
was £135,398, whilst the imports from other countries
was only £6,714, or, in other words, Fiji imported over
twenty times as much merchandize from British
possessions as she did from foreign countries.
This naturally arises from the close connection which
the bulk of the settlers have with the Australian colo-
nies, and the fact that as yet the Colony and its
resources are so little known to other nations. In
point of fact, however, some of the most enterprising
business houses in Levuka are German, and much of
the produce of copra and cotton is shipped to Ger-
many, calling, however, at Falmouth for orders, which
makes it appear in the Returns as if the cargoe s
had been sent to England. The return ships which
come out from Germany do not on the other hand
come direct to Fiji, but go first to Samoa and Tonga
to take in part of their cargo. The leading article
of import is drapery, being that which is most
largely consumed by the numerous native population.
They take it in the shape of “ sulus ” or cloths to
wrap round their bodies, of under-shirts, which the
more important natives now generally wear in addi-


tion to the sulu, and of skirts, jackets and gay colored
handerchiefs for the women. The European popula-
tion being now more successful is also investing in a
better class of goods, and especially in Levuka
there is a great difference in the style of dress.
A considerable amount of common drapery is also
required for paying off the Polynesian laborers, who,
however, as a rule, when on the estates, prefer to
go clad in a very scanty manner. There has been
no attempt in Fiji to force the natives to adopt Euro-
pean costumes, but, as in other countries, the possession
of exchangeable commodities leads them to clothe
themselves and their wives and families in richer
stuffs and a more becoming manner. The advance, there-
fore, in the import of drapery, whatever it may be,
may be taken as a genuine advance occasioned by the
increasing wealth of the country. In 1877 there was
a great rise in th‘e imports of drapery, the amount
having risen from £30,331 in 1876 for the whole
Colony to close upon £48,000 for 1877; that is
about sixty-two per cent in one year, notwithstanding
the great decrease in the native population, probably
amounting to one-fourth of their number, during the
epidemic of measles. Therisewas not sustained, and 1878
and 1879 show a decrease upon this large amount, the
figures being £37,556 for 1878, and £36,084 for 1879.
Taking the figures of 1879 as compared with the im-
port of 1876 they show, however, an excess of twenty
per cent., which may be taken as the sound natural
increase of consumption in the three years from the
end of 1876. The next most important article is hard-
ware, including, as it does, all the simple agricultural
implements of knives, axes, and other articles which
are used by the natives. There has been here a slight
decrease in 1879 as compared with 1878, figures being
£19,751 for the latter and £17,964 for the former,


but a variation may be occasioned on any article
by one cargo even of the Sydney steamer being
included in one year’s returns or another. On the
consumption there has been a large and satisfactory
increase since 1876, the amount imported in that year
being £11,076 15s. Bd., and in 1877, as we have seen,
£17,964, or an increase of about sixty-one per cent, in
three years. It need scarcely be pointed out that
these figures, which are the invoice values upon which
the customs duties are assessed, in no way represent
either the amount of money which is paid for these
goods by the importers, nor the price paid by the con-
sumers which may be said to be the purchasing power
of future exports. To the invoice value, as far as the
traders are concerned, the duty must be added, and as
regards the consumers, not only is the price increased
by the duty and the interest and commission on the
payment of the duty by the trader, but the large
profit which the trader makes on such articles. There
is in fact a large and increasing internal trade which
cannot be measured, as there is no method, as in
foreign trade, by which the statistics may be taken.
The other items of import consist of a great variety
of articles of trade and consumption, which it would
be tedious to classify or enumerate.
Exports.
The total exports have increased from £103,459 in
1876 to £169,040 Bs. in 1879, being an increase of
sixty-one per cent in the three years. The colony is
admirably situated as regards several excellent
markets for its tropical produce. It is within easy
distance of New South Wales, Victoria and New
Zealand, where its sugar, maize, fibre, peanuts, fruit,
pearlshell and other products find ready markets.
The principal other articles of export, and indeed at


present the most considerable of all, the copra and
cotton, go either directly to Europe, or to Australia
simply in transit to Europe. A striking example
of how commerce is created by the accessibility of a
market, is afforded by the fruit trade between Levuka
and Sydney, which has sprung up since the monthly
steamer has begun to run. In 1876 the export of
green fruit to Sydney was represented by a value of
£lO, in 1877 it had increased to £IBO, in 1878 it took
a jump to £1,642, and in 1879 to £2,605. The fruit
trade with New Zealand will probably increase in a
similar ratio if the present attempt to keep a monthly
steamer on the line should prove successful. The
fruit at present exported is chiefly bananas, but the
pineapple grows in all the islands like a weed, the
grand passion fruit, grenadilla, grows most luxuriantly
and several of the native fruits such as dawa and the
ivi-nut would doubtless become universal favourites.
Oranges, shaddocks, lemons, and limes may be
exported in any quantity. The export of sugar is
almost equally divided between New Zealand and
Victoria : that to the former passing through Levuka,
and the latter through Suva. The sugar mills may as
yet be numbered on the fingers of one hand, so that
the addition of a single mill might alter the course of
trade. Indeed when the Colonial Sugar Company of
Sydney, which has resolved to enter the field, has its
first mill erected, the larger quantity of sugar will be
exported to Sydney. Of the two articles of copra and
cotton, the export of the former of which from Levuka
amounted to £56,390 in 1876 and the latter to
£38,860, by far the larger quantity goes either directly
to Hamburg or to Falmouth or Queenstown for orders.
A considerable quantity, however, of both finds its
way through Sydney. There was in 1879 a large
decrease in the amount of copra exported compared to


1878, but it arose partly from accidental causes
The amount of 1878, it is confidently believed, will be
largely exceeded in the present year. Coffee, which
will be soon exported in large quantities, had scarcely
begun to show in the returns for 1879, but the value
was £4OO exported against £l5 in the prOceding year.
This in future will be one of our substantial exports,
and will probably be fairly divided between all oui‘
colonial markets.
The following table shews the total values of
the principal exports for the years 1876-1879 :
Copra 308,849 17 0
Sea Island Cotton ... ... ... 97,532 10 0
Sugar ... ... ... ... ... 71,932 7 0
Maize 38,927 7 0
Green Fruit ... ... ... ... 5,828 5 0
Beche de mer ... ... ... ... 12,286 0 0
Candlenuts ... ... ... ... 9,956 19 0
Cocoanuts ... ... ... ... 1,974 14 0
Cottonseed ... ... ... ... 2,999 8 0
Hides ... ... ... ... ... 483 0 0
Arrowroot ... ... ... ... 1,575 0 0
Coffee 683 0 0
Fibre 11,507 0 0
Fungus... ... ... ••• 790 0 0
Livestock ... ... ••• ••• 830 0 0
Molasses ... ••• 3,675 0 0
Oil, Cocoanut ... ... 1,989 0 0
Peanuts... ... ... ••• ••• 7,941 0 0
Pearlshell ... ••• ... ... 4,554 0 0
Tortoiseshell ... ... ••• 1,751 0 0
Spirits (Col. dis.) ... ... ... 2,518 0 0
Timber... ... ••• ••• ••• 1,500 0 0
Wool 2,544 0 0
Yams 941 0 0


Steam Communication.
There is a monthly Mail Service between Sydney
and Fiji, subsidized by the Government, and carried
on by the finest steamers of the A. S. N. Co’s fleet.
Messrs. James McEwan and Co., of Melbourne and
Suva, have a steamer of considerable tonnage running
regularly between Melbourne, Levuka and Suva_
Another Company maintains monthly steam com-
munication between New Zealand and Levuka,
The A. S. N. Co. have also a fine steamer subsidized
by the Government which makes regular trips to
Tonga (Friendly Islands), employing its other time in
making short trips within the colony: in this work of
keeping up regular communication between the differ-
ent islands in Fiji, it is assisted by another of the
Company’s steamers.
Other Shipping,
A large portion of the exports, principally
is shipped in fine vessels trading direct from Fiji to
England and the continent of Europe, and a numerous
fleet of brigs and schooners assist in carrying on trade
with the neighboring colonies and importing labourers
from Polynesia. A great number of small craft is
continuously employed within the group in collecting
produce to the commercial centres.
Marine Board.
A Marine Board has lately been constituted to
supervise the shipping of the Colony.
Light-Houses, Beacons, &c.
Some have already been erected, and a considerable
amount of money has been voted by the Legislature
for expenditure in this direction.


Banks.
At present the only Banking institution having a
branch in Fiji is the Bank of New Zealand, which has
been established in Levuka since 1876, when it took
over the business of the Fiji Banking Company. It
is confidently expected that other Banks will have
established branches in Fiji ere long.
Insurance Companies
There are five Companies having branches and
agencies in Levuka. Lloyds have also an established
agency.
Chamber of Commerce.
This Association has been in existence for a few
years.
Agdcttltaw.
Cotton.
Sea Island Cotton was the first means of bringing
the Fiji Islands under the eyes of the outside world.
The commencement of this industry was due to Dr.
Brower, for many years the Official Representative in
the group of the United States of America, who in
the year 1863 planted the first Sea Island Cotton
grown in the present colony of Fiji. In the year
1865 this Sea Island Cotton was sold in seed to a
trading vessel at eight cents a pound, which would
be about equivalent in those bye-gone days to two
shillings a pound for clean ginned cotton.


The soils most suitable to the growth of the Sea
Island Cotton are to he found on the rich sandy flats
encircling the different islands ; also the rich black
loam and chocolate soils are suitable to its growth.
Care must be taken in choosing the land, as the richer
the soil so much better will be the yield. Great mis-
takes were made by early settlers in choosing grass
land, as the cost of clearing and planting same was
much lower than on that more heavily covered.
The process of planting is as follows First fell
the trees and undergrowth and let them remain till
dry. A fire, if lit on a windy day, will destroy a
great portion of the felled timber; then stack in heaps
and burn again until the ground is quite clear ; large
logs may be left with advantage to rot on the ground.
The next step is to mark off the ground. This is done
with lines marked off* according to the quality of the
land. On the best land the trees should be about four
feet apart, and in the rows about eight feet. On
poorer lands from 6 x 3 to 7 X 3|. Then dig the
holes 9 inches to 1 foot deep. Each man then carries
the seed in a bag, placing from five to six pips in each
hole, thus ° o ° about an inch under the soil, and then
flattens slightly with hand the top of ground where
the seed is placed. In about three to four days the
seed will have sprung if the weather is moist. In
about ten to fourteen, pass men through rows to thin
out to three seeds and slightly hill same, and again in
about the same time thin out to one and keep well
hilled up as the wind, if at all strong, is very apt
to snap off* the young trees near the ground. The
growth of the tree is very rapid, as in two to two and
a half months it will be four or five feet high if it be
not topped. This should be effected when it is about
four to four feet six inches high. It is done by seizing
the head within about an inch of the top of the tree


and breaking it off. The tree then spreads out its
branches, and the first flowers will be showing three
months after planting ; these are yellowish, and last
only from twelve to twenty-four hours and then turn
a reddish pink and fall off. The boll then commences
to form and in about six weeks is fully developed,
when, if the weather be hot, it will rapidly burst its
skin and in two or three days the fine white silky
Sea Island Cotton hangs waiting to be picked. After
picking, men sort it by taking away any of the dis-
colored cotton and portions of leaf and it is then
ginned. This is for the purpose of separating
the lint from the seed, and is done by ma-
chinery. An eight horsepower engine will drive
six knife gins, and daily with these there can
be passed through from three to five tons of seed
cotton which will produce about the same number of
bales of lint, each containing about 4001hs. It is then
shipped to England where at the present time its
value is from two shillings to two shillings and three
pence a pound. The charges after it is grown and
picked, including ginning, amount to about fivepence
to sixpence a pound. The acreage of land suitable to
Sea Island Cotton so as to make its growth remunerative
is limited, although there are plenty of districts where
the soil is suitable, but the heavy rainfall does not
permit it to become a paying industry. Land fitted
for the growth of Sea Island Cotton and in a suitable
climate may be got from £2 to £4 an acre, and the
cost for the first year of putting in one hundred acres,
clearing, burning off, planting, dwellings and then
keeping the land properly weeded would cost, with
proper management, from £9 to £l2 an acre. The yield
for the first year is comparatively small, as what with
clearing and other heavy work consequent on opening
up a new plantation the cotton is late for the


proper seasons. In February in each year prune the
cotton trees right through the whole plantation?
about five months after the picking commences; this
will take from two and a half to three months.
Some years a second crop is taken off the trees in
January and February; the drawback to this, how-
ever, is, that it throws it out of season for the ensuing
year.
Cotton planting should be done in the latter end of
November and December. The yield per acre in the
second year is, on an average season, from eighty to
ninety pounds of clean cotton, and the expenses of
working second year are considerably reduced by hav-
ing laid out in the first year capital in importing labor,
expenses of clearing, erection of dwellings, &c. The trees
planted the first year can remain for a third year, and
the crop from these will be almost as large as in the
second year. After the crop is finished, pull up the
trees and replant between the rows. Experience here
is that cotton may profitably be grown on the same
land without manuring for fully twenty years.
Coffee.
Coffee industry in Fiji is now making rapid strides,
and no wonder either, seeing how well suited in soil
and climate many parts of the group are for this
peculiar shrub. It is barely four years back since coffee
from Ceylon was introduced and planted out on regu-
larly formed estates, although for many years previ-
ously patches of coffee, supposed to have originally
come from South America, had flourished most luxuri-
antly. Now many estates are being opened up
by Europeans, while the natives, under Government
supervision, have commenced the cultivation in many
suitable districts.


Statistical information may perhaps be advantage-
ously left for a time when this industry—now only in
its infancy —shall have assumed larger dimensions
but a few remarks about cultivation may prove of
some utility to intending settlers.
Cultivation varies very little from that pursued in
other coffee producing countries, but great regard
ought to be paid to the shelter afforded to the planta-
tion from the south-east trade winds, and no shade
trees ought to be left, as coffee does better in the open.
Altitude, however, differs materially from that
necessary in other countries, and experienced planters
from Ceylon say that one thousand feet in Fiji is equal
to about three thousand five hundred feet in Ceylon*
while coffee on the coast lands yields well but gives a
smaller berry.
Seed, when planted in the ordinarily careful way,
quickly germinates and the seedlings are fit for use in
seven months. If planted out in October or No-
vember it will yield a maiden crop of four cwts. per acre
in about two and a half years, while it has already
been proved that almost any weight up to fifteen
cwts. per acre may be picked in successive years
according to variations in climate, soil and weather.
Wide planting, too, will be found advantageous, but
the distance ought to be regulated by the rankness of
the soil, which, being in many places volcanic, causes
the primaries to overlap in the third year when
planted six feet apart.
Topping, likewise, must be regulated by
and in well sheltered places fiveffeet is not too high to
allow, especially where the soil is volcanic.
Handling and pruning, if taken in time, will require
only ordinary attention, but must on no account be
neglected.


Weeding in many districts will prove laborious for
some few years where local labor cannot be obtained
and where contracts consequently cannot easily be
made.
Buildings of a substantial character can be erected
at a moderate cost, fine hard wood being plentiful in
the jungle and easily sawn by Polynesians or other
labor on the estate, while lime is made from the coral
which abounds on the coast.
Leaf disease has already found its way into some
districts, but we need not anticipate very disastrous
results, as, owing to the particularly rich nature of the
soil, the trees run very much to foliage and wood, and
the effect of the disease will rather lessen the crop than
materially injure the trees.
The estimate appended has been formed with great
care from the expenses incurred already in opening up
an estate and may therefore be relied upon as correct-
Ginger.
Ginger is indigenous in Fiji and is to be found
growing luxuriantly in the jungle, but that grown by
Europeans has been imported from Ceylon and is
succeeding admirably.
The small knobs are planted about two feet apart
in rich ground which has been well dug up and is free
from roots and stones.
The crop matures in nine months and, when dug up,
ought to be scalded in boiling water and afterwards
dried in the sun. It is at present exported in this
state and finds a ready market at twenty-five shillings
a cwt., but should means be fouud to bleach it here a
far higher price will be realised.
Preserving ginger ought to become a large industry,
as sugar is grown on the spot, and the ginger ought to
be young and tender when taken for preserving.


This industry offers a fine opening to practical men
of small means.
Cinchona.
Among the many advantages which the cultivation
of the plant possesses over others, one of the most
important is the immense difference which exists
between the expense of production and the market
value of the product. This characteristic is the result
of, first, the comparatively narrow limits of the avail-
able areas within which the Cinchona will thrive.
Secondly, the little labor required during its growth.
Thirdly, the great and increasing demand.
The two questions which a would-be planter most
anxiously asks are—Can I obtain a large return for
my investment ? and, Is the climate a healthy one ?
Elsewhere the answers to both are rarely satisfactory,
and in no other instance that we are aware of can
they be given so emphatically in the affirmative as in
Fiji, and especially in respect to this particular product.
Unfortunately, as will be seen, the cultivation of
it is to a great extent impracticable to a settler who is
poor, and this despite the large returns and the inexpen-
siveness of manipulation. Within the space allowed
for this sketch it is impossible to enter into minute
details, embracing the history, appearance, and many
other interesting characteristics of this tree, but a few
facts and conclusions derived from authoritative
sources, together with practical experience in Ceylon
and observation in Fiji, may be relied upon, and are
all that is requisite here for a practical view of it.
The commercial value of the bark is due to the
alkoloids secreted within it: these are quinine, cin-
chonine, cinchonidine, and quinidine. The high im-
portance and uses of quinine are too well known to
need remark here, and of the others it is only neces-
sary to say that they are rapidly moving forward in


M jf*' ft'
fl. f (A\
VW* " * *
scientific estimation, as experiment shows their cura-
tive powers in some of the greater ills to which large
sections of the human race are subject.
In Ceylon, Cinchona has proved a great success,
although the climate and soil are in no way so favor-
able as in Fiji. In Ceylon the wet season, or mon-
soons, is an almost incessant torrent of rain, which
damages the leaves and branches, and of course gives
an excess of moisture to the roots, while the dry
months act injuriously in the reveise direction;
whereas the characteristic of Fiji is alternate rain and
sunshine throughout the entire year, and, although the
distinction is observed of the “ wet ” and the “ dry ”
seasons, there are continued breaks of fine weather
through the former and repeated showers during the
latter. This most important peculiarity is the chief
cause of the wonderful vigor and rapid growths of
vegetation in this colony, which, in conjunction with
its mineral constituents again accounts for the amazing
fertility of the soil. In Ceylon and India it is found
necessary to plant both coffee and cinchona at high
elevations in order to approach the necessary tempera-
ture, which, owing to the happy geographical position
of Fiji, its latitude, its position within the belt of the
SE trade winds, and its division into a number of
islands refreshed by the surrounding ocean, is here
obtainable at much lower levels.
There are numerous sites, timbered hills and slopes
and well sheltered valleys in Fiji where the welcom e
conditions and soil are everything that the most exact-
ing planter could desire, and the infant Cinchona
plants that have come within the writer’s observation
in this group are much larger and more thoroughly
vigorous than any seen in Asia of a like age. The
great contrast between them leads to the conviction
that the tree in Fiji will, at maturity, have gained a


year, or even more, upon its kin in Ceylon and India,
so that bark from the loppings and thinned out trees
in Fiji would, at four years, be equal to that of five
years in Ceylon, and, at seven years here, the yield he
equal or superior in quality to that of eight years
there, and would undoubtedly present even a greater
contrast in point of size or quantity. The species
which has been most successfully grown in Ceylon is
the succirubra, or red bark, and is one of the most
hardy. It is therefore the favorite in Fiji, but the
variety known as officinalis is also growing in nurseries
of planters as well as in the native gardens under
governmental supervision, and is coming forward with
promising vigor.
The figures which are used by the most experienced
persons to state the value of cultivated Cinchona are
decidedly startling, and even when cut down to a
much lower level and considerably below those assured
by considerable experience, yet remain large. At
the end of the eighth year the planter will have
received at least £4OO to £5OO per acre clear of the
expenses of the culture, lopping, felling, barking, &c.,
the greater portion of it (say five-eighths) being ob-
tained by him at various times between the fourth
and the eighth years, the remaining three eighths
being the average return at the end of the fourth year.
This return really amounts to from £5O to £6O per
acre per annum at the least, and that for every year
from the commencement. The drawback to a poor
man is that he has no return until the fourth year,
and it is, we think, inadvisable for anyone to plant
Cinchona only unless he has at least £2500 or £3OOO,
except he be drawing an income from other sources.
For the capitalist who desires a good investment at
300 or 400 per cent for his money we know of nothing
better than Cinchona.


- ‘ v-.- ' 51 ■■' r
Copra.
The systematic planting of cocoanut trees and the
manufacture of copra (or the cocoanut thoroughly
dried, either artificially or by the heat of the sun) are
branches of agriculture and industry of quite recent
date in Fiji.
Prior to 1870 copra was almost unknown as an
export article from this colony, and although so early
as in 1860 attempts were made to produce copra, the
continued rains and the natural moisture of the
locality (the island of Moturiki) prevented success.
For nearly ten years a product, worth now about
£50,000 per annum, was neglected, and the only use
made of the cocoanut was the production of oil, of
which, at no period, the exports reached the value
of £B,OOO annually. The present yield of nuts is de-
rived almost exclusively from the trees planted years
ago by the natives, and the copra made amounts to
about 4,000 tons per annum.
After the value of copra became better known and
also the easy method of producing it, the planters of
Fiji have gradually established large cocoanut planta-
tions. Since 1871 about 6,000 acres have been put
under cultivation.
The ordinary method of planting nut trees is to
place them in rows of about thirty feet apart, that is
to say, leaving a space of thirty feet between the trees
This gives about fifty trees to the acre. When, in full
bearing, after having reached the age of upwards of
seven years, the trees will produce about half a ton of
copra per acre and about the same amount of cocoanut
fibre. The value of both articles is nearly the same,
viz., about £l2 per ton.
After the fifth year the nut trees are sufficiently tall
to allow cattle and sheep to graze amongst them, so
that the expense and labor of weeding are saved.


When the nuts are first planted crops of cotton and
maize are grown amongst them, but in a few years the
branches of the nut trees produce too much shade and
then they must be kept weeded.
On plantations owned by whites, and on which
formerly cotton was grown, there are, especially on the
Windward Islands, large numbers of cocoanut trees,
planted many years ago by the natives.
The copra made by the settlers from the nuts of
these trees is produced in many instances by artificial
heat; in fact the cocaanut is simply baked in huge
ovens. The natives, however, content themselves with
drying the cocoanut in the sun, and, when care is
taken to keep the dew off the nuts, the best copra that
can be made is produced in four or five days. The
disadvantage of this simple sun drying process is that
in showery weather the whole of the raw material is
spoiled. The drawback to the artificial drying is that
the home buyers are not so willing to give high prices
for copra which has any taint of smoke about it.
In a few years the exports of copra from Fiji will
no doubt be doubled and represent an annual value in
Europe of over £lOO,OOO.
The Cocoanut.
Order —Palmucece. Genus — Cocus.
The cocoanut tree is one of the most beautiful of the
palms, and it is certainly the most generally valuable
and useful of trees. It is grown altogether within the
Tropics, but its favourite localities are on the low-lying
coast lands of the West India Islands, tropical Africa?
India, the Malayan Archepelago, Straits Settlements,
and the islands of the South Pacific. The cocoanut has
been carefully cultivated for a good number of years in
Ceylon, Cochin, Java, and various other places.


The South Sea Islands have been celebrated for many
years for the vigorous growth of their cocoanut palms,
These palms were not cultivated except in the
most crude and primitive manner, yet, withal, the
produce has been truly marvellous.
However, within the last ten years considerable atten-
tion has been called to this product, and a number of
large plantations made. And since Fiji was created a
British dependency a large sum has been invested in
planting and cultivating cocoanuts. The cultivation on
such plantations is thorough and systematic, and the
appearance of those just coming into bearing is such as
to gratify the planter and promise very handsome
returns.
Situation.
The most suitable situation for the full development
of the cocoanut tree is near the sea, or, at anyrate, well
within the influence of the saline air, as salt in some
form is essential to the vigorous development of the
plant.
The smaller islands of Fiji, and the coasts of the
larger islands, are peculiarly well suited to the cultiva-
tion of the cocoanut, as here you have the sea breeze
blowing all the year round over your land and trees.
Sandy beach flats, almost level with the sea, are the
favourite haunts of the cocoanut, and there its greatest
vigour is attained.
Elevation.
The more elevated lands when near the sea arc also
eminently suited to it, especially if the geological forma-
tion be coral or volcanic. Some persons have asserted
that the tree will not thrive nor bear fruit at any great
elevation above sea level. This may obtain on very
large islands or continents, but the opposite has been


proved in Fiji, as we have observed, on the Island of
Rambi, which is 30 miles round, at an elevation of 1000
feet, cocoanut trees bearing well, and these two or three
miles from the sea. It therefore may be considered as
certain that in the parts of Fiji suitable, and where soil,
&c., is favourable, the cocoanut tree will flourish well
up to, at least, an elevation of 500 feet.
Mode of Culture.
The mode of cultivation is as follows : —Get your land
in the right place,—timber land if possible, being the
richer, —clear and burn off as you would for any other
crop, taking care to burn stumps well, otherwise they
will soon come to jungle again. Heavy trunks and
limbs of trees may rot on ground.
Seed Nuts.
When you commence clearing select your nuts
that you intend to plant so that they may
be in the nursery sprouting. In selecting from
about thirty sorts of nuts, the great desideratum is to
get that kind which will bear large nuts and plenty of
them. When you have accomplished this (and you can
purchase such nuts for £2 to £3 per thousand from
natives), and placed them in your shady nursery to
vegetate you may push on your preparation of the land*
When you have your land clean you will decide at
what distances you will plant your trees. From 24 to
30 feet apart, according to situation, may be taken as
the correct thing—the former on high lands, the latter
near the sea beach. If planted 24 feet apart you will
have 75 trees per acre, but if 30 feet apart you have 50
Per acre, or say you take 25 feet as the distance you
will get 70 per acre. There is some advantage as to
space in planting in the mode called u Quincunx,” —
that is, one in each corner, and one in the middle of a
square, so I*l, which system, carried through a


plantation, will give more room to the trees for the
space occupied than by any other method.
Holing.
When you have drawn your lines, and have marked
with pegs or reeds the spots for your trees, you set your
labourers on to dig a hole, or pit, at every such mark.
These holes sheuld be at least 2 feet deep and 2 feet in
diameter, the soil from each being thrown up all round
it.
Planting.
When this is done advantage should be taken of a
wet or showery day when your sprouted nuts have at-
tained a growth of say 9or 12 inches. They should be
taken up and carried to the field and some careful
labourers set to plant them in the holes. This is done
by holding the sprout erect in one hand, and with the
other, digging with a pointed stick a little soil round
off the sides of the hole on to the nut until it is just
covered. He then presses the soil firmly down with his
foot and the work is done. Thus the holes are left, only
very partially filled with soil, the intention of which is
that as the young plant grows the rain, &c., very slowly
and gradually fills in the soil, so that at the end of
twelve or eighteen months the holes are full, and your
young tree has made a fine start in growth.
Cotton.
It is an economical plan to plant some other crop
amongst your young nuts for the first two or three
years when they are small. Sea Island cotton is the
crop usually selected for this purpose, as it does not
impoverish the land much, and it gives a quick return*
If, therefore, cotton is put in you can plant thiee rows
of it between each row of nuts. You will thus weed
and keep clean two crops with one trouble and expense,


and the crop of cotton should at least pay for the whole
cultivation during the term you keep it on the ground.
Cattle.
You will find it necessary to pull up your cotton in
the third year, as by that time your cocoanuts will have
attained such a size as to throw too much shade on the
cotton. After this, for another year or two, you should
keep well weeded a space round each tree of 6 feet at
least, and have the soil in that space stirred up occa-
sionally. About the fifth year you cannot do better
than turn in a herd of cattle to your nut plantations, as
by that time the trees will be out of reach of mischief.
This small herd of cattle—say 20 to every hundred
acres —will be more useful than as many men, as the
cattle keep down grass weeds, scrub, &c., and they
manure and improve the ground. After this time,
until you begin to collect your nuts, one man to every
20 acres will be all that is necessary ; his duty will be
to remove dead leaves off the trees and prune them.
Bearing.
A certain kind of cocoanut begins to bear fruit in
about four years, and others at longer periods, but a
good crop need not be calculated on before the seventh
year, after which the yield increases steadily for five or
six years more, when the maximum should be arrived
at; it then continues bearing heavy crops for 60 or 70
years, and is fairly fruitful up to 100 years.
Produce.
In Ceylon, where data can be relied on, it is found
that the cocoanut tree in full bearing will average
about 90 nuts per annum, although on some plantations
there the average is as high as 120 nuts per tree per
annum.


Husking do....
... 0
5
0
Drying and shipping
... 0
5
0
Total
... £1
0
0
Value.
We may therefore very fairly take the produce in
Fiji at 80 nuts per tree per year, which would give, say,
5,500 nuts per acre per annum. This would make, say,
one ton copra, value £l4, from which you deduct the
expense of collecting the fruit and manufacture, viz
£ s. d.
Collecting 5,500 cocoanuts ... 010 0
which leaves a profit of £l3 per acre per annum.
Husk.
And it must be remembered that in the above calcula-
tion no account is taken of the husk or pericarp, which,
by the use of the proper machinery, is manufactured
into coir fibre and is of considerable value.
Copra.
It may be here explained that the article u copra,”
named above, is the dried kernels of the cocoanut.
This copra is shipped to Europe, where it sells at from
£2O to £25 per ton.
Cost of Cultivation.
As to the cost of land, and the expense in labour, &c.,
entailed to bring a cocoanut plantation up to the bear-
ing point, a rate cannot well be fixed, as many causes
may operate to vary the amount. Land may be pur-
chased at a low or a high figure. Labour may be well
and economically used, while, on the other hand, it may
be wasted most enormously. Taking the above into
consideration, the cost per acre for bringing a cocoanut
plantation into full bearing may vary from £2O to £4O


per acre; it may be clone for £2O, bnt it might take
£4O.
Summary.
If, therefore, a person has capital to purchase say
500 acres suitable cocoa-nut land in the proper locality,
to clear, plant, and cultivate 500 acres of cocoanut trees
up to full-bearing point, he may safely calculate on a
net income of at least £5,000 per annum thereafter.
Value in' Ceylon of Cocoanut Plantations.
As to the value of full-bearing cocoanut plantations,
a reference to the Ceylon newspapers will show that
sales of such properties there are never made under
£lOO per acre, and often much more.
Of all crops none perhaps gives so little anxiety to
the planter as cocoanuts. The tree is troubled with
few if any diseases. Its enemies are few and easily
disposed of. Whether it rains or keeps fair matters
little, as the tree still grows and flourishes and the fruit
is continually falling. Suppose the planter has another
crop, such as sugar, coffee, or tea, that requires great
attention and a press of labour at certain times in the
year, well, if such be the case, he can withdraw all the
hands from his cocoanut plantation and keep them away
for three months, and no bad result will follow further
than there will be three months’ accumulation of nuts
on the ground ready for gathering.
It therefore may be seen from this paper that probably
no crop or product is to be found where so large a
return is obtainable at so small a risk as that of cocoa-
nuts. In Fiji, where the cocoanut thrives so luxuriantly,
it is without doubt destined to be. with sugar, coffee,
and tea, a great source of wealth.


JJmttrfacfnm
Coir Fibre.
Amongst the many valuable products to be obtained
from the cocoanut tree that of coir is probably the
second in importance and value, the kernel of the nut
standing first in both respects.
Pericarp or Husk.
Most persons arc aware that the cocoanut has an
outer covering, which is called the “ pericarp ” or busk.
This husk is removed from the nut by the clever use of
a sharp pointed stick stuck in the ground, on which, in
a few seconds’ skilful manipulation, the dusky labourer
takes off this covering, thereby carrying out the first
process of coir manufacture.
Soaking.
The husks arc then placed in large tanks filled with
water ; steam is then applied, and they are allowed to
soak for twelve to twenty-four hours.
Crushing.
They are then passed through between very powerful
fluted me f al rollers, which flattens them out to some
extent, and softens the woody matter they contain.
Devils.
From this the husks are passed to the “ Devil,” w'hich
is a machine having a large cylinder or drum filled with
sharp steel teeth. The cylinder is driven by steam
power at a very high speed, and the teeth operating on
the husk reduces it to coir fibre.
There are different kinds of Devils 01 coir machines.
Some in use in Fiji have been made in Sydney, and do
their work fairly. These machines, however, turn out
only one quality of coir.


Machinery.
On the other hand, there are a number of very
superior English made coir machines at work on the
estate of the Rambi Plantation Company, of Rambi,
which turn out coir of various qualities and in very
marketable condition. Two of these machines recently
imported are very powerful and manufacture a large
quantity of excellent fibre. On this estate also are coir
machines that turn out a quality of coir called bristles
or brush fibre ;it is used for making brushware. Other
qualities of coir are used for upholstering purposes and
rope manufacture.
Market.
The market hitherto for the coir fibre made in Fiji
has been Australia and New Zealand, but as the pro_
duction increases a market will have to be found amongst
the greater centres of population.
Value.
The husks from 7000 cocoanuts produce about 1 ton
fibre, which is of the value on the estate in Fiji of from
£7 to £l5 per ton according to quality. Brush fibre
or bristles is worth from £l5 to £3O per ton in Fiji.
Cost.
The cost of labour to produce 1 ton fibre, exclusive
of cost of machinery, may be put down at from £5 to
£6 per ton.
Arrowroot.
The climate of this Colony is admirably adapted for
the growth and manufacture of this starch. Climate
and soil, with abundance of the purest water, render its
production comparatively easy ; but the prejudice al-
ways to be overcome in starting any industry in a new
country, together with high freights and charges, have


in this case caused at least one large plantation to be
abandoned.
The varieties of the starch-producing plants which
form the subject matter of this paper, grown in Fiji,
are—
(1.) 2acca pinnafifida, or “ Yahia,” indigenous to
the South Sea Islands.
(2.) Maranta anindinacea , or “ Bermuda.”
(3.) Canna coccinea , or “ Tousles mois.”
(4.) Jatropha manihot , or “ Tapioca.”
The “jellying” qualities, which are the practical
market test (absolute purity of whiteness being always
understood), are exactly as the varieties are numbered,
the Fijian, or Yabia, possessing in addition the very
high recommendation of being invaluable in cases of
dysentery, and to be preferred over all others for this
purpose. It grows wild in all the Colony, but more
abundantly in the Yasawa Group and the north-west
coasts of Yiti Levu. The natives of the Yasawas used
formerly to make arrowroot in very large quantities,
and which was sold in the colonies as “Arrowroot, pre-
pared by the Missionary converts in the South seas.”
Now the production has dwindled to an insignificant
amount, pounds only being produced where tons were
formerly made. The natives use it as an article of food
in many districts forming a valuable additional supply
of food. It is not grown or cultivated by the colonists
to any extent.
2. —Maranta Arundinacea, or Bermuda.
This, the true “ Bermuda,” is now, I believe, only
grown by one planter, who, however, receives a very
good price for his produce. It is so well known in the
Home markets as to render comment unnecessary. I
may remark, however, that carefully prepared cases of
this and the “ Tousles mois ” were sent Home and pro-


nounced “inferior potato starch, not arrowroot at all,”
possibly because it came from an unknown and little-
thought-of place. The exporter, strange to say, had at
the time in his possession certificates from high medical
and analytical authority “ that it was a genuine West
Indian arrowroot pure and free from any extraneous
matter, and to be preferred to any of the imported
article,” It realised per lb. at Home, which did
not pay charges.
It is a curious fact that the tuber which produces
“ Bermuda,” worth 2s. to 2s. 3d, in the London market,
and the St. Vincent or West Indian arrowroot, 9d. to
Is. 6d., are identically the same, the difference in price
being attributable, no doubt, to the old established
reputation of the former, and its being produced in very
limited quantities, the total amount produced in Ber-
muda in 1870 being only 25 cwt., against 500 cwt. in
1868; and I have been informed by a planter, recently
returned from Bermuda, that the production has ceased
altogether. In St. Vincent the yield in 1870 was worth
£17,300. The yield here is about 12 per cent, of starch,
in both Tacca and Maranta.
3. — Canna Coccinea.
This has been very largely cultivated by a planter,
but for reasons above given the industry has been aban-
doned. The yield is about 10 to 13 per cent., but the
weight of roots per acre reaches 20 tons on well culti-
vated soil. The irregular shaped tubers, with their
numerous rootlets, need, the most careful attention in
cleansing, much more so than the two previously-
mentioned varieties, otherwise colouring matter is
deposited with the starch, and thereafter it cannot be
thoroughly cleansed.
4. —Jairopha Manihot, or Tapioca.
This yields a very fine floury starch, about 14


per cent., easy to obtain, but very slow and tedious in
the settling; is worth about £2B per ton in Sydney,
but the colonial markets are easily overstocked with 3
or 4 tons. As a food plant it is much cultivated by the
natives who prepare it by peeling, steeping, and after-
wards kneading into cakes, which are boiled and
also by burying in pits, where it undergoes a putrid
fermentation, and when dug up and cooked has a most
offensive odour. It is highly relished, however, and is
always in demand for travelling with as portable and
remaining eatable for many days.
That the “ Commercial Arrowroot ” will eventually be
largely produced I have no doubt, it being easy of
manufacture and inexpensive in the cost of the plant.
The growth in the consumption of maizena, cornflour,
and other products from cereals, is now, however,
increasing steadily, and this, to a certain extent, will
always tend to keep profitable production within limits.
Moreover, New South Wales and Queensland already
produce a very fine article from the Canna, commanding
a ready sale in the colonies, and with the advantage of
having already an established reputation.
.$*
ipUe .Stack.
Upon the larger islands of the colony there are ex-
tensive areas of country suitable and well adapted in
every sense for stock raising purposes.
Plentiful supply of running water and the continual
verdancy of the pasturage, throughout the whole year,
give especial advantages over countries wherein there
is a necessity of providing food for winter resort and


where water must be obtained during certain seasons
by artificial means.
The development of stock raising in this colony, as
yet, has not received very much attention. Enough,
however, has been gained in experience to warrant the
assertion that Live Stock of all varieties may, with
ordinary care and discretion, be successfully raised in
it with profit.
Horned cattle and horses have increased consider-
ably in the last ten years and no anxiety or doubt is
now felt in regard to the successful breeding here of
all varieties.
In cattle, a mixed breed has thus far seemed to
thrive best.
In horses and mules, those bred in the colony are in
no way inferior to those of other colonies.
No endemic or epidemic diseases in either horses or
cattle have as yet given any cause of anxiety.
So much cannot be said of sheep and sheep breed-
ing. Yet, in some few instances, sheep are doing
remarkably well.
In the early history of the sheep breeding enter-
prise, foot rot and titanic spasms seriously troubled
the pioneer venturers, but at present those drawbacks
to success have disappeared. Crosses between the
Leicester, Southdown, and Lincoln prove the hardiest
in resisting the influences of the locality and climate.
One flock of pure bred Merinoes have done remarkably
well, having in the last three years increased at the
rate of over seventy per cent. The wool has not been
found to grow coarse or otherwise deteriorate, except
that it gets lighter on the sheep’s back and in the
fleece. This may easily be obviated by frequent
introduction of new blood by imported rams. It has
been found that shearing twice a year preserves both


the carcass and fleece, and two and a half inches in
length of fleece is obtained.
Within the last five years several persons have
engaged in breeding the Angora goat; and in each and
every case there is a fair prospect of success.
Pigs thrive well in the colony in all parts. For
many years, in its earlier history, the principal meat
food of the white residents consisted of pork. The
present plentiful supply of beef and mutton has re-
sulted in abandoning that flesh mostly i o native races.
The Berkshire and China Poland breeds have been
introduced, which, crossed with Captain Cook’s
original stock, have much improved it.
Fowls of most varieties succeed well and prosper
bountifully. Wild fowls abound in the bush. The
game fowl and dorkings are best for all purposes.
Game birds, such as quail and pheasants, have been
introduced in some localities and are increasing rapidly.
The supply of excellent beef and mutton throughout
the colony is at present quite equal to the demand,
and both may be obtained in almost any part thereof
at reasonable prices.
There are in the Colony, of: —
Horses and Mules, about ... ... 500
Horned Cattle ... ... ... 4,000
Sheep ... ... ... ... 3,000
Angora Goats (cross)... ... ... 1,500
Common Goats ... ... ... 3,000
Pigs ... ... ... ... 100.000
Poultry... ... ... ... 100,000


Climate anti (Seneral Jfeatuccs
The geographical position of this group, lying as
it does within the Tropics, between 15 and 20 degrees
south latitude, would naturally indicate a hot tropical
climate, but owing to the size, situation, and heights of
some of the islands, a great variety of climate is found,
with, perhaps, more of the sub-tropical than of any,
other,and much less humidity than characterises islands
near the Equator.
On most of the small islands, and on the leeward
side of the large islands, the climate is very dry and
almost arid, whilst on those portions of the group to
the windward there is a very considerable degree of
moisture.
To give a full description of the physical features of
Fiji would be far beyond the compass of a notice of
this kind. Generally speaking, the windward side
which is exposed to the trade winds which bring up
rain clouds, is covered with dense vegetation, and on
the large islands, with heavy virgin forests, which
attract the rain even towards the interior, whereas the
leeward side is usually open reed and grass country
free from timber, and very dry. Thus, on the opposite
side of the same island, the contrast is so marked as to
constitute an entirely different climate.
The winter season between May and September is
the most pleasant and salubrious, but the heat is much
the same all the year through, and is less oppressive
in summer than is experienced in many of the Austra-
lian colonies. The mornings and evenings are delight-
ful.
Comparatively, with other groups in the Southern
Pacific, Fiji has, with some exceptions, few swamps,
and to small extent, and fever or ague are almost un-
known. Other diseases, too, are not so numerous or


malignant as in other climes, especially such as lie
within the Tropics. The dryness of the atmosphere
and the cool breezes that prevail, endow the group
with a most healthy climate, no better evidence of
which can be given than the generally sound condition
of settlers w'ho have been here fifteen or twenty years
and whose families are in general pictures of health.
Along the coast the mean temperature during the
year may be set down at 80 degrees. The temperature
in the high lands in the interior is much lower than in
the coast districts, and the nights are often so cold as
to make a fire welcome.
There may be said to be two distinct seasons, the
wet and the dry, or summer and winter, but their
limits are not strictly defined, dry weather sometime g
occurring during a month in which rain is looked for
and heavy rains also sometimes falling during the dry
months.
In the dry season, which extends from May to Sep-
tember. the south-east trades blow with more or less
constancy: and in the wet season, from October to
March, the winds are variable, a north wind at times
prevailing, and usually bringing great heat or sultri-
ness, and not unfrequently languor or depression, but
with twenty-four hours again of the refreshing trade
winds comes an agreeable relief.
t January, February, and March are usually called
“ the hurricane months/’ and are much dreaded by
seamen and settlers, though years pass and nothing
more is experienced than what in other countries would
be called a full gale. The most noted hurricanes
within the past quarter of a century were in 1860 and
1871. These blew with nearly equal force all over the
group, causing great destruction to property. Between
these two, and since the last, cyclones have touched


parts of the group with more or less severity, but have
not been general.
During these gales the rain falls with true tropical
force, and the floods rising, cause no small part of the
devastation made by these storms. It would be wrong,
however, to style Fiji a country subject to hurricanes.
The meteorological observations are not so numerous
in different parts of the group as is to be desired,
still those appended may be regarded as a fair average,
the observers residing within each of the more marked
divisions of climate. Mr. Holmes, of Yanua Levu, a
gentleman of experience in meteorological matters, and
a careful observer, may be regarded as representing the
lee side and the dry districts; and Mr. Shave, on the
Rewa river, in Viti Levu, illustrates the other division
that is, the forest and river country and more humid
climate; while Mr. Newall gives the rainfall of Tavi-
uni, one of our finest islands. The rainfall is given by
Mr. Holmes, of Bua, as 105.1 G inches ;by Mr. Shave,
of Rewa, as 116,04 inches; and by Mr. ISewall, of
Taviuni, as 101.04 inches. A comparison of their
tables (appended) will show that whereas the greatest
rainfall at Bua was in the month of January,—viz.
25.89 inches, and the least in the month of August,
viz., 0.96 inches—the largest in Rewa was in the
month of April,—viz., 20.91 inches, —and the least in
September, —viz., 3.25 inches; while Mr. Newall, at
Taviuni, experienced the greatest rainfall in February
—viz., 20.53 inches, —and the least in January,—viz.,
3.09 inches. The average rainfall for the last eight
is given by Mr. Holmes, at Bua, as 106.19 inches.
The physical features of Fiji are very varied. The
eye of the stranger is at once attracted by their soft
and chastened beauty. A few islands are small and
low, and covered or fringed with cocoanuts ; others are
large, and bold, bare, and rugged, indicating their vol-


canic origin, or clothed to the mountain tops, from two
to four thousand feet, with the most luxuriant foliage,
and diversified with broad navigable rivers and exten-
sive fertile plains, capable of growing to the great-
est perfection, any tropical or sub-tropical product.
Nearly all are surrounded by reefs, mostly with avail-
able passages from the “ blue water ” to good anchorage
and safe harbours, and the larger are indented by bays
ranging from one or two to thirty miles in depth, and
in all, save, perhaps, the smallest, there is abundance
of clear fresh water from stream or river.
Many of the islands are of a volcanic formation,
their shores only having a coral base.
Geological formation generally has not yet received
much attention, but it may be stated that while a dark
red or yellowish loam is common, often deep and very
rich, containing as it does much decayed vegetable
matter, especially in those vales where volcanic debris
mingles with deposits of vegetable mould, there are
also large quantities of more clayey soil less suitable
for cultivation.


Taken at Delanasan, Bua, Fiji.
0 jl
1 Selp-Registeeing ! ! Raineall.
5; . | Thermometers. .
o§| ’ M
1879. |||! &.I ft a | No .§
£3 K £ : S [ S S d ; § ® g of 5
*|*!|l 5 * ir II l*f i
i- j a I lj g- 9 -S3 Mg
January.. 29.823 79.9 92.4! 70.1 13.0 25.89 4.66 20 103
February.. 29.825| 79.0 91.8! 69.8 12.0 19.62 3.10 20 100
March.... 29.871- 81.6 96.8 71.7:14.9 7.83 1.36 16 18
April .... 29.910 80.0 92.7 69.6'13.7 8.01 1.10 22 44
May 29.928; 79.1 90.6 66.3 15.6 3.98 J.lO 8 24
June 29.978: 78.9 90.4 64.4 15.3 5.28 2.65 11 24
July 29.990 78.2 90.2 j 63.1: 16.9 2.83 1.02 8 13
August.... 30.007 77.2 90.8; 63.21 17.2 0.96 0.38 6 9
September 29.987 j 77.6 89.4) 63.3- 15.9 4.22 0.90 13 22
October... 29.947 79.1 93.7164.6116.8 7.63 2.04 12 26
November 29.885 79.5 91.0- 68.0 j 15.4 8.36 2.17 14 27
December.. 29.780 79.8 91.4: 68.0 15.0 10.60 2.57 16 54
Year 1879 29,911 79.1 96.8)63.1 15.1 105.16 4.66 166464
1878 ) 80.4 98.6'56.7) 15.8 56.87 2.45 125 249
1877 | 78.9'97.6 56.3)16.1 | 80.53 12.08 106 312
18761 1 79.3 97.0 60.0)16.3 91.361 5.73)135 388
1875) 79.1 1 95.5 58.5 15.8 126.64: 7.65 146 553
1874 79.3 94.1 61.3| 15.6 103.48) 4.85 165 405
1873 78.9 94.5 60.3)15.8 104.10) 2.82 181 470
1872 78.9 97.5 59.3) 15.7 127.03) 5.05 180502
1871 79.4 97.7 63.2: 15.0 159.51 14.95 180
8 Years .. 79.3 98.6 56.3) 15.8 106.19 14.95 152 411
[ i II I
N.B.—The results contained in the above table have been r
from observations taken daily throughout the year at 9 a.m.,
the barometers. Thermometers by Cassella. Rainguage by R
and Zambra, five inch circular, fully exposed ; orifice 2 feet 7
above ground.
Notes on 1878:
Greatest daily range, 25.3 on July 9th.
Least daily range, 8.8 on February 11th.
ABSTRACT OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS AT
BIT A FOR 1879.
Latitude 16° 38’ S. Longitude 178° 37 E.
Height above sea level, 77 feet; distance from sea, 1 mile.
O _ ‘ Kaixeaxl.
grg 1 Thermometers.
I 111 ' !
w». ijg *<l f * * 11. «=i »• i,«,
I:l, N ; I i it st ji ° f * m
"i l-sh; ~a a 11 |x d f t " IHI
* |a*!a I r : t a j s«s^
January.. 29.825 ! 79.9 92. 4! 70.1 13.0 25.89 4.66 20 103 24.11
February.. 29.825| 79.0 91.8| 69.8 12.0 19.62 3.10 20 100 15.77
March.... 29.871 81.6 96.8 71.7:14.9 7.83 1.36 16 18 21.00
April .... 29.910 80.0 92.7 69.6'13.7 8.01 1.10 22 44 9.33
May 29.9281 79.1 90.6 66.3 15.6 3.98 J.lO 8 24 4.70
June 29.978 78.9 90.4 64.4 15.3 5.28 2.65 11 24 2.17
July 29.990 78.2 90.2163.1 16.9 2.83 1.02 8 13 2.00
August.... 30.007' 77.2 90.8 63.21 17.2 0.96 0.38 6 9 4.40
September 29.987 77.6 89.4) 63,3! 15,9 4.22 0.90 13 22: 3.41
October... 29.947 79.1 93.7164.6 16.8 7.63 2.04 12 26 5.79
November 29.885 79.5 91.0'68.0 15.4 8.36 2.17 14 27 5.68
December.. 29.780 79.8 91.4:68.0 15.0 10.60 2.57 16 54 7.83
Year 1879 29,911 79.1 96.8 j 63.1 15.1 105.16 j 4.66 166464 106.19
1878 80.4 98.6 56.7 15.8 56.87 2.45 125 249
1877 78.9'97.6 56.3 16.1 80.53 112.08 106 312
1876 79.3 97.0 60.0116.3 91.3615.731135 388
1875 79.1 1 95.5 58.5: 15.8 126.641 7.65 146 553
1874 79.3 94.1 61.3| 15.6 103.48 1 4.85 165 405 -----
1873 78.9 94.5 60.3115.8 104.101 2.82 181 470
1872 78.9 97.5 59.3| 15.7 127-03 j 5.05 180502
1871 79.4 97.7 63.2: 15.0 159.51 14,95 180
8 Years., j 79.3 98.6 56.3| 15.8j106.19j14.95 152 411
N.B.—The results contained in the above table have been reduced
from observations taken daily throughout the year at 9 a.m., except
the barometers. Thermometers by Cassella. Eainguage byNegretti
and Zambra, five inch circular, fully exposed ; orifice 2 feet 7 inches
Extreme range of temperature in shade 33.7, or from
9G.8 on March 7th to 03.1 on July 9th.
Highest mean temperature for any twenty-four hours,
85.5 on 7th March.
Lowest mean temperature for any twenty-four hours,
70.0 on 2nd September.


Mercurial Barometer.
By Negretti and Zambra, compared with the
standard in the Sydney Observatory, and through it
with the British Standard at Kew ; index error -0.007.
Readings were taken throughout the year at 9 a.m.,
3 pan., and 9 pan. The monthly and yearly means
have been deduced from the morning and afternoon
readings (omitting the night, and are corrected for in-
dex error, reduced to 32 ° Fall., and sea level. The
greatest and least pressure of the atmosphere during
the year was 30.141 on 12th July, and 29.404 on Ilth
December—all corrections applied. The 3 pan. read-
ings averaged 0.009 lower than those taken at 9 a.m.
O O
The 9 p.m. readings exceeded the 9 a.m. by an average
of 0.007 in December, January, and February ; while
during the remaining nine months of the year, the
9 a.m. averaged .015 higher than the 9 p.m. observa-
tions.
Rainfall.
The total fall for the year—los.l6 inches—was short
of the previous eight years average by 1.03 inches.
During the dry season—June to September —13.24
inches were collected, against 11.98 inches average for
same four months in previous eight years. No floods
occurred from excessive rainfall at any one period.
The following are the only noteworthy entries showing
amount of precipitation in stated times :
4.00 inches in 14 hours on Jan. 20
4.58 „ 19 „ Jan. 28
Jan. 26
45 minutes Nov. 2 of


On January 11th and 12th, heavy squalls of wind
and rain occurred from N. to N.W. February 11th
was stormy and very wet; from the 9th of that month
till the morning of the 14th no sun was visible, being
the longest overcast period on record here. Rainfall
for week ending Saturday, the 15th, was 9.73 inches
in 64 hours. On 11th December there occurred a
strong gale with only light rainfall. It began from
S.E. with thunderstorm, passing round to N.E., whence
it blew hardest at nightfall. Barometer minimum at
3 p.m., viz. 29.404—a1l corrections applied. During
the night the wind passed to westward, and fell to a
moderate breeze with clear sky on the morning of the
12th. On this coast the damage done was very slight,
yet it was the hardest blow felt here since the hurri-
cane of 1871.
R. L. Holmes,
Fellow British Meteorological Society.


METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS AT REWA FOR THE
YEAR 1879,
Taken on Great Amalgam Estate, Wai Mann.
Elevation above the sea, 100 feet.
II 9 J TF 10NiOTjlMO>N«DCOr-iai-< O O CO
jo nhnnhhh — i <m cm cm o cm
a
X
•.£bp OHO o <m <m
L !>• CD CD
UI ITBJ _• j « .0
COMNHMNffIMOOHtD rH (M CO
■saqom m vco>o<i>ococoinc'lco®o) 000 o>
junomn JBJojj So o
rH iH , **H
[‘ool noijnan
-jag] •Xjtpiumq
JO 99X§9(J
«hh®OXOON-!)IN o o
N®J~NN®OOO® t— t
•are jo jooj - qno
O
O
£
§
m
H
§
3
w
X
a
p
H
H
s
o
«
a
W
'Bajß.inißs 01 S co. co
p9Jinb9xrnod« A & ”
■jooj - qno r£ H a c-i •# t- o oco o ® o
n m anodn a d » cc cc 1-i-t~ OO 20
•inndpA * 00 ■rH o he t - * n »-h
.lUUU.BA co OiCOCOOOINrHOOOcMrH rH
jo aojoj oxjsßja; S ‘'r ® ® *>:
, 0000000000 o o
•jntod rHOSCOCJO-VIrHOOOTH CO CO.
Man nnafat ®
O O
I— UOCOCIOOINO®CON 10 hra
qprq J9A ht!9j\[ o ®(oioo»HcJmioio
N 1> I>- N N L- N N N N
•#HlooN®o«l'® rH H
-< ll n B[ ©WtHOOIHUiWHiO OO 00
C rr\ j/-» rH C* r—l <0 C 5 CO 05 rH CO OT
AJp JO UHOJ\[ OOCOCOCONNI-GOCOX GO CO
T , rH co CO
’ dmex O zo T'— CO co co CO CO CO CO CO co co O co
w
i
CO
draaj, isaqhijq o m®xSx®coxS«§o 00 S
_ OJS
‘ajnj'Bjod. n co co h co w w h h n os o G ®.
-TUP TIT TIP TAT C N<ooo N CO W Csf CO CO*
- t> N N N N N
C 5
CO
iO
IH
w
P 5
I
n
M
g
i
w
H
10 N H O in 05 CO O fO
"uinuimij\[
TTUPTJT* 0 HHoioONtO^IGNOCi
uyd JAL t-NNI^NOCOCOCOCOCO?O
lOriiNHOinoiCoon coo 0
CO 05 05
S
t,t'NWt'o®oo!StO!o COO CD
OiOiOWONnwcCiOOM »>.
St-ONOONOtOWNOO O5
r-3
30 00 00 00 GO GO GO CO CO CO CO 00 COCO 00
; . I I . . T i I - I 03 CO 03 OD
iiii i ; i ; u ill 11
t*s H n r 2^ ! , +5
a § i g | gg| § g
H-| £ 3 C 'i H 'i O S Cj'gt*
3Sa<s££-3«B<Sfc<3 Si Si
O>O‘OfOONCOCOcC'OOcO
•UmraiX'BW Q N NOoCIOCO CO N CO
TT-oa-nr ° cOCO^COOaO^OOCQTpiO
H'eajyL oooocoooccoooogogogogoco
o
s


The horizontal movement of the air during hurri-
cane was as follows:—December 11, between 3.30 p.m.
and 4.30 p.m., 40 miles; between 4.30 and 5.30, 50
miles ; between 5.30 and 6.30, SG-g- miles ; and between
6.80 and 7.80, 56 miles. The number of miles regis-
tered from 6 a.m. on the 11th to 6 a.m. on the 12th
was 644 miles, but fully two-thirds of this happened
between 12 o’clock on the 11th to 8 p.m. on same day
Greatest pressure in lbs. per square foot at 5.80 to
6.30 p.m. on 11th December, 12.706.
Extreme range of temperature in shade was 82 ° , or
from 92 ° on December 19th to 60 ° on July 9th and
10th.
Instruments by Negretti and Zainbra.
H. T. Shave.
RAINFALL AT TAVIUNI.
Register of rainfall at Wai ni Gere, Yuna, Taviuni, for tlie year
ending December 31, 1879.
Height above sea, 30 feet; distance from the sea, 100 yards.
Total
Month.
Greatest
daily
No. of
days it
fell.
Inches.
January
February
March ..
April
20.53
10.75
May
June
July ...
August ...
September
October...
November
December
16.14
Total
101.04
New all,


labour
Fijian Labour.
Fiji differs from most other Australasian colonies in
having no assisted European immigration, so that the
phrase, “ Labour and Immigration” in Fiji, refers only
to Fijians, Polynesians from neighbouring islands, and
Indian immigrants, by whom all household and planta-
tion work is performed in this Colony.
The hiring and service of Fijian labourers is regu-
lated and controlled by law (Ordinance No. X of
1877).
Every contract for the hiring and service of native
labourers for any time exceeding one month is entered
into in the presence of the Stipendiary Magistrate of
the district within which the intending labourers
reside. The contract is in a form prescribed by the
Ordinance, and states the duration of the term of ser-
vice, the rate of wages, the quantity and quality of
rations, and the clothing to be supplied by the em-
ployer, who further engages to provide proper accom-
modation, and to defray the cost of conveyance to the
place where the labourer is to work, and to provide
him with a return passage home.
In the engagement of Fijian labourers, a distinction
is drawn in the law between those engaging to work
on plantations in their own province and in their own
island, and those proceeding to work on plantations
situated elsewhere.
Any person may engage for himself or others those
belonging to the former category without communi-
cating with the Immigration Department, but in every
such case contracts of service may be entered into
before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district.


When the proprietor or manager of any plantation
proceeds personally to engage native labourers to leave
the island or province in which they reside, to work on
his plantation, he procures, on application, from the
Agent-General of Immigration, a written permission
to engage the number of labourers he requires, and
this authority is produced before the Stipendiary
Magistrate in whose presence the contract is entered
into.
The proprietor or manager may, however, instead of
proceeding personally to engage his labourers, employ
a professional recruiter, —a plan, however, which is
now seldom adopted. The latter must obtain a license
from the Agent-General of Immigration, and when he
appears with the intending labourers before the
Stipendiary Magistrate of their district for the purpose
of entering into the formal contract, he must also pro-
duce a letter of agency, filled in and signed by the
person employing him, and specifying the number of
labourers he authorised to engage.
In some parts of the Colony native labourers cannot
be got to work on plantations in their own province.
Children under 14 years, unless accompanied by
their parents or guardians, cannot enter into a con-
tract.
Regular working hours must not exceed nine hours
a day, exclusive of the time allowed for meals.
The condition of labourers employed on plantations
is subject to Government inspection.
Each labourer under a contract of agreement receives
either a “Meat or Fish Ration,” or a “Vegetable
Ration.” The former, which is very seldom, if ever,
given, as being more difficult to obtain, and probably
less in accordance with the ordinary mode of life of
Fijians, consists daily of —


Yams, taro, or sweet potatoes...
7 lbs.
Or beans
1| „
Or maize meal ...
2 „
Salt
i oz.
Meat or Fish ... 1 lb.
Vegetables , 8 lbs.
Salt ... ... ... ... | oz.
The daily vegetable ration, which is the one almost
always supplied, consists of—
Two ounces of tobacco, which may be native grown
is allowed each week, and the clothing to be supplied
for one year consists of four loin cloths, two mats, and
a mosquito curtain.
The current rate of wages is £4 a year, but £5 has
been paid in not a few cases lately. The wages are
paid to the Fijian direct, but payment has to be made
in the presence of a Magistrate, who endorses and
discharges the contract.
About four-fifths of the planters in the group prefer
Polynesian to Fijian labourers, although the latter cost
on an average £2 a year less than the former, and are
as a rule healthier.
The average estimate of the total annual cost of a
Fijian labourer, including recruiting and returning
home, food, quarters, clothing, wages, medicine, and
any other necessary expenses, taken from figures sup-
plied by twentyone experienced planters, is £ll 6s.
The estimate, however, varies greatly, as the amount
is much affected by the difference in the cost of
recruiting and of returning home. The lowest esti-
mate of total cost was £B, and the highest £l6, a man
a year.
The number of Fijians engaged by contract does not
vary greatly in different years.


1,212 were engaged in 1879.
1,368 „ „ „ 1878.
806 „ „ „ 1877.
1,213 „ „ „ 1876.
The proportion of the sexes has been the following :
Male. Female.
1877 ... 793 .. 13
1878 ... 1346 ... 22
1879 ... 1204 ... 8
The supply is, however, apparently not equal to the
demand, as permits were granted by the Immigration
Department in 1879 for engaging 1,402, —that is, for
190 more than were actually engaged.
Polynesian Laboxte.
The Polynesian immigrants employed as labourers in
Fiji are natives of the following groups of islands : —•
Solomon, New Hebrides (including Santa Cruz), Line
Islands (Marshall, Gilbert, and Ellice groups), The
numbers introduced since the beginning of 1877 from
these different islands have been as under : —-
Solomon Group.
New Hebrides Group,
Line Group.
1877
152
1878
1,286
1879
1,060
9 months
of 1880
The proportions of
the two sexes have been
Males.
Females,
1877
527
1,448
1878
1879
1,621
1,766
9 months of 1880


Under 10.
From 10 to 12
1877
...
1878
• • •
1879
10
• • •
9 months
of 1880
• r >
• • •
For the payment of wages they have been classified
as to age as follows :
From 12 to 14. Over 14.
221
320
274
The numbers arriving in this colony from the New
Hebrides group, where vessels proceeding eastward in
search of labourers first call, appear to be decreasing,
and the supply of labourers from this source is steadily
falling further short of the demand, which increases
with the development of the colony. Many labourers
also leave that group for Queensland and for New
Caledonia, and with the spread of Christianity and
advance of civilisation in their own islands they have
perhaps less inducement now to emigrate than formerly,
and there must also by means of this emigration alone
be a very considerable decrease of population ; but there
appears to be no great difficulty in procuring sufficient
numbers for tire present from the Solomon Islands ; in
fact there is sc me reason to think that the number ar-
riving in the colony this year will probably be greater
than will be required. The population of the Line
Islands is small, and the inhabitants are not, as a rule,
considered equal to other immigrants as domestic ser-
vants or as ordinary plantation hands, although when
manual dexterity of importance, as in manufacturing
coir yarn, they are preferred by certain planters.
The recruiting and introduction of Polynesian im-
migrants is regulated by law (Ordinance No. XXIV of
1879) and carried out under Government supervision.
Before the close of each year planters and others mako
application to the Agent General of Immigration for


the number of labourers required for next year.
When the list of applications is complete, suitable
vessels are chartered by Government to introduce the
necessary number. The passage money and other ex-
penses are paid in the first instance by Government.
An estimate is made at the beginning of the year of
the total cost of introduction, according to which re-
payment is made to the Immigration Department on
the allotment of labourers.
Up to the present time the whole cost of introduc-
tion has been paid by the planter at the time he re-
ceived his labourers, but a law has recently been
passed, with the object of enabling planters to pay the
cost of introduction in three instalments with intervals
of twelve months, the first payment being made on
allotment. Every vessel carries a Government agent
on board, and care is taken that all immigrants recruited
are in good health and engage voluntarily, and that
they are properly fed and cared for on board. They
are detained in the Immigration Depot for thirty days
after their arrival in the colony, in order to recover
from the effects of the voyage, and are vaccinated dur-
ing this interval. Their state of healtn on delivery to
the employer is certified by the medical officer of the
department.
The relations between Polynesian immigrants and
their employers are regulated by a law passed 9th
March, 1877. (Ordinance No. XII of 1877.) Every
immigrant over ten years of age is indentured to serve
on the plantation of his employer for three years, and
is not transferable except with the permission of the
Agent General of Immigration,
The yearly wages payable on account of those over
fourteen years of age are £3; for those from twelve to
fourteen £2; and for those from ten to twelve £1 10s.
with rations in all cases.


All wages are paid as they become due at the end of
each six months to the Colonial Treasurer, by whom
the money is kept until the expiration of the term of
indenture. The wages of Polynesians is made a first
charge on any estate to which they are indentured.
As payment in money would be inexpedient to people
unaccustomed to the use and ignorant of the trading
value of coin, the Government each year calls for
tenders for the supply of all articles of trade
the immigrants care to select from in payment of their
wages. Each labourer selects from the store of the
contractor, in the presence of a Government officer }
whatever his fancy or his wants dictate, until the full
figure of his wages has been reached. The Colonial
Treasurer then pays the amount to the contractor.
The employer is bound to supply the immigrant
during his term of service with a suitable dwelling j
cooking utensils, food, and medicine, and with four
loin cloths, a half blanket, two mats, and a mosquito
curtain every year.
Food of the kind most suitable for both Fijians and
Polynesians may be grown on each plantation,
many planters grow only small quantities of food and
purchase much ot what they require from Fijians or
from Europeans. The rations supplied to Polynesians
must at least seven days in each month consist of yams
or taro, at the rate of seven pounds a day uncooked.
For the remaining part of each month the ration must
be, sweet potatoes at the rate of lOlbs. a day or one and
a half pound of beans, rice, biscuits, or freshly ground
maize meal. To the rice must be added daily not less
than two ounces of animal food, and to the maize meal
two ounces of molasses, but maize meal cannot be
given more than fourteen days in one month without
special permission from the Agent General of Immi-
gration.


In some parts of the colony bread fruit flourishes in
great luxuriance, and may he given as a ration at the
rate of ten pounds a day.
Each immigrant receives in addition to the above,
two ounces of soap and two ounces of tobacco every
week
A list of medicines, specified by regulations, has to
be kept on every plantation employing more than ten
Polynesians.
Each Polynesian works for nine hours a day except
on Saturday when he works five hours.
The return passage money of each Polynesian, on
completion of his term of indenture, is paid, by his
original employer to the Colonial Treasurer within
five days after the embarkation of the Polynesian, as
the Immigration Department makes the necessary ar-
rangements with vessels for returning the immigrants
to their homes and Government meets the expenses in
the first instance.
The average of the estimates of the total annual
cost of a Polynesian immigrant, including indenture
fee, and return passage, food, quarters, clothing, wages,
medicine, and any other expenses as prepared by
twenty-one planters is £l3 3s. 2d.; the highest esti-
mate was £l7 10s., and the lowest £ll ss. The item
of cost on which there is most discrepancy is food, the
lowest estimate for which is £2 and the highest £7 a
year.
Polynesians are well suited as labourers for Fiji
Their own climate and their own food are nearly the
same as what they meet with in this colony, and they
readily acquire a sufficient knowledge for all practical
purposes of either the English or the Eijian languages.
The Fijian is both mentally and physically superior
to the Polynesian, and for certain kinds of work, such
as clearing land, building houses and planting food, the


Fijian labourer has probably no superior; but the less
assuming Polynesian, far removed from his own island,
and engaged to his employer for a term at least three
times as long as that contracted for by a Fijian, is more
docile, and looks on his master’s home more as his own,
and studies his employer’s interests, withoutsupervision,
in a way and to a degree that Fijian labourers seldom
do: Where careful, quiet, methodical work is required*
such as picking crops, working machinery or horses,
or tending cattle, the steadiness, honesty, and
general reliability of the Polynesian render him an
excellent and trustworthy servant, superior to the
Fijian.
Indian Immigrants,
As there is every reason to believe that the require-
ments of the Colony, when its resources are more fully
developed, cannot be fully met by Fijian or Polynesian
labour, and as it is desirable that a certain proportion
of labourers should be procurable by planters whose
length of service and intelligence would fit them for
special training in skilled labour, a law was passed
(Ordinance No. VI of 1878) to encourage the intro-
duction of immigrants from the East Indies, and to
regulate the relations to subsist between them and
O
their employers.
An Emigration Agent, acting for this country in
India, makes the necessary arrangements with the
immigrants, who are brought to the Colony in a vessel
chartered by Government. The immigrant, on his
arrival in the Colony, is indentured to serve for a
period of five years on the plantation to which
he is allotted by the Agent-General of Immigra-
tion, but each immigrant must complete an actual
and continuous residence of ten years in the
Colony before he is entitled to a free passage


to India. He is at liberty to work where he
pleases during the last five years of his stay in Fiji,
and may be reindentured by the Agent-General of
Immigration for periods not less than six, nor greater
than twelve, months.
In 1879, 480 Indian immigrants were introduced,
the majority of whom have been employed on Govern-
ment works, but all have lately been applied for to
work on plantations, and are now allotted.
For the immigrants already introduced the em-
ployer pays, in respect of each immigrant allotted to
him, an indenture fee of £l5, in five annual instalments
of £3 each, the first payment being made previously to
the execution of the certificate of indenture. He pro-
vides also suitable dwellings, medicine, and medical
attention when required.
When the labourers are employed at time work each
male over 15 years of age receives as wages not less
than Is., and every female over 15 years not less than
9d., for every day on which such male or female per-
forms an ordinary day’s work of nine hours. Every
labourer under the above age is paid according to the
work done.
The employer furnishes the labourer with rations
during the first twelve months, and deducts, in pay-
ment of the same, sd. for every day from the wages of
the labourer, unless when the latter is sick and in
hospital, in which case he is entitled to rations from
his employer.
The ration supplied daily consists of —
One pound and a-half of rice.
Four ounces of dholl or other equivalent vege-
table food.
One ounce of cocoanut oil or ghee.
Three-quarters of an ounce of curry stuffs.


Two ounces of sugar.
One ounce of salt.
Wages are paid in money to the immigrants every
month. After the first year the immigrant finds his
own food and receives full wages ; he provides himself
with clothes.
The Indian instead ot being paid at so much a year,
like Fijians and Polynesians, is paid according to
results, either for the number of tasks—a task being
an ordinary day’s work—or for the number of days
wrought.
As the longer period for which the Polynesian is
engaged renders him in many ways preferable to the
Fijian, so doubtless the still greater term of the Indian’s
engagement will be found to be a solid advantage, and
this should be borne in mind in comparing the cost of
the three different kinds ot labour. The total annual
cost of the Indian cannot be estimated as yet with the
same facility as in the case of the Fijian and Polynesian
on account of the want of experience, but it has been
variously stated from £l3 14s. to £2O 11s. 6d., depend-
ing on the number of days it is supposed the Indian
will work in one year.
The climate of Fiji appears to be well suited to the
Indians, and during the fifteen or sixteen months they
have been in the Colony they have, as a class, been
healthy, more so than the Polynesians during the same
period.
There is no difficulty in working Indians and Poly-
nesians on the same estate.


\lhc ijatibc fqmkttcn
I.—Tribal Divisions,
The native population of the Colony, according to a
census taken in March, 1879, andbelieved to be approxi-
mately correct, gives the numbers at a little over one
hundred and ten thousand, as will be seen from the
following table:—
Census oe Native Population,
I
■, March, 1879.
•Sip3bßlßJ\[
OH- • • H •UO • ■COCDt-00 00 CO
CD CD Ol • *OO -CD • • CO O) CO CO t-
■SO CM CO • -TP •CO • • MNIOW
•suwoj.
(MCOCOOffiOr-KMCDOOCDt-CO^OCO
OOOOCOiOQOt-XffiiOMH'tiDt-CO
r— l r—l r-H rH
a>
CM
■S^OU;ST(J
HOHiCOOOOOOCOt^COCOiOiOUJUJ
r—l t-H H t— < r—l r—( rH p-H
Is
-4-»
o
Eh
'Ocococi^aD(»io«s(Nt-noHN«
OOVi—iNOCOCJCOiOCDCDOiOr-1 o
r-T o' i-H i-T *o i— o' i- - ' o' i-T o' rji' tjT o' r-T
i-H r-H r-H r-H
CM
qo
o
r~<
co
r g
o
H
CfJ
O
a
<D
COQOTfIb.OI-Cl'l ( HairjHrHQOCDO)t-
-(NOdoOCpiOOraOKMiOiT-1 Cl o> CO 00
o' CO o' «coCOco ct cm »oT csT o' CO
CQ
CD
P-(MCS-tl>OCo't l os-rtl>O<M^’
O N 00 1- O! CO W 5 O X to CT O
CD CO o' CM CO CO CO CO cm' ‘o' ci'p-"' CO r-T
CO
C 5
TT
f-
‘O
rrj * •
§ • 9cs a
.S 5 *rj •
5 : 2■* J • ; £ * es ■ : :£ ’g :
a <r £ *.S ■§ sp’fi • -pS -2 •
53 S c 3 ' ci’rt'3 3
e 3 3 c3 r O r c 3 S
i—i co «cdncddd rn M eo Tjl «j to
oi
©
■p
o
Ph
r-H r-H r-H r-H r-H r-H r-H
(The above does
not include laborers engaged out of their dis-
t, about three thousand in number.
Provincial Office,
Nasova, January, 1880


Living under a system of community, the inhabitants
of Fiji, as a race, are divided into qalis, which are again
subdivided into mataqalis. Of qalis, or tribes, there
are about one hundred and forty, and of mataqahs. or
families, about four thousand, residing in about twelve
hundred and twenty towns or villages.
Politically, the Colony is divided into thirteen pro-
vinces and three districts, called yasanas (the only
difference being that the latter are not governed by
chiefs of the rank of Roko Tui ), four of which contain
over ten thousand inhabitants each, seven over five
thousand each, two over four thousand each, and the
remaining three under two thousand each,
As these numbers are, on the whole, fairly pro-
portioned to the geographical extent of each province,
it will be seen that the population is scattered, with
some degree of equality, over the whole group. It is
also a fact that, with the exception of lands claimed
by whites, there is no very large tract of country or
island of importance uninhabited.
The provinces are again subdivided into one hun-
dred and thirty-nine districts, called ‘ fikina,’ and these
divisions, each of which is ruled bv the hereditary
chief of the rank of Bull, generally contain one or more
of what is called Qali (tribe), which has generally been
considered the unit of the wider political combinations
in former times.
The chiefs and people are the hereditary owners (ai
taukei) of the lands, and reside in towns and villages.
Each town, again, contains one or more of the family
divisions called mataqali, which may be considered the
unit of tribal combinations. There is little doubt that
they are originally the germ from which qali , or
tribe, has sprung or developed : or, in other words,
qali is nothing more than an aggregation of families
or mataqali. The family community, assumed to be


of common lineage and descent, are the hereditary-
holders in common of the land; the mataqali is, in
fact, the only true proprietary unit, and no matter the
number of individuals or families within itself, it is
the only true owner of the lands, holding them for the
present and future use of the individuals composing
the community or brotherhood, whether they be full
birthright members or only strangers admitted to share
in the benefits for a time or adopted into it for good.
Each mataqali has a distinct name by which it is
known, and which is not unfrequently the name of the
principal allotment of its land, which belongs to its
chief or head.
Industries.
The natives of Fiji are emphatically agriculturists.
Notwithstanding that some are called £ ‘ fishing tribes ”
and others “ carpenter or building tribes,” yet even
these cultivate to a greater or less extent. No greater
mistake can be made than to suppose that they are
not, as a people, industrious cultivators of the soil.
Few cases will be found of any one, from a boy of 12
years up to an aged man, who has not his own plot of
cultivation each year, and in some places even the
women have their own particular gardens.
The articles usually and most largely cultivated are
yams (uvi),dalo,Jcawai, banana, masi (the bark of which is
made into native cloth), sugar cane, arrowroot, tobacco,
and yangona or kava. The cultivation of dalo is of
two kinds: one is planted on the dry land, and the
other, and by far the more important, is grown in the
water, and requires in many places extensive systems
of irrigation, which are carried out and maintained by
each several mataqali holding the water and land
rights for that purpose.
Of late years a few exotics have been introduced,


such as kumala, cassava, maize, oranges, coffee, and
other plants. Their mode of cultivation is primitive,
and is that which has been pursued by their forefathers
from time immemorial. Though it may not be the
most labour-economising system, the cultivations are
extensive and carefully tended, yielding good and often
very heavy crops. The implements of cultivation
consist of an axe and knife for clearing purposes, and
the universal digging stick ( doko ) for turning over the
soil. The latter has been considered by many Euro-
peans to give a better cultivation than even the plough,
and no foreign native introduced yet into Fiji can
compete with a Fijian in the effective use of the doko.
Whilst each individual attends to his own plot or
plots of cultivation, whatever they may be, yet in the
spring, or planting season, they work in communities.
Thus a whole town will be employed at one time in
the garden of one individual. Commencing with a
mataqali they go through the land of every individual
until the whole of the townspeoples’ gardens are com-
plete. This common helping not unfrequently extends
to the seed to be planted as well as the digging and
working of the soil; all that is required of the actual
owner being that he provides a plentiful supply of
good provision for the day.
Beside their individual gardens, they often also have
gardens in common, which may be cultivated, planted,
and kept in order according to their extent, and object
by a whole mataqali, a town, or a district.
It has always been urged by the chiefs and heads
of families that their communal system of cultivation
and work conserves their industrial habits, and tends
to increase their wealth and comfort, comprehending
as it does, not only the cultivation of their food, the
erection of their houses, the cutting and building of
canoes (or what is more common now, the purchase of


boats), the making of roads, or whatever else may be
for the common good, but also placing within the reach
of every individual, food and a good house, no matter
what his class or circumstances.
The manufacture of malo (native cloth), plaiting of
mats, making of crockeryware, and other articles of
domestic and household necessities, are chiefly con-
fined to the women, and are also tribal specialities ;
hence certain districts are noted for particular kinds
of pottery, or for the quality of particular kinds of
mats, baskets, &c., and the manufacture and printing
of different kinds of malo, known by their special
names, which indicate the tribe by which they are
manufactured, or the island on which they are made.
Many thousands of mats are plaited every year, and
the amount of native cloth prepared is enormous, but
it would be very difficult to give an accurate estimate
of these native industries, either of the amount of
cultivation or the articles manufactured, which were
formerly much more extensive than at present, but
are said to be of late years reviving.
No Fijian considers that he has realised the idea Of
a householder {at taukei ) unless he has a supply in
store on his vata more than sufficient for the every,
day requirements of his family, dependents, and way-
farers. Besides food, either housed or in the ground,
he must have rolls of mats and native cloth, as well as
other property in store, for all contingencies, even to
the shroud, in which he will fold up his dead. Plenty
to eat and plenty to give is the beau ideal of a Fijian,
whether chief or commoner.
Though often judged by foreigners—perhaps at times
with some truth—to be indolent and improvident, yet
taking into account the influences under which he
lives, and the usages and customs to which he has been
born and brought up, he is a useful member of society,


and very well fitted for the place he is called upon
to fill among his kith and kin.
The Number of the People.
The preservation and improvement of a race living
under so comprehensive yet natural and very ancient
internal polity, developing intelligence and habits of
industry as have been in the most cursory manner indi-
cated above, becomes a subject of not only deep
interest, but of the most vital importance, both to
themselves as a people, and to the country in which
they live.
Going back two hundred years, and making every
allowance for the legendary traditions of the
but with the evidence that still exists, there can be
little doubt that the population was then ten times as
numerous as it now is. The causes of decrease, it is
said, have been chiefly war (which was almost inces-
sant) and epidemics. Some of the latter swept away
the people by thousands, extinguishing without rem-
nant whole communes and tribes. Two of the most
remarkable —one called ‘ lila ’ (a wasting away), and
the other dysentery —are said to have been introduced
by foreign vessels, and the record of the terrible devas-
tation and death which followed is found in the legends
and songs of the time that have been handed down, in
which the “ closed doors and silence of the emptied
villages and extinguished tribes, where no one is left
to cultivate the land, build the fort, or carry the club,”
is told with touching pathos and but too real minute-
ness.
All authorities, whether native or white, are nearly
agreed that during the last thirty-five or forty years,
there has been a very marked decrease, which we may
hope reached its cfimax in the epidemic of measles,


that in 1875 is estimated to have swept off over thirty
thousand of the population.
In the absence of reliable or complete statistical
returns extending over any lengthened period, or even
a decade, previous to 1879, the rate of increase or de-
crease cannot therefore, with any accuracy, be deter-
mined, but this defect is to some extent now being
remedied, and returns of births, marriages, and deaths
are kept all over the Colony under the Regulations,
and those in the accompanying table B for the year
1879, show a result which, though not so encouraging
as could be desired, may be relied upon as fairly
correct.


Returns of Marriages
Births,
and Deaths for 1879. "
‘ 98139.109 (J
:
CO
io
rH
01
to
N
to
<M
:
:
CO
■9SR9J0UJ
<M
GO
to
CO
0
co
HNN
to to
r—
r—
OX
0
rH
rH
CM
eo
per
3.
1"
00
rH
rH
CO
CON CO ON m to H
CO
(M
_ 0
CM
01
Cl
0
co
to
'HtOtONNOHtN
co
00
.2 0
CO
CD
m
Cl
H
I'-
to
Cl 00 Cl CO N- CO
Cl N-
cs _T
CM
CO
(M
eo
rH
<M
CO
CM
CO CM CM CO CO CM
co
<M
CM
P
&
A
rH
N-
Cl
O N-
Cl
O
0
CO to r-
c
CO N
CM
CM
CO
c3
Cl
co
co
co t-
O
0
CM
c
O CM N
to
Tff
0
<M
CM
0
CM
CM
CM
rH
CO r—
to CM rH
CM
H
CO
<D .
CM
rH
CM
00
co
Cl
to CM
Tf-
to
to
CO CM O
to
CO
rH
O
O
O
00
Cl
to
to
CM
GO
tON C
tO CM
CM
CO
CD
CO
1
® O
eo
co
CO
0
rH
CD
rH
0
ON 00 CO 00
to
00
CM*
A"
CO
eo
CM
CO
CM
CO
CO
co
CO CM CO CO rH
co
co
S
r “3
01
rH
CO
■tH
Cl
CO
Cl
0
CD
to
cc
CM Cl CM
CM
eo
eo
CO
x^
co
Cl
x^
CC
0
0
CO
CO
CO tJ - * t}-< O
00 N-
■§
CO
CM CM
CM
rH
cm
CM
CM
co
rH
to CM -H
EH
eo"
rf
Cl
CM t—1
CO
Cl
CD
CO N- 00 CM (M rH
rH
<M
•000 l
(M
to
rH
rH
eo
co n-
co tc
00 Tf
CM Cl CM
■Cf
CD
CO
9tb££
rH
00
0
to
CC
Cl
CM QO CO
to N Cl
cm'
cm’
rH
rH
rH
r—
rH
r— 1
r—
T—
rH
■H
CO
to
CO
00
0
c
tco 1—1 N rH O
00
Tt-
0
co N* N-
rH
CO
Cl
(M
rH
CL
CO N H lO
rH OX
CM
CO
rH
iO
00
CO
GO
00
to
to
CM J>
co
O N N -He CM
CO
T*
O
0
Tt
0
CD
CO
co
co
co
O
rH
CM
rH
c
•y'B'4.04
eo
CO
co
CM
00
rH
01
Cl
CM
00 Tf
00
Cl
Ci
uoty'Byndoj;
rH
®h> co n» co 1—1 0
Hi H- CD tfj
r—
'
00
0
rH
,
'S'
'cS
m
c3
m
O
9
Is
Id
0
£
• H
c3
H
c3
O
fee
D
Hi
4
o3
CO
o3
H
Hi
01
03 cc
c3 p
RP
a
>
c
r C
5
cc
c
,
cc
P
P
*4-
5
£
c
A
Maeuata . .
§
£
nz
cc
z
Namosi....
T?,a
c:
PC
1
P—
*s
E-
Nmtasiri . .
CQ -+3
CD OQ
e
OOP
*3 *3 &
OOa
■s;ou;si(
•
I
rH
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
0.
r—
CM CO H- tCJ
co"
r-
r—
T—
r—
rH
rH
Net increase 307.


The returns of marriages, births, and deaths are
given according to provinces, and from a perusal of
the above table it will be seen that there were 3,553
births registered in 1879, consisting of 1,877 males and
1,676 females, being 201 in favour of the former over
the latter, the birth rate of the year being 32.61 per
thousand of the population. The number of deaths
registered during the same period was 3,246. The
male deaths numbered 1,801 and the female 1,445
being 356 of the former in excess of the latter, the
death rate for the year being 29,80 per thousand of
the population.
By referring to table A (the census returns) it will
be seen that the total numbers are 57,493 males and
51,431 females, which gives 6,062 in excess of the
former over the latter, or 52 males and 47 females in
every hundred of the population.
The net increase to the population from births over
deaths during the year is 307, or 2,79 per thousand
over the whole Colony. In a comparison of the pro
vinces, Nadroga gives the highest birth rate of any,
viz. 41.22 per thousand, and Colo Central (Wainimala)
of the districts, viz. 45.25, while Lau gives the lowest
birth rate of any of the provinces, viz. 20.53, and of
the districts Colo West (Navosa), viz. 18.80, yet both
of these provinces are considered amongst the most
healthy for Europeans.
Kadavu gives the highest death rate of the provinces,
viz. 39.01, and Colo Central (Wainimala) of the dis-
tricts, viz. 39.73. Five of the provinces and one dis-
trict show a decrease from deaths over births of 67 ;
the total decrease in Kadavu is 15. Of the districts
Colo West (Navosa) is the highest, 25, a gross decrease.
The decrease in Kadavu, which is also considered a
very healthy province, is attributed to an epidemic of
dysentery, which was introduced in the month of Feb-


ruary by some return labourers from Naitasiri into
the Buliship of Naceva, where by the end of 31 st June
over 60 deaths had occurred. But for this Kadavu
would probably have shown a higher rate of increase
than any other province.
The number of marriages duly registered during the
year was 1,340, or 12.32 per thousand of the popula-
tion. The highest rate was in the province of
Macuata, viz. 19.79, and of the districts Serua, viz.
12.61. The lowest rates were in the province of Lau,
viz. 5.31, and of the districts in Central Colo (Waini-
mala), viz, 4.41.
The highest number of births were regis-
tered during the quarter ending September 30th,
and the lowest during the quarter ending March 31st
whilst most deaths occurred in the quarter ending June
30th and the fewest during the quarter ending March
31st.
It is not without interest or importance to notice
that the same causes at work under the very same circum-
stances produce the very opposite effects upon the two
races living side by side. The winter season, say from
May to September, which is considered by foreigners
to be the most healthy, shows the highest rate of
mortality among the natives, and the summer, or
wet season, especially from January to March, usually
more oppressive to the whites, appears by the returns
to be the most favourable to the general health of the
Fijian. The warm and humid weather of these months
is clearly more suited to his constitution, whereas the
cold south and south-east winds which prevail during
the winter months are trying to the native, and dis-
pose him to colds and influenza, which often assume
an epidemic form, producing fatal effects.
A net increase of 2.79 per thousand cannot be


regarded as very satisfactory or hopeful for the future
ncrease of the race.
A very general impression prevails amongst the
people, and one not altogether unsupported by facts,
that a very considerable decrease continued for three
years after the measles epidemic: that is, from 1876
to 1878, or as they put it, “the first year there were no
births, the second, nearly all that were born died,” and
in some districts they maintain that the effect has not
been got over yet. However this may be, there can
be no doubt that “ the after-effects ” as they call them
were observable very much as put by themselves.
Referring again to the effects of previous epidemic®
and losses sustained in war there is one hopeful feature;
their traditions all point to the fact that subsequently
the vitality of the race reasserted itself, and their
legends tell us of islands and towns being reoccupied
and the land filled again with people.
The question is whether the same experience will
recur ? The more intelligent of the people reply that,
owing to changed circumstances and surroundings, to
new influences at work, and also to changes amongst
themselves, such as the declining power of the chiefs,
whereby the necessity for the daily performance of a
very elaborate ceremonial, involving activity,
industry, and cleanliness, that the same good results
cannot be looked for.
The revival of such customs is impossible. The
beneficial effects can only now be secured by the enact-
ment of laws and regulations firmly carried out to make
up for the order of the chief, backed as that was by
the uncompromising “ law of the club.”
The improvement and removal to better sites of
towns, surrounded as many are by deep fosses, con-
taining stagnant water ; by swamps, by mangroves, or


bush, all unhealthy and pregnant with disease, is found
to be no easy matter.
The people are no less superstitious than other races
in a similar state, and are most tenacious of the ancient
inheritance of the foundations of their homesteads,
many of which contain the bones of their ancestors for
many generations. They will defend to their utmost,
and answer every reason given or argument used to
show why any town should thus be removed.
Something very much like the following has been
heard on more than one occasion:—“ Wherefore all
this ? Were we not ‘ born here ? ’ Is it not here where
our fathers were born ? Did they not live and die here ?
Why has the water now death in it as you say ? They
drank from the same spring as we do, walked in the
same paths as we do, ate fruit from the same trees we
eat from. Why is all this ? Why should we not live
and die where they did ? Why ? Why should we
not continue to do as they did ?” And using the name
of their town will say, “It is still Bau as of old.
Will Bau leave Bau empty ? Impossible ! ’Tis war!
’Tis war ! Hear, 0! ye Gods ! Hear, ye spirits of our
fathers ! These desecrations are war ! ’Tis war !
Will no one avenge us ?”
Where the removal of badly situated towns or
houses has been enforced in different parts of the
Colony, the bitter wail of the old people’s “ Tagi ” over
their ancient foundations has been often most piteous,
and has called forth not unfrequently the remonstrance,
“ Why not leave the poor people to live and die as
they list.”
The general intelligence and capability of improve-
ment of the native, however, can be gathered from the
fact, so satisfactory has the progress in education been,
that probably two-thirds of the population can read
their Bible, and probably not much less than half of


that number can write also. The proficiency attained
in subjects of ordinary elementary education as read-
ing, writing, arithmetic, etc., in many of the village schools
throughout the Colony would compare not unfavour-
ably with like institutions in more civilised countries.
The hope of the future is therefore in the young race.
It is due here to state that this work, originally com-
menced by the Christian Missions in these islands, has
been mainly carried on by native agents up to the
present time, to whom too much praise cannot be given,
proving, as it does, the natives’ ability to teach as wel]
as to be taught. Few of the villages are without
churches and schools, which they voluntarily erect.
To supplement what has already been done the
Government now proposes to establish two Industrial
Schools, on a free and comprehensive basis, in which
youths are to be instructed in trades and professions,
usually taught in such institutions, and such as may
be found advantageous, arising from the requirements or
circumstances, or customs of the country. These tw°
are to be started at once, on the recommendation by a
resolution passed at the last Annual Council of Chiefs,
one on Yitilevu for the Leeward part of the group,
and the other on Yanua Levu for the Windward part
of the group. It is worthy of notice in connection
with this subject that almost incessant enquiries are
made from all parts of the islands as to the time the
schools are to be started.
4.—System of Government,
The system of government adopted by the Governor,
Sir Arthur Gordon, is found to work well and ef-
fectively, adapted as it is to the genius of the race.
They have Yillage, District and Provincial Councils
(the former held monthly, and the latter twice a year),


in each of which their affairs are managed, disputes
settled, and improvements instituted.
In the village councils the elders of each mataqall
with the chief of the town meet together monthly, or
as often as may be necessary, and discuss all matters
respecting their plantations, house-building, keeping
the towns clean, road-making, and the carrying out of
any order from the superior councils. They also, as
far as they are able, settle disputes between mataqalis.
direct what lands shall be cultivated for the year, and
make arrangements for the nature, extent, and por-
tioning out of the tax produce for the year. Ques-
tions and disputes which they cannot settle, or which
are beyond their jurisdiction, are referred to the Dis-
trict Council, composed of the chiefs of towns, mata-
ni-vanua, or other men of importance, presided over by
the Bull It meets on the first Tuesday in each month
and discusses all matters connected with the district,
enquiring into the state of the roads, the sanitary con-
dition ofthe towns, the removal of rubbish, and the con-
dition of bathing places', &c. It also hears complaints
or disputes between towns, questions affecting succes-
sion to lands, or boundaries, and settles them, or in
grave cases, refers them to the Provincial Council.
O '
The Provincial Council is held in the months of
January or February, and again in June or July, and
is composed of the hulls of the districts, mat a-ni-vanuas,
chiefs of qali. chiefs of towns, the native stipendiary
magistrate, and any other person of importance in the
province. It is presided over by the Boko 1 ui, and
each Bull gives a report of his district, and is required
to answer a number of questions relative to his
periodical visits to the various towns under him, their
situation and general condition, the state of the houses
and roads, gardens and plantations; “if there isqplenty
in the land”; if the marriages, births, and deaths are


duly recorded, and the relative number of each town;
if there is any particular disease or distemper preva-
lent, or any matter disturbing the peace and regular
occupation of the people. The hull is asked if he has
enquired into these matters, and with what result;
whether the monthly meetings are held, and as to the
attendance of the children at school. The removal of
badly situated towns, when compulsion is necessary, is
enforced by this council. All complaints or intertribal
disputes arising from questions, customary usages and
precedency, are heard and disposed of, or referred to
the superior annual council of chiefs. A full and de-
tailed report of each provincial council, which gene-
rally lasts about a week, is prepared by the provincial
scribe and submitted by the Roko Tui to the Governor;
and any resolutious passed or rules made or suggested,
on receiving the Governor’s sanction, are observed and
carried out.
The great Annual Council of chiefs meets in the
month of November at a town named by the Governor.
It is composed of all the Roko Tui, two Bulls from each
province elected by the preceding provincial councils,
the native stipendiary magistrates, and provincial
scribes.
The hulls from the “colo” (mountain) districts are
selected by the Goyernor, and any person named by a
Roko Tui may, with the Governor’s approval, be also
admitted.
The Council, which generally lasts about a month, is
opened and closed by the Governor in person. Each
Roko Tui gives a report of the state of his province for
the last year, and each question or subject is discussed
and disposed of as he proceeds. When these reports
are finished the subjects laid before the council by the
Governor in his opening address are next each con-
sidered; also the general operation of the laws and


regulations, and any suggestions for their alteration,
or additions, or the framing of new ones. This council
also takes cognisance of all disputes between provinces,
or matters referred from provincial councils, questions
of boundaries, and the re-settlement of tribes upon
their hereditary lands. The fullest and freest discussion
proceeds on each question, and though often warm and
animated, the greatest decorum and order prevails.
Although there are no special rules for the guidance of
debate, the innate respect for ceremonial usages does
not restrain any from giving his opinion or making
known his grievance to the fullest.
Their discussions are submitted in the form of reso-
lutions accompanying the report of the proceedings to
the Governor at the close of the council, when the
Governor gives his approval or otherwise to each reso-
lution. Such as affect regulations already in existence,
or suggestions for new ones, if approved, are subse-
quently submitted to the Native Regulation Board,
created under Ordinance XXXV, 1870, and composed
of both whites and natives, and finally, being approved
by the Legislative Council, become law.
The District Courts for the exercise of summary
police jurisdiction, held every two months, are presided
over by the Native Stipendiary Magistrate, who may
be assisted by the Buli. These courts have jurisdiction
in all cases where the fine does not exceed thirty shil-
lings, or the term of imprisonment does not exceed three
months. Any one thinking himself wrongly judged
in the District Court may appeal to the Provincial
Court.
The Provincial Court, held quarterly, is composed of
at least one European and one Native Stipendiary
Magistrate, and can inflict upon natives fines to the
amount of twenty pounds or imprisonment (which
practically means detention and unremunerated labour)


for three years. Records are kept and reports, with
returns, are regularly forwarded to the Provincial
office, but have not as yet been laid before the Legis-
lative Council.
The staff of native officials in connection with the na-
tive department is, as may be supposed, large. Besides
eleven of the Roko Tui. who govern thirteen prov-
inces, there are directly under the department one hun-
dred and thirty-nine bulis, twelve native stipendiary
magistrates, thirteen provincial scribes, and many assist-
ant scribes, all of whose stipends are paid out of the
general revenue. In each province there is a police
constable, who is under the control and receives pay
from the Police Department.
Besides these there is in each town a recognised
chief of the town, a position generally hereditary, who
receives from the people the customary dues of the posi-
tion. Each town has also one or more town constables.
The bulis have scribes who are also district registrars
of births and deaths. There is a district overseer
of gardens. The whole of these are remunerated from
a provincial tax of money and kind raised for the pur-
pose once a year, in the month of December.
Notwithstanding the very small staff of white
officials employed in the Provincial Department a vast
amount of organisation and system has been accom-
plished, which is being improved and extended
as the occasion or the means are at hand for so doing.
The same principle prevails throughout the whole sys-
tem.
The native is employed to do the native work, and
his efficiency in the discharge of his duties is promoted
in every possible way. The opinion of those who
have the best opportunities of judging is that he makes
a careful and dilligent officer, if on the one hand proud
of position among his fellows and of the confidence


placed in him, yet, as a rule, doing his work with
thoroughness most praiseworthy.
Besides the regular and more purely official work
there is a great deal of semi-official business done for
the benefit of the people, when they seek for informa-
tion or advice, both as communities and individuals.
Amongst many others may be noticed the assistance
that has been given in procuring European boats and
vessels. As a Fijian is a great traveller, and also
naturally anxious to visit Levuka or other places with
his produce a very serious annual loss of life at sea
was the result in consequence of the unseaworthiness
of the canoes, and in their desire to obtain a better and
safer article they were often imposed on. They make
fairly good sailors, and are largely employed on board
the interinsular craft. Most of the vessels belonging
to the chiefs and the provinces are manned and entirely
in charge of natives, yet casualties are comparatively
rare.
In conclusion it may be said the preservation and
progress of a race in many respects so interesting, and
promising so many good qualities, is receiving and will
continue to receive the assiduous attention of Govern-
ment.


attb (Education.
The best method of exhibiting the condition of the
colony in this respect will be to give a succinct
account of the position of the different religious bodies
in our midst.
The Wesleyan Mission.
This Mission was began in Fiji in the year 1835
by the Rev. D. Cargill, M.A., and Rev. W. Cross, from
Tonga, with a native teacher of that place. They
commenced their work at Lakeba, in the Windward
portion of the group. Much assistance was rendered
by a supply of native preachers from Tonga of whom
Joeli Bulu became one of the most remarkable. The
Islands were gradually, and in some cases rapidly
won by the influence of Christianity, but in the moun-
tains of Na Viti Levu heathenism remained till within
the last three years. At present, however, there is
not a single professedly heathen village in the country ;
the whole of the group is nominally Christian, nearly
every village has its own church, resident pastor and
school. The distant island of Rotumah is included in
the Fiji Mission District. A marked feature in the
conduct of this Mission is the large employment of a
native agency —local preachers, teachers, catechists
and ordained native ministers. The English Mission-
aries are principally occupied in training these and in
overseeing them in their work Though they are
numerous and the staff of English ministers small, yet
by a careful and minute system of organization, by
frequent meetings of various kinds, and by placing
some of the best natives in offices of responsibility and
honor, considerable supervision and control is main-
tained. The Fijians have the whole bible given to


them in their own language, and they are great read-
ers of it. There is a number of small books in circula-
tion among them, a hymn book and offices, catechism,
church rules, primer for schools, geography, Pilgrim’s
Progress, and handbooks of theology for native
preachers. There is also a dictionary of the language
by the Rev. D. Hazlewood for the use of Europeans
All the children everywhere go to school and a num-
ber of them excel in reading and writing ; their other
attainments are neither high nor varied. Each village
pastor is also a schoolmaster. Special training insti-
tutions are maintained. The native ministers are
expected to have a few lads under instruction, and
each English Missionary has also a number in training
from among whom the best are drafted off to the large
District Training Institution at Navuloa, which is the
chief educational establishment belonging to the
Mission. The native preachers are facile of speech
and often very effective, using the beautiful Fijian
language with ease, correctness and originality of
expression. Some of the chiefs are most efficient pul-
pit orators.
Wherever practicable, divine services are held by
the Missionaries for the settlers and planters and an
English congregation is regularly ministered to by the
Wesleyan Missionary in Levuka. Attempts have
been made to hold services with the imported Poly-
nesian laborers, but difficulties exist which have
hitherto rendered most of these attempts abortive.
Teachers are sent annually from Fiji to the New
Britain Mission, a few being selected from those who
volunteer. They evidence Christian courage and faith-
fulness, endure much and do a really useful work. A
new mission vessel, the “John Hunt,” has just been pro-
vided for visiting the different islands in Fiji, Rotuma


and part of Tonga, and for cruising between this group
and New Britain,
The people of Fiji bear a considerable portion of the
expense of the Mission in their midst; by far the larger
proportion of them are hearers, and there are many
members of the Church, including the ex-King Cako-
bau and some of the principal chiefs. As to the type
of Christianity existing here it would be manifestly
unfair to judge it by that which is recognised in lands
long civilised and Christianised. It must be estimated
by contrast, the past with the present; what has been
abandoned should be considered rather than what has
been attained. The Mission has had pioneering work to
do, and is now endeavoring to raise the standard of
morality and to promote consistency of Christian con-
duct.
The latest Statistical Returns are as follows
Churches, 841.
Other preaching places, 291.
Missionaries, 10.
English schoolmasters, 1.
Native ministers, 48,
Catechists, 12.
Head teachers, 984.
Schoolmasters, 2,023,
Local preachers, 1,405
Sabbath school teachers, 2,252.
Class leaders, 2,733.
English members, 39.
Members, 2,327.
On trial, 5,438.
Deaths (members), 673.
Sabbath schools, 1,391.
Sabbath scholars, 40,906.
Day schools, 1,603.


107
Day scholars, 38,019.
Attendants or adherents, 100,885.
The Catholic Mission.
The Catholic Mission was founded in Fiji, in August,
1844, at Lakeha. Up to 1863 it was included in the
Apostolic Yicarate of Bishop Baliviltou, presiding at
the Samoa Islands.
Since that time it has been a separate Mission, under
the name of “ Prefecture Apostolique,” governed by an
Apostolic Prefect, under the French dependence of
Rome.
The present Superintendent of the Catholic Mission
in Fiji is Pere Breheret, at Levuka, whose kind and
general sympathies have ever been open to one and
all of those who, in either spiritual or temporal mat-
ters, could be benefited by an appeal to him, and which
has won for him universal esteem and respect.
The Mission in Fiji belongs to the Society of Mary,’
from Lyons, France.
Since 1860 this Mission has extended from its head
quarters at Levuka Station to Rewa, Solevu, Yerata,
and Taviuni.
Besides these establishments, where there are good
substantial wooden churches, a school has been lately
established at Bureta, on the south-west side of
Ovalau, where from fifty to sixty pupils are being
taught in all the branches of an English education,
both in English and Fijian. It is the intention of the
Mission to have “ Sisters” for the school that it may
be may be useful in educating girls of both the white
and native race, similar to that in Samoa, which has
been so highly useful and popular.
White Missionaries conduct most of the schools. In
some districts native teachers have charge of them.


The number of Church members (Catholic) is about
8.000.
There are ten white Missionaries under and includ-
ing the Apostolic Prefect.
One thousand children are being educated by the
Mission and sixty native teachers.
The Church of England and Melanesian
Mission.
In consequence of a large number of planters having
settled in Fiji about ten years ago, induced to do so by
the good price and great demand for cotton, a desire was
expressed by many of them who belonged to the
Church of England that a branch of their Church for
their special benefit should be planted in the group.
Accordingly the Rev. William Floyd, with the sanction
of the Primate of Australia, the Bishop of Melbourne,
and the late Bishop Pattison of Melanesia, arrived in
Levuka for that purpose. After years of struggle,
with almost insuperable difficulties, owing to the
peculiar circumstances of the country, and with little
or pecuniary help from England, the Church has at
length obtained a permanent footing in the Islands.
A building site was secured in fee simple and a
church erected. Regular service, twice each Sunday,
with a Sunday-school continually increasing, have
long been established. As a general rule, the Holy
Communion is celebrated every Sunday. The services,
which are semi-choral, conducted by a surpliced choir,
are as bright, hearty, and congregational as under
existing circumstances it is possible to make them.
The last annual report shows that the Church was
then not only out of debt, but with a balance in its
favour. The building in Levuka has since been en-
larged, and continues to be well filled. The Sunday-
school averages over GO children.


The Church has not interfered, nor is it her inten-
tion to interfere, with the existing Wesleyan and
Roman Catholic Missions, but, on the contrary, wishes
them well in every effort for the benefit of the Abori-
ginal Fijian race. At the same time she has felt it to
be her duty to try to do what she can for the imported
labourers, many of whom belong to her own Mission
in Melanesia. For this purpose a school for the benefit
of all classes of imported labour is regularly held in the
Church of the Redeemer, Levuka, every Sunday at
4 p.m., which is remarkably well attended. This,
however, is regarded as only the prelude to more
extended work of the same sort in other parts of the
group.
The Society for Propagating the Gospel voted last
year for the first time the sum of £5OO, thereby en-
abling the Church to employ the services of a second
clergyman, the Rev. A. Poole, who will officiate in
the Rewa and Suva district, and also amongst the
imported labourers there.
Bishop Selwyn paid Fiji an episcopal visit a few
months ago, when amongst other special duties he con-
firmed above forty young people. He also pointed out
the great importance of taking immediate steps for
establishing a Bishopric in Fiji by raising a bishopric
endowment fund. For the purpose of advocating this
the Rev. William Floyd, who holds the Bishop of Lon-
don’s license, will proceed to England probably next
January.
It is confidently hoped that before long a Bishop
and one or two extra clergymen will be stationed here,
which will tend materially to the prosperity of the
Church in Fiji, and also to that of the Group itself;
whose general welfare a Church in its midst cannot
fail to promote.


Education.
The educational wants of the Colony have not been
overlooked by the Government. In 1879 a short Or-
dinance was passed providing for the establishment of
schools in various parts of the Group for the special
benefit of the white population. In Levuka there is a
flourishing Public School, with an enrolment of nearly
200 children, under the supervision of anexperienced and
certificated master and mistress, who are assisted
by young teachers. The course of instruction is
similar to those adopted in the English and Colonial
schools, and the results of the teaching are highly
satisfactory. Private schools are also in existence at
Rewa, Suva, Yuna Point, Loma Loma, and other places,
and as population increases these will be supplemented
by the establishment of State Schools under certificated
teachers obtained from the Australian Colonies. Move-
ments are now on foot at both Suva and Rewa for the
establishment of State Schools, similar to that of Le-
vuka, and in a few months these will be accomplished
facts.


EXHIBITORS AND
FROM FIJI
AT THE
Class I.
Ryder, Brothers
R. L. Holmes
T. Burness
Maize
Maize (white)
Pea Nuts
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
M. H. Fraser
R. L. Holmes
Mrs. Storck
Arrowroot
Tapioca
Tapioca
Arrowroot
Arrowroot
Arrowroot
Turmeric
Arrowroot
Yams
Mrs. Abbott
Hon. Captain Barrack
G. McPherson
Adi Kuila
Mrs. Shave
W. F. Parr
Arrowroot
Rice
Native Exhibit
T. Burness
Yams
Tapioca
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
R. L. Holmes
Ryder, Brothers
J. & W. Randall
J. & W. Randall
W. Chapman
Ground Turmeric
Mace
Nutmegs
Ginger
Ginger
Cinnamon
Limes
Citrons
Citrons
ITS
s\\hrt\nt'm\dl
GEOUP—AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.


Class I.— Continued.
J. S. Crowe Ginger
L. Smith Ginger
Hon. Captain Barrack Chillies
Ryder, Brothers Lime Juice
Hon. Captain Barrack Arrowroot
Mrs. E. L. Holmes
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
R. L. Holmes
Langdale & Steinmitz
J. P. Storck
J. H. Petersen
G. C. H. Smith
D. Wilkinson & Co,
T. Burness
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Ginger Preserved
Coffee Beans (in parchment)
Coffee (hulled)
Coffee (ground)
Coffee (pea-berry)
Coffee Beans
Coffee Beans
Coffee Beans
Coffee Beans
Coffee Beans
Coffee Beans
Tobacco
Cocoanut Kernel (dried)
GROUP—VEGETABLE PRODUCTS (USED AS FOOD
OR MATERIALS).
Class 11.
Ryder, Brothers Copra
Samuel Sewell Copra
Henry Cave & Co. Copra
R. L. Holmes Copra
Hon. G. McEvoy Copra
T. Burness Copra
Hon. Captain Barrack Copra
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Ryder, Brothers
M. H. Fraser
Ed. Chippendall
D. Waterston
R. L. Holmes
Bananas (in boxes)
Bananas (in leaves)
Bananas (in leaves)
Bananas (in leaves)
Sugar
Sugar
Sugar


Glass ll. — Continued.
Turner & Edgerly
Ellis & Son
Wilmott Chapman
A. Witherow
P. Joske
J. C. Smith
W. M. Thomas
J. R. Dods
W. F. Parr
Wm. Peece
Ed. Ohippendall
Ed. Chippendall
Native Exhibit
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Sugar Cane
Molasses
Cane Juice Vinegar
Sugar Cane
GEOUP—ARBORICULTURE AND FOREST PRO
DUCTS.
Class 111.
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Henry Cave & Co.
Ryder, Brothers
Henry Cave & Co.
Ryder, Brothers
Paul Joske
M. H. Fraser
J. & W. Randall
J. & W. Randall
J. P. Storck
Hon. Captain Barrack
Hon. G. McEvoy
Native Exhibit
P. Stress
W. F. Parr
Exhibition Committee
Dilo Oil Nuts
Dilo Oil Nuts
Kava (Piper Mythisticum)
Candle Nuts
Candle Nuts
Cocoanuts (long sinnet)
Ivory Nuts
Timber
Timber
Timber
Timber
Tree Fern
Cassia Bark
Timber
Dilo Oil
Gum
Kava (Piper Mythisticum)
Timber
Sandalwood


Class lll.'— Continued.
Ryder, Brothers
Ryder, Brothers
Hon. G. MeEvoy
M. H. Fraser
Bark
Lemon Grass
Candle Nut Oil
Dilo Oil
Hon. G. McEyoy
Cocoannts
GROUP—TEXILE SUBSTANCES OF VEGETABLE
OR ANIMAL ORIGIN.
Class IV.
Ryder, Brothers Cotton (Sea Island)
Ryder, Brothers Cotton (Sea Island) in seed
Ryder, Brothers Cotton Seed
Ryder, Brothers Cotton (in pod)
Henry Hulton Cotton (Sea Island)
Hon. James E. Mason Cotton (Sea Island)
Hon. G. MeEvoy
Ryder, Brothers
Hon. J. B. Thnrsten
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Fiji Native Exhibit
Adi Kuila
Cotton (Sea Island)
Coir Fibre
Coir Fibre
Angora Hair
Angora Hair (cross-bred)
Masi
Baskets
Baskets
Exhibition Committee
GROUP—ANIMAL PRODUCTS, LAND AND MARINE
(USED AS MATERIALS).
Class V.
Hon. R. B. Leefe
Native Exhibit
W. A. Boyd
Pearl Shell
Shells
Seaweed
Coral
Exhibition Committee
Ryder, Brothers
Coral
Pearl Shell
Native Exhibit


GROUP—MINERAL, ORES, &c.
Class YI.
Ryder, Brothers
Soils
Ryder, Brothers
Stones
Ryder, Brothers
Sands and Stones
W. & M. Randall
Ellis & Son
Iron Ore
Lime
GROUP—PHOTOGRAPHY, DESIGNS.
Class YII.
E. H. Dufty
F. Spence
Photos
Fern Album
GROUP-
CLASS
G. Hennings
Stuffed Birds
GROUP—CERAMICS, POTTERY.
Class VIII
Fiji Native Exhibit
Turner & Edgerly
Shadier & Koster
Native Pottery
Bricks
Bricks
Class IX.
Fiji Native Exhibit
Mats
Fiji Native Exhibit
Native Bure
J. P. Storek
Bamboo Carpeting
Exhibition Committee
Large Mat
Native Rope
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
,i a
Native Exhibit
Fans
Sinnet
GROUP—YARNS AND WOVEN GOODS OF VEGE-
TABLE OR MINERAL MATERIALS.
A-v
v «v' 1


OEOUP—WEAPONS.
Class X.
Turner & Edgerly
Turner & Edgerly
J. P. Storck
Exhibition Committee
W. 0. Bur ding
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
P. Stooss
Native Exhibit
Native Clubs
Native Axes
Native Spears
arrows
Native Spears
Native Clubs
Native Axes
Native Clubs
EXTEA.
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
Exhibition Committee
P. Stooss
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Native Exhibit
Mrs. Fowler
GEOUP—WINES, &c.
Class XI.
Eewa Plantation Company
Eum
Native Clubs and Spears
Native Oil Dishes
Native Paint Dishes
Native Walking Sticks
Native Canoe Paddles
Native Pillow
Native Yaqona Bowls
Native Yaqona Bowls
Native Head Dress
Native Pillows
Native Bone Knives
Native Oil Dishes
Native Masi Sticks
Native Plates
Native Yaqona Bowl
G, L. Griffiths, Printer, Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji.
Native Spears, Bows, and
Dress made from Native Cloth




