

A Campaign
for the
Abohition
of the
Slums in Sydney
BY
ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE.
SYDNEY
William Andrews Printing Co. Ltd., 236 Castlereagh Street.
1913.




The Campaign for the
Abolition of the Slums in Sydney.
BY ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE
This is published primarily to push forward the work of
completing the Abolition of the Slums in the City of Sydney.
The exposure of bad and wretched conditions should arouse
all right-minded citizens to action. People should have room
to live.
Secondly, it is to furnish some record of what was done
in the movement, and to chronicle important successes.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE ROYAL COMMISSION.
The Wade Government in 1908 appointed a Royal Com-
mission for the Improvement of Sydney. The members of
the Commission were: The Lord Mayor (then Mr. Thomas
Hughes); Sir James Graham, M.L.A.; Messrs. E. W. Fosbery,
C.M.G.; H. Gorman; R. R. P. Hickson; J. S. 1. McGowen,
M.L.A.; E. W. O’Sullivan, M.L.A.; E. W. Scott; Norman
Selfe; J. Wall; and J. Wheeler.
Many witnesses were examined as to beautifying the
city, widening the principal streets, etc., but as not a word
was said about the abolition of the slum areas, I wrote asking


to be allowed to give evidence. The Commission soon after
appointed a day (12th October, 1908) on which I could be
heard. The following is my evidence taken from tht official
report:—
President: Your name is Francis Bertie Boyce? Yes.
You are a Canon of St. Andrew’s Cathedral? Yes.
And you are Rector of St. Paul’s, Sydney? Yes.
I understand you wish to give some evidence regarding areas
which, in your opinon, should be improved? Yes. I wish to draw
the attention of the Commission to the congested areas, which are
often termed the “slum areas of Sydney.” You propose to widen
Oxford Street, and that is a matter with which I am in full sympathy.
But it seems to me to be very inconsistent to have a beautiful street,
with an area that is a disgrace to any modern city, within two or
three hundred yards of it. I refer to those miserably narrow streets
in what is termed the Wexford Street neighbourhood. The streets
to which I particularly allude are as follow: —Poplar Street; Robin
Hood Lane, 12 feet wide; Pelican Street; Waine Street, 16 feet wide;
Evans Place, Little Smith Street, Smith Street, Mackey Street, Little
Riley Street, East Street, Milk Street, all narrow; Upton Street, 20 feet
wide; List Lane, 8 feet wide; Beaumont Lane, 10 feet wide—about
eighteen houses in it; Hunt Street, about 20 feet wide, backyards
about 10 x 10 feet. The area in question is bounded on one side by
Elizabeth Street as far as Albion Street, on another side by Liverpool
Street and Oxford Street, on the east by Riley Street, and on the
south by Albion Street. I have a map with me, but it does not make
any allowance for the new road which practically does avyay with
Wexford Street. The road, however, does not relieve the difficulties
as regards the population on the other side. The new road, however,
is a very great improvement. I think there is no room to live in those
areas, properly speaking, and that in a modern city there ought to be
no slums. I want to draw special attention to the miserable yards in
the areas in question, some of which are only 10 feet square—in fact,
I think some are only 8 feet square. The water-closet, of course, has
to be in the yard. If a yard is, say, 10 feet square, the water-closet
has to be within that space.
Do you think that the law should provide for a good air-space to
each building? I certainly think that that ought to be the law of the
land. A great many respectable people live in the area to which I
have referred, but a great many loose women also live there. In fact,
immorality and crowded areas always go hand in hand.
What do you define as the boundaries of Chippendale? George
Street West, Regent Street, Cleveland Street, and Pine Street, which
runs out towards George Street West. The true boundary of the area
would be an old creek which used to run down and was right in the
dip of the land. According to Mr. Coghlan, Chippendale is the most-
crowded area in the metropolis. You come out of a very fine street,
and at once get into these wretched little streets. Wattle Street is
about 20 feet wide, and is overcrowded; Somerset Place is a lane 3
feet wide. About 30 feet up these are two houses to which
there are no backyards, just very small yards in front. Of cipurse,
the sanitary arrangements have to be in those places. The children
who want to play have to go through this 3-foot lane and out into a
20-foot street (Myrtle Street, late Wattle Street). Many of these
streets, such as Outram, Gould, Balfour, Carlton, Dick, Middle, and
Dale Streets, as well as Dangar Place, are very narrow —in fact, the
average seems to be about 20 feet. Here, again, there is no room to
live. I believe that if the death-rate in these areas could be discovered


it would be found to be higher than most other parts of the city. We
cannot expect children to be healthy and robust in these places.
Mr. Fosbery: Would any of the buildings to which you have
referred be condemned by the City Council? The City Council has
done very good work, but it has done nearly all it can do. If merely
the buildings are condemned it will not get rid of the congestion.
President: Do you think that new buildings should not be allowed
in their places ? That is a very good point. In this part the yards
are extremely small, but they are a little larger than in the Wexford
Street area. Still, they are altogether inadequate, and when it is
remembered that the sanitary conveniences must be in the yards,
the thing speaks for itself. I do not see why workmen’s dwellings
should not contain bathrooms.
It should be compulsory on every owner of property to have a
bathroom built; —I tried to get that provision ten years ago, but I
was not successful ? There is another area to which I wish to refer.
It is off Devonshire Street, and is bounded by Devonshire Street,
Elizabeth Street, Riley Street, and Belvoir Street. It is very congested.
I submit three maps showing the congested areas to which I refer.
Do you know that the City Council have now resumed sufficient
land to carry Devonshire Street through into Bourke Street; —does
that touch the area you are referring to? No. It is a very useful
improvement, however. While there are very narrow streets, the
tendency is for the people to deteriorate rather than to improve. I
wish to suggest that these areas should be resumed and laid out tn
a proper way with streets of the minimum legal width—at least 66
feet—and that the whole neighbourhood should be gradually recon-
structed. I do not think it would do to take any steps by which these
people would be turned out immediately; but something might be
done to permit of these areas being reformed entirely in time. I also
suggest that when the areas have been reconstructed mansions be
erected for working men. It seems to me to be a necessity for some
working men to live close to their work. The rents are rather high
in these areas.
Do you mean large tenement blocks with flats ? Yes.
Do you think that that is popular amongst the working classes
in Sydney? Some of the most aristocratic people in London live
in flats.
Of course, you know how strong the feeling is against flats in
the Rocks area That may be, but there are some places in London
where the mansions have been built and they are very popular. I
went over one set of mansions in Westminster, and the people seemed
to be pleased with the better conditions and lesser rents. I think
that the balconies should be larger than the present yards. If you
give them plenty of fresh air you will meet one of the difficulties which
have been advanced as regards flats. When these areas are resumed
you want to put up good buildings—if not workmen’s cottages, then
it appears to me that you want “Hogarth” mansions for workmen’s
quarters.
Mr. Hickson: Do you think our climate is suitable for mansions,
or flats, —there is a very strong feeling in all the areas under the
control of the Harbour Trust against flats; —I do not think our climate
is suitable for housing people so close together, and I do not think it
tends towards morality to have a common staircase for a number of
families ? There is that objection, of course.
Mr. Selfe: Do you think, in view of the commercial expansion
of the city, these sites will not shortly be requred for business purposes


rather than for residental sites —say within the next twenty-five years ?
I think that some part will. I still think, however, that a large number
of workmen will want to live near their work. Even if you have
factories in these narrow streets and lanes, difficulties will still be
met with. For instance, if you get a vehicle in it is difficult to get
it out again.
Mr. Fosbery: You are aware that of late years there has been
an enormous increase in the erection of small workmen’s dwellings
in the suburbs, which are connected with the city by our tramway
system, and that these small cottages are being largely availed of?
Yes, and the tramway communication has helped things very much.
I believe, however, that it will always be found necessary for a lot of
people to live close to the places where they are employed.
I suppose that, for higher reasons, you would prefer to see an
increase in the number of small cottages in the suburbs, than a
congestion in the city, even if they had to come a greater distance to
their work ? Yes.
President: We have had all sorts of schemes for constructing
mansions, but the feeling of the working clases is extremely against
them, and the better judgment of those in authority is, with the
working classes, against the mansions? I think that that is largely
because sufficient attention has not been paid to the question of fresh
air. You ought to give a balcony as large as an ordinary yard. I
would make the balcony at least 16 feet square. I mentioned mansions,
but I wish to suggest that you should not confine any rebuilding to
that class of structure. There are many other styles of workmen’s
buildings that could be put up on these areas. I only mention
mansions because of the need for economy in ground space.
Mr. Hickson: Do you know the south side of the city of London
where the workmen live? Yes.
When I went through there last year I found there were a great
many mansions built on the south side of the city, but the result was
that the only place the children had to play in was the streets ? I
thought that if you had a large balcony, the difficulty would be
overcome to some extent.
But you could not keep children on a balcony all day long? No.
There are various other portions round the city that ought to be dealt
with. I wish to suggest that in future no buildings should be erected
in any lane, that every dwelling should face a main street. There are
certain places to which one could refer and which are most unsatis-
factory. There are certain houses off Bathurst Street, for example,
which face back: St. John’s Court, the entrance to which is 316
Kent Street; Barker Lane, about 17 feet wide; Washington Street,
pract’cally off Bathurst Street, about 24 feet wide. I do not think any
building should be allowed to remain situated off a main street. I
think it should not be used for dwelling purposes. Of course, com-
pensation would have to be made to the owners.
President: The practical difficulty is that to prevent the use of
buildings in lanes of 20 feet width would be almost impossible, in
view of the expense, but I suppose you would not object to their use
for commercial purposes, so long as they were not used for dwelling
purposes ? Quite so. I think they might be used for commercial
purposes, but dwelling houses should not be in such streets.
Mr. Fosbery: Has it ever occurred to you that the law which
exists in some places would be useful, viz., to prohibit, as residences,
any buildings which have not a certain number of cubic feet of area
for every inhabitant? I think that would be a very desirable law to


have. In some of these areas of which I have been speaking, there is
more than one family to be found, and I suppose you could find families
consisting of four, five, and six persons living in the same room.
And boys growing in adolescence sleeping in the same room with
thdr sisters, together with their fathers and mothers? Yes.
Do you think that that could be cured by insisting on a certain
amount of air space for each inhabitant? Yes. I think that the
children ought to be particularly considered. It seems to me an
uncanny thing that the city should be beautiful without and unclean
within.
A condensed account of this evidence appeared in the
daily papers, and I soon found that my action had attracted
great attention, and that there was sympathy. It will be
seen that while I specially mentioned certain areas, I advo-
cated slum abolition no matter where it existed.
“The Sydney Morning Herald” shortly after said:—
NEW SYDNEY.
A GREAT CITY TAKING STOCK.
THE SLUM AREAS.
The enquiry by the Sydney Improvement Commission has been
turned in a new direction by the evidence of the Rev. Canon Boyce.
Hitherto it had been an affair of experts dealing for the most part with
communication and traffic problems and projected street widening
in the central areas of Sydney. The new field opened by Canon Boyce
dealt with improvements affecting human life, health, and the future
of the race. The city family is supposed to be a fragile stock, bolstered
up by families fresh from the land, which, transplanted from their
healthy country surroundings, become extinct in three generations
amid their city environment. The main cause of this extermination
is the slum and the unhygienic products of those conditions caused
by the decay of city structures in the effluxion of time, as well as the
primitive knowledge employed in the original construction of the
oldest parts of Sydney.
A DISGRACE TO A MODERN CITY.
The witness did not mince his expressions before the Commission
in describing the evils which he desired the City Improvement Com-
mission’s recommendations to cure. “I am in full sympathy with your
proposal to widen Oxford Street; but it seems to me to be very
inconsistent to have a beautiful street, with an area that is a
disgrace to any modern city within two or three hundred yards of it. ”
He then went on to deal categorically with the areas he had described
with such asperity. The first area taken as a fit subject for drastic
improvement was a portion of Surry Hills, and Canon Boyce must have
startled the Commission by giving details of the widths of some of the
streets and lanes. Thus Robin Hood Lane has a width of 12 feet,
Waine Street 12 feet. List Lane 8 feet, and other narrow streets, such
as Poplar Street, Pelican Street, Evans Place, Smith Street, and Little
Smith Street (as “great fleas have little fleas”), Mackey Street, Little


Riley Street, Milk Street, Upton Street, Beaumont Lane (likewise
“Beauchamp Lane,” high-sounding- but pestilential, not enumerated
in Canon Boyce’s list).
HOUSING AND MORALS.
In these areas live a great number of respectable people. This
Canon Boyce testifies, but there are also conditions which are not
conducive to morality. “In fact, immorality and crowded areas always
go hand in hand,” said the witness. From this we may infer that
there are great forces behind city improvement, moral, hygienic, and
racial, besides the mere matter of commercial convenience and
progress. Better housing of the people, on a systematic plan, appears
to be recognised as one of the greatest moral factors in the govern-
ment of nations such as England, France, and Germany. In these
areas dealt with by Canon Boyce some of the very worst conditions
exist—conditions which are usually only associated with medieval
cities of hoary antiquity, built in the days when architecture as
applied to public buildings was a noble art, but hygiene as we know it
was unknown, and no regulation was used as to the sort of hovels the
lower ranks dwelt in.
CHIPPENDALE.
In these narrow streets, obviously, there is little or no yard space,
and we cannot be surprised when Canon Boyce tells us that in some
of the areas the yards are only 10 feet square, and some even as small
as 8 feet. It must be noted also that, as there are no municipal
laundries in these areas such as have been established in congested
centres of British cities, the whole of the washing and drying operations
have to be carried out in these yards; and the conditions which may
arise from that may be better imagined than described. Leaving
Surry Hills as a typical “improvable zone,” to which he could easily
add a dozen more areas to swell the total without leaving the inner
Sydney area, Canon Boyce then drew the attention of the Commission
to the Chippendale area, bounded by George Street West, Regent Street,
Cleveland Street, and Pine Street. Here we again just walk from
“a very fine street, and get into these wretched little streets,” as the
witness said. You have Wattle Street, 20 feet wide —quite a boulevard
by comparison with some of the surrounding “streets” —and get as
low down as “Somerset Place”—high-sounding title —3 feet wide.
“NO ROOM TO LIVE.”
In such “streets” in this zone as Oldham, Gould, Belvoir, Carlton,
Dick, Middle, and Dangar Streets, the average width is 20 feet. In
these areas we can realise the aptness of Canon Boyce’s phrase that
“there is no room to live.” It cannot well be called “living” in
such narrow purlieus, and with the mean houses and small accom-
modation. Here we have evidence that more than one family abides
in one of these mean houses in the mean streets. Apart from the
question of the desirableness of remodelling of the areas, an opinion
expressed by Canon Boyce will be generally shared that the destruction
of these hovels, root and branch, would be a great public service, and
one which the Royal Commission need not hesitate to recommend as
a very necessary step of great urgency, in the direction of Sydney
improvement.
The Trades and Labour Council from the Trades Hall
encouraged me by a letter of warm appreciation of my action
bv what I said before the Commission.


EARLIER WORK.
As to earlier work Sir William Lyne, when Premier, did
a most useful act when he resumed the Rocks area. He did
so because of the bubonic plague then in the city. There was
a scare.
Another useful act was the making, by the City Council,
of the new broad street from College Street (Commonwealth
Avenue) to Elizabeth Street, so as to give a short cut to the
Central Railway Station, as it wiped out Wexford Street, but
it left streets near it that were worse. The resumption
of the flooded area at Athlone Place also ridded the city of
a small undesirable part. Any specially heavy rain over
the George Street West neighbourhood would cause three or
four feet of water to get into the houses there, and leave
much distress. The part has now factories chiefly. These
and some minor changes have been helpful in the abolition
of slum areas, but the great bulk of the congested parts
were left untouched. Other designs than those of giving
people room to live were apparently in the minds of those
who took action, or if they were not, the idea of the abolition
of slum areas was quite secondary. There should be no
slums anywhere in a twentieth century city, and this remark
applies in a stronger way to suburbs. Yet all honour to
those who have done anything, if having taken only a step,
in giving people better conditions of life.
The City Council had done most useful work in con-
demning many insanitary dwellings, and insisting on better
ventilation.
The abolition of the public houses, or a great reduction
in their number should ever accompany the reform I am
advocating.
Personally, having known the need, I have long been
anxious to see action that would abolish the slums. In my
annual programme of social reform put forth usually on the
first Sunday of each year in St. Paul’s, Redfern, and in each
case reported in “The Daily Telegraph,” ! have often urged
the duty. For example, I said at the beginning of the year
1908:
“I welcome resumptions in Wexford Street and other
parts, but hope that similar action will be speedily taken
elsewhere. There are networks of narrow streets, slum
areas, in Sydney that should be freshly laid out and rebuilt


as soon as possible. I recognise improvements, but hundreds
of dwellings are still intolerable. How many families are
there each living in a single room ? Were health and purity
possible in such circumstances ? What kind of places could
be such homes ? I have lived more than half my life not in
a suburb, but within the precincts of the city, and am zealous
for its honour. Its future greatness should be realised, and
the sooner radical changes come, the easier it would be.”
On the first Sunday in 1002 I said, quoting again from
‘‘The Daily' Telegraph”:—•
‘‘They needed better dwellings for thousands of their
people. What home could have comfort where there was no
space to rightly live, or where a family was confined to a
single room ? They' were thankful for the Rocks’ resump-
tion, but there were other parts of the city' where the need
had probably' been as great or greater. He thought that
the network of narrow and crowded streets at the back of
Ly'on’s Terrace, Plyde Park, should be resumed, and a great
part of Chippendale. Those areas should be laid out with
broad streets, and have model artisans’ dwellings built upon
them. It would be intolerable to think that some neighbour-
hoods of our generally beautiful city are to remain in their
present undesirable condition, although so near to the
business centres. It was hard, indeed, to have a happy'
home and healthy children in such overcrowded quarters.”
MR. (now SIR) GEORGE REID’S ACT.
Sir George Reid did magnificent service to the whole
State when he brought in his bill, that was passed, to prevent
any new streets being formed that were not at least 66 feet
wide. They might be as much wider as desired, but 66 feet
was to be the minimum. Sir George was a young and but
little known member of Parliament at this time —it was his
first effort—l think the year was 1880, but I considered it
the greatest legislative thing he ever did, and for it he
deserves our gratitude and should have lasting praise. The
law at once stopped the making of wretched little streets.
Every new town laid out, every new suburb formed, every
new subdivision, and every new road had to conform to his
Act. With the rapid extension, with the frequent town
planning in a new country, the law has had a far reaching
and most beneficial effect.
It was, unfortunately, too late, of course, for the old
city of Sydney and for suburbs laid out prior to about 1880.


I may say that while in the old suburbs there are a few un-
desirable conditions, I have never seen anything like those
of old Sydney. The suburbs have nearly always given yard
room.
NEED OF EXPOSURE.
Knowing that publicity as to the bad conditions, and that
education of public opinion were vital factors in the movement,
I asked the daily press to assist by letting me pilot round
reporters who would give an account of what they saw. It
is well known that statesmen, politicians, aldermen hardly
ever act until public opinion is on their side. It is the
pressure from the people that always tells; votes, votes,
votes, are always considered. The exposure of the conditions
of the slum areas was of great importance to this movement.
“The Daily Telegraph’’ inserted two of the maps
I placed before the Commission that showed the areas of
Chippendale and Surry Hills, each only a few hundred yards
from the Central Railway Station.
“The Sydney Morning Herald” sent round with me
an able and "keen reporter, and what he wrote appeared on
30th November, 1908, on the same page as its leaders, as
follows:—
SYDNEY’S SLUMS.
TWO AWFUL AREAS.
STONETHROW FROM HYDE PARK.
WHAT CHANCE HAVE THE CHILDREN?
RESUMPTION SAID TO BE IMPERATIVE.
“What —what street is this?” we asked of the woman on the
doorstep.
“My word! ’e don’t know Little Riley Street,” she said to the
woman on the step next door.
One makes bold to say very few people in Sydney do know Little
Rilev Street. The most conclusive evidence of it is that Little Riley
Street exists.
Little Riley Street straggled from where we stood over the edge
of the hill towards a maze of the most miserable nameless back lanes —
one of which, three feet wide, was the only front road and back road,
too, for a row of two-storey houses —in one direction, and in the other
dwindled down in the distance to an alley called Smither’s Lane.
Where we stood we paced it, not merely from kerb to kerb, but from
wall to wall, and made it 8 feet wide, or 9 feet at the most. We had
just come from Little Smith Street. That we made 8 feet wide. But


then Little Smith Street holds only five houses. Whereas Little Riley
Street is a long Sydney street, with many houses on it.
OFF LITTLE ALBION STREET.
The narrowest alley on which houses fronted was off Little Albion
Street. They have the grace to call these streets “little.” The
“little” streets generally runs behind its namesake, and seem to
have been meant for a back lane to it. Little Albion Street looks more
like a back gutter. Off Little Albion Street, where it ends in a high
stair leading up a precipice to Riley Street, is a yet “littler” street.
On to it, behind a row of miserable yards—probably backyards once—
faces the most extraordinary terrace in Sydney. It is a set of wretched
two-storey houses. On top of their roofs is built another set of houses,
backyards and all. We could see people in the lower houses on their
balconies, first and second floor. Just over their heads a woman in
the upper set of houses was sitting in her backyard sewing. The
name of the footway on which the lower houses faced people did not
seem to know'. They thought it might be Little Riley Street. Probably
they were wrong. The upper houses fronted on to Riley Street.
From that front, looking over the side of the footpath down the deepest
area one ever peered into, could be seen the back windows of the
lower houses—two whole stories of them, crammed blankly right up
against the precipice.
It was from Riley Street that we had strolled down Little Riley
Street into the awful slums at the back. If Sydney people do not
know; it the sooner they know it the better—that within five minutes
of Liverpool Street, Elizabeth Street, and Oxford Street, there exists
a slum, in which not one of the children with whom it is crowded
stands anything like an even chance of growing up honestly. There
is not a word in this article that does not strictly tell what was seen
in an afternoon’s stroll that never led us more than five minutes
from Hyde Park or George Street. An infinitesimal scrap in Wexford
and Campbell Street has been resumed. But an afternoon about the
slums at the back of Riley Street and in Chippendale will make most
people ask whether the resumption of the whole of them is an urgent
matter, whatever the cost.
POSTERITY’S PLAYGROUND.
In one street, not over-long, we saw 30 children. They were sunny
Australian children, winsome, grubby, obviously as harmless as any
that ever romped along the beach at Manly. They were not as big
as the average, many of them frail, undersized. Seeing them anywhere
else one would say that, given only half a chance, they would make
every bit as healthy honest citizens as any others. In that slum, with
one glance at the background, you know there is no chance. They
must play in the street, to begin with. In East Street we saw one
backyard that cannot have been more than 8 feet by 10 feet, out-
houses and all. There were hundreds not very much larger. Had
they been ten times the size the gutters were a wholesome playground
by comparison with these smelly filthy cages, where outhouses and
garbage tins clustered under the back windows.
So the children play in the street. Squatting in doorways behind
them, leaning over balconies half-clothed, are slatternly women—many
obviously base women—and lazy men. The Chinamen have mostly
gone since Wexford Street was resumed. But doors and balconies
swarm with Indians, negroes, half-castes, half-breeds. Honest
labourers—coal-lumpers, w,ho must be near their work—live there
perforce, wives, children, and all. Side by side with them the thieves
and the lowest prostitutes of the city cluster into these parts. The


police are always there on business. The police are the daily gossip
of the alley which you hear as you walk along it.
“What did vou do after the police came?” a girl asked a man.
“Did Jack go?”
“’E wouldn’t go and get ’im,” was the answer.
That is just as we heard it. You may fit in what story you like..
A little later we were passing the back lane to Lyon’s Terrace, to
see what had come of the old stables and back buildings of what was
once the Park Lane of Sydney. As we came near there was a shout.
“Look out, boys; ’ere’s the cops.”
A second later a perfect avalanche of men poured out of the narrow
opening, and bolted, for the most part, like rabbits into the slum.
There may have been from 30 to 50. Such as we noticed were mostly
the class of larrikin which their country could well spare. One
small boy, particularly brave, waited behind until we were well up to
him, ostentatiously bawling, “Come on, Jim! ’Ere’s the cops.”
Now, beyond the fact that our faces were washed, and one of us
wore blue, we were neither in the least like policemen; one was dressed
as a clergyman. What a clergyman wanted in those parts the people
could not imagine. “Is anyone dying?” asked one hoarse voice from
a doorstep.
The doorstep was the favourite lounge.; or the kerb, which is
sometimes two feet high, a mere narrow threshold to the narrow
unfenced open verandah. The doors stand often wide; and in some
streets they seem to make quite free of each other’s houses.
A GHASTLY CERTAINTY.
About these parts little children swarm. We were hunting for
what used to be held the worst street in all Sydney, Upton Place. It
was once largely inhabited, to the writer’s knowledge, by thieves,
married women—the friends and consorts of thieves—and husbands
who lived by their baseness. There some years ago, not far from the
spot where a man had strumbled across the street killed by his own
wife—thirteen feet it was from kerb to kerb—the writer stood one night,
and saw with his own eyes through the open doors a little row of
bright, sunny Australian children drinking in open-mouthed their baby
notions of good and evil from the degraded habitues of that thievish
quarter. It was no fancy. The writer knew these people well by sight;
had heard from their own mouths something of the life amidst which
they lived. And that was within three minutes of Hyde Park. We
boast, with our hands on our shirt fronts, of the fair field that we
give to Australian children !
We looked long for Upton Place; and when wc got there we found
a square demolished basement, and a council surveyor taking sights
through a theodolite. It is not in the Wexford Street resumption, but
at least they had flattened one side of Upton Place and let the fresh air
and the light of the sun into it. Nothing quite as bad as it was is
left, so far as one could see. Waine Street seemed about the worst,
with Goodchap Street, Mackey Street, East Street, Brisbane Street,
Little Albion Street, Hunt Street not far behind. The average is from
18 to 20 feet wide.
CHIPPENDALE.
On the other side of the railway station, between George Street
West and the railway lines, is a slum nearly as awful. The streets
are nearly as narrow. Smithers Street we stepped, and made to be
10 feet across, pavement included; Balfour Street about 15 feet, Carlton
Street about 20 feet, Dwyer Street about 14 feet. The ugly length of


O’Connor Street was the playground of at least 30 little children. The
smallest houses we saw anywhere were in the parts behind Dangar
Place. House after house had a frontage squeezed into 9 feet to 10
feet, that was the whole breadth of the hovel. They were mostly two
rooms. Sometimes the family sleeps in one, sometimes in both. Near
Hyde Park we had found two-storey houses of two rooms. In some of
them the lower room was a sitting room. They had a sort of kitchen
besides.
BY THEIR DOORKNOBS.
Here and there, with a foul, crawling, open verandah on one
side, a forbidding, tumble-down den on the other, and the reek of
drainage, which hits you again and again in these streets, under its
nose, we came across a shining, polished door-knocker; the number
of the is beneath it in brass, shining like the binnacle of a
battleship. That doorknob is the sure sign of an honest, clean wife
w;thin. By their doorknobs shall ye know thqm. The blinds of the
house hang straight, the curtains washed and neat, behind a spotless
window-pane. Probably there is a pretty garden, too, on a square
foot or two at the back. Behind Dangar Place was a point on which
infinitesimal backyards centred, whose out-houses huddled together,
leaving barely room for rubbish bins. In one was a scrap of garden
as pretty as you could wish to see. The City Council has done
much—is at least forcing people to be superficially clean. But it has
not the power to prevent or cure. Only one street, Bartley Street,
which was opened out voluntarily, shows what might bo done. Next
to one of the worst parts of Chippendale runs this broad open place,
with decent houses along the sides of it, and a row of trees down the
middle.
COMPARED WITH LONDON.
One of the two of us had searched a part of London for its slums,
guided by one who knew them. It was his deliberate opinion after
v'siting the slums of Sydney that the slums of Sydney are in every
degree the peers of the slums of London—not as centres of poverty,
but as centres of dirt, vice, crime, ugliness. In poverty and overcrowd-
ing Sydney cannot compare with London, where even passages and
closets have been let for living in.. But in London the slum streets
are on the whole wider, and the houses well built alongside of those
of Chippendale. You will see women half-dressed, the usual beer-laden
men in each. In parts of each the bath seems quite unknown. Each
is crowded with children; only the Sydney children have not the
pathetic pinch of real hunger on their faces. They are such pretty,
sunny, bright little Australians as would melt the heart of an iceberg.
And that is the tragedy of those slums, which you must go there to
realise. What chance of coming by an honest manhood or womanhood
has any Sydney child reared in those infamous surroundings ?
RESUMPTION.
There seems only one thing which Sydney, in self-respect, can
do to these parts. It was Mr. Reid who made it the law that everv
roadway should be 66 feet wide. These two blots on the map of
Sydney, with their labyrinth of alleys, are older than that. Parts of
them are as old as the slums of London—which are not in Old London
for the most part, but in the London which has sprung up since the
’3o’s. In Sydney these two old crowded villages have quite obvious
boundaries. They lie one of ench side of the railway, and each of
them is only about the size of the railway station and Belmore Park
taken together. Canon Boyce has suggested that each of them should
be resumed at slum values, wide streets driven through them, and
decent houses built. It is the very centre of Sydney, and the hope


is that the resumption would pay for itself, because respectable
frontages would have three times the value of these hovels. No
building should be allowed within 60 feet of the opposite frontage.
At present, if the hovels on either side of a 14 feet street are cleared
away, big houses will go up in their place. And that would be worse
than ever. Whether they pay or not, these two expensive resumptions
must be made in common decency. But before and above all, some-
body must be appointed to save the necessity of such monstrous
needless expense in the future, with full power to prevent new slums
growing up on the outskirts of to-day, which will be the city of
to-morrow.
AREA FOR RESUMPTION.
The areas suggested by Canon Boyce for resumption are:
1. In Chippendale. Most of the part lying between Regent Street,
Cleveland Street, Beaumont Street, Bowman Street, Wattle Street,
Abercrombie Street, and George Street West, excluding the Kent Street
Brewery.
2. Riley Street area: Most of the part between Riley Street,
Oxford Street, Liverpool Street, Elizabeth Street, and Albion Street.
To back up my evidence before the Royal Commission I
asked four gentlemen interested in the social welfare of the
people to offer to give evidence. One was the Rev. George
Campbell, who was sworn and examined on IGth November,
1908:
President: What is your name ? George Campbell.
You are the President of the Sydney City Mission ? Yes.
You are also minister of the Burwood Congregational Church ?
Yes.
You wish to bring under the notice of this Commission some slum
areas in Sydney which, in your judgment, should be done away with?
Yes. Wexford Street and Chippendale areas have been particularly
referred to by the Rev. Canon Boyce. I think that the best plan
would be to resume the whole of the blocks and rebuild them. The
districts in question are hot-beds of vice, insanitation, misery, and
disease. The idea of running a street through these places, and
leaving the back places, would only perpetuate the evils that should
be removed.
Sir James Graham: To which parts are you referring? The
Chippendale and the Wexford Street areas, down as far as Strawberry
Hills. One of the areas is comprised within Commonwealth Street,
Albion Street, Crown Street, and Goulburn Street. The other block
is within Crown Street, Devonshire Street, the back of Liverpool Street,
and Albion Street. There have been some improvements down at
Dank Street, along Cleveland Street, right into George Street. The
block runs from Regent Street right down into the hollow. Coming
in on the train, one begins to see the tumbled-down places. The
backyards are nests of disease and insanitation. The houses are
the smallest conceivable. There has been a great improvement since
the sewerage system was carried out, but still there is scope for further
improvement. When I resided in Redfern I worked in some of the
places in question, and I had personal experience of the houses with
small looms, where I have visited men suffering from consumption
and other diseases. The smell of the places was enough to create
disease.


President: Although the buildings remain, I hope you do not
find the conditions the same? No; since the introduction of the water
and sewerage system the conditions have been vastly improved. I
suggest the resumption of the areas to which I have referred, and the
erection of working-people’s dwellings in place of the tumble-down
places that now exist There are certain classes who must
be near their work, and if they can live sufficiently close to their places
of employment they can get home for the mid-day meal. Family life
would be promoted, and, moreover, it would keep the worker from the
public-houses. Furthermore, land in and around the city must be
getting more valuable every day, and to resume now would be an
easier matter than to resume in the years to come.
Other portions of Mr. Campbell’s evidence referred to
buildings necessary to take the place of . those pulled down.
Mr. J. D. Fitzgerald was examined by the Commission:—
President; I think you now wish to refer to slum areas and a
Housing Act? No Housing Act exists on the Statute Book just now,
so far as I am aware. A Housing Act is really a City Improvement
Act, so that although the Acts that you, gentlemen, know as Lord
Cross’s Acts have developed into Housing of the Working Classes Acts,
they are really City Improvement Acts. The scheme is to take an area
which has been condemned by the medical officers as unfit for human
habitation. I was very much struck with Canon Boyce’s evidence the
other day. I agree with his evidence, and I should very much like
to take the Commission some day and just show them a slum area in
Surry Hills. I lay down this proposition, to which I attach great
importance, that plans for the remodelling of these slum areas should
be got out as soon as possible as part of any scheme that you may
suggest, so that in time, perhaps not immediately, these areas will
be remodelled by the local authority, or whoever happens to be capable
of doing it. I want to cite the instance of Corporation Street, Birming-
ham. The council took a slum area of 43 acres, destroyed it, and
planned new street and new surroundings, and also insisted upon
strict building conditions. The leaseholds were auctioned. They
insisted upon a harmonious plan, which was agreed upon by the
engineers, and purchasers bought with the condition precedent that
they should carry out that plan. One of the principles of the Housing
Act is that you must re-house the people displaced as nearly as possible
on the old site, and when they built Corporation Street, model
dwellings were constructed for the working people in an area a little
distance from the area that had been remodelled. They were nearly
all what are called model dwellings—separate tenements.
Are you favourable to Workmen’s mansions? Yes.
Mr. Fosbery; We have evidence that these tenement mansions
for the working-classes are not readily availed of—in fact, that they are
not popular? They are always packed. lam now speaking of
England.
We have evidence that they are not in such request in Sydney. I
do not think that there is a really good example in Sydney of a modern
tenement house, such as the Cadbury Trust in London are building.
When I advocated model tenements I was told that the workman would
not live in them, that he preferred his little cottage with his acre of
ground where he could grow his cabbages and his roses. Crickville
and Lilyville were thrown open, but I believe there were only two
applications for the leases. The wharf labourer, the coal lumper,
etc., must be near the wharfs, and the house that he lives in becomes


a tenement house. The Hotel Australia is, after all, a tenement house
on a glorified scale.
Other portions of Mr. Fitzgerald’s valuable evidence re-
ferred chiefly to model dwellings.
I asked the Trades Hall Council to send a witness. Mrs.
E. J. Dwyer appeared for it and gave useful evidence in the
same direction.
As the question of rebuilding had been raised, I wrote
“The Sydney Morning Herald” a letter which was published
on 22nd December:—
THE ABOLITION OF THE CITY SLUMS.
To the Editor of the “Herald.”
Sir,- I would like to explain that I regard the question of the
class of buildings to be erected on congested areas after resumption
to be quite secondary. The chief matter now is to have these
congested parts relaid out with streets of a proper width. At present,
with streets from 10 feet to 25 feet across, there is practically no room
for people to live, and there can only be the many evils that follow-
overcrowding. The rebuilding question may safely be left for settle-
ment, and in a sensible way.
While referring to workmen’s dwellings generally, I spoke of
flats, among other buildings, because of the small spaces available.
Two of the congested areas, and the principal ones in the city, that I
proposed to the Royal Commission should be resumed, lie on the two
sides of the Central Railway Station, and within a few hundred yards
of it, and the land should be made the most of, and largely for the
convenience of men who must live near their work. Cottages with fair
sized gardens are not possible when land is so valuable. Flats with
very large balconies to give fresh air, and they might easily be larger
than many present yards, seemed to me to make the most of ground
where economy was a necessity. Many of the wealthy and aristocratic
people in London live in flats.
The question of rebuilding should be approached when the time
comes with open minds. Now the main point is the resumption and
relaying out of the congested areas. There should be no slums in a
modern city. All families should have room to live. The longer the
resumption is postponed the greater will be the cost, but I am very
hopeful that the Royal Commission will report in favour of early action
I am, etc.,
F. B. BOYCE.
St. Paul’s, Sydney, December 21, 190 S.
I said in my annual sermon in St. Paul’s, Redfern, on
the first Sunday of 1909, when setting out a programme of
social reform for the year, as reported in “The Daily
Telegraph”:—
A pressing- question for this city now was the resumption of the
slum areas. At present thousands of men, women, and children had no
room to live. What could be expected morally or as to health when
streets were only 20 feet wide, and yards were ho larger than rooms ?


These congested areas were a disgrace. There should be ho slums in
a modern city. The improvement of the city should primarily be not
so much the beautifying of it with stately thoroughfares, though that
he favoured, as to making it right and pure inside. Were they to make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, while the within was
full of extortion and excess ? The thought was intolerable that streets
should be made wide and splendid while a hundred yards at their back
began slum areas that should cause anyone who loved the city to blush
with shame. Every high-minded citizen should use all his influence
towards a radical reform. There should be wide streets, better
dwellings for the workman, and lower rents. There would be no
money loss in the end, and there would be brightness and happiness
where now there was much that was very much the reverse.
I wrote “The Evening News,” IGth January, 1909: —
THE ABOLITION OF THE SLUMS.
It is pleasing to note that the new Lord Mayor proposes to take
action for a reform of the congested areas of the city. I hope that
the question will not be lost sight of for a moment. lam like most
men, thoroughly in favour of broad streets and stately thoroughfares,
but the city should be pure and on right lines within as well as without.
Are we to make clean the outside of the cup, and the platter, while
the within is full of extortion and excess ? Wexford Street has been
resumed to make a wide street to the Railway Station, and connect
with College Street, but within a comparatively few yards of it remains
an area of narrow and crowded streets that arc a disgrace to our
civilisation; many are only 20 feet wide, and some yards are no bigger
than a room. There should be no slums in a modern city. Athlone
Place has been resumed, because the area is so often flooded in heavy
rain, but very near there is again a network of narrow streets, where
properly people have no room to live. Are those who love Sydney to
stand quietly by when the general improvement of the city is in the
air, and make no demand for reform of our slum areas ? We want
streets of a minimum width of 66 feet, better dwellings, of some
approved kind, and I am confident that the whole cost would be met
even by easier rents. However, the longer the delay the greater will
be the value of the land, and the consequent financial difficulty.
I have a great hope that the Royal Commission on the Improvement
of Sydney will make some important recommendations on the subject.
I urge that the matter he earnestly taken up and all possible assistance
given the Lord Mayor and others in authority, but not merely for
the sake of beautifying the city, but to give the people proper room to
live. There are thousands of men, women, and children who must be
robbed of very much of the happiness of life by the present wretched
conditions. Bright and proper dwellings, with a fair quantity of room
would mean an uplifting of people to a higher and truer social position.
Immorality would receive a blow that would be beneficent in the
extreme and other advantages would accrue. I trust that the whole
question may now be resolutely faced and dealt with and primarily for
the sake of those who dwell in the congested areas referred to.
Other steps than those indicated were taken at this time
by many persons. Help came from several new quarters.
The subject was referred to in various newspapers, in
addresses by clergymen and other citizens. Public opinion
was aroused by the exposures made, and the feeling was
becoming strong that action should be taken in reform.


Towards the end of January I took a reporter, kindly sent
at my instance by “The Evening News,” through the con-
gested areas. His report appeared in that journal on 26th
January as follows:—
IMPROVEMENT OF THE CITY.
THE CONGESTED AREAS.
A VISIT TO THE LOCALITIES.
WHAT CANON BOYCE THINKS. ’
" The Rev. Canon Boyce, who evinces a consideiable interest in the
improvement of the city, and especially in the remodelling of the con-
gested areas, when seen by an “Evening News” representative yester-
day, spoke pretty freely his opinion with regard. to the attention that
should be given, in a consideration of the true improvement of Sydney,
to the poorer quarters.
“I think,” said he, “that the matter ought to be taken up in the
interest of the people residing in the congested areas. Wexford Street
has been resumed, and rightly so, for the purpose of making a stately
street to connect College Street with the Railway Station. But the
congested area at hand is left untouched. It seems discreditable to
talk of widening Oxford Street, and making this new thoroughfare,
while comparatively a few yards behind there is an area in which
people have no room to live, and I hold it is a disgrace to our
civilization.
; “The City Council deserves every credit for the resumption of the
area formerly known as Athlone Place, hut that was in consequence
of the flooded nature of the neighbourhood whenever there was heavy
rain. I think that all the congested areas of the city ought to be
resumed, and relaid out in streets of the present legal minimum width
of 66 feet. This is according to the Reid Act of 1880, which is un-
questionably one of the best that that gentleman ever passed. The
congested areas of Sydney became so before that year, and are an
old-standing trouble.
“Any resumptions,” continued Canon Bpyce, “should be carried
out so as to only gradually depossess the residents, to give them time
for changes. But what is wanted is that new workmen’s dwellings
should be erected of an up-to-date design, with the best sanitary
arrangements, and every home should have a bathroom. At present
there are scores of families with only two small rooms and a kitchen,
and back yards no bigger than an ordinary apartment, and the front
doors opening to a 20 feet street. It_ is intolerable to think that these
congested areas are to remain for all time such as they are. The longer
a delay is made in reforming them the greater will be the cost. Now
they can be easily relaid out, and any sensible surveyor will leave
untouched any broad streets that happen to intercept them, and give
the crowded parts plenty of room for people to live. The matter would
financially pay well. The Rocks area, although the buildings are in
a most incomplete state, and much remains to be done, is returning
already on the cost of resumption over 2J per cent. It will be a
valuable asset in time, and these other areas will be the same.
“A great many workmen must live in some central position through
the exigencies of their employment. Their hours cannot be always


CHIPPENDALE’S YOUNGER GENERATION.
Some Pessimists and an Optimist or two photographed at Chippendale. Note the Pessimist with the axe.
—The Sun, 23/8/10.


The New Residential Buildings in Chippendale erected by the City Council.


the same, and the men must be readily available. There has been a
great relief through the suburban residences; but it will not suit all
men to live outside the city. I believe that by what is proposed life
will be made happier among thousands, especially among the women
and children, that the whole conditions will be healthier, and that
immorality will receive a severe check.”
In a subsequent inspection' with Canon Boyce, the reporter observed
that'there was no question of the truth of the rev. gentleman’s remarks
with respect to the areas of which he had been speaking. A casual
glace at some of the thoroughfares traversed afforded ample evidence
of the wretched conditions to be seen within a stone’s throw of the
Central Railway Station. That Chippendale is one of the most, if not
the most, thickly-populated district within the city boundaries has been
revealed by statistics, and as Canon Boyce pointed out, more good
would be effected if the Royal Commission on City Improvement were
to direct its attention primarily to relieving the crowded state of the
city localities than to comcern itself about central points in the
beautification of the city.
A stroll through Chippcn Street, a thoroughfare which intersects
Meagher Street, and runs parallel with Middle and other streets,
showed that the houses inhabited in some instances by large families,
were of the smallest dimensions, while the residential quarters, if such
a dignified term might be applied to them, were of extremely limited
space, the yards being necessarily still more limited. As a matter of
fact, to the ordinary city resident who passes his leisure hours in
congenial surroundings a visit to these poorer localities might prove
the truth of the old saying that one half the world doesn’t know how
the other half lives. Had he joined in the stroll which was undertaken
with Canon Boyce yesterday a very striking lesson would have been
brought home to him. He would have been led through a labyrinth
of lanes which interlace each other in the most extraordinary way—now
leading to a broad and open thoroughfare (to which nobody could take
exception), then penetrating into byways leading into an occasional
cul-de-sac. He would have also observed that in the majority of
instances the footpaths are from 12 to 18 inches in width, and that now
and again a kerbstone does duty for what is usually denominated a
sideway. Some of these steps lead down from cottages having but a
couple of rooms, the sitting-room opening on to the lane, exposing
furniture of a meagre description, and a few cherished household gods
which decorate the walls. If the cottage happens to have a verandah,
and there are many such, children in slender clothing, without boots,
and with sad faces, in which the picture of poverty has made an un-
mistakable impress, huddle together in a corner of it in an effort
at play.
In some streets the architectural designs are rather curious. A
square building, sometimes of brick, at other times of stone, and again
of wood, stands in dignified contrast with the meaner habitations which
either flank or confront them. A considerable amount of eccentricity
has been displayed in the architecture in many of the houses, and the
ventilation in some would appear to have been an afterthought. The
sanitary conveniences are altogether too close to the rooms. The back-
yards are absurdly small, and in some instances the outhouses are in
the front.
In the Chippendale district the reporter was shown an alleyway
which was certainly not a yard wide. He was assured by Canon Boyce
that it led to the front, and not to the back, of three habitations. Two
of these had yards which could be measured, not by yards, but oy
‘Meet”; while opposite these dwellings was a third, which boasted a
garden that looked like a glint of sunlight in the gloom.


There can, however, be no question that Canon Boyce has in no
way exaggerated the great importance of the question, and the necessity
for immediate attention being given to it. While he advocates a
broadening of the narrow thoroughfares in the congested areas, his
intention is that it will not be sufficient for the authorities to content
themselves in any scheme of remodeling with a few important streets
without considering in the first place the narrow inlets and outlets
where the poorer classes concentrate. Though the rev. gentleman
favours a general scheme for the beautification of the city, he thinks
it more important that in the meantime the crowded areas should be
relieved, so as to give the residents more breathing space. He is of
the opinion this can be done in various ways, and amongst his schemes
for the improvement in the living conditions of the working people is
one which would provide for the establishment of working men’s homes.
THE RESUMPTION OF THE SLUM AREAS.
To the Editor of the “Herald.”
Sir, —I have observed several references to the slum areas of the
city lately, but await any scheme for their reform. In any change chc
primary matter is the welfare of residents that they might have room
to live in fairly wide streets, with convenient, comfortable, and pleasant
dwellings. There should be no slums in a modern city.
There can only be a chorus of approval in the resumption of
Wexford Street, but the ostensible reason for the act was to make a
new and fine street to connect College Street with the Railway Station.
The resumption of Athlone Place, again, was a wise act, but it arose
because it was so often flooded in heavy rain. The belief that residents
in cither case should be better housed seemed only in the background.
Surely the time has arrived when the whole question of the resumption
of the slum areas should be earnestly and fully considered, and a wise
and comprehensive scheme of reform adopted. The stately street in
place of Wexford Street will have hidden behind it a congested area
that will be a disgrace to the metropolis.
I await with hopefulness the report of the Royal Commission on
the Improvement of Sydney. I have confidence again in the Lord
Mayor’s desire to promote reform, but can scarcely expect much action
on his part until the Commission has reported. I believe that public
opinion will heartily endorse any w r ell considered proposals, even though
the cost be great; thoughtful citizens must realise that in the long run
there will be financial gain. The longer the delay the more serious
will be the expense and other difficulties. The two resumptions referred
to do little more than touch the fringe of the question, and I trust
that the proper authorities will face the whole matter with a resoluteness
worthy of a good and great cause.
I am, etc.,
March 18.
F. B. BOYCE.
I escorted another reporter from “The Evening News”
through congested quarters in March, 1909. I had asked
the Trades Hall to have some representative, and it sent Mrs.


E. J. Dwyer and Mr. Vernon. The following account
appeared in that journal on 10th of that month:—
CHARMLESS CHIPPENDALE.
ANOTHER CONGESTED AREA.
THE NEED FOR REFORMS.
Chippendale is the most congested area in Sydney, and that means
in the whole of Australia. This, on the authority of Mr. Coghlan,
formerly Government Statist of New South Wales, whose knowledge
of the movements and locations of population is, or was, profound.
Apart altogether from what the official records state, the ordinary
observer who takes a walk through the south-western extremity of the
city, will be quite satisfied that he never saw so many wretched
apologies for dwellings huddled together in so small a space.
The area lies south and west of the Central Railway Station, and
originally formed portion of a grant of land made to one Chippendale,
70 or 80 years ago. He reached the young colony in 1814 (in the ship
which bore the news of Napoleon’s escape from the island of Elba),
and evidently carried with him ancient ideas of how thoroughfares
should be laid out. As they stand to-day, the streets and alleys and
lanes represent the utmost economy of space. The same is true of
most of the premises erected thereon. It is not exactly a slum
quarter. The people are poor, but respectable, and many of them
persevere in the heart-breaking task of keeping their abiding places—
scarcely can they be called homes —as neat and clean as circumstances
permit.
Yesterday Mrs. Dwyer and Mr. Vernon, of the Workmen’s Dwell-
ings Association, accompanied by the Rev. Canon Boyce and an
“Evening News” reporter, made a fairly comprehensive tour of
Chippendale. Their object was to inspect the streets and as many
of the houses as possible, ascertain the rents, and gain other in-
formation that may prove helpful when the association tackles the
Government and City Council with suggestions for reform. Mrs.
Dwyer is a tactful woman, who knows precisely how to approach the
housewives, and the commission of enquiry suffered nothing more
than occasional glares from house-agents busily engaged in the
Monday morning task of collecting rents. Particulars were freely
given by occupants and one voluble lady, from the commanding
altitude of an attic window, volunteered whole heaps of details con-
cerning all the places in her immediate neighbourhood.
Chippen, Middle, Dale, and Beaumont Streets were traversed in
that order. None of these thoroughfares is more than 22 feet wide,
including the narrow sidewalks, and each is jammed tight with single
and two-storeyed houses, apparently built in the ’forties or ’fifties.
“Two rooms and a kitchen,” was the usual answer to enquiries as
to accommodation. Fixed water tubs are rare; baths are practically
unknown. The designer, having come from a cold climate himself,
evidently had never contemplated the possibility of the Australian
working man requiring a bath. Perhaps he omitted this adjunct to
civilisation and cleanliness because he was hard put to it for room.
When a house has a frontage of 9 feet, and extends backwards no
more than 12 feet, and two rooms have to be squeezed into the space,
there is not a great deal left over for entrance hall, lavatory, porch,
verandah, and back garden, so all these were cut out of the plans.
It was an easy way of overcoming a big difficulty.


As for rents, the average is 7s. 6d. a week for two rooms and a
kitchen. In the majority of cases it seemed to the writer to be 6s.
too much. One woman, with modest pride, invited attention to her
domicile, which boasts of a bathroom and copper, and costs her 10s.
a week. “I don’t think really that it’s worth more than 95.,” she
added, with a wise shake of her head; “but it is such a pleasure having
the bath and the copper.” We agreed, sighed, and passed on. Bartley
and Smithers Streets presented no specially striking features, save
that here and there back yards had reached almost vanishing
point. Off Myrtle Street, however, a 3 feet alley led us, one by one,
to a queer group of three two-storeyed dwellings, set in a desert of back
yards. Two of these extraordinary structures have no yards at all,
and their outhouses adjoin the front door. They contain two rooms
and a kitchen, and are rented at 6s. a week. The third is a two-roomed
place, with a decent-sized yard, which the occupant has made into a
garden. It is a veritable oasis in this dry and dingy locality, and the
ardent horticulturist was pleased with the impression made on the
visitors.
An example of what seems to be serious negligence was brought
under notice in Dick Street —a locality not unknown to the health
authorities. The wife of one of the householders invited the party to
look at great rat holes in the kitchen. “I’ve told the agent about it,”
she said, “and my husband has been to the Town Hall about it. We
see great big rats scurrying in and out of those holes, and I’m really
afraid for my children. The council’s inspector has been here, and
said it would be attended to, but you can see for yourselves what a
state the place is in.” Somebody requires to be livened up in regard
to this complaint.
Many of the houses seen this morning, while scarcely bad enough
to be condemned, are also scarcely fit to be let for residence. Here
and there in the neighbourhood are streets of a decent width—66 feet
or more —and with a policy of resumption these thoroughfares could
be carried through the congested areas and linked up to wide streets
on the other aide. Chippendale, as a part of the city proper, certainly
calls for the early attention of the energetic Lord Mayor; meanwhile
much might be done by humane landlords in the direction of making
more habitable and home-like the dwellings for which they receive
decidedly high rents.
REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION.
The Commission on how to improve Sydney issued its
long-expected and useful report in June, 1909. The following
part touched the slum areas: —
SLUM AREAS AND HOUSING REFORMS.
The attention of your Commission has been directed to certain
portions of Chippendale, Surry Hills, and the Wexford Street neigh-
bourhood, where residential conditions, if not actually insanitary, are
nevertheless, very unsatisfactory.


Your Commissioners appreciate the fact that good work has
already been done by the City Council in the resumption of insanitary
areas, and we urge a continuance of this policy. We are of opinion
that the areas referred to should be resumed and remodelled at the
earliest opportunity. In this connection care should be taken to
ensure that in clearing a slum the evil is eradicated, and not merely
transferred to another locality. Municipalities should not only have
full power to resume and remodel slum areas, but also to prevent,
by stringent building regulations, the growth of fresh slums in their
districts.
With regard to workmen’s dwellings, we do not think it desirable
that the tenement or flat system should be introduced in Sydney.
Australian workmen, we are convinced, would not take kindly to these
communal dwellings. The experience of the Harbour Trust Com-
missioners, who provided separate houses for waterside workers,
confirm this- opinion. On social and hygienic grounds we think it
better that workmen should be encouraged to live in separate houses
in suburban areas. To this end we recommend that municipalities
be empowered to acquire land for the provision of sites for sanitary
homes at rentals within the means of the working classes.
While we are of opinion that as a general rule workmen should
be encouraged to live in the suburbs, we recognise that an_ exception
must be made in the case of waterside workers, who require to live
within easy reach of the wharfs to which their work calls them at all
hours of the day or night.
SLUM AREAS AND HOUSING REFORM.
The provision of decent home conditions for the working classes
is a matter of primary importance to the prosperity of the metropolis
and the well-being of the State as a whole.
In connection with the housing of the working classes, no
Building Act would, to our mind, be satisfactory that permitted of
living rooms being erected with less than 1000 cubic feet of air space,
and that did not provide adequately for yard space, wash-house
accommodation, bathrooms, etc. Intimately related with the housing
problem is the question of providing playgrounds for children in the
more densely-populated parts of the city and suburbs.
Our recommendations under this head may be summarised as
follows;
1. Local authorities to have full powers to resume and remodel
slum areas, and to prevent by regulations the growth of fresh
slums in their districts.
2. Local authorities to have power to acquire land for the provision
of sites for workmen’s dwellings; and to provide by regulation
for the erection of such dwellings on approved hygienic lines.
3. That workmen be encouraged to reside in separate houses in
suburban areas, in preference to tenement buildings in the
city.
4. Playgrounds to be provided for children wherever possible
throughout the city and suburbs.


I at once wrote “The Sydney Morning Herald,” which
it printed on 7th July;—
THE CONGESTED AND SLUM AREAS.
To the Editor of the “Herald.”
Sir, —The comprehensive and able report of the Royal Commission
on the Improvement of Sydney will naturally command wide attention.
It is given us by gentlemen of large experience, and after a careful
study of the conditions in the light of varied evidence. Even if not
approved of in every part, it must be conceded that it forms the basis
of very desirable and necessary reforms.
I now desire to direct attention to one phase that it may be em-
phasised. The report says “that the provision of decent home con-
ditions for the working classes is a matter of primary importance to
the prosperity of the metropolis.” It recommends that certain congested
or slum areas should be “resumed and remodelled at the earliest
opportunity.” Neighbourhoods almost in the heart of the city, and
lying on both sides and within a few hundred yards of the Central
Railway Station, are indicated. I hope that this recommendation will
cause action, that the trouble may cease, and the “open sore” be
healed.
Wexford Street has disappeared to make way for a wide and stately
thoroughfare, but within almost a stone’s throw is a network of crowded
narrow streets, where families, and little children especially, cannot live
in healthy and bright conditions. Are we to make clean the outside
of the cup and the platter, while the within is full of extortion and
excess ?
This report has been waited for with anxiety and hope. It should
encourage the Lord Mayor and aldermen of the city to push forward
the reform of these congested and slum areas with vigour, and I believe
the desire is in their hearts. There can be no excuse for delay, as they
have now the high authority of a Royal Commission, which speaks of
the question as of “primary importance.” That which is moral and
uplifting should ever stand on a higher plane than mere beauty and
convenience. Are not wide thoroughfares and fine streets only
secondary in value to the health, morals, and lives of the people ? 1
trust that the authorities will immediately rise to the occasion, that the
dark stain on our loved city may speedily be removed.
I am, etc.,
St. Paul’s, Sydney, June 28.
F. B. BOYCE.
There was discussion. .1 called on the Lord Mayor
(then Mr. Allen Taylor) and asked him to go through the
slums with me. He showed sympathy and would communicate
with me. Pressure of business, I suppose, made him put off
consideration of the question.
THE ALDERMANIC ELECTIONS.
The general election of aldermen in the city took place
at the end of the year. The question of the slum areas was
probably more before the citizens in the contest than any
other. I found that my evidence before the Commission


was frequently quoted by candidates. I consider that the
result of the election was most distinctly favourable to the
abolition of the slums. I cannot call it a mandate from the
citizens to take action, but it was practically so.
In my programme of social reform, for 1910, I said at
St. Paul’s, Redfern, as reported in “The Daily Telegraph”:—
They should use their influence that the congested and slum areas
of the city should be reformed and remodelled. He hoped that the
recommendations on this point of the Royal Commission on Sydney
would be speedily carried out.
The sum devoted for this purpose last year, apart from that pre-
viously agreed to, was miserably small, and most disappointing. There
should be no streets in this city only 20 feet wide. There were many
such within two or three hundred yards of fine thoroughfares that were
a disgrace to us Australians. How could there be health for little
children in such streets and with backyards smaller than an average
bedroom. With Paris about to spend .£36,000,000 on itself there was
an example to Sydney of at least a great effort to reform the wrongs
of the past, and do what we should do here; that is, give the people
room to live.
THE SOCIAL REFORM COMMITTEE.
Not anything was done, but there being now a Social
Reform Committee of the Church of England, I asked it to
take action. The Synod of the Diocese had passed with
applause a resolution of mine in favour of the abolition of
the slums, and I had proposed such a Committee, having
seen that such an organisation was necessary if the Church
was to take its right part in social work. Some people think
that the Church does not do anything.
The Committee decided to ask the Lord Mayor to receive
a deputation. Other bodies, including the Evangelical Council
and the Trades and Labour Council, were asked to send
representatives. The Lord Mayor, Mr. Allen Taylor, met it
on 27th July, 1910. Each daily paper gave an excellent
report. “The Daily Telegraph’s” was:—
SYDNEY SLUM AREAS.
CHURCH PEOPLE TAKE ACTION.
DEPUTATION TO LORD MAYOR.
A deputation, representing' the social and reform committee of
the Church of England, appointed by the Synod, and accompanied by
Mrs. Dwyer as a representative of the Sydney Labour Council, waited


upon the Lord Mayor yesterday to ask that some action should be
taken in the direction of the abolition of certain slum areas in Surry
Hills and Chippendale respectively.
Archdeacon Boyce introduced the deputation, which consisted of
Archdeacon D’Arcy-Irvine, Rev. W. J. Cakebread, and Messrs. E. G.
Cranston, L. S. Donaldson, and J. A. I. Perry, and others.
Archdeacon Boyce explained that they were there in the best
interests of the city that they loved. They asked that the Lord Mayor
would use all his influence to have the congested and slum areas re-
formed and remodelled. Wherever there was congestion it ought to
be dealt with. There were especially the two important areas of Surry
Hills and Chippendale, lying within a few hundred yards of the Central
Railway Station, in which work should be at once begun and carried
out, but in such a way as to cause the minimum of inconvenience to
residents. The people ought to have better dwellings and be given
an ampler space. Already the rents were high, but by different
arrangements they might be made more reasonable. There were not
many families living in single rooms, but there were scores and scores
in two rooms and with back yards not bigger than an ordinary-sized
room. The tenements faced streets only 20 feet w'ide. He gave the
names of several of such crowded little streets. Two, but not actually
crowded, were only 10 feet wide. There was an alley only 3 feet wide,
and having gone up it one came to two houses with no back yards,
and with a few feet at the front door chiefly occupied by the sanitary
arrangements. How could these people live in decency and comfort
and fair health? Where were the children to play? There should be
no slums in a modern city.
Mrs. Dwyer declared that the health of the people was of far more
importance than their wealth. Wealth would not save a nation if the
health of the nation was bad. She instanced cases in which tenants
had applied to have baths installed in their premises, and the result
was that the rent had been raised in consequence of the fixing of this
very necessary domestic convenience.
Mr. E. G. Cranston also spoke.
The Lord Mayor, in reply, said he was pleased to have the privilege
of meeting the deputation on so important a question. He fully
recognised there was a great deal in the arguments of Archdeacon
Boyce, and he thought the subject was one which must appeal to every
heart. During the last few years the civic chamber had been very
busy in connection with remodelling, but the work was still in its
infancy, and would have to be continued in the interests of the city
generally. The remodelling of Athlone Place and other areas would
be beneficial to the city as a whole. Several bad spots which had
been attended to had been a menace to civilisation, and if any work
would redound to the credit of the municipal authorities it was the
widening of those thoroughfares which were a disgrace to the place.
Such a state of affairs as that outlined by the deputation ought not to
be allowed to exist. On the other hand, it had to be remembered that
the civic authorities had only a limited income. All the works of im-
provement which had been initiated up to date had been properly
covered without any additional burden on the people. Speaking of
Chippendale, he had no hesitation in saying that if he had his way he
would start at George Street West to-morrow and sweep the major
portion of that area back to Regent Street, because it was necessary
in the interests of sanitation. The question, however, was: How was
the financial side of such proposal to be satisfactorily dealt with ? He
would not be a party to undertaking any work which might land the
citizens in a heavy expenditure. He felt there must be some way of
overcoming those difficulties. Another “lovely” location, although


his aldermen did not agree with him, was at Duke Street, Woolloo-
mooloo. Although a number of the aldermen said it did not want
remodelling, that would not prevent him submitting the matter for
consultation, for he was strongly of opinion that it was a slum that
ought to be wiped out. “I will give you this promise,” said the Lord
Mayor, “accompanied by the heads of my departments, I will visit the
localities referred to, if those people so deeply interested in the
problems will go with us, and we will all then be in a position to
form some. idea of what is necessary to be done, always provided
there are financial ways and means.” He had been told by some ol
the oldest members of the institution that this very progressive policy
meant future bankruptcy. That was utterly absurb. His experience
had been that the remodelling had made the city healthier, and had
increased the value of property, thus increasing the revenue without
raising the rents. He would meet the deputation on Wednesday, 10th
August, at 10 o’clock, and with them would go over the areas .hey
proposed should be dealt with.
The headings to “The Evening News” report were:—
CITY SLUMS.
AN ALLEY THREE FEET WIDE.
SWARMS OF BABIES IN LANES.
FAMILIES HUDDLED TOGETHER LIKE SHEEP.
The Lord Mayor agreed to visit Chippendale. “The
Daily Telegraph” report of his visit was as follows;
IN THE SLUMS.
LORD MAYOR VISITS CHIPPENDALE.
CITY EYESORES MUST GO.
“HABITATIONS UNFIT FOR DOGS.”
Not far removed from the palatial railway station, almost within
the shades of the imposing L'niversity pile of buildings, and flanked by
busy streets that carry the roaring traffic of a city throbbing with com-
mercial activity, the Lord Mayor and a party of social reformers found
themselves yesterday afternoon in the centre of one of the most unin-
viting quarters of the city proper.
The visit was the outcome of a deputation, organised by Arch-
deacon Boyce, that waited on the Lord Mayor recently. On that
occasion some statements made by members of the deputation, and by
Mrs. Dwyer, a Trades Hall representative, in particular, were such a
serious indictment of landlordism that Alderman Taylor thought it
wise to inspect the locality for himself. The party met at the corner


of Georg-e and Abercrombie Streets at 3 o’clock, and, accompanied
by the officers of the council most concerned in city sanitation (Dr.
Armstrong and Messrs. Gordon and Brodrick) marched to the
accompaniment of a running fire of comments, complimentary and
otherwise, through some of the worst streets of Chippendale.
DUST AND GRIME.
For the most part all the thoroughfares were found to be in a
good condition, so far as maintenance was concerned, but the dust
rose playfully with each semblance of a breeze, and made the houses
for the most part grimy and dirty, and the children who gambolled
about them appallingly neglected-looking little specimens of humanity.
Like the clever tactician he is reputed to be, Archdeacon Boyce,
accompanied by Mr. Mitchell, led the party first through the least
unsavory streets of the locality. Each pointed out how the towering
buildings of some big industrial establishment put in a claim for
most of the sunlight and fresh air, and, occasionally, through no fault
of any particular person, deposited soot and waste from the chinmey
stacks in the living rooms of the occupiers of the poorer class of
tenements.
“Worse localities than this in the city,” remarked the Lord Mayor,
as the party trudged on. “Granted,” was the reply. “But they are
bad enough, and there is something worse to come.” And so as the
inspection progressed, the party found itself being met by deplorably
bad features of city life. Small dilapidated tenements leaning against
each other, hemmed in by paling fences and pickets in bad repair, were
“discovered” with monotonous regularity, causing one to wonder what
class of residence some of the unfortunates who toiled for sweating
wages must have occupied before the Board of Health made regulations
which compelled the provision of something approaching decent ven-
tilation in all living quarters. Here and there an heroic attempt at
cleanliness presented itself. The nicely-whitened cement that made
the flooring of a verandah of some careful and tidy woman’s home;
the polished windows, with the newly-starched curtains of poor
material, made the oasis in the desert of the slum. The “lydy” of
leisure, however, who leaned over a shabby balcony or hung on the
pickets in front of a plot that might once in the long ago have been
a garden, seemed content to take things as they were so long as she
could “guy” the party as it passed along. “BIP me,” shrieked one
of these, “if that bloke with the camera tries to take my phiz I’ll bust
his picture-box with a rock an’ ask the parson with him to pray for the
repose of his soul,” whereat the photographer, in blissful ignorance
of the observation, “snap-shotted” a flock of dusty little urchins and
passed on.
EIGHT PERSONS IN TWO ROOMS.
Easily the worst discovery of the entire round was that made in
a little street that, to quote the description of one of the company,
“began somewhere and ended nowherO.” In one house of a tenement
of unpretentious proportions eight persons were found to be housed
in two small rooms, in which the roof was perilously low. Of the
occupiers, five slept in one apartment, and three in the other. The
ventilation was bad. Close in winter, what must the apartments be
in summer? “What can we do?” appealingly remarked one of the
inmates. “We can’t afford anything better, and times are so hard.”
The Lord Mayor shook his head, and beckoned to the City Health
Officer. And the City Health Officer will have something to say to
at least one property-owner as the result of the round. Not far away.


Dr. Armstrong pointed to several other wooden structures, facetiously
called cottages, which had come within the range of the regulations
for the better preservation of health, and which in the ordinary course
of events must disappear from the landscape.
CUT OFF FROM THE WORLD.
Opening into another more important thoroughfare was found
a lane about 2 feet 6 inches wide, running between two houses.
Curiosity prompted several members of the party to follow it along.
It was discovered that it was the only entrance —back or front—to three
residences. The doorstep of each was practically the back yard, and
here had made their homes several persons, who bitterly resented the
intrusion. “Six of ’em,” snarled one of those who stood at her “front
gate,” “ought all to be stuffed in a bag.” The surprise, amounting
almost to indignation, that manifested itself in the countenances of the
occupiers of the premises referred to was equalled only by the sotto
voce observation of one of them, “Who’s growling about the houses,
eh? Not me.”
Other localities were visited, in which less entertaining sights
presented themselves. The paint that might in past years have been
put on windows and doors, or the whitewash and wall-paper that
could well have been distributed over most of the houses that flanked
the narrow streets, had landlords thought it worth while to keep their
properties in average repair, would possibly involve the expenditure of
enough money to pay the interest on the cost of the entire resumption.
As things are, there has been no waste of material, nor has there been
any lavish display of the painter’s or decorator’s art. And yet the
occupiers of the premises seemed to be tolerably satisfied with their lot.
ONE OF THE REASONS.
The obvious question following such a statement of facts is, Why
do people live under such conditions? And the answer, from the stand-
point of the said occupiers is equally obvious, “Needs must when the
devil drives!” they say. It is necessary for the children of poor people
who have to assist in the precarious duty of bread-winning to reside
within reasonable distance of their place of employment. Many of
them work for small wages, and have to walk to and from their duties,
and the only reasonably low rentals are to be had in the worst parts
of the city. Then, again, the aged and poor have no option. If the
only stand-by they have in the evening of their life is the pension they
must live frugally and in cheap quarters. So that on paper it would
seem that the people who reside in slum areas are those who are
virtually compelled to live in them. Abolish one bad spot and they
will seek another. And so on till the close of the chapter.
WHAT THE LORD MAYOR PROPOSES.
After the inspection was over the Lord Mayor was asked what he
thought of the locality. “Some of the places are not fit for dogs to
live in,” he said; “and they must go.” What he intends to do is to
formulate some scheme for presentation to the council for the re-
modelling of the area in question. “Of course,” he said, “it will have
to be understood that any such scheme cannot be completed inside
seven or ten years, but a beginning can be made.”
I offered to pilot the Lord Mayor through the other slum
areas of the city, but his time would not permit, and he said
that he knew of them. Following on the inspection he placed


the whole matter before the City Council. His proposals
appeared in “The Daily Telegraph” of 21st September, 1910:
VICTORY.
BIG IMPROVEMENT SCHEME.
LORD MAYOR’S RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Lord Mayor (Alderman Allen Taylor), in pursuance of his
policy of city improvement, has prepared another big' scheme—which
was endorsed by the Works Committee during a visit yesterday—pro-
viding for the resumption of several large areas in the most insanitary
portions of Sydney proper. The scheme includes the re-modelling of
Chippendale, of Duke Street, Woolloomooloo, a narrow, badly-aligned
and crooked thoroughfare, and the resumption of a slum area adjacent
to Campbell Street, in Belmore Ward.
Necessarily, the expenditure will be heavy, but the benefits will
be correspondingly great.
“Since my minute of 18th August was confirmed,” said the Lord
Mayor, “I have made a personal inspection with the officers of the
department, of the whole of the Chippendale area. I need scarcely
say the property referred to inside those respective boundaries is in a
most unsatisfactory condition, and the question of resumption and
remodelling should be undertaken forthwith, in view of the fact that a
great number of large factories are about to be erected in this locality
at a very early date, and in the event of such being undertaken, future
remodelling of this deplorable area is lost for all times, unless we are
prepared to pay heavy compensation for the disturlsance of such
factories and the extnesive buildings erected thereon.
A GOOD DEAL.
“In the minute referred to, under date 22nd August, the council
gave me authority to negotiate with the manager of the Australian
Drug Company for the right of purchasing or resuming about 33 feet
of land of the property which they had acquired, tenders having been
called and the contract signed for the building thereon, work to be.
commenced in a day or two. This would have blocked the widening
of Myrtle Street from City Road to Meagher Street, but fortunately my
efforts were successful, and arrangements have now been made with
the owners that the council will resume the property adjacent to theirs,
close up Dangar Street, give them a new sub-division, equal rights
of light, straighten out the block, and give them additional land by
the fact that we are going to close this right of way. The amount of
compensation to be paid for the plans and inconvenience caused their
clients has been agreed at ,£200, which covers all compensation, and
which is an excellent adjustment. This will enable us to remodel this
area to very great advantage, and wipe away tenements which are
nothing more than hovels, and improve that locality.
“I have given the proprietors, subject to confirmation by the
council, authority to commence operations forthwith, and I, therefore,
recommend that this matter receive the endorsement of council. To
remodel the area as outlined will involve an outlay of approximately
£77,000. Against this council will have residues to the extent of
£45,000, leaving the nett cost against the city of £32,000 on the existing
values, which, it is reasonable to assume, will be considerably in-
creased when the locality is remodelled, made wholesome, and cut up
into decent blocks for valuable building sites for factories, which


there is an enoimous demand for in that particular locality, but under
the existing- state of affairs it is an eyesore and a blot upon our
administration
DUKE STREET, WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
On 29th July, 1909, I submitted a minute covering this very
necessary remodelling, and I have no hesitation in again asking
council to consider at once the advisability of resuming this dangerous
thoroughfare and giving our people a better approach to connect with
Woolloomooloo and William Street, overcoming what to-day is a
menace and a danger to our civic government, through this very
unsatisfactory congestion of this particular locality and the density
of population.
“The cost of this work will involve, approximately, as per the city
valuer’s estimate, .£IB,OOO.
SLUM AREA ADJACENT TO CAMPBELL STREET.
“In reference to the proposal for the resumption of an area
bounded by Brisbane, Upton, and East Streets and Burns Lane, off
Campbell Street, this area is in a very unsatisfactory condition, and it
is inevitable that it is necessary that this locality should be remodelled
forthwith.
“This improvement can be undertaken at a cost of approximately
£12,000, and apart from this, Brisbane Street can be widened to connect
with Hunt Street, and, as the Public Works Department, through
arrangements recently made with the Minister for Works, intends to
construct a line of tramway from Flinders Street to Castlercagh Street,
via Campbell, Hunt, and Foster Streets, it has been agreed between
the council and the Public Works Department that the necessary
resumptions which are needed in Hunt Street must be undertaken at
the sole cost of the constructing authority. This will then enable us
to improve the egress from Campbell Street to widen Brisbane Street,
which will prove a great boon to the city generally.
“The cost of this work is set down at approximately £12,000,
which will always remain a very valuable asset to the city, and, as
hereinbefore mentioned, will serve a double purpose. I therefore
recommend that this area be resumed for the purposes herein outlined.
“A summary of the above recommendations is as follows;
(a) £77,000
(b) 18,000
(c) 12,000
£107,000
Deduct nett value of residues 57,000
Showing a cost to the city of £50,000
FINANCIAL OUTLOOK.
“This will entail an expenditure of a charge against our revenue
of £2,500 per annum, and, notwithstanding that we have entered into
many resumptions, after close personal supervision I have no hesitation
in saying that our existing revenue rate as now levied is ample to
meet all commitments and this extra burden with ease.
“I therefore urge that the council will give this matter their fullest
consideration, and that the resumptions hereinbefore mentioned will
be confirmed and adopted.”


The Aldermen were on the whole very sympathetic, and
were loyal to their professions made during the aldermanic
elections of the December previous. The proposals as to
Chippendale were adopted, but those as to Duke Street were
turned down. We should always be thankful for any steps
taken in a right direction, and I say all honour to the City
Council for the important advance it made. We should
remember Sir Allen Taylor.
The Social Reform Committee of the Church of England
encouraged me by passing, on the motion of Archdeacon
D’Arcy-Irvine, seconded by Canon Bellingham, a very hearty
vote of thanks for my persistent advocacy of the abolition of
the slums. This was in view of the City Council having
agreed to improvements in the areas costing nearly
In my programme of social reform for 1911 I said in
St. Paul’s, Redfern, quoting from “The Daily Telegraph”:—
The agitation should be continued for the full reform and recon-
struction of the slums and congested areas of the city. They were
thankful for what had been done, but active support should be given
the Lord Mayor in carrying out that which was in his heart still to do.
The people should have room to live. There should be no
dwelling houses in lanes and alleys of a modern town. To widen
main thoroughfares and to beautify the city was right, but it certainly
should be made clean within. What could they think of a man in a
handsome dress suit, yet with very dirty underlinen? This great
question of the slums touched both the heakh and morals of the people.
In April of that year I said in “The Sydney Morning
Herald”:—
HOUSING PROBLEM.
“Of course, I admire Mr. Carmichael’s proposal for a workman’s
model suburb, but will it succeed better than Mr. Crick’s Lilyville?
So much depends on the location. It must not be far away. It is
very easy to outline ideal schemes, but a very different matter is the
carrying out of them successfully. Mr. Carmichael should have
encouragement.”
“Do you think all the workers should be outside the city area?”
“It would be very unfortunate to have the city proper largely filled
up with factories and the people turned out. lam told that the reason
why the factories are pressing into the city is because directly they
cross into even a near suburb the rate of carriage by dray is greatly
increased, in some cases doubled.”
“The housing problem is a serious one,” continued the Archdeacon.
“I am sure that it is right and wise to have a considerable number
of workmen’s dwellings within the city. There are men whose hours
of labour are such and are so uncertain that they must live near their
work. Destroyed dwellings should never be chiefly replaced by
factories. lam glad to see that Mr. Carmichael proposes on the Rocks


to have workmen’s dwellings erected. It is absurd to think, however,
that they can all be cottages, or two-storey houses, with gardens,
because the land it too valuable, and there is not room. I believe in
cottages, houses, and flats, so that those who cannot get either of the
former might obtain the latter, and with some the latter would be
preferred. Flats should have verandahs at least 16 feet deep to each
floor, so as to give fresh air to make up for yard space. A flat, too,
should be self-contained, each having its own bathroom, etc. It would
be a suite of rooms suitable for a small family. When there is a lack
of ground space we must go up with higher buildings and use air
space.”
In my annual programme of reform for 1912, I said:—
They should join in urging the entire abolition of the slums in
this great city. Since his evidence had been published before the
Royal Commission for the Improvement of Sydney, about three years
ago, showing that thousands had no room to live, and were in squalor
and wretchedness, the question had been zealously pushed. All honour
to Sir Allen Taylor for having so earnestly taken the matter up.
They should not rest until every slum area was reconstructed, and
their loved city made to appear as clean in its backblocks as in its
principal streets.
LIVING NEAR THE WORK.
After the City Council had decided on the Chippendale
resumption the idea among several aldermen was that the
area should be let on fifty-year leases, most probably for
factories. This rightly aroused considerable opposition in
the locality, in which I joined. There are many persons who
find it most convenient to live near their work, indeed, must
do so, and why should not they be considered? Why, too,
depopulate the city? Much as I can favour the suburbs for
ordinary residential purposes, that idea can be carried too far.
The opposition to leasing for factories was successful. There
were several meetings, and residents were much helped by
Alderman T. H. Barlow, Mr. A. Mitchell and others. The
City Council adopted a sane and useful policy when it decided
to erect dwellings. Birmingham and other cities in the mother
country supply fruitful examples of excellent results; but I
may not enlarge on this branch of the subject, as my pages
are already far beyond my intended limit. The Council will
be acting in the best interests of the people if in some other
parts it also builds suitable dwellings. A fair return for its
money is all but certain.


CONCLUSION.
Various minor improvements have now been made in
congested areas since this campaign began, and great ones
in certain of them. The Duke Street area resumptions, now
approved and proceeding, will cost, it is estimated, £90,000,
and the Campbell Street part, £9,000. These mean very
notable improvements in the city. The Chippendale re-
sumptions were more extensive, as several acres of city land
were included. The estimated cost of the fine new municipal
buildings, with land on which they are erected, is £47,000.
There is still much vacant land there through the pulling
down and remodelling, and which I understand will be sold
by the Council, and doubtless yield a good profit.
It is remarkable that so much can be done in this matter
in the city on comparatively so small an outlay, when the
many hundreds of thousands of pounds are remembered for
the widening, etc., of Oxford and other streets. One reason is,
that being slum areas the values were very low. lam confident
that the completion-of the abolition of the slums will be in
the long run, by the better conditions that would follow, very
profitable to the Council. But are not the moral and social
improvement of the people more important than money?
The Chippendale buildings, or "mansions as they would
be called in England, will, I hope, be successful from various
points of view, and lead to other erections. About 300 people
should be comfortably housed in .them at moderate rents.
They are residential flats, but not lofty ones, and with the
most suitable modern conveniences. Are not the flats m
Macquarie Street and Darlinghurst eagerly sought after?
Do not wealthy people in London live in flats by the
thousands? Of course most would prefer to have cottages
with good gardens, but where land is about £25 a foot they
are out of the question, as rents would be too high so as to
allow any fair interest on the outlay. The land, barely ten
minutes from the Central Railway Station, should be fully
utilised and therefore buildings of several stories erected.
Cottages and gardens belong to the suburbs rather than to
the city. In another part I give a photograph of these
new splendid buildings in Chippendale, and they are a visible
truth of the success of a great forward movement.
The main part has been done, I earnestly urge a com-
pletion. I name an area at the back of Oxford Street, close
to Campbell Street that sadly needs reconstruction, also some


small streets in Woolloomooloo and some in Surry Hills. They
are a scandal to our twentieth century civilisation, unworthy
of our great and growing metropolis and of our Imperial race.
The City Council has done much and deserves all credit, and
I trust that a final effort will speedily be made so that Sydney
may be fair and clean within as well as attractive and
beautiful without. To be able to say that there are no slums
would be a pardonable boast and rejoice the heart of all right-
minded citizens.
VVm. Andrews Printing Cc, Ltd.. 236 Castlereagh St., Sydney


