

LIBERAL RELIGION
IN THE
HIGHER CURRENT LITERATURE.
LECTURES
A. B CAMM
(KEPORTED BY J. M. SAUNDERS)
“Thos. Carlyle : the Divine Idea of Life.”
“ George Eliot : the Development of the Individual & Life for Humanity.”
“Tennyson’s ‘ln Memoriam’: a Solution of the Problems of Suffering
and Death.”
“ Charles Darwin : Development the Method of Creation.”
“R. W. Emerson (the Poet of Evolution) : God in Nature.”
SYDNEY:
Printed by Robert Bone, at the “Pikenix” Office,
BOND STREET.
1 8 8 3.




LIBERAL RELIGION
IN THE
HIGHER CURRENT LITERATURE.
LECTURES
A. B. CAMM.
(REPORTED BY J. M. SAUNDERS)
“Thos. Carlyle ; the Divine Idea of Life.”
“ George Eliot : the Development of the Individual & Life for Humanity.”
“Tennyson’s ‘ln Memoriam’: a Solution of the Problems of Suffering
and Death.”
“ Charles Darwin : Development the Method of Creation.”
“ R. W. Emerson (the Poet of Evolution) : God in Nature.”
SYDNEY:
Printed by Robert Bone, at the “Phosnix” Office,
BOND STREET.
1 8 8 3.




M3395/T 7
These Lectures were delivered in the Unitarian Church on
Sunday evenings in May and June this year.
The interest evinced in the treatment of the subjects, by
audiences, that increased in numbers as the Course advanced,
seemed a reason why I should respond to the request of friends
who asked me to put the lectures in a more permanent, printed,
form.
I shall be glad if I can convey my profound conviction to
my readers, viz.—that in the development of the Higher Literature,
and the progress of Modern Science, true Religion has everything
to hope, and nothing to fear.
I am indebted to the kindness and ability of Mr. J, M.
Saunders for his accurate reports of my spoken thought.
A. B. CAMM.
Sydney,
August 15, 1883.




THOMAS CAKLYLE :
The Divine Idea of Life.
In the life of Thomas Carlyle I have chosen the most difficult
subject for my first lecture, and it is so because of the mingled
and strange elements that exist in his personality.
Only in the law of inherited tendency, and the survival in
maturity of the influences and belief of childhood, have we the
explanation of those strange elements which existed, but did not
blend, in Carlyle.
Before the publication of his “ Reminiscences ” and his
“ Life ” Carlyle was called a seer and a sage by a great number
without the least qualification of judging ; but now people
generally feel that the seer was limited in his inlook, and the
sage limited in his outlook, so I will try to be neither too
eulogistic nor too discriminating in my attempt to portray his
characteristics. I only wish to deal with his life, as it has
relation to his thought, and that, as it bears on the religious
development of our time, making only a slight reference to his
home life and literary career.
Whatever gentlemen may do, ladies will never forgive Carlyle
for his treatment of his wife. lam old-fashioned enough to
believe in love matches, and consider that nothing but the
“ grand passion ” will justify a union for life.
Jane Welsh —Mrs. Carlyle—did not come to Carlyle heart-
whole. She had loved, and did love another —Edward Irving,
and Carlyle knew it. In marrying Carlyle she merely wanted
to become the wife of a great man —one with whom she might
feel some growth and popularity in his toilsome climbing of the
heights of fame, and share with him his bright pre-eminence in
history. She wrote: “ I love you, but lam not in love with
you ; it is a simple, honest, serene affection. In short, it is a
love which influences but does not make the destiny of a life.”
A less clever man than Carlyle would have foreseen disaster in
the initial stages of such a union.
Carlyle, absorbed in his literary pursuits, and being chron-
ically dyspeptic, became gloomy and sad. When they were
married he neglected and ignored her to a certain degree ; but
after her death the memory of his conduct towards her while
alive filled him with remorse, and he felt that he had had an
angel at his side all the time. So he tried to make posthumous
amends by idealising her and bitterly recriminating himself.


Emerson wrote after visiting them: —“ Carlyle and his wife
live on beautiful terms. Their ways are very engaging ; and, in
her bookcase, all his books are inscribed to her, as they came
from year to year with some significant lines.”
Carlyle’s eccentricities and faults are all the more marked
because of his huge rough strength ; but we always have to
remember, as interrupting the tranquillity of his whole life, that
chronic dyspepsia, which he said was a very “ devil in his
stomach.” It brought on that sleeplessness which, in a large
measure, caused Carlyle’s misery; and he tells us that he went
to the Continent to escape the painters and plasterers, and
experienced “ six weeks sleeplessness in German beds.”
I daresay those of you who have read Carlyle’s works with
a passion, as most of you must have done, were much influenced
by his “ Doctrine of Characteristics,” where he tells, as if in
contrast to himself, of a man who did not know he had a stomach.
We cannot here enter on the philosophic side of this
familiar illustration, viz:—how far consciousness in mankind is
a disease, and whether a sublime unconsciousness constitutes
perfect being. Though Carlyle’s illustration may seem to lead
to the doctrine of the Unconscious which belongs to Pessimistic
thought, we feel that the truer idea is that, —in ourselves as
finite, and in the infinite life, a rich consciousness, which is a
glowing sense of harmony and perfection, constitutes final and
ideal existence.
In consequence of this chronic dyspepsia the man became
gloomy, a distortion of the divine idea ; but Carlyle did not
ignore the higher philosophical thought of our time, that behind
our ordinary consciousness, with just the telling of our dis-
turbances there was a sublimer one being held in regard.
In order to get at the positive elements of Carlyle’s thought
we shall quote his own words. In answer to the questions : “You
seem to suffer from dyspepsia ? How did this come about P Did
you inherit it or have you acquired it ?” Carlyle replied “I am
sure I can hardly tell, sir ; I only know that for one or two or
three and twenty years of my mortal existence I was not con-
scious of the ownership of that diabolical arrangement called a
stomach. I had grown up the healthy and hardy son of a hardy
and healthy Scotch dalesman ; and he was the descendant of
a long line of such men that had tilled their paternal acres,
and gained their threescore-years-and-ten, or even, mayhap, by
reason of strength, their fourscore years, and had gone down to
their graves, never a man of them the wiser for the possession of
this infernal apparatus. And the voice came to me saying ‘ Arise
and settle the problem of thy life!’ and so I entered into my
chamber and closed the door, and around me came a trooping
throng of phantasms dire from the abysmal depths of nethermost


perdition. Doubt, Dear, Unbelief, Mockery, and Scorn were
there, and I arose and wrestled with them in travail and agony
of spirit. Whether I ate I know not; whether I slept I know
not. I only know that when I came forth again it was with the
direful persuasion that I was the miserable owner of a diabolical
arrangement called a stomach, and I have never been free from
that knowledge from that day to this, and I suppose that I never
shall be until I am laid away in my grave.”
What does it all mean ? That Carlyle, in the early part of
his career, did not know the gospel of health and the laws of his
organism. In consequence of which he has given to the world
forty years of gloom. He was not in harmony with the divine
idea, hence the physiological and the mental disturbances, for, in
order to create a permanent impression, we want man’s ideas in
his sunlit hours, his happier words, his brightest outlook, his
broadest sweep of vision, and his amplest faith. In the light of
the law of inherited tendency, and the survival of the influences
of his early life, we find in a large measure the characteristics of
Carlyle’s genius. When we come, however, to the positive
elements by which he will be known in the future, we see how he
believed in forces, as expressed in great personalities, and here
also the light of the doctrine of inherited tendency helps very
much.
Carlyle was born in a religion (but it can’t be a religion
if it passes away, for religion survives) ; born in a creed then,
where Calvinism was the force, and God the great personality;
and when he left the Scotch hills let us be thankful that he carried
with him strength enough to throw off some of the shackles that
bound his spirit. The individual as a unit, the divine incarnation
in every man and woman; if Carlyle ever saw that he lost it.
He gives us in his “ Glorification of Forces ” no glimpse of ideal
democracy, where every man will be a king and every woman a
queen ; where all are priests and all space a temple. Such would
not harmonize with his doctrine of forces in great personalities.
It is said to be one of the strong and fine elements of the
Scotch character that they individualize themselves ; each
becoming a unit, collectively they individualize as a nation; and
such a nation is destined to become strong and grand.
A man brought up to believe that God was the supreme
individuality, who could do with and damn men as He pleased;
a man who had not really shaken off all the survivals of his creed
to come into sudden contact with German thought, as exhibited
in the works of Fichte and Kant, and Goethe, one can readily see
how the divine idea became modified ; how the survival of Cal-
vinism mixed with the new growth of German philosophy, but did
not blend into beautiful harmony, as we think it would have done
if Carlyle had been free from all those minor characteristics we


so much deplore in him. It led him to this, however, —to look to
kings and soldiers for the guidance and redemption of humanity.
It is generally thought now that this Scotch-Calvinistic
survival (though it was softened and made plausible by the
German mode of speech) the divine idea of governing the
world through strong personalities, led him to take such men as
Frederick the Great and Cromwell and Napoleon the First,
because they expressed grand individualities. This was the
error, though the speciality, of Carlyle, and how often it led the
great man astray ! Especially was it manifested when the great
upheaval took place in North America, when the struggling
slaves and their emanicipators wanted the sympathy of all who
loved humanity and freedom. But Carlyle used his thought
and speech against the slave, giving his sympathy to the slave-
holding South. When Garrison, the great emancipator in
America, found that this rising star of English literature did not
speak for English freedom, did not assist in the great struggle
for liberty, he said, “ Turn his portrait to the wall.”
Carlyle’s want of sympathy with the units, in the aggregate
of the people, led him altogether away from sympathy with the
mass.
Whoever has read Carlyle’s description of “ Prison Life in
England,” will see that he only speaks of low-browed, heavy-
jawed, vicious-looking men, and whatever else may have been
brought up in the atmosphere of crime. So he missed the finer
thought, for all this was the perversion of the divine idea in
humanity, and the very antipodes of George Eliot. Carlyle pos-
sessed not one pulse of enthusiasm for the humanitarian ideals.
The heroes of Thomas Carlyle are not those of the nature
of Jesus and Buddha and Zoroaster; his heroes are those who
aim to realise the very antithesis of the ideal of the Gospels;
they are the courtiers, they are the statesmen, they are the
warriors of mankind—men of force : force of will to govern, force
of arms to subdue; and not in one instance has Carlyle selected
the hero with the force of goodness to win, with the force of
love to bless, with the power of sacrifice to elevate and redeem.
We are sorry for it; but in the great law of which I speak we
can accept his contributions, knowing that the best will survive.
The very man who had the Jesus-heart in his reforms, the
Christ-spirit in his life—John Howard—was sneered at and
treated with scorn by Thomas Carlyle, who said : “ These philan-
thropists want to cure the world’s woes by rose water, and I
would say to such, ‘ Here, you may go down.’ ”
It was a survival of Calvinism that accounted for these
eccentricities in Carlyle, and there is no wonder when he was
telling of the population of Great Britain he said, “ There are
thirty millions, and mostly fools.”


Carlyle may be great and grand in some respects, but he
missed the finer forces of his age, and is the antipodes of another
great writer—Browning, who said: “ Make no more giants Grod,
but raise the race at once ! ” Carlyle took the giants, and lost
sympathy with the race.
But there is another, a better side to his nature and genius.
Although he had no “ grand passion ” for his wife, no sympathy
for the mass of the people, yet he bore a tender, strong, undying
love to his mother, which was the survival in him of the sweet
influence of his early home, and of the humane and reverential
elements of his childhood’s faith. In all his eccentricities,
dyspepsia, gloom and misery, he never lost faith in reverence,
which to him was the true interpreter of life and of the universe.
Can’t you see the value of home training, friends, when he
speaks of his good mother, suggesting “ Memories of a Cottar’s
Saturday Night,” and when he tells us how he learnt religious
reverence when he saw the highest he knew on earth “ bowed
down with awe unspeakable before a Higher in Heaven.”
“ Such things,” he goes on to say, “ reach inwards to the very
core of your being. Mysteriously does a Holy of Holies build
itself into visibility in the mysterious deeps, and reverence (the
divinest in man) springs forth undying from its mean envelop-
ment of fear.”
In “ Wilhelm Meister ” we have, in the three grades of
apprenticeship, the recognition of three reverences. First, we
have the finger pointing upwards, indicating reverence for the
Divine Power, for that which is above ; as the second reverence,
we have the finger horizontal, reverence for what is around ; and
as the third, the finger points downwards—reverence for what is
beneath, —sorrowing humanity. Here also Groethe touched
the principle of the philosophy of Jesus, who said : “ Inasmuch
as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye did it
unto me.” He shows reverence when he speaks of the great
humanitarian reformer and martyr as a human character, holding
elements of love and sacrifice through all ages. So all this came
into harmony with our great dramatist, who tells us that
“ Reverence is the angel of the world,” and this reverence showed
Carlyle that, though Ecclesiasticism was false, there were con-
tained in Christianity true, unique, human elements. Still
speaking of the human elements enshrined in the life of Jesus,
G-oethe wrote, and Carlyle quotes it: “It is a height to which
the human species were fitted to attain, and from which, having
once attained it, they can never retrograde.” But this was not
the Christianity of Traditionalism, but the Christ-spirit in life.
All this harmonizes with the very essence of what we want
to be in our recognition, in our liberal religion—that the human
element is the divine.


The Marquis of Queensbury once said : “ Remember we are
not opposed to the humanity in Christianity.” The beauty of
the divine idea in life is that it takes all the excellencies of all
the faiths in growing humanity, and it was this humanity which
was the unfolding of divinity—the divinity that Goethe and
Carlyle saw, and which blended so well with the early influences
of Carlyle’s home.
The recognition of the limits of Carlyle’s sympathies and
affections, and the acknowledgment that his glorification of
force in great historic personalities is the vitiating principle in his
philosophy, make us glad to recognise the true man in working
out for himself his relations to the universe, as we all must do, in
spite of what the churches and the clergy may say ; and thus find
for ourselves, even as Carlyle did, through the agony of doubt,
the grand central principle; and happy shall we be if we come,
as he did, to the divine idea.
In “ Sartor Besartus ” —commonly termed the modern “Pil-
grim’s Progress ” —Carlyle, like all I have ventured to select as
exponents of liberal religion, ignored and repudiated the theo-
logical solution of life ; he cast it aside altogether, and was in
quest of the “ everlasting yea.” He never seemed to have
regarded it worth his while to ask whether there had been a
federal fall in some imaginary Adam and Eve, and an Atonement
to get rid of the twist and the bias in humanity through it. What
is the meaning of all this—the ignoring of the theological solution
of the problem of existence. It means that the age is outgrowing
it; and we must also, like Emerson and Carlyle, re-begin our
relation to the universe, knowing there are steps to a higher
ascent.
Carlyle went through the periods of gloom and doubt, and
he says, “ Dead devouring universe ! The whole Me stood up in
its God-created majesty.” He no longer crouched like a coward
beneath it. “What art thou afraid of?” he said to himself;
“ hast thou not a heart F canst thou not suffer whatsoever it be ?
And as a child of freedom (though outcast) trample Tophet under
thy feet, while it consumes thee. Let it come then; I will defy
itand so Carlyle took the “ Devil by the nose.”
Thus Carlyle is a preacher of the Liberal Faith, and in a pas-
sage of great force and beauty he says : —•“ It is great, and there
is no other greatness, to make some nook of God’s creation a
little fruitfuller, better, more worthy of God ; to make some
human hearts a little wiser, manfuller, happier, more blessed,
less accursed. It is a work for a God The latest
gospel in this world is, Know thy work, and do it.
Blessed is he who has found his work, let him ask no other
blessedness. He has a work —a life purpose ;he has found it,
and will follow it Labour is life: from the inmost


heart of the worker rises his God-given force, the celestial life-
essence breathed into him by Almighty God from his inmost
heart awakens him to all knowledge— ‘ self-knowledge ’ —and
much else as soon as work fitly begins. Knowledge! The
knowledge that will hold good in working; cleave to that.
Work is the best antidote to doubt. It contains ‘ The twined
knot, which has so often made my thinkings anxious, untangles of
itself!’” Notice! Carlyle never once applies the theological
solution to the problem of doubt. Our great men and our great
women never do. Carlyle’s answer is the “Everlasting yea,”
which is the very opposite to the traditional solution.
Carlyle always shrank from Atheism, as nearly all men are
doing,—even the so-called champions of Atheism. However
chaotic present-day life might be, Carlyle always felt that there
was an inner harmony; he felt the world was not orphaned.
Though the God of each one may be his Magnified Ideal
Best, we should imagine that the God of Carlyle was the Infinite
Force, with not very much tenderness, and with very little love
in its heart; yet there was the “ everlasting yea ” in it all, till
by-and-bye he reaches to the feeling that all things are divine ;
nature is nothing more than the constant action of this Supreme
Being. All these, the processes of the world you see going on
now around you, are not the results of a creation six thousand
years old, or six thousand millenniums ago ; but creations of the
present constant action that is always going on. Ever at the
loom of time is this garment of God being woven. This is the
“ Everlasting yea.” “ Thou too art divine,” Carlyle says, “ Art
thou not the shrine of the Eternal ? Is it not in man’s heart
that God is to be found ? Is not man the incarnation of Deity p”
Here again is the “ Everlasting yea.” “ God,” he says, “is not
an absentee God. He did not wind up the universe, and let it
work without his notice and constant presence. Inspiration did
not cease when the Jew lost his nationality. The Holy Ghost
goes not into the teaching of any particular race, but goes
wherever the man is capable of receiving the truth, and express-
ing it in action or in words. This is a profounder sense of Deity ;
a larger idea of God.”
The last forty years of Carlyle’s life were not the evolution
of glorious thought. He finished his growth, philosophically, at
the age of forty. Victor Hugo says : “ Forty is the death of
youth, the birth of old age; forty represents a young man old,
and an old man young but to finish one’s growth at forty leaves
one in danger of being altogether blind to any new beauty that is
revealing itself in this growing age. Carlyle, however, was filled
with the sense of the divine idea. He writes: “We sit as in a
boundless phantasmagoria and dream-grotto, boundless for the
faintest star; the remotest century lies not even on the verge


thereof. Sounds and many-coloured visions flit round our sense;
but Him, the unslumbering, whose work both dream and dreamer
are we see not; except in rare half-walking moments suspect
not.” There is more force and beauty in this divine idea than if
God were put in any symbols or defined in any term. This
divine idea has saved many from Atheism. See what a difference
there is between this divine idea and the creation by design of
special ideal forms, that ultimates by a fiat of a finished, final,
unprogressive world. An absentee God; not an actual, immanent,
evolving, upward striving, divine power; infinite progression, as
seen in the light of the divine idea ; for if we do not see much, it
is because it is not good for us to see more. “ A minnow in its
native creek is ignorant of eclipses, trade winds, monsoons, &c.;
and such a minnow is man. His creek, this planet earth ; his
ocean, the immeasurable all; his monsoons and periodics, the
mysterious course of Providence through aeons.”
Sir John Lubbock says : “ Our planet is but a fraction of
seventy-five millions of worlds.” Then can this minnow-man live
in the creek in which he was born P No. He will swim out of
his creek to a larger sea, and he finds others have been swimming
there before him, and have left the results of their labour and the
symbols of their thought behind ; and so the little minnow-man
swims back to his creek and feels sure there is order working out
life, and life working out beauty, and light and love. So in spite
of all life’s limits and sorrows there is still the divine idea.
“ Divine idea in history ?” you say. Yes ! Some, ignoring
the great laws of human development and wishing to make
capital for their own pet theories, have told us that the French
Revolution was the “ unleashing the passions of the mass; the
mere triumph of anarchy; bowing out God (hardly with polite-
ness) from his own world, and the enthronement of the harlot as
a Goddess of Reason; but what was it in the thought of the
Prophet of Chelsea ? “A vindication by outraged nature of her
broken laws. Europe lay pining, obstructed, moribund, quack-
ridden, hag-ridden. The king was no more as his name implied,
the capable man. The Pope was no longer as his title signified,
the Father of the Faithful; then God rose out of his place and
‘ the anger of the Lord did kindle against them,’ and their
carcasses were torn in the streets.’” To Carlyle: “It is the
death-wrestle of out-worn Feudalism and young Democracy;”
and were he alive he would say the same of the Russia of to-day.
The method seems cruel and is bloody ; but now we see in
the progress of thought the divine idea in history, for “ ever right
comes uppermost, and ever justice is done.” * So through the
struggle and pain there is the joy of progress, for humanity
“ must on and ever upward go.”
Carlyle said: “Seedeep enough and you will see musically,”


while beneath the harshest discords you hear the music of
celestial law.
Well, I think Carlyle saw deep enough, and heard the
music beneath the discords of the process of the working out of
this divine idea; but at times he did not see broad enough.
With his strong individuality and his self-reliant genius he lost
many of the bright elements that go to build up man. His
grandeur and force of intellect, his thoroughness, his sincerity
and his earnestness all determined his limit. In the intensity of
his genius he lacked the broad sympathy. In solving the
problem of life too soon he left no open questions for his later
manhood ; and could not see how his special excellencies were
balanced and modified by other influences.
After Carlyle entered on his period of gloom and dyspepsia,
the scientific counterpart and complement of his own divine idea
was elaborated in the development theory ; but the revelation
came too late for Carlyle, for he had closed his thought life and
sneered at Darwin. “ A good sort of man is this Mr. Darwin,”
he wrote, “ and well-meaning, but with very little intellect. Oh,
it is a terrible thing to see nigh a whole generation of men and
women professing to be cultivated looking around in a purblind
fashion, and finding no God in this universe. And this is what
we have got to. All things from frog spawn ; the Gospel of Dirt
the order of the day.”
“ Carlyle’s opinions,” says Professor Tyndall, “ had for the
most part taken their final set before the theory of man’s descent
was enunciated, or, rather, brought within the domain of true
causes by Mr. Darwin. He ‘ abhorred ’ the evolution theory,
‘ as tending to weaken that ethical element in man,’ which, in
Carlyle’s estimation, as in that of others, transcends all science in
importance.” But Tyndall quietly hints that Carlyle was
beginning to perceive that this was a mistake, and states that
Carlyle on meeting Mr. Darwin pronounced him “ the most
charming of men.”
One witness related (on the authority of lady Ashburton)
how at her house the conversation on one occasion turned on the
theory of evolution. Carlyle took no part at first in it, but he
ultimately exclaimed : “ Gentlemen, you are well pleased to trace
your descent from a tadpole and an ape, but I should exclaim
with David, “ Lord, thou hast made me a little lower than the
angels.” As I said before, Carlyle saw deep but not broad
enough. He did not know that those who were in love with this
theory saw behind the ape and the tadpole a finer origin, in a
greater, a diviner life than a Jewish Lord.
To justify what I have said about Carlyle closing his
thought-life too soon, just let me refer to the year 1821. Carlyle
then writes : “ This year I found I had conquered all my


scepticisms . . . looked down upon the welterings of my poor
fellow-creatures ... no concern whatever in their Pusey-
isms, ritualisms, metaphysical controversies, and cobwebberies.”
In the remaining thirty years Carlyle missed all the fine thought,
and in consequence has given us one lesson, viz., Keep your mind
open, keep your heart open, and your whole nature open, after
forty, for passing away at seventy, when there may be new gleams
and glimpses of truth, and you will then be thankful that you
did not miss the finer thought evolving in the universe.
We now know Carlyle’s real religion. Froude, his bio-
grapher, says: “He tells his mother, and he continued to tell
her as long as she lived, that their belief was essentially the same,
although their language was different. Experienced fact was to
him revelation, and the only true revelation. Historical religions,
Christianity included, he believed to have been successive efforts
of humanity loyally and nobly made, in the light of existing
knowledge, to explain human duty and to insist on the fulfilment
of it. In revelation, technically so called, revelation confirmed
by historical miracles he was unable to believe.” To Carlyle, as
to us, the universe was itself a miracle, and all its phenomena
were equally in themselves, incomprehensible. That —a rational
religion—is the liberal faith. The universe with its mystery and
beauty is the expression of the divine idea. The Gfod of tra-
ditionalism is gone ; but hear what Carlyle says on the subject:
“ To prove the existence of God, as Paley has attempted to do, is
like lighting a lantern to seek for the sun. If you look hard by
your lantern you may miss your search.”
I have said little of Carlyle’s gospel of work, for you all
know it; but I wish he had spoken more of the quality of the
work to be performed, and I also wish I could mark with a big
“ B ” every passage of bitterness and gloom which is the product
of his biliousness ; while for the sake of surviving friends Ido
hope to see some passages in the “ Reminiscences ” entirely
eliminated, —especially that harsh estimate of poor Charles Lamb,
whom he has impaled by a literary epithet and a string of nick-
names. Little did Carlyle know that the gentle Elia was
compelled to resort to drinking gin or using other stimulants,
owing to his high nervous temperament; and little did he know
that all the time he was nursing and caring for, with almost
infinite fondness, a maniac sister. Carlyle, all through, mis-
understood Charles Lamb. He never knew the tragedy and
pathos connected with the life-history of brother and sister.
Carlyle advocated “ Organized emigration,” and believing
in the divine idea did preach the gospel of duty to some who,
with splendid opportunities, make their only aim in life mere
pleasure. The aristocrat with his fine physique, his cultured
tone, his ample leisure, his influence and means, who does not


let his hand find something good to do, is as a drone in the
human hive. Dowered with money, influence and opportunity,
he lives for himself, not for humanity, and in leading such a life
he frustrates the divine idea. Carlyle asks : “ Where are your
Hengists and your Horsas now ? Where are those heroes who
should be leading their people to useful employment, and
inducing them to carry their occupations to distant countries,
where are they ? Preserving and killing their game.” Further,
Carlyle was one of the first to advocate the appointment of the
thinking scions of the aristocracy to positions of influence in the
Colonies, that they ought to do something better than go hunt-
ing and wasting their lives.
Carlyle’s pessimism was broken at times by optimistic
moods. He felt his gloom becoming chronic with approaching
age. Emerson chided him with his “apathized moods,” to which
Carlyle replied: “ The gloom of approaching old age is very
considerable upon a man, and one contrives to take the very
ugliest view now and then of the very beautifulest things ; and
to shut oneself up with a kind of imperial sorrow which is
almost felicity. On the whole lam infinitely sorry.” (What a
vision for a man that should be ripening for a new birth !) “ Yet
the earth is verdant withal and suu-beshone.”
Walt Whitman touched the real chord when he said “ Two
conflicting agonistic elements seem to have contended in Carlyle,
pulling him different ways like wild horses. His ailing body
affected much that he wrote. Dyspepsia is to be traced in every
page, and now and then fills the page. One may include among
the lessons of his life, how, behind genius and morals stands the
stomach and gives the casting vote.”
Carlyle was a grand man in the positive elements of his
being, but with his dyspepsia he became the prophet of gloom.
He thought, commercially, the universe was deteriorating;
politically, it was shooting Niagara; religiously, becoming the
“ Gorilla damnification of humanity.” This is the antithesis of
the divine idea, —all this, just when the whole planet is having a
new birth into broader thought and clearer light and larger life.
Well might Professor Seeley say —and this some twenty
years ago too —that “ Carlyle’s face was towards the setting
sun.” When new r gleams of light, when new bursts of radiance
came into our timelike revelations of the 19th century, Carlyle
could not feel as Longfellow did when he said
“ There is daybreak everywhere.”
Let us be thankful for the life of Thomas Carlyle. Grand
and great is he. The ascent of life in this planet is felt to be
the outworking of the divine idea; so the transient and the
permanent may all go together for a time, and in the larger


evolutions of the universe will come the working out of the
transient and the enshrining of the permanent. The best
wdll survive and go to make rich the grander humanity that is to
be.
In Carlyle we are sure of one thing, and that is he was
sincere ;he always spoke out his true thought. I like to listen
to the man who will tell me his idea of life, and although I may
not agree with all he says, still his sincerity is the charm. Men
felt that when Carlyle spoke, the words were the clothing of his
truest and best thought, and at once knew that he held in scorn
the
“ Juggling fiends that palter with us in a double sense ;
That keep the word of pjomise to the ear, and break it to the heart.”
Poor Sterling, whom Carlyle loved dearly, wrote a letter just
before he felt himself going out somewhere, and said : “ I go
with very little fear and very much hope; there are thoughts
within me that I must keep down with all the iron weights I
have in my power ; and yet if I can give you a helping hand
there , it shall not be wanting.”
Who knows what “ helping hand ” Carlyle has received
now ? One describes him as bearing the burden and bending
over the riddle of the earth, till when he looks up to the firmament
of stars it seems to him “ a sad sight.” But these stars always
had a fascination for Carlyle, and not long before he passed
away he looked towards them and said : “You soon I shall behold
for the last time!” Strange fascination in these orbs ; points of
light suggesting an infinity beyond. Stars silent over us ; graves
under us silent; and between these two silences you and I,
friends, have a duty to do —to turn into discipline for ourselves
and help for humanity, the divine idea.


GEORGE ELIOT:
The Development of the Individual and Life for Humanity.
George Eliot has been called the “ greatest Englishwoman
of our century,” and already in her posthumous influence she is
a sweet and strong presence of a good diffused. She was well
fitted by her mental peculiarities, by her early surroundings, and
by the influence of her growing womanhood, to be a unique
teacher to her age.
Born in traditionalism, she passed through the agony of
doubt and changed her phases of faith ; she had a new birth into
the rich expanding life of our own time, and early came in
personal contact with the young master minds that have been a
formative influence in our philosophy and literature. She had a
masculine strength of mind without lack of womanly sweetness.
She was broad in her humanitarian sympathies with a high moral
and spiritual ideal.
Broadly speaking, the great lessons she teaches in all her
works, and illustrates in all her characters are, —That race,
ancestry, and parentage give a predominating bent or bias to
our nature, while by our own will we either deteriorate or
develop. There is further in her works the “ awful power of
circumstance,” and she also recognises the more awful power of
will —of used or abused opportunity. She teaches that the deep-
est peace, the highest life, the most exalted being, is in self-
renunciation, that the true doctrine of the cross (apart from all
theology) is life for humanity.
In the working out through fiction of these laws, there is
felt to be in the heroes and heroines of G-eorge Eliot’s novels, a
possible or real second self, a reflection of her own life in its
aspirations and deeds. Of course this must not be pushed too
far, but nevertheless it is deeply true, and the more one studies
and reads her works (for they deserve study as well as reading),
the more the George-Bliot-element runs through them all, giving
a new charm to what was old.
As most of you know, the father of Marian Evans, after-
wards Mrs. Lewes and Mrs. Cross, but whom we shall hereafter
speak of simply as “ George Eliot,” was a steward to a landed
proprietor.
It is said that at the age of 13, beginning to alarm her father


by critical remarks on the sermons after church, and showing
decidedly heterodox proclivities, she was sent to stay with an
aunt who lived in Derbyshire. This aunt was a very saint,
preaching at times among the Methodists; and she is said to be
the original of Dinah Morris. At this time George Eliot was an
earnest Biblical student, seemingly very anxious about her
spiritual condition. George Eliot says in a letter to her aunt
that she is “ living in a dry and thirsty land, and is looking forward
to her visit to Wirksworth as to a well of spring water —ac-
ceptable to her as is the well dug for the traveller in the desert.”
She tells us that she was then a strong Calvinist.
Though there is very little incident in her career, yet if we
could but see her development with the soul-struggles and
triumphs ; with the increased mental growth from the time when
she was a country, pensive, pale-faced girl, managing her father’s
household, to the time when she was an acknowledged power in
English literature, the first novelist of her age ; a pure, sweet,
almost silent influence in society ; the companion and co-partner
in thought of one of the most original and powerful philosophers
of modern times (George Henry Lewes) : if we could see her in
all these changing phases of growth, we should see a life with
elements of pathos and tragedy, if not grandeur and romance.
Her genius was the result of hard study and gradual development,
the fruits of which she has given to English literature.
"When 21 years of age she removed with her father to
Eoleshill, near Coventry, and there learnt Greek, Latin, French,
German, Italian, the organ and the fine arts. All this tends to
show what a many-sided, brilliant, powerful woman she must have
been. Here at Coventry began her true mental development.
To read “ Adam Bede,” and to see the pure, womanly, sacrificing
saintly heroine there —Dinah Morris—you would hardly believe
that the views connected with her faith (out of which she after-
wards grew) had “ grievously burdened the spirit of George
Eliot.” Yet such is her own testimony.
It is said that never in the annals of English literature did
so purely virtuous a girl win such unmixed sympathy as Dinah
Morris. E. H. Hutton, the editor of the Spectator , said: “If
George Eliot had a little more of her own Dinah in her nature
she would be simply perfect.”
How is it that Dinah Morris, one of the most charming
heroines in English fiction, was the outcome of the traditional
faith which George Eliot at Coventry outgrew, and felt to be a
“ grievous burden ?” It is a question that puzzles many ; and
though some say it is because of the faith to which she
once belonged and outgrew, yet we think the answer is that
notwithstanding the fact that there are so closely connected with
traditionalism lovely lives, martyr spirits, examples of the self-


forgetting love that Can die to redress human wrong, and to bear
witness to the truth, that can drink the G-ethsemane cup, that
can wear the crown of thorns, and can bear the exile’s loneliness
and endure the martyr’s pangs rather than be false to conscience
and truth ; yet the outgrowth of George Eliot tends to show
that all this belongs to humanity, and not to one system of belief.
Dinah Morris, like many women in our ordinary churches, was
the embodiment of the love, the emotion, the sacrifice, the ideal
elements, all of which belong to our race. They came out of
humanity in the first place, and have become enshrined in the
dogmas of traditionalism ; but when this crystallization shall be
again dissolved these precious gems will be seen to adorn, as they
always have done, humanity ; for they can only be looked upon
as accidentally connected with the traditional dogmas.
George Eliot says that this aunt (the original of Dinah
Morris) once told her of a visit she had made to an unhappy girl
in prison who was under sentence of death. She stayed with
her all night, and went with her to execution the following
morning ; and her aunt told her how a supposed miracle happened
to the poor girl on the night before the execution. In looking
into the mirror she saw a pale face wearing a crown of thorns.
This unfortunate girl, executed for the murder of her own
child, was the original of poor Hetty. Hetty, fond of ribbons, in
love with her own pretty face, absorbed and selfish in her pleasure-
loving nature, was one of the saddest examples of that terrible law
which shows, that beginning in harmless pleasure, you gradually
slide down the inclined plane of easy wrong —not thinking, not
knowing —until you stop at the very antithesis of what you would
have been in your childhood’s dreams. There you are chronically
at that stage which you would have once shuddered at. Poor
Hetty! How varied, how rich must have been the mind that
could create Hetty Sorrel in the same book as Dinah Morris !
It is said that no man could have written the account of Hetty
at the looking glass, notwithstanding the masculine strength of
mind that George Eliot displayed in her earlier works. In like
manner Charles Dickens wrote to Langford, of the Athencemi, as
follows : —“ Will you, by such roundabout ways and methods as
may present themselves, convey my best thanks to the author of
“ Scenes of Clerical Life,” whose two first stories I can never say
enough of, I think them so truly admirable ; but if those two
volumes, or a part of them, were not written by a woman, then
should I begin to believe that I am a woman myself.”
I dare say it will be interesting to the majority of you if I
give an account of this period of George Eliot’s life in her own
words, and for further remarks I shall trace her life-history
through her novels, without exceeding the limits of cautious
criticism.


In a letter to Miss Hennell, George Eliot tells how her
Aunt Elizabeth went to visit her father’s house in Warwickshire
when she (George Eliot) was about 17. She writes :•< —“ I was
then under the influence of evangelical belief, and earnestly
endeavouring to shape the anomalous English Christian life of
ours into some consistency with the spirit and simple verbal
tenor of the New Testament.” All this while George Eliot was
showing her Shakesperean nature by sympathy with such diverse
specimens of humanity as Adam Bede, Arthur Donnithorne, and
Hetty Sorrel. Oh, Hetty! How one’s heart goes out to her in
pity, as to a frail barque on the sea of existence. “Tes, the
actions of a little trivial soul like Hetty’s struggling amidst the
serious sad destinies of human beings are always strange,” says
George Eliot. “So are the motions of a little vessel without
ballast—tossed about on an angry sea. How pretty it looked
with its parti-coloured sail in the sunlight moored in the quiet
bay. Let that man bear the loss who loosed it from its moorings.
But that will not save the vessel—the pretty thing that might
have been a lasting joy.” George Eliot says at this time she
clung to Calvinism, and thought the manners of her aunt very
strange. “ I had never talked,” she says, “ with a Wesleyan
before, and we used to have little debates about predestination,
for then I was a strong Calvinist. Here her superiority came
out, and I remember now, with loving admiration, one thing
which at the time I disapproved was not strictly a consequence
of her Armenian belief, and at first sight might seem opposed to
it, yet it came from the spirit of love which clings to the bad
logic of Armenianism. When my uncle came to fetch her, after
she had been with us a fortnight or three weeks, he was speaking
of a deceased minister (once greatly respected) who, from the
action of trouble upon him, had taken to small tippling, though
otherwise not culpable. ‘ But I hope the good man’s in heaven,
tor all that,’ said my uncle. ‘ Oh, yes,’ said my aunt with a deep
inward groan of joyful conviction, ‘ Mr. A.’s in heaven—that’s
sure.’ ” At that time so strong was her Calvinism and so traditional
her faith that it was an offence to her stern, ascetic, hard views;
and because she broadened into the sunlight and elevated herself
into Armenianism she could say, before she passed away, “ How
beautiful it is to me now.”
Oh, friends ! It is a grand thing to grow out of a hard creed
into a larger, more loving life. So George Eliot grew out of
strong Calvinism into a more benevolent view of the universe in
Wesleyan Armenianism ; but this was only one of the quick
stages in her mental growth. She was just beginning the great
transition from traditionalism to the philosophic humanitari-
anism, and had not done growing when she passed away.
At Eoleshill her larger development began. She here became


acquainted with Charles Bray and the Hennells, cultured
rationalists, who have done so much in a silent way to shake the
basis of dogma and to form a severe intellectual ideal. She also
came in contact with Emerson and Herbert Spencer. Here at
Foleshill, when 25 years of age, she translated Strauss’s “ Life of
Jesus,” and received the compliments of the author on the
excellency of her work. A work of more significance she also
translated here from the Gferman—“ Feuerbach’s Essence of Chris-
tianity in which all theology is shown to mean anthropology.
Because George Eliot derived the inner meaning of all thought
connected with traditionalism, she permeates all her works with
a diffused sweetness, and never speaks in scorn of any one’s faith,
but meets them all on their better side, regarding them but as
the outcome of developing humanity, and not as the finality of
any faith.
It is well known that George Eliot defied conventional
usage in regard to marriage. Early in her new thought-life she
formed a friendship with a many-sided brilliant literary man —
G. H. Lewes—a relationship to which I shall not refer more,
because of the different opinions held regarding the union; though
from George Eliot’s point of view her union with G. H. Lewes
mighty be in accord with the “ higher morality,” we cannot
but wish that in a doubtful social position she had given us an
example of the renunciation and sacrifice she so glorifies in all
her works. Her first work, “Scenes from Clerical Life,” was
sent by .Lewes anonymously to “ Blackwood.” History is never
written, biography is never written, the life of the’ simplest,
meanest creature worthy of public pen and notice is never
written. "We cannot get to the real life with our narrow view of
things, but if a life could be known we should find that in
the blended influences of these two remarkable persons—George
Henry Lewes and George Eliot—a marvellously developing
power was every day going on.
George Lewes in his “ History of Philosophy ” banishes
metaphysics. He says : “ Philosophy has been ever in movement,
but the movement has been circular; and this fact is thrown
into stronger relief by contrast with the linear progress of
science.” Instead of perpetually finding itself, after years of
gigantic endeavour, returning to the precise point from which it
started, science year after year, advancing step by step, each
accumulation of power adding to the momentum of its progress,
each evolution, like the evolutions of organic development,
bringing with it a new functional superiority, which, in its turn,
becomes the agent of higher developments. Not a fact is
discovered but has its bearing on the whole body of doctrine;
not a mechanical improvement in the construction of instruments
but opens fresh sources of discovery. Onward and for ever


onward, mightier and for ever mightier, rolls this wonderful tide
of discovery, and “ the thoughts of men are widened by the pro-
cess of the suns.” That was his early view and the position he
took in his brilliant work the “ History of Philosophy.” But
none of us ever reaches the ultimate ; so later in life, just before
he was called away, Lewes brought out a book, entitled “ Problems
of Life and Mind,” and some say that although the author
banished metaphysics in early life, he let it in by a back door
during a later period of his career under another name, “ Metem-
pirics.” If we did but know half of what these two lives were,
for they contain more than can ever meet the eye or ear in any
written or spoken speech, we should see that these changing
phases were all very important. When a fuller life of George
Eliot does appear, let us hope we shall know more of their
transitions and mutual influence.
The “ Mill on the Floss ” indicates the transition of George
Eliot’s inner history. The heroine, Maggie Tulliver, is strongly
influenced by a little book attributed to Thomas aKempis, “ He
Imitatione Christi.” The packman brought her a parcel of
books, and she turned to the page of her favourite work and
read, “ Know that the love of thyself doth hurt thee more than
anything else in the world. . . Both above and below, which
way soever thou dost turn thee, everywhere thou wilt find a
cross, and everywhere of necessity thou must have patience if
thou wilt have inward peace and enjoy an everlasting: crown.
Blessed are these ears that receive the whispers of the Divine
voice.” “ A strange thrill of awe passed through Maggie as she
read it. She drew a long breath, and pushed her heavy hair
back as if to see a sudden vision more clearly.” “ Thomas
aKempis ” was one of George Eliot’s favourite books, and it was
found by a friend lying opened on her table by an empty chair
after her death.
Swinburne calls the “ Mill on the Floss ” the highest and
purest and fullest example of George Eliot’s magnificent and
matchless powers.” I shall never forget finishing that book. It
was while at college. I could not go to bed without finishing it.
It was two o’clock in the morning as I moved towards the tragic
end of Tom and Maggie Tulliver, with all their differences,
becoming united in death, as they were drowned in the final
catastrophe of the flood. As I ascended the stairs to my dormi-
tory the still building seemed to tremble as if in awe. In
Maggie’s initiation into sorrow the author touches the tragic
element in life. Tulliver, who thought this was a puzzling
world, and that the lawyers were the agents of the devil, only
wanted to have his son educated as clever as they were; but
having lost his lawsuit he was killed by a fall of his horse when
riding home. Then came Torn and Maggie, standing on the


doorsteps of the house, and to whom Mrs. Stelling brought out
a little basket of provisions, and placed it on Maggie’s arm say-
ing, “ Do remember, dear, to eat something on the way down.”
Maggie, who had disliked this woman from the first, was by this
generous and thoughtful action brought to love her, and she
kissed her silently. It was the first sign within the poor child of
that new sense which is the gift of sorrow. This susceptibility
to the bare offices of humanity raised these two into a bond of
loving fellowship, which stirs the deep fountains of affection
as does the mere presence of an ordinary comrade to haggard
men among the icebergs.
George Eliot was developing all the while. Another stage
in her life history was past. Erom this philosophy of self-
renunciation (written, as she says, “ ages ago by a brother who
had suffered and renounced, not the less true and human
because written in the cloister by one with serge gown and ton-
sured head, and with a fashion of speech different from ours, but
under the same silent far-off heavens, and with the same passionate
desires and stirrings, and the same failures and weariness.)”
George Eliot passed on to another stage, for her next work
showed the firm grasp she had obtained of the principles of
deterioration and development in human life —the rigid but grand
laws of love in the moral universe. It was “ Silas Marner,” the
flawless and faultless novel, as it is called of George Eliot,
You know the story. Wrongfully charged with theft poor Silas,
the hero, is cast out by vote from his little sect, and he has to
leave the town where be dwelt. He goes as a stranger to a new
place, and being alone becomes misanthropic. At first he toiled
away at the loom, hardly able to keep flesh and bones together ;
he had to act very economically ; but as prospects brightened the
passion for saving grew by what it fed on. He began to love his
gold; he counted it, talked to it, until he became almost shrivelled
up and as dry and yellow as his own guineas. Dwarfing to his
idol he became a miser. One day—a happy day for Silas —
returning to where his treasure had been deposited he found it
gone, and prattling on the hearth stone was a little child with
golden curls, whose mother had perished in the snow. The child
proved to be the doorway of a newer and purer life to Silas, As
the golden curls glistened and sparkled in the firelight he thought
what a paltry thing was his golden metal. This change of affec-
tion became the redemption of the man from his growing
selfishness ; it touched his better latent spirit and opened for him
new springs of life and love and hope and joy. The child became
the ideal, and so Silas Marner developed upwards just as Tito in
“ E-omola ” deteriorated so strangely and sadly downwards.
“ Eomola ” fully deals with the laws of the moral life—
deterioration and development—in another manner. You know


how that handsome, winning, clever youth Tito could melt all
hearts by his presence and his voice and his touch. How he
from being merely limp and very slightly lax in his morals,
resolving that life should “ pinch him nowhere,” passed out of
youth, from the gentle, winning, handsome, cultured favourite
of all, to a conscienceless piece of inhumanity ; so by the terrible
law of deterioration he was caught in a web that went on spinning
itself in spite of him, almost like a growth over which he had
no control. Tito at first, with his moral limpness and laxity, had
hardly yet arrived at that stage of depravity in which he would
actually disown and deny his foster father. But Baldassarre came
to Florence. He put his hand on Tito. He had been a prisoner
and a slave, but had escaped. He had much the look of a
tatterdemalion maniac. The two men “ looked at each other
silent as death.” It seemed long to both ; it was only a moment.
“ Who is he, I wonder ?” said a friend of Tito’s. “ Some madman,
surely,” said Tito. “He hardly knew what he said ; but he was
experiencing that inexorable law of human souls that we prepare
ourselves for sudden deeds by the reiterated choice of good or
evil, that gradually determines character.” At the beginning of
the book he is gentle and kind to all alike ; “ but because he tried
to slip away from everything that was unpleasant, and cared for
nothing else so much as his own safety, he came at last to commit
some of the basest deeds —deeds that make men infamous. He
denied his father and left him to misery. He betrayed every
trust that was reposed in him, that he might keep himself safe
and get rich and prosperous.” In contrast to this character we
have the pure high-souled loving Romola. “ She avowed the cause
of Savonarola, whom she looked up to almost as her ideal when
she found her husband was not worthy a place in her affections.
She put off her black garments, and as she thrust her soft white
arms in the harsh sleeves of the serge mantle she felt the hard
girdle of rope hurt her fingers as she tied it. She courted these
rude sensations. They were in keeping with her new scorn of
that thing called pleasure which made men base —that dexterous
contrivance for selfish ease, that shrinking from endurance and
strain, when others were bowing beneath the burdens too heavy
for them, which now made one image with her husband.” Then
she turns to the other picture, and Savonarola says: “ And do
you think nothing of the sorrow and the wrong that are within
the walls of the city where you dwell. You would leave your
place empty when it ought to be filled with your pity and
your labour. If there is wickedness in the streets your steps
should shine with the.light of purity. If there is a cry of anguish,
you my daughter, because you know the meaning of the cry,
should be there to still it. My beloved daughter, sorrow has
come to teach you a new worship ; the sign of it hangs before


you.” And so this Eomola had hoped to find the ideal in her
husband, and in her disappointment prides herself in self-renun-
ciation and sacrifice for humanity. These are the established
characteristics of George Eliot. Eomola cared for the baby wife
and the little children of her own passionately-loved, but false
and deteriorated husband—Tito. Eomola, as you know, is a fine
picture of the middle ages, and Savonarola might have some
reference to the great mental transitions of our own day, for
George Eliot’s Savonarola keeps on for a while preaching the
creed of yesterday, in the hope that it might by the force of
mere iteration come back and be the creed of to-day.
Only a few words for “ Middlemarch ” and “ Daniel
Deronda.” Dorothea, in “ Middlemarch,” is the contrast
between the actual and the possible ; a woman yearning for some
far resonant action, some long-recognisable deed, and then marries
a poor dry-as-dust. She is compared in the epilogue of “ Middle-
march ” to Saint Theresa, whose passionate ideal nature demanded
an epic life; what were many-volumed romances of chivalry,
and the social conquests of a brilliant girl to her ? George Eliot
says: “ Many Theresas have been born who formed for themselves
no epic life wherein there was a constant unfolding of far-
resonant action; perhaps only a life of mistakes, the offspring
of a certain spiritual grandeur ill-matched with the meanness
of opportunity; perhaps a tragic failure which found no sacred
poet and sank unwept into oblivion. With dim lights and
tangled circumstance they tried to shape their thought and deed
in noble agreement, but after love stories in prose and verse.
Here and there a cygnet is reared uneasily among the ducklings
in the brown pond, and never finds the living stream in fellowship
with its own oary-footed kind. Here and there is born a Saint
Theresa, foundress of nothing, whose loving heart-beats and sobs
after an unattained goodness tremble off and are dispersed
among hindrances, instead of centering in some long-recognisable
deed.” That to me is very fine, though a departure from the
sweet simplicity of her earlier works. George Eliot was faithful
to the facts of life, and did not portray in her writings that
rounding off of “ marrying and being happy ever after,” which is
the old style of novel, and totally ignores the true phases of life.
Mrs. Cadwalleder said of this man writing the “ Key to all
Mythologies ”: “ A dry-as-dust, not fit for a great aspiring soul.
He’s no better than a bladder for dried peas to rattle in.” So
Dorothea passed into the “ Foundress of Nothing ” in marrying
Ladislaw.
There is not the least doubt that the heroines of George Eliot
reflect in a large degree her own mental and spiritual growth.
Dinah Morris, the aspiration and enthusiasm of her orthodox
days. Maggie Tulliver, her transitional development and conver-


sion to the high purpose in life. Dorothea, her yearnings for an
epic life —a proper sphere where her deeds could lose them-
selves in far-resonant action for the good of humanity. Eomola,
her own strength in love ; herself as she would have been in
sacrifice for the pet and children of one by whom she had been
cruelly wronged. “ Daniel Deronda ” was a new departure in
the novelists’ style. People did not like it at first, and some do
not care for it now ; but when it is read and re-read the higher
outcome of George Eliot’s genius can easily be seen. So Daniel
Deronda, in his fellowship with human suffering ; loving too well
the losing causes of the world, is the finest specimen we have of
the Christ-spirit in modern fiction. Gwendolen, the handsome
pleasure-loving woman, with her rescue and redemption ; and
G-randcourt, with self for his ideal and pleasure for his purpose;
always thinking about the “ least boring thing we can do.”
With his fine physique and great wealth and leisure and splendid
opportunities, there he is amid all the glory of the Mediterranean,
trying to pass away the day in a boat. It is a sermon, this
“ Daniel Deronda ” —a gospel for the 19th century. No book
we know of shows the laws of life better than is shown by these
characters of “ Daniel Deronda.”
One word about George Eliot’s Shakesperean quality. It
lies in her ability to appreciate all excellencies in all forms of
faith and individualities. She enters sympathetically into every
good phase of human existence, bringing her Mrs. Poyser, as
Shakespere introduces his clown, to show the funny sides of
life.
As one says : “ George Eliot was in every fibre devout with
the faith of every earnest soul.” With the fervent Evangel of
Savonarola, with the gentle gospel of Dinah Morris, the cherished
Judaism of Mirah, the stern Catholicism of the Spanish Gipsy,
with the purity, saintliness and sacrifice of Eomola, and the fine
humanity of Daniel Deronda, George Eliot was in harmony with
each and all. The religion of such an author cannot be sub-
scribed in any creed or worshipped in any church ; her religion is
in the works and the beauty of her life, and it is a religion that
will make us higher and purer, and nobler men and women.
Many people have been disappointed in the likeness of
George Eliot, but as we know that she always shrank from
mixing in society, it is highly improbable that we have not a
faithful representation of her. But friends say : “In every line
of her face there was power, and about the jaw and mouth a
prodigious massiveness which might well have inspired awe had
it not been tempered with the most gracious smile which ever
lighted up human features, and was ever ready to convert what
otherwise might have been terror into fascination.”
Of the religion exemplified in her own life, a friend writes:


“ She possessed, to a marvellous degree, the divine gift of charity
and of attracting moral outcasts to herself, whose devils she cast
out, if I may be permitted the expression, by shutting her eyes
to their existence. In her presence you felt wrapped round by
an all-embracing atmosphere of sympathy and readiness to make
the least of all your shortcomings and the most of any good
which might be in you.”
George Eliot carried her doctrine of sacrifice for humanity
beyond even what many think is needful in her early philosophic
faith, which perhaps she was outgrowing with her husband’s return-
ing love of metaphysics and the perception of a more spiritual side
of life. The husband and wife were ready to sacrifice all things,
even their own individuality, to the great cause of humanity;
but one cannot speak on that subject without going very far.
The conception of the Eternal purpose, the divine poem of
individual existence, demands more than this life for its full
expression.
I think the philosophy of George Eliot would have been
enriched and become a truer interpretation of the forces of life
if it had included a perception and expression of the divine
origin, divine discipline, and divine issue of existence, or in the
old words of God, duty and immortality.
All the good of George Eliot’s noble religion can be attained
without the suicide of self. The higher law shows that you
grow to a larger, fuller life as you forget self in sacrifice ; while
the grand paradox is that dying we live. Then let the higher
current literature be your modern Bible. Carry the principles
of George Eliot into the larger life, and you have a gospel for
the day and an evangel for the 19th century. A hell in which
we may all fall—deterioration; a heaven into which we may all
grow, viz., spiritual development. In her own words there is
nothing nobler than
“ to live
In pulses stirred to generosity,
In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
For miserable aims that end with self,
In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
And with their mild persistence urge man’s search
To vaster issues.”
So to live here on this planet doing our duty, so to live any-
where in the universe, where the Supreme Power that brought
us into existence may call us by death ; so to live is heaven.


TENNYSON’S “IN MEMORIAM ” :
An attempted Solution of the Problems of Suffering and Death.
When I was thinking of the representatives of the higher current
literature for a course of lectures, I put down the name of
Tennyson with some misgiving. So far as I can understand, I
believe Tennyson is not appreciated here so much as in England.
“In Memoriam ” I think, especially, requires a certain mood of
doubt, and a period of sorrow, for a full appreciation and com-
prehension. Perhaps Tennyson, in his general characteristics, is
better adapted to an old-world culture than he is for the growth
of life here. I mean his adaptation to the coziness and ease of a
drawing-room afternoon, on a winter’s day; for the mere sweet-
ness and light, without the strength and self-reliance that come
from a rapidly progressive life ; perhaps more suited generally
for the conventionalisms of social traditions, without the openness
of outlook, that belongs to the fresh phase of the new development
of humanity, as found in Australia ; the mere love of rhythm and
form, without the glory, as found in newly and sometimes slightly
cultured strength. For these and many other reasons, there is a
danger of overlooking his real value, and not regarding his
elements of enduring power.
It is often said that the most powerful preachers of to-day
are out of the churches and the pulpits, «,nd we believe it.
Tennyson is certainly one of them; so I think it will be a little
interesting and important for us to regard him to-night, as he has
expressed his thought and reflected his age in “ In Memoriam.”
He is regarded as the “ mirror of his age ” rather than a great
creative force; he is a grand reflection of the phase of faith
through doubt up to the high comprehension of the universe,
rather than a robust, prophetic, poetic genius. This seems to
be felt and owned by his greatest admirers ; and those who prefer
a more robust, heroic, realistic, or, as some would say, andro-
theistic school, which is coming into vogue with the broad
humanitarian ideal in philosophy, do not hesitate to speak in
strong terms of the limitations of Tennyson’s genius.
From this peculiarity his depreciators call him a drawing-
room poet. A very interesting survival is in what occurred years
ago in Punch, when Bulwer Lytton wrote some scathing lines
about Tennyson from this point of view; and even in his “ New
Timon,” where so many uickuames are given, Bulwer Lytton


calls him “Miss Alfred.” Of course all this shows the side of
Tennyson that can be viewed by those who do not enter fully
into his mood and thought. In not much better tone, Tennyson
replied, and with great sarcasm, calling him “ a man in stays,”
and “just out of a bandbox,” and being a dilettante in cultured
literature, rather than a mental force.
Alexander Smith, a young genius in Scotland, who had a
strange tragic history in this our bustling nineteenth century ;
and though fastened to the desk all day, had great intellectual
strivings, great yearnings and hopes, trying to solve the problem
of his own and the universe’s existence: so, consuming his
vitality too soon, he died too early. And because of this struggle
of his genius and oppression of his doubt, he was prepared for
appreciating Tennyson’s “In Memoriam :” and he speaks of the
wonderful way in which Tennyson reflects the culture, the senti-
ment, the lazy scepticism, made amiable only by the sadness, the
vague aspirations, of English society.
Well then, friends, if Tennyson is a mirror of our age rather
than a creative force, we should all like to see the facts, and
changing phases, and tendencies of our own time. He holds the
mirror up to mental and social nature, and shows us our own
intellectual, though changing, image.
According to one of the best critics, Tennyson has not
“ dominated his age,” but given it back the modicum of spirit-
uality it possesses. Of course all this brings us to the plane
where we can more properly view “ In Memoriam.”
Tennyson is generally regarded as a Pantheist, but we shall
leave this part to a future lecture, where we shall regard him and
the author of the “ Epic of Hades ” as poets of Higher Theism.
Pantheism and vagueness make a charge easily flung against
those who have felt themselves obliged to give up the God of the
religion of Dogma, and who, like Tennyson, have found their joy
and inspiration in the Higher Theism. Still the charge should
either be substantiated or withdrawn. I think, however, that it
can be proved from “ In Memoriam ” that Tennyson is not a Pan-
theist, in the sense that God is the sum-total of all phenomena;
and that the soul of man is reabsorbed at death (with the utter
loss of identity or individuality) in the great ocean of being. I
know this reference does not include the elements of an ex-
haustive definition of modern Pantheism, but it indicates the
position of those, who some years ago, denied the theism of the
Poet Laureate.
The great value and significance to me of “ In Memoriam ”
is, that it is the last, and very noble, attempt to solve the problems
of sin, suffering, and death, altogether apart from the dogmas of
Traditionalism or Orthodoxy on the one hand, and Evolution on
the other; but just now we are between the two ; for Tennyson’s


work appeared before a flood of light bad been thrown on the
process of nature, on the condition and prospects of mankind, by
the formulated theory of development, and the hypothesis of
evolution. Tennyson “ reflects,” as one says, “ the second half
of the nineteenth century like a mirror.”
Whatever we may think about Darwin, his “ Origin of
Species ” was an epoch-making book, and in the light of evolu-
tion, half the problems connected with man’s origin, and growth,
and destiny (especially the two former), are already solved. “In
Memoriam ” would have been an entirely different work had it
been written twenty years later.
The charge of vagueness we may not fear, if it means that
“In Memoriam” contains no neat statement of system. Further,
that stimulating little book of Miss Frances Power Cobbe’s on
“ Broken Lights ” has helped many out of dogma towards a happier
faith. Systems, however complete for humanity at one time, will
be outgrown. It is impossible to get a definite harmonious state-
ment of theological thought. Ido not complain of this want of
definite statement, for there are many new formative influences
in our time ; currents of thought that move in a winding way,
and do not flow in a line with the supposed river of revealed
truth ; but which in all their curvings tend in one direction, as if
they were making for some large confluence, from which will run
the stream of tendency for the future. A poet who has faith in
this grand progressive tendency, as Tennyson has, will, while he
is indicating the currents of the age in his thought, be in some
respects inharmonious and vague, but he need neither fear nor
resent the charge.
May I say, just in parenthesis, that this charge of vagueness
can all be taken to our own selves ; but act up to your clearest
light ; act on your surest instinct; harmonize your nature to the
highest reason, and trust your largest hope ; and though others
may think Liberal Religion cold and vague, there is to be found
in it a grand, progressive life.
Carlyle, rugged in his style and nature as his own grand
Scotch hills, said : “ I can do nothing with these vapours except
wish them condensed.” Ah ! Carlyle did not know the beauty
hidden in, or concealed by, the vapours. We have found that
what once seemed nebulosity, was only the hiding of the potenti-
alities of the new worlds! hidden latencies of beauty and fruit-
fulness, and possibilities of mind and heart and love, all hidden
in the vagueness of a nebulous cloud, out of which our planet has
whirled.
Let us now look at the general drift of the poem ; the
subject as you all know, is the beloved college friend of Tennyson
—Arthur Hallam.
The poet with his hopes, his enthusiasms, his ideals, and


loves, finds himself, early in life, confronted with the presence of
death, the death of his own best-loved friend ; one who shared
with him the trials and triumphs of intellect in the pursuit of
truth ; one who was a moulding influence among his fellows, and
had the promise of a rich manhood for the world. There is a
fine picture of his deceased friend as the oratorical archer in a
debating society:—
And last the master-bowman, he
Would cleave the mark. A willing ear
We lent him. Who, but hung to hear
The rapt oration flowing free
From point to point, with power and grace
And music, in the bounds of law,
To those conclusions when we saw
The God within him light his face ? ”
And now that friend is no more to him and the world, and
Tennyson asks ; “Ishe no more ?” There the poet is with the
blossom of his friendship nipped in the bud ; to the bitterness of
his blighted hopes ; to the pang of his loss, is added the pain and
mystery of death ; and his private grief has a universal signifi-
cance, the gloom of his own sorrow is part of that shadow which
suffering and death cast over all the world, for death, he says,
enters every home. There he touches the universal heart, for
there comes to every home sorrow and death. From the small
circle of the individual to the larger circle of home, and even to
the still wider one of humanity, the problem the poet has to solve,
is the problem of all; and being as we are in this bread-winning,
power-gaining, aspiring life, it is the problem you and I have to
solve now or sometime, for
“ Never morning wore to evening but some heart did break.”
Here is the value of the true poet; the fascination of the
poet, perhaps, will never be destroyed in humanity. With
Tennyson, in this especial instance, Traditionalism had gone ;
Evolution had not come; how was he then to solve this terrible
mystery? By just falling back on his instincts, on his intuitions.
By just appealing, not to mere sentiment, for it has so many
meanings, and he had heard and had seen its richest meanings
swept away; but the heart and mind, and soul and spirit, all form
intuition, to answer this question of the meaning of suffering and
death. Tennyson’s intuition had quick processes of thought;
the whole of the processes of logic were lost as are the spokes of a
wheel, when in rapid motion. Intuition is not the great God out-
side, but the God-principle within. It comes from the organized
experiences of the past; the transmitted tendencies of all great
souls, and the ripe result of the world’s reason, so far as can be
caught and expressed through the poet’s individuality; all form
intuition—the poetic instinct. So with Tennyson, Traditionalism
gone, Evolution not come, the heart stood up and said; “ I have
felt.” That was the poet’s answer.


You have all heard of that pure, beautiful, saintly, martyr-
like, suffering, struggling, yet conquering and rejoicing soul —
Frederic William Robertson, of Brighton. Let me read you his
statement of the elements of the questions which “In Memoriam”
tries to answer: “Is there indeed a life to come ? and, if there is,
will it be a conscious life? Shall I know that myself? Will
there be mutual recognition and continuance of attachments ?
Shall friend meet friend and brother friend as friends and brothers?
Or, again : How comes it that one so gifted was taken away so
early in the maturity of his powers, just at the moment when
they seemed about to become available to mankind ? What
means all this, and is there not something wrong? Is the law of
creation love indeed ? By slow degrees all these doubts, and
worse, are answered ; not as a philosopher would answer them,
nor as a theologian, or a metaphysician; but as it is the duty of
a poet to reply, by intuitive faculty, in strains in which imagina-
tion predominates over thought and memory. And one of the
manifold beauties of this exquisite poem, and which is another
characteristic of true poetry, is, that piercing through all the
sophistries and over-refinements of speculation, and the lifeless
scepticism of all science, it falls back upon the grand, primary,
simple truths of our humanity, those first principles which
underlie all creeds, which belong to our earliest childhood, and
on which the wisest and best have rested through all ages. What
are they ?—that all is right; that darkness shall be clear; that
God and time are the only interpreters; that love is king; that
the immortal is in us; and that (which is the keynote of the
whole)
“ All is well though faith and form
Be sundered in the night of fear.”
My attention was drawn to the drift of “In Memoriam ”
first, by a little controversy which appeared in the North of
England. An editor in “ Blackpool,” a fine philosophic Scotch-
man, but held in the limits of Traditionalism, feeling that our
liberal faith was “ vague,” once quoted, in a friendly way, this
verse from “ In Memoriam ” :
“ Hold thou the truth, define it well,
For fear divine philosophy should push
Beyond her mark, and be
Procuress to the Lords of Hell.”
He assumed that this “holding the truth” was getting a
little creed, and putting it in a little book, and keeping it in a
little pocket of our very little selves. But the stanza, you will
see if you will refer to it, just as the whole drift of the poem,
represents the essence of the liberal religion —that, defining, was
getting a hold of the great principle, and living by it; that
manhood is better than saintship, and character is preferable to
creed.


May I run the risk of wearying you by referring once more
to the tact that another of our “ leading lights of thought ”
Tennyson —in the mood of sorrow and in the period of doubt,
ignores, or casts aside, the dogmas of orthodoxy. What does it
mean p That the world is casting them aside, and they must go
to make way for the higher and purer religion. Was not the
very essence, and foundation, and the cause of the superstructure
of Traditionalism,
“ Man’s first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world, and all our woe ?”
Yet, just as Carlyle, in “ Sartor Resartus,” never refers to
the theological solution, so Tennyson in “ In Memoriam,” is as
beautifully silent about Adam and Eve, and the apple, the fall,
and the devil in the Garden of Eden, as Jesus was himself.
There is no doubt that Tennyson often deals poetically with
the traditions of theology. The history of Jesus he refers to,
but also seemingly without reference to the legends and idealiza-
tions that have crystallized round his supremely lovely life.
The prologue of “ In Memoriam ” has been taken by a great
many to represent the old religion ; but they could only have read
the first verse, and did not define the meaning of the whole of
the prologue. In one place it says —
“ Our little systems have their day,
They have their day and cease to be.”
Now, no finality can “ have a day ; ” its day is always. The
prologue begins with reference to the history of the Incarnation,
and, almost undoubtedly, it is the personification, in poetry, of the
Supreme Being of the Universe, while the expression of the
Incarnation in Traditionalism is used as the machinery.
“ Strong Son of God, immortal love
Whom we that have not seen Thy face,
By faith, and faith alone, embrace,
Believing where we cannot prove.”
That does seem at first sight to be the Incarnation, unique
and complete in Jesus, but the next verse, referring to the same
personification, is—
“ Thine are these orbs of light and shade ;
Thou madest life in man and brute ;
Thou madest death ; and 10, thy foot
Is on the skull which thou hast made.”
Did Jesus make death ? Did anyone ever pretend, even the
most orthodox, that he did ? No ! He came to redeem us from
death —to destroy death. Of course the two last lines refer, as
we shall see afterwards, to the process of nature. Development
and life are there. Beauty of babyhood, with the promise of
manhood and womanhood, is there ; but then there is the skull,
which means destruction of life. Again—
“ Thou wilt not leave us in the dust,”


You now see, after the processes of thought are gone more
fully into, a gleam of light arises as to this infinite purpose:
“ Thou wilt not leave us in the dust;
Thou madest man, he knows not why,
He thinks he was not made to die,
And thou’hast made him : thou art just.”
This is the prologue, but it contains the conclusion of the
whole poem. A preface is very often written after the book
itself, and contains the essence of the thought, and governing
motive of the whole ; it is the case with this prologue of Tenny-
son’s.
“ Thou seemest human and divine”
merely meaning that humanity is the highest expression that we
have of this eternal life, which we call Love.
“ Thou seemest human and divine —
The highest, holiest manhood Thou;
Our wills are ours, we know not how
Our wills are ours, to make them Thine.”
I would rather just refer to those parts that have the
elements of Traditionalism in them in order to be quite fair, as
well as bringing into exercise our power of comparison more
fully. You know that part which deals with the story of
Lazarus, either as history or legend, or a mixture of both, for
poets seldom explain their thought. They write with their own
broad, vague, beautiful ideas, using often the machinery of the
old-world thought, without its literal acceptance as part of a
creed. Hear how beautifully Lazarus is referred to :
“ When Lazarus left his chamel-cave,
And home to Mary’s house returned,
Was this demanded—if he yearned
To hear her weeping by his grave 1
‘ Where wert thou, brother, those four days ?’
There lives no record of reply
Which, telling what it is to die,
Had surely added praise to praise.
From every house the neighbours met;
The streets were filled with joyful sound;
A solemn gladness even crown’d
The purple brows of Olivet.
Behold a man raised up by Christ!
The rest remaineth unreveal’d—
He told it not, or something seal’d
The lips of that evangelist.”
You know the story—idyllic, perfect of its kind—of Martha
and Mary and Lazarus, and of the home to which the great
reformer-martyr might retire, when he was weary of all misunder-
standing and persecution from those who were not ready for the
fine spirit of sacrifice and broad thought of Giod and man, which
was revealing itself. It is a beautiful picture that Tennyson has
left us, of Lazarus returning to his lost home with Mary there at
supper, I shall just quote and leave it:—


“ Her eyes are homes of silent prayer,
Nor other thought her mind admits;
But he was dead, and there he sits,
And he that brought him back is there.
Then one deep love doth'supersede
All other, when her ardent gaze
Roves from the living brother’s face,
And rests upon the life indeed.
All subtle thought, all curious fears,
Borne down by gladness so complete,
She bows, she bathes the Saviour’s feet
With costly spikenard and with tears.”
There is the same poetical use of the story of the Incarnation in
that one remarkable verse :
“ And so the word had breath and wrought
With human hand the creed of creeds
In loveliness of perfect deeds,
More strong than all poetic thought.”
On these matters each one must form his own opinion of
Tennyson, using the material of history, legend, or myth, for the
purpose of poetry ; but on the main question there is no doubt at
all. In the crisis of sorrow, in the presence of death, the theo-
logical solution of the problem of life is never resorted to. Why
not ? If it is good for humanity, and Tennyson, living as a giant
of thought, or in some respects inhabiting the mountain peaks,
why did he not apply it ? Simply because it does not meet the
facts of the case, and is altogether inapplicable to us in doubt, and
sorrow, and death.
Why are we here to-night friends P not for an intellectual
diversion, not to pass an hour away; but as denizens of this
wonderful planet, all born into this glorious universe, all having
our sorrows, our struggles, our life’s pathway darkened by the
shadow of our coming death. We feel the ordinary theological
solution fails us in our direst need. Life itself is full of crises,
but when the departure from this stage of existence is near, on
what shall we rely ? Of course as a minister I have seen some
terrible sights of sorrow and death, and, when preparing this
lecture, one came to my mind; it was a poor young husband who
had his wife taken away from him, by the sudden change we call
death. There he stood in the greatest of agonies over her coffin,
crying “ Good God ! it cannot be! ” And so our Tennyson had
a similar mood, and yet
“ He trusted God was love indeed,
And love, creation’s final law,
Though nature, red in tooth and claw,
With ravine, shrieked against the creed.”
His best friend was gone, the promise of so much life was no
more. Christmas comes, and all is lost in song and merriment,
but at that Christmas table there is a gap, the sorrow at which
makes the wound bleed afresh; and with Tennyson all the merri-
ment of the festive time ended in tears, and he longed for
“ One hour's communion with the dead.”


In England, where the processes of thought are, I think,
slower than here, and, in the general mind, the transitions are
more gradual, “In Memoriam” has been, especially among
ministers and clergymen, the greatest disintegrating influence
in literature, apart from the idea of evolution.
Oh, what doubting liberal ministers there are that one
knows, and of whom one has heard the phrase used “ Ah, he has got
Tennyson on the brain,” just because these phases of doubt and
changing faith are exhibited, which we are all, more or less, going
through, except those who are privileged enough to be born free ;
but those who have to struggle with the problem of life and
death, nearly always find some phrase of Tennyson to express
the feeling and mood.
Tennyson always had an equal fear of Atheism and strong
Orthodoxy, and between these two he has planted himself, as
Emerson said, “ indomitably on his instincts,” waiting till the
world comes round to him. Of course, in the way in which Ten-
nyson shuts himself up on the Isle of Wight, there is no wonder
he should sometimes class all who are liberal in thought as mere
Atheists and Nihilists ; and great as he undoubtedly is, yet by his
intensity and secluded sphere, he does not see all the phases of
the new thought of our day.
Let me give you the direct antithesis of Traditionalism to
“ In Memoriam,” where the Liberal Faith is shown in its broadest
and best sense. Instead of a mechanical Q-od, with plans and
creative fiats, and after-thoughts and remedial schemes, Tennyson
talks about a Living Will, which is cruel, seemingly in process,
but justified in the result, which will turn into Law, issuing
forth into humanity as Love.
Tennyson assumes the antithesis of the Traditional and
Liberal Faiths, so instead of dogmatic certainty and final revela-
tion he tells us of his hero, his loved hero and almost ideal, —
“ He fought his doubts and gathered strength,
He would not make his judgment blind;
He fought the spectres of his mind
And laid them. Till he came at length
To find a nobler faith his own,
And power was with him in the night;
A power that makes the darkness light
And dwells not in the light alone.”
What is that ? Spiritual growth through the struggle for
existence —the very essence of the Liberal Faith. Dogmatic
certainty! Oh, how many mothers there are, mothers with good
hearts and yearning hopes, and with the only fear that their sons
or daughters may go wrong, and be taken from heaven in straying
from the old path. They do not know the glorious truth which
Tennyson tells us about —
“ There lives more faith in honest doubt
Believe me, than in half the creeds,”


Instead of the Theological heaven of which we should tire
in a fortnight, and wish ourselves back again on this little planet
earth, with all its struggles and sorrows, there is in the poet’s
thought, progress and hope for all, conquering love at the heart
of things, and a conquering love which will reveal itself in higher
developments of the universe.
“ O, yet we trust that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill;
That nothing walks with aimless feet,
That not one life shall be destroyed
Or cast as rubbish to the void
When God has made the pile complete.”
Have we not been taught that there was a rubbish heap
of the' universe never to be removed ? Nay, worse, a living,
quivering, throbbing, hopeless, burning mass of poor lost
humanity ? You say “ all that is passing away ” from the
orthodox pulpits. Of course! and in that we rejoice. We do
not speak against any pulpit or any person, but in the decay of
dogma we rejoice and thank God for it. Yet some of our thanks
are due, as one little expression of this Eternal Power, to Tenny-
son, who has taught us the Gospel of the Larger Hope.
Tennyson does fear Materialism, and Atheism, but when he
obtains the finer idea of matter which is now coming into vogue he
will not fear the world is falling into Atheism ; he sees no value
of life with Atheism or Materialism. He says :
“ I trust I have not wasted breath,
I think we are not wholly brain,
Magnetic mockeries ; not in vain
Like Paul with beasts, I fought with death.
Not only cunning casts of clay:
Let science prove we are, and then
What matters science unto men—
At least to me 1 I would not stay.”
Instead of annihilation, and immortality merely in the race, and
posthumous influence in growing humanity, living again in grass
and flower ; instead of laughing at the wish to be when Death
and Time are no more, as mere sentiment—he says :
“ One question more than others, all
From thoughtful minds, implores reply,
It is as breathed from star and pall,
What fate awaits us when we die ? ”
Instead of conversion, transferring a criminal from the scaffold to
an angel in heaven, we have development—those who have
struggled through all doubts and are struggling to higher
ascents, —
“ I hold it truth with him who sings
To one clear harp of divers tones
That men may rise on stepping stones
Of their dead selves to higher things.”
Instead of finality of life in Jesus, he says :
“ Ring in the Christ that is to be.”


Instead of finality of thought to any age or individual,
“ But what am I ?
An infant crying in the night:
An infant crying for the light:
And with no language hut a cry.”
Yet a child crying in the night
“ Knows its father to be near.”
Not saying it through the sufferings of a second Almighty
Infinite, not saying it by any blood or any atonement, but out of
the darkness in which the human child is crying
“ Come the hands
That reach through Nature moulding men.”
Yes, friends, I think the poetical liturgy of the Liberal Faith
might be compiled out of “In Memoriam.” A joyous faith it is
—a faith that in the darkest doubt, and in the deepest gloom, and
in the most bitter anguish and most desolate death, hears a
sentinel whispering
“ To the worlds of space
In the deep night, that “ all is well.”
Yes, “ all is well,”
“ Though faith and form
Be sundered in the night of fear.”
And by faith in that immortal love of the prologue, which is the
conquering love of the world, there is
“ That God which ever lives and loves—
One God, one law, one element,
And one far-off divine event
To which the whole creation moves.”
¥im


CHARLES DARWIN:
Development the Method of Creation.
Less than two years ago I had the pleasure of seeing Charles
Darwin at a lecture delivered by Professor Tyndall, on “ Theories
of Light,” at the Royal Institution in London. There was a
fascination in the calm pale face of that celebrated listener. I
had heard him fulminated against in the pulpit, and talked about
as a warning to youth. I had heard Darwinism traced to the
Devil, and had seen caricatures of that face, which I remember so
well now. Yet, both in the pulpit, magazines and reviews, and
even in the comic journals themselves, there was growing a slow
appreciation of the value of his thought, and a profound respect
for his life. I knew then that he was plodding on, heaping
illustration on illustration of his great idea ; that his character
was winning respect every day; that his hypothesis, so feared at
first, was, almost weekly, covering more spheres of thought and
life ; and that his influence was gaining a power never dreamt of
by his most ardent admirers.
It is something for you and me to have lived through the
time of the revealing of this hypothesis, to have seen it emerge
from scorn, and ridicule, and misrepresentation, to what it promises
to be —the characteristic mark of the 19th century.
When I saw Darwin at that lecture, I little thought that he
was so soon to be called away by death, and equally as soon to
be designated by that powerful paper that had ridiculed his
theories and caricatured his face —“ A Leading Light of Thought.”
There is a universal testimony to the beauty of Darwin’s
character, and that is why I want to read an extract, so as to
confirm one in the testimony, that great men regard purity of
character as all-sufficient for humanity. Huxley says : —“ In
these islands, men have felt the fascination of personal contact
with an intellect which had no superior, and with a character
which was even nobler than the intellect.”
In Westminster Abbey, where Darwin’s remains lie, doing
honour to, more than receiving glory from, that grand historic
pile, he was called the “greatest man of science of his day;”
“ and,” said the preaching Canon in that Abbey, “ surely in such a
man lived that charity which is the very essence of the true spirit
of Christ.”
The more I read, and the more I study the works of our


greatest authors, the more I am impressed with the fact, that
they all ignore, or cast aside, the traditional dogmas of the Fall
and the Atonement, the significance of which renunciation, in
relation to religious thought, is very great. I ventured to make
the above assertion in my first lecture, which was on Thomas
Carlyle, and a Sydney weekly orthodox paper, which had only
obtained the drift of my remarks from a short notice of the
lecture that appeared in a morning paper, said that it was “ a
shameful assertion.” Thomas Carlyle, Greorge Eliot, Charles
Darwin, and as we hope to show Tennyson and Emerson like-
wise, all “ignore and cast aside” those things which are supposed
to be essential in our preparation for the great future, to which
we are daily progressing. When I say “ cast aside or ignore,” there
is no scorn or bad spirit involved in such an act, but simply a
calm moving on in the line of character, as being sufficient with-
out atonement in life and death. It was so with Charles Darwin
more than with any of the others, and yet what a pureness, a
sweetness, a modesty, a greatness, he possessed ; all combining to
make the soft diffusive strength of that penetrating power of this
wonderful age.
Dr. Carpenter, whom you know, here in Sydney, as one of
the first physiologists of the world, says : —“ Those who knew
Charles Darwin most intimately, are unanimous in their apprecia-
tion of the unsurpassed nobility and beauty of his whole character.
In him there was no other side. As a man he exemplified in his
own life that true religion, which is deeper, wider, and loftier than
any theology.”
Well might a leading London paper say, “His whole life was
one continued worship of truth for its own sake. He was
incapable of jealousy, ambition, or self-seeking, and though he
himself knew it not, the moral lesson of his life is, perhaps, even
more valuable than the grand discovery he has stamped on the
world’s history.”
Huxley regards him as the “ incorporated ideal of a man of
science, pursuing his labours under physical difficulties that
would have converted nine men out of ten into aimless invalids.”
Sometimes we are tempted to ask the Eternal Power of
this Universe, “ Why so much suffering ? Why not always
health and strength to realise the joy and energy of a physical
ideal ?” Let us be thankful for a gleam of revealing light on the
mystery of pain, by remembering that it is confessed by Darwin’s
most intimate friends and contemporaries, that it was his own
weak health alone which kept him away from the busy spheres
of London life and professional ambition, fastening him down to
his own Kent home—though he loved his narrow environment—
and gave him the opportunity of developing his marvellous theory,
which seems to be the very method of the Eternal.


Huxley says: “ Darwin possessed a certain intense and
almost passionate honesty, by which all his thoughts and actions
were irradiated as by a central fire One could not
converse with him without being reminded of Socrates. There
was the same desire to find someone wiser than himself—the
same belief in the sovereignty of reason.”
On his 69th birthday, Darwin was presented with a magnifi-
cent album containing the portraits of 154 men of science in
Germany. At the same time there came from Holland an album
with the photographs of 217 distinguished professors and men
of science in that country. In returning thanks for these unique
marks of appreciation, Darwin wrote : —“ I suppose every worker
of science occasionally feels depressed, and doubts whether what
he has published has been worth the labour which it has cost
him ; but the remaining years of my life, whenever I want
cheering, I will look at the portraits of my distinguished co-
workers in the field of science, and remember their generous
sympathy.”
May I say again, that character here, altogether apart from
creed, seems so beautiful, so all-sufficient; and it tells us that
the higher morality is here in our midst. This high morality,
this sweet and pure life, this grand and noble purpose, are
the very essence of our liberal religion.
I thought you would have liked me, just in connection with
these short views of life and thought, to speak of the high
characters of the leaders of society, which tend to show that the
world is not going to moral chaos because theology is passing
away, and to dwell also on the charm of the personal character
of Darwin —so exquisitely refined, so exuberant in his praise of
others’ success, with such unaffected modesty, and grand cheerful
simplicity of his own.
All this, with that intellectual power, about which I need say
no more, with that penetrating glance, by which he saw the great
generalization so early in his youth, he was enabled to give his
whole life to the gathering, from every sphere of nature, illustra-
tions for his life-work. He left to his brother scientists, and to
humanity, the corroborating and proving of that which he himself
had found by patient investigation of fact on fact. It is said
that Darwin owned, towards the end of his life, that he did not
regard his own exposition of the theory as complete and final,
but believed that there was to be some grander sweep of his
great law, revealed through the patient investigations of science.
Darwin, in his quiet Kent home, knew that the pulpits were
fulminating against him, and that the magazines and reviews
were trying to write his theories down; but yet, to me and to
you, he, not attending any church, is the saint; he, not being able
to express his ideas in any creed, is the worshipper ; he, not


occupying any pulpit, is the preacher; his observatory was his
church, nature his temple, and with all the misrepresentation and
ridicule, out of which he knew he was growing, Tennyson’s words
have their verification: —
“Nor ever narrcrwness or spite,
Or villain fancy sweeping by,
Drew in the expression of an eye
"Where God and nature met in light.”
Of course, his life is not very eventful, so far as changeful
incidents are concerned ; but we find, as in Carlyle, that Darwin’s
life and thought, are the illustration of the great law of his hypo-
thesis —Heredity.
His grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin, poet and botanist,
was an ally of Priestley, the great scientist and Unitarian.
Dr. Carpenter, speaking of the grandfather of Darwin, shows
how he shared with Priestley alike his “ enthusiasm for scientific
research and his liberality of thought on religion.”
In almost every guide book to your uniquely beautiful har-
bour, there are to be found quotations from Dr. Erasmus Darwin.
The grandfather of Charles Darwin particularly insisted on the
close analogy between plants and animals in their functions.
The father of Charles Darwin was a physician of some eminence
in Shrewsbury, a great lover of science, and an ardent believer in
Liberal Thought.
You know how Darwin was branded as an Atheist, by
orthodox churches, when his great work first appeared, but after
his death the vicar of St. Chad’s, Shrewsbury, claimed him as a
member of his church,because,when a child, he had been “received
into Christ’s flock” by baptism. Those who knew him best say
the religion of his youth consisted in “ a reverent belief in Grod,
a personal fidelity on man’s part to what he believed to be true,
the doing of duty, the being good and doing good in practical
life. And in so far as the churches taught this, he was in
harmony with them, but in respect to their dogmas, their theolo-
gies, and religious speculations, he simply had nothing to say.”
Thus, like his father and grandfather, while in a certain sense he
belonged to all churches, yet none could claim him as distinctly
its own; for Charles Darwin belonged to the Church of Nature,
where he worked and where he worshipped. The whole of space
was his temple, the whole of humanity his brotherhood of saints.
It is well known, that during the voyage of his early man-
hood round the world in the ship “ Beagle,” which lasted for five
years, he, by acute observation, laid the foundation for the grand
superstructure of his life, but chronic dyspepsia was induced.
So he was obliged to seclude himself in his quiet Kent home, and
there the man of science had his pigeons about him, tested their
varieties and habits, and watched the operation of the great laws
of the universe iu the changes and ascent of life, of which he had


caught a gleam, and felt the instinct, and seen the illustrations
during his five years voyage. Having plots of ground marked
out, and there for years and years watching the worms, those
insignificant little insects, which had been used as the symbol of
all that was vile and mean, looked at as something upon which
to tread, something to correspond with sinners, as they said
“ What dying worms are we.” Darwin now got new views of
those poor despised insects ; he saw they had their own organism
and heaven in the fulfilment of the laws of their own being in the
earth; he saw (and he had his own ideas tested by numerous
scientific men, who had watched them for the same reason, for the
same period, and with the same result) that they, through
thousands of years, had, by attrition of soil passing through their
bodies, been preparing our earth, with its vegetable mould, for
seed, so as to produce its beauty and fruitfulness, and reveal, in
the vegetable world, the smile of that Great Eternal Power, the
central soul of all things. Towards the end of his life Darwin
vindicated these scorned insects ; he showed that for years they
had been the precursors of, and servants and anticipators to, the
wants of man, preparing the ground for its fruitfulness and
beauty, its life and joy.
There was the same law of heredity illustrated in Darwin’s
own thought. You know he did not originate the idea of Develop-
ment, as the method of creation, or, in a larger sense, of Evolu-
lution, as the life and method of the universe. Lucretius, the
author of the “ Yestiges of Creation,” Goethe, Lamarck, and
Hilaire, all prepared the conditions for Darwin to be born in an
atmosphere congenial and ready for the working out of his
great hypothesis, illustrating what is true in all spheres, —that no
man originates the thought of his own time. All the finest
influences and expressions of mind, come by the slow growth of
ancestral tendencies : so with the organized experience of the
race, with the unique conditions of their age, and the culti-
vation of their own powers, great men are the best epitome, in
their sphere, of the past and their own time. Such was Charles
Darwin.
The real life of Darwin is, of course, in his thought. What
is it p Ido not presume to teach my friends here to-night, but
shall simply say that it was the collecting, by a great generaliza-
tion of thought, of the scattered fragments of the universe into a
little unity ; and, as the result, there was the evolution hypothesis,
which meant revolution for the existing ideas in theology. What
is it ? Something to be afraid of altogether, or something to
approach with love, and say t® it “ When you reveal yourself by
proofs, and by use (and all beauty belongs to use), you shall be
welcome, because I am in a universe in which no harm can come
to me by the acceptance of any proved truth.”


When I was a student, living in the suburbs of London,
during a long vacation I bought a book —the “ Origin of
Species,” —and never shall I forget, while walking the hayfields,
reading it for the first time. What a new world of thought
seemed to he entering into my mind! Like many others, I
trembled because I felt the old basis, that I had thought to be a firm
foothold, shake beneath my feet, and apparently to glide away
as if but slipping sand. After this disintegrating process, I began
to see this generalization more and more as a working hypothesis,
and as it continued to grow in beauty to me, I saw that all the
good of the past, the beauty of art, the inspiration of religion, the
tenderness of the best associations were preserved by it; while it
was so broad, and expansive, and absorbent, that I seemed to see
it taking to itself all the finer influences of our time, and resolving
itself into what it promises to be —the law and method of the
science, the ethics, the religion of the great future of our race.
When Darwin began to elaborate his theory, the cataclysmic
party was strong, but in time he helped to establish the uniforrn-
itarian theory—the basis of the evolutionary idea —that all the
changes that have taken place in the centre and on the surface
of our planet, all the changes that have taken place in the growth
of humanity, and in history, and in art, and in science, can be
accounted for by the laws that are now in operation.
Darwin’s position is simply this; that all plants and animals
are perpetually engaged in a struggle for existence ; more are
born in the lower realm of plants and animals (and there he
limited his view, leaving others to expand his theory) than can
survive, the weak must yield to the strong, and those most
adapted to their surroundings, or to their environment, or to
their circumstances, will survive. This is merely the survival of
the fittest, —natural selection.
The law of heredity is" running through it all.
that survive communicate their qualities to their offspring, and
this is what is termed the “ transmitted tendency.” We are all
born with the transmitted tendency of the experience of our race.
Of course one is tempted to branch off into the physical and
religious sides of the ideas that are so rich, but I shall to-night
confine myself to the direct line of Darwin’s own thought.
As shown in that charming little book, “Organic Evolution,”
by Dr. Romanes, which is a perfect compendium of the general
theory, and was approved of very much by Darwin himself, you
will see how gardeners and cattle-breeders recognize those two
laws before mentioned, and you are shown their results in giving
new varieties and finer physiques. They, then, are the natural
selectors, they do not make, but help the laws of nature by their
own human intelligence.
We do not believe in a Great Selector outside His universe,


as the words “natural selector” might imply, but in One who is
the life within, the infinite and indefinable Life, making all things
better, and all things new.
So we are told that, in regard to proof of this theory, there
is the explanation of, what Dr. Eomanes called, the “ideal types ”
theory, and he says : “ Seals, and whales, and porpoises are an
illustration of the great law ; they are aquatic animals that once
lived on land, and are gradually becoming adapted to their new
environment —the circumstances of sea instead of land, and, in
consequence of which, are changing both their form and their
nature ; each possesses rudimentary parts, showing proof that
once it was on land, and that the disused member has simply
become the epitome of what it once was. So now, instead of a
seal walking on its hind legs on laud, you see it with fins in the
water. Here the old legs have become new fins. Further, it
is stated that whales had four feet, and evident indications of
such are there internally, in the rudimentary bones. It is still
further stated that, relative to our own organism, there is to be
found, inside the head, in a rudimentary condition, the whole
power by which the ear could be moved, but we have lost that
power in our higher development. The Eed Indians say
that their ancestors were covered with scales, and the remains of
them now are just the ten nails on the hands and on the toes.
According to historians, they also testify to their ancestors having
had tails, which they lost by sitting on them. I was fortunate
enough to hear Professor Huxley’s lecture on the horse, after he
returned from America, where he had examined Professor Marsh’s
discoveries in the valley of the Mississippi. Huxley had diagrams
to illustrate his lecture. He showed the legs of a horse, and the
legs of an animal which belonged to the mammals, from which
the horse is stated to have developed. He stated how they had
all the transitions from the horse of to-day, with its fine step
and prancing movement, to the slow mammal that moved on feet
with three toes. When need for quicker movement came, the
lecturer explained how the force became concentrated on the
centre two, and drawn away from the toes on either side. So
gradually and gradually, through long ages, these two toes, by
disuse, became thin, and at last began to retire towards the
ankle, when finally they were lost to view, resolving themselves
into what is now known as the splint bones.
Darwin’s great laws are : —heredity ; variation, by climate
and food; the survival of the fittest; the ascent of life. We
should not assume a supernatural explanation, whenever a natural
one is found insufficient to account for facts. If science has not
found the light, and does not see the transition, Darwinians say,
you must not assume a supernatural power to bridge the gulf,
but that there is a law in logic, which makes you feel, when you


know more, and see more, you will find the natural, though
hidden, missing links.
Kepler was unable to explain, by any known causes, the
paths described by the planets, and he supposed that every planet
had a presiding angel. Men felt that they must account for the
universe somehow, and, when they could not find a natural law,
they assumed a supernatural one; but when Newton framed
his own beautiful law of gravitation, the wide sweep and
scope of which he could not limit, for he felt it to be universal,
the specialized angelic influence, guiding the movements of the
planets, resolved itself into a grand law, which now shapes alike
our globe from the whirling nebulous mass, and rounds the
glistening dewdrop, and moulds the tear on the cheek of a child.
Oh, what a fascination there is in the world of matter, and
mind, and man, with this view, called the “ working hypothesis !”
By it you will know more and more, for Nature is slow in
coming into its results, and God will not condemn you for not
accepting a thing you cannot find proved. This theory is always
telling us we are
“ Nourishing our youth sublime
With the fairy tales of science
And the long results of time.”
We live in a fairy land: all Nature is a palace as well as a
gymnasium. There is a stone book. No !it is the life book ; it
tells us of the ascent of life; it is the Bible of the planet, the
“ Word of Grod.”
Even Liberal Theologians now talk about the nebulous hypo-
thesis as if it were all perfectly true, and recent utterances in
Sydney show that the ecclesiastical theory is being displaced by
the scientific belief, viz., that the sun is a vast globe of fire,
sending olf its incandescent masses, which are caught up by the two
beautiful laws of centripetal and centrifugal force. Our planet
was such a mass. Then came the cooling process and condensa-
tion, then its surface was prepared for life, and fruitfulness, and
beauty, and man. Is there anything to fear in a theory like
that ? Oh no, and in consequence of the evolution hypothesis,
such a revealing light has been shed upon the past, such know-
ledge is given of the methods of present forces, that we utter the
word “ God ” with deeper awe, as we feel we are in a moral
universe, and are subjects of a discipline by which He works out
the purposes of love.
Development, as the method of creation, began and con-
tinued in the crude processes of nature. Man could not have
lived in the earlier stages; there was no oxygen to breathe, no
beauty of flowers to behold ; but, after untold ages, by the
gradual transition of lower forms, man, king and lord, and woman,
queen of the other spheres, made their appearance, the crowning
perfection of nature’s work —the masterpiece of God. Nothing


degrading—nothing irreligious there. It is the method of God
—the upward-striving movement of Divine power.
Do not be afraid of the jokes about the monkey being your
ancestor any more ; do not be afraid of having it said that the
baboon and gorilla are your ancestors; do not even smile in
pity on the ignorance that can malign any animal in God’s
creation; do not be afraid of being told, if you are going to the
Zoological Gardens, that you will find your pedigree there, when
we feel sure we are the result of the “ upward-striving movement
of Divine power.” Carlyle, who lived so much alone, and kept him-
self alone when he ought to have been with his peers gathering finer
influences, talked about the evolution hypothesis as the “ gospel
of dirt,” and this “ gorilla damnification of humanity.” But that
is all a narrow view. The real origin is not the dirt, and the
mud, the firemist, or the monkey. One might as well say the
origin of man, in the Biblical idea, is in the dust, because it is
said he was “ formed out of the dust of the ground.”
The jokes about the monkey and the mud are getting old.
In the truer and larger view, behind the monkey, behind the mud,
and in the mud; behind the firemist, and in the firemist; just as
behind the dust of the earth in Genesis, the evolutionist finds life
all latent, waiting, with the patience of the Infinite one, for the
time when it would be evolved in mind, and love, and aspiration.
But granting that we, in the line of development, believe the
ascent of life is the Method of Creation, it is no more unworthy
of man to come through the monkey or the mud, than from the
damp and dirt of the ground in your garden, to have evolved the
beauty and the fragrance of the rose. Whether evolution only
prove itself “ a working hypothesis,” covering many spheres, or
an exhaustive theory of creational activity, it is teaching us we
are in a living universe and that God is the Soul of all.
Development theory irreligious ! Nay ! It is the very
opposite ; but it is anti-theological; it is revolutionary to Tradi-
tionalism, which is a very different thing. Evolution will be the
death of theology, but new life and power to religion.
Of course, on such a large subject, I can only hint at certain
things, but, even in the view of its best exponents, it is eminently
religious. We shall take five divisions, represented by five
leading men, who advocate development as the method of creation,
or evolution as the hypothesis of the universe, —and what do we
find ?
Haeckel maintains that we can be satisfied only in the
hypothesis that all life came from the inorganic. Many feel he, in
advocating the monistic, materialistic theory, is not free from the
dogmatism that has characterized the propagation of theology.
Huxley and Tyndall are Idealists, as well as Evolutionists,
especially Tyndall. You know of his standing before a flower in


the spring, and wondering whether there was not some greater
Power in the universe who knew more about the flower than he.
Herbert Spencer owns to a great power, an unthinkable,
great actuality behind phenomena, which he calls the Unknow-
able.
Alfred Russell Wallace was in readiness with the theory
of development and evolution, before Darwin wanted to announce
his generalization to the world. Wallace felt, in the great trans-
itions of life, there was need for a new influx of creative energy
at the appearance of man. Nay, he believes that evolution does
not cease at death, but that the continuity of life goes to higher
spheres in the Unseen.
Darwin himself, in his Doctrine of Descent, speaks of an
Almighty Creator breathing into a few forms of life.
Irreligious! What, when three or four out of the five of
these great leaders of the idea of evolution involve, by their own
thought, the Divine idea. That cannot be irreligious or dangerous.
Science is reserved ; does not always frame hypotheses ; that is
probably owing in some measure to the ecclesiastical tyranny of
the past. But there is a higher aspect of science, which is the
enlargement of the physical sphere to the inclusion of the
religious idea.
In speaking of the monkey theory, Darwin says: “For my
own part I would as soon be descended from that heroic little
monkey who braved his dreaded enemy to save the life of his
keeper, or from that old baboon who, descending from the
mountains, carried away in triumph his young comrade from a
crowd of astonished dogs, as from a savage who delights to
torture his enemies, offers up bloody sacrifices, practices infanti-
cide without remorse, treats his wives like slaves, knows no
decency, and is haunted by the grossest superstition. Man may
be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though not
through his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic
scale, and the fact of his having risen, instead of having been
aboriginally placed there, may give him hope for a still higher
destiny in that distant future.”
The Ultimate Cause of all phenomena is not denied by science.
Science does not deny there may be a final reason for the exist-
ence of this cosmos—the universe. What it does deny is the
immediate cause, i.e., that species were created suddenly, for all
the evidence we have bears testimony to their being slowly
evolved. Darwin says : —“ When I view all beings, not as special
creations, but as the lineal descendants of some few beings which
lived long before the first bed of the Cambrian system was
deposited, they seem to me to become ennobled. . . . There
is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers having
been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms, or into


one, and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on, according
to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning, endless
forms, most beautiful and most wonderful, have been, and are
being, evolved.”
Evolution only shows the processes of life —the method of
nature. But there is the Higher Science of Man. He is the
richest outcome of Nature. His highest faculty, reason, prompts
him to go beyond the method, beyond the “How ” to the “ Why”
and the “ Whither.” He may never reach the Primal Cause, or
forecast his own ultimate destiny, but in his search for the origin
of life, he is ever pushing the unknown farther back, and enlarg-
ing his circle of knowledge. He must be true to the laws of his
own thought and being, and by them he feels the highest
manifestations in Nature are a revelation of a Central Life, the
outcome in humanity of goodness, and love is the expression of
the Eternal Cause. Though Evolution may one day be scientifi-
cally proved as belonging to all spheres, yet we shall not be
orphans. The complement and glorification of modern thought is
the science of the higher nature of man, leading us to the convic-
tion that human life is divine in its origin, discipline, and destiny.
We have every reason to believe that Evolution will give a new
and grander meaning to the words God, Duty, Immortality.
To Darwin Nature was as a “ great mother,” at whose feet
he sat, and whom, in his work as a naturalist, he worshipped.
After his travels in South America, he wrote : —“ Among
the scenes which are most deeply impressed upon my mind, none
exceed in sublimity the primeval forests, undefaced by the hand
of man, whether those of Brazil, where the powers of life are
predominant, or those of Tierra del Euego, where death and
decay prevail. Both are temples filled with the various produc-
tions of the God of Nature, and no one can stand in these
solitudes without feeling that there is more in man than the mere
breath of his body.”
In his hypothesis there are still gaps, or missing links. There
are three great transitions, according to science—and they are
here very roughly and imperfectly stated : The transition from the
inorganic to the organic cannot be discovered yet; the process
between life and the non-living, out of which it came (according
to the hypothesis there is a good deal to be said about no
inorganic; to the higher science now all matter lives ) ; the next
transition is from mere sensation to intelligence; and then
from intelligence to consciousness, with power of progress and
aspiration.
What is our position in this theory of development as the
method of creation ? I think the reasonable position is this, to
put it mildly : So much of the development theory has been
proved as to disprove the fiat-creational idea, merely from the


scientific point of view. Ton find this theory explaining the
method in so many spheres : the great stone book in the strata
of the earth, the growth from savagedom to civilization, the
development of the arts and sciences, the varieties of the religious
sentiment, from crude ideas and grotesque symbols to the religion
of reason. It explains the distribution of plants and animals,
the anomalies of rudimentary organs, and the transitional stages
in the human organism. In one word, it covers the ground in so
many spheres, and is constantly bringing under its sway more
realms of nature, that it has discredited all rival hypotheses, and
promises to establish itself by scientific proof on the basis of
revealed fact. We are now applying it to national, and social,
and ethical, and religious life, and the more we enter the realm
to which we are guided, the more we feel its beauty and order,
its explanation of progress, its revealings of love.
I read a short time since in a Sydney weekly religious paper,
that Professor Haeckel, in a lecture on Darwin, said: “As in this
holy place, 360 years ago, Martin Luther introduced the new
era in civilization, by his reform of the church, so in our day has
Charles Darwin, by his reform of the Doctrine of Evolution, raised
the whole feeling, thinking aspiration of man to higher planes—
to the Monistic Eeligion of humanity.” I read also : “It was
suggested by one present that had Martin Luther heard himself
thus classed among the infidels, Haeckel’s head, like the Devils,
would have received the impact of the fighting reformer’s ink-
stand.”
All that, whether uttered in G-ermany or in Sydney, is the
very antithesis of the beautiful spirit of Charles Darwin, who, in
trusting to the Eeligion of Nature, had many inkstands thrown at
his head, while the sputterings, intended to mar him, turned into
streams of light, which formed themselves into a halo round his
venerable brow. Few higher testimonies could be borne to the
character, and influence, of Charles Darwin, than the one that
appeared in a paper that previously ridiculed his theory and had
given caricatures of his face: —
“ Studious porer over nature’s plan,
Calm tracker of her steps, keen, watchful, wise
Recorder of the long descent of man,
And the most living witness of his rise.
Long o’er his life-work may the fight he fought,
Yet leave him still the leading light of thought.”
_ ft.
Cs eJ


RALPH WALDO EMERSON:
The Poet of Evolution.
To-night lam embarrassed with the riches of my subject. If I
have ardent lovers and students of Emerson here, they will know
how difficult it is to present in a popular way, and in so short a
time, the essence and scope of their master’s thought, the almost
flawless beauty of his life and spirit, and his relation to this
wondrous age in which we live.
Profoundly as I love Emerson, and influenced as I feel I
have been by his thought, I do not want to present him to you
as an ideal man. Emerson himself would be the first to tell us
that no one, of any temperament, can be an ideal man ; the best
has the defects of his excellencies, as he must have in the nature
of things ; but of the contemplative, retiring, philosophic, poetic
type, Emerson is almost flawless —a king among men.
A fine-souled Puritan named Eobinson, leaving England
with a band of religious enthusiasts, all having a desire to find, in
the ampler air of the United States, freedom to worship God,
uttered, on leaving the shores of the old country, a remarkable
saying : “ God hath yet more light to break forth from His
"Word.” Ealph Waldo Emerson, in the influence of his individu-
ality, his thought, and his growing power, is the fulfilment of the
Pilgrim Father’s prophecy.
Emerson used to ask, according to one of his biographers,
“ How shall a man escape from his ancestors F” If we had all
as fine an ancestry as he, we should be proud of our pedigree,
and not want to escape from the forces out of which we were
born. He belonged in his ancestry, and the influences of his
early life, to the higher aristocracy of mental and moral worth.
There were, as elements of his ancestry, the moral purity, con-
scientiousness, and love of liberty in those who were the early
life-blood of the great Eepublic of the West. There was
spiritual life enshrined in the hard dogmas of their creeds ; there
was the richness that came from the struggle to preserve an
openness to clearer light and truer thought; there was the
experience gathered in the clear continuity of growth from the
ascetic Puritanism, the fierce Calvinism of Jonathan Edwards,
and the modified theology of Arminianism. There was also the
growth, through reason and culture, to Unitarianism, and after-


wards his own development from denominational Unitarianism to
a radiant Optimism; a fine, serene, spiritual philosophy; a
grander unity than any religious denomination could hold or
express. To Emerson all life was embosomed in beauty ; and all
forces tended to unity.
Emerson illustrated the almost established law, that great
men have been blessed with fine natured women for their
mothers. One of his brothers said of this mother of theirs,
“ When she came from her room in the morning it seemed as if
she came ‘ from communion with Q-od.’ ”
The very atmosphere of Emerson’s early years was one of
classical culture and philosophy. An aunt, who helped to
mould his mind, had “ read all her life,” and was perfectly at
home with, and enthusiastic about, the Vortices of Descartes, the
Monads of Leibnitz, and the One Substance of Spinoza. Think
what it was to come out of all these ancestral influences, into
the rich forces of culture contained in all the great individu-
alities of Emerson’s young days.
In early life, Emerson came in contact with the influences
of Channing, and felt the beauty of his character, and caught
the tone of his spirit. Coleridge and Wordsworth were forma-
tive influences in his thought.
Before he became a Unitarian minister, Emerson expressed
his life’s love for retirement, away from the struggles, ambitions,
greeds, pride and follies of the world. He expressed his longings
in a form which now reads like a yearning, for the ideal environ-
ment he enjoyed during the greater part of his life.
This poem is so beautiful that I must read it to you. It
shows the thought of a young man who is forming his purpose
in life, and choosing his own path.
“ Good bye proud world ! I’m going home ;
Thou art not my friend, and I am not thine.
Long through the weary crowds I roam;
A river-barque on the ocean brine,
Long I’ve been tossed, like the driven foam,
But now, proud world ! I’m going home.
Good bye to flattery’s fawning face ;
To grandeur with his wise grimace;
To upstart wealth’s averted eye;
To supple office, low and high ;
To crowded halls, to court and street;
To frozen hearts and hasting feet;
To those who go, to those who come ;
Good bye, proud world ! I’m going home.
I’m going home to my own hearth-stone,
Bosomed in yon green hills alone,
A secret nook in a pleasant land,
Whose groves the frolic fairies planned;
Where arches green, the live-long day
Echo the blackbird’s roundelay ;
And vulgar feet have never trod
A spot that is sacred to thought and God,


O, when I am safe in my sylvan home,
I tread on the pride of Greece and Rome;
And when I am stretched beneath the pines,
Where the evening star so holy shines,
I laugh at the lore and the pride of man,
At the sophist schools, and the learned clan;
For what are they all, in their high conceit,
When man in the bush with God may meet ? ”
The tone of that poem gives an illustration of the pre-
dominant bias of Emerson’s mind, as you can readily perceive.
The reason of Emerson leaving the Unitarian ministry was,
because he could not conscientiously administer the Lord’s
Supper; let it be remembered, that his own church considered
his views with patience and candour, but some thought him
“mad,” and reported that he was insane. It was Emerson’s
abhorrence of Form, to be compelled to administer the Lord’s
Supper, when he felt that it was not right to celebrate uniquely
any one person, when there was “ God’s larger son”—the
human race. With his idea of God in Nature, all life is an
Incarnation, and as all are sons of God, he thought, to select one
and call him “ Lord,” was to narrow their judgment of God, and
offer an insult to humanity, through which the Eternal was
shining in Progress and Love.
Father Taylor, the sailors’ chaplain, and a very orthodox
gentleman, said, “ Mr. Emerson may say this or that, but he is
more like Jesus Christ than any one I have ever known.”
Emerson went to England, saw Wordsworth and Carlyle,
and talked on the Scotch hills about immortality. Carlyle told
him “Jesus Christ built that church yonder.” They saw the
relation of the little kirk on the Scotch hills, to the Cross on
Calvary. Emerson returned to America, and would have again
been a Unitarian minister, had he been permitted to “ pray or
refrain from prayer as the spirit moved him.” Still Emerson
believed profoundly in prayer, and he said “ All our prayers are
prophecies.” There is a philosophical meaning in aspiration,
and Emerson did not want to be bound down to any other man’s
mood or expression, in having aspiration always.
When Emerson was a student, a lady entertained him, and
found, not merely a raw student there, but as she afterwards wrote
to her sister, “ O Sally! I thought to entertain a pious indigent
but lo ! there came an angel unawares.” The personality of his
life threw a charm over, and interpreted his books, and later on,
this same lady said, “ Well, you call it transcendental, and that’s
all you have to say about it, but I call it the profoundest
common-sense.” Emerson said, and well he might, “ Good
women never despair of an ideal right.” One of them called him
The Apostle of Eternal Reason.
Emerson came in contact, of course, with Theodore Parker
and Channing, in the different phases of Unitarianism; but


Emerson went beyond the mere incidentals of what became, in
history, almost a quarrel. He was charmed by the martyr-
reforming spirit of the one—Theodore Parker, —and the peerless
beauty of the life of the other. Emerson, in his broadest thought,
never ceased to love Channing; he even tried to make Carlyle
love him; but Carlyle had prejudiced ideas about a man because
he happened to be labelled by denominationalism; he would not
see beneath the name. Still, Emerson wrote : “ Please love
Channing’s Catholicism, for at his age he can relish “ Sartor
Hesartus.”
I say, let us get Emerson’s spirit in our organizations and
churches, and let us look at each other on our best, and not on
our worst side, and then we shall soon feel ourselves growing
into Emerson s serenity and power. Emerson had out-grown
all forms, but cherished a love of the spirit enshrined in them; and
when his wife wanted to have their child christened or baptized,
he said “he would consent, when he could find a man pure
enough.” That was his idea of “ baby humanity,” not a “ sin-
accursed ” thing, because a federal head in Adam had fallen.
However, when Channing came round, he consented to have the
baby blessed.
Of course the supreme interest of Emerson’s life is in his
thought, but it seemed well to give a rapid glance at his early
career.
Safe in his “ sylvan home,” he enjoyed, as he said, in his little
book on Nature, “original relations to the Universe.” Let
the meaning of that be understood in our churches, and a new
religion will grow as the old ideas become dim, just as pictures
fade in a dissolving view, only to admit the greater beauty that
appears before our eyes.
Although Emerson broke with the past, in its forms and
dogmas, no man has yet transferred so much of the meaning and
spirit of the old faith into his life and philosophy. Hear what
he says, in his little work on “ Nature,” and this before 1840,
too : —“ Our age is retrospective: it builds the sepulchres of the
fathers; it writes biographies, histories, and criticisms. The
foregoing generations beheld God and Nature face to face; we
through their eyes. Why should we not enjoy an original
relation to the universe P Why should we not have a poetry
and philosophy of insight, and not of tradition; and a religion
by revelation to us, and not the history of theirs.” It was this
right to face Nature, in all its broad aspects, that gave a new
meaning to the word “ universe,” and brought, through Emerson’s
thought, new words to man.
“ Nature never did betray tbe heart that loved her,”
as one wrote, whom Emerson dearly loved, and Emerson is the
High Priest of Natural Religion.


The very year Darwin returned from his voyage in the ship
“ Beagle,” and began his great work, Emerson published his
little book, “ Nature.” It is a work that, to-night, I want to
emphasize most, because it always refreshes and stimulates, how-
ever often you read it. Of it, Tyndall says : —“ The first time I
ever knew Ralph Waldo Emerson was when, years ago, I picked
up, at a stall, a copy of his book, ‘ Nature.’ I read it with delight,
and I have never ceased to read it; and, if anyone can be said to
have given the impulse to my mind, it is Emerson. Whatever I
have done, the world owes to him.”
Surely a man worth knowing then ! About this little book
on Nature : I have selected but one of its admirers as an
exponent of its value. Emerson wrote to Carlyle : “ I send you
a little book, which I have just now published, as an entering
wedge—l hope for something better.” This little book had a
marvellous influence. It has a prelude of six lines, and, though
Emerson’s thought is very difficult to quote, because it needs the
contemplative mood, and the quiet study, for full comprehension
of its depth and grandeur, yet I am sure you will be able to see
the drift of this marvellous verse: —
“ A subtle change of countless rings
The next unto the farthest brings.
An eye reads omens where it goes,
And speaks all languages the rose,
And, striving to be man, the worm
Mounts through all the spires of form.”
“ The whole essay,” says one, “ shows that Emerson’s mind
had fully conceived the idea of the relationship between all
organic forms, and that of the harmony of each and all, with
elemental environment.” So Emerson was the Poet of Evolution,
before Darwin had elaborated the theory of development, or
Herbert Spencer had worked out its philosophy.
On the receipt of his work on “Nature,” Carlyle wrote to
Emerson as follows :—“ Tour little azure-coloured “ Nature ”
gave me true satisfaction. You say it is the first chapter of
something greater. I call it rather the foundation, and ground
plan, on which you may build whatsoever of great and true,
which has been given you to build. It is the true Apocalypse,
this, when the open secret becomes revealed to a man. I rejoice
much in the glad serenity of soul, with which you look out on
this wondrous dwelling-place of yours and mine, with an ear
for the Eternal melodies, which pipe in the winds round us, and
utter themselves forth in all sounds, and sights, and things.
.. . . In fine, sit still at Concord with such spirit as you are
of, under the blessed skyey influences, with an open sense, with
the great book of existence round you ; we shall see whether you,
too, get not something blessed to read us from it.”
With all these “ eternal melodies ” around us in the universe,


we are dwelling in a time when we must keep our ears, and eyes,
and heart open, to catch the finer melodies, just as Carlyle and
Emerson opened their eyes a little more, and opened their ears,
and opened their hearts to them. We are in eternity now, and
God is all about us.
When Carlyle read “ The Oration,” he said : —“ So out of
the west comes a clear utterance, clearly recognisable as a man’s
voice. God be thanked for it. I could have wept to read that
speech. I read it to my wife. ‘ There, woman !’ I said ; and she
replied that there had been nothing met with like it, since
Schiller had gone silent.”
We shall understand Emerson best by appreciating the large
meaning which he gave to nature. I think that is the “ open
sesame ” of all his works, the large, indefinite meaning, he gave to
nature ; not. only trees, and flowers, and crags, and ravines, and
beasts, and birds, and man ; not only these, but all that could
come through the marvellous phenomena that meet our eye.
The universe, to Emerson and Carlyle, was a miracle. There is
nothing in it more than nature. How can there be ? There is
no antithesis between the natural and the supernatural. An-
tithesis is all lost; absorbed in the larger idea ! Law and miracle!
All is law ; all is miracle. There is nothing transcendental about
this. It is all plain common sense, when you are on the range of
thought, to appreciate it. When we grasp Emerson’s idea of
nature, there is a fine meaning in the very crudities of the
Bible; with its records of tribal wars, its imperfect science, and
the strange story of early man. What a rich significance it has,
looked at as the record of growing humanity, with its aspirations
and yearnings, and its longings for a larger and richer life!
Out of the heart of Nature rolled
The burdens of the Bible old.
The Litanies of nations came
Like a volcano’s tongue of flame,
Up from the burning core below
The canticles of love and woe.”
Ah! there were other Bibles besides that one; though, per-
haps, Emerson would have said, very naturally, this one was
supreme in its elements, as the expression of the nation’s
ideal of righteousness, and in the rich, poetic expression of its
language.
Science and Genesis ! Oh, what a narrow issue that would
seem to Emerson ! In Emerson’s idea, God has not written
the first chapter of Genesis yet, nor a verse of it, for the Great
Spirit is still making man, and all the while he is completing
the book of Revelation. The universe is the Apocalypse of the
Divine.
Emerson’s theory of Evolution was a theory of ascent. The
gases gather to the solid firmament. The chemic lump arrives


at the plant, and grows ; arrives at the quadruped, and walks ;
arrives at the man, and thinks. Or, as someone else has it:
“ God sleeps in the plant, dreams in the animal, and wakes in
the man.” This was Emerson’s idealism : —“ That matter and
mind, as they are called, are very varied movements in one
symphony. Matter —hard, cold matter —dissolves at the touch of
mental analysis. The rock—hard, dull, dead rock (as we used
to think) —was, in Emerson’s idea, deluged with Deity, The
rock itself, deluged with Deity, is the lower expression of the
Divine Idea. When someone asked, knowing Emerson’s great,
comprehensive thought of nature, “ Who is the author of
‘ Nature ?’ ” (it was just after his work on Nature appeared), the
reply was, “ God and Waldo Emerson.”
Emerson’s idea of Evolution was a poetic, philosophic intui-
tion—a rapid generalization. He says : “We can point no
way to anything final: but tendency appears on all hands—
planet, system, constellation, total nature is growing like a field
of maize in July, is becoming somewhat else. The embryo does
not more strive to be man, than yonder burr of light, we call a
nebula, tends to be a ring, a comet, a globe, and parent of new
stars.” Emerson shows that, with the old idea of creation, “We
knew nothing rightly for want of perspective ; now we learn what
patient periods must round themselves before the rock is broken,
and the first lichen race has disintegrated the thinnest external
plate into the soil, and opened the door for the remote flora,
and fauna, and Ceres, and Pomona, to come in. How far off
yet, when Nature has reached this stage —the growth of beautv
—is the trilobite; how far the quadruped ; how inconceivably
remote is man. All duly arrive, though ; and then race after race
of men. It is a long way from the granite to the oyster;
farther yet to Plato, and the preaching of the Immortality of the
Soul. Yet all must come, as surely as the atom has two sides.”
Oh! what a realm you are in, with such a thought, friends—
of the interpretation of Nature, and the Great Spirit of the
Universe I
In his thought—Nature is to be spiritually interpreted—
Emerson was called the “ Prince of Idealists.” Every natural
fact is a symbol of a spiritual one ; life is full of rich compensa-
tions. There are two sides to everything ; everything you gain
involves a loss, everything lost involves a gain. What does it
mean ? The laws of the spiritual universe are, with men, self-
acting, and sure. There is no need for a Judgment Day in the
future. Your judgment day is now, and here. You need no
book of life. Your book of life is your own self. Emerson,
in his idea of unity, went so far as to appreciate a lady, who,
when perfectly well dressed —beautifully attired—said she had a
feeling that corresponded very much with what religion alone


could give—perfect harmony, completeness, fitness of things,
unity ; and, if the woman were pure, then religion was in her
beautiful dress. How often you have heard Emerson called
Transcendentalist, Pantheist, Idealist, and unpractical. All that
tends to show how little a great man is understood at first.
Carlyle wrote to Emerson: —“ How you go, as if altogether
on the ‘ over-soul,’ the ideal, the perfect, or universal, and eternal,
in this life of ours ; and take so little heed of the frightful
quantities of friction and perverse impediment there everywhere
are, the reflections upon which, in my own poor life, made me now
and then very sad as I read you.”
At times, Emerson’s thought was so subtle and profound,
that he could make others about him feel the power of religion
—God in Nature; a grander religion than has yet been
expressed in any creed.
Emerson told the rustics living at Concord, where he himself
dwelt, of the glory there was in their common round, and their
daily task. He told them how their very words once were, and
now might be, with a right use, poems in themselves ; told them,
in their progressive America, how gods and goddesses had not only
been dreamed about in beautiful Greece, but were there to them
in the dawns, and the days, and the clouds —in the sunrise, and
the sunset —all manifestations of the Spirit of the Universe. As
one says : “ Emerson made the very trees sing to these poor
rustics —there was Ariel in each.” Nature to them, clodhoppers
as they were, was touched and tinted with new light. Emerson
unpractical! The finest philosophy is deepest practice, the
subtlest thought is the finest morality ; it can be, and will be,
applied. Emerson told his rustic friends, and made them feel,
that everything was supernatural. Told the farmer, anxious not
to be cheated on market day, that, when he was equally anxious
not to cheat, his market cart wheels would shine like the chariot
of the sun. Is not that high morality ? Higher than we can
teach in the churches yet. Emerson’s Boston lectures made
life to the rustics beautiful and divine. He once saw a carpenter,
in a wrong position, hammering a nail, and told him that, if he
understood the laws of the universe, they would all go to help
him with his work. The carpenter opened his eyes ; what did
he mean by the laws of the universe , and this practical dreamer,
from his study in his “ sylvan home,” told the carpenter to get
above his work, and the force of gravitation would draw the
hammer down, and knock the nail in more easily, and save the
muscle of the man —the practical application of his fine thought.
Told the men about him to hitch their waggon to a star, to go
in harmony with all the laws they knew, applying their know-
ledge of right, and especially of truth, thus working in harmony
with the Eternal Thought and the Eternal Life.


Emerson had so made the simple folk about his “ sylvan
home” appreciate his fine thought that, when a new clergyman
came to the parish, they said: “ You know we are very simple
people here—we can only understand Mr. Emerson.”
Yet Emerson was, and is, difficult to understand at first
in his concentrated form. Even Dr. Walter Channing said:
“ Listening to one of Emerson’s lectures gives me a headache.”
There is an American myth that, when Emerson went to Egypt,
and stood face to face with the stone sphinx, which it is said
devours those who cannot answer its conundrums, it spoke to
him, exclaiming : “ You are another !”
A friend of mine, that worships in this church, told me of
one sentence of Emerson’s that had opened his mind, and given him
a new revealing light. It is, I think, “ Q-od builds his temple in
the heart, on the ruins of churches, and creeds,”
G-od ! What was God to Emerson ? He says :—“ There is
a soul in the centre of Nature, and over the will of every man
there is, so that none of us can wrong the Universe, a Power over
and behind us, and we are the channels of its communications;
but do not put any Mediator there, to come between us and the
Great Spirit.” We all want to have an open mind, and an open
heart, and an open eye, by which we shall have “ original rela-
tions to the Universe.”
In Emerson’s thought, man is the highest fact in this
universe. He had immense faith in the forces that are still
creating man. It was, as the poet, that he saw, through the long
ages, the slow ascent of life to man. I shall refer to the song of
Nature, in order to show the grand thought he has of ourselves;
for Nature had been labouring through long aeons, with satellites
and rings and broken stars, to make the globe. Nature, in the
poem, is almost impatient with her own processes, and says:—
“ But he the man-child glorious
Where tarries he the while :
The rainbow shines his harbinger,
The sunset gleams his smile.
I travail in pain for him,
My creatures travail and wait,
His courtiers come by squadrons,
He comes not to my gate.”
No one appreciated the past more than Emerson, but he did
not believe that Almighty God had been cradled in the manger
of the perfect man ; he did not believe that the ideal man had
been born at all. He believed in the forces that had made
humanity in the past, and were at work now, in the finer, richer
conditions in the new worlds. Jesus, Plato, and Shakespeare—
all may be surpassed in the idea of Emerson. Nature aud God
are still creating man, “ the more wonderful Genesis, creation
unceasing.” Though this may seem to some a want of reverence,
yet, with Emerson, it was faith in the latencies aud potentialities


of human nature —of that Humanity through which the Eternal
Spirit is revealed. To see the high estimate of, and real rever-
ence for, the character of Jesus Emerson had, it is well to
remember another saying of his : —“ Jesus is the name of every
man writ large.” If we are to hope, as Emerson intimates, that
in the future the normal conditions for the birth of men may be
as rich as those out of which Jesus sprang, we may feel proud of
being progenitors of the humanity that is to be. Let Nature
speak in Emerson’s own words :
“ Twice I have moulded an image,
And thrice outstretched my hand,
Made one of day, and one of night,
And one of the salt sea sand.”
One in a Judean manger,
And one by Avon's stream,
And over against the mouths of Nile,
And one in the Academe.
I moulded kings and saviours,
And bards o’er kings to rule,
But fell the starry influence short,
The cup was never full.
Yet, whirl the glowing wheels once more,
And mix the bowl again—
Seethe fate! The ancient elements —
Heat, cold, wet, dry, peace, pain.
Let war, and trade, and creeds, and song
Blend, ripen race on race;
The sunburnt world a man shall breed
Of all the zones a,nd countless days.
No ray is dimmed, no atom worn;
My oldest force is good as new,
And the fresh rose on yonder thorn
Gives hack the bending heavens in dew.”
Emerson did not appreciate music—he had a limit there ;
he did not appreciate Shelley —he had a limit there ; but these
are supposed to be Puritanic survivals. Emerson was a sunny
optimist; he was neither, what he was called, a Pantheist, in the
ordinary sense of the word, nor, as Joseph Cook would have him
regarded, a “ Christian Theist.”
Emerson anticipated modern science in one sentence : “ The
law of harmonious sounds reappears in harmonious numbers.”
With his thought and spirit, he was always creating sunny out-
looks for man.
In his fable of the quarrel between the mountain and the
squirrel, he says :
“ Talents differ; all is well and wisely put,
If I can’t carry forests on my back,
Neither can you crack a nut.”
He sees in all the unity of things. Emerson’s philosophy of
reform touched the heart of the wrong of slavery. He said :


“ But laying hands on another,
To coin his labour and sweat,
He goes in pawn to his victim,
For eternal years in debt.
To-day, unbind the captive,
So only are ye unbound;
Lift up a people from the dust,
Trump of their rescue sound.
Pay ransom to the owner,
And fill the hag to the brim.
Who is the owner 1 The slave is owner,
And ever was. Pay him.”
The depth and tenderness of Emerson’s affection are shown
after the death of his son. He writes :—“ You can never know
how much of me such a young child can take away. A few
weeks ago, I accounted myself a very rich man, and now the
poorest of all How often I have pleased myself that
one day I should send to you this morning star of mine, and stay
at home so gladly behind such a representative I
dare not fathom the invisible, and inquire what relations to my
departed ones I yet sustain.” No genius is more than a ray of
the Eternal. If Emerson had faults and flaws, they were the
defects of his own excellencies, and now he has gone to a larger
unity. The passing away of these great ones, shows how rich
our age has been, and is. Carlyle—gone ! George Eliot—
gone! Charles Darwin—gone! Emerson—gone ! They have
all helped to make rich our time —the Yictorian age of literature.
Have they also made our lives richer, and broader, and deeper,
and purer P Moral aspiration was the ethical essence of all
Emerson’s life and thought.
Emerson showed such a richness of nature that Father
Taylor, Christian as he was, in the ordinary sense, said : “ Well,
I suppose Emerson cannot go to heaven because he is not a
Christian, to our minds; but if he goes to the other place, he will
surely change the climate, and turn the tide of emigration that
way.” All these great men seem to say, in the moral tone of
their life, that with which an American bard closed his wonderful
poem:—
i- So live, that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan, which moves
To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go—not like the galley slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, hut sustained and soothed
By an unfaltering trust, and
Like one that wraps the drapery of his couch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.”
[ A h |
(5 1 K


