

r. BARTON’S MOTION
DISTRIBUTION TO THE ELECTORS
OF COPIES OF
E COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA DRAFT
CONSTITUTION BILL.
U JDIJuJU,
J. I ;
VICTORIA :°ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




rb fLj
FEDERAL CONVENTION, MELBOURNE
(FINAL SITTING).
SPEECHES MADE ON 17th MARCH, 1898, ON
Mr. BARTON’S MOTION
TO DISTRIBUTE COPIES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA DRAFT
CONSTITUTION BILL.
THURSDAY , 17th MARCH , 1898.
Western Australian Representatives: Letter from Sir
John Forrest Suspension of Standing- Orders
Commonwealth of Australia Bill—Votes of Thanks to
the Officers of the Convention —Close of the Pro-
ceedings.
The President took the chair at ten
minutes past ten o’clock a.m.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
REPRESENTATIVES.
The PRESIDENT.—I deem it my duty
to acquaint the Convention with the fact
that I have received a letter from the
Right Hon. the Premier of Western Aus-
tralia (Sir John Forrest), which I will ask
the Clerk to read.
The letter was read by the Clerk, as
follows: —
Menzies’ Hotel, 16th March, 1898.
Dear Mr. President,—l regret I shall not be
with you to-morrow, to join with the other
delegates in my expression of thanks to you
for the kindness and consideration you have
shown me and the other delegates from Western
Australia during the sittings of the Convention
at Adelaide, Sydney, and Melbourne.
It is very gratifying that so much harmony
and good-will on all sides have marked the pro-
ceedings of the Convention, and I feel sure this
satisfactory state of things has been aided by
the courtesy and assistance we have all received
from you, and from Sir Richard Baker, whose
untiring efforts deserve, and I am sure will re-
ceive, the fullest acknowledgment from every
member of the Convention.
The conclusion of our labours makes me feel
grateful to all who have assisted in our work.
The hospitality of the Governments, the good
work of the reporters, the willing services of
the attendants, all deserve my best thanks, and
I must not forget the good fellowship of all,
which has given a charm to our gathering,
which I shall always look back upon with
pleasure.
Believe me, Dear Mr. President,
Yours most sincerely,
John Forrest.
The Right Hon. C. C. Kingston, M.P., Q.G.,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales).—
I beg to move — , V - -
. \v '"*N\
That the letter be printed and entered upon
the minutes. A
The motion was agreed to>


SUSPENSION OF STANDING
ORDERS.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales).— I
beg to move —
That the standing orders be suspended to
enable the motions of this morning to be taken
without notice.
The motion was agreed to.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
BILL.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales).—l
beg to move—
That this Convention cordially invites the
Prime Minister of each colony here repre-
sented to provide for the supply of copies of
the Draft of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Bill, as now finally adopted by
this Convention, to the electors of his colony.
This motion will, I hope, give the mem-
bers of the Convention an opportunity to
state from their places in this chamber to
the electors who sent them here their
opinion of the Draft Bill and its pro-
visions. I think that on this, the last
day of our meeting, it is only fit that
some opportunity should be given to
honorable members so to express their
opinions that the statement of them in
an authoritative form, as printed in the
official report of the debates, may reach
those whose verdict upon the Bill is so
soon to be sought. It has been many
times asserted that the Bill contains that
which we know it does not contain, and
many of its critics have carefully omitted
to mention the manifestly advantageous
provisions which it embodies. It is, there-
fore, well that an authoritative state-
ment of the main provisions which it in-
corporates should go forth to the public,
with the correction of the erroneous views
circulated concerning it. This is the 41st
day of the Melbourne session, and, as one
who has been an eye-witness of the
proceedings at almost every moment of
their currency, I should like to bear my
testimony to the zeal in a great cause,
to the patriotic desire that no harm to
that cause should be done by too great
demands, to the sagacity in expression
Barton.
of opinion, and to the eminent talent in
debate, which have characterized our pro-
ceedings since the Convention began its
sittings in Adelaide last year. I suppose
there is no one more anxious to see
a plan of federation adopted than I
am—-so that it be just. I have conceived
a very great admiration for the spirit of
justice which has at all times animated
the members of the Convention, and for
the manner in which they have realized
the gravity of the situation, whenever
it has appeared that the claims made
upon behalf of a colony, however patrio-
tically they may have been urged, were
likely to endanger the final success of
our cause. We have been accused of
a tendency to reverse our decisions ;
but I think very little of the man
who, having once been convinced that
his first opinion was a hasty one, is
too obstinate, which means too Aveak, to
retrace his steps. The very readiness
of the Convention to realize -that its pro-
ceedings may at times have led it to
overstep the mark in one direction or
another, is to me the surest guarantee of
the anxiety of its members that the Con-
stitution shall be just. To be just, it can-
not be marked by evidence of over-zeal or
over-demand upon the part of any section
of the community. The motion that I
am moving is one that is calculated, if it
is received by the Prime Ministers of the
colonies in the sense in which I move it,
to insure that the provisions of the Bill
are understood by the electors, who
will have to deal with the question of
its adoption. One nmst recollect that
many statements are circulated about
measures of this kind, which no-
thing but a cool perusal of a clearly-
drawn Bill such as this is will enable the
readers or the hearers of them to confute.
If I may say it in all modesty, I believe
that, so far as the expression in the lan-
guage of an Act of Parliament or of a Bill in
Parliament of the opinions of this Conven-
tion is concerned, the measure which will
be put into the hands of the electors is so
2


clearly drawn that every man of ordinary
intelligence who receives it will be able to
readily grasp its meaning. Next to such cer-
tainty in expression as will prevent the risk
of too much conflict hereafter —a risk which
is as far as possible to be prevented—is
the great object that we should all have in
view, when once our opinions are formulated
and made known, that the electors, after
they have perused the measure, may be
able to discuss it with other electors in a
spirit which will show that they have
understood how far it conforms, first, to
their views of perfect federation —perfect
constitutionally—and, next, to their views
of a reasonable settlement of the con-
flicting claims of the various colonies.
Now, before I enter upon a fuller advo-
cacy of the Bill, I should like to point out
in what main respects this measure differs
from the last Federal Constitution per-
fected by a Convention. The last one was
the Bill of 1891. We have been told from
one quarter that the Bill has been rapidly
losing its national character. We have
been told from another quarter that there
is a great conservative preponderance in
the Convention, and that the decisions on
crucial points have invariably leaned in an
anti-liberal direction. It does not take
much examination, by way of comparison
of the Bill of 1891 with the Bill of 1898,
to enable one to confute both of these
statements.
Sir Edward Braddon.—The Bill speaks
for itself.
Mr. BARTON.—The Bill speaks for it-
self, sir, but it is as well to mention in what
respects the differences arise; and lam
about to mention differences not merely in
the direction of a liberalizing tendency in
the present Bill, but in the direction of
improvements in other respects as com-
pared with the Bill of 1891. The follow-
ing arc some instances : —Under the Bill of
1891 the senators were to be elected by
the Legislatures of the states. Under the
Bill of 1898 they are to be elected by the
people, onthe same suffrage as the members
of the House of Representatives. Equal
representation, of which so much complaint
has been made, and about which I think
complaint has been carried altogether too
far, was, under the Bill of 1891, absolute.
But under the Bill of 1898 it is only the
original states that are necessarily to be
equally represented in the Senate, and
the quantum of representation of states
admitted after the adoption of the Con-
stitution is to be determined by the Fede-
ral Parliament. In the Bill of 1891 the
suffrage for the House of Representatives
—which suffrage was not then the same
as for the Senate —was left absolutely
to the Parliaments of the several states.
In the Bill of 1898 the suffrage for
that House which has been called, per-
haps with a good deal of reason, the
National House, is, while it is to be the
suffrage of the state for the time being,
nevertheless, subject to be controlled
by any uniform law made by the Par-
liament ; and we who know how that
Parliament will be based need not have
the slightest fear that that suffrage will
be framed in an illiberal The quali-
fication of senators or candidates for the
Senate was, under the Bill of 1891, the
attainment of the age of 30 years, and a
five years’ residence in the Commonwealth,
Under the Bill of 1898 the qualification
of members is to be the same for both
Houses of the Commomvealth, namely,
the attainment of the age of 21 years,
and a three years’ residence. Under the
Bill of 1891 the division of electorates
for the House of Representatives to
be made by the state itself. Under the
Bill of 1898 that power is subject to re-
vision by the Parliament of the Federation,
so that if any abuse should occur in its
exercise, there will always be a controlling
power in the direction of equality and
justice. This Bill also contains a pro-
vision in favour of electors, which is alto-
gether absent from the Bill of 1891 ;
that is, a provision for the protection of
the voting right, when the right has been
granted, so that no adult person who, at
the establishment of this Constitution, or


at any time afterwards, acquires the right
to vote for the Legislative Assembly in
his own colony or state can be deprived
of that right by any law passed by the
Federal Parliament. This is a provision
which was introduced at the instance of
the Hon. Mr. Holder ; and although the
matter has been the subject of com-
plaint from time to time, the instance
I have cited may be appealed to as one
evidence of the want of foundation of
accusations against this Bill on account
of its alleged illiberal character. Again,
to the powers of the Federal Legislature,
as they were defined in the Bill of 1891,
there have been added some very impor-
tant further powers. Amongst them is
the power to legislate with reference to
invalid and old-age pensions ; another is the
right to legislate for the appointment of
courts of conciliation and arbitration in
industrial disputes which extend beyond
the limits of one state ; and I may add
to those the power to legislate in re-
gard to insurance, saving the rights of
the states in regard to state insurance—-
a power which I am quite sure will be
strongly appreciated by business men all
over the colonies. Coming to one of the
most important provisions in the whole
of this measure, there is incorporated in
this Bill, as there was not in the Bill of
1891, a provision for the termination of
those disputes which, in common parlance,
are called dead-locks. The 57th clause
of this Bill provides that when it has
been ascertained by two passages of a
Bill through the House of Representatives
that it is not to be passed by the Senate,
there shall be a power in the Governor-
General to dissolve the two Houses
simultaneously, and confront them both
with the public opinion of the electors;
and should the Bill, after that proceed-
ing, not be the subject of agreement
between the two Houses, then there is
power to convene a joint sitting of the
House of Representatives and the Senate
together, so that amendments made in the
Bill may be considered by the two Houses
[Mr. Barton.
sitting and voting together; and by a
three-fifths majority the Bill may be
adopted. Those who have accused the
representatives of the smaller colonies of
an unfair attitude towards the other
colonies which are more populous, have,
in my judgment, made a serious mistake
in this respect. Whatever one’s opinion
is on the question whether the Second
Chamber—the Senate—of the Federation
should be elected in proportion to the
numbers of people or otherwise, the
strongest advocate of proportionate repre-
sentation in that body cannot but admit
that there is a great deal to be \irged in
favour of the claim for equal representation
in the Senate; and he cannot also but ad-
mit that if he were a citizen of one of the
less populous states, anxious to preserve
its individuality, fearful lest that individu-
ality might be at the mercy of the larger
populations of the other states —not seek-
ing to grasp anything, but only to defend
—he might be unyielding in his desire to
preserve that equal representation in the
Senate. Is it not, then, a strong ad-
dition to the power of the majority
of the electors, resident though they
may be in states which have raised some
demur about the granting of equal re-
presentation in the Senate —is it not, I
say, a strong addition to the power which
is embodied in the House of Representa-
tives, that there should be this provision-
for the dissolution of both Houses ? The
entire dissolution of the Upper House is a
thing which has not been practised, to
our knowledge, in any English-speaking
country. And is it not a strong additional
power that, ' when the final vote for
affirming the Bill comes to be taken, the
majority which will suffice for carrying it
is smaller than tvould be indicated by the
relative proportion of the two Houses?
I regard that as a considerable concession
to the views of the larger states. Being
myself a believer in the principle of equal
state representation in one of the Cham-
bers of the Legislature under a Federal
Constitution, for reasons which it is not
4


convenient, because time does not allow it,
to discuss now, but which I conceive to be
purely federal, I do think that those.who
hold that opinion, and who live in less
populous states than that in which I live,
have made a very large concession in
agreeing to these provisions for dealing
with dead-locks. It is a concession that
must be regarded as all the greater when
we consider the extreme care with which in
this Bill, as drawn, and also in the Bill of
1891, the ordinary causes of dead locks—
the causes which are generally to be antici-
pated—have been one and all provided for.
Finding that the process ordinarily known
as tacking, and other measures which have
in times past been adopted, perhaps with
a view of ending, but generally with the
result of provoking, differences between
the two Chambers, are provided against so
carefully by the 53rd, 54th, and 55th
clauses of the present Bill, we may, I think,
regard it as a very considerable thing that
in addition to this protection there should
have been added the enactment which
deals with the double dissolution and the
joint vote. lam reminded that just now,
in referring to the joint sitting of the two
Houses, 1 spoke of the making of amend-
ments. Of course, I meant that to be
understood in the sense in which it is so
clearly expressed in the Bill, that is to
say, that the joint sitting will consider
amendments which have been previously
made, so far as one House can make them,
by either branch of the Federal Parlia-
ment. Now, with regard to the double
dissolution of the Senate, it is to be
remembered that that provision was,
until we commenced our sittings in
Melbourne, tacked to another provision,
which, to my mind, unduly enforced the
idea of a penal dissolution of the House of
Kepresentatives. The Convention, having
struck out that provision and left in the
dead-lock clause merely the double dissolu-
tion and the joint sitting, has, I think it is
fair to say, made again a large step in
the direction of liberalism. Without dis-
cussing the amendment which was carried
at the instance of the honorable member
(Mr. Symon)—and I admit that in some in-
stances it might have placed a very large
power in the hands of the Executive—l
may say that I am one of those who take
the view that it is not wise to give the
Executive power to penalize one of two
Houses, when both spring from the same
suffrage, and are elected by the same
people. 1 think, therefore, that we
may confidently appeal to the electors
who sent us here whether this again is not
an indication of the march of liberal
opinion which has characterized the Con-
vention. In the discussions which we
sometimes hear and sometimes read of out-
of-doors, very great care is often taken
to prevent the electors from knowing
that this Constitution is to be worked
under a system of responsible government,
a system which can only be applied where
the power of the purse is in the Parlia-
ment, and where, therefore, a Ministry
which ceases to retain the confidence of
Parliament can be deprived of Supplies
unless it either resigns or appeals to the
country. That is the cardinal provision
on the constitutional side of this Bill.
It needs no expression in writing. It is
the inevitable outcome of the provisions
of the Bill, and it assimilates the Con-
stitution which we have framed to the
Constitutions of the colonies in which we
live and the Constitution of the great
mother country from which we spring.
If there could be alleged for a moment
to be any truth in some of the criti-
cisms levelled at the Bill that it may
lead to corruption—and I must say that
I cannot find any evidence of any such
tendency in a line of it—these criticisms
might, at any rate, be accompanied by a
statement of the fact that, if corruption is
manifested, there is the ordinary British
cure for it in the dismissal of the Minister
or Ministry that is guilty. But there is
more than this in the Bill to insure
government by responsible Ministers.
There is this in it, that, inasmuch as a
responsible Ministry cannot exist without


the power of the purse, so that power of
the purse, given to the Parliament, is the
guarantee of the retention by the people
themselves of their sovereign right. It
is the people who make these Houses;
it is the people Avhose money is dealt
with; it is the people who speak when a
Ministry is turned out of office or com-
pelled to appeal to the electors —it is their
voice which brings about these things, and
it is their voice also which says—“ Unless
you conform to the demands of the people,
and either leave the office which you have
disgraced, or give us an opportunity of
pronouncing on your conduct at the
polls, you shall not have any more of our
money to spend on reckless govern-
ment.” We have had a great many sug-
gestions from various quarters that the
Constitution should be framed in a different
way in this respect —that avc should have
an irresponsible Ministry, at any rate
for a time, that is, a Ministry to be kept
in office in some such manner as in the
United States or Switzerland. Much as
I value the argument that responsible
government is, to a certain extent, incom-
patible with federation, and although I
recognise that that argument can be sup-
ported by what look like very good rea-
sons, still I am convinced that there are
stronger reasons against that argument
than for it, and that responsible govern-
ment may well be made to co-exist with
a reasonably federal Constitution. If we
had adopted some of the arguments which
have been urged in favour of an irrespon-
sible governing body—and I mean irrespon-
sible merely for a term—or a body of mo-
dified responsibility, we might have made
our Constitution different in other respects.
We might perhaps have made the two
Houses of the Federal Legislature entirely
co-ordinate, and that we could not do with
responsible government. On the other
hand, we might have made some provision
for what is called the referendum. I
admit that you could not work a Consti-
tution like that of Switzerland or of
America sufficiently in the interests of the
\Mr. Barton.
people without some such remedy, for cer-
tain contingencies, as the referendum, but
I have always considered that the Con-
vention has acted rightly in rejecting the
referendum as applied to a Constitution in
which the principle of responsible govern-
ment is recognised. Much more truly
than it can be said that federation might
kill responsible government, or that respon-
sible government might kill federation, it
can be said that the referendum might kill
responsible government. There certainly
would not have been much chance of re-
sponsible government killing the referen-
dum. It could not do that any more than
a man who had swallowed poison could
eliminate it by any contortion of his body.
I am not going into this much-vexed ques-
tion, but I think I may congratulate
the Convention on having rejected the
referendum. As applied to the principle
of responsible government, the referendum
would be an entirely experimental provision
although it might have been tried, and tried
with success, in other forms of government.
I venture to say that by rejecting it, as
applied to responsible government, we
have not shown any anti-liberal tendency.
We have simply said that the guarantee
of the liberalism of this Constitution is re-
sponsible government, and that we decline
to impair or to infect in any way that
guarantee. That is the principle on
which the referendum has been rejected,
and I take this opportunity, as I did not
take part in the discussion on the subject,
of expressing my hearty concurrence in
the decision of the Convention. It is a
necessary consequence of the adoption of
responsible government that Ministers
should be obliged to sit in Parliament.
There is an express provision for that in
this Bill. Without it responsible govern-
ment would have compelled Ministers to
sit in Parliament; but lest there should
be any danger of an assertion to the
contrary, it has been thought wise to
make this provision, which Avas not in
the Bill of 1891. Another guarantee
of the preservation of the Constitution
6


until the electors themselves ' choose to
change it, is contained in the provision
that the interpretation of the Constitution
by the High Court is to be final. Of
course it will be argued that this Con-
stitution will have been made by the Par-
liament of the United Kingdom. That
will be true in one sense, but not true
in effect, because the provisions of this
Constitution, the principles which it em-
bodies, and the details of enactment by
which those principles arc enforced, will
all have been the work of Australians. I
think it is right and fit that the highest
court in Australia should be left as the
guardian of the expressions of the people,
and the sole body to determine finally what
the people meant when they used those
expressions. That is a provision which
was only adopted after some divisions. I
believe it to be a right one, and I am not
going to quarrel in the slightest degree
with the decision by which the Convention
determined that, apart from the considera-
tion of those questions of interpretation of
the Constitution of the Commonwealth or
of a state, there should be retained a
power in Her Majesty to grant special
leave to appeal, in all such cases as
might be held under proper regulation
to justify an appeal, to the Privy Coun-
cil. We have certainly had a great
deal of controversy upon this subject,
and it is very hard to say —it is a mat-
ter very much of individual judgment—
whether the provisions with respect to
appeals to the Privy Council are more
liberal or less liberal than those in the
Bill of 1891. They have been adopted, at
any rate, by the Convention on the showing
that the right of the subject to appeal to
the Queen in Council should not be taken
away by the Constitution. If that argu-
ment has been conceded, it certainly does
not lie as a charge at the door of the Con-
vention that it has acted without regard
to liberal principles. I might enumerate
a great many other points of difference
between these two Bills, but I shall
confine myself to a few. With regard to
the rights of citizens to avail themselves
of the judicial proceedings which will be
introduced by the establishment of the
High Court, there is one important differ-
ence between the Bill of 1891 and that
which we have now finally adopted. It is
that jurisdiction has been conferred upon
the High Court with regard to disputes
which lie between residents of different
states. That is a right which was not
sought to be conferred by the Bill of
1891, and it has been adopted as a
reasonable corollary to that union of
the states which avc believe will do so
much to promote interchange and com-
munity of interests between the citizens
of the Avhole CommonAvealth. I might
mention that the rights of civil ser-
vants Avho may be transferred to the
CommonAvealth are much more care-
fully preserved under this Bill than
under the Bill of 1891. The compen-
sation to the states concerned for any
property transferred to or A r ested in
the Commonwealth for the purposes of
the Commonwealth are also more fully
secured under this Bill than under the
Bill of 1891. I will pass on to a much more
hnportant provision very lately introduced
into the Bill. That is a provision that a
fourth only of the net revenue of the
CommonAvealth Avill be alloAved to be
expended by the CommoiiAA ealth. That
is to say, three-fourths, or more, of the
reA r enue must annually come back to the
stales Avhose citizens are taxed. That is
the Customs and Excise. 1 am aware the
provision Avould be different in regard to
direct taxation, as to which Mr. Beid re-
minded us that the Treasurer of the Com-
monAvealth would make it his business to
secure £1 in order to provide the ss. as
required for federal expenses and the
15s. which has to be refunded to the
states. We need have no fear on this
head, because, inasmuch as the control of
Customs and Excise is by the Constitution
transferred to the Federation, there can
be no doubt that the first means of
revenue availed of by the Federation
7


would be Customs and Excise. That is an
important provision, and I congratulate
ray right honorable friend (Sir Edward
Braddon) on the sagacity which dictated
his moving the amendment yesterday.
The provision is now much more elastic,
but it affords the same guarantee to the
various states, while it conserves to the
Commonwealth the same share in the
revenue from Customs and Excise. That
share, as the population and the capa-
city of the inhabitants of the Common-
wealth increase, will not be increasing
in proportion, but always increasing in
amount. That seems to me to afford a
reasonable guarantee. I should have pre-
ferred some power, if this provision were
found to work too stringently, to enable
it to be modified. But it is a fair
coi'ollary to the provision for dealing
with the revenue for the first five
years after the imposition of uniform
duties of customs, and further reflection
has led me to the conclusion that, on the
whole, it will be a useful and beneficial
provision. There is an important provision,
not embodied in the 1891 Bill, which
deserves to be mentioned. This is, not a
final denial of state bormties, as 1 saw it
expressed in print somewhere, but a pro-
vision that a state may give bounties for
production and export with the consent of
the two Houses of the Federal Parliament
expressed by resolution. That might
be regarded as tending to derogate from
the freedom of trade and commerce; and
it may be that in its operation the pro-
vision might occasionally be found to do so.
On the other hand, the power of the Com-
monwealth to impose duties of customs
and of excise such as it may determine —-
which insures that these duties of customs
and excise would represent something like
the average opinion of the Commonwealth
—that power, and the provision that
bounties are to be uniform throughout
the Commonwealth, might, I am willing to
concede, be found to work with some hard-
ship upon the states for some years, unless
their own rights to give bounties were
[Mr. Barton.
to some extent preserved. The restriction
is a just one, that if the Parliament of
the Commonwealth does consider that an
industry is unworthy of treatment in that
way by the state —that it does not promise
reasonable results, that the industry is
such that the grant might be regarded as
derogating in either case from freedom of
trade —Parliament may be relied on to
refuse the bounty. And if it could not be
relied on to refuse the bounty, it may be
relied on not to sanction its continuance
unduly or for an indefinite period. Under
these conditions, it is conceivable that the
state bounties granted in that way will do
beneficial work for a certain time, while
after that time, the provision that
the Commonwealth should have the
control of bounties, and that they shall
bo uniform, may be expected to work,
where bounties are required at all, with
beneficial results. On the whole, this
being a compromise, it is impossible
to understand the criticism that it is a
final denial of state bounties, and I hope
that those who read this Constitution will
think that some of the condemnations
which reached their eyes before the Con-
stitution reached them, are much more
surprising to them than even they have
been accustomed to find such criticisms.
We are told that utter confusion has
been wrought in the state finances.
There has been great difference certainly
in the method in which the distri-
bution of the federal surplus has been
provided for ; but that this should
lead to the dislocation or the confusion
of the finances is what I am unable to
understand. There are two principles in
the method of distribution adopted under
this Bill which ought to commend them-
selves to the sense of the electors of the
Commonwealth. The one is that until
the time has come when experience will
dictate the proper method of distribution,
the just principle has been adopted that a
state shall get back all that it contributes,
less the fair and necessary proportion ex-
pended in collecting the revenue due, and
8


in maintaining the Commonwealth. It
seems to me, moreover, to be a provision
that has on the face of it the essence of
justice. We are told that it will he diffi-
cult to trace goods across the border. I
don’t agree with that criticism, because it
will be as easy to trace goods across the bor-
der when duties are not to be paid as it has
been when there are temptations to make
a false declaration for the purpose of
avoiding the payment of taxes. Sir, on
the face of it, it must be clear that the
difficulty after the abolition of inter-
colonial customs will be much less than
ever it was while taxes existed. The
other principle to which I adverted as
supporting the system of finance adopted
by this Bill, is that while every one trusts
the Commonwealth Parliament to do its
duty, steps are taken to see that it shall
have before it the necessary data and evi-
dence before it makes, I will not say final,
but definite provision for distribution.
The provision in this Bill that five years
shall elapse during which the system
which the Bill lays down shall operate is
one on which the determination of the
Federal Parliament can only be come to
on the evidence which experience affords.
How well must that compare with any
attempt that we might ourselves have
made to prophesy the working of a Federal
Tariff of which none of us have any experi-
ence ! I have said that these provisions
are marked by the essence of justice. I
repeat that phrase, because I believe that
what I have said about them demonstrates
that they are so characterized. How
they can work utter confusion to the
finances of the various states —how it can
be asserted that with the guarantee which
Sir Edward Braddon’s amendment affords
they can work confusion and dislocation
to the finances of the states, is what I am
unable to understand. And really, sir, I
do believe that I am either so dense or
so right on this subject that a conclave
of all the statisticians in the colonies
would be unable to convince me. Then,
in order that the trade and commerce
provisions, including the intercolonial free-
trade provision, may be fairly carried out,
we have provided for an impartial judicial
body, with powers of administration as well
as of adjudication, to maintain and execute
the clauses. It is not the chance vote of a
Legislature, but the deliberate determina-
tion of the court—from which there may
be an appeal on matters of law. It is the
determination of that tribunal which will
regulate decisions as to whether any
colony is doing an injustice to another by
professedly internal regulation. I cannot
help saying I approve strongly of the pro-
vision, because of the nature of the clauses
which are to be committed to the Inter-State
Commission. If I am not tiring the Con-
vention, I should like to point out that,
according to clause 99 —“ The Common-
wealth shall not, by any law or regulation
of trade or commerce, abridge the right
of a state or of the residents therein to the
reasonable use of the water of rivers for
conservation or irrigation!” Then, again,
in clause 98 it is set forth that—“ The
Commonwealth shall not, by any law or
regulation of trade, commerce, or revenue,
give preference to one state or any part
thereof over another state or any part
thereof.” Again, in clause 101 it is pro-
vided—“ The Parliament may by any law
with respect to trade or commerce forbid, as
to railways, any preference or discrimination
by any state, or by any authority consti-
tuted under a state, if such preference or
discrimination is undue and unreasonable,
or unjust to any state.” But that provi-
sion is coupled with a proviso that due re-
gard is to be had to the financial responsi-
bilities of a state in connexion with the
construction of and maintenance of its rail-
ways. How that could work ruin to the
Victorian railways, or, as has been said,
turn the New South Wales railways into
old iron, is more than I can understand.
With the proviso, I am satisfied with
the clause, the proviso showing clearly
what the intention of the clause is. The
proviso reads—“ But no preference or dis-
crimination shall, within the meaning of
9


this section, be taken to be undue and un-
reasonable, or unjust to any state, unless
so adjudged by the Inter-State Commis-
sion.” So that it appears on the face of
the clause that where a preference or dis-
crimination is not found to be undue or
unreasonable, having regard to all the
circumstances, then that preference or
discrimination may be maintained, pro-
vided it is not unjust to any state. A
tribunal is created for the purpose of de-
termining this question of the dueness
or reasonableness or justice, and really I
think Ave ought to be satisfied with the
creation of such a tribunal to interpret
those clauses. I believe those provisions
Avill Avork Avell on the whole. They are
Avell adapted for the maintenance of that
condition of things marked by the state
OAvnership of railways, while Ave have in
clause 51 provided that, with the consent
of the state concerned, the CommonAvealth
may take over the Avhole or any part of the
railways of a state, after which it will pro-
vide for railway construction and exten-
sion. 1 have always voted against handing
over the railways by this Constitution to
the Federation. But I am satisfied that
if it be found a necessary accompaniment
to federation—if it be found to be a Avise
thing, for the adjustment of the finances
and in the interests of commerce, that the
railways should be taken over by the Com-
monwealth, Ave should have sufficient con-
fidence in the CommonAvealth to know that
if that is done it will be the result of public
opinion, spreading not only throughout the
CommonAvealth but throughout the states,
for here, as elseAvhere, the same party
principles would operate in the Common-
wealth as in the states. If it becomes a
necessity for the CommonAvealth to take
over the railways, giving good value or
compensation, Ave may rely on the per-
missive provision of the Constitution to
work out that result, and then I admit
there may not be so much necessity for
an Inter-State Commission as at the
present time exists. There, again,
is a most important difference betAveen
[Mr. Barton.
this Bill and the Bill of 1891. Let me
now draw attention to two very important
points in the Bill. A large agitation A\ r as
got up in all the colonies in favour of the
recognition of the Supreme Being in the
Constitution. As the result of that agita-
tion, a phrase has been inserted in the
preamble. I will not use the words them-
selves, but say that the preamble states
that the people, Avho have agreed on the
Constitution, humbly rely on the blessing
of the Supreme Being. It Avas feared that
some interpretation such as has been taken
up in one or two cases in America might
lead to this phrase being regarded as an
action taken against religious liberty.
This Convention has agreed to a clause
which prevents any possibility of that
kind as regards the Commonwealth, and
which does not interfere with the states
in questions of their internal regulation,
with Avhich, of course, this CommonAvealth
will not have anything to do. Clause 115
says—
The Commonwealth shall not make any law
for establishing any religion, or for imposing
any religious observance, or for prohibiting the
free exercise of any religion, and no religious
test shall be required as a qualification for any
office or public trust under the CommonAvealth.
While, therefore, a concession has been
made to the popular opinion that some
reverential expression should be embodied
in the preamble, due care has been taken
by the Convention that no reliance upon
that provision, and no far-fetched argu-
ments based upon it, shall lead to any
infraction of religious liberty under the
laAvs of the Commonwealth which Ave
hope to create. As regards these dif-
ferences, I would like to point out one
other matter. It has been a constant
subject of complaint against this Consti-
tution that the powers Avhich the people
possess of amending it are not sufficiently
great. The distinction betAveen this
Constitution and that of 1891 is in this
respect most marked. That of 1891 pro-
vided that amendments of the Constitu-
tion, after an absolute majority had been
secured in the two Houses of Parliament,
10


should be made by Conventions of the
people. The present provision is a marked
advance upon the provision of 1891, for
after the requisite majority has been
secured in the two Houses, this Bill pro-
vides that the alteration of the Constitu-
tion shall be carried by the people them-
selves. That, again, we may be told, is a
taking away of the national character of
the Bill, for our critics are not scrupulous;
but how it can be said to be an evidence
of anti-liberalism or a conservative feeling
seems to me in the nature of a conundrum.
This Convention has made a very great
advance in these particulars on the work of
1891, and perhaps one of the greatest ad-
vances has been this, that the free people
which is to be constituted shall under this
provision be free to alter the Constitution
themselves, care only being taken that it
is done deliberately and faithfully; that
work of that character, which may affect
the destinies of unborn generations, shall
be done only under circumstances which
insure that thought and reason shall pre-
vail, and that, in making amendments, we
should take that much security for the pro-
tection of our children and their children
after them. That, again, may be described
by some as a “ conservative ” tendency. I,
too, should consider it a conservative ten-
dency if I were prepared to say that every
step taken in the direction of safety and
moderation was mere conservatism. But
not holding that opinion, hnt holding
that steps taken in this way are not
only compatible with liberalism, but are
the very conditions of a just liberal-
ism, I must venture to differ from the
opinion which has been expressed. It
has been said again about this provision
that one state can, by holding out against
the proposed amendment, defeat the in-
tentions of all the other states. That is
utterly incorrect. It is certainly provided
that where an amendment of the Constitu-
tion aims at destroying the proportion in
the House of Representatives which the
representatives of one state bear to the
numbers of those of another state, such a
drastic thing shall not be done without
the consent of that state. But that is just.
It is also insured that equal representa-
tion of any state in the Senate shall not
be taken away without its consent. Is it
not also just to provide that ? If the Fede-
ral Parliament attempts to do one or other
of these things, to single out one state for
different treatment with regard to num-
ber of its people and their representa-
tives in the House of Representatives, or
to deprive it of the equality which other
states possess in reference to their repre-
sentation in the Senate; if, under any
pressure, the Federal Parliament were to
attempt to do a thing so utterly unjust
and subversive of the entire Constitution
and of right principles, is it not just that
the consent of the state affected should
be obtained 1 ? That is the only case in
which one state can, by holding out, defeat
the intention of the rest of the Common-
wealth. It is just that such power should
exist in that state, for provisions of the
kind would absolutely mean the demolition
at once or speedily of that state as an
individual part of the Commonwealth.
That could never be intended. This is a
necessary corollary of the provision that
the limits of a state or the territory of a
state cannot be altered without its own
consent. It would be the same thing to
deprive that state of its proper share of
representation in the Commonwealth as to
take away part of its territory or alter its
boundaries, and it would lead to its being
unable, effectually, to resist action taken
for such a purpose. In every other respect
it is untrue that this provision for the
amendment of the Constitution enables
one state to triumph over the others,
because it is an absolute necessity of
the Constitution that if five states have
federated, the Constitivtion can be altered
at the polls if the amendment is carried
by absolute majorities in Parliament,
and by a majority of the people in three
states out of five. I have now set forth
some of the differences between the two
Constitutions, and in that way I have
11


answered some of the criticisms which
have been made upon this Bill. It has
taken me a longer time than I expected
it would, but I thought I would have
the indulgence of the Convention in
defending this Bill, and in that way I
think I have done useful work, because it
is not by any resort to high-flown oratory
or by any endeavour to rouse the sentiments
of the people from within this council hall
that we shall do our work, but rather
by a calm statement of the nature of our
labours, and by an appeal to the reason
and not the passiqps of the body outside.
I should have mentioned in dealing with
the railway provisions that there is an
important qualification conveyed by the
103rd clause, which reads—
Nothing in this Constitution shall render un-
lawful any rate for the carriage of goods upon
a railway the property of a state, if the rate is
deemed by the Inter-State Commission to be
necessary for the development of the territory
of the state, and if the rate applies equally to
goods within the state and to goods passing into
the state from other states.
We have been told that will work an in-
justice to some of the colonies. I cannot
see that it will. I cannot see any state —
whether it be Victoria in developing its
coal mines, or New South Wales in develop-
ing its wheat-fields—can do any harm by a
developmental rate for any of these pur-
poses, so long as that rate is consistent with
intercolonial free-trade. Because it seems
to me that the development of a state is a
corollary to the act of this Constitution
in leaving that territory in the hands
of states. Therefore, I cannot see that
either one of these colonies should be
considered to be doing work which the
Federation ought to prohibit, if, in re-
gard to its internal traffic only, it makes
such concessions as will develop the pro-
duce of the land, whether that produce
be from a coal mine or a wheat-field,
I believe that is an entirely just pro-
vision. It is one of the provisos I
intended to mention as taking off, to
some extent, what might be considered
to be the rigour of Sir George Turner’s
[Mr. Barton.
clause 101. I believe it is an addi-
tional safeguard, which tends to pre-
serve that power of internal regulation
on the part of a state which ought to be
allowed to it, so long as it does not conflict
with the provisions of the Constitution
in giving the federal authority the sole
control of inter-state traffic. Now, where
inter-state traffic is concerned, this clause
cannot operate, because, unless the rate
which is concerned applies equally to
goods coming from other states, and to
goods passing entirely within the territory
of the state itself, the rate cannot apply,
and the Inter-State Commission will have
power to interdict it. That being so,
where the rate interferes with inter-state
free-trade it will be interdicted by the
Inter-State Commission ; and where it does
not interfere with the other provisions of
the Constitution in this respect the rate
will be allowed to continue. That is a just
solution of what might otherwise be a
very grave difficulty. Ido not intend to
detain the Convention at much greater
length. I have not spoken to-day for the
purpose of making what is called a speech.
My object has been to lay clearly before
the country, through this Convention,
what I believe are the wise and just
provisions of this Constitution, and the
respects in ■which it is an improvement
upon, as being a more liberal Constitu-
tion than the work of 1891. Providing,
as this Constitution does, for a free people
to elect a free Parliament—giving that
people through their Parliament the power
of the purse—laying at their mercy from day
to day the existence of any Ministry which
dares by corruption, or drifts through
ignorance into, the commission of any act
which is unfavorable to the people—
having this security, it must in its very
essence be a free Constitution. What-
ever any one may say to the contrary,
that is secured in the very way in which
the freedom of the British Constitution is
secured. It is secured by vesting in the
people, through their representatives,
the power of the purse, and I venture
12


to say there is no other way
of securing absolute freedom to a
people than that, unless you make a
different kind of Executive than that
which we contemplate, and then overload
your Constitution with legislative provi-
sions to protect the citizen from interfer-
ence. Under this Constitution he is saved
from every kind of interference. Under
this Constitution he has his voice not only
in the daily government of the country,
but in the daily determination of the ques-
tion of whom is the Government to consist.
There is the guarantee of freedom in this
Constitution. There is the guarantee
which none of us have sought to remove,
but every one has sought to strengthen.
How we or our work can be accused of not
providing for the popular liberty is some-
thing which I hope the critics will now
venture to explain, and I think I have
made their work difficult for them. Hav-
ing provided in that way for a free
Constitution, we have provided for an
Executive which is charged with the
duty of maintaining the provisions
of that Constitution; and, therefore, it
can only act as the agents of the people.
We have provided for a Judiciary, which
will determine questions arising under this
Constitution, and with all other questions
which should be dealt with by a Federal
Judiciary; and it will also be a High Court
of Appeal for all courts in the states that
choose to resort to it. In doing these
things, have we not provided, first, that
our Constitution shall be free : next,
that its government shall be by the
will of the people, which is the just result
of their freedom: thirdly, that the Con-
stitution shall not, nor shall any of its
provisions, be twisted or perverted, inas-
much as a court appointed by their own
Executive, but acting independently, is to
decide what is a perversion of its provisions'?
We can have every faith in the constitution
of that tribunal. It is appointed as the
arbiter of the Constitution. It is appointed
not to be above the Constitution, for no
citizen is above it, but under it; but it is
appointed for the purpose of saying that
those who are the instruments of the Con-
stitution—the Government and the Par-
liament of the day—shall not become
the masters of those whom, as to the
Constitution, they are bound to serve.
What I mean is this: That if you, after
making a Constitution of this kind, enable
any Government or any Parliament to
twist or infringe its provisions, then by
slow degrees you may have that Constitu-
tion—if not altered in terms —so whittled
away in operation that the guarantees of
freedom which it gives your people will
not be maintained ; and so, in the highest
sense, the court you are creating here,
which is to be the final interpreter of
that Constitution, will be such a tribunal
as will preserve the popular liberty in
all these regards, and will prevent,
under any pretext of constitutional action,
the Commonwealth from dominating the
states, or the states from usurping the
sphere of the Commonwealth. Having-
provided for all these things, I think this
Convention has done well. The question
for us is this—the question for the elec-
tors is this : Is this a Constitution which
will enable a free people to come together,
and in community together to work out
their own destiny ? Who can deny it ? Is
it a Constitution which gives all reason-
able and liberal guarantees of freedom?
That can only be answered in one
way. Is it a Constitution the action
of which, until amended by the people,
is preserved and safeguarded ? There is
only one answer to that. Is it a Consti-
tution which the people themselves, by
their will expressed by their Parliament
and themselves, are able to alter to suit
their needs under conditions of reasonable
thought, without unreasonable difficulty?
There can be no answer but one to
that question. Then, if the Convention
has done those four things, I take it that
it has done its work. There is no voter
of the electoral body, coming to the con-
sideration of this Bill, and having an
average share of intelligence, who will
13


say that because there is one provision or
another in the Bill which he objects to,
he, therefore, will not vote for the Bill.
Because the elector will say this to him-
self—Do I believe in every syllable of
the Constitution under which I live 1
There is not an elector who can say that.
Should I like the Constitution of this
country (whether it be Victoria, or New
South Wales, or any other country) to be
amended in certain particulars 1 Cer-
tainly I should. But do I need to go
away and live in another country, because
I cannot get the very alteration I want
in my Constitution ? No ;I do not.
Is not that a series of questions
which the elector will put to him-
self and answer as I have answered
them 1 Will he not say While I
may not agree with the Convention in
every detail of its work, no Constitution
probably can be framed against which
nearly every elector in every country would
not have some Avord to say. There are very
few belonging to either of the great politi-
cal 'parties in Great Britain Avho Avould
not wish to alter the Constitution in one
direction or the other. There are very
few in these colonies, and I suppose there
are very few in Canada and in the United
States, Avho do not desire amendments in
their Constitution. But the question they
ask themselves is : Is this the right sort
of country to live in under such a Con-
stitution as this ? If it is I am content,
provided you give me freedom to par-
ticipate in its alteration under every
condition. That, sir, is Avhat this Bill
secures! I believe that in this gi’eat
colony, in which Ave have been meeting
for 41 sitting days, the work of the Con-
vention Avill be reasonably appreciated, and
that their labours will be rewarded with
the only reward they ask, and that is the
unity of their country. I also believe that
similar reason and Avisdom Avill prevail in
the country in Avhich I live, for notwith-
standing the huge burden laid on the
people of that colony by a breach of faith—
and I still stigmatize it as a breach of
[Mr. Barton.
faith—l do believe in my inmost heart
that, when this Constitution is explained
in its truth and justice to the electors of that
country, they will demand that union, that
friendship, that connexion in all business
matters between themselves and the other
colonies, which it is manifest every citizen
of this country was intended to have and
maintain. I believe that such results
will ensue that this Constitution will be
adopted, even under the huge burdens laid
on the electors of New South Wales as a
condition of its adoption. I believe that in
other countries—in yours, Mr. President,
for example, where 1 am quite sure the
electoral body is permeated by a very, very
strong demand for and insistence on liberal
principles —this Constitution will not be
distasteful, but will instead be regarded
as highly satisfactory. I sincerely be-
lieve that that will be the result in every
one of these colonies. It is there that
all of us seek our reAvard. Other re-
ward we cannot expect; and I, for one,
can say from my very heart, that other
reward Ido not desire. lam quite sure
that is the feeling we all of us share, and
I am quite sure, too, that the approval of
our honest labour which we shall receive
if this Constitution is, as it will be,
adopted by the voice of the people, will
be such a reward to us as will satisfy any
ambition we may have entertained in the
whole course of our lives.
Sir EDWARD BRADDON (Tasmania).
—I have to express my sincere thanks to
Sir Richard Baker and the Attorney-Gene-
ral of A ictoria for allowing me this oppor-
tunity of speaking to this motion, an
opportunity which I could not get unless
I spoke at this moment, inasmuch as I
have to leave this chamber to catch the
steamer in some tAventy minutes or so.
Mr. President, I entirely and heartily in-
dorse the motion of the honorable the
leader of the ConA 7 ention. That motion
calls upon the Premiers of the colonies
represented here to engage to. see that
the principles of this Bill are made
fully known to the constituents in their
14


colonies, and already I have taken steps to
secure that that shall be efficiently done.
I do not think it would be possible by
issuing copies of the Bill itself to every
elector of every colony to make the prin-
ciples of the Bill intelligible to him, and
I have ordered a synopsis of the Bill to
be prepared. That synopsis which will be
intelligible to all, and which probably will
be read by all who can read, where the
Bill might not be read, will, I hope, effect
the purpose that we have in view. I de-
sire to adopt no Fabian policy whatever
in regard to the Bill we have just com-
pleted. I wish to speak with no uncertain
sound, and I declare for myself, and I
believe that I am declaring it for the great
majority of the representatives of Tas-
mania, that we are heartily in sympathy
with this Bill, and will do everything in
our power to get it accepted by our colony.
I have heaixl from two visitors who have
recently come here from Tasmania, that
there is a feeling in the colony against
this Bill. It is believed there that the
Bill will not be approved by the people.
Well, I believe that possibly when we come
to explain matters to our people, especially
when we show the effect of that clause
which I was happy enough to pass the
other day—when we show them that we
have secured by that clause a guarantee
of a certain minimum return of revenue
from Customs and Excise, and a certain
amount of economy in the administration
of the Commonwealth’s affairs; when we
show them that, and explain the Bill in
other respects to our constituents, I be-
lieve we shall be able to win their votes
in spite of any feeling that may prevail
there now. Of course, none of us can say
that, according to our lights, according to
our individual wishes, the Bill is perfec-
tion. It would be necessarily impossible
that that should be so, when we, who are
collected here together, however honest
our views may be, are necessarily in-
fluenced in this Convention by the in-
terests of our own particular states. That
is as natural as it is excusable. We are
here to see, as far as we can, that the Consti-
tution Bill should be moulded so as to suit
our particular interests; but at this stage,
having adopted that Bill, we, supposing we
become members of the Commonwealth,
should entirely drop that parochial feeling;
we should cease to feel that we belong to
this state or to that, and only acknow-
ledge that we belonged to the Common-
wealth, and work together honestly and
with strenuous energy to carry out
the Bill to the greatest possible suc-
cess. It was a disappointment to some
of us representatives of the smaller
states that the power of amending Money
Bills was not given to the Senate, as we
urged that it should be. Upon that
point we were defeated and we have
accepted our defeat with gracefulness,
I hope, and with perfect satisfaction to
ourselves, because if we met with some
little failure there, well, it has been said
somewhere that “ Failure is God’s road to
success.” And I hope now, when 1 have
thoroughly accepted the Bill as it stands,
even as to that claiise, we shall find the
Senate so powerful that it will realize
very much by its strength what we sought
to realize for it by Act of Parliament.
Sir Samuel Griffith has said, and very well
said, that if the Senate be a powerful
body its suggestions will be accepted,
but that if it be a weak body its amend-
ments will be refused. I think we may
therefore be perfectly satisfied in having
retained for the smaller states the most
liberal representation in the Senate, and in-
deed the most liberal representation in the
whole Parliament for the smaller states.
Having done that, I hope that not only we
who are here in this Convention, but those
whom we represent in every one of the
smaller colonies, will be perfectly satisfied
with what they have got. And without at-
tempting to do that which time will not
permit me to do, that is, to criticise or to
analyze the Bill in any way, I should like to
say that to my mind it is a Bill which appeals
thoroughly to the people, the great masses
of the people, for Avhom we have prepared
15


it. Throughout all the stages, therefore,
which we have had to pass in dealing with
this Commonwealth Bill, from its initia-
tion, and the election by the people of their
representatives in this Convention, to the
end, the people will dominate—dominate as
they should do, reasonably and in a whole-
some way —and nothing will be possible to
be done except with the assent of the
people. Before I sit down, Mr. President,
I think I should fail in my duty if I did
not, on behalf of us departing Tasmanians,
say some of those valedictory words with-
out which meetings of this sort never close.
We, I am sure, unanimously, like other
members of the Convention, have recog-
nised the dignity, ability, and self-sacrifice
with which you have adorned the Presi-
dent’s chair. We must all have admired
the courtesy, and, sometimes under trying-
circumstances, as points of order were
raised, the ability and infinite tact
with which Sir Richard Baker has filled
the position of Chairman of Committees.
We know for ourselves that we are under
a great debt of gratitude to the officers
of the House, from whom we have received
immense assistance, and whom we have
occasionally worried in a most inexcusable
manner.
Mr. Douglas. —Do not forget the
Parliamentary Committee.
Sir EDWARD BRADDON. —I am not
going to forget them. We have all seen
with admiration the splendid way in which
our leader, the honorable and learned
member (Mr. Barton), has conducted the
proceedings of the Convention. We must
all have admired the devotion to the work
before us which has been shown by him
and by the members of the Drafting
Committee. Many honorable members
are possibly unaware that they have
given hours to the consideration of the
Bill when we have been enjoying our-
selves in bed. They have spent the mid-
night oil —perhaps I should say electric
light—upon the measure without stint,
and it is due to their efforts that we were
able to pass the Bill as early as yesterday.
[Sir Edward Braddon.
As I shall have no other opportunity, I
will now express, on behalf of my col-
leagues and myself, our gratitude for the
great and unsparing hospitality shown to
us by the Government and people, not of
Melbourne only, but of all Yictoria. We
have been hospitably received in various
parts of Yictoria, and would no doubt
have been equally well received in
all parts of the colony if the people
could have rendered it possible for us
to be in two or three places at once. I
should have liked to have said more, but
steamers, like time, wait for no man, and
it is necessary for me to get away.
Sir RICHARD BAKER (South Aus-
tralia). —I should, perhaps, not have felt
called upon to take up some of the few re-
maining moments of the time of the Con-
vention had it not been that, owing to my
duties as Chairman of Committees, I have
been the only member of the Convention
who has not been able to express his
opinions, and to explain through the press
to his constituents who sent him here the
position which he takes up. Before I pro-
ceed, let me express my meed of praise for
the admirable and able speech of our es-
teemed leader, a speech which Avas a fitting
climax to the able and courteous manner in
Avhich he has performed the arduous duties
of his position. Not only the members of
the Convention, but the people of Australia
are under a debt of gratitude to the hon-
orable and learned member —a debt which
I hope they will repay in the manner
which he himself has suggested, by crown-
ing his efforts and those of all of us
by the formation of the Australian nation
I have heard many remarks concerning
the time Avhich our deliberations have
taken up, and I have been told, and I
have seen it stated in print, that the
public are losing the thread of our de-
liberations, and are ceasing to take an
interest in the federal movement. Ido
not believe the public of Australia are less
interested in the great question of federa-
tion now than they have been at any time
during the last six years. It is quite
16


excusable for them not to have been able type of what I call true federation ; there
to follow our deliberations, because to
those unacquainted with parliamentary
procedure they have, no doubt, appeared
of a complex nature, and it has been
difficult, with the limited information con-
veyed to the outside public through the
press, to follow our proceedings. But
although they may not have taken
such a great interest in our proceed-
ings during the last few weeks, I
do not believe it is true that they
have lost interest in federation. I firmly
believe that not a moment has been
wasted during the whole of the time that
we have been here. When we consider
how vast the importance is that every
word of the Constitution should be cor-
rect, that every clause should fit into
every other clause; when we consider the
great amount of time, trouble, and expense
it would take to make any alteration, and
that, if we have not made our intentions
clear, we shall undoubtedly have laid the
foundation of lawsuits of a most extensive
nature, which will harass the people of
United Australia and create dissatisfaction
with our work, it must be evident that
too much care has not been exercised. I
place it before the public in most unmis-
takable words that it is my opinion, as
Chairman of Committees, that in all our
deliberations, and notwithstanding all the
reversals of conclusions previously ar-
rived at which have taken place, no time
has been wasted. The result of our
labours is a Bill which, for drafting, for
clearness and conciseness of expression,
it would be difficult to equal in any
written document. My honorable and
learned friend (Mr. Barton) has approached
the subject of the Bill from the position
of a speaker and an actor; I have been a
listener and a thinker. I hope to be per-
mitted, before I come to any of the
details of the Bill, to analyze the prin-
ciples upon which it is founded. There
have been three types of government
struggling for mastery all through our
deliberations. There has been, first, the
has been the type of a federation ima-
gined by some of my honorable friends
from Victoria; and there has been the
British type of government. Those three
types are to a very considerable extent
inconsistent with each other. But in the
work which we have completed traces will
be found of every one of them. The re-
mark has frequently been made that we
want a federation of the British respon-
sible government type. That has always
seemed to me a contradiction in terms.
You might just as well say—“l want
a stamp battery of the roller-mill
type.” Both the stamp battery and the
roller mill are machines designed for the
crushing of matrix, but they are founded
upon absolutely different principles. Both
the federal type of government and the
British type of government are framed for
the same purpose—the government of the
people—but they are founded upon abso-
lutely inconsistent theories and principles.
I do not want to reiterate arguments and
statements that have been made over
and over again in the Convention, but I
may, perhaps, be permitted to refer very
shortly to the principles upon which
these different types are founded. We
have in the British Constitution, and in
all the copies of it which exist in these
colonies, a centralized form of govern-
ment, in which there is one predominant
power—in which one of the branches of the
Legislature has usurped the powers of the
other by the aid of a committee of its
members called the Executive. . This we
sometimes refer to as the responsible
Ministry system. Is not such a type of
government absolutely inconsistent with
the fundamental principles of a Federation
in which free people wish to unite for
certain purposes, and in which, according
to all sound theory, the two branches of
the Legislature—that which represents
the states, and that which represents the
people, ought to be, if not co-equal
in power, to a great extent co-equal?
The third type, the type in which it is
17


suggested that all states boundaries shall
be completely swept away, and that, so
far as the legislative powers transferred to
the Federal Government are concerned,
the people shall act as one people, and
there shall be an Upper House and a
Lower House only, is founded upon
a want of consideration of the effect of
any such form of government. If the
people of the colonies are willing to
act as one nation—to sweep away the
boundaries of the different colonies in
reference to the 38 powers given by clause
52 of the Bill to the Federal Government
—surely they will submit to give to the
Federal Government powers of legislation
concerning all matters. This suggested
half-way house between unification and
Federation is no permanent abiding place.
I invite the honorable and learned mem-
ber (Mr. Higgins) to consider this point:
If the people of the smaller states are
willing to adopt the type of govern-
ment suggested by our Victorian friends,
we can save the expense of ten Houses
of Legislature and five Governors, and
we can become a truly united people.
But we have been sent here to frame
a scheme of federation, not of amal-
gamation. Now, what have we done 1
We have framed a scheme of govern-
ment such as hitherto has been abso-
lutely unknown. It does not follow that
it is not a good scheme, that it is not
workable, or that it will not perform the
objects at which we all aim. I believe,
sincerely and truly, that the Bill which
we have framed is a machine which will
work most smoothly. We have adopted,
so far as we can, the forms of govern-
ment to which we have been accus-
tomed. That of itself is a great thing, and
we have imported into it such an amount
of federal principle as will make this form
of government a federal form. I believe
that when this system comes into existence,
its smooth working will be immensely
aided by the fact that those who take part
in it will take part in a form of govern-
ment to which they have been used, and
[i Sir Richard Baker .
that the people themselves will be recon-
ciled, in eveir the smaller states, to some
departure from the federal form, because
they will see that all they have looked up to
and cherished for a considerable time as a
free government will still remain to them
intact, so far as it is possible that it
can remain intact under a federal form of
government. In the first speech which I
made in the Sydney Convention in 1891,
I admitted that we were not assembled to
make any theoretical or ideal type, but
that, in the words of Solon, we must
give to the people of Australia “not the
best form of government, but the best
that they can bear.” Now, this system is,
I think, the best the people of Australia
can bear. It must be always recollected
that, in building a house, the architect
ought not to build to suit himself, but he
ought to build the house to be convenient
and commodious for those who will live
in it. That is the principle which has
influenced the minds of members of this
Convention, and they have given effect to
the idea in the Constitution which we
have framed. There are many people in
these colonies who look upon this Consti-
tution from a conservative point of view.
They think that it is far too democratic.
They point out that in no Constitution
which has yet existed in the world have
there been two Houses of Legislature in
which property has no representation
at all. They point out that this is a
Constitution in which one set of people
—those who have little or no property—
because they are the majority, will have
the power of dictating how the taxes shall
be raised, and how the taxes shall be spent;
and that another set of people—those who
have property, and are the minority—
will pay the taxes; that representation and
taxation will not go hand in hand, be-
cause taxation will be imposed by one class
and paid by another. Now, that criticism
undoubtedly has a great deal of force.
But the answer seems to me to be
that, at all events for a considerable
time perhaps for ever the Federal
18


Government will rely on taxes raised
through the Customs ; and you cannot im-
pose customs duties so that they will fall on
any particular class. I doubt very much
whether you can impose any taxation
which will fall on any particular class, be-
cause all taxation has a tendency to spread
itself over the whole of the community.
But that is specially true of taxation raised
through the Custom-house ; and that is
the answer to such criticism. There is one
point in which I have taken a great interest
—one point on which I have taken up what
some have thought to bean extreme stand —
and that is as to the powers of the Senate
under the Constitution. I look upon the
Senate as the sheet-anchor of the smaller
states, as the pivot on which the whole
Federal Constitution revolves; and I have
been compelled to analyze this Bill care-
fully before arriving at any conclusion as
to what effect the various alterations made
in clauses 53 to 56 will have on the
powers and position of the Senate. Now,
the following alterations have been made
which will have the effect of decreasing
those powers. The power, the dignity,
and the importance of the Senate, so far as
those Money Bills which rmist originate
in the House of Kepresentatives are con-
cerned, has been very greatly decreased. In
the Bill of 1891 the words used were “ Bills
for imposing taxation.” Those words were
altered in Adelaide, on my motion in
the Constitutional Committee, to “Bills
the main object of which is for imposing
taxation.” But that form of words has
now been altered again, so that we find
in theßill, as drawn, that no Bills inci-
dentally imposing taxation, except of the
most trivial nature, can originate in the
Senate. That is one stamp of inferiority
placed on the Senate since 1891. And,
also since 1891, a proviso has been added
to one of the clauses relating to
the Executive, which makes it abso-
lutely necessary that the members of the
Executive shall be Members of Parlia-
ment. That provision also diminishes the
power of the Senate. Sir Samuel Griffith
purposely left the matter vague. He ex-
plained to us, in 1891, and has since ex-
plained in some of his pamphlets, that
he is not at all sure that under a federal
form of government we should continue to
have responsible government, and that free
institutions might work out under repre-
sentative government without the Cabinet
system of responsibility ; and he left the
matter open for that change which time
and evolution might bring. But in this
Bill we have insisted that members of the
Executive must be Members of Parliament.
In a former speech, which I do not intend
to repeat, I have explained that this
inherent power of the House which con-
trols the purse, and of that committee of
such House called the responsible Ministry,
which will inevitably work with the House
to which it owes its existence, and to which
it is responsible, will have a powerful and
constant tendency to reduce the Senate to
a position of impotency; and these two
alterations since 1891 will also work in that
direction. On the other hand, however
there are provisions in this Bill which
will act in a contrary direction. The
question of the quota —the fixed propor-
tion between the two Houses—which is
rendered absolutely necessary by the fact
that they will sometimes sit together, is
a gain from my point of view. The
franchise—the fact that the Senate is to
be elected on universal suffrage, no matter
how you may look at it from a conservative
point of view, undoubtedly gives added
power to the Senate. The fact that
there is a power of dissolution will also
tend to increase the power of the Senate,
for elected bodies, like Antseus when he
touched mother earth, arise with renewed
strength after an appeal to their consti-
tuents. And so it will be with the Federal
Senate. What will be the effect of the
two Houses sitting together in a joint
session after dissolution has taken place, I
am not prepared to say; but I think it is
quite possible that that will not weaken
the power of the Senate. There can be no
doubt that, at all events for some time to
19


come, we shall have party government,
and that in the last resort, when the
two Houses sit together, the Senate may
have some slight say and some slight
action on the Executive, and that, there-
fore, the joint sitting may increase the
power of the Senate. Taking all these
circumstances, both for and against, I
have come to the conclusion that on this,
which I consider to be a vital point, I can
safely recommend this Bill to the consti-
tuents who sent me here. I admit that
for some time I had doubts. In fact,
when sitting in the chair presiding over
the proceedings of the committee of the
whole, I have often thought that if a par-
ticular motion were carried it would ruin
the whole scheme and render it impossible
for me to advocate the Bill before my con-
stituents. But, sir, although some of these
motionswere carried, later on, perhaps a day
or two later, something else was carried
that had a counterbalancing effect, and
when 1 came to look at both the bane
and the antidote in about a week’s time, I
came to the conclusion that I had very
much overrated the importance of both
these motions which had loomed so
large to my mind during the time they
were under discussion. And here let
me appeal to some of those honorable
members of this Convention who, as at
present advised, are not prepared to adopt
and to recommend the Bill. Let me appeal
to them not to come to any final conclu-
sion just now. Let me ask them to pause,
to wait, to allow the disappointment which
arises from defeat and the heat engendered
by conflict to subside, so that they can look
on all the questions which have been de-
bated in this Convention in proportion to
their relative importance, and view the
scheme calmly and deliberately as a whole.
I feel sure that if they will do that many of
those mole-hills which now seem to them
to be mountains will sink into the com-
parative insignificance wdiich they really
have. In this connexion Ido not wish to
follow Mr. Barton, but I want to mention
one point which he omitted in his speech
[(S'ir Richard Baker.
in reference to the Senate—and indeed
to both Houses. He omitted to mention
that under this Bill no plural voting is
allowed.
Mr. Barton. —Hear, hear.
Sir BICHARD BAKER. Whereas
plural voting was allowed under the Bill
of 1891. That, from a liberal point of
view, is a great concession. The pro-
vision was strongly objected to by the
people of South Australia in 1891, and I
only want to supplement the speech of
my honorable friend in this particular now,
so that it may be known to the people of
South Australia at all events that that
bugbear to them has disappeared. Now,
I have seen it stated, and I think it is a
matter that ought to be contradicted, that
there is some kind of tacit understanding
in this Convention as to where the seat of
government under the Commonwealth is
to be. For my own part, I give that
statement a most absolute denial.
Honorable Members. —Hear, hear.
Sir RICHARD BAKER.-I do not be-
lieve there is the slightest understanding
of any sort. I know that, so far as I am
concerned, I have not made up my mind
at all; but I do think —and I say this ad-
visedly—that it will be a good thing that
the federal capital should be located in
some place where there is at present no
population at all, where all the land is
in possession of the Government of some
one colony or another’, and that if some
such place is chosen probably some-
where near to the borders of New r South
Wales and Victoria—money can be raised
from the sale or leasing of that land
which would go a very long way to
pay the expenses in connexion with
the federal site and the erection of
public buildings and offices. There is one
matter which I think I am bound to
explain to my constituents, and that
is with regard to the river question.
I had to give a casting vote on that
point, and I gave that casting vote in a
manner which has seemed to some people
in South Australia to be against the
20


interests of that colony. Now, sir, I
deliberately departed from the ordinary
rule, which, if it does not oblige, at all
events intimates to the chairman the
manner in which he should vote, namely,
to uphold the former decision of the com-
mittee. But I felt that the position was
one of great difficulty. I felt that if I
gave that vote the other way, some-
thing would be put in the Bill which
was most obnoxious to the delegates
from one of the colonies. I also felt
that the solution that was then advocated
was not the best solution of the diffi-
culty. I am very glad now that I
voted in that manner, because we have
solved the difficulty concerning this
river question in the very best possible
way. If we sat here for another month
we could not arrive at a more equitable
and fair conclusion. What is the solution?
It is that the Commonwealth is not to pro-
hibit any state from a reasonable use of
the waters of the rivers of that state
during the time it flows through their
territory. Now, is not that a compromise
which the representatives of the colonies
can accept with honour and with satisfac-
tion? For my part, Ido not think that the
representatives of the colony from which I
come ever wished to get any more. They
never wanted to be unreasonable, and
they did not want other colonies to be
unreasonable. The provision which has
been inserted in the Bill will be found to
work in a manner fair and equitable to
all parties, and I am glad indeed that fur-
ther time was given for the consideration
of this subject, and that so just and so fair
a solution was arrived at. There is one
matter which my honorable friend (Mr.
Barton) did not touch upon, and it is of
great importance in the minds of the
people wffio will have the final say
concerning this Constitution. They want
to know what it is going to cost them. I
wish to refer more particularly to the
people of South Australia. Under the
financial clauses of this Bill the Federal
Parliament will have to return to each
state all the money raised from that state
either from customs or other duties, or
from the Post-office or the other services,
the management of which is taken over by
the Commonwealth, less a proper propor-
tion of the added expenses of the Common-
wealth, which I understand will, in South
Australia, amount to some £30,000 per
annum, the population of South Aus-
tralia being one-tenth of that of the
Commonwealth. But South Australia
is not going to lose that £30,000. I
followed with very great interest the
figures given by the Hon. Mr. Holder in
reference to the consolidation of the public
debts, and I gathered from those figures,
and I believe they will be found to come
out pretty right, that South Australia will
gain £35,000 per annum if the scheme of
federalizing the public debts is adopted;
so that instead of federation costing South
Australia anything, they will be the gainers
of £5,000, that is, if the powers given in
the Constitution to the Federal Govern-
ment to take over the public debts of the
various colonies are exercised wisely, care-
fully, and with discretion. And not only is
that so, but surely it must be admitted
by all the colonies that when the Federal
Government comes into existence, and
takes over so many departments, we can
in each state make a large number of
consequent economies. We shall not re-
quire so many Ministers of the Crown;
we shall not, perhaps, require so many
Members of Parliament; and we shall not,
owing to the decrease of our various
establishments, require to spend money in
many other directions. I hope, therefore,
that I shall not only be able to state, but
to prove, to the people who sent me here
that this federation will not only cost them
nothing, but that they will actually make a
pecuniary gain by entering into the Union
which we so strongly advocate. I might say
a great deal more, but it Avould be unfair
for me to unduly take up the time when
there are so many other honorable mem-
bers who would like to offer a few remarks
in the limited time at our disposal before
21


we part. Before I sit down I have to thank
the Right Hon. Sir Edward Braddon, and
those who cheered him, for the very
flattering remarks which he made con-
cerning myself as Chairman of Committees.
It would be unbecoming of any one who
addresses this meeting to-day to refrain
from expressing our grateful thanks to the
Government and people of Victoria for
the splendid and lavish hospitality
with which they have treated us.
I have had perhaps more peculiarly
than any other member of the Convention
been brought into contact with the clerks
who have so ably and efficiently done our
work. To those who are outside, the
work which is done after the Convention
adjourns is unknown, but it is very real
and very arduous for all that. It is only
fair that we should give our acknowledg-
ment to those who have sat up night after
night, doing work for the Convention,
so that it might commence its delibera-
tions next day. In that I would include
the Drafting Committee, who have so
arduously and so ably fulfilled theirduties.
Before I conclude, I would suggest a
mode of procedure which, if adopted, would,
it appears to me, recommend this Bill
more forcibly to the people of the various
colonies than any other. It is this, that
each group of delegates, or as many of
them as are willing to join together,
should issue one manifesto to the people
who sent them here. That is a course
which has been followed when other con-
stitutional conventions have finished their
labours. I dare say all of you have read
the address of George Washington, in
which he recommended the Bill as framed
by the Philadelphia Convention to the
people of America. I find that the same
plan was adopted in Switzerland in 1874,
when some amendments were made in
the Constitution. A joint address,
couched in most elegant language, was
then issued by the members of the con-
vention to the people of Switzerland. It
was pointed out to them that the scheme,
like every other scheme, was subject
[Sir Richard Baker.
to human defects —that although some
might think the federal action too circum-
scribed, others might take the view that
it went quite far enough—but that a
federal edifice had been constructed in
which it was hoped that the people of the
various cantons might live in amity to-
gether. It was also pointed out that the
Constitution contained the germs of new
developments of progress and liberty,
and that if the people did not adopt it
they might have to wait long for the
chance of obtaining anything equal to
it. And I say to the people of Aus-
tralia that if they do not go to the poll
and vote for the Constitution which we
now recommend for their acceptance a
fatal blow will be struck at the cause of
federation. Ido not say that we must
have federation now or never, but its re-
jection now will mean the postponement of
all chances of any federal union during
the life-time of most of us here present.
This is the second attempt that has been
made. If this Convention has not been
able to frame a Constitution which the
people of Australia can accept, I should
like to know how such a Constitution is
to be framed ? It is idle for persons to say
“I will have this,” and “I will have that.”
It is only by frank conciliation, by a
spirit of compromise, by the sacrifice of
our personal ideas and inclinations on the
altar of our country, that we can hope
to become a United Australia.
Mr. ISAACS (Victoria). —Mr. President,
in rising to speak to the motion which has
been so ably proposed by the honorable
the leader of the Convention, I have first
to express my regret that the Right Hon.
the Premier of Victoria is not here to
respond in person. I am sure that the
Convention sympathizes with him in his
present position, and will remember, with
a considerable amount of gratitude and
good feeling, the fair, kindly, and reason-
able, as well as able and assiduous, part he
has taken in its deliberations. Before I sit
down I shall have the pleasure of com-
municating to the Convention what he
22


has commissioned me to say. I desire
at the outset to join with those honorable
members who have preceded me in offer-
ing a tribute of praise—and a well-earned
tribute—to those who have been charged
with the conduct of the business of the
Convention. In you, sir, we have had a
President of ability and impartiality, who
has lent dignity to the position which was
conferred upon him. To our honorable
friend (Sir Richard Baker) a large measure
of praise is most assuredly due. On his
shoulders, even more than on your own,
has fallen a laborious task, and one which
he has discharged with a success that
could only be commanded by not only
impartiality, but ability and atten-
tion in every direction. Of the
Drafting Committee, I desire to say, in
the most unqualified manner, that they
have discharged the onerous duty which
has fallen to them with conspicuous
ability and enormous labour. Only those
who have been intrusted with official posi-
tions, and more particularly those who have
filled positions of a legal nature, know the
extreme difficulty and hazard there is in
performing such work as has been so
remarkably well performed by the Drafting-
Committee. Whatever may be thought
of the measure which we are about to
place before the people of Australia, little
fault can be found with the way in which
the intentions and resolutions of the Conven-
tion have been expressed in actual words.
Before passing to the motion itself, I
should say that I entirely indorse what
has been said by Sir Richard Baker with
regard to the splendid and self-sacrificing
work by the clerks of the House. And I
must not forget to add to that the cbnsi-
deration we should extend in the direction
of gratitude, not only to those gentlemen,
but also to the various other gentlemen
connected with the House who have given
their attention. I allude to the Librarian
and attendants, and all concerned in the
administration of the affairs of the
House. Now, sir, on the motion itself
I desire to say that I entirely and
absolutely concur in it. I think it
is not only a reasonable and advisable
course to adopt, but it is an absolutely
necessary one. I may say for the Govern-
ment of Victoria that it is a step which
would be taken by us under any circum-
stances ; but it is indicative, and properly
indicative, of the feeling of the Convention
that such a resolution should be passed in
order to evince our desire that the people
of the country, before arriving at a con-
clusion which must so greatly affect their
future welfare and interest, should have be-
fore them, as far as can possibly be done, the
proper material upon which to exercise their
judgment. It is plain, from the whole
tone of my honorable friend (Mr. Barton’s)
speech, and also from the speeches of my
honorable friends (Sir Edward Braddon
and Sir Richard Baker), there is a
general concurrence in the view tjiat
this matter must be approached, in
the manner in which it was dealt with
by the Convention that is to say,
by argument, reason, and careful con-
sideration and that it must be so ap-
proached not only by the Convention but
also by the people whose interests are more
nearly and directly involved. And we
shall, by furnishing them with the mea-
sure which has now reached its comple-
tion, and, as Sir Edward Braddon pro-
perly pointed out, with such other means
of gathering the intention and, so far as
possible, the purport of the measure, we
shall enable the people to judge of the
whole question without any fear that they
are misunderstanding its provisions or its
probable effect, and without any fear that
they are not at liberty to exercise their
jiidgment fully, freely, and frankly upon
the material which is laid before them.
In other words, the people will be enabled
to exercise their own personal judgment,
and will not have to rely on the judgment
of others. Now, sir, I think it was well
that honorable gentlemen who have pre-
ceded me have thought it right to point
out matters for the consideration of the
people in regard to the provisions of the
23


statute itself. In doing so, it was quite
right to indicate how marvellously
the provisions of this Bill in many re-
spects transcend the corresponding pro-
visions in the Bill of 1891. I do
not wonder that in 1891 the Bill as
then framed was not accepted, or con-
sidered acceptable by the people of the
various states. In the particulars pointed
out by the Hon. Mr. Barton, or, at all
events, in most of these particulars, there
has been considerable advance ; and there-
fore the attention of the people is very
rightly directed to the particulars in which
that advance has been made. On the other
hand, there are certain other particulars to
which attention ought, I think, with equal
propriety, to be drawn for the considera-
tion of the people. When my honorable
friend (Sir Richard Baker) said that
the Senate was the pivot on which the
whole Federal Constitution revolves, that
was an observation deserving of the most
careful attention, and one he was, in
view of the provisions of the Bill, thor-
oughly justified in making. When he
pointed out clearly some of the particulars
in which the Senate is strengthened as
against the House of Representatives he
was doing his simple duty in calling atten-
tion to the fact. Before I sit down, I de-
sire to add one or two particulars in which
the Bill of 1898 differs from the Bill of
1891. In many respects liberalism has
been granted its share of recognition. In
regard to the franchise, the powers of Par-
liament, the mode of election to the Senate,
and other matters, tremendous, though
necessary, advance has been made. But
there are other matters which are engag-
ing the attention of the delegates as well
as of individuals and which have been in-
dicated in the press. These are matters
which must receive consideration in order
to determine how, upon the whole matter,
the ultimate decision shall be cast. Now,
in respect to the relative positions of the
Senate and the House of Representatives
in the Bill of 1891, the number of mem-
bers in the House of Representatives was
[Mr. Isaacs.
uncontrolled by any consideration of the
number of members in the Senate.
Mr. Higgins.—Or the number of states.
Mr. ISAACS. —Or by the number of
states. The number of members in the
House of Representatives was decided by
one consideration alone, namely, the
necessity of population with regard to
representation. When we are forming a
representative Government the question of
the representation of the people is un-
doubtedly the central question for con-
sideration. There is, therefore, this im-
portant departure, that the representation
of the people in the National House is
limited in the Bill of 1898, as contrasted
with the Bill of 1891, by the number of
senators —that is, by the number of states.
Then, with regard to the House of Repre-
sentatives itself, in which the proportion-
ate representation of the people was con-
cerned, there is another distinct departure,
to the disadvantage of what I consider
the liberal principle of the representation
of people according to the needs of popu-
lation. In the Bill of 1891 there was to
be one member for every 30,000 of
the population, and there was a minimum
of four representatives. In 1891, if the
Constitution then framed had gone into
operation, Victoria would have had 40
members, roughly speaking, and Tasmania
four members. That is to say, according
to the population, granting a minimum to
Tasmania, her representation would have
been one-tenth of that of Victoria. In the
Bill of 1898, the representation of Victoria
is 24, the representation of Tasmania being
raised to a minimum of five, or more than
one-fifth. In that respect also, it will be
seen, a large concession has been made
to the smaller states. It is also a very
important consideration, as Sir Richard
Baker has reminded us this morning,
that responsible government may be
most materially affected, if not altered,
by the fact that the final determination
of these matters will be left to the opera-
tion of a joint sitting. As Sir Richard
Baker said, the Senate will receive in all
24


probability a much larger share of the
control over the Executive than has hither-
to been afforded in any bi-cameral system.
So we have to look at these considera-
tions as well as the other considerations
which have been presented to us. In
another way we have to recollect that the
Bill of 1891 seemed to recognise in a larger
manner than the present Bill the effect of
the British Constitution by allowing the
ordinary provision for the dissolution of
one House. The question might arise
whether, as in England, Avhere there is an
immovable Upper Chamber and a Lower
Chamber amenable to the will of the
people by dissolution, that would not have
had the effect, not only of keeping respon-
sible government more in the British track,
but also of compelling to a larger extent
than is contemplated under this Bill the
recognition in the last resort of the will
of the majority. These are only some of
the matters in which distinction is made.
My honorable friend (Mr. Barton) has
referred to railways and to bounties. In
regard to bounties, my honorable friend
(Mr. Barton) will forgive me if I say
that I do not agree with him that the
criticism that has appeared—l cannot
say where w r as unjust. I think my
honorable friend will admit that by reason
of the amendment made only yesterday
the position in regard to bounties may be
very materially altered.
Mr. Barton. —lt makes clear what was
the real meaning of the Bill before.
Mr. ISAACS.—WeII, I may be wrong,
but, to my mind, the change of verbiage
may make a most material difference in
effect. I have not had time properly to
consider it, but it may make all the differ-
ence.
Mr. Higgins. —What is the change ?
Mr. ISAACS.—The change is, instead
of saying that nothing in the section shall
have a certain effect, it is provided that,
“ notwithstanding anything in this Con-
stitution ” a certain effect may follow in
regard to bounties. These words have
such an enormously-increased importance
that they may take away very much of the
objection, or, at all events, mitigate much
of the objection, that I, in common with
other delegates in Victoria, felt on the
question. For myself, I think that the
criticism referred to might be perfectly
justified upon the words that previously
stood, but that may now have been to a
large extent met if not cured. I refer to
this now, but reserve for future con-
sideration, if need be, the full effect of
the words inserted yesterday. In regard
to the railways, I feel considerable hesita-
tion. I should have preferred not to ad-
vert to the matter at all, but, as my hon-
orable friend (Mr. Barton) has dealt with
the subject, I will say that I consider the
clause lastly mentioned by him, namely,
clause 103, has, in my judgment, a much
wider and more serious import than my
honorable friend appears to consider.
The 101st clause has been referred to as
Sir George Turner’s clause. Only the
first portion of it, less than half, is Sir
George Turner’s. That portion gives to
the Parliament the power, if it were not
otherwise limited, of holding a fair and even
though paramount hand over any cutting
rates, over any preferences or discrimina-
tions, that might be made on the railways
of one state as against another state. It
provides, subject to the qualifications which
follow, and which are not Sir George
Turner’s, that the Parliament in its wisdom
may exercise this beneficial control by for-
bidding any preference or discrimination
which is undue and unreasonable, or un-
just to any state. That was the extent
to which we desired to go. That was the
extent to which we believed the Conven-
tion ought to go, while leaving the con-
trol of the railways and their management
to each individual state. I should have
infinitely preferred a provision to federalize
the railways. It would leave the power in
the Federal Parliament to say to any state
that was doing anything undue and un-
reasonable, or unjust to any other state—
“ You shall not continue that course of
25


conduct,” Then, however, there are limi-
tations inserted which cut down the power
of Parliament, and the last sentence pro-
vides, in effect, that Parliament shall have
no such power of interference, whatever it
may think of the injustice or the unrea-
sonableness of a rate, unless the Inter-
State Commission shall first adjudge such
rate to be undue, or unreasonable, or un-
just to any state. That is a somewhat
cumbersome form in which to deal with
the questiou, but ultimate justice could
be reached and probably would be reached
by that method.
Mr. Barton. —As the matter stood, be-
fore the Drafting Committee gave ex-
pression to this clause, it was open to an
interpretation which would have been, I
think, very much more against the views
the honorable member holds.
Mr. ISAACS.—I am not complaining
of the drafting.
Mr. Barton.— l am not setting up the
drafting, but I thought it was open to a
dangerous interpretation.
Mr. ISAACS.—I am going to speak of
the effect of clause 103, which, I think,
places the matter in a very serious con-
dition. I do not wish to say one Avord
stronger than I am obliged to say, because
it will be a matter for further consideration.
This clause has been referred to as well as
others, and I have tried to express my
opinion as lightly as I could. Clause 103
again cuts down the poAver of the Parlia-
ment, and, what is more, the power of the
Inter-State Commission. It provides, in
effect, that certain rates, no matter hoAv
unjust to any other state, no matter
how undue or unreasonable it may be,
shall be out of the power of the Inter-
State Commission, out of the po\A r er of the
Parliament, out of the power of the High
Court, to prohibit it. But, unfortunately,
these rates that are so protected cannot
be rates that can be created in Victoria,
and they can be rates that can be created
in New South Wales. That is Avhere I
feel such difficulty—that is Avhere I feel the
[Mr. Isaacs.
injustice—because these two conditions are,
that if the trade is deemed by the Inter-
State Commission to be necessary for the
development of the territory of the state
—that is, the state which makes the rate
—and if the rate applies equally to
goods within the state, and passing
into the state from other states,
then nothing in this Constitution shall
render the rate unlawful. In other words,
if two rates exist, one adopted by New
South Wales from Riverina to Sydney,
and one adopted by Victoria from, say,
Wodonga to Melbourne, each undue and
unreasonable, and unjust to the other
state, the Victorian rate can be prohibited,
because it cannot be said to be for the
development of the territory of Victoria. It
may be for the development of Riverina,
but certainly it does not extend to Victoria,
because the goods pass into Victoria from
the other state. But, on the other hand,
the corresponding cutting rate in New
South Wales might comply with the con-
ditions in the Bill, because they may say
it is necessary for the development of
their territory Riverina and applies
to all goods wherever they come from,
whether Victoria or New South Wales.
Mr. Barton. —The goods which come
from other colonies would still be assisted
in the direction of intercolonial free-trade
by being charged under the larger rate.
Mr. ISAACS.—No, it is not the larger
rate, it is the smaller rate.
Mr. Barton.— l do not suppose the rate
can be either larger or smaller.
Mr. ISAACS.—I quite agree that if we
charge the larger rate, or if New South
Wales charges the larger rate, the trade
and commerce clause would prevent that.
Mr. Barton. —We do charge a larger
rate on goods coming from Victoria.
Mr. ISAACS. —I think the larger rate
could be prevented under the trade and
commerce clause. I am speaking of the
operation of these clauses, and that is
where I feel the injustice. I would not have
referred to any of these matters, but they
26


have been referred to by other honorable
members, and there might be a misunder-
standing.
Mr. Fraser. —The higher rate now
charged from Junee, or the stations in that
direction, to Wodonga can be prevented
under these clauses.
Mr. ISAACS.—Not under these clauses.
Mr. Fraser.—Yes.
Mr. ISAACS.—That is not correct.
Mr. Fraser.— Yes, with regard to an
unduly high rate.
Mr. ISAACS.—I am sui'e Air. Barton
would not agree with that view.
Air. Barton. —lt would apply to any
inequality on goods destined for Victoria
and goods destined for New South Wales.
Air. ISAACS.— A r es, but it does not
touch the particular point I am dealing
with. I wish to say, in connexion with
the railways, because they trouble me
-very much, that we shall get the very
best and most impartial information we
can. We will deal with this matter, as we
intend to deal wdth every other matter
which troubles us, in the fairest and most
impartial manner, and I think it is due to
the people whom we represent that that
course should be adopted. Now that I have
dealt with these subjects as lightly as I pos j
sibly could, I want tosay aword in regard to
other matters, such as the absence of certain
provisions which we sought to insert, in
regard, for instance, to the referendum.
Believe me, sir, that no feeling whatever,
no personal feeling, can ever prompt us to
refuse assent or to colour advice because
anyproposal that we had suggested has not
been adopted. This is too high and majestic
a matter for any such feeling to enter into
the question. It is beyond all personal
feelings. It is even beyond local feelings
so long as a fair measure of justice is pre-
served. Therefore, I am sure we shall be
believed when we say, and I speak for
more than myself, that no element, how-
ever slight, of personal consideration
could for an instant be permitted to enter
into the determination of this question.
But with regard to the referendum, un-
doubtedly we regret extremely that some
such provision has not been inserted. I
regret that it should have been referred to
to-day as a poison. I am not going to
repeat arguments previously addressed
to the Convention. I feel this is not
a time to do so, but may I be
permitted to read half-a-dozen lines
which, I think, are worthy of attention,
since my honorable friend not unfairly has
given his opinion with regard to this great
question? It is a matter which I hope,
when we come to consider the whole Con-
stitution, will be open for the considera-
tion of the people of the future Com-
monwealth. The quotation 1 refer to is in
the book to which my honorable friend
(Sir Bichard Baker) alluded. I do not
think he named the book, but he gave
a reference from it. It is by Charles Bor-
geaud, and is called Adoption and Amend-
ment of Constitutions. It is a remarkably
fine work. In dealing with the whole
question of the referendum he says —
The Swiss peasant, journeying to the next vil-
lage in his Sunday garb to deposit his “ Yes ” or
“No ”in the urn at the school-house, would shake
his head incredulously if told that his act may
have an interest for men outside of his own
country, living far away beyond the mountains.
Yet such is the case. The old historic nations
are marching, one after the other, or are pre-
paring to march, toward democracy, like the
columns of an army, slowly advancing into an
unknown country. This peasant is a scout of
the advance guard of this army.
I believe those words are eloquently and
absolutely true, but still, although I have
fought to the best of my humble ability to
secure the insertion of some provision that
would be a step in that march, it has not
met with the approval of the Convention.
It is true, as was pointed out in the columns
of a leading journal, that there is no
cause for despair, because three colonies
showed by the presence in the minority
of their Premiers and two Alinisters,
besides other gentlemen of known ability,
ex-Ministers amongst them, that they ap-
proved of the principle ; and we must also
27


recollect that amongst the majority on the
other side there were ten of our honorable
friends who have not been elected directly
by the people to this Convention. But,
however it may be, I do not desire for an
instant to enter into the merits of the con-
troversy. The time is past for that, but I
think the observations of my honorable
friend might not be unfairly added to
by the words I have just uttered. The
Bill is before us. I said I had a mes-
sage from Sir George Turner, and, as the
lawyers say, for greater certainty I will
read a portion of his note to me of a few
days ago, which embodies the words I de-
sire to communicate. And I wish to say
that they entirely accord with the views
that I hold and have sought elsewhere to
express. Sir George Turner writes—
lam not altogether satisfied with the Bill; but
I intend, after the lapse of a fortnight, to care-
fully consider the whole question, and if I can
possibly do so with justice to Victoria, I will re-
commend the people to accept the Constitution.
JSTow, sir, that is the attitude which, I
think, is the right attitude
Sir John Downer. —For everybody.
Mr. ISAACS.—Yes ; I think that is the
right attitude for everybody to assume.
We have now done our best, according to
our respective lights, to obtain the inser-
tion, or to prevent the insertion, in this
Constitution of certain provisions. lam
sure that the whole Convention have
striven with the utmost friendliness, I am
glad to say, right through the Convention,
with the utmost harmony—for I disregard
altogether some insignificant little pas-
sages which have no permanency in the
minds of honorable members or in any
other way —I say that with the utmost har-
mony and good feeling on the part of the
representatives of every state to the repre-
sentatives of every other state, we have
sought, to the best of our ability, and
without sparing ourselves in any shape or
form, to frame a Constitution in accord-
ance with the mandate that sent us here.
How, sir, it behoves us, therefore, in
the manner plainly indicated by the
[Mr. Isaacs.
motion to which I have the honour to
address myself, and which I cordially
support, that we shall take every means of
enabling the people of our respective
countries to familiarize themselves with
the contents of this Bill and with its
effect. And also, we should do this : We
should endeavour, calmly and quietly our-
selves, to obtain in our own minds as cor-
rect a picture of what the future of the
Commonwealth will be under this Bill as
we possibly can.
Mr. Barton.— Hear, hear.
Mr. ISAACS.—I am glad to hear that
approving cheer of my honorable friend.
I am sure we are as one on the subject,
because no man—l venture to say it for
myself, and I believe I may say it for
others—no man, however he has laboured
in this Convention, however he has given
his mind to the great questions that have
presented themselves from time to time,
can be sure that he appreciates, in their
relative importance, the effect of the
various provisions of the measure that
we have framed. There is no doubt that
it is a serious responsibility each one of
us has to take, and we must recollect
that the responsibility is not for ourselves
alone, nor even for those who surround
us at the present moment. We are
speaking, when we do speak here, not to
this Chamber, not to the people who are
outside merely, but we are also speaking for
and to future generations, and, therefore,
we should approach the matter, as it seems
to me, with calmness, with consideration,
with soberness, and with solemnity, and
we should make sure, as far as it is pos-
sible to make sure, that the resolve we
ultimately form, and the advice we ulti-
mately give, will be unattended, in any
event, and under any consequences, with
any degree of reproach. This Bill, if
accepted, will lead us, to a large extent,
upon an unknown track. Is it too much
to ask that we shall endeavour to throw all
possible light upon the yet untrodden path
we are about to traverse 1 Is it too much
to ask that the light that we seek to get in
28


this great enterprise shall not be a mere
momentary flashlight, gaudily coloured, it
may be, but shall, so far as we can secure it,
be the purer and clearer search-light of our
intelligence and calmer judgment. We
may do all this without any undue con-
sumption of time. We may do it, and we
shall do it with the highest satisfaction
to our consciences, and to those whom we
ultimately have to address; and I there-
fore think that, remembering the enormous
burden that there is upon our shoulders,
remembering the magnitude of the task
that lies before us, no less great, no less
important, than the task which we have
just accomplished, we are compelled to
move soberly and calmly if we are to
do our duty as we are expected to do it.
That is the least that can be expected
from every member of the Convention,
more particularly, it seems to me, from
those members who happen to occupy
positions of responsibility in their re-
spective colonies; and feeling that, and
being in absolute accord, I am proud to
say, with the right honorable gentleman
at the head of the Government of which I
have the honour to be a member, it is onr
intention to carry out the spirit of this
resolution now proposed by affording the
people every means, so far as we can—
every fair and legitimate and reasonable
means —of coming to a just conclusion
upon the merits of this great matter. I
believe, sir, there is not a member of this
Convention who is not urgently desirous
of achieving federation. For myself, I
say there is no dearer hope of my heart
than to see a Federated Australia; and,
in the ultimate result, while approaching
this matter with an unshakable determi.
nation to do my d\ity to the people who
sent me here, as well as to myself, I do
earnestly trust we may find, after all the
investigation and care we shall have given
to the matter, that our duty is so irre-
vocably linked with our desire, that we
may be able to offer our strongest advice
to the people of Victoria to accept this
Constitution.
{The President left the chair at fifty-one
minutes after tivelve o'clock p.m. The
House, resumed at five minutes past two
o'clock p.m.~\
Mr. HOLDER (South Australia). —As
while you, sir, are in the chair I am the
senior representative of South Australia
upon the floor of this chamber, it is to be
expected that I should say a few words
upon the present occasion. Ido not want
what I have to say to be taken as purely
formal and official, because the words that
I shall utter will express the earnest
convictions to which I have come ; and
especially in regard to the matters about
which I shall speak first, I desire that
there shall be an utter absence of any-
thing merely formal and official. I want,
first of all, to express, on behalf of the
South Australian representation, to the
colony of Victoria, and to the Ministry of
this great colony, our very sincere
thanks for the boundless hospitality and
kindness which has been shown to us ever
since we came to Melbourne. We were
most hospitably treated in Sydney; we
have been equally welcomed here. In
each city there appears to have been the
desire to outdo the other in this respect.
But that has been impossible.
Mr. Isaacs. —We have only tried to
reciprocate your kindness to us while we
were in Adelaide.
Mr. HOLDER.—I hope that the time
which was spent in Adelaide was as plea-
sant to the visiting representatives as the
time which we have spent under the care
and hospitality of the Government of
Victoria has been to us. I think that a
word is due to those who have laboured,
not merely to make our stay pleasant,
but to assist us in accomplishing that
which we have had in view. Speaking
for myself, I consider that the reporting
of our debates has been remarkably good.
There has hardly been the need of even
trifling verbal alterations, and the way in
which the speeches have been reported,
transcribed, and committed to print has
29


left nothing to be desired, I am quite
sure that in the permanent record of our
proceedings we have a document entirely
worthy of the purpose we have in view.
By the other officers of the House —the
attendants and others —nothing has been
shown us but kindness, courtesy, and at-
tention at every turn, and I am doing no
less than ought to be done in bearing this
testimony to the value of their services.
From them I pass to the officers of the
House who have been directly concerned
with the business of the Convention. Both
the Clerk and the Assistant Clerk unceas-
ingly, both in the chamber and outside in
their spare time, have devoted no small
amount of attention, care, and skill to the
performance of their work. Then I come
to those who have guided our deliberations
to a very large extent—the members of the
Drafting Committee. To our leader, the
honorable and learned member (Mr. Barton),
we owe a debt that we can never repay.
I am sure that it is hopeless to talk about
any recompense to that gentleman short
of that which he has set his heart upon
—the recompense of seeing his work
crowned by the ultimate acceptance of
the Constitution by the people of Aus-
tralia. I hope for his sake, as for the
sake of all of us, that this result will
accrue, and that he will be rewarded in
this way for the time he has given to the
Bill both during the sittings and upon
other occasions. To him and to the other
members of the Drafting Committee we
owe a large debt of gratitude. Of
the work of the Chairman of Commit-
tees I also wish to say a word or two.
Though that gentleman is one of my
colleagues in the representation of South
Australia, I may perhaps be allowed to
say that his work has been of the utmost
assistance to us. In the chair he has never
for a moment lost the thread of orderly
debate. He has kept us to our work, has
seen us through very many difficulties,
has helped us over several stiles where we
might otherwise have come to grief, and
has earned the approval of every member
\Mr. Holder,
of the Convention as being a most capable
Chairman. I thoroughly agree with the
view expressed by the honorable and
learned member (Mr. Isaacs) and others as
to the dignity and ability with which you,
Mr. President, have discharged your duties.
Now, a word or two upon the Bill itself.
I want to make a remark upon a
point which was overlooked by our leader
in the able speech delivered by him this
morning, and that is as to the more fre-
quent insertion than ever of words in
many of the clauses providing that the
enactments therein contained shall be
“ until the Parliament otherwise pro-
vides.” That is a very important matter.
Had those words not appeared so often as
they do, the Constitution would have been
somewhat of a cast-iron, or, to use another
expression which we have heard, of a hide-
bound character. How frequently these
words appear only those who have gone
carefully through the Bill will under-
stand ; but where they appear it means
that freedom has been left and scope
allowed for the growth and develop-
ment of the public feeling and senti-
ment of the people of these colonies.
These words mean that our Consti-
tution is not a hide-bound one, and is
not incapable of expansion to meet the
increasing demands likely to be made by
the people from time to time. Altera-
tions of the Constitution will, doubtless,
become necessary as time goes on; but I
think that the measure, as framed, is of
such a character as to postpone to the
furthest date the necessity for any con-
siderable alteration. That is largely be-
cause of the frequent insertion of the
words to which I have referred, giving*
power to the Federal Parliament to alter
conditions from time to time, and to ex-
pand provisions which might otherwise
have been found somewhat irksome. I
do not propose to enter at very great
length upon a discussion of the details of
the Bill, but there are two or three
matters to which I wish to refer very
shortly. First, so far as its financial
30


provisions are concerned, I do not think it
would have been possible for us, without
the gift of prophecy, which w r e do not pre-
tend to possess, to have laid dow r n much
more definitely than we have the exact
method in which a surplus, the dimensions
of which we cannot measure, - should be
distributed between the various states.
We have adopted a plan which I never
liked very well, and from wßich I should at
the present moment like to escape if I saw
any escape, but a plan which is eminently
just and fair. We provide for the ascer-
tainment as regularly and definitely as
possible of the contributions from each
state, and then for the due return—under
the amendment carried by the right hon-
orable member (Sir Edward Braddon) —of
a fixed proportion to the states concerned.
I think that that is a provision against
which no serious argument can be brought.
During the five years through which this
provision must prevail the Parliament of
the Federation will gain experience, and
in the light of that experience will be
able to deal further with the matter as
time goes on. We have also provided for
elasticity in dealing with the finances.
One of the most important questions
which will have to be faced is that
connected with the debts, and I associate
with it a matter which must be associated
with it—the control of the railways. These
are subjects which have so much in com-
mon that one can hardly be considered
without the other. lam very glad that a
provision which would have had the effect
of placing the federal guarantee behind
the separate state loans without any ade-
quate compensation has been left out of
the Constitution. That that federal gua-
rantee will be given in the early
future I fully believe, but it ought
not to be given in this Constitu-
tion. We have provided that the debts
of the colonies may be taken over by the
federal authorities at, I take it, the
earliest possible moment, which means, so
soon as agreements can be arrived at be-
tween the central authority and the states,
and so soon as a fitting business arrange-
ment can be come to with those w T ho hold
the bonds and stocks of the colonies to-
day. To take over the debts of the
colonies before would be mischievous, but
when these arrangements have been come
to, the principal and interest of the
state debts will be made a federal
charge, proper debits, of course, being
made to the various states concerned.
I have been looking since I was speaking
a few days since at the rates at which
Canada has been able to borrow money,
and I find that the Dominion is able to
obtain money in the London market on
much more favorable terms than any
colony of this group. I see no reason
why that should be, except that the
Dominion of Canada is a Federation, which
is able to offer the security not of one state,
but of all the states jointly and severally;
and when we are in a similar position, stand-
ing before the financial world as a Federated
Australia, and able to give such security, I
have not the slightest doubt that we shall
be able to obtain terms as favorable as
those which are now obtained by the
Canadian Dominion. Then again, there
will be the possibility of inducing the in-
vestment of British trust funds in Austra-
lian stock; and I can conceive of no
argument so strong for inducing the
British Government to allow the holders
of trust funds to invest them in Austra-
lian stock, as the argument which would
be available to the Federal Treasurer
having all the Federation securities at
his back. I confidently believe that federa-
tion will be speedily followed by the adop-
tion of the provision to which I refer.
The railways we have provided for
under the Constitution, and provided
for, again, in the wisest possible manner.
Had it been set out that the railways
were to be taken over by virtue of the
coming into being of the Commonwealth,
we should have aroused fresh antagonism.
There are enough antagonisms against
this Bill already, and it would have been
a misfortune to have aroused others.
31


Certainly others would have been added
had we provided for the compulsory taking
over of the railways by the Federation.
We have, however, provided simply that
the railways may be taken over by agree-
ment between the Commonwealth and
the states on terms to be agreed upon, and
this provision will enable the complete
federalization of the railways to be
brought about. I have listened with at-
tention and interest to the remarks of the
Attorney-General of Victoria (Mr. Isaacs)
upon the railway question, and my remark
upon his observations is this : If the diffi-
culty prove as serious as he imagines, it
will be the strongest possible argument to
commend the Bill to the Victorian people,
seeing that the provisions of the Constitu-
tion relating to the railways provide for
the possibility of their complete federaliza-
tion. I think the answer to the objection
raised is this—that we have provided in
regard to railways that they may be dealt
with in the best possible way and at the
earliest possible moment, so as to prevent
antagonisms and not create them, and so
as to help on and not stand in the way of
the realization of the federal idea. With
regard to constitutional issues, there are
a few remarks which I should like to
make. Of course, the Bill is not perfect.
No human work is perfect. But the
question is not whether the measure is
perfect. We could have answered that
question in the beginning, because we
knew in advance that we could never
make a perfect Bill. We know that it
could never have been perfect by any pos-
sible contingency. But we may claim
that it is sufficiently perfect for a free and
self-reliant people to live under its rule
with their freedom undiminished ; and my
answer to those who ask whether the Bill
is acceptable in this light is this: When
we met in this Convention we entered
upon a task in which we realized we
should be untrue to the trust reposed in
us if we had not dealt with the matters
which came before us with the sense of re-
sponsibility resting upon every one of us
{Mr. Holder.
that we were dealing with matters on
behalf of independent and self-reliant
states. And we have dealt with those
matters on which the interests of the states
clashed, we have harmonized the interests
of the several states where they differed,
and we have provided a Constitution
sufficient to provide for the fullest and
the most self-reliant government of a
free people. We have created an instru-
ment of partnership between us which, I
believe, while it secures the independence
of the several states, will provide for
the joint control of certain matters, at
the same time as it also leaves free
and complete self-government on all
matters not committed to the central
authority. And this, it seems to me, is
what we should have done—to provide
that national questions should he federal-
ized, and that local questions should be
left to local self-government. And it is
this, it seems to me, that we have done; and
thus we have done Avhat we ought to have
done and what our constituents expected
of us. We have framed a Constitution of
such a character that I have no hesitation
in asserting that under it class privileges
have no place, and sectional representa-
tion disappears. The Senate, as we
have provided for it, is not a Senate
elected as the Upper Houses of our
various states are elected now, but as
“broad based upon the people’s will” as
is the House of Representatives itself.
The suffrage, to begin with, will not be
quite uniform. We shall, in South Aus-
tralia, have the lead to some extent at the
beginning, but I believe that the other
colonies will speedily come into line with
us. But at least this is sure, that man-
hood suffrage will be the basis of the
franchise of the Constitution, and, with
that as the foundation principle of the
Commonwealth, I do not see how the
Constitution can be described as being-
other than a popular Constitution. Then
we have provided a method for dealing
with any disputes that may arise between
the two Houses. We provide that both
32


Houses shall, in case they cannot agree,
go back to their constituents and get
fresh instructions. So that here also
Ave still keep the same fundamental idea
in vieAv, that the people are those
whose determination shall settle any ques-
tion, great or small, that may come up
for settlement. We have further pro-
vided for the referendum, concerning
Avhich my honorable and learned friend
(the Attorney-General of Victoria) feels so
strongly. We have engrafted the principle
of the referendum upon this Constitution,
by providing that no alteration of the
Constitution no expansion or limitation
of its provisions—can be made unless the
people are consulted and given the decision
of the question. This being so, it seems
to me that any description of this Consti-
tution as being anything less than the
most liberal, the most popular, of Consti-
tutions would be a misdescription, and
not a true description of its cha-
racteristics. I do not believe, either,
that our efforts at reform will cease
by the adoption for the Federation of
an equal franchise for both Houses, as
laid doAvn in this Bill. It seems to me
to be impossible to believe that, if avc
enact such provisions with regard to
the Senate of the Commonwealth, the
restrictive franchises for the Upper Houses
in our various states can much longer con-
tinue. It seems to me that the influence
of the federal franchise for both Houses
must be in the direction of bringing about
a reform in the constitution of the Upper
Houses as we have hitherto known them
in Australia; and thus, in the early future,
I believe we shall possess, not only for fede-
ral purposes but for state purposes, Consti-
tutions which, Avhile abolishing all class
privileges, will confer upon the citizens as
a Avhole those equal rights in respect to
the government of their country which
Ave desire the people to enjoy, and which
they demand at our hands. I do
not propose to detain the Con-
vention by pointing out at any length
the advantages that will arise from the
adoption of this Constitution. I be-
lieve that there will be advantages to the
traders, advantages to the producers, advan-
tages to the consumers of all classes of the
community, advantages to those who work
with their hands and to those who work
with their brains ; and without occupying
time in detailing all the advantages that
will arise, I will say that I can conceive of
no class which will not benefit from the
incoming of this federation which we are
striving to bring about. I can conceive
only that the mere partisan, the person
who is more governed by his prejudices
than by arguments and by calm judg-
ment —these, and these only, can bring
forward what they may conceive to be
arguments against the adoption of this
federation scheme. I know that there
has been in reference to our proceedings
to day some sense of parting ; there has
been a feeling of having come to the end
of our labours. But, sir, I shall express
the hope that we are not viewing the
setting of the sun and the end of day
when we contemplate the conclusion
of the labours we have all participated
in ; but that Ave are looking at the
oncoming dawn, in which these colonies
shall Avitness the termination of their
period of isolation, so that this great
Australia may stand before the world
as one Avhole, taking her true position
amongst the nations of the Avorld ; and that
after that dawn shall come the rising of
the sun in all its brightness, upon that day
of federation towards Avhose oncoming our
labours luwe been devoted.
Mr. DEAKIN (Victoria). —May I be
permitted, without repetition, to echo and
indorse the acknowledgments that have
been made to you, sir, for the distinc-
tion with which you have presided over
this Convention; to Sir Richard Baker
for the masterly manner in Avhich he
has controlled the very prolonged pro-
ceedings in committee, and for the marvel-
lous skill with which he has been able
to simplify our Avork; to the Drafting
Committee for having produced a Avork
33


which will be their best monument; espe-
cially to our leader, for the labours by
which he has placed us all under a heavy
debt of obligation to him, which labours
have ended in his extremely concise and
lucid exposition of this Bill ; and, also,
to the Clerk of this Convention and his
assistants in all the colonies, to whom
we owe so much that is not apparent
upon the face of the printed reports of
our debates. Then, sir, if I rise, it is
not for the purpose of adding to the de-
tailed criticism of this measure, but, so
far as I can, to view it in its most
practical aspect, especially in the
light of recent criticism. Speaking to-
day, one is taking advantage of the
arrangements which have been made for
the reporting of our proceedings in Han-
sard; and this is probably a suitable place,
especially for one who imposes so great
a task upon reporters, to speak in the
warmest terms of the work, admirably
performed under all difficulties, of those
who have accomplished the transformation
of our utterances into the Hansard re-
ports.
Honorable Members. —Hear, hear.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The first criticism to
which I desire to offer a word of reply
is that which minimizes the issue
about to be placed before the several
colonies by the assertion that in any case
its negation simply means postponing an
achievement of whose ultimate accom-
plishment there can be no doubt, and that
such a postponement need be but for
a very short period. That is certainly
an extremely optimistic view of the
situation. The federal movement is al-
most as old as the colonies, and this par-
ticular form of it, which has now reached
its climax, is five years old. It had
its inception in the Corowa Confer-
ence of 1893, and was not officially
adopted by the Premiers in January,
1895. It was considered at the Bathurst
Conference in November, 1896, and
its ultimate result was the creation
of this Convention, which commenced
[Mr. DeaJcin,
its sittings in March of last year. These
sittings had to be terminated at an in-
complete stage, and quite unexpectedly,
because of the demands made by other
duties upon many of the representa-
tives. We adjourned to Sydney, where
we believed that our task would be
finished; but again local demands made
their urgency manifest, and a second
unexpected adjournment took place.
There have been proposals that even
this last and most prolonged session of all
should be adjourned for a still further
period, in order to afford time for the ac-
complishment of our task. If we recall
the five years which have been spent in
getting the Convention together, and the
difficulty that has been felt in keeping
it together, even when it has been elected
by the people solely for this purpose,
we shall be better able to realize the task
that will lie before us if, most unhappily,
this effort after federation should fail. All
this work will practically have to be done
again, and although we may fairly claim
that public opinion has been ripened
and public judgment matured by the
discipline and education through which
we have passed during the last five
years, it is certain that in the
future local emergencies and political
urgencies will be no less keen than they
have been in the past. They kept us
waiting for years before the Convention
could assemble, they twice disturbed its
onward progress, and they may easily
be of such a nature as - to postpone the
success of any future effort for an even
longer period. Consequently, those who
Avould have us set aside our work at
its present stage, as if it could be
resumed at any time, are presuming
beyond and in the face of our experience.
Then it is perfectly true that, even
if this effort should fail, the federal
spirit is not likely to die. It never
can pass away until it has accom-
plished the object we have in view. To
judge by official statements, it may well
be that if this great effort fails we
34


shall have the work removed to a lower
plane, and the solution sought in a
weaker, a poorer, and a confessedly
transient form of federation. We shall be
asked, instead of achieving a true federal
union, to be pacified .for some years
with a partial federation, which must
break down sooner or later, to the great
prejudice of all concerned, as did the
preliminary and utterly unsatisfactory
union of the American colonies before
they entered on their full federal career.
We hear, and have a right to hear and to
attend to, the warnings with which we are
favoured as to the dangers of union, but
are entitled to reply by asking that the
account should be balanced by some
estimate of the dangers of disunion.
Disunited we are, and, should this
effort fail, for many years dis-
united we must remain. The perils
which are thus involved, not only from
without, but from the growth of warring
forces within, should be taken into
consideration at the same time as
the risks of union are carefully mea-
sured. To the demand for the fullest
and most careful criticism of this
Bill, no honorable member can have
an objection to urge, and I, for one,
welcome the calm and studious examina-
tion of it from both sides by my hon-
orable colleague the Attorney-General
of Victoria this morning. Not one
comment of his should be put aside
until it has been answered by calm
reason and a recollection of proved facts.
The task of criticism has been rendered
more easy to those outside the Convention
by the necessities of the procedure to
which we have recently been submitted.
It has been our duty on the floor of this
chamber to ignore the glowing colours
in which we might have painted the
merits'of the scheme we are debating and
the advantages that are to flow from it.
These have been tacitly assumed, while
voice has been given to every possible
criticism and every possible forecast of
danger which the keenest and most
sensitive imagination could conjure up.
The consequence is that the record of
our proceedings is a record of the search
for all possible faxilts which could be
found, or, under any set of circumstances,
thought likely to occur. For the purpose
of perfecting the drafting, language has
had to be strained to the breaking point,
and beyond it, in order that every pos-
sible application of every phrase under
the most exceptional and remarkable con-
ditions might be made clear before it was
finally adopted. We have been examin-
ing therefore the abnormal and not the
normal developments of the Constitution.
We have been seeking for and exposing
its defects, and not its merits. The task
that begins for all of us to-day is to
exactly reverse our procedure. Now that
the Bill has been finally adopted we must
remit its defects to their true place, so
that they may be seen in their true
perspective, while bringing before public
attention once more the overwhelming
merits of the Constitution that we have
at last succeeded in shaping. While we
have been, and rightly, keeping before us
at all times the ideal Constitution which
we hoped to create, we have had to re-
member that even ideals differ, and are
often in absolute conflict. Our task has
not been to realize an ideal common to us
all, but to realize ideals which embody, as
Sir Richard Baker has shown, at all events,
three distinct lines of thought, seeking to
express themselves in three largely differ-
ing forms. We have had conflicting ideals,
and not a little of our difficulty has been
in grafting one upon another so as to
produce a whole which, without being too
complex, should sufficiently embrace the
general ideal of the whole Convention and
its differing sections. We recognise at the
outset, and it cannot be too often re-
peated, trite as the phrase is, that per-
fection of any kind is impossible to us.
We do well to aim at it, but we surely
act unwisely if we demand absolute fault-
lessness in our Constitution, and refuse
to accept anything that comes short of it.
35


It has been said that we may marry
in haste and repent at leisure, hut we
may also refuse in haste and repent at
leisure, none the less bitterly. If either
sex insisted upon absolute perfection, there
would he no marriages either in haste or
leisure. Moreover, it is not the acceptance
of a new obligation that alone involves
risk. There is the risk of accepting a loav
ideal. The minor and the smaller success
that belongs to a shrunken and narrow fede-
ration can never be contrasted with the
effort after a greater and nobler union, even
if that be attended by some measure of
failure. Perfection is unattainable in any
sphere. Even our national emblem—the
Southern Cross—is not perfect, nor per-
fectly proportioned, nor equal in all its
members, and yet it shines supreme in
queenly brilliancy above all its sister con-
stellations of the southern skies. Though
we remember the ideal, we shall surely not
ignore the possible nor forget the actual.
It is from the stand-point of the actual that
we must regard the Constitution which
is placed before Australia to-day, and I
think we need not fear the result. Is the
actual condition of Australia’s politics and
policies ideal? Do we run no risks as
separate communities ? Are we faced by
no dangers, financial or otherwise? Why
are we here, if not in obedience to a de-
mand, widespread and born of a universal
recognition of the fact that the condition
of the colonies to-day is not one with
which the people of the colonies are or
ought to be satisfied ? When our critics
urge that we should show the merits
and advantages of this Constitution, we
must begin by deducting the demerits and
the disadvantages under which we now
labour, and from which this Constitution
offers us an escape. If our present
Constitutions were ideally satisfactory
we should not be seeking a Federation.
Of necessity in framing a Constitution,
we must, taking the largest view of the
situation, allow for what we are avoiding
as well as reckon what we are hoping to
gain. I do not propose to say much
[ Mr. Dp akin.
in regard to what may be termed the
purely political aspects of this measure,
except to question the applicability of
Sir Richard Baker’s metaphor that the
Federal Senate is to be the pivot of the
Constitution. It appears to me that the
responsible government which we are in-
augurating will be the pivot of the Con-
stitution, and the support of that pivot
will necessarily lie in the National House.
This is not urged in depreciation of the
force of the argument which Sir Richard
Baker employed. The great growth in
dignity, importance, and power of the
Federal Senate as ' compared with our
own Upper Chambers is indisputable. In
that respect, I heartily indorse his reading
of the Constitution. It is the fact that
the Federal Senate is to be brought into
closer touch with the manhood, in some
colonies with the manhood and woman-
hood, that is, with the citizens of the
whole of Australia, that will give it power,
strength, and prestige. The provisions
which some of us supported, though they
appeared to the advocates of Senate con-
trol to be fatal to their aspirations, were
not inserted in the Bill with the object of
rendering one Federal Chamber subservient
to the other. They Avere made Avith the
simple and direct object of bringing both
Chambers into touch Avith their constitu-
ents and allowing their constituents to de-
termine their differences, instead of involv-
ing them in party and internecine warfare,
prejudicial to the transaction of public
business, and injurious to the common
Aveal. Sir Richard Baker’s vieAv, indorsed
though it has been by the Hon. Mr.
Isaacs, appears to me to need great
qualification. It needs the qualification
that in this Constitution more than in any
other Federal Constitution in the world,
and as much as if not more than in any
unitary Constitution in the Avorld, both
Chambers are brought into direct relation
Avith their constituents and their constitu-
encies, especially on matters of difference.
It is from this close and intimate relation
that those avlio think with me foresee the
36


best prospects for harmony —foresee the
best prospects for the working of the legis-
lative machinery—foreseethe best prospect
of general agreement, both Chambers de-
voting themselves sincerely to the inter-
pretation and execution of the mature and
deliberate will of the public. It has been
said that one respect in which we have
relaxed from the Bill of 1891 is in the
limitation upon the number of members of
the representative Chamber. And so far
I agree with that position. At the same
time, it cannot be ignored, and might have
been mentioned, that some limitation
of the numbers is essential if the
provision for the joint sitting is to have
any meaning whatever. That sitting has
considerable value. If the joint sitting is
ever to allow fair consideration to those
representatives of the people of the several
states who sit in the Senate chamber, there
must be some fixed proportion between
them. If the old proviso of one member
to 30,000 had remained, in the course of a
few years we should have seen the Senate
asked to unite in a joint sitting with a
House three or four times its strength.
Under these circumstances, what meaning
would a joint sitting have had? What signi-
ficance would have attached to it ? What
solution would it have afforded of any diffi-
culty in which the states were concerned'?
Mr. Barton. —The three-fifths condi-
tion would have been useless.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Any fractional condi-
tion would have been useless under the
circumstances.
Mr. Symon. —The Senate would have
been a perfect delusion.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The result would be
government by a single Chamber, and that,
speaking for myself, is what appears to be
an entirely unsuitable and inappropriate
federal ideal. If we recognise that there
must be some limit (although this limit is
piit in a hard-and-fast manner, which ap-
pears to me unnecessary) we must admit
that by this three-fifths provision we
have come as close to the acceptance
of the referendum as it is possible to
go without altogether departing from
the principles on which responsible
government has been worked in the ppst,
and on which responsible government
is being worked in the present. The
double dissolution means an appeal to
the whole people in the same way as the
referendum, except that instead of being
governed by a count of the states and the
people as a whole, the states return their
senators and the people of the Common-
wealth their representatives. The two acting
together will, in nineteen cases out of twenty,
decide as the referendum would have de-
cided. The only difference is that there
must be a majority of voters in its favour
sufficient to obtain a three-fifths majority
in the two Houses. That means not
much more than the simple majority of
voters which, under the ordinary referen-
dum, would have attained the same end.
Consequently, we may say that in nine-
teen cases out of twenty the joint sitting
with the three-fifths principle would pro-
vide for the settlement of questions just
as the referendum would have settled
them, while preserving the representa-
tive character of our institutions. It ap-
pears to me that, as every Executive which
challenges this double dissolution must
take its life in its hands, and imperil the
seats of all its followers, you may rarely
see the provision brought into actual
operation. From my experience of colonial
Governments and their supporters, a burn-
ing ardour for dissolution scarcely arises
once in three years. When the election
does come it is welcomed by no one with
satisfaction except those who think they see
a chance of turning their minority into a
majority. That being the case, those in a
majority—the Executive, which has the
choice —would take care they do not give
the minority an opportunity if they can
prevent it. It is a very gratifying thing
to be able to dissolve an obstructive
Senate, but to have to stake your
seats on your success is very awkward.
That is the security of the double disso-
lution. Under these circumstances it


appears to be little more than the re-
ferendum, with a penalty attached to
its misuse. One danger which even
those who advocated the referendum for
local affairs have recognised is that the
referendum might be too readily, too fre-
quently, and unnecessarily resorted to,
and that, consequently, responsible govern-
ment, with the authority and sense of
duty of the representatives, might be
impaired. Even if we think this dan-
ger is overbalanced by other consider-
ations, we must all recognise that, at
all events, there is such a risk. Under
this Bill we have practically a referen-
dum to the whole people, with the
important qualification that before the
Executive resort to it by means of the
double dissolution they have to prove
their belief in the importance of their
cause, and their confidence that the
country indorses their view, by staking
all they politically possess on the hazard.
That, I think, is a very important prelimi-
nary. Speaking of the political provisions
of the Bill, it appears to me that they
may be fairly said, not only to mark a
great advance on the Constitution of 1891,
but to be vastly more liberal than any of
the Constitutions under which we at pre-
sent live. Not one of the Constitutions
under which we live provides a more
liberal franchise, or applies it to both
Chambers under the restriction of one man
one vote. No Federal Constitution in the
world provides the safeguard of a double
dissolution and a joint sitting. Although
the Norwegian Constitution approaches
the Constitution we have framed in
character, there is no Federal Constitu-
tion in the world so liberal. We must
remember that this Federal Constitu-
tion is to be built up out of two quar-
ries. The first quarry is the existing
powers of the local Parliaments, which are
called upon to make certain surrenders. By
these surrenders, liberal electors will ob-
serve that we are taking powers in every
case from a less liberal Constitution,
and referring them to a more liberal
{Mr. Deakin.
Constitution. Every existing Constitution
in Australia is less liberal from a political
point of view' in its framework and
machinery than the Federal Constitution.
Liberal electors will note, therefore, that
whatever powers they sacrifice they are
transferring to a more liberal Government,
over which they have a readier con-
trol. As to the new' powers with which
the Federal Government is endowed —and
that is the other quarry —liberal electors
will note that not only in the future will
they be endowed with powers which they
have not at present, but that those powers
Avill be exercised under a more liberal
Government than they now enjoy. For
my own part I have no hesitation and no
fear in recommending the acceptance of
this Constitution to the people of Victoria.
I do not ignore, though proposing to deal
very briefly with the question of material
losses and gains, which remains to be re-
viewed apart from political principles. Here
it may not be out of place, in view of the
criticisms w'hich we are at present re-
ceiving, to recall, to the critics themselves,
the forecasts which they made of the
material advantages to be obtained from
federation before this Constitution was
promulgated at every time when discussion
arose. We are all agreed that the adop-
tion of this Constitution must mean, first,
the establishment of complete intercolonial
free-trade, and we have heard much of its
commercial and monetary advantages and
of the increased production which it will
secure. We have heard that magnified for
many years. Now, it appears to be totally
forgotten. We have not only that pro-
spect, but, looking at the policy pursued
in four out of the five colonies repre-
sented, we have it, according to the ad-
mission of so fair-minded and clear-
sighted a representative as Mr. McMillan,
of New r South Wales, that there will be no
mere revenue Tariff. We are certain that it
wfill not only be a protective Tariff in gene-
ral principle, but, as it must raise consider-
able sums of money, and express the will
of four colonies which practise protection,
38


it follows that the protection afforded to
our industries established under the policy
will not be nominal or inconsiderable, but
considerable and extensive, from the first
Federal Tariff. Even the free-trade party,
judging at all events from the utterances of
some of their leaders, will not seek at the
outset of the Commonwealth career to
force their principles, when they know that
their success, if it were possible, would im-
peril the position of four of those colonies,
and that there are tens, and even hundreds,
of thousands of citizens of the Common-
wealth who would be prejudicially affected
by such a policy. I believe, personally, that
the enormous advantages that must follow
from the sweeping away of the boundaries
between the colonies will be obtained under
a high Tariff, distinctly protectionist in all
its details, and yielding a large revenue,
without the sacrifice of a single industry
in Australia. These large general in-
calculable gains require to be continually
borne in mind at the time when individual
losses of individual colonies are taken into
account. It appears to be forgotten that
all these losses have to be deducted from
the great general gain which ’each indi-
vidual colony will receive under the pro-
visions of the Constitution. We enter
on the calculation of individual losses
with this knowledge, and are perfectly
well prepared to meet a great many
of them, and yet have a balance to our
credit from our general gains. Subject
to this, let us take a few' concrete instances
of anticipated losses. My reading of the
six clauses dealing with the Inter-State
Commission and the control of the rail-
ways, is not that of my friend the Attor-
ney-General for Victoria, though I quite
admit the cogency of his interpretation.
These clauses, if put into plain and simple
language, seem to say—“ You shall create
a body composed of responsible and able
men in whom you will be able to place
as much confidence as you place in the
Judges of your Supreme Court. Having
created that body, you are to lay before
it a variety of guiding principles, some
of which must necessarily come into
conflict. You say that trade shall be per-
fectly free, and that each state when the
border barriers are thrown down shall be
forbidden to make any charges or reduc-
tions on its raihvays which will have the
effect of diverting the trade from its
natural geographical routes —from ports
offering the greatest advantage not to
the state receiving the traffic, but to
the people sending it.” The first con-
sideration of this Inter-State Commis-
sion w T ould be to enable people to send
their traffic to the cheapest and nearest
ports, and without loss of time, to get
their produce to the place where it could
be most profitably exported or sold. That
is subject to certain other conditions. A
state is to be allow'ed to develop its own
territory, and make special reductions or
special charges where the construction
of railways has been costly, but no state
is to act unjustly or in an unfair manner
to its neighbours in framing its rates.
Now, it is quite possible that these con-
siderations will, in some respects and to
some extent, come into conflict. But my
reliance is that the Inter-State Com-
mission wall exercise the free mind which
our own courts have exercised at times,
and which notably the great Federal Court
of the United States of America under
Chief Justice Marshall boldly and con-
sistently exercised throughout. They
will feel that they are, by appointment
and function, a truly Federal Court.
They will give a federal interpretation to
all these provisions, unless the context
clearly forbids them so doing. Their
guiding principle and object will be not to
fetter trade, not to encourage differential
rates, not to permit preferential rates, or
any interference wdth freedom of com-
merce. Reading those clauses as a whole,
they appear to apply in such a manner
that, though none of us can precisely
forecast their exact consequence in a par-
ticular case, the result which we are en-
titled to expect, if the members of that
commission are worthy of their position, as
39


no doubt they will be, must be fair to
all. If they rise to the occasion, and
feel their federal responsibility, they
will deal with this vexed question in
such a manner as to do injury to
none. Victoria has undoubtedly some-
thing to apprehend in regard to the
operation of the 103rd section taken
by itself. But, reading the whole of
the clauses together, looking at the
question from a practical point of view
—recognising that these clauses sweep
away preferential rates at present existing
in New South Wales as well as in Victoria;
realizing that, after all, no Inter-State
Commission can ignore geographical facts,
that it cannot make 200 miles as long as
400 miles, and that they must recognise
the well-being of the settlers of the
interior as first to be considered—l am
inclined to believe that in the ultimate
result Victoria will receive no injury
from the operations of these provisions.
The sweeping away of the barriers which
at present shut out some of the Ri-
verina trade will lead to a greater busi-
ness being done between that part of
New South Wales and Victoria. The
mere abolition of the stock tax, which is
one of the necessities of the operation
of a uniform Tariff, will bring tens of
thousands of pounds of yearly income to
the railways of Victoria, a great part of
which we have lost for many years. So in a
variety of ways these clauses will operate,
not to the detriment, but to the advantage
of Victoria. In striking a balance I
am strongly inclined to believe no colony
has anything to fear. Now, a few words
as to the bounties. The Federal Parlia-
ment, representing the federal people, will
be as sensitive to the appeals of the
people for assistance as any local Parlia-
ment has been. The great federal indus-
tries of. Australia—fruit-growing, dairying,
agriculture, and horticulture —will be no
less an object of concern to repre-
sentatives in the Federal Parliament
than they have been to represen-
tatives in the various local Parliaments.
[Mr. Deakin.
Indeed, the improved circumstances and
more independent position of the Fede-
ral Government will allow them to deal
with the development of these indus-
tries with a more liberal hand than
the local Governments can deal with
them. If our neighbours across the bor-
ders share in these bounties we cannot
regret it and remain Australians; Ave can-
not desire to escape that if we are feder-
ated. We must realize that where one great
industry runs through several colonies, the
interests of that industry are federal, and
its encouragement must be undertaken by
the Federal Government. While we lose
in one direction we probably gain more in
another. I see no reason why the future
federal bounties should not be larger than
those given by special states in the past.
In addition to that, if there be an industry
peculiar to one state, or of so small a
character that the Federal Parliament does
not feel disposed to take action in its
favour, we have the means of assisting it
from state funds on obtaining a resolution
from both Houses of the Federal Parlia-
ment. We shall have 24 members in one
House and six in the other, making 30 in
all, to urge the claims of Victoria. New
South Wales will have slightly more
representation, and the other states will
be as strong in the Senate, although
not so strong in the House of Repre-
sentatives. The claims of all the colo-
nies must meet with ready considera-
tion from the Federal Parliament. The
gain of one is not the loss of another.
The development of an industry in any
one state will be welcomed by representa-
tives of other colonies in the Federal Par-
liament, because appeals will come for
similar consideration from all. Looking
at the practice of the past in the local
Legislatures, and their sensitiveness to
popular appeals of this kind, I have little
apprehension in remitting to the Federal
Parliament the granting of federal boun-
ties, and retaining to the states, subject to
its approval, the fostering of those peculiar
to each colony. The complement of my
40


argument with regard to the railways and'
bounties is that we must recall the actual
position. It is said that under this measure
we may have great losses on the Victorian
railways, because we may lose traffic that
now comes from New South Wales. Well,
if we do not federate, the traffic which comes
from New South Wales remains under the
control of New South Wales. If New South
Wales is prepared to cut rates far enough,
and to impose dues high enough, she can in-
flict all the losses feared from the Common-
wealth Bill. We have no power to pre-
vent them. We have no means of urging
a plea for equitable treatment. If we in-
sist upon remaining independent we must
take the consequences, and face the pos-
sibility of equal railway losses. We are not
relieved from the possibility or prospect of
railway losses by remaining outside the
Federation. By remaining outside the Fede-
ration we leave the whole and sole control of
such a question, not in the hands of an inde-
pendent body of Federal Inter-State Com-
missioners, to whom we can appeal, before
whom we have statutory rights, and from
whom we can well claim consideration,but we
leave the matter solely in the hands of the
Government of New South Wales. If that
Government is prepared to make the neces-
sary financial sacrifices, and to take the neces-
sary legislative steps, they are in a position
to deprive us more effectually of the railway
traffic than any Inter-State Commission can.
Although one hesitates, even by way of
illustration or argument, to represent as
possible so hostile and unfriendly an act
as that on the part of a neighbour, yet
when we are looking at the Federal Com-
monwealth Bill in the light of the worst
that can possibly happen under union, we
are justified in looking at what is the
worst possible that can happen under dis-
union. There is no greater railway danger
under union than under disunion—there is
infinitely less. On the one hand, we have
a federal claim, a Federal Court, a federal
appeal; in the other case, we must remain
helpless and silent, unable to retaliate, and
bound to submit. The same argument
applies in regard to bounties. The pre-
sent position is not one whit more to our
advantage as promising benefits for the
future than it would be under union.
At present the finances of the various
colonies are heavily drawn upon. It is
with difficulty that Ministries can be
persiiaded to vote bounties. We require
a Government in a better financial posi-
tion than the Governments of the states
now are if we wish the system extended
and generally employed. I now come to
the important question of the finances.
A fear has been expressed that the Federal
Tariff may be so framed, and the federal
finances so managed, that the Treasurers
of the several colonies may find themselves
left with large deficits. Well, unfortunately,
deficits are well known to all the states
already; they have been frequent before
federation, and hence afford no novel terror
peculiar to union. Still, with four colonies
out of the five joining this Federation, it is
an absolute financial necessity that at least
£6,000,000 should be raised through the
Customs in order that they may receive back
a sufficient sum to fill up the deficiency
left in their accouxrts by the transfer of
their great revenue-producing department.
Under these circumstances, although the
representation in Parliament outside the
Senate will not be quite four-fifths, those
colonies will have an overwhelming majo-
rity. An overwhelming majority of the
future Federal Parliament will be returned
by constituencies which will be compelled
by the inevitable necessities of their
situation to insist upon at least £6,000,000
being obtained from the Tariff, so
as to place their Treasurers beyond
embarrassment. There is no possi-
bility of loss to the taxpayers of the
several colonies. It is a question of loss
to the states Treasuries, in consequence of
the remission of a great body of taxation
at present levied upon people in the form
of intercolonial duties. The effect of
clause 87 is to put the states Treasurers
in such a position that they will not
need to come upon their constituents
41


to make up this deficiency in their Trea-
suries, although the money has remained
in the pockets of those constituents.
The federal financial position need not
be prejudiced by the fifth colony (New
South Wales), for after this Federation
has been established there are certain
concessions very dear to the heart and
nearest the mind of our neighbours.
When the time comes in the Federal
Parliament for federal representatives
to undertake the government of their
common country, there will be mutual
adjustments and concessions on every
hand. The representatives of New South
Wales will be penetrated with the fede-
ral spirit. As I have more than hinted,
there are ambitions of New South
Wales which are not satisfied in this
Constitution, and which require to be deter-
mined. The site of the federal capital is
one, and by no means the least important.
It is perfectly possible, therefore, to fore,
see that it will not be the representatives
of four colonies alone, but of the whole
five colonies, who may be at one in the
determination to put the several states
beyond the possibility of financial disaster,
and to enable them to commence their
career as states without apprehension.
Though we refuse to unite while seasons,
prices, and catastrophes remain, we must
all be liable to financial miscalculations,
and consequent deficits. I have tres-
passed on the time of the Conven-
tion upon familiar well-worn aspects of
this subject, which I would not have
thought of touching upon had it
not been plain that they have been re-
cently passed by as if dropped from
memory —as if existing minor difficulties
had blotted out all the larger, aspects of
the situation. Ido not propose to re-
iterate, as we have often reiterated, the
impossibility, without federation, of united
action, enabling us to face with equani-
mity the position of foreign affairs, never
so threatening to the mother country, never
so critical or so serious to her, or to us, for
100 years as they are to-day. With the
\Mr. Deakin.
burden of a far vaster empire than she
bore at Waterloo, we find Great Britain,
as an empire, threatened in every part
of the globe, and at the same time, by
great powers and great influences, often
apparently leagued in their hostility. At
a time like this, when the question of
the control of alien races and the influx
of alien populations has become, and
threatens to become, a still more burning-
question in all these colonies, it is surely
not idle to remind our critics that without
union we must remain exposed to that
and many similar dangers. Dangers
without, and difficulties within, track
the steps of disunion, and threaten far
graver losses to every corner of the Com-
monwealth than the worst interpre-
tation of union can possibly threaten.
The federal future intrusted to a Fede-
ral Parliament of this type will mean
the natural development of this great
country in security and without dis-
ruptions. Mr. Holder has pointed to the
permissive powers of this Constitution.
It allows a drawing closer of the bonds
and an increase of benefits ; federaliza-
tion of the railways ; federalization of the
debts : in truth, it provides for the realiza-
tion of the promise one people one pro-
sperity, as well as one people one destiny.
That will be the inevitable result. In
this Constitution, although much is
written much remains unwritten, and has
to be supplied out of our experience of
our own people, and our working methods
in political affairs. Can we have any doubt
as to how and whence the forces of union
will be supplied 1 Is there any doubt but
that when we enter the Commonwealth
Parliament, federal spirit will increase
federal spirit, until in the whole of our
dealings, in our material losses and gains,
and in the whole of our political aims and
aspirations, there will be that hearty union
which will enable us to confront and solve
many of the problems which this Conven-
tion most unwillingly has been compelled
to pass by. After all, and much as it
accomplishes, this Constitution is but the
42


framework and ground plan of the nation
that is to he. It is perhaps, by a wise
discretion, that we have insufficiently and
inadequately dealt with the difficulties
with which we are at present perplexed.
It is enough that we have provided
the means of enabling those to deal
with them who will be far better quali-
fied for that task than we are. One
word more. It appears to me that in each
state the citizens of that state must sub-
mit to themselves this question—What
will be our position if the other four states
unite without us ? We in Victoria have
to face the possibility of the federation of
four states, with a common Federal Tariff,
federated railways, federated debts, and
federated policy, and Victoria standing
outside the hedge. New South Wales has
to face the same prospect. So has South
Australia, Tasmania, and Western Aus-
tralia. Is there any colony of the group, no
matter how wealthy or powerful, that can
afford to face that calamity—the prospect
of a United Australia existing at its doors
of which it is not a member 1 This is a
grave and serious consideration which must
be submitted to the electors of each colony.
After that comes encouragement in the re-
flection upon the giant stride towards
prosperity, power, and prestige Avhich this
union will enable us to accomplish. What
a charter of liberty is embraced within this
Bill of political liberty and religious
liberty the liberty and the means to
achieve all to which men in these days can
reasonably aspire. A charter of liberty is
enshrined in this Constitution, which is
also a charter of peace —of peace, order,
and good government for the whole of the
peoples whom it will embrace and unite.
Mr. SYMON (South Australia). —I wish
to say one word or two before we part. I
do not intend to enter into any detailed
examination of, or any elaborate apology
for, the Constitution which we have been
engaged in framing. But, sir, no man can
remain unmoved upon this momentous
occasion. We who are assembled in this
Convention are about to commit to the
people of Australia a new charter of union
and liberty; we are about to commit this
new' Magna Charta for their acceptance and
confirmation, and I can conceive of nothing
of greater magnitude in the whole history
of the peoples of the world than this
question upon -which we are about to
invite the peoples of Australia to vote.
The Great Charter was wrung by the
barons of England from a reluctant king.
This new charter is to be given by
the people of Australia to themselves.
Upon the consideration of this question
at the stage to which it has come, I
think we may all join in the felicitations
which were addressed to us by my honor-
able friend (Mr. Barton) this morning,
that there should have been so much har-
mony, and so much dignity, and so much
earnestness in the proceedings of this great
Convention, owing its existence and owing
its authority to the manhood and—in our
colony—to the womanhood also, of the
peoples of this country. Sir, the dif-
ferences to which my honorable friend
(Mr. Isaacs) referred were as mere
ripples on the surface of the water. They
are the natural incidents of that earnest-
ness in debate which is attributable and
becoming to serious men. Even I myself
have been told that my natural sweetness
of temper has shown slight signs of
wear. But I hope, sir, if any word of
mine or any departure from my natural
equanimity has even seemed to wound any
honorable member of this Convention
it will be forgiven me, and that it will
be understood that there was no sting in
anything that I said that w'as intended
to hurt anybody in the slightest degree.
I may be permitted further to say this,
that, however slight and inefficient my
own contributions to the great work of
this Convention may have been, there is one
part which brings to me the very greatest
satisfaction, and thatfis that it was upon
my own proposal, with the unanimous
assent of this Convention at its first sitting
in Adelaide, that my honorable and learned
friend (Mr. Barton) was chosen to lead our
43


deliberations and the proceedings of this
assembly. I am proud of that, at any
rate. We owe much to my honorable
friend. It is very hard to say how
much, but this I will say, that although I
myself, in common with every honorable
member, knew him to be a man of unusual
capacity, unusual in any deliberative as-
sembly, a patriot imbued with the glow-
ing spirit of union, I do declare here that
he has outstripped his reputation, and,
through his efforts in this cause, he has
become a cause of pride not only to every
member of this Convention, but, I honestly
believe, to every man in Australia—-aye,
every man, woman, and child in Australia
who loves his or her country, and appre-
ciates the advantages of union. I feel I
must say that before leaving this chamber
this afternoon. As to the Convention itself,
I consider that it has fulfilled its mission.
It has done its duty, nobly it has done its
duty, and I believe that, before the people
of this country, when the Avork comes to
be weighed in the balance it will not be
found or pronounced Avanting. I feel
I may say this; in fact, I should not have
risen at all but for the fact that my
position here is someAvhat different from
that of most honorable members. lam
not a Minister of State. lam not even a
member of any Parliament in Australia.
I am not even in the usual sense a
public man. I am simply a private
citizen, a remark which is also applicable,
I think, to three other members of this
Convention, sent here to represent a colony
Avhich holds the respect, and in some re-
gards, is entitled to the gratitude of
her sister colonies —sent here to represent
that colony, with others, on this occasion,
and for the purpose of this work. And,
sir, when we disperse after you make your
declaration that this Convention is closed,
and Avhen I pass beyond the portals of this
palace of legislation, I shall return again
into the ranks of the private citizens of
this country, and it is amongst them, and
in the position of a private citizen, that I
shall have to express my vieAvs, and give
[Mr. Symon.
effect to my oavii Avishes for the good of this
country in the near future that lies before
us. And, sir, I feel, looking at the position
Avhich I hold, I may be pardoned for
taking one moment longer to declare that
Avhilst this Constitution is not perfect—to
say that it is the Avork. of human minds
and human hands is to say that it is im-
perfect—Avhilst it has blemishes, which I
should like to have seen removed, and con-
tains provisions which I confess I struggled
against, and should like to have seen
changed, still, with all its faults, with
all its defects, whatever they may
be, I am now going to accept this
Constitution without reservations and
Avithout misgivings. I entertain none.
I believe in the governing capacity of
the race to Avhich I belong. I be-
lieve in the elasticity of this Constitu-
tion. Its details have been pointed out
by other honorable members Avho have
spoken; but, sir, it is an elastic Constitu-
tion ; it is a Constitution which, besides
the letter of it, will be found to be
saturated Avith those principles of free
government which are inherent in the
British race, and it is upon that I place
my trust. It is that Avhich affords me a
solution of any difficulties and any doubts
which I had previously entertained. I say,
further, that you will get no Convention
in this world which will frame a better
Constitution. I believe that this Con-
stitution is the finest instrument of go-
vernment that ever Avas framed. I knoAV
of none to compare with it. Nothing has
struck me more in this Convention than
the Avay in Avhich, as the debates have
gone on, light has broken in upon ques-
tions Avhich were admitted by every one to
be dark—which separatists and adverse
critics declared to be insoluble—and just
as that light has broken in upon these
questions during the progress of our de-
liberations, so I believe in the time to
come, Avhen it has been, as I firmly be-
lieve it will be, accepted by the people
of Australia, the same principles will
come into play upon its interpretation and
44


upon its working. And even in those pro-
visions as to dead-locks—those hobgoblins
that have been made so much of—we shall
find little or no occasion to call them into
play. They will simply remain in the
Constitution as a standing memorial of
the anxiety of those of us who have been
here to see that every possible safeguard
against injustice was provided. One word
more, and it is this. We have still
much to do. We must not, when
we part this afternoon, ungird—if
I may use the expression—our loins, and
consider that we may take our ease. That
is not the course, it seems to me, that lies
before us. We have a great task still to
perform, and that is not only to do what
I commend my honorable friend (Mr.
Isaacs) for seeking to do—not only to take
care that those who have got the vote—the
people who have to make this Constitution,
to give it its vitality —shall thoroughly ap-
preciate the work which they will have
to do; but we shall also have to see that
not only do they understand the Consti-
tution, but that they are prepared to go
to the poll and record their votes. I
do not fear the anti-federal vote. It is
the stay-at-home vote that I dread—those
who do not vote. The greatest task which
lies before us, who are earnest for union, is
to see that there shall be an understanding
of the Bill by our constituents and the
people at large, and that they shall be
prepared to zealously and earnestly give
effect to it by their votes at the ballot-box,
and thus secure freedom to themselves,
and justice to all, under the Constitution
we have provided. I fear no failure. The
honorable and learned member (Mr.
Deakin) said that if there was failure it
would mean failure for a generation or
more to come. That I believe. If we do
not have federal union now w-e shall,
probably, not have federal union within
the life-time of many of us who have met
in this Convention. But I fear no failure.
I seem to feel round me, and about me,
and everywhere a desire for union. I
know the criticisms to which our scheme
is subject. I know the doubts expressed
about it, but upon the great central fact
of union I feel that there need be no
doubt. I appeal to those who are anxious
in criticism, and to those who are distrust-
ful, to lend a ready ear to the injunction of
the honorable and learned member, not to
magnify their doubts and not to see too
many of their difficulties; but to consider
the work as a whole, and to declare for
union, even though they may have appre-
hensions upon one or two details of major
consequence, believing that the sun is
none the less the sun because there may
be considerable spots upon it. I remem-
ber reading, in the history of the early
years of the American Union, that Count
Aranda, who was the Spanish plenipoten-
tiary in the negotiations with regard to
the Mississippi Valley, wrote to his king
something to this effect: —
This federal state is born a pygmy, but it
will soon become a giant, even a Colossus,
great and powerful in these countries.
May not that be said of the union which
we are seeking to create 1 No man can say
that, even burdened with disunion, Aus-
tralia will not have great prosperity. No
man can say that every state upon the
continent will not share it. But, in my
opinion, all that prosperity will be as
nothing to the prosperity which will come
from union. It will be a union with strong-
foundations set deep in justice, a union
which will endure from age to age, a bul-
wark against aggression and a perpetual
security for the peace, freedom, and pro-
gress of the people of Australia, giving to
them and to their children and to their
children’s children through all generations
the priceless heritage of a happy and united
land.
Mr. McMILLAN (New South Wales).—
I do not intend to make a speech. Time
is going on, and I think that any attempt
to any further analyze the Bill w-ould be,
at the very least, injudicious. But I have
been connected with the federal move-
ment ever since its inception in the Con-
ference of 1890. I have watched the
45


movement through all its varying stages,
and though I cannot lay claim to the
gifts or to the training of a constitutional
lawyer, I have done my best during these
years to study the subject carefully, and
to bring to bear upon it anything of com-
mon sense, of Ministerial knowledge, and of
parliamentary practice that I may have had.
I say unhesitatingly that we have framed
a Constitution which ought to be accept-
able to all Australia. The time for
minute criticism has gone by. We are
now to be the propagandists of this great
movement, and by explanation, by ex-
hortation and organization, it must be
brought to its final consummation. We
have enemies to oppose, and there have
been matters connected with our proceed-
ings which will be used, especially in my
own colony, by the anti-federalists. One
of the chief objections they have to union
now is that the debates in this assembly
will be an object-lesson for the future.
But we all came into this controversy with
the natural pugnacity of British people.
We have each fought for what we thought
were the rights of our own colonies,
and like British people we have accepted
reasonable compromises. I deny that the
Federal Parliament will be in any way
analogous to the Convention. Its mem-
bers will not be in any antagonistic posi-
tion. They will not meet for the pur-
pose for which we met. We met to frame
a Constitution —they will meet to legislate
under it. A great many people have said
that the Constitution is too liberal, and
some honorable members have tried to-day,
by argument and by rhetoric, to show that
it is, if anything, ultra-liberal. I donot hold
that it is ultra-liberal in any bad sense. I
hold that a Constitution must have two
things; itrnust have a conservative founda-
tion and liberal possibilities of legislation. I
believe that this Constitution is sufficiently
well founded and sufficiently conservative to
last practically for all time. But there is a
difficulty which we shall have to face when
we go back to our own colonies. It is often
said that what is everybody’s business is
[Mr. McMillan.
nobody’s business. We shall want the
organization of general elections, the mag-
netic influence created by local people
canvassing for themselves in a personal
character—and I think that, instead of
the hesitation about which we have heard
in the last few days, every Government
and every representation should organize
itself and pledge itself to the consummation
of this great work. I believe that what
has seemed an anti-federal spirit in New
South Wales—l am only speaking of
what has been alleged—will pass away
when the Constitution is understood. I
cannot believe that, after the popular vote
which elected in each colony presumably
ten of the foremost public men, the people
will not be true to the Constitution which
has been framed. Circumstances are now
combining, both in our relations to the
British Empire and to ourselves, to bring
about this consummation. I believe, my-
self, that the national spirit is rising
throughout Australia. I believe that
the necessity is upon us to become a
nation, and I am not at all sure
that it will not be this national spirit
which, rising above every material con-
sideration, will not ultimately win the
battle for us. The population of these
colonies by the end of the century will be
almost entirely native-born, and these
native-born men, as we see in this colony
particularly, will not be satisfied with the
parochial life. They will feel that Aus-
tralia must be home to them. The bulk
of them can never expect a career outside
this island continent. They will feel that
if they have to take a part in the respon-
sibilities of the British Empire, and to
share its dangers, they must have a proud
identity of their own. I believe that
the more you encourage the Austi’alian
nationality the better factor you create
for the British Empire. It will be
by the element of Australian nation-
ality rising in our midst, and by its being
pressed upon the people by the representa-
tives that have met here—using not too
much the material argument, as the
46


argument of a national life—that our work
will be ultimately consummated. We shall
have a tremendous fight in New South
Wales. As the leader of the Convention
has pointed out, there have been traitors
to the cause. We had a stab made at
us by an alteration of the fundamental
Act connected with the movement. But,
in spite of that, if the ten representatives
of New South Wales are determined to
become propagandists of a movement
in their own colony, portioning it
into sections, and if the Govern-
ment gives the movement hearty and
generous support, New South Wales will
come into the Federation. Without mean-
ing to be egotistical or presumptuous, I say
that there is no doubt that the formation
of the Commonwealth lies with New South
Wales. I have no fear for Victoria. The
advantages given to Victoria are so great
—she gets back to a large extent her
natural geographical area—that she would
be utterly mad if she did not accept the
Constitution or even a far worse one.
Therefore, I believe that with New South
Wales thoroughly in earnest —and I pledge
myself between this and the taking of the
vote to use every personal effort to secure
this end—if at an early period of the can-
vass she shows herself in earnest and
throws away the unreasonable prejudices
we have heard of in the last month, her
example will have such a moral effect
upon the people of Australia that we need
not fear their verdict upon the Bill.
Mr. THEN WITH (Victoria).—l have
not made any preparation for a speech
upon this important occasion, but I feel
that, owing to the peculiar position which
1 occupy, the responsibility is entailed
upon me of saying something, and of ex-
pressing in general terms my conclusions
as to the merits of the Bill, and as to
the desirability or otherwise of its accept-
ance by the people. I set out, as I be-
lieve most of us did, with the opinion
that, starting at the end of the nineteenth
century with all the history of the past
at our disposal, with the Constitutions of
the world before our eyes, we should
make in Australia a governmental ma-
chine superior to any of those of which
the world previously had knowledge.
This, I am prepared to admit, was a very
large expectation ; but after carefully
considering the result of our labours
I think that we have accomplished it. I
do not mean by that statement that I
am satisfied with every detail of the
Bill, or that I do not think that there
are not a number of its provisions which
I should like to see altered if possible.
But when we remember that this Consti-
tution is not for the government of one
individual or one country, but for a num-
ber of countries that for many years have
been existing as separate independent
communities, and have during that period
been developing, through their want of
unity, conflicting interests, not to say
strong prejudices and jealousies, which
would have been impossible if we had had
a Constitution such as this from the start,
it would have been surprising if we had
arrived at a Constitution which was satis-
factory in all its details to all the repre-
sentatives. But while I did, as I think
most of us did, point out as vigorously
as I could the objections which I
saw to some of the propositions that
were presented to us, with a view, if
possible, of preventing their adoption, I
feel now that many of the objections were
undoubtedly magnified by some of us. I
have felt, I think, as strongly as any
one here that a government, to be com-
pletely government of the people by the
people, must let the people more frequently
into its counsels than it has done in the
past, and that that could only be com-
pletely and effectively done by means of
what is known as the referendum. There-
fore, a Constitution to meet my wishes
ought to have within it the opportunity
of readily applying that principle. I have
felt, as most people in these colonies have
felt, that our bi-cameral system, while
containing the elements of safety and of
security from ill-considered rushes of
47


legislation, also contains within it an
element of sometimes vexatious delay, and
not infrequently absolute legislative stag-
nation. And I have felt that where the
two branches of the legislative machine
have failed to perform the work for which
they were designed, there ought to be a
reference from the agents to the principals.
But I recognise that there is great force
in the argument that has been urged
against this proposal, that it is subversive
of the principle of government that we
as British people are accustomed to—
the principle of government known
as responsible government. While I
recognise that there is great force in
these arguments, and, therefore, those
who urge them may be fairly and properly
excused for voting against the referendum
in consequence of their weight, still I do
not think that the arguments are con-
clusive. It may perhaps be considered
by some honorable members to be useless
at this stage to discuss the referendum,
and I, for one, should not do it, even in
the slightest degree, were it not for the
fact that our respected leader, in that most
admirable speech which he delivered this
morning, gave some attention to this par-
ticular aspect of this question that the
referendum is subversive of responsible
government; and Mr. AVise, in discussing
the question the other day, also gave a
great deal of attention to that aspect of it.
As I hope that the referendum for the
settlement of disputes between the two
branches of the Federal Legislature will
ultimately be embodied in this Constitu-
tion after it is adopted in its present
form, and that it will also be adopted in
connexion with our state Legislatures
independently of this Constitution, I feel
it desirable to give some attention to it.
It is pointed out that a Minister or a
Ministry responsible to Parliament, and
only holding office because it has the
sanction of the people’s representatives,
might find itself in a minority, and might
submit to the people for their arbitrament
a question which the people, in exercising
\_Mr. Trenwith,
that power, might decide against the
Ministry, and therefore we should have
the anomaly of a Government holding
office out of accord with the policy
of the representatives of the people.
But I would respectfully submit in
answer to that objection that the
anomaly is only apparent, not real, be-
cause the Ministry will be out of accord
with the people whom they represent,
not upon a question that they had to deal
with, but iipon a question that was settled,
and consequently was not a matter for
legislation at all. However, I feel with
my honorable friend (Mr. Deakin) that,
although we have not the referendum in
this Constitution, we have the principle of
the referendum in it. As I at a previous
sitting of this Convention pointed out,
there is the principle of the referen-
dum in the British Constitution. But
we have it in this Constitution in a
more complete and definite form than
it is to be found in any other Con-
stitution in the world, so far as I know,
except that of Switzerland. Because we
have here not merely the referendum to
the people by means of a general elec-
tion involving one branch of the Legisla-
ture, but we have a reference to the
people, not by the method ordinarily
described as a general election, but by
means of a special election to settle a
distinct issue about which the two
branches of the Legislature have come
into conflict. Thus, although we have
the slight disadvantage that persons and
some side-issues will undoubtedly be in-
volved, still, as the electors will only
have one distinct issue presented to their
minds, the point at issue will be virtually
settled upon the principle of the referen-
dum, because it will be referred to
the people in order that they may
elect representatives who hold their views
not on general questions only, but more
particularly on that single issue. But it
seems to me we have something more in
the referendum, or one form of it which
has been suggested; that is, the referendum
48


of the states and the referendum of the
people. We may have a complete solution
by that means. Because I can conceive
of a large majority of the people holding
a view that was not held by the people of
the majority of the states ; and if such a
contingency as that arises, and the dual
referendum were applied, the great
majority of the people would necessarily
and certainly be subjected, as far as that
single issue was concerned, to the minority
in the majority of the states. But by
means of the double dissolution, and the
subsequent sitting of the two Houses, it
may, and I think sometimes will, be
possible for a majority of 'the people —the
taxpayers—to obtain a solution of the
question favorable to the majority, even
though in that special connexion there
Avere not a majority of the states.
Mr. Dbakin. —Would not a double dis-
solution tend to bring a greater number of
people to the poll than an ordinary gene-
ral election 1
Mr. TBEjNWITH.—I think that is ob-
viously so. The double dissolution must
create a degree of interest and enthusiasm
that would not centre round a simple
issue which is unassociated with persons.
However, there is another extremely im-
portant aspect that, it seems to me, has
been dealt with at very great length
and adversely criticised, and that is the
question of whether, when we adopt this
Federal Constitution, we should be able to
develop our local industries as Ave can and
do uoav. It seems to me that Ave have to
consider whether our present condition is
satisfactory—whether our ability to de-
velop our OAvn resources uoav is sufficiently
great. It seems to me that it must be
self-evident that it is not, or Ave should not
be seeking to change that condition. And
if we are expecting—as I think we are
rightly expecting immense advantages
from the breaking doAvn of barriers that
are at present put up betAveen the colonies,
we must be prepared to forego some of
the advantages that isolation gives to us. I
feel confident that the Federal Parliament,
elected as it will be from the colonies
that have the necessities of local develop-
ment pressing closely upon their represen-
tatives, will be the more inclined to create
conditions that permit of development
than the state Parliaments possibly can
be. Therefore, I think we shall have
Commonwealth bounties which will offer
almost all the possibilities of development
that can occur. But if there should, and
I believe there possibly may, occur some
special necessities for bounties to assist
a small portion of the Commonwealth,
all experience in these colonies teaches
us that we shall have no difficulty in
getting from the Federal Parliament
its consent to pay those bounties.
\\ e find, within the area of our state
Legislatures, that we have local interests
continually presented to Parliament from
various parts of the respective states. In
Victoria we have a most complete system
of local government, under which particu-
lar localities legislate for their local re-
quirements, and manage very largely their
local concerns in regard to roads and
bridges, and so forth. They are con-
tinually coming to Parliament asking for
some special concessions. Very often
these special concessions involve the
expenditure of large sums from the
general revenue, but yet we find
that whenever these requests are made
they are almost invariably passed with
the greatest possible rapidity. Parlia-
ment is always inclined to act generously
to sections of the community over which
it has to govern, and we have a right to
assume that when we havo created a
Federal Parliament, and local considera_
tions from any of the states are sub-
mitted to it, it will treat them in much
the same manner as the state Parlia-
ment treats matters from municipal
councils within the area of their go-
vernment now. I am afraid that I
ha\’e spoken longer than I intended,
and than I ought. We must finish this
afternoon, but I felt it to be my duty to
say that, after considering the whole
49


question, after considering with regret
necessarily many objectionable features
in this Bill, I recognise that there are
many advantages in it. On the merits,
the advantages more than outweigh the
disadvantages. But, then, going outside
of the Bill to the larger and greater
question of the advantage of unity to
these colonies, it seems to me to make the
consideration overwhelmingly in favbur
of adopting the Bill. I shall regard it
as my duty, as I hope the delegates of
all the other colonies will, to take
every possible opportunity of making clear
to the people who must vote upon this
Bill its provisions, not attempting to con-
ceal some of the manifest objections, but
endeavouring to prevent their having un-
due weight in the public mind, and pre-
senting as fully and clearly as I can the
obvious advantages of the Bill. I would
like to suggest, because I take it that
■what is said here to-day will probably be
more carefully considered than what has
been said on any single day’s or per-
haps month’s sitting of this Conven-
tion, that there ought to be an
effort made, not merely on the part
of the delegates, but of all persons in
responsible positions, to do whatever is
possible to make the people acquainted
with the measure. I hope that the
mayors of the municipal councils, the
presidents of the shire councils, and the
persons in charge of public buildings
in the various parts of Australia, will
feel it to be their duty to place any suit-
able buildings at the disposal of persons
who are competent and willing to give
instruction in connexion with this impor-
tant question. If the people are to be
educated—and when I say educated I
mean made acquainted with the intricate
provisions of this Bill—it will be necessary
for the delegates and other persons com-
petent to go from point to point of the
respective colonies, and to take the people
directly into their counsel, submitting to
them the details of the measure, and being
prepared to afford any information that
[Mr. Trenwith.
the people may desire in connexion with
it. That can only be done by all persons
capable of rendering assistance uniting to
give the greatest possible facilities to edu-
cational efforts in connexion with the Bill.
Mr. GLYNN (South Australia). —At
this late stage of the proceedings I do not
think I should be justified in entering into
any details, but I desire to say a few words
in explanation of my intention to recom-
mend the Bill heartily to the people of
South Australia. During a connexion of
about ten years, and a connexion of which
I was exceedingly proud, with the press of
South Australia, and a direct connexion of
several years also with the political life
of that colony, I have held it to be an
ideal to seek after the full realization
of the principle of popular government—
popular not in the sense of the domi-
nance of one particular class, but in
the reconciliation of the interests of all
classes, of the community. I think I can
honestly say that the measure we have
now before us is the nearest approach to
the perfection of representative as distin-
guished from pure democracy that you will
find in any federal or unitary Constitution.
Again, and although this is a small matter,
as it has been overlooked, I may be justified
in mentioning it, we have started with the
recognition of the principle which is the
great equalizer of the opportunities of the
rich and the poor—the principle of the pay-
ment of members. Then, following out
the idea that this Constitution takes its
origin from the people, when we are seeking
the elements of its renovation and repair
we throw it back upon its source, and
appeal to the popular voice for a justifica-
tion of any improvement or alteration
which time may necessitate. May I also
say this, that though it is an objection,
and a necessary one, to all federal, in com-
parison with unitary, Constitutions that
they are rigid, we have, to a very large ex-
tent, in connexion with our Constitution,
that principle of elasticity which is a pecu-
liarity, if not one of the glories of the British
Constitution. As this, by happy augury,
50


happens to be the festival day of my native
land, a land which, I may say, is bound to
me by ties of affection no more close
than those living links which attach me to
the country of my adoption, whose Con-
stitution I have been privileged in helping
to frame, and whose destinies I am proud
to share, I may be permitted, in the words
of a fellow countryman, to express what
that principle of growth is :
Our political system is based upon a just cor-
respondence and symmetry with the order of
nature, and with the mode of existence decreed
to a permanent body composed of transitory
parts, wherein the dispensation of a stupen-
dous wisdom, moulding together the great
mysterious incorporation of the human race, the
whole at one time is never old, nor middle-aged,
nor young, but in a condition of unchangeable
constancy moves on through the varied tenor
of decay, fall, renovation, and progression.”
I say that the rigidity of this Con-
stitution is only in the recognition of
those fundamental interests which are the
prime conditions of our partnership. But
in Executive relations and otherwise its
capacity of automatic adjustment to the
growing needs of society as time goes on
is as great as that of the British Constitu-
tion itself. We have had objections taken
to the Constitution from the point of view
of some of its imperfections. I will only
say that the man who seeks perfection in
the sphere of politics—a science which
deals, not with the known quantities of
mathematics, but with those uncertain
elements, the passions, prejudices, and in-
terests of man—will have to wait for the
recognition of his ideal until the crack of
doom. It is beyond the power of any man
to embody in any Constitution a seeming
recognition of all national rights, or to
give such a clear and adequate expression
to ideas that they will be beyond the pos-
sibility of verbal criticism. Now, as to the
necessity of federation, I will only say
this, that we cannot shut our eyes to
the fact that the theatre of the world’s
struggle is being shifted from the West to
the East; that a young power —Japan—has
within the last ten years sprung into a
vigorous and militant life ; and that China,
after a sleep of 2,000 years, is now awaken-
ing up to industrial activity. Surely these
colonies, with their small piping individual
voices, cannot expect to have the slightest
influence in the counsels or upon the desti-
nies of the East, unless they unite. I desire
now to say a few words of gratitude to
those who have been so largely instrumen-
tal in the framing of this Constitution. I
would not like to sit down without
recognising the loyal devotion to the task
imposed upon them of the Drafting Com-
mittee. The duty of giving clear and
concise expression to the recommenda-
tions of the various committees and the
decisions of the Convention called for the
exercise of a capacity, zeal, and sacrifice of
personal leisure of which, throughout the
course of our proceedings, the Drafting
Committee have given ample evidence.
Time after time our difficulties of exposi-
tion were settled by referring them to the
Drafting Committee, with the confidence
that in their hands the obscure would
become clear, and with a perfect faith in
their ability to find ample time when
practically none existed. On a few occa-
sions, the Hon. Mr. Barton and his
associates were relied on to find out for
some of us what we intended, and if they
now and then failed in divining what
position we did, it was only to demon-
strate beyond question the position we
ought, to assume. They preserved under
all troubles of policy and language a
composure wmrthy of you, Mr. President,
in the chair, and of Sir Richard Baker
when under that cross-fire of amendments
of which he was expected and found to be
the reconciling genius. Of our worthy
leader I will only say this, that I think
he has proved himself to be one of those
rare men, found, as if by a providential
dispensation, to fit the hour. It was said,
I think by Adams, of the leaders of the
movement in which the American Consti-
tution originated, that—
There seems to arise in great emergencies
force unfelt at other times, which may be
51


called the attraction of public necessity, which
brings to the surface a race of men who would
otherwise have remained unseen, children of the
gods, who, in human affairs, work so rarely and
so well.
As to Mr. Barton himself, I hope that the
reward of his labours will be in their
fruition, and that in the fiat of the Aus-
tralian people to the Constitution which
he has helped so much to shape will be
found the lasting expression of their grati-
tude.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales). —I
do not rise to reply on the extremely able
and interesting debate which we have
heard to-day, the participants in which
have fully expressed the federal feeling
which animates those who sent them
here. I wish merely to make a quotation
from a letter from one of our members.
It is a very interesting communication,
written apparently in the train last night.
That honorable member desires me to
make some reference to his opinion on the
Federal Constitution. I refer to Mr. Venn,
of Western Australia, in whose letter
occurs the following passage :
In regard to the Federal Constitution, I have
no hesitation in saying that it is such as I
can in my individual capacity as a member of
the Convention, and a member of the Western
Australian Legislature, heartily and strongly
recommend to the people of Western Australia.
No stone will be left unturned by me among
those to whom I am known, in placing
the Bill before them with all the force of
character I may possess. I can only hope that
Western Australia, as a whole, will accept the
Bill heartily and with confidence. I would ask
you to express these views for me when you
meet to-morrow, as I would assuredly have
done had I been present.
I thought that, as this motion could only
be brought forward after our friends of
Western Australia had left the Convention,
it was only just I should afford Mr. Venn
the opportunity of having his voice heard
here, although he was unable to express
himself in person.
The PRESIDENT.—Before I put this
motion, I should like to say a word or
two. I congratulate this Convention on
[Mr, Glynn.
the conclusion of their honorable task. It
seems to me that this is not the time
when one should stand trembling on the
brink of a distinct declaration as to
future policy in connexion with this great
movement. I can but speak for myself
alone; but in regard to this Constitution,
I say unhesitatingly that I accept it gladly.
More, I welcome it as the most magnifi-
cent Constitution into which the chosen
representatives of a free and enlightened
people have ever breathed the life of
popular sentiment and national hope.
Mine will be no Laodicean advocacy;
but with such ability as I may possess,
and with the fullest enthusiasm and
warmth of which my nature may be capabl
—with my whole heart and strength—l
pledge myself to recommend the adoption
of this Constitution, daring any danger
and delighting in any saci’ifice which may
be necessitated by unswerving devotion
to the interests of the Commonwealth of
Australia.
The motion was agreed to.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales). —It
is now my duty to move—
That the thanks of this Convention be given
to the Right Hon. Charles Cameron Kingston,
P.C., President; and to the Hon. Sir Richard
Chaffey Baker, K.C.M.G., Chairman of Com-
mittees, for the services rendered by them to
this Convention.
I have not made these separate motions,
sir. I have simply adopted the precedent
which the proceedings of the Convention
of 1891 afforded. I thought it was, per-
haps, right in a motion of this kind that
services rendered so much in a like
capacity should be dealt Avith by hon-
orable members in the same motion.
We, sir, all of us admire your conduct
of business from the chair. We have
been perfectly confident in your knowledge
of parliamentary procedure and in your
sense of justice. We know that, as to
your opinion and feelings in respect to
federation, we have had in the chair of
this Convention one who is devoted to
the cause, and who will be no niggard in
52


advocating it in his own country. I am
happy to think, sir, that the cause of
federation will have as its chief advocate
in your country a man so able to ex-
press his views with power and enthusiasm,
and a man who has given so strong a
pledge that nothing will be wanting on his
part to see Australia accomplish the
end to which she was destined. I should
like to add my own meed of praise
of the conduct of business in committee
by our very able Chairman. Sir Richard
Baker had no ordinary task. He had to
deal with a very large number of amend-
ments suggested by the Parliaments of the
various colonies. In many cases, indeed
generally, these amendments were not
made with the concurrence of both Cham-
bers, and the list had to be arranged in a
way that no tabulated statement, such as
that which was prepared, would have
arranged them. On the part of Sir
Richard Baker was required not merely a
knowledge of the place these amendments
occupied in the Bill, but a knowledge of
parliamentary procedure such as few men
possess. He had to decide when and
bow these amendments should be put,
so that each of them could be
brought before the Convention in its
relative value and importance, and none
of them, except where their principle had
already been submitted for decision,
should fail to come before honorable
members. That work Sir Richard Baker
has accomplished with marked ability.
In addition to all that ability, Sir Richard
Baker has shown a very strong and
ardent attachment to the federal cause,
which I hope will be joined with your
labours, sir, and those of your colleagues
for the accomplishment of Australian
union so far as. South Australia is con-
cerned. The tact and judgment which
have been exhibited by the Chairman often
saved the committee from entanglements
amongst those numerous amendments
which any one, however skilled, but with
less skill and judgment than Sir Richard
Baker, might have allowed the committee
to drift into. In that way, the Conven-
tion is deeply indebted to Sir Richard
Baker. We may not only say fairly of
him that he has brought to this labour the
skill of a practised parliamentarian—not
only the tact o? a naturally able man, but
that that skill and that tact has been
directed by a devotion to the cause which
has enabled both to be exercised with
special point and effect. Sir, I beg to
move the resolution.
Mr. ISAACS (Victoria). —Mr. President,
I have the very greatest pleasure possible
in seconding this motion. I have already
expressed myself this morning in terms
which I find it difficult to add to regarding
yourself and Sir Richard Baker. There is
no doubt, Mr. President, that the eminent
services of yourself and the Chairman of
Committees have been of the very utmost
value to us in arriving at the conclusion
that has now been reached. lam sure
that everything my honorable friend (Mr.
Barton) has said regarding the great
abilities and the impartiality, tact, judg-
ment, unfailing industry, and courtesy of
both yourself and Sir Richard Baker to
every member of the Convention is per-
fectly correct and well warranted. I have
very great pleasure in supporting the
motion.
The motion was agreed to.
The PRESIDENT. —I should like to
say, in acknowledgment of the vote just
passed, that 1 am well pleased to-be asso-
ciated in that vote with the Hon. the
Chairman of Committees. I would also
like to add that I indorse most heartily
everj r word that has been said in con-
nexion with the mode in which the Chair-
man of Committees, has discharged his
duties. It has been an undoubted pleasure
to co-operate with Sir Richard Baker in
the discharge of the business of this Con-
vention. As for myself, I think the
observations which have been made are
all too generous. I am deeply indebted
to the Convention for the support
they have given me in the discharge of
my duty. It has been my constant effort
53


to facilitate business as far as was consis-
tent with parliamentary usage, to main-
tain the dignity of the Chair, and to dis-
charge its responsibilities without fear or
favour. At the same time, lam conscious
of many short-comings, axad under these
circumstances I am all the more deeply
sensible of the kindness of the remarks
made by the leader of the Convention, and
of the vote which has just been passed.
Sir RICHARD BAKER (South Aus-
tralia). —May I say a Avord ? I should like
to express my deep gratification at the
fact that my labours, as Chairman of
Committees, have met with such ap-
preciative remarks from members of this
Convention. It is not always, in fact it
is very seldom, that a person filling the
position of Chairman of Committees has
any other reAvard than a sense of having-
done his duty. It must be remembered
that it is impossible for a president or a
chairman to satisfactorily perform the
duties pertaining to his office unless he
has the cordial co-operation and assistance
of the members over Avhom he presides.
You, sir, have had that co-operation and
assistance, and so have I; and I beg to
tender to the members of this Convention
my sincere thanks for the honour Avhich
they have done me in passing a vote of
thanks, and for the courtesy and kind
assistance Avhich they gave me in the per-
formance of Avhat was sometimes a some-
what difficult duty. Before I sit down I
may say I believe—and I think I may
say this Avithout egotism—l have suc-
ceeded in the task imposed on me of seeing
that every amendment suggested by every
legislative body Avas put to the vote;
so that it does not lie in the mouth
of any member of any House of Par-
liament to say that a solemn vote
passed in any Parliament did not receive
the consideration of the Convention. It
is true that on some occasions amend-
ments were not debated, but that
Avas because the principle Avhich they
involved had been debated on jxrevious
occasions. Although perhaps the identical
point had not been actually decided, still
the main principle had already been agreed
to or disagreed to by the committee, and
therefore there was no necessity for debate.
Words fail me in attempting to convey the
sense of gratification which I feel. 1 can
only say that I have laboured arduously and
strenuously in the cause of federation from
1891 to the present moment, and that it
will be one of the proudest moments of my
life if I see the great work on which Ave
have been engaged become an actual and
realized fact.
Mr. ISAACS (Victoria). —By the per-
mission of my honorable friend (Mr.
Barton), the leader of the Convention, I
desire to interpose Avith a motion which, I
think, ought not to take a lower place
than that which I, desire to give it. The
motion is—
That the thanks of the Convention be given
to the Hon. Edmund Barton, the Hon. Sir John
Downer, and the Hon. R. E. O’Connor, the
members of the Drafting Committee, for the
services rendered by them to the Convention.
It affords me extreme pleasure to submit
this motion to the Convention, because I
think it will be universally admitted that
those honorable gentlemen have performed
Avith unswerving industry, Avith the utmost
fidelity, with extreme ability, and Avith
eminent success, the responsible and
arduous duties which have devolved on
them as members of the Drafting Com-
mittee. In a smaller sphere, sir, I per-
sonally know the difficulties surround-
ing the discharge of such a task.
When I look back, even Avith some degree
of expert knoAvledge, and recollect the
various phases which this Bid has assumed,
the many amendments, the divergent
vieAvs intended to express the ideas of
those Avho moved and those who sup-
ported various propositions, it seems to
me that the Avork of the Drafting-
Committee is Avorthy of the very highest
praise. I do not suppose these honorable
gentlemen w'ould claim that the measure
is absolutely free from defects, but,
so far as can be discovered, it is one
54


that can be regarded as practically free
from them. Ido not personally know at
the present moment of anything whatever
that can be changed for the better. I
think that the contemplation of the weight
and magnitude of the task that they
so willingly accepted, and so generously
performed, must lead us to offer them
our sincere gratitude and unstinted ac-
knowledgment of the work, and we
may hope, in the result, for the per-
manence of the labours which they
have just concluded. I think further
observations from me * are unnecessary.
No length of expression could increase the
admiration that we all must feel for the
labours of the Drafting Committee, and I,
therefore, have the very utmost pleasure
in moving the motion I have just sub-
mitted.
Mr. DEAREST (Victoria). —I have much
pleasure in seconding the motion.
The motion was agreed to.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales). —It
is very gratifying to Mr. O’Connor and
myself, as I know it would be to Sir John
Downer if he were here, to know the kindly
as well as complimentary terms in which the
Attorney-General of Victoria has proposed
this motion. It is not for us, who con-
stitute the committee, to dilate upon the
nature and performance of our work ; all
we can tell the Convention is, as I think
they will believe, that it was very hard work.
The Bill, as presented to us for final draft-
ing, contained the result of a great many
amendments and motions which were clear
enough in themselves, but which required
to be converted into other terms for the
purpose of insertion in the Constitution,
and there Avere other motions and amend-
ments which were inserted in the Bill up
to that time Avhich, although one could
clearly gather the intentions of the movers
from the debate, Avere not in their Avords
such as we could have left without such
alterations as in some cases Ave feared
might almost have provoked the resent-
ment of the honorable members who
had moved them. But it is a happy
thing for us to say, and I say it
Avith gratitude, that a long schedule
of amendments of a drafting character,
numbering something like 400, Avere yes-
terday passed by this Chamber, not Avith
a rush, not inconsiderately, but after fair
consideration, and that in no case did Ave
find that any honorable member had
treated our dealing with his work, as
expressed in the amendments, Avith any
Avant of appreciation. There seemed to
be a confidence on the part of hon-
orable members that we were deal-
ing fairly with them, for Avhich we
cannot express too grateful thanks. It
is to me and my colleagues a matter of
pride that Ave should have so gained the
confidence of those avc have been Avorking
Avith. I should like to speak in high terms
of the officers who have given us such
great help in our labours, and in respect
of whom I shall presently move a motion;
and in regard to the Government Printer,
Avhose expeditious, accurate, and neat work
betokens the ability of himself and the
staff working under him. Noav, I wish to
mention a gentleman Avho has not been
prominent, apparently, among members of
the Convention, but to Avhom Ave are under
a serious debt of gratitude. I refer to my
friend—he is so much taller than myself
that I can scarcely call him my young friend
—Mr. Garran, who is a member of the bar,
and Avho came here as secretary to the
Ncav South Wales Premier, and in an un-
derstood, though not in an official Avay,
to the New South Wales representatives.
The Drafting Committee had the benefit
of that gentleman’s assistance, and I think
I should be very unfair indeed if I took
all the gratitude to the Drafting Commit-
tee Avhich lb implied in the kind motion
passed without acknowledging that a great
deal of that credit is due to the assistance
of Mr. Garran, Avhose technical knowledge,
strong and varied research on this subject,
and literary taste and judgment in the
expression of his vieAvs, when the work
Avas urgent, and the drafts had to be pre-
pared and revised in a very short space of
55


time, were of the very highest assistance
to myself and my colleagues.
Mr. Deakin.— As they were in his
handbook to all of us.
Mr. BARTON.—Yes. I believe his
handbook was of great assistance to all
of us. I am pleased to be able to take
this opportunity of expressing my own
feeling of thankfulness to that gentleman,
who has been untiring in his labour, and
who has worked in so unobtrusive a way
that he might have escaped attention, not-
withstanding his great services, if I had
not mentioned them. lam very grateful
to honorable members for passing this
motion.
VOTE OF THANKS TO THE OFFICERS
OF THE CONVENTION.
Mr. BARTON (New South Wales). —I
beg to move —
That the thanks of this Convention be given
to the Clerk of the Convention, Edwin Gordon
Blackmore, Esq., and to his assistants at the
sittings of this Convention held in Adelaide,
Sydney, and Melbourne; and also to the report-
ing staffs at those several sittings.
Mr. Blackmore’s rich knowledge of par-
liamentary law and practice needs no
description from me, because he is a stan-
dard authority among all Australian par-
liamentarians. His work is always given
ungrudgingly. He is always working for
the Convention early and late; and he
has devoted to his duties in connexion
■with our labours, more hours and more
hard work than perhaps any of us are
aware who are not thrown into immediate
contact with him. He was ably assisted
at Adelaide by Mr. Halcombe, and in Syd-
ney by Mr. Webb, and here by Mr. Duffy.
The ability, discrimination, industry, and
generous services of all those officers
ought to command the great thankfulness
of the Convention. In addition, I should
like to say that the reports which have
been furnished by the official staffs have
been most accurate and painstaking. We
all know how very exacting and wearing
is the labour which shorthand reporters
often have to undergo at times when
other people are resting. They have
shown a very great deal of intelligence
and discrimination in their reports,
and I think we may include the re-
porters at every one of the capitals at
which this Convention has been held in
this meed of praise. Having spoken of
these matters, it rests with me to men-
tion, on behalf of the whole of this Con-
vention, our feeling of appreciation of the
kind and considerate treatment which we
have received from the Ministers of this
colony, and from the Reception Committee
who were told off to see that we were
made comfortable.
Mr. Isaacs.— We only hope that you
were comfortable.
Mr. BARTON.—We were indeed made
free of care as regards many minor troubles,
and we were received with hospitality, which,
although generous, had this great recom-
mendation besides, that it was considerate
and thoughtful. lam sure I speak for a
great many members of the Convention,
who would have been present to-day if
they had not been forced to go away,
when I say that this visit will live in our
memories, not only because of the great
occasion and the very fine and interesting
struggles which have accompanied it, but
also because those who had the care of
the Convention as their hosts, performed
their duties with so much tact and with
so little interference with the necessary
labours of the Convention. I think it
would never have done to have finished
the labours of the Convention without
expressing the feeling we all entertain
towards the Ministry of Victoria and the
committee whom they appointed.
Dr. COCKBURN (South Australia). —
I beg to second the motion. Although
Mr. Blackmore is a South Australian,
I, as a South Australian, feel that I
can speak to the motion, because his
reputation is not only South Australian
and intercolonial, but as a parliamentary
authority it extends wherever English
representative institutions exist. With
56


regard to the Government of Victoria
and the Reception Committee, they have
earned our lasting gratitude. They have
surpassed all expectations and previous
performances in their efforts to make the
delegates’ prolonged visit to this city
not only pleasurable, but in every way
profitable. They have watched over and
provided for our hours of work in the most
solicitous manner, and have enabled us to
spend our few moments of leisure to the
best possible advantage, not only in Avhole-
some recreation, but also in visiting those
institutions for which the city is so famous,
and which are of the greatest possible
interest to visitors. We shall long retain
the most pleasant recollections in our
memory of this final stage of the many
Conventions which have been held in con-
nexion with this work of Australian Union.
The motion was agreed to.
CLOSE OF THE PROCEEDINGS.
The PRESIDENT.—The statutory re-
quirements having now been complied
with, it will be my duty in a moment to
declare the proceedings of this Conven-
tion closed. However, before doing so I
think it would be becoming that cheers
should be given for the Queen, and after-
wards cheers should be given for Aus-
tralia. All present will be permitted to
join.
Cheers were given for the Queen and
Australia.
The PRESIDENT.—I now declare the
proceedings of this Convention closed.
The Convention terminated at a quarter
to five o’clock p.m.
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
57


