

STAFF
ORDERS
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
WAR SERVICE HOMES
COMMISSION
Reprinted May, 1926
By Authority:
H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C.5480.




WAR SERVICE HOMES (STAFF) REGULATIONS.
Short Title 1. These & gulstions may be cited as the War Service Homes
(Staff Regul&tions 1$2)m
f* Th * far Service Homes (Staff) Regulations iSt&tutory Rules
1322 $ No#63} are hereby repealed#
definitions these Regulations unless the contrary intention appears -
'the Deputy Commissioner* means a Deputy of the Commissioner
doing duty in the matter in relation to *fcich the expression
is u&ed and include© the Secretary|
*Rui ings ** means rulings made by the Commissi oner#
2 the Secretary 1 means the officer for the time being holding
the position of Secretary to the Commissioner;
"Staff Order® * means staff orders issued by the Commissioner;
"the Act” mean® the War Service Homes Act 1918-1923.
Offences. An officer who -
(a) wilfully disobey© or disregards any lawful order
made or given by any officer having authority to
sake or give the order; or
(b) is negligent or careless in the discharge of hie
duties; or
\c) 1b inefficient or incompetent through cause© which
appear to be within his own control; or
M (d) use© Intoxicating liquors or drug© to excess; or
(ej is guilty of any disgraceful or improper conduct,
either in his official capacity or otherwise; or
(f) commits any breach of these Regulations or of any
Ruling© or Instructions or of Staff orders.
who thereupon impose upon the oftieer iftrt-rd an y punish-
ahallbe guilty of an offence and shall be liable to such
punishment ae the CoaalSBiontp directs*
5» lhe deputy Coaaiseioner has any reason to believe that
ha ® committed a minor offence, he may call upon the
*ff of the alleged offence, and If. on
oTcnitT*i 0 L°l iSLJ*?l.aa tie#, he is of the opinion
ofrendlri ' cautloa or the
** VtTZ% the *T, lB re6Eon to Relieve that an officer has
committed, an offence, other than a minor offence —
(a; The officer any be charged by the Deputy Commissioner
and may, if it is considered that the charge i© of such
©serious nature that the charged officer should not
continue in the performance of hi© duty, be suspended
by the Deputy Commissioner*
(b) suspension say be effected prior to or at the date of. or
subsequent to, the laying of the charge, and any be
*** u f® b * the Gosaissloner pending deter-
mination oj the charge, or, In any case where the charge
th!t n effecu 8U8taIned » upon s finding to


(e) the officer shell be Unedl&iely rural shea with a
copy of the charge, ane shall be squired forthwith
to state li* writing whether he adults or denies the
truth or the charge, and shall be allowed to give any
written explanation in regard thereto*
(and) the Deputy Commissioner shall forward the explanation,
together with Ms report and his recommendation, to
the Qmmlmmiom or#
(•} Where an officer is suspended for an offence end the
charge has been found by the Commissioner to be not
proven, full pay for the period of suspension shall
be allowed*
(f} Where the offence is admitted or proved and the
Canalesloner decides to dismiss the officer concerned,
no payment shall, unless with the express authority
of the Gobies loner, ism made for any portion of the
period of suspension, and the dismissal shall take
effect as from the date of suspension* but where the
Oeawitsiener decides to impose a penalty, other than
dismissal, the officer may be deprived of pay for the
whole or any portion of the period of suspension,
provided that where the Cannier i oner decide® to
reduce the offending officer to a lower class or
grade and salary or wages, ywemi. Cor the period of
suspension may, at the discretion of the Con* is*loner,
be. at the reduced rate*
(o A " ■
an officer is suspended and charged with having—
offence eg lost the law of the Condon*
wealth or of any at®te, ntsiishable either cm lMietac&i or on
eusn&ry conviction, the CaMiatiflas* shall decide whether the
officer ie to be dismissed f*ros tha service of the Coisntseion
or otherwise, &m whether, if he in re in® ta ted - thenar fleer is
to receive «ny payment of salary for the period fron
suspension to date of resuming duty*
Sec *




STATUTORY RULES.
1929. No. 12.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE WAR SERVICE HOMES ACT
1918-1927.
ITHE GOVERNOR-GENERAL in and over the Commonwealth
, of Australia, acting with the advice of the Federal Executive
Council, hereby make the following Regulation under the War Service
Homes Act 1918-1927, to come into operation forthwith.
Dated the fourth day of February, One thousand nine hundred and
twenty-nine.
STONEHAVEN
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
G. F. PEARCE
for Minister for Markets and Transport.
Amendment of War Service Homes (Staff) Regulations.
(Statutory Rules 1923, No. 141, as amended to this date.)
1. After regulation six of the War Service Homes (Staff) Regula-
tions the following regulation is inserted:—
“ 6a. — (1.) The Commissioner may, if he is of opinion that it is
desirable to do so, appoint a Board of Enquiry to hear and report
upon any charge laid in accordance with regulation six of these
Regulations.
(2.) A Board may he appointed under the last preceding sub-
regulation notwithstanding that a decision on the charge iu respect
of which the Board is appointed has previously been given by the
Commissioner.
(3.) A Board appointed under this regulation shall, in relation
to the hearing of the charge, have power to summon witnesses, to
require the production of hooks and documents, to administer oaths
or affirmations and take evidence upon oath or affirmation.
(4.) The Board shall report upon the charge to the Commissioner
who may thereupon impose upon the officer charged any punish-
ment the Commissioner has power to impose under regulation four
of these regulations or, where a prior decision has been given in
respect of the charge, annul, vary or confirm that decision.”
2. Regulation seven of the War Service Homes (Staff) Regulations
is repealed and the following regulation inserted in its stead: —
“7. —(1.) Where an officer is charged with having committed
any criminal offence against the law of the Commonwealth or of
a State, punishable either on indictment or on summary conviction,
he may be suspended by the Deputy Commissioner.
“ (2.) If the officer is convicted of the offence by any Common-
wealth or State court, the Commissioner may (whether the officer
has been suspended or not) deal with the officer as if he had been
charged under these regulations.”.
By Authority: H. J. Green, Government Printer, Canberra.
289. —Price 3d.


STAFF
ORDERS
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
WAR SERVICE HOMES
COMMISSION
Reprinted May, 1926
By Authority:
H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 6480.




INDEX.
Order
No.
Absent Officers—Performance of duties of .. .. . . .. 48
Absence—
To be reported .. .. .. .. .. .. ..38
During office hours t . .. .. .. .. .. 37
Without leave .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
Address of Officers .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 122
Advances from grade to grade .. .. . . . . . . .. 106
Allowances—
Arbitration rates for Supervising Officers .. . . ..' .. 85
Travelling .. .. .. .. 75,76,77,78, 79,81,82
Performance of higher duties .. .. .. .. .. 87
Meal .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 73
Child Endowment . . .. . . . . .. . . 86
Based on Salary .. .. .. .. .. . . . ..119
Superior Work .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Discontinuance of .. . . . . .. .. . . . . 90
Illness when away from Head-quarters . . . . . . . . 80
Amendments of system, &c. .. .. . . .. .. . . 6
Annual Report on Staff .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Applications of conditions of employment under determinations . . . . 120
Appointments .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Attendance — ;
Hours of .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Irregularity of .. .. .. .. .. . . 35, 36
Book .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 32,33,34
Breaches of Orders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Child Endowment . . .. . . .. .. . . 86
Classification—Clerical, Professional, and General Divisions .. ..104
Communications to —
Central . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 22
Deputy Commissioner .. . . .. .. . . . . 23
Contracts —not to be entered into . . . . .. . . . . 29
Deaths —to be reported .. .. .. .. .. 7
Duty after office hours . . • • • • • • • • 62
Employment —Preference in . . . . .. . . . . 91
Excess Officers .. .. .. .. .. ..9
Exchange of positions . . . . • . . • • 98
Fares of Officers .. . . • • • • • • • • 84
Fees —Acceptance of .. .. .. .... 25
Functions of—
Officers in charge of Sections .. .. .. . . .. .13
Clerks in charge of Sub-sections .. ... .. . ■ . . 14
Furniture —Removal of .. . . .. • • • • . . 102
Fixation of Salary for certain positions . . . . . . • ■ 107
Gratuities . . . . .. .. .. .. . • 25
C. 5480—2


O^er
Holidays— No.
Authorized, compensation for .. .. .. .. .. 71
Compensation for where salary exceeds £450 p.a. .. . . 72
To be observed .. .. .. .. .. .. ... 60
Prescribed .. .. . . . . •. • . 60
Performance of duty on .. . . . . .. . . 61
Pay for duty on .. . . .. . . . . 70
Duty—Temporary Employees .. .. .. .. ..115
Hours of attendance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Increments . . .. .. . > .; . . . . .. 105
Leave—Recreation —
Classified Officers .. .. .. .. .. 39,40,41,42,43,44
Temporary Employees . . .. . . . . . . ..110
Leave —Sick—
Classified Officers . . . . . . . . 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58
Temporary Employees . . . . . . .. .. ..11l
Leave—
Emergency . . .. . : . . . . . . 59
Short Leave of Absence .. . . .. . . . . 45
For Defence purposes . . . . . . . . . . 46
For Arbitration proceedings . . . . . . 49,50
To Officers called as witnesses ... .. .. .. ..30
Legal—
Advice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
Decisions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..11
Meal Allowance .. .. .. ... .. ~ ..73
Money —Borrowing or Lending .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Offences .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Office hours .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 31
Offices —Creation, abolition, and reclassification of . . . . 8
Officers—
Appeals against instructions .. .. .. .. 18
Appointed to stations away from home . . .. .. . . 88
Called as witnesses .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Sequestration of estate .. .. . . .. .. .. 28
To be given written instructions .. .. .. ~ .. 3
Death or resignation of .. .. .. . . .. 7
Excess .. ~ .. .. . .. .. .. .. 9
Attention and devotion to duty .. .. .. .. .. 17
To have knowledge of Act, Regulations, &c. .. .. .. 16
Not to comment on administration .. .. .. .. 19
Outside influence .. .. .. .... .. .. 21
Seniority of .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 96
Making inquiries on behalf of the Commission . . .. . . 121
Record cards and official history of . . . . . . 123
Address of .. . . . . . . .. . . .. 122
Fares of .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 84
Performance of work outside Commission . . . . . . . . 126


Order
No.
Orders —Breaches of .. .. .. ... .. .. 2
Overtime—
Authority for . . . . .. .. .. .. . . 63
Recording and payment of . . . . . ■ .. .. 64
Classified Officers . . . . . . .. .. 64, 65, 66,67, 68
Temporary Employees .. -. . . .. . . . . 113
Performance of work outside Commission .. .. . . .126
Press comments .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Property—Care of Departmental .. .. .. .. .. 26
Record cards of Officers .. . . . . . . . . . . 123
Recreation Leave —
Classified Officers .. .. .. .. .. 39,40,41,42,43,44
Temporary Employees . . .. .. .. .. ..110
Report of Officers incapacitated through liquor or drugs . .. . . 15
Responsibility of Deputy Commissioner to Commissioner .. . . 1
Returns and reports . . .. .. .. .. .. 4
Salary—Fixation of, for certain positions .. .. . . .. 107
Secrecy. —■
Information to he kept secret .. .. .. .. 20
Declaration to be signed .. .. . . .. .. . . 20
Seniority of Officers . . .. • .. ~ .. . ■ . . 96
Sick Leave —
Classified Officers .. .. .. .. 51,52,53, 54, 55, 56,57, 58
Temporary Employees .. .. .. •• •• ..111
Staff-
Annual report on .. .. .. .. • • • • .. 5
Changes—Return of —Form 43 . . . . • • ■ • • • 124
Sunday Duty —
■Classified Officers . . .. .. • • • • • . . 69
Temporary Employees .. .. •• ..116
Suspension .. .. • • ■ • • • • • • • ■ • 125
Superior work allowance .. . . . . • • • • . . 89
Tea Money—
Clasified Officers .. .. • • •• ■ • • • .. 73
Temporary Employees .. •• •• • • ..114
Temporary Employees —
Preference of Employment . . • • ■ ■ • • ■ • . . 108
Testing of . . . ■ •• • • ■ .... 109
Rates of pay .. .. • • • • • • • . . 112
Sic-k Leave .. .. •• •• • • •• ..111
Recreation Leave .. .. .. •• •• •• •• HO
Conditions of employment . . . . • ■ • ■ • • .. 117
Dismissal .... .. . • • • • • • • • ■ 118
Overtime . . . . . . • • • ■ • ■ • • .. 113
Tea Money .. .. •• •• •• •• H 4
Holiday duty . . .. . . . . . • • • ..115
■Sunday duty ..’ .. •• •• ..116
Testimonials —Giving of .. .. •. • • • • .. 24


Order
No.
Transfers —
Fro-m place to place .. •• •• •• . .9/
Temporary ~ • • • • ■ • • • • • .. 99
Expenses . . . . • • • • • • • • •• • • • *^o
Conveyance of Officers .. •• •• •• •• ••
Removal of furniture .. • • • • • • • • . . 102
Inability to secure accommodation .. . . • • • • • • 103
Travelling-
Allowances .. •• 75,70,77,78,79,81,82
Time . . • • • • ■• • • • • •• .. 74
Mode of .. .. • • • • ■ • • • . . 83
Vacancies —
Report of .. . . .. . • • • • • • • .. 93
Procedure in filling .. . ■ • • ■ • • • . . 94
Test of qualifications of applicants . . . . ■ • • • . . 95


STAFF ORDERS.
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
THE WAR SERVICE HOMES COMMISSION.
{War Service Homes Act 1918-1925.)
Part I. — Preliminary.
These Staff Orders are divided into parts as follows: —
Part I. —Preliminary.
Part II. —Functions of Officers.
Part lll.—Attendance and Duties of Officers.
Part IV.—Leave of Absence and Holidays.
Part V. —Hours of Duty and Overtime.
Part VI. —Travelling and Other Allowances.
Part VII. —Appointments.
Part VIII. —Transfers.
Part IX. —Classifications and Salaries.
Part X.—Temporary Employment.
Part XI.- —Miscellaneous.
In these Staff Orders, unless the contrary intention appears—
“ Central ” means the Central Administration of the Commis-
sion.
“ Chief Clerk ” means a Chief Clerk appointed under the Act.
11 Commissioner ” means the War Service Homes Commissioner
appointed under the Act.
“ Deputy Commissioner ” means a Deputy War Service Homes
Commissioner appointed under the Act.
11 General Orders” means General Orders issued by the Commis-
sioner.
“ Officer,” “ Clerk,” “ Employee,” or “ Assistant ” means an
officer, clerk, employee, or assistant appointed under the Act.
“ Regulations ” means regulations made under the Act.
“ Rulings ” means rulings made by the Commissioner.
“ Secretary ” means the officer appointed as Secretary to the
Commission under the Act.
“The Act” means the War Service Homes Act 1918-25.
“ The Commission” means the War Service Homes Commission.
Parts.
Definitions.


Responsibility
of Deputy
Commissioner
Breaches of
orders, &c.
Officers to be
gi v'en written
instructions.
Returns and
reports.
Annual report
on staff.
Amendments of
system, &c.
Death or
resignation
of officer.
Part ll. —Functions of Officers.
1. (a) A Deputy Commissioner shall be responsible to the Commis-
sioner for the proper and efficient working of the branch office in his
State, and for all the administrative business thereof.
( b ) Any power or authority vested in a Deputy Commissioner under
these Orders shall be exercisable by the Secretary fc»4ho-Coramiooion 'M
regards the administration of the head-quarters sta#r " IJ[L jl'tij.
2. A Deputy Commissioner shall not—
(a) condone any breach of the Act, Regulations, Rulings, or
General or Staff Orders, or any instructions issued by the
Commissioner; or
(b) except in cases of extreme urgency, in which event he shall
report the matter immediately to the Commissioner, vary
any instructions from the Commissioner.
3. A Deputy Commissioner shall insure that —
(a) each officer is supplied with written instructions as to his
duties, and that a copy of these instructions signed by
the officer concerned, is filed in his office;
( b ) a copy of all instructions from the Commissioner is issued
to each officer affected by them; and
(c) an officer resuming duty after absence on leave or on
official business shall acquaint himself with all new Regu-
lations, Rulings, Orders, or other instructions issued dur-
ing his absence.
4. A Deputy Commissioner shall supply to Central such returns and
reports, or other information as may be required.
the thirty-first day of January of each year the
missioner shall furnish to Central a return showing the
officers under his control, the offices they Division,
Class, and subdivision of Class or Grade, the head of expen-
diture to which such salary is married and/or re-
turned soldiers, an detail of the duties
performed by each date of his date of his
appointment to-ddleservice, and what alterations, if his
in the salaries of any officers under his contra.
3t£b£re a position is vacant it will be indicated on the return.
6. A Deputy Commissioner shall report to Central whenever neces-
sity arises as to what alterations are, in his opinion, necessary or ex-
pedient for the more economic, efficient, or convenient working of his
branch, or any section thereof, and shall also bring under the notice
of Central any matter, whether in relation to any officer, or to the work
of any section of his branch, with which he may think it desirable the
Commissioner should be acquainted.
7. (1) Resignations will be accepted at the discretion of the Deputy
Commissioner.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner will report by telegram to Central
confirming by letter the death of any officer.


8. (1) A Deputy Commissioner shall report to. Central whenever it
is deemed advisable —
(a) to create new offices in any Division in the branch under his
control;
(b) to abolish any offices in his branch; and
(c) to raise or lower the classification or grade of any office, the
duties of which have materially changed.
(2) Whenever an alteration is made in the duties of any office
affecting the importance or character of its work, the officer responsible
for the alteration shall furnish a report setting out particulars of the
alteration. The report shall be made to the Commissioner through the
Deputy Commissioner, who shall inform the Commissioner if, in his
opinion, the classification of the office should be varied consequent upon
the change of duties.
9. Whenever a Deputy Commissioner finds that the number of
officers under his control is greater than is required to perform the
current work of the Department, he shall forthwith report the circum-
stances to Central.
10. A Deputy Commissioner shall forward to Central with such
comment or explanation as will afford full information of the facts,
copies of all complaints, criticisms, or comments on the Commission’s
administration appearing in the press.
11. A Deputy Commissioner shall forward to Central, with such
comments and remarks as he considers necessary, all reports of legal
proceedings and judicial decision affecting the powers and rights of the
Commission.
12. A Deputy Commissioner may, where legal advice is required on
matters local in their incidence, consult the Deputy Crown Solicitor
or the representative of the Crown Solicitor, as the case may be, but
shall refer all cases involving the interpretation of the Act or Regula-
tions, or matters which also affect or apply to other States, to Central.
13. (1) Officers in charge of sections of a branch shall be responsiole
to the Deputy Commissioner for the proper and efficient working of
their sections, and shall afford him their utmost aid and support.
(2) They shall report in writing to the Deputy Commissioner —
(a) when they consider that a reduction of staff can be made in
their sub-sections through reduction in the amount of work
or rearrangement of duties; and
(b) any breaches of the Act, Regulations, Rulings, Orders, or
other instructions that come to their knowledge.
14. (1) Clerks in charge of sub-sections shall be responsible to the
officer-in-charge of the section for the proper and efficient working of
their sub-sections, and shall afford him their utmost aid and support.
(2) They shall report in writing to the officer-in-charge—
(а) when they consider that a reduction of staff can be made
in their sub-sections through reduction in the amount of
work or rearrangement of duties; and
(б) any breaches of the Act, Regulations, Rulings, Orders, or
other instructions that come to their knowledge.
Creation,
abolition, and
reclassification
of offices.
Excess officers.
Press
comments.
Legal decisions.
Legal advice.
Functions
of officers in
charge of
sections.
Functions of
clerks in charge
of sub-sections.


officers
incapacitated
or r dru B gs! iqu ° r
Knowledge of
Act,
Regulations,
Ac.
Obligations as
to duty and
behaviour.
Appeals
against
instructions.
Public
co mment on
administration.
Information
to be secret.
15. If an officer-in-charge or sub-charge observes at any time that
any officer or employee under his supervision is unfit to perform his
duties properly by reason of over-indulgence in intoxicating liquor or
drugs, he shall immediately report the matter to his immediate superior
officer or to the Deputy Commissioner, who shall at once suspend the
officer or employee concerned.
Part lll.— Attendance and Duties of Officers.
16. All officers shall acquaint themselves with the Act, Regulations,
Rulings, Orders, decisions, and instructions issued in connexion there-
with.
17. Every officer shall—
(a) during the hours of official business devote himself exclu-
sively and zealously to the discharge of his public duties;
( b ) behave at all times with courtesy to the public, giving
prompt attention to all reasonable requirements;
(c) obey promptly all instructions given to him by any officer
under whose control or supervision he is placed;
( d) promptly and correctly carry out all duties appertaining to
his office, or any other duty he is directed to perform;
and
( e ) in due course and at proper times comply with, and give
effect to, all enactments, regulations, and authoritative
instructions made or issued for his guidance in the
performance of his duties.
18. (1) If any officer considers he has grounds of complaint arising
out of an official instruction, or from any other cause, he may appeal in
regard thereto to the Deputy Commissioner through his immediate
superior officer, who shall forward the appeal forthwith to the Deputy
Commissioner, but he shall nevertheless, as far as possible, carry out
any instruction given him until it is countermanded by competent
authority.
(2) If an officer, having appealed to the Deputy Commissioner in
pursuance of this Order, is dissatisfied with the decision, the Deputy
Commissioner shall on request forward the appeal to Central.
19. An officer shall not —
(a) publicly comment upon any administrative action or upon
the administration of any Department; or
(b) use for any purpose, other than for the discharge of his
official duties, information gained by or conveyed to him
through his connexion with the Service.
20. ( a ) Except in the course of official duty, no communication con-
cerning public business, or any other matter of which the officer has
knowledge officially, shall be given directly or indirectly, nor shall the
contents of official papers be disclosed, by an officer without the express
direction or permission of the Deputy Commissioner.
(b) The Deputy Commissioner shall immediately suspend anv
officer charged with committing a breach of this Order.
(c) Officers shall sign a declaration of secrecy with regard to
information received by them in their official capacity.


21. Officers shall not seek the influence or interest of any person out-
side the Commission in order to obtain promotion, removal or other
advantage, or shall not supply to another officer, for use for any such
purpose, certificates or testimonials relating to official capacity, or per-
formance of official duties. Any officer who considers that his claim
fcr promotion or consideration has been overlooked may communicate
with Central in the manner prescribed by the next succeeding Order.
22. All official communications intended for Central shall he for-
warded by the officer-in-charge of the section through the Chief Clerk
to the Deputy Commissioner, who shall forward them addressed to the
Secretary with such comment as he deems necessary.
23. All communications intended for the Deputy Commissioner shall
be forwarded through the officer-in-charge of the section to the Chief
Clerk, who will transmit same at once to the Deputy Commissioner
with such comment as he deems necessary.
24. jSTo officer, other than the Deputy Commissioner, shall give a
reference or testimonial to an officer or ex-officer of the Commission
as to the manner in which he performed his official duties.
25. (a) An officer shall not receive any fee, reward., gratuity, or
remuneration of any kind whatsoever other than his official salary and
allowance (if any) for services performed by him in connexion with
the Commission.
(6) The Deputy Commissioner shall immediately suspend any
officer charged with committing a breach of this Order.
26. All officers shall be held responsible for the careful use and pre-
servation of all property of the Commission in their possession, custody,
or care.
27. Any monetary transaction between officers,, either as principals
or agents,"whereby any interest or other return in money or kind is
charged or paid, or money is borrowed by senior officers from their
subordinates, is forbidden.
28. (1) If the estate of an officer is sequestrated, either voluntarily
or compulsorily, for the benefit of his creditors, he shall, within seven
days of the date of sequestration, give to the Deputy Commissioner
written notice thereof, with a statement of the causes of his embarrass-
ment.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall forward the notice and state-
ment with any remarks he desires to make thereon to Central.
29. JSTo officer, unless duly authorized, shall incur any liability or
enter into any contract on behalf of the Commonwealth or alter the
terms or conditions of any approved contract.
30. (1) An officer subpoenaed or called as a witness shall promptly
notify the Deputy Commissioner.
(2) An officer required as a witness on behalf of the Commonwealth
shall not be entitled to receive any witness fee, but shall be granted leave
with pay for the period of necessary absence, and in cases where the
officer is required to travel he may be allowed his ordinary travelling
allowance.
Outside
influence.
Communications
to Central.
Communication
to Deputy
Commissioner.
Giving of
testimonials.
Gratuities.
Care of
property.
Borrowing
between officers.
Sequestration
of estate.
Contracts.
Officers called
as witnesses.


Hours of
attendance.
Attendance
book.
Officers to
sign attendance
book.
Accessibility
of attendance
book.
Late
attendance.
Reports of
late attendance.
Absence from
duty during
office hours.
(3) An officer subpoenaed or called as a witness on behalf of a State
shall, as regards his attendance to give evidence, be deemed to be in the
performance of his official duties, and no witness fees (other than the
expenses, if any, paid by the Commonwealth for his travelling allow-
ances) shall be charged by or paid to him on account of his being so
subpoenaed or called. Any amount received by the officer, otherwise
than from the Commonwealth, in respect of travelling expenses shall be
paid into the Consolidated Revenue.
(4) An officer subpoenaed or called as a witness in any other cir-
cumstances may be granted leave, hut such leave shall be without pay,
and any fees received as a witness may be retained by the officer.
31. (1) Hours of attendance to be observed in the Commission shall
be from 9 a.m. to 4.45 p.m., with an interval of one hour for luncheon,
except on Saturdays, when the hours of attendance shall be from 9 a.m.
to 12 noon.
(2) The hours of attendance of chauffeurs shall be from 8 a.m. to
5 p.m., with an interval of one hour for luncheon, except on Saturdays,
when the hours of attendance shall be from 8 a.m. to 12 noon.
32. An attendance book shall be kept, and the Chief Clerk will be
responsible to the Deputy Commissioner for the proper keeping of the
book and the observance by officers of the regulation office hours.
33. All officers, except those specially exempted by the Deputy
Commissioner, shall enter daily in the attendance book the time of
their arrival at and departure from the office. Officers shall sign
immediately upon, and in order of, their arrival at the office, and enter
the time of their arrival. On departure from the office at the termina-
tion of the day or period of duty, officers will sign again in consecutive
order of departure, entering the time of their departure.
34. The attendance book shall be accessible at the ordinary time
of arrival of officers, and shall he made available at the ordinary time
of ceasing duty, and not before.
35. An officer arriving on duty later than ten minutes after the
ordinary time of commencing duty shall not record his attendance, hut
shall report himself to the officer-in-charge, by whom the record shall
be made, together with the officer’s explanation for late attendance.
36. Where a satisfactory explanation of late attendance is not
furnished, or where the officer—•
(a) is frequently late in arrival after the ordinary hour of com-
mencing duty, whether or not such attendances are ten
minutes late;
(&') leaves duty without authority before the ordinary time of
departure;
( c ) absents himself without authority during office hours; or
( d ) records incorrectly the time of his arrival or departure;
it shall be the duty of the officer-in-charge to report the conduct of the
officer to the Deputy Commissioner as a breach of these Orders.
37. (1) Ho officer shall be allowed to leave the office during office
hours, except on official business or by express permission of the Deputy
Commissioner or Chief Clerk, and the period of such absence, if not
on official business, shall be duly recorded.


(2) At the discretion of the Deputy Commissioner, leave for such
absence may be granted with or without pay, or may be deducted from
recreation leave:
Provided that where the leave is not so deducted and payment is
made for overtime worked during the thirty days succeeding such leave,
the period of leave, or, where the period of leave exceeds the period of
overtime, so much of the period of leave as is equivalent to the period
of overtime, shall be without pay.
38. (1) No officer shall he absent from duty or shall leave his
district without proper authority, unless reasonable cause is shown.
(2) If an officer is prevented by illness or other emergency from
attending to duty, he shall immediately report the fact through the head
of his branch to the Deputy Commissioner, and the officer shall furnish,
in the case of illness, such evidence as is prescribed, and in the case of
emergency, such evidence as the Deputy Commissioner considers
necessary.
Part IV.—Leave oe Absence and Holidays.
39. (1) Every application for leave of absence shall be made to the
Deputy Commissioner through the officer-in-charge of the Section in
which the applicant is employed. The officer-in-charge of the Section
shall report as to the conduct of the applicant and as to his compliance
with instructions, and whether leave may be granted without detriment
to the work of the branch.
(2) On receipt of an application for recreation leave on the pre-
scribed form, a Deputy Commissioner may grant to an officer leave of
absence for recreation purposes for any period or periods not exceeding
in the whole eighteen days in each year, exclusive of Sundays and holi-
days, provided always that such leave shall be dependent upon the
officer’s good conduct and proper attention to duty.
(3) Officers will take leave due to them according to a roster kept
for that purpose. Such roster will, as far as may be found practicable,
be kept in such a manner as to meet the wishes of officers and to give
each officer in turn the benefit of the more favoured seasons of the year.
40. (1) Where recreation leave is arranged by roster, the Chief
Clerk, or such other officer as is authorized by the Deputy Commissioner,
shall, within one month prior to the date fixed for commencing leave
in each case, report to the Deputy Commissioner as to the period of
the officer’s absence from duty for any cause whatsoever since his last
recreation leave, or, if no previous recreation leave has been granted,
since the date of his appointment, and as to whether the leave can be
granted from the proposed date without detriment to the work of the
branch.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner may direct an officer to take, at such
time as is convenient to the working of the Commission, recreation leave
due to him, whether or not application for leave has been made by the
officer.
(3) Leave not applied for shall lapse.
41. (1) In any case in which an officer since his last recreation
leave, or, if the officer has not previously had recreation leave, since the
date of his appointment, has been absent from duty for any cause (other
Absence from
duty in case
of illness or
emergency.
eatlon
Order of
granting
recreation leave.
®®^ i c o “| tion
lea ve on
other absences.


Recreation
leave to be
taken in
year in which
it accrues.
iw < feavf ble
Resignation or
termination of
services.
Leave not to
be granted.
Short leave of
absence.
Leave for
Defence
purposes.
than leave under Orders 30, 45, 46, 49, 50) for more than twenty-
six working days in one or more periods, the period of leave which may
be granted shall be subject to a deduction of one and one-half days for
each twenty-six working days of absence, excluding the first twenty-six
working days.
(2) Officers granted recreation leave shall not be entitled to claim
leave for any other purpose during the currency of that leave.
42. The Deputy Commissioner shall, wherever practicable, cause
such arrangements to be made as will insure that each officer shall be
granted leave of absence annually for recreation, and, if leave is not
taken in the year in which it accrues, it shall lapse:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner may in any case where it
is found impracticable to grant leave of absence in any year, or for any
other sufficient reason, direct in writing that the leave may be taken in
the following year in addition to the leave for that year, and any such
case shall be reported to Central:
Provided that where leave has been deferred, and if it is not possible
to grant leave before termination of appointment, or if on the completion
of twelve months’ service the services of the classified officer are not
further required owing to reduction of staff, the officer shall be granted
an amount equivalent to the pay for the period of leave deferred,
provided the services have been satisfactory:
Provided further that in no case shall an officer be allowed to
accumulate more than six weeks’ recreation leave.
43. Xo officer shall be eligible for recreation leave until he has
completed twelve months’ service:
Provided that in the case of officers transferred from other Depart-
ments continuous service in any Commonwealth or State Department
shall be regarded as service with the Commission :
Provided further that in the case of temporary officers promoted to
the classified staff, such temporary employment shall be regarded as
' part of the officer’s service, provided it has been continuous.
. 44. Recreation leave shall not be granted on the resignation of a
classified officer or on the termination of his appointment on account
of unsatisfactory service.
45. (1) The Deputy Commissioner may, upon sufficient cause being
shown, grant any officer leave of absence not exceeding three days in
any twelve months.
(2) All such periods of leave shall be properly recorded, and at the
discretion of the Deputy Commissioner, may be deducted from the next
recreation leave:
Provided that where the leave is not so deducted and payment is
made for overtime-worked during the thirty days succeeding such leave,
the period of leave, or, where the period of leave exceeds the period of
overtime, so much of the period of leave as is equivalent to the period of
overtime, shall be without pay.
46. (1) Leave of absence for the purpose of attending the annual
training prescribed in Part XII. of the Defence Act 1903-1918, and of
attending one school, class or course of instruction annually, may be


oranted by the Deputy Commissioner to officers who are members of the
Naval or'Military Citizen Forces, whether they be serving vohintaiilj
or as trainees. Evidence of the necessity for. such attendance shall be
furnished before the grant of leave and a certificate of attendance s
be produced to the Deputy Commissioner at the conclusion of the camp,
school, class or course of instruction.
(2) Leave of absence granted in pursuance of the last preceding
sub-order may, at the option of the officer, be deducted from recreation
leave due and, in respect of the period so deducted, shall be granted witn
full pay If not so deducted, it shall be granted without pay unless the
arnounf of pay which the officer would have received if he had been on
duty exceeds the amount of pay, excluding pay for Sundays andl holi-
days, received as a member of the Naval or Military Citizen Forces, m
which case he shall be paid the difference.
(3) Leave of absence with full pay may be granted by the Deputy
Commissioner — . .
(i) To officers who are Senior Cadets to perform the training
required by section 127 of the Defence Act 1903-1918,
which the officers are required to perform within ordinary
hours of duty; and .
(ii) to officers who are serving voluntarily in cadet units for the
1 J purpose of attending cadet training, on the production of
evidence to the Deputy Commissioner that attendance is
necessary and that the officers are duly enrolled members
of those units.
(4) Sub-orders (1), (2), and (3) of this order shall apply to
tem providedthat 7 where the employee’s services are not further required
lea™ shdl out be granted to the date on which he would ordmanly
have ceased duty. .
C5l Leave of absence shall not be granted under this order in respect
of anv period of training required of an officer for failure to become
efficient as a trainee or while he is undergoing, as a trainee, detentio
training for an offence.
47 Where an officer absents himself without leave, his pay for every
day of the absence shall be deducted from his salary.
48 The duties of an absent officer shall be performed, if practicable,
bv his fellow officers without additional salary or remuneration, m such
a manner as the officer-in-charge of the Section directs,, but, if not prac-
ticable, then in such a manner as the Deputy Commissioner or Chief
Clerk directs.
49 Leave of absence with full pay may be granted by the Deputy
Commissioner to officers summoned to attend as witnesses m proceedings
C MU* Service) Act 1920, but only for such
period as is necessary to enable evidence to be tendeied.
Provided that this order shall apply only to officers stationed in
the metropolitan area of a capital city in which the hearing takes place
or subiect to the certificate of the Arbitrator that attendance was
p sential to the proper presentation of the case by an organization, to
officers stationed beyond a radius of 15 miles of the capital ci y.
Absent without
leave.
Performance
of duties of
absent officers.
Arbitration
leave with pay.


Arbitration
leave without
rpay.
certificates in
leave 01 ’ sick
Basis of
computation of
sick leave.
Provided that in respect to any continuous period of
absence, leave with pay and without pay shall not exceed
seventy-eight weeks.
50. Leave of absence without pay may be granted by the Deputy
C ommissioner to officers who are representatives of organizations for
the purpose of preparing evidence for submission to the Arbitrator in
any proceedings under the Arbitration (Public Service ) Act 1920:
Provided that such leave shall not be granted to more than two
representatives of an organization at any one time and that the period
of leave so granted shall not exceed three months in any twelve months.
51. (1) Applications for leave of absence on the ground of illness
shall be supported by the certificate of a duly-qualified medical prac-
titioner, except in the case of single-day absences, not exceeding three
m any twelve months, when, unless otherwise directed by the Deputy
Commissioner, the production of a medical certificate shall not be
necessary.
(2) Subject to sub-order (1) of this Order, where sick leave is
granted without the production ol a medical certificate or other evidence
approved by the Deputy Commissioner, such leave shall be without pay.
wo2 (1) In the case of the illness of an officer the Deputy Commis-
may, on production of satisfactory medical evidence, grapFhhe
of absence upon the following conditions:—
C«Q The basis for determining the terms on which leave of
\ absence may be granted on account of illness shall be
\aseertained by multiplying one week on full pay, two
on half pay, and four weeks on tjm-d pay by the
number of completed years of the officers service.
(b) To de%mine the leave, if any, for which an officer is
eligiblexmder this Order, the leave,fhat has been granted
during husservice at rates of full pay, half pay, and third
pay respectively, including single-day absences, shall be
deducted from, the periods Ascertained under the pro-
visions of paragraph (a) of' this Order:
Piovided that,’in tlmgcase of an officer who was
appointed to the Commission before the commencement
ol this Order, the of absence to be deducted shall
be the 16&V6 of &b#bnc6 granted within seven years pre-
ceding the date pf commeikement of this Order, together
with any leavq granted sinchsuch date:
Piovided fiirther that no deduction shall be made in the
case _of a Returned soldier in respect to leave granted
within fige years after the date of his discharge from the
Expeditionary Forces. \
(c) After deduction has been made as providethin paragraph (b)
of Ahis Order, the periods remaining at (Huh rate of pav
Alall be the periods of leave for which the officer is
' eligible at the date of application: \
/ . Provided that the maximum period allowable with pay
/ m respect of any continuous absence through illness shall
/ be fifty-two weeks.
/ Where an officer has exhausted all leave allowable with pay
he may be granted leave without pay:


■fA In any case where an officer has not completed twelve
months’ service, he may he granted such proportion of
one w r eek on full pay, twe; half pay and fom
weeks on jiied pay as his serTrce* m completed months
....hears 'to twelve months.
(2) Upon the commencement of this Order a record shall he made
as soon as practicable, calculated as provided in this r er, o e
for which the officer is eligible, and such record shall be amended fio
time to time as becomes necessary by leave
granted the officer and the leave for which he is still eligible
accordance with his length of service.
53 (1) Where an officer has been absent through illness for thirteen
weeks' continuously, and application for further 18 the
Deputy Commissioner may, subject to these Orders, provisionally gra
further leave, but all such applications with supporting evidence of
illness shall be forwarded to the Commissioner, who may approve o«
(2) The granting of such further leave shall be subject to the
officer being examined by a Commonwealth Medical Officer or other
medical practitioner approved by the Deputy Commissioner.
54 If any officer is absent from duty on account of illness, and sueh
absence has extended beyond thirteen weeks continuously, he shall not
be permitted to return to duty unless and until the Commonwealt
Medical Officer, or other medical practitioner approved by the Deputy
Commissioner, has certified that he is fit to resume work:
Provided that where an officer resumes duty after a lesser perio
than thirteen weeks’ continuous absence due to illness, the Deputy Com-
missioner may, if lie is of opinion that the officer is not fit to resume
duty direct him to submit himself for examination by an approved
medical officer or practitioner, and if the examination discloses that the
officer is unfit to resume duty, the Deputy Commissioner shall grant
such further leave of absence on account of illness as the medical lepoit
indicates as necessary.
55 (1) If the Deputy Commissioner has reason to believe that
officer' is in such a state of health as to render him a danger to his
fellow officers or the public, he may require the Officer to obtain and
furnish a report as to his condition from a duly-qualified medical prac-
titioner or may require him to submit himself for examination by a
Commonwealth Medical Officer or medical practitioner named by the
UpmTecffipt r 'of the medical report the Deputy Commissioner
mav direct the officer to absent himself from his duties for a specified
period or, if already on leave of absence, direct him to continue on
leave for a specified period, and the officers absence shall be regarded
as absence on leave owing to illness.
56 Cl! Upon report by a duly qualified medical practitioner that,
bv reason of contact with a person suffering from an infectious disease
and through the operation of restrictions imposed by Commonwealtn
or State law in respect of such disease, an officer is unable to attend
for duty, the Deputv Commissioner may grant the officei leave of
absence. Such leave "of absence may be regarded as leave of absence
owing to illness or, at the option of the officer, the whole or any portion
of the leave may be deducted from recreation leave due.
Provisional
extension of
leave.
Certificate as
to fitness to
resume.
Health of
officer rendering
him a danger
to others.
Leave to be
granted through
contact w'l h
infectious
per=ou.


js. (x) • xxi -bfa-e oase of the illness of an officer the Deputy Commissioner
may, on production of satisfactory medical evidence, grant the officer i«av«
of absence on the following conditions :-
(a) The basis for determining the leave which may be granted
shall be ascertained by crediting the officer with the
following periods, such leave to be cumulative :-
Leave on Leave on Leave on
Full Pay Half Pay Third Pay
Working Working Working
Days Days Days
On date of appointment 6 4 3
On completion of six months*
service 6 4 3
On completion of twelve months*
service 12 8 6
On completion of each additional
twelve months* service 12 8 6
(b) To determine the leave for which an officer is eligible under
this order the leave which has been granted during his service
at rates of full pay, half pay, and third pay respectively
shall be deducted from the periods ascertained under the
provisions of paragraph (a) of this order;
Provided that no deduction shall be made in respect of leave
granted earlier than seven years prior to the date of operation
of this variation;
Provided further that no deduction shall be made in the case
of a returned soldier in respect of leave granted within five
years after the date of his discharge from the Expeditionary
Forces*
(c) After deduction has been made as provided in paragraph (b) of
this order the period remaining at each rate of pay shall be
the amount of leave for which the officer is eligible;
Provided that in the case of an officer with not less than
six months* service whose credit after 3ueh deduction has been
made is less than twelve days on full pay, eight days on half
pay, and six days on third pay, his credit shall be increased
to those amounts; and that in the case of an officer with less
than six months* service whose credit after such deduction has
been made is less than six days on full pay, four days on half
pay, and three days on third pay his credit shall be increased
to those amounts;
Provided that where in cases of long service the Commissioner
considers that exceptional treatment is justified he may, where
leave on pay has been exhausted, grant additional leave on third
pay;
Provided further that the maximum period allowable with pay
in respect of any continuous absence through illness shall be
52 weeks*
(d) Where an officer has exhausted all leave allowable with pay he
may be granted leave without pay;
Provided that in respect of any continuous period of absence
leave with and without pay shall not exceed weeks*


Pay for
holidays when
on leave.
Illness caused
through
misconduct.
Emergency
leave.
Prescribed
Holidays.
•be iranted a for°Lv bSen “/5 I<ler * he , last Preceding sub-order shall not
be practicable fa? Z toe earl “ St date at which il would
ritSn s a Sp„ f :: d t law rt ' SUme ***’ t * ad *° tbe
(2) Wheie the Deputy Commissioner, or any officer annroverl Kv tb«
Deputy Commissmner, has occasion for’doubt Vs to of
e°Vii a t b hT 0 c § he may a a > p-
attend on a dlreC ‘ 8 “ b ° ffi - *
the concemeT o°/if,b is not favorable to
„ f , . concerned, or if the officer is not available for examination
of Ve V 6 t of V “^ ICal Practitioner’s visit without, in the offin on
of the Deputy Commissioner, reasonable cause therefor a fee for the
ZoTCZV/y™* ShaU he Cdarged ai “ s ‘ tba » ffi -r and bVdedVted
titioneiV rooms stVSloTt Wrtf* W P™
reqmred to visit the officer the fee’shall be £, e ls medlcal Practitioner is
the Deputy VgrVtV fVtffianVVVsuVV
S^l P pVctiV™ Sed “ t£ W ctmiSioiV Tnl tt
a p ( erianent f officef of e tL ai V° "V™’ P r f titioner unless he be
Consolidated Revenue ™ 6 ’ whe “ 11 sball be P aid “*» ‘he
doV wV? “ mself .»? medical examination when
iquirea to do so, by the medical practitioner selected bv the Denutv
commissioner, or any officer approved by the Deputy Commissioned *
-itfsns 2 a,;' w?
of a 6 nv strfoT ent i° ned W ,°- r any doys Prescribed untfer the law
oi any fetate to he observed m lieu thereof in tW Q tQ + r n c
observed as holidays in the Commission, namely:- ® ’ ba be
First day of January.
Twenty-sixth day of January.
Chiistmas Day and the following day.
Good Friday and the following Saturday and Mondav
rhe anniversary of the birthday of the Sovereign. ' ’
lhe twenty-fifth day of April.
Any , da f P r y laimed *>? the Governor-General or required by any
Act to be observed m lieu of the said days:
day P of°Anril t Ml, W nr CT6r « Ily i of *\ e Said eme P‘ twenty-fifth
ay 01 April, tails upon a Sunday, the next following Mondav shall he
observed as a holiday in the Commission in lieu of such Simdfy


61. (1) The performance of scheduled duty terminating at or before
a.m. on a holiday shall not he deemed to he the performance of duty
on a holiday unless the officer is required to perform other duty on the
same holiday. J
-^ e performance of scheduled duty commencing at or after
Pf\ ° n a holiday stall not be deemed to be tbe performance of duty
on a holiday unless the officer has already been on duty on the same day.
VO l ut -T commencing on the evening of a holiday and terminating
o the morning of the next day (also a holiday) is to be considered as
duty on one day, and paid for at holiday rates:
, ,T- r °o d j d SUch case the P ro ™ons of sub-order (1) and (2)
o this Order shall not apply. Provided further that where one of such
days is an authorized holiday the portion of the duty performed on that
holiday shall be compensated for by the grant of time off duty.
Part V. Hours of Duty and Overtime.
62. Officers may, whenever it is necessary to bring up arrears of
work or to meet pressure of business, be required to perform public duty
a ter the usual hours. Where the Deputy Commissioner thinks such
course necessary, the staff dealing with the arrears, or the whole office
staff may be retained beyond the ordinary official hours. Every officer
? aU? when required. by the officer-in-charge, remain after the usual
hours ot duty to complete work considered necessary to be done on the
same day.
63. (1) Where attendance beyond the usual hours is considered
necessary, and such attendance may involve the payment of overtime
report ’ in
fh (2) re T° rt shall specify the officer or officers to be employed and
the probable duration of the overtime, and the Deputy Commissioner.
1 sashed as to the necessity therefor, may sanction the working of
overtime provided the approval of Central has first been obtained.
(3) At the end of each four weeks, based on the pay period, the
Deputy Commissioner shall furnish Central with a return showing over-
time worked by each officer in each Section during said period the
worked t k erefor > and tlle reasons for requiring the overtime to be
(4) Payment of claims for overtime shall be made only on the
approval of the Deputy Commissioner.
ff4‘. (1) Oveitime shall be recorded and paid in accordance with the
conditions prescribed in any relative Determination under the Arbitra-
tion Public Service) Act. 1920, and, in the absence of any such Deter-
mmation, m accordance with the provisions of this Order. *
iV, hourly rate of overtime, based on time and a half, shall be
calculated m accordance with the following formula:
Annual Salary 6
X ;
Presci ibed weekly hours before overtime is payable. 2
(3) The hourly rate of pay for overtime shall be computed to two
decimal points of a penny with a minimum rate, except where otherwise
prescribed, of Is. 6d. per hour. Overtime shall be calculated to the
nearest quarter of an hour of the total amount of overtime to be
claimed m each fortnightly pay period.
Performance of
duty on a
holiday.
Duty after
office hours.
Authority for
overtime.
Recording a ad
payment of
overtime.


Overtirm
Clerical
l)ivis on only.
(4) An allowance paid to an officer for the performance of higher
duties, and allowances granted in such other cases as the Commissionei
determines, shall be regarded as salary for the purpose of computing
overtime payment.
(5) Where an officer, who has ceased work for the day, is recalled
for duty, such duty shall be recorded as overtime and shall include the
time necessarily spent in travelling to the place of duty and returning
to his home.
(6) Officers not working under close supervision, or whose hours
of duty cannot be definitely determined, and any officer in receipt of
salarv exceeding £450 per annum, shall not be entitled to claim o\er-
time.
(7) Overtime will not be paid for duty performed before 1 p.m.
on Saturdays.
(8) Overtime shall not be paid for less than one hour on any
one day.
(9) When overtime is computed on a w'eekiy basis and an officer is
absent on one or more days or half-days during the week on
leave, or on account of public holidays or half-holidays, deductions as
provided in this sub-order shall be made from the number of hours
to be worked before overtime can be claimed —
(a) In the case of officers whose daily hours of duty are clearly
defined by regulation, schedule, or otherwise, the deduc-
tion shall be the time which the officers would ordinarily
have worked on those days or half-days;
(/>’) In the case of officers whose daily hours of duty vary with
the volume of work to be performed, the deduction shall
be —
(i) For a full day’s absence on authorized leave or
for a public holiday —
The number of hours which would ordi-
narily have been paid for in respect of an
average day’s duty on the day of absence or
on which the public holiday occurred; or
(ii) For a half-day’s absence on authorized leave or
for a public half-holiday —
The number of hours, from the commence-
ment of the authorized leave or the half-holi-
day, required to complete the time which
would ordinarily have been paid for in respect
of an average day’s duty on the day on which
the officer was absent or on which the half-
holiday occurred; or
(iii) For authorized leave of less than half a day or
for more than half a day but less than a full
day —
The actual number of hours’ leave granted.
65. (1) This Order shall apply to officers of the Clerical Division
only, together with such part of the preceding Order as is not in con-
flict with this Order.


(2) Officers may be required to work without overtime payment for
any hours after 8 a.m. and before 6 p.m., provided that 81 hours per
fortnight be not exceeded. Overtime shall be paid for any duty in
excess of the time per day or per fortnight aforesaid:
Provided that in cases where an officer works for more than 8
hours in the aggregate in a fortnight he shall be paid at overtime rate
for any time worked on any day (Mondays to Fridays) in excess o!
7£ hours:
Provided that for all work performed on Saturdays after 1 p.m., an
officer shall be entitled to payment at overtime rates.
(3) In reckoning the hours of overtime per fortnight 81 hours shal
be treated as reduced by 6f hours for each holiday in the fortnight anc
if the holiday occurs on the Saturday by 3 hours.
(4) The minimum rate for overtime pay shall be Is. 6d. per hour.
(5) Officers employed on overtime duty where it extends into the
evening hours will be required to remain on duty until 6 p.m., thus
completing 8 hours before leaving for the day. No departure is to be
made from this arrangement except for very special reasons.
(6) Overtime shall be paid for at the rate of time and a half and
the hourly rate shall be ascertained by applying the following
formula: —
Annual Salary 6 2 3
X X X
313 81 2
In cases where an officer works overtime for a period extending over
a meal hour the minimum payment for overtime shall be 3s.
66. (1) This Order shall apply to officers of the Professional
Division only, together with such part of Order 64 as is not in conflict
with this Order.
(2) Officers may be required to work without overtime payment for
any hours after 8 a.m. and before 6 p.m., provided 81 hours per fort-
night be not exceeded. Overtime shall be paid for any duty in excess
of the time per day or per fortnight aforesaid.
(3) Overtime shall be paid for at the rate of time and a half and
the hourly rate shall be ascertained by applying the following
formula:—
Annual Salary 6 2 3
: X X X
313 81 2
(4) In reckoning the hours of overtime per fortnight 81 hours shall
be treated as reduced by 6f hours for each holiday in the fortnight,
and if the holiday occurs on the Saturday by 3 hours.
. 67- (1) This Order shall apply to officers of the Clerical Division
only.
(2) Officers required to work on a holiday involving overtime
extending into the evening hours shall be required to remain on duty
until 6 p.m. before ceasing for tea, and the hourly rate of such overtime
is to be computed as follows:
Annual Salary 6 2 2
X X X
313 1 81 1
) —-
Overtime—
Professional
Division oniy.
Holiday
overtime —
Clerical
Division only.


Sunday
overtime —
Clerical
Division.
Sunday duty.
Holiday pay.
Authorized
holiday—
compensation
for.
Compensation
for holiday
duty where
salary exceeds
£450 per
annum.
Moal allowance.
(3) Officers required to work overtime on a holiday under the con-
ditions set out in the preceding sub-order shall be credited with the
time actually worked between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. for the purpose o
computing any overtime payments for which they may he eligible m
a fortnightly basis of 81 hours.
68. (1) This Order shall apply to officers of the Clerical Division
only.
(2) Officers shall be required to work for eight hours on a Sunday
before being paid overtime, and the hourly rate for the time worked in
excess of eight hours shall be ascertained by applying the following
formula: —
Annual Salary 6 2 3
X X X
313 SI 2
69. (1) Subject to these Orders, an officer who is required to attend
for duty on a Sunday shall be paid for such attendance at the rate of
time and a half for the period of attendance.
(2) An officer who has been required to perform a full day’s duty
on a Sunday shall, wherever practicable, be granted a day off duty
during the six days succeeding that Sunday, and in such case the pay-
ment for Sunday attendance shall be half-a-day’s pay at ordinary rates.
(3) Sunday pay shall be granted for any scheduled duty between
midnight on Saturday and midnight on Sunday.
70. Subject to the approval of the Deputy Commissioner all officers
required to work on prescribed holidays will be paid at the rate of
double time.
71. Where an officer is required to work on an authorized holiday,
he shall be compensated by being granted equivalent time off as soon
as practicable thereafter.
72. The payment of any amount, in the case of a prescribed holiday,
or the allowance of any period off duty in the case of an authorized
holiday, in consequence of the attendance and services of an officer
during such a holiday or half holiday, shall, if the salary of the officer
concerned exceeds £450 per annum, be subject to the approval of the
Commissioner.
73. (1) Where an officer whose ordinary hours of duty are between
8 a.m. and 5 p.m., is required to attend for duty before 6.30 a.m., or
to remain on duty after 6.30 p.m., and where an officer is required to
commence duty at least two hours before the usual time, or to remain
on duty at least two hours beyond the usual time, and such attendance
necessitates his obtaining a meal away from home, he shall be granted
a meal allowance according to salary on the following scale: —
Salary Allowance.
£750 and over . . . . 4s. od.
£5OO and under £750 . . . . 3s. Od.
£4OO and under £5OO . . 2s. 6d.
Under £4OO . . . . 2s. Od.
(2) A meal allowance shall not be granted when overtime pay is
given, but when the amount of the meal allowance would exceed the
amount of overtime pay, the meal allowance may be granted instead of
overtime pay.


Salary.
Allowance first two
weeks’ residnece in
same place in—
Allowance after two
weeks’ residence in
same place in—
Hourly rate.
Capital
Cities.
Other than
Capital
Cities.
Capital
Cities,
Other than
Capital
Cities.
£372 and under
£373 to £450
£451 to £550
£551 to £650
£651 and under £800 ..
£800 and under £1,000..
£,1000 and over
Per day.
s. d.
14 6
15 6
17 6
19 6
22 0
25 0
30 0
Per day.
s. d.
12 0
13 0
14 6
16 6
18 6
21 0
25 0
Per week.
s. d.
42 0
48 0
60 0
72 0
84 0
96 0
Per week.
s. d.
35 0
40 0
50 0
60 0
70 0
80 0
l/24th of daily
► rate or 1/168 th
of weekly rate
(3) Meal allowance is not to he regarded as overtime payment, but
merely as a method of recouping an officer for expenses necessarily
incurred through his authorized detention beyond official hours.
74. (1) Where an officer is required to travel on departmental busi-
ness in his private time he shall be entitled to be paid for the time
spent in travelling at a rate equal to his ordinary rate of pay.
(2) Travelling time shall not be paid to any officer receiving salary
in excess of £450 per annum. This means salary proper.
(3) Travelling by sea shall not be regarded as travelling for the
purpose of travelling time payment.
(4) Payment for travelling time shall not be made to any officer
travelling by train between 10.30 p.m. and 7 a.m. if a sleeping berth is
provided.
(5) The maximum amount payable in respect of travelling time
shall be five hours pay in any one day (midnight to midnight) irrespec-
tive of the number of hours actually spent in travelling during the day.
(6) Where travelling time does not exceed half-an-hour in any one
day, no payment shall be made, but if more than a half hour, the whole
period of travelling time, up to a maximum of five hours, shall be paid
for.
(7) Travelling time shall be paid only in respect of the time actu-
ally spent in travelling by train, coach or other conveyance, and shall
be calculated from time of departure of conveyance to time of arrival at
destination.
Part Yl.—Travelling and Other Allowances.
(a) General Allowances.
75. (1) Subject to these Orders, the following shall he the scale of
travelling allowances for all officers and temporary employees:—
(2) The rates set out above to be paid to an officer in a capital city
shall not apply to time spent in travelling to or from a capital city,
but only to the period of the officer’s residence therein. For time occu-
pied in travelling to or from a capital city payment shall be made at
the rates prescribed for localities other than capital cities.
Travelling time.
Rates of
travelling
allowance.


Allowances
payable where
officers travel
by steamer
or railway.
Allowances to
to°costo d f ition
conveyance.
Claims not to
include personal
services.
Additiona
officer llo6lo
movingfrom
Allowance for
illness when *
away from
head-quarters.
Adiitionai
rate^pro viced 6
not sufficient,
(3) Where allowance has been paid to an officer under this Order
for eight weeks’ residence in one locality, the Deputy Commissioner
shall submit the case to Central for review. No such allowance shall
he continued beyond three months without the approval of the Com-
missioner, and if, upon review, the Commissioner considers the amount
excessive it shall be discontinued or reduced to such amount as the
Commissioner thinks fit.
(4) No allowance, other than for expenses necessarily incurred,
shall be paid under this Order in any case where an officer is not
required to be absent from his head-quarters over night.
76. (1) When officers travel by steamer or by railway, and the fare
paid includes subsistence, one-quarter of the ordinary rates to which
those officers would he entitled shall be allowed.
(2) Where an officer is provided with subsistence and lodging, the
Deputy Commissioner shall determine what allowance, if any, shall he
granted, but any allowance granted shall not exceed one-quarter of the
amount specified in the scale of travelling allowances, according to the
period of residence in the same place.
(3) Where an officer is provided with subsistence without lodging,
or is provided with lodging without subsistence, the Deputy Commis-
sioner may reduce the prescribed travelling allowance, but the allowance
shall not he reduced by more than one-third in any case where lodging
only is provided, and by not more than two-thirds where subsistence
only is provided.
77. All travelling allowances shall be in addition to cost of con-
veyance. The period for which travelling allowances may Jbe claimed
shall be computed from time of departure to time of arrival of the
train, steamer, or other conveyance by which officers travel.
78. Claims for travelling allowance shall not include items such as
gratuities for services on behalf of officers personally and payments to
porters for handling the personal effects of officers.
79. When an officer temporarily stationed at any place and receiving
a travelling allowance has to visit any other place, and thereby neces-
sarily incurs extra personal expenses, he may be permitted to draw such
additional allowance for the visit as the Deputy Commissioner directs.
80. (1) When an officer absent from his head-quarters on duty is
forced by illness not due to his own fault to take sick leave, and he is
unable to return to his own home, he may be paid an allowance to the
extent of the proved costs to him of such illness, but not exceeding the
sum to which he would have been entitled under the Orders governing
travelling or relieving allowance had he been on duty for the period
involved.
(2) The operation of this Order shall be subject to the conditions
contained in sub-order (3) of Order 75.
81. Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Commissioner by
any officer that the travelling expenses he would be entitled to receive
under these Orders do not cover his actual expenses, the Commissioner
may authorize a payment in addition to that otherwise provided by
these Orders.


82. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Orders, an officer
who is instructed to proceed to a Branch in anticipation of his perma-
nent transfer thereto, and who has been notified in writing by the
Commissioner that his transfer is to he made permanent, shall not he
eligible to receive travelling or relieving allowance during his employ-
ment at such Branch.
(b) Mode of Travelling.
83. (1) Officers shall travel by railway ustess the cost be not greater
by other means of conveyance.
(2) Where an officer does not travel by railway he shall be rep,aid
the actual cost of the necessary and most economical means of convey-
ance upon furnishing receipts for the payments when they exceed ss.
84. Second class fare shall be allowed officers the maximum salary
of whose positions does not exceed £336 per annum, and in other cases
first class fares shall be allowed:
Provided that in special circumstances the Commissioner may allow
first class fare to any officer:
Provided further that first class fares shall be allowed —
(a) to officers travelling by steamer on the Queensland or
Western Australian coast;
(b) to officers travelling by railway—
(i) north of 22 degrees south latitude; or
(ii) in tropical climates on journeys exceeding ten hours
. in duration, or on journeys of any duration if
accompanied by wife and family; and
(e) to female officers.
(c) Special Allowances.
85. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Orders, an officer
who is permanently in charge of, or in control of, other officers tne
terms and conditions of whose employment are the subject of a determi-
nation under the Arbitration ( Public Service ) Act 1920, may, on the
approval of the Commissioner, be granted such allowance as will, added
to his salary, make his remuneration equivalent to the salary prescribed
in the determination for an officer of similar status, and may likewise
be accorded any other conditions secured by the determination.
86. (1) In addition to the rates of salary fixed by these Orders or
under any Determination made under the Arbitration (Public Service)
Act 1920, there shall be payable allowance at the following rate: —
To each officer who is married or a ividower or widow and
who is the father or step-father or mother or step-mother
of dependent children under the age of fourteen years and
who is in receipt of salary at a rate less than £5OO per
annum —the sum of £l3 per annum in respect of each
such child so dependent. A similar allowance may, on the
approval of the Commissioner, be granted to any officer
in respect of orphan or adopted children under the age of
fourteen years who are dependent upon and maintained
by that officer:
Travelling and
relieving
allowances not
payable where
transfer to be
permanent.
th**
Railway
travelling.
Fares.
Arbitration
rates for
supervising
officers.
Child
endowment.


Higher duties
allowance.
Officers
appointed to
stations away
from home.
superior work
aiiowanoe.
Discontinuance
of allowances.
Provided that the total sum per annum paid to any
officer under this paragraph shall not exceed the amount
by which the salary per annum of the officer falls short
of £5OO.
(2) It shall be the duty of each officer who is in receipt of allowance
under the provisions of this Order, immediately to notify the Deputy
Commissioner in the event of his becoming ineligible under the pre-
scribed conditions for the payment of allowance or any portion thereof.
(3) In this Order “salary” includes —
(a) any amount granted by way of cost of living allowance in
. any determination under the Arbitration (.Public Service)
Act 1920;
(b) such allowances in the nature of salary as are determined
by the Commissioner.
87. ( a ) Where an officer has for at least twenty-six working days
(continuously or in periods of not less than one day) within any period
of twelve months performed, to the satisfaction of the Commissioner the
whole of the duties of a position higher 1 than that in which he is classi-
fied, he shall he granted payment, after the completion of twenty-six
working days, and while continuing to perform the higher duties, of an
allowance at a rate not lower than the minimum prescribed for officers
of the higher position.
(b) Officers called upon to occupy temporarily a higher position or
positions for a period of at least twelve months, whether continuous or
broken, in any period of two years shall be entitled to increments on
the basis of the actual time of service in the higher position or positions,
In the event of any such officer receiving promotion to a higher position
he shall not suffer any reduction of salary or increments, but such
promotion shall for all purposes be deemed to have been made on the
date the officer was promoted to the higher position:
Provided that if the officer is promoted to a class which is lower
than the class in which he has been acting his salary on promotion
shall be equivalent to the salary he would have received had the period
of acting service been in the lower class.
88. Where an officer is appointed or transferred to a position the
duties of which necessitate his residing away from home, the Commis-
sioner may grant to the officer such allowance, not being less than is
sufficient to raise his total remuneration to £lO6 per annum, as the
Commissioner determines.
89. Where an officer of the Clerical Division has received the maxi-
mum salary of the sth Class for one year and his duties are, in the
opinion of the Commissioner, of a nature superior to those generally
performed by sth Class Officers, but are not of a nature to justify
reclassification of his position in the 4th Class, the Commissioner may
grant him an allowance of £l5 per annum and such allowance shall be
considered an addition to and part of the officer’s salary.
90. All allowances previously granted other than those in accord-
ance with these Orders shall be discontinued as from the commencement
of these Orders unless specially approved by the Commissioner.


Part YII. —Appointments.
91. In making appointments to the staff, preference shall he given,
in the case of adult male positions, to ex-members of the Australian
Imperial Force, and in the case of female positions, to widows,
dependants, and relatives of ex-members of the Australian Imperial
Force.
92. (1) All appointments to the staff shall be made b t y the Deputy
Commissioner, but no new positions, temporary or otherwise, may be
created, or increments granted, without the approval of the Commis-
sioner.
(2) Appointments will be subject to confirmation by the Commis-
sioner, for which purpose advice on Treasury Form 43 (vide S.O. 124),
will suffice.
(3) Where an officer is appointed at a lower salary than that classi-
fied for the position filled by such officer, the Deputy Commissioner
may, with the approval of the Commissioner, increase the salary of such
officer, but the increase shall not raise the salary of the officer to a
higher rate than is specified.
93. When a vacancy occurs the Deputy Commissioner shall forth-
with report the vacancy to Central, stating whether in his opinion
it is necessary that the vacancy be filled.
94. (1) Where approval is given for the filling of a vacancy pre-
ference in appointment to such vacancy shall be given—
(a) to officers already employed in that Branch;
(b) to officers employed in other Branches;
(c) to the most suitable applicant as prescribed by Order 91.
(2) Where a vacancy may be filled by an officer employed in another
Branch, the Deputy Commissioner in the State in which the vacancy
occurs shall circularize all other Deputy Commissioners, and receive
replies before proceeding to make an appointment.
95. Whenever it appears to be necessary to subject applicants for
a vacancy to a test of their qualifications, the Deputy Commissioner
may appoint an officer who shall conduct the necessary test and report
to the Deputy Commissioner.
96. Except where otherwise determined by the Commissioner the
relative seniority of officers shall be in accordance with the following
conditions:—
(a) The officer receiving the higher salary shall be the senior;
( b ) Where officers are receiving the same salary, the officer who
first received such salary shall be the senior;
(c) Where the salary is the same and received from the same
date, the officer who received the higher salary at the
nearest date of difference, if any difference has occurred,
shall be the senior;
( d ) Where officers were appointed to the staff on the same date
and at the same salary, and there has been no subsequent
difference between the officers in salary, seniority shall be
determined by the Commissioner as he thinks fit:
Preference of
employment.
Appointment#.
Beport of
vacancy.
Method of
appointment
to vacant
position.
Test of
qualifications.
Seniority.


Transfer of
officers from
place to place.
Exchange of
positions.
Temporary
transfer.
Transfer
expenses.
Provided tliat salary paid by reason of age or conjugal
condition or service in another Division or by determina-
tion under the Arbitration (Public Service ) Act 1920,
shall, if the Commissioner so determines, not be con-
sidered in determining seniority, and in any such case
the Commissioner may state the amount, to be known as
“ nominal salary/’ which should be regarded as salary,
and the date on which it is to be deemed to have been
received, and seniority shall be determined accordingly;
and
Provided further that where an officer is eligible to
receive increment to salary within the limits of salary pre-
scribed for the office occupied by him, and increment has
been withheld or deferred, the Commissioner may deter-
mine that for purposes of seniority the salary of the officer
and the date of receipt of the salary shall be those which
would have obtained but for the withholding or deferment
of increment.
Part YIII. — Transfers.
97. ISTo officer ffiiall refuse transfer from one position to another ot
equal importance in any part of the Commonwealth. The circum-
stances of individual officers will receive due consideration, but while
attention will be given to objections of a personal private nature, it is
to be understood that private considerations must give place to the
interests of the Commission. Should any officer object to a change of
station or work on the grounds that it will involve him in pecuniary
loss, or that the change is not to a position of equal importance, he may
apply through the d eputy Commissioner to the Commissioner for per-
mission to decline the transfer. If it is considered that the objections
are well founded, permission may be granted, without prejudice to the
officer’s right to future promotion or appointment:
Provided that the officer shall have no grounds of appeal against
less of seniority should another officer be appointed to the position, and
should it be determined that it is of higher status than the position
occupied by the officer objecting to the transfer.
98. Where officers, who are similarly designated and classified,
desire to exchange positions temporarily or permanently, the Commis-
sioner may approve of the exchange. All such exchanges shall be
effected in the applicants’ own time and at their own expense.
99. The Deputy Commissioner may transfer an officer from one
position to another. When it is necessary to fill a position temporarily
by the transfer of an officer of lower classification, selection shall be
made from available officers on the basis of efficiency and seniority.
100. (1) An officer transferred from one locality to another because
of misconduct must pay the whole cost of transfer unless otherwise
determined by the Commissioner.
(2) Except as provided in the next succeeding Order, officers trans-
ferred from one locality to another at their own request must bear the
whole cost of their removal.


101. When officers are transferred—
(a) in the public interest;
(b) in the ordinary course of promotion;
(c) on account of illness, due to causes over which the officer
has no control, subject to satisfactory medical evidence;
the actual cost of conveyance of such officers, together with their wives
and children, and of removal of furniture and household effects, subject
to the provisions of the next succeeding Order, shall he paid by the
Commission.
102. (1) Payment of the cost of removing furniture and household
effects shall be subject to the following limitations
_ _ . „ , Maximum Amount
Officer’s Salary. Allowed.
£
Under £3OO .. .. 35
£3OO to £6OO .. 40
Over £6OO .. .. 50
Provided that, where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commis-
sioner that removal cannot be effected for the amount prescribed above
as the maximum, the Commissioner may authorize the payment of such
amount as will cover the reasonable cost of removal.
(2) In providing for cost of removal, only necessary household
furniture and effects shall be taken into consideration.
(3) Before removal is undertaken, the officer shall, wherever prac-
ticable, obtain offers from at least two carriers, and submit them to the
Deputy Commissioner, who may, subject to this Order, authorize the
acceptance of the more suitable.
(4) Where an officer elects to dispose of his furniture and effects
instead of removing them to his next station, the Commissioner may
authorize payment to the officer of an amount equal to the loss shown
io have been sustained in the disposal, but not exceeding the amount for
which removal might have been effected under this Order.
(5) An officer shall not be entitled to any compensation from the
Commission for losses or damages arising from removal.
(6) Furniture, where practicable, shall he removed by railway if
the cost he not greater than by other means of conveyance.
(7) No payment shall he admitted for the purposes of this Order
unless vouchers are produced.
103. Where an officer upon transfer cannot enter into private resi-
dence through inability to secure a house or through unavoidable delay
in transmission of furniture and household effects, and the officer must
therefore necessarily reside for the time being with his family at an
hotel or other house of accommodation, the Deputy Commissioner may
grant such officer an allowance not exceeding half the cost of hoard and
lodging of himself and family, provided that the allowance shall not
be paid for more than one month except upon approval of the
Commissioner.
Cost of
conveyance
on transfer.
Remoyal of
furniture.
Transfer—
inability to
secure
accommodation.


- \
Subdivision.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 /
9
10
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
Class 1
\ 600
620
640
660
680
2
\509
529
549
569
589
„ 3
'419
439
449
469
489
„ 4
309
334
359
379
399
„ 5
113
131
155
215
227
23/
257
269
289
“Y
Subdivision/
1
2
3
\ 4
\
5
6
/ 7
8
9
10
11
12
£
£
£
V
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
Class A
750
850
950
\
„ B
656
680
704
728
„ C
575
593
602
620
638
„ D
467
485
503
521
*539
f .557
,, E
371
389
407
413
431J
449
„ F
119
137
161
221
239
4
257
275
293
311
329
347
365
Office.
Sala
Mmimum.
ry.
Maximum.
\
Increments.
(Annual).
Remarks.
£
£
£
Messenger (senior) .. /
209
239
6
„ (under 17 .
77
\
„ at 17 years / ..
95
\
,, ,, 18 years / ..
107
,, ,, 19 years /
125
\
,, ,, 20 yeary
149
Senior Assistant (mal«)
251
275
6
\
„ (female)
214
238
6
Assistant (female) /.
95
202
12, 18, 24,
Under 18 years of age
.. £95
17, 6, 6,
At 18 years of age
.. 107
6, 6, 6, 6
At 19 years of age
.. 125
At 20 yearn of age
. . 149
Adult
. . 166
Typiste (female)
95
202
12, 18. 24
Under 18 years of age
95
17, 6, 6,
At 18 years of age \
. . 107
6, 6, 6, 6,
At 19 years of age \
. . 125
At 20 years of age V
. . 149
Adult..
. . 166
fgf
Increments.
Part IX. —Classification and Salaries.
104. Officers of the Clerical, Professional, and General Divisions
shall he classified and paid as under: —
\ Clerical Division.
Professional Division.
General Division.
. 105. The granting of increments shall be discretionary and con-
ditional on good conduct, diligence, and efficiency of the officHf
jjoncerned, and on the value of the work justifying the increase in
salary.


106. (1) Except where otherwise provided, advancement from
grade to grade shall be dependent upon the occurrence of vacancies in
the higher grades, or upon alteration of the classification of the
position.
(2) An officer promoted from the lower grade to a higher grade
shall only he entitled to the minimum salary of the higher grade.
107. When the salary to he paid in respect of any particular office j
is fixed at any sum within the limits of a class or grade, that shall he <
the salary payable to the officer holding the office unless otherwise
decided.
Part X. —Temporary Employment.
108. In making appointments to the temporary staff, preference
shall he given, in the case of adult male positions, to ex-members of
the Australian Imperial Force, and in the case of female positions,
to widows, dependants, and relatives of ex-members of the Australian
Imperial Force.
109. The Deputy Commissioner may require an applicant for tem-
porary employment to be tested as to his possession of the skill and
experience required in the employment he seeks.
110. (1) A temporary employee who has completed twelve months’
continuous service shall, immediately upon the completion of such
service, subject to his services being still required, be granted eighteen
days’ leave of absence for recreation, exclusive of Sundays and
holidays :
Provided that in any case in which an employee in the twelve
months preceding the date on which his recreation leave accrues has
been absent on approved leave (other than leave under Staff Orders
30, 46, 49, 50, and such other leave as the Commissioner from time
to time determines) for more than twenty-six working days in one
or more periods, the period of leave which may be granted shall be
subject to a deduction of one and one-half days for each twenty-six
working days of absence, excluding the first twenty-six working days.
(2) The granting of leave shall not be deferred for any reason other
than there being no means of carrying on the work of the temporary
employee during his absence, and, in any case, where leave has been
deferred the Deputy Commissioner shall advise Central immediately
upon the leave becoming due, of the circumstances necessitating
deferment.
(3) Where leave ha 3 been deferred and if it is not possible to grant
the leave before the termination of employment, or if on the completion
of twelve months’ service the services of the temporary employee are not
further required, owing to reduction of staff, the employee shall be
granted an amount equivalent to the pay for the period of leave
deferred, provided the services have been satisfactory.
(4) For the purpose of determining eligibility for leave under sub-
order (1) of this Order, any discontinuance of employment for any
period not exceeding six working days shall not be regarded as a break
in the continuity of employment if such discontinuance was entirely due
to the requirements of the Service. Additional time equal to the total
period of such discontinuance shall, however, be worked before the
temporary employee may be regarded as having completed twelve
months’ continuous service.
Advances from
grade to grade.
Fixation of
salary for
certain
positions.
Preference of
employment.
Testing of
temporary
employees.
Recreation
leave for
temporary
employees.


(5) Recreation leave shall not be granted on the resignation of a
temporary employee or on the termination of his employment on
account of unsatisfactory service.
111. (1) Temporary employees who are returned soldiers, may be
granted leave of absence on account of illness, subject to the following
conditions: —
(a) the employee shall apply in writing, stating the cause of
absence;
(&) where the employee has not completed twenty-six days
actual duty the Deputy Commissioner, if satisfied that the
absence is due to illness, may grant the employee leave
of absence without pay;
(c) Where the employee has completed twenty-six days’ actual
duty, the Deputy Commissioner may, if satisfied that the
absence arises from illness due to causes beyond the
employee’s own control, grant leave of absence as
follows: —
(i) with pay, at the rate of one day for each twenty-
six days of service in respect to which no sick
leave with pay has been previously granted, sub-
ject to the production of a medical certificate
when the absence exceeds one day or the
employee has been previously absent for one day
with pay on two or more occasions; and
(ii) without pay, at the rate of two days for each
twenty-six days of service;
(cl) the leave granted under this sub-order in any twelve
months shall not exceed twelve days with pay and
twenty-four days without pay:
Provided that where satisfactory medical evidence is produced that
the illness originated from active service, the Commissioner may deter-
mine the conditions under which leave shall be granted.
(2) Temporary employees who are not returned soldiers may be
granted leave of absence on account of illness if the Deputy Commis-
sioner is satisfied that the absence arises from illness due to causes
beyond the employee’s own control, subject to the following conditions: —
(a) application for leave shall be made in writing stating the
cause of absence and, if the leave is applied for with pay,
supported by a medical certificate when absence exceeds
one day or the employee has previously been absent for
one day 'with pay on two or more occasions;
(l) during the first twelve months of continuous service the
leave granted shall not exceed twenty-four days and shall
be without pay; and
(c) after completion of twelve months’ continuous employment
the leave granted shall be at the rate of one day with pay
and two days without pay for every twenty-six days’
service, but not more than six days with pay and twenty-
four days without pay shall be granted in any twelve
months.


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this order, where a
temporary employee sustains physical injury while on duty, or in
circumstances in which the action of the employee is regarded by the
Deputy Commissioner as being so meritorious in the public interests
as to warrant special consideration,, the Commissioner may determine
from time to time the period of leave of absence on account of such
injury which may be granted to that employee and the conditions
under which the leave may be granted.


1— ——™ —
If ' • . ..
Hoei potion
i fc«vpora?7)
Igt*
par
In mmh
omse
! If- of ij
tlMI®
‘vcinlt* . .
| ' *,
1 .
l#T US • ws of a
£
01 erk» A Ault
•:j:.;l ' • • ?■?> Y’fc/.r--? of d
£40-264
* Junior
113
1$ re&rs «£ age
m n
" ; ; ;
121
It *
m *t
-, r.. >, : "j
15$
20 *
A«el mtmnt, a
Suit
£1$
kale©
»
m
X?$
'irnmlm
**
99
1$ rears* oi mm
»
»
111
IS yofsrs oi mg*
**
a
1S9
19
»
«
152
20 - *
fjtpltts* (£eumle),
AMI t
if$
« iV «
Junl&r
9$
Uridor 1$ jraaro ol
mg©
* 1*
m
111
1$ yastre o£ ag#
ft -/*.»*
*
129
It * *
tt at
* I
152
20 * * •
MMhinist {* «*$&«*
1
• &ult
195
•»
:. •■:' ft
Molar 1
tf
Sr, lor 1$ rera?* #x
are
w
it
«t
It
■*t
«
in
129
1$ ream oX &*b.
If * 1
«*
#
9
153
* *
:k ' ;!■■•>■•: : Sk-.; tij
$f
l&Mar If jaara aX
««•
m
99
At If /oar#.
m
in
* 18
OhmultmY
234-25$
/
kvk ' r ’ \- ■
■
b;. t .,
t,i>- V... ... , . '" V ; -
l 1 he rat m i&r teaperar/ employees atoll fee 1b
aeaerto&ee with the lollowinf sehe&ul e : -


Sunday duty—
temporary
employees.
Conditions of
employment.
Dismissal.
Allowances
based on
salary.
Application of
conditions of
employment
under
determination
to other officers.
Officers making
inquiries on
behalf of the
Commission.
Address of
officers.
Officers’
record cards.
Treasury
Form 43.
Offences.
116. For all time on duty on Sundays, a temporary employee shall
be paid at the rate of double time.
117. Every temporary employee shall be deemed to be subject to the
Orders for the guidance of classified officers of the Commission relating
to attendance, absence from duty, performance of duties, and prescribed
holidays, &c.
118. The services of any person temporarily employed may be
dispensed with at any time by the Deputy Commissioner.
Part Xl. —Miscellaneous.
119. Where the rate of payment of any allowance, or of any pay-
ment extraneous to salary, is based upon the rate of an officer’s salary, in
the case of an officer who is entitled to increments at prescribed periods,
the rate of salary shall be taken to be the rate to which the officer is
entitled during the period in respect of which the allowance is payable,
and, in the case of an officer who is not so entitled, the rate of salary
shall be taken to be the rate at which the officer is actually being paid
during the period in respect of which the allowance is payable, notwith-
standing that he is subsequently granted an increase of salary to take
effect from a date earlier than such period.
120. Where in any determination under the Arbitration (Public
Service) Act 1920, conditions of employment are prescribed in relation
to any officer or class of officers, those conditions or any of them may
be applied to any other officer or class of officers if the Commissioner
determines that the circumstances of employment justify such
application.
121. Officers deputed to make inquiries on behalf of the Commis-
sion shall be provided with written authorities by the Deputy Commis-
sioner, who must receive and cancel such authorities on the transfer of
the officer to other duties, or on the termination of his appointment.
122. A book shall be kept showing the address of each officer. An
officer changing his address shall immediately notify the Chief Clerk,
and such change must be recorded in the Address Book.
, 12-j. A Personal History Card shall be kept for each officer of the
Commission. The card shall contain a complete record of the officer’s
official career, date of appointment, transfers, promotions, increases of
salary, commendations, reprimands, dates, and periods of both sick and
recreation leave granted, and such other matter as may be deemed
necessary.
124. Treasury Form 43 will be prepared in duplicate as on the last
day of each month, and forwarded to Central within seven days, the
duplicate only being signed by the Deputy Commissioner.
125. (1) An officer who—
(a) wilfully disobeys or disregards any lawful order made or
given by any officer having authority to make or give the
order; or
(b) is negligent or careless in the discharge of his duties; or
( c ) is inefficient or incompetent through causes which appear to
be within his own control; or


( a nd) uses intoxicating liquors or drugs to excess; or
(e) is guilty of any disgraceful or improper conduct, either in
his official capacity or otherwise; or
(/) commits any breach of these regulations
shall be guilty of an olfence and shall be liable to such punishment as
the Commissioner directs.
(2) If the Deputy Commissioner has any reason to believe that an
officer has committed a minor olfence, he may call upon the officer for
an explanation of the alleged olfence, and if, on consideration of the
explanation, he is of the opinion that the olfence has been committed
he may caution or reprimand the offending officer.
(3) Where there is reason to believe that an officer has committed
an offence, other than a minor offence—
(a) The officer may be charged by the Deputy Commissioner
and may, if it is considered that the charge is of such a
serious nature that the charged officer should not continue
in the performance of his duty, be suspended by the
Deputy Commissioner.
( b ) Suspension may be effected prior to or at the time of, or
subsequent to, the laying of the charge, and may be
removed at any time by the Commissioner pending deter-
mination of the charge, or, in any case where the charge
has not been sustained, immediately upon a finding to
that effect.
(c) The officer shall be immediately furnished with a copy of
the charge, and shall be required forthwith to state in
writing whether he admits or denies the truth of the
charge, and shall be allowed to give any written
explanation in regard thereto.
(and) The Deputy Commissioner shall forward the explanation,
together with his report and his recommendation, to the
Commissioner.
(e) Where an officer is suspended for an offence and the charge
has been found by the Commissioner to be not proven, full
pay for the period of suspension shall be allowed.
(/) Where the offence is admitted or proved and the Commis-
sioner decides to dismiss the officer concerned, no payment
shall, unless with the express authority of the Commis-
sioner, be made for any portion of the period of suspen-
sion, and the dismissal shall take effect as from the date
of suspension; but where the Commissioner decides to
impose a penalty, other than dismissal, the officer may be
deprived of pay for the whole or any portion of the
period of suspension, provided that where the Commis-
sioner decides to reduce the offending officer to a lower
class or grade and salary or wages, payment for the
period. of suspension may, at the discretion of the
Commissioner be at the reduced rate.
(4) Where an officer is suspended and charged with having com-
mitted any criminal offence against the law of the Commonwealth or of
any State, punishable either on indictment or on summary conviction,
the Commissioner shall decide whether the officer is to be dismissed




Performance of
work outside
Commission.
from the service of the Commission or otherwise and whether, if he is
reinstated, the officer is to receive any payment of salary for the period
from suspension to date of resuming duty.
126. ISTo officer, except with the express permission of the Commis-
sioner, shall —
(a) accept or continue to hold an office in or under the Govern-
ment of any State or in or under any public or municipal
corporation; or
(b) accept or continue to hold or discharge the duties of or be
employed in a paid office in connexion with any banking,
insurance, mining, mercantile, or other commercial busi-
ness, whether the same be carried on by any corporation,
company, firm, or individual; or
( c ) engage in or undertake any such business whether as prin-
cipal or agent; or
( d ) engage or continue in the private practice of any profes-
sion; or
(e) accept or engage in any employment other than in con-
nexion with the duties of his office or offices under the
Commonwealth :
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent
an officer from becoming a member or shareholder only of any
incorporated company or of any company or society of persons
registered under any Act in any State or elsewhere.
By Authority: H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.


%27*{t) 3 uggssUeas ty officers, net only in connection
with the i»f« sffididst porfoms&oo tfeiir duties#
al@o fur itapresed s»thod# or any other miters conducing
to the »re eoenossdoal and to the better writing of the
3ranefe to which they are attached# rill he vdleoaed sad
given special eoasi deration*
(2} where a Is of such practical vmbm
so to warrant its adoption mi table recognition of its
worth will he made is the for® of a» adequate aonotary
reward and/or hr suitably endorsing the officer* e record
sard*
(3) All suggestions sucmitted by officer* «hould he
referred# with any cements considered necessary# hf the
Twenty Qomissleaer to Central A&ainietratios for eon-
el deration*




