

% . I-r
'r fs.S< *ll
OF THE ABORIGINES INHABITING THE GREAT
LACUSTRINE AND RIVERINE DEPRESSION OF
THE LOWER MURRAY, LOWER MURRUMBIDGEE,
LOWER LACHLAN, AND LOWER DARLING.
JjU V» IT.
BY
BY
PETER BEVERIDGE.
> ■' '“ i . , '
'' ' J \ - ’ ' - " I
f N- / /




3 3 <^er
Of the Aborigines inhabiting the Great Lacustrine
and Riverine Depression of the Lower Murray,
Lower Murrumbidgee, Lower Lachlan, and Lower
Darling.
By Peter Beveridge.
before the Royal Society of N.S. W., 6 June, 1883.}
In commencing this paper, I may premise that the whole of the
information herein set down has been gained by my own observa-
tion ; and, moreover, the greater portion of it was obtained before
the aborigines became sophisticated by contact with Europeans
and their ways. My opportunities of observing the aborigines
and their habits extend to a period of twenty-three years, that is to
say, from 1845 until 1868.
The tribes herein treated of inhabit the Great Lacustrine and
Riverine system of rivers and creeks which the Lower Murray
takes from Moama to Wentworth. They comprise the Boora
Boora, the Baraba Baraba, the WaMy Watty, the Waiky Waiky,
the Bitchy Bitchy, the Darty Darty, and the Yairy Yairy tribes.
Each tribal name being the negative of the dialect spoken, and
when I say that these dialects are as distinct from each other
as are their negatives, philologists can readily imagine what an
insurmountable task it would be to endeavour to reduce these
dialects to a written language, with the view to its universal
application. To obviate the difficultieo which would naturally
arise from the diversity of dialects, in their tribal and commercial
communications (even the Australian tribes have commercial
relations with each other), each tribe possesses a Ngalla Wattow
or postman, who can speak and understand the dialects of all the
tribes within a radius of 150 miles. The persons of these officials
are held sacred, even by tribes which are at feud with their own;
they therefore negotiate all matters of barter and tribal policy—
as a consequence they are kept pretty constantly on the move.
Singular to say, these Ngalla Wattows are, without exception, all
more or less imbecile or silly, still they perform their respective
functions most admirably. In physical development these men
are all small, very wiry and attenuated, —their constant travelling
and short commons on their many tribal missions not being con-
ducive to the making of flesh.
5A I—B4


The articles of commerce which the aborigines exchange with
each other consist of reeds for spears, red ochre and chalk for
painting purposes, stone for tomahawks, fibre for nets and cord,
opossum cloaks, wood for weapons, &c. Some of these articles
are peddled backwards and forwards, even as far as the Tropic of
Capricorn, each tribe gladly exchanging its local productions —of
which it has abundance—for such commodities as are the produce
of other tribal territories, and in which their own locality is
altogether lacking. At first, this doubtless seems a very primitive
kind of commerce, but really, it was ample for all the simple
requirements of these savage tribes, ere the advent of the civilized
race gave to them tastes and wants which, until then, were
altogether foreign to their nature.
It will thus be seen that the Ngalla Wattoto, or aboriginal
postman, is about the most central figure in tribal life ; as a con-
sequence thereof, he is respected and revered far above any other
aboriginal character.
Of Chieftainship.
Unlike other savage races, these people have not any hereditary
or elected chiefs or rulers of any kind, to whom, in time of need,
either as leader in war or arbiter in tribal difficulty, they can go.
With regard to the former, however, it is of very little conse-
quence, inasmuch as these people are by far too cowardly to fight
in a straightforward manner and in daylight, where the services
of a leader would be of the first consequence.
Amongst higher races cowardice is held in thorough contempt,
but that failing being innate in the aboriginal character, it should
be viewed as a peculiarity of race rather than otherwise, and so
deemed a physical imperfection only, which it doubtless is, else
there would be exceptions, and to this rule there is not one even
to prove it.
The oldest man in the tribe is, to some small extent, looked up
to beyond his fellows, but this quasi respect is only shown him by
reason of his being able to recount incidents, legends, and thrilling
adventures (of which latter he is invariably the hero) that are
beyond the ken of the others, and more than probable only had
birth in his own fertile imagination ; he, however, carefully dates
the period of these occurrences far enough back to preclude the
possibility of his being taxed with either plagiarism or romance.
It is in the long, bright, starry nights when these old fellows
ars seen and heard to perfection : it is at such times that they
shine in all their self-glorification, which may almost be seen
exuding from their pores, so patent is it, if their audience be
numerous and attentive.
When there happens to be a dozen or two of one tribe camped
together, and food is abundant, after supper, when the stars are


twinkling briglitly and the camp fires glowing, one of these old
fellows will get up, nude as he came into the world (with the
exception of his waist-belt, which is of the narrowest), place his
back to the fire, and with a grand flourish of his throwing-stick
(which he holds in readiness to emphasise his flowing periods) to
attract the attention of his audience, who, nothing loth, subside
into silence, and so remain for hours together, with perhaps an
occasional ejaculation of wonder, listening with mouths and ears
agape to the savage stories and legends of the ancient narrator,
who never seems at a loss for matter, and it is only when tired
nature asserts herself that these savage seances come to a teinii-
nation.
These legends and histories, in fact all their knowledge, is thus
kept alive, and so handed down from one generation to another;
therefore whatever cannot be woven into an entertaining nar-
rative, for tribal amusement during the long nights, is entirely
lost and forgotten. As a matter of course, this therefore quite
accounts for their paucity of historical or any other kind of lore,
and the entire absence, as well, of anything like reliable testimony
as to their antecedents ; that is to say, if we endeavour to trace
them back for several generations. Any telling incident, how-
ever, such as a sanguinary midnight conflict, may not be altogether
forgotten even after a lapse of twenty years or so, and they will
speak freely enough about it in a general way, but it is quite
impossible to get them to individualize or even pai’ticularize upon
the subject, as from the moment of a man’s death his name is
never again spoken, and should there be another in the same tribe
■bearing the same name (as frequently happens) he immediately
adopts another.
Thus, much that would have been available information, but for
this superstitious craze, is completely lost. From this it will be
readily seen that the Australian aborigines are merely a people of
the day, to whom events of the past, however interesting, are as
though they had never been; in short, figuratively speaking, they
are a people to whom grandfathers have not been vouchsafed.
Proportion of Sexes.
In all the tribes the males preponderate very considerably. This
is not because of the paucity of female children born, as, at birth,
the sexes are about equal. The mortality amongst the females
after the age of puberty is attained, however, is far greater than
it is amongst the males, and for this aboriginal feature there are
abundant reasons, amongst which their early maternity is not one
of the least. I have seen girls frequently, of not more than eleven
or twelve years old, becoming mothers ; and child-bearing at these
tender years entails future infirmities, which materially assist in
carrying them off ere they have well reached maturity. Then,


again, their husbands convert them into perfect beasts of burden,
making them cany loads suthcient almost to break down horses,
much less weak women; besides that, they ill-use them otherwise
most brutally, often—yes, very often, killing them outright in
their ungovernable periods of passion. When an accident of this
kind happens the other members of the tribe do not pay the least
heed to it; it is only a lyoor (woman), and a husband has a per-
fect right to chastise his wife to death’s door, and even beyond its
portals, if he feels so disposed. The loss is not a tribal one, as the
death of a male adult would be ; at least it is not considered so, as
it merely affects the individual, and he soon discovers that it does
so; for when his fire needs replenishing, or his coolaman (water
bucket) requires filling, he has either to do them himself or go
cold and thirsty.
Wanton profligacy is another fertile source of disease and death
amongst the women. In speaking of this source of mortality, I
know that, in general, it is supposed that the venereal disease
amongst the aborigines is entirely due to Europeans, but a greater
error than this never had promulgation, for long before the advent
of the white man it was one of the vilest scourgf'.s this primitive
people had to bear. The probabilities are that the trepang-hunt-
ing Malays and Chinese first introduced it on the northern coast,
centuries ago, whence it spread from one tribe to another, until
at last the foul disease became a national calamity.
The women being constitutionally weaker than the men, there-
fore less able to run away and hide, during the frequent midnight
massacres, are more liable to fall into the clutches of their relent-
less foes than men. Besides, at those times of extreme peril, they
become perfectly paralysed with terror, and thus fall an easy prey
to the ruthless assassins. The victims, therefore, of these slaugh-
ters are most frequently females ; next in order comes children of
tender years, and then bed-ridden old men. Such a thing as a
chivalrous endeavour on the part of the men to protect the w'eaker
portions of the tribe during those panics, or indeed at any other
time, is quite unknown ; in fact, it would be deemed derogatory to
aboriginal manhood to run the slightest personal risk for any such
Quixotic purpose; but then, in all phases of aboriginal life, self-
preservation is the only law, and unanimity towards that end is
not in accordance with their innate instincts. Everything they
do, in short, is done instinctively; they never by any chance
arrive at a conclusion by sheer force of logical reasoning.
Marriage Relations.
The marriage relations of these people are of the most primitive
and simple character, the noun being entirelylacking in their
vocabulary. Nothing in the guise of courting or company-keep-
ing is attempted by the prospective bridegroom and bride. The


bridegroom and father, or guardian (as the case may be) of the
intended bride, come to a proper understanding, and the latter
simply desires the moorongoor (girl) to j)ick up her belongings
and take herself off to the looncUhal (hut) of her future lord and
master. Should she demur, as is frequently the case, the coercion
of a nulla nulla (bludgeon) is resorted to, and it seldom fails to
have the desired effect. There is not the faintest trace of any
ceremony connected with this tie —it is merely a matter of
mating. Still, it is binding enough, at least as far as regards the
woman ; the man at any time, however, can cut the knot, and
send the woman back to her people, by whom she is received
readily enough, and there is not any trouble or bother about it.
There may perhaps be a slight coolness displayed by the father or
other guardian of the girl towards her some time husband, for a
few days, but further than this there is not any dispute or quarrel
on the subject of the slight. (Their dialects, however, being alto-
gether guiltless of a synonym for that noun may account for their
calmness under the circumstances.) The girl, of course, is again
ready to be disposed of to the first eligible aspirant who may offer,
even although her first matrimonial venture had resulted in the
production of an infant. The new lord has of course to take the
encumbrance along with the mother, which he readily does, and
feels proud too of what will, in the future, be deemed his putative
paternityship.
Polygamy is allowed to any extent, and this law is generally
taken advantage of by those who chance to be rich in sisters,
daughters, or female wards, to give in exchange for wives. No
man can get a wife unless he has a sister, ward, or daughter,
whom he can give in exchange.
Fathers of gi'own-up sons frequently exchange their daughters
for wives, not for their sons, however, but for themselves, even
although they already have two or three. Cases of this kind are
indeed very hard for the sons, but being aboriginal law they must
bear it as best they can, and that too without murmur; and to
make the matter harder still to bear, the elders of a tribe will not
allow the young men to go off to other tribes to steal wives for
themselves, as such measures would be the certain means of
entailing endless feuds with their accompanying bloodshed, in the
attempts that would surely be made with the view of recovering
the abducted women. Young men, therefore, not having any
female relatives or wards under their control must, as a conse-
quence of the aboriginal law on the subject, live all their lives in
single blessedness, unless they choose to take up with some
withered old hags whom nobody owns, merely for the purpose of
having their fires cared for, their water-vessels filled, and their
baggage carried from camp to camp.


This ill-assorted kind of engagement is, however, not of very
frequent occurrence, as the young men are too much afraid of the
ridicule which their more fortunate fellows would surely shower
upon their all too uxorious heads.
In their matrimonial engagements great deference is paid to
consanguinity, the very slightest hlood-relationship being a definite
barrier to that connection; in their sexual intercourse, however,
they are not the least bit particular, consequently incest of
every grade is continually being perpetrated; chastity, as civilized
people appraise that virtue, is quite unknown amongst them, and it
is altogether a hopeless task endeavouring to make them understand
the beauties and value thereof.
In speaking to them on this not veiy choice subject, they point
to all the animals in nature and say, “ These are not restricted in
any way, why then should we be ? Such trammels and prohi-
bitions may be quite correct as regards white men, but not being
in accordance with our ethics, and never having been the rule of
our progenitors, we cannot see why we should ignore that which
our forefathers deemed good merely because white men, who do
not understand black-fellows, tell us to do so.” Of course to
arguments of this kind, and so put, especially when your opponent
is an untaught and nearly, if not quite, unteachable savage, there
is not any possibility of reply.
Much of this absence of chastity is due to the promiscuous
manner they have of huddling up together in their loondthals
(huts), and to the coarse, obscene, and lewd character of the
stories in which are spent so many of their evenings round the
camp fires; all their facetiae, too, are of the same broad gross
nature; were it not so, it would fail to meet with the appreciative
audiences which sit silently for hours together drinking in the foul
pruriency of the savage story-teller. Considering that all these
lewd tales with their accompanying gross facetiae are related in
the presence of the children, it can scarcely be matter for wonder
that they should grow up into men and women, possessing
but hazy notions concerning chastity and its many beauties.
It frequently happens that two brothers-in-lav/ fall out and
quarrel. Should the difference assume a serious aspect,
the first thing they do is, each sends off his wife to her
brother, thus getting back their respective sisters (as wives
are always obtained by exchange, the relationships of brother
and sister-in-law, are usually double ones). The fact of them
each having babies does not in any way militate against the
custom. Of course the children in these cases go with their mothers.
Disputes the most trivial very often result in these summary
denouements, and against which the poor women dare not say one
word, however much their aversion may be to the harsh proceed-
ing. This cruel law is one of the rights inherent to aboriginal


manhood, which cannot he controverted. As a natural conse-
quence, the right is frequently exercised. Sometimes however,
regret will supervene, the misunderstanding of the brothers-in-law
become adjusted, and in due course, the wives return to their
original partners.
When a woman becomes a widow, she falls back to her father,
brother, or guardian, as the case may be, not in any instance does
she go to her late husband’s relations; if she is not too old, she is
again exchanged away, her children, if any, going with her. If on
the other hand, she should be too old to tempt the happy owners
of marriageable girls, she becomes a waif and drudge in the tribe ;
that is to say, unless some one of the enforced bachelors* should
deem her fitted to attend to his wants ; if so, he has only to make
his wishes known, when the sable widow gladly accepts his
protection.
These innumerable choppings and changes make it almost im-
possible to tell the true paternity of many of the children, but as
there is not any property depending upon legitimacy, heirship or
the contrary is of but little importance, and a bar sinister in an
aboriginal’s genealogical tree is not deemed derogatory in any
sense.
Children, their lack of training.
The children do not receive any schooling ; when old enough to
run about they do just whatever seems mete to their savage
instincts, without the slightest reference to any one, —their parents
never by any chance endeavour to guide them aright; in short,
they do not possess, or even attempt to possess, the very remotest
control over their progeny. It is true that sometimes in a burst
of passion a father will give his child a blow with a waddy, which
as likely as not will well nigh brain the little savage ; this sort of
training, however, only results in a wild fit of bellowing, together
with a period of sulks, more or less extended, according to the
evanescence, or the contrary, of the pain inflicted.
Aboriginal parents never use any means calculated to inculcate
patience, endurance of pain, or privation, into the youthful
character, therefore both adults and children are woefully deficient
in the attributes pertaining to these virtues. Unlike children of
other races, these have not any sports or pastimes relating to the
years of childhood alone, their youthful amusements being merely
the occupations of their riper years in miniature. Thus, in figura-
tive language it may be said, that with these people there is not
any period of boy and girlhood amongst them, boys and girls being
men and women from the time they can run alone, only of a lesser
growth.
* Enforced bachelors. Those men not having any sisters or wards to
exchange for wives.


Dress and Ornament.
In dress there is not the least difference that of the
male and female, the opossum cloak being the only Avear of both
sexes, and in both it is Avorn in exactly the same manner, and
that is somewhat after the fashion of the Roman toga, across the
shoulder Avith one arm free. On the old men and the young
•women it is an exceedingly graceful garb. The men Avear a belt
round the loins under the cloak, Avhilst the Avomen Avear a band
round the same portion of the person, from Avhich depends a thick
fringe all round about a foot in depth ; the fringe is made of
innumerable strips of opossum or A\-allaby skin ; on the upper por-
tion of both arms male and female Avear armlets, also made of
opossum skin; besides these they Avear a netted band about an
inch and a-half wide round the broAv ; this band is coloured red
Avith ochre, mixed in fat, from time to time, therefore in general
the circlet is gaudy and bright, and rather pleasing than otherwise.
Round the neck both sexes Avear sti'ings of reeds cut into sections
of an inch long, which, Avhen carefully dried, are of a clear pale
straAv colour; these reed necklaces are admirably calculated to
form an agreeable contrast to their ebony-hued necks and shoulders,
more especially when these portions of the person have been recently
Avell anointed Avith cod-fish fat. Tliey also make necklets from
the antennse of the great Murray lobster, Avhich, Avhen the fish
have been cooked, are of a bright red coral tint. They are broken
into half-inch sections and threaded on kangaroo tail sineAvs ; these
with two kangaroo teeth attached to the liair by means of gum,
just oA’er the ears, and a bone or short section of reed through the
septum of the nose, make up all the ornaments with which they
are delighted to decorate themselves. Not having any festive
periods in their calendar, they merely adorn themselves Avith these
ornaments as the whim takes them, or for lack of other occupation.
Practices on attaining the age of puberty in the boys, and
PRIOR thereto PHYSICAL CAPACITY.
When the boys arrive at the age of puberty the tAvo front teeth
of the upper jaAv are knocked out. This operation is performed by
the Baangal (doctor) of the tribe, and the manner of the operation is
of the most primitive kind. Two holes, about a foot apart and
twelve or fourteen inches deep, are sunk in some secluded place
at a distance from the camp, Avhere the subject to be operated on
is taken by his father if he have one; if not, then his next of kin
to see him through the ordeal. Arrived at the spot, the
boy s feet are placed one in each hole, his father then kneels on
the ground behind him, placing his arms under those of his son,
and bringing his hands together over his brow ; the head of the
subject is then drawn firmly back against his father’s breast, Avhen


firmly fixed in that position the Baangal advances with a wooden
punch made hard by fire ; this rude implement is placed against
the teeth to be extracted, and then, with one smart blow on the
punch with a tomahawk the operation is completed, and the
hitherto boy has become a man. For three months after this
cruel ordeal the young men are not allowed to look at a woman,
young or old, as the sight of one during this probation would
be the means of entailing numberless misfortunes, such as wither-
ing up of limbs, loss of eyesight, and, in fact, general decrepitude.
Prior to the period when the youths are made young men of,
they dare not eat of emu flesh, wild turkey, swans, geese, or black
duck, or of the eggs of any of these birds. Did they infringe this
law in the very remotest degree their hair would become pre-
maturely grey, and the muscles of their limbs would waste away
and shrink up.
Any members of the tribe having malformations of the limbs
or other parts of the body are pointed out as living examples of
the dire fate of those who knowingly commit a breach of this
aboriginal law. These poor cripples who are thus pointed at by
way of illustration have had it impressed upon their minds from
their earliest youth that their respective infirmities are entirely
due to such indiscretions; .so persistently has this been iterated and
reitei’ated in their presence, they can scarcely help but give
implicit credence to the story. Having such dread penalties so
continually placed before them, the various kind of tabooed food
are carefully avoided by the youths of the tribe ; thus the full
grown men and women come in for many of the good things of
aboriginal life which they most certainly Avould not but for this
law. Nathless the framers of this wise (?) decree were sensible
in their generation, and their descendants to this day reap the
benefit of their remarkable wisdom.
As a rule the aborigines have not any great capacity for physical
endumnce, at least they cannot compete with average white men.
When violent and long drawn-out fatigue chances to be the order
of the day they have thews and sinews enough too—in fact
usually their whole physical development is unexceptionable, but
unfortunately they lack what is commonly called pluck, there-
fore it requires but a very small matter beyond common to make
them give in ; they, however, always evince a certain amount of
shamefacedness at such times, as is obvious enough by their
invaiiably attributing their apparent want of stamina to the fact
of their having a sore finger or some equally trivial ailment. They
can bear the pangs of hunger, however, to a most remarkable
extent; a whole week’s starvation is not by any means an
uncommon occurrence with them, more especially during stormy
winter weather. During those inhospitable times though, nothing
will induce them to stir out of their camps; indeed, they will


scarcely make use of sufficient exertion to turn themselves round,
unless perhaps when they fancy it will lessen their discomfort in
some small degree, if they can elaborate enough of energy to
enable them to give their waist-belts an extra twist, thereby con-
tracting the vacuum which lack of food has made so painfully
apparent.
Signs of mourning for the dead. —Of Sepulture, and the
CEREMONIES CONNECTED THEREWITH.
When men of consideration or young people die there is much
mourning and grief in the tribe, and with those related by blood
to the deceased the mourning takes the shape of very violent
physical suffering. They (the relations) score their backs and
arms, even their very faces don’t always escape, with red hot
brands until they become hideous with ulcers. These ulcers stand
them in good stead, however, in this way: if their grief is not
sufficiently acute to induce a genuine cry, they have only to come
roughishly against the ulcers, when they will have cause enough
for any quantity of lachrymosity. At sunrise and sunset, the one
who is principally bereaved begins to cry or howl in a long
monotonous kind of yodeling tone, which is immediately taken up
by old and young. At first it is begun in a low cadence, but
gradually it swells into such volumes of uncouth, excruciating
sound as is not heard under any other circumstances. The
mourning cries at a good large wake are considerable, and not by
any means pleasing to the cultured ear, still they are as the music
of the Spheres when compared to the hellish din created by a
large campful of aboriginal,mourners.
Each period of daily mourning lasts for about an hour; the
remainder of the twenty-four hours they, to all appearance (but
for the mourning paint), are as free from grief as though that evil
were not common to all humanity. Of course every member of
the tribe has his or her head plastered over with a white pigment,
which they manufacture by burning gypsum, and then mixing it
with water until the required consistency is achieved. The face
is also painted with the same stuff, in such designs as best pleases
the taste of each individual savage, there not being any recognized
rule for tribal mourning decorations. When all the members of
the tribe are so adorned, they give as perfect a representation of a
host of demons as the most imaginative in demonology could well
portray, and a stranger unacquainted with the aborigines and
their customs, coming suddenly on an encampment tricked out in
this guise, could hardly be blamed if a thrill of real terror did
imbue his every nerve.
They prepare their dead for burial by wrapping them up tightly
in the cloak which they wore during life, winding numberless
plies of cord round the body to keep the cloak in its place. This


operation is performed, as soon as the body becomes idgid, and
when completed, it is borne to the grave at once. The graves are
usually about four feet deep, and in every instance bearing east
and west. In the bottom of the grave a sheet of bark is placed,
or should bark be difficult to procure, it is thickly strewn with
grass instead ; the body is then let down with the feet towards
the east. All the property which belonged to the deceased, such
as weapons, nets, &c., is laid beside the body; then sticks are
placed across the grave, the ends of which rest on ledges a few
inches above the body; over these, and crossing them at right
angles, sticks the length of the grave are arranged, then bark or a
good thick covering of grass hides the body from sight and pre-
vents the earth, which is now filled in, from coming into contact
therewith.
When all this is properly completed, the relations of the
deceased fling themselves prone upon the grave, howling, tearing
their hair out by handfuls, and rubbing earth over their heads and
bodies in vast quantities; besides this, they rip up the green
mourning ulcers in the most loathsome manner, until with blood
and grime combined they present a ludicrous and ghastly spectacle.
There is about an hour of these proceedings before the ceremony
terminates; after it is concluded the mourners trudge back to the
camp in twos or threes ; on their arrival there they sit down
silently and stolidly for about an hour, after which, they again
wake up into every day activity, their grief from thenceforth is
forgotten, unless at the morning and evening intervals of pre-
scribed mourning. The self-inflicted sores, however, remain long
unhealed, and no doubt have the effect of keeping their bereave-
ment fresh and green in their memories.
Should the person buried have been esteemed of consideration
prior to death a neat hut is erected over the grave, the covering
thereof being generally thatch, made of a hard knotty grass, having
many joints, probably, therefore, akin to polygonum. This thatch
is firmly secured to the frame by cord, many hundred yards of
which are used in the work.
On some occasions a net is made, having meshes 4 inches square,
with which the hut is completely enveloped.
These mausoleums cover the grave entirely; they are about
5 feet high, and are of an oval shape ; a small opening or door-
way is left at the eastern end ; these openings are never more than
30 inches high, only being large enough to allow of a full grown
man creeping in; the tops of the graves or floors of the huts are
covered with grass, which is renewed from time to time as it
becomes withered. The tombs are enclosed by brush fencing, the
forms of the enclosures being of a diamond-shape j the tomb in
every instance is exactly in the centre; all the grass inside of the
fence is neatly shaved off, and the ground swept quite clean. It


is kept in this tidy condition for two or three years ; after the
lapse of that" time, however, the whole arrangement is left to
dwindle to decay, and after a few more years the very site of it is
forgotten.
When a first-horn child dies, should it be a son (if a daughter
it is hidden out of sight as soon as possible), and under two years
of age, instead of being buried in the usual manner, the little body
is tightly swaddled in a cloak, well fastened round with cord,
until it assumes the appearance of a long narrow bundle, without,
however, showing the outline of the figure, as is the case with a
body prepared for burial, but looking exactly similar to a bale of
skins ready for dispatch to market. This bundle the mother
carries with her wherever she goes, and at night sleeps with it by
her side; and this loathsome custom she continues to carry out
for six months, until, from decay, nothing but a few bones remain
in the bundle ; after this, the bones are put in the ground and
forgotten.
These decomposing atoms of mortality do not tend to render the
atmosphere in the vicinity of the camp either pleasant or healthful,
still, these benighted savages bear with the offensive effluvium
without the slightest murmur, deeming it, doubtless, one of those
sacred customs which have been habitual to them from the
remotest period, and which to omit would be sacrilege of the very
worst.
When very old women die or wittals of long standing, of whom
there are generally a few in each tribe, a shallow hole is merely
scraped in the most convenient spot, having due regard to
proximity and softness of soil, whei'ein the body is carelessly
thrown without the slightest preparation or ceremony, covered up
and forgotten, unless, indeed, the shallow grave chances to be
scraped out by the hungry dogs of the camp, which is not by any
means unusual, and the poor remains of humanity voraciously
devoured by the ghoul-like brutes; then, instead of viewing this
disgusting desecration with horror, they actually make merry
thereon, bandying obscene faceti* with each other on the subject;
such occurrences, in fact, being deemed fitting in every respect for
the display of their vile and prurient wit.
Brevity of Aboriginal Life.
The Sick and how attended—Bleeding and other modes of cure—Snake-bite
and its treatment —Obstetrical.
Length of life is not a feature that pertains to these people ;in
most subjects, old age sets in ere thirty-five years have been
attained ; in fact long before these comparatively few years have
been passed they are quite grey, and frequently bald. About that
time, too, their muscular development begins to tend towards
attenuation; few of the women reach even those years, being


mostly worn out by drudgery and disease together before they
are well past their teens. Unless in the cases of old worn-out
women, or bed-ridden subjects of standing, who are grudged
the very slightest attention, the sick are attended carefully enough.
Not being subject to infectious diseases, those attending the sick
have not the least fear of contracting the illness from a patient
during their ministrations ; in fact, they are quite ignorant of the
nature of infection, and are not aware that disease can be con-
tracted by coming into contact with or breathing the same air
even as patients suffering from ailments do.
Phlebotomy is practised to a very considerable extent for many
of their ailments; it is performed upon the cupping principle
merely, their surgical knowledge being too limited to allow of
their understanding the efficacy of opening one of the lai-ger veins.
When blood-letting is desirable, their cupping operation is effected
in the following manner : part from which they wish to draw
the blood is scarified pretty deeply by means of a sharpened
mussel shell; when this has been done sufficiently well, the
operator sucks the wound with his mouth, spitting out the blood
from time to time, until he feels satisfied that sufficient has been
extracted. Much relief is afforded by this practice to those sufter-
ing from headache, inflammation of the bowels, ophthalmic sore
eyes, &c., all of which ills prevail amongst the aborigines to an
unenviable extent.
For pulmonary affections and rheumatic fevers (these two
diseases are very common and very fatal in the aboriginal tribes)
they make use of the vapour bath, from the use of which much
benefit is obtained. The bath is constructed in a very primitive
though at the same time very effectual manner. A hole long
enough and wide enough to hold the subject to be operated on is
dug to a depth of about 18 inches; it is then filled with fire-
wood to the top and ignited, when the wood is all consumed
the ashes are scraped out and damp pine leaves filled in to the
thickness of a foot; over the pine leaves an opossum cloak is
spread and the patient placed carefully thereon; he is then covered
all over, with tlie exception of his face, with another cloak, then
all over the cloak earth is spread of a thickness capable of retain-
ing the steam without weighing too heavily upon the patient; to
attain the former and obviate the latter the finest earth that can
be prociu'ed is only used, that is in the absence of sand, sand in all
cases being preferred when comeatable.
During the progress of the bath the perspiration exudes from
the face in great globules, and the hair becomes quite wet from
the same cause, a female attendant is seated by the side of the
patient, and it is her duty to wipe off the perspiration as occasion
requires, the napkin used for this purpose being a soft piece of tlie
ever useful opossum skin.


When the Baangal (doctor) thinks that the patient has been
steamed enough, he is removed from the pit carefully, and expe-
ditiously rubbed dry, after which he is closely rolled up in cloaks,
and placed so that a breath of wind cannot reach him.
Although the aborigines are perfectly well aware of the vast
benefit which patients suffering from many complaints derive from
the use of these baths, it is but seldom that their efficacy is tested,
simply because the preparation of them entails more labour than
they care about expending, unless indeed in extreme cases, or when
the patient is held in high estimation by the tribe j then, of course,
no degree of trouble is deemed burdensome.
Hot sand baths are also used for local application, more espe-
cially for rheumatic affections of the joints. The sand is heated
by simply being poured on to a fire, prepared to that end only,
and allowed to remain there until the fire is consumed, when it is
withdrawn in portions as required, such portions being brought to
the right temperature by the admixture of cold sand. The sand as
prepared is applied by the Baangal to the affected part: he takes
it up in double handfuls, and holds it against the seat of pain, and
as the sand becomes cool he lets it fall and applies a fresh lot, so
he continues until the pain is removed or the sand exhausted.
Sin autem nec venis incidendis quidquam profecerint, et calidi
vaporis usus, quod quidem varo accidit, curantium spem fefellerit,
ingravescente morbo, ad extremum remedium confugiunt, foedum
illud quidem et quod referre pudeat, verum tamen, si hujus gentis
medicos audias vel in gravissimis morbis certissimum. Mulierem
ob guventutem firmitatemque corporis lectam sex vel plures vivi
in locum baud procul a castris remotum deducunt; ibique omnes
deinceps in ilia libidinem explent. Tum mulier ad pedas surgere
jubetur, quo facilius, id quod maribus excepit, effluere possit; quod
in vase collectum agrotanti ebibendum praebent. Infandam sane
potionem, cujus tamen vim salutiferam hujus regionis incolae
plurimis exemplis demonstratam esse confirmant. Equidem ipse
in pluribus periculum factum esse comperi, sed ne in uno quidem
languentis corporis vires fuisseredintegratas. Ceterum baud provsus
incredibile videtur liquorem, qui vitsee communicandae enservit,
eundem vi quadam vitali esse praeditum ; ideoque fieri potest, ut
quemadmodum ipsi uno ore testantur, homines ex illo haustu baud
quidem morbo liberentur, sed in morbus excesserit, vires mali
dituonitate affliatas denuo recipiant. Sed quoniam in hugus modi
quoestionibus plane hospes sum, artis mediiae peritis rem dijudi-
candam relinquo.
In the treatment of snake-bites they are singularly successful.
In my long experience of the aborigines I only know of one death
resulting from that cause, although I have been cognizant of many
aborigines being bitten from time to time. Their method of
extracting the poison, though primitive, is most effectual. The


moment an aborigine is bitten, he squats down and pinches the
bitten part between his thumb-nails. This causes the blood to
exude from the fang punctures, which is rubbed off every now and
then as it gathers. During this pinching part of the operation,
his murtoomoo (wife) or companion, as the case may be, has
not been idle. A small fire has been made, and a piece of
of opossum skin heated thereat, to as high a temperature as the
material will bear without shrivelling. When the blood ceases to
flow from the pinchings, the heated skin is placed on the fang marks
and kept there firmly by the palm of the hand; when the skin gets
slightly cool it is removed, and the punctures sucked until the
skin is reheated, when the sucking ceases, and the hot skin is again
applied, and so the cui’e progresses, alternate sucking and the hot
opossum skin applications until the patient is deemed out of
danger. The whole operation seldom lasts more than three-quarters
of an hour.
A sting from a deaf adder, however, is considered by the natives
hopelessly fatal, therefore they rarely attempt the extraction of the
deadly virus injected by that reptile’s horny tail spur, in fact, they
have not any time to try a cure, for the victim seldom lives twenty
minutes after being wounded. These reptiles are the most dreaded
of all the snake kind by the aborigipes, by reason of their superior
virulency. To add to the danger arising from these reptiles, nothing
will move them from the position in which they are met. If one
is touched by a careless foot, or even by a piece of stick, as he lies
in the path, he does not crawl away from the interrupting object
as quickly as possible, as is the habit of most other reptiles; no
indeed, he merely raises his head and tail simultaneously, and with
the rapidity of thought, seizes the disturbing object with his mouth,
holding firmly thereby, whilst he drives his tail spur into it
repeatedly.
I once saw a native bitten by a black snake; the punctures were
on the shin a little above the ancle; it occurred whilst we were
shooting ducks on a Murray lagoon. On being bitten, the first
thing the blackfellow did was to kill the snake, he then squatted on
the ground and pinched the fang punctures very hard ; the blood
as a matter of course under this treatment oozed from the wounds
pretty freely, and as long as the faintest trace of blood came so
long did the pinching continue ; however, the whole proceedings
did not occupy more than ten minutes. When the aborigine got
up he said it was all right, and there was an end of the matter.
On another occasion, I knew of a native being struck on the
great toe, also by a black snake. He was walking from the
fishing ground to the camp after sunset when it happened, and as
he had still 2 miles to go after the accident the poison had ample
time to get into the circulation. As a matter of course, in this
case the poison could not be pinched out, because the punctures w'ere


in the horny* part of the toe, where pinching would not he of any
avail. On reaching the camp, however, he was attended to at once ;
but the poison had Vjeen too long in the system to allow of a per-
fect cure ; certainly his life was saved, but he could not move out
of the camp without assistance for two years afterwards, and
during these years of enforced confinement he was continually
breaking out in boils and blotches, which in every instance left
very uncurable ulcers and sores behind. All the sole of the
bitten foot suppurated and came away piecemeal, leaving the bones
and tendons of the foot quite bare. He never regained his wonted
strength, or even a semblance of it; although he got to be able to
walk about a little, it was quite an effort to do so. He wasted
and dwindled quietly away, free from pain, for a few years more,
when he died. At the time of his death, he was the merest
skeleton I ever saw, and so light he could easily have been raised
from the ground by one hand.
In their obstetrical practice they are very primitive indeed;
but then, to be sure, scientific assistance is rarely required by
them during the periods of partuidtion, their unconventional
manner of living, together with the simplicity of dress, makes
Dame Nature’s assistance ample on nearly all those occasions. It
does occur, occasionally, that a woman about to become a mother
will be accompanied by one of her own sex into the part of the
bush selected for the interesting event ; but this is merely for
company’s sake, and not with the view of rendering assistance,
as in all cases of the kind the mothers have their wits so well
about them they even fasten the umbilical cord themselves. As
soon as the dark mite of aboriginal humanity is brought forth,
the mother picks it up and carries it straight to the nearest avail-
able water, where site washes it clean, and that, too, without
taking the chill off the water. When this essential has been
satisfactorily concluded, she rolls it up in her cloak, and walks off
to the camp with the greatest composure ; when she arrives there,
neither her appearance, nor that of her new production, elicits the
least wonder or surprise—the putative father even sits calmly by,
and pays no particular heed. It frequently happens that a woman
will be taken with the pains of labour during a trail from one
place of encampment to another. When this occurs, she merely
drops out of the line of march, and seeks the friendly shelter of
some convenient bush, after which she picks up the trail again,
and walks on to the new place of encampment, carrying her
latest progeny with her as though the penalty incurred by Eve
had not descended to her aboriginal sisterhood.
* The skin on the under part, as well as a good distance up the sides of
the feet and toes of the aborigines, is as hard as a horse’s hoof. This merely
applies, as in fact, the whole of this paper does, to the unsophisticated
aborigines.


During my long experience of the aborigines, I have only
known of one parturition case terminating fatally, and, in my
opinion, the woman was physically incapacitated for the ordeal of
maternity—although it is such a simple matter from an abori-
ginal point of view—she being the veriest pigmy in the shape of
a woman that I ever saw; besides, she gave birth to twins on the
occasion, which may have had something to do with her death.
Most singular to say, as far as I have been able to learn, this was
the first and only instance of twins being born known to these
aborigines, and these were by a white father.
Small-pox.
All the very old men in these tribes show distinct small-pox
traces. In speaking of this scourge they say that it came with
the waters, that is to say, it followed down the rivers in the early
flood season, laying its death clutch on every tribe in its progress,
until the whole country became perfectly decimated. During
the earlier stages of its ravages the natives gave proper
sepulture to its victims; but at last the death rate became so
heavy, and, naturally, the panic so great, burying the bodies was
no longer attempted—the survivors merely moved their camps
daily, leaving the sick behind to die, unattended, and the dead to
fester in the sun, or as food for wild dogs and carrion birds, until
in a short time the whole atmosphere became tainted with the
fetid odours arising from the decomposing bodies. The poor
creatures began to think that not one would escape death, conse-
quently they sank to so great a depth of despondency, through
this foul destroyer, as to make them indifferent whether they lived
or died.
When the bright torrid summer displaced the moister spring,
the disease, after devastating these tribes, gradually died out,
leaving but a sorry remnant of the aborigines behind, to mourn the
depopulation of the land, and many, many moons waxed and
waned before the fell destroyer’s foul presence was even partially
forgotten. To this day the old men who bear such patent traces
of the loathed distemper speak shudderingly and with so much
genuine horror as it is impossible for any other evil to elicit from
their inherent stolidity.
. This small-pox infliction seems to be the only occasion upon
which great numbers died from one cause; it is not wonderful
therefore if the survivors do look back to the time of the scourge
with feelings of profound dread. The aborigines attributed this
pestilence to the malign machinations of tribes away on the upper
rivers, with whom they were not on terms of amity; that however,
is only a matter of course, since they ascribe all the ills with which
nature smites them to the same source.


Food.
As a rule the food of these aborigines consists of fish princi-
pally, of which, for eight months in the year they have a super-
abundance ; so much so indeed is their su})]>ly during those
months they cannot nearly consume it all, consequently quite a
moiety is absolutely wasted. To supplement the fish they have
kangaroo, emu, opossum, and wallaby; and besides these, aquatic
wild-fowl of countless variety are found in the greatest profusion
on the lakes and lagoons; these latter they capture abundantly,
aided by nets manufactured for that purpose only; and during the
breeding season of these birds they get eggs innumerable, the canoes
arriving at the camps in the evenings then are literally laden down
to the water’s edge with no other cargo but eggs ; they are heaped
up at both ends until there is hardly room for the native to stand
and paddle. It is of but small moment to them whether the eggs
have birds in them or not, as they are consumed with a relish
all the same. A species of flag having a farinaceous root, called
by the aborigines kumpung, grows very plentifully by the margins
of all the lakes and lagoons; it makes, even to a European, a very
palatable and nutritious food ; it can be procured in abundance,
but as it requires considerable labour to dig it, much less is pro-
cured than its manifold merits would justify. The flower-stem of
this flag when it rises through the water in spring is also eaten in
its I’aw green state; it is very insipid to European }>alates, and I fancy
it contains but a very small modicum of nutritive matter; how-
ever the natives are extremely partial to it, they therefore consume
it in great quantities. In this green stage the aborigines term it
jontie. The common small-flowei-ed yellow water lily which so
plentifully fringes most of the colonial lakes and lagoons, is another
source from whence they deiive a desirable addition to their diet.
The roots of this plant are formed of many tubers, averaging about
an inch in length, by a diameter of about half an inch; the roots
of one plant will frequently yield as many tubers as a half-pint
measure will contain. They are baked before being eaten, and are
of a sweet mawkish taste, and not unlike Jerusalem artichokes in
their consistency. These tubers are called laboor by the aborigines.
The common sow thistle, dandelion, yam, and a trefoil which
grows on country subject at times to inundations during their re-
spective seasons are largely consumed. To see the lyoors (women)
approaching the camp in the evenings with each a great bundle of
these forage plants on her head, a stranger to their customs would
imagine that they were providing the nightly fodder for a dairy of
cows; they eat all these herbs in their raw state by way of salad.
Besides the foregoing they eat the larvae of several kinds of ants,
some of which are tree-inhabiting, whilst others are mound-raising
ground insects. Grubs also of all kinds and sizes are greatly
appreciated by them, more especially the large one common to the


gum-trees all over the Colony. The natives are very expert in
discovering the shrubs and trees in which grubs are to be found,
in fact they seldom err; yet to a casual observer, or even one with
some acuteness, there is not the slightest perceptible difference in
the appearance of a tree or shrub containing numerous grubs and
those which do not contain any, but aboriginal observation is won-
derfully keen in all matters pertaining to nature; even objects seem-
ingly the most trivial fail to elude their ever ready perception.
The ant larvae is consumed raw, whilst the grubs are eaten either
raAv or roasted.
During the cold bleak weather which occurs in winter they are
not the least bit choice as to their food ; anything having life, no
matter how repulsive to European notions it may be, is most
acceptable at those times; frogs are deemed good; the then hybern-
ating carpet or true snake most toothsome, and even the abomin-
able fetid wild dog is esteemed a luxury of the very highest order.
Blackfellows’ ovens or cooking-places have been a fertile source
of argument for many years, some holding that they are not
cooking-places at all, but tumuli or burrows left by some race long
since passed a,way and quite forgotten. Still, so far as the general
public are aware, none of the writers or discussers of the point
have had sufficient curiosity to dig into the mounds, and so set the
vexed question at rest once and for all.
Blackfellows’ ovens are not by any means misnomers, as to all
intents and purposes they are essentially genuine cooking-places,
or cooking-places and kitchen middens combined, and the following
is the manner of their formation : —A family, or perhaps several
families, as the case may be, select a site for their camp, where abund-
ance of game and other sources of food obtain and are procurable
with the least expenditure of time and laboui-. Towards the middle
of the afternoon the hunters drop into camp, with the result of the
day’s industry, consisting in all probability of all sorts and sizes;
for my present purpose however I shall assume the game to con-
sist of opossums only.
When the hunters have seated themselves comfortably, they
set to work at once skinning the opossums, Avhilst several of the
Jyoors (women) go off with their yam-sticks; when they reach the
spot selected for the purpose, they begin with a will to excavate
a hole, about 3 feet in diameter and nearly 2 feet deep;
during the digging of the hole any pieces of clay which they chip
out, in size similar to ordinary road metal, are placed carefully on
one side with the view to their future use.
When the hole has been dug sufficiently deep, it is swept or
brushed out with some boughs or a bunch of grass; it is then filled
to the top or a little above it with firewood, wdiich the lyoors had
previously collected and prepared for that purpose. On the top
of the firewood the selected pieces of clay are carefully placed, the


wood is then ignited, and by the time it is all burned the clay
nodules have become baked until they are exactly similar to
irregular sections of well burnt brick ; of course they are red hot.
When this result has been properly achieved, the hot clay is
removed from the hole; for this purpose they use two pieces of
stick about 8 inches long, holding them both in one hand and
working them deftly, even as a cookmaid uses a pair of tongs.
The aborigines have not any distinctive name for these pieces of
stick, merely calling them kulkie (wood).
The deft manipulation of these tongs is an accomplishment
enjoyed by old and young alike ; their dexterity therein seems
quite an aboriginal gift, as few white men ever attain to any
degree of proficiency in their use.
After the hot clay is removed from the hole the ashes are care-
fully swept out, and a thinnish layer of slightly moistened grass is
placed over the bottom and round the sides, upon which the
prepared opossums are nicely packed and covered over with more
damp grass; the hot clay nodviles are then spread evenly over the
top of the grass, and over these the finer earth which originally
came out of the excavation is spread.
Should this final covering be too thin to keep in the steam, it is
supplemented by earth dug in immediate proximity (this supple-
mented soil fully accounts for the depressions always found about
the bases of these ovens); ashes are never employed for the
outside covering, nor is sand, because being so fine they would be
apt to percolate through the interstices of both grass and clay
nodules, thereby adding an amount of grit, which would not
improve either the flavour or appearance of the food. Before the
heat in the clay nodules and the hole itself has become exhausted
the opossums are beautifully cooked, as perfectly so indeed as
though the operation had been performed in the most perfect
kitchen range extant.
When the cooking has been completed, the covering is scraped
off, and this debris, consisting of calcined clay, ashes, and burnt
earth, becomes the nucleus of a blackfellow’s oven, such as are to
be seen at the present day. This process being repeated at short
intervals, over a series of years, perhaps indeed for centuries,
results in the mounds which are in reality blacks’ ovens.
As long as the camp remains in the same position the original
hole is used for baking ; and when it is understood that at least a
barrowful of fresh clay is required every time the oven is heated,
to replace the unavoidable waste by crumbling, which is by no
means inconsiderable, in consequence of the clay being used in an
unwrought state, it will readily be seen how these mounds
gradually but surely increase; bones too of the animals they use
as food, charcoal, &c,, tend materially to hasten this growth.


As a general rule the aborigines do not erect their loovdthals
(huts) on these cooking mounds ; an exception to this exists, how-
ever, on the extensive reedy plains of the lower rivers, which are
annually inundated, remaining so for at least five months in the
year.
On these wide-spreading reed-beds, blackfellows’ ovens are
much larger in size and vastly more numerous than they are in
any other portion of the Colony, thus plainly denoting how dense
the population in the locality must have been, as well as the
abundance of food pertaining thereto, which was ready to hand
for their sustenance. When the mild rains of spring dissolve the
snows on the Alps and in their valleys, the liberated waters rush
down the rivers and their innumerable tributaries, spreading
themselves out in every direction, when they reach the reedy
country, until many hundreds of square miles are submerged.
All over the submerged country, cooking mounds stand up out
of the waters, perfect little islands, looking bright, green, and
refreshing to the eye, by reason of the dense growth of giant salt-
bush with which they are prettily dressed.
These oven islands the aborigines utilise in the flood season, for
camp sites, conveying their firewood and other requirements over
miles of water in their canoes. An encampment will frequently
remain on one of these tiny islands for a whole month, the
inhabitants thereof feasting to the top of their bent, on the
oleaginous codfish and his congeners, taking ample toll from the
great river-lobster, as well as from his more delicate though pigmy
brother, the crawfish. Aquatic birds too, of many varieties,
together with their eggs, have to contribute their share of the
general spoil to the savage larder. It will thus be seen that
everything used by the dwellers in these island encampments
has to be brought there from outside places, and that the daily
refuse therefrom aids very materially in the growth of these
mounds.* So long as the fish and game continue plentiful the
natives never think of moving to fresh quarters, that is to say,
unless the tiny spot becomes too offensive for even aboriginal
olfactories to bear with any degi'ee of comfort. When it does so
they shift away to another mound, leaving natural agencies to
purify the contaminated atmosphere round and about the
abandoned islet.
Aboriginal skeletons are frequently found in the cooking
mounds, which no doubt led to the notion of their being barrows ;
the reason for the position of these skeletons, however, can easily
be explained—for example, a death takes place on one of these
* These mounds are usually near to a permanent water (lake or lagoon) on
these submerged plains, and as a matter of course were raised above the
flood-level by long continued use before they become useful for encampment
sites when the plains are inundated.


isolated spots, when there chances to be but a small section of a
tribe located thereon, and as grave-digging is very arduous when
hands are few and the implements merely yam-sticks, the easiest
method, therefore, of covering up the dead from their sight is at
once adopted, and that is simply enough done by scraping a hole
in the friable soil of the mound, wherein the defunct is placed and
covered up. Immediately after one of these hurried burials the
mound is vacated, and ere much time has passed the defunct
subject is entirely forgotten. Be it understood, however, that this
description of sepulture is only given to old worn-out women or
invalids of long standing, and who had become troublesome and
tiresome to their unwilling attendants.
I once had occasion to remove the whole of a blackfellow’s oven ;
it was a fair-sized one, and contained quite 3,000 cubic yards
of soil; during its removal twenty-eight skeletons were exhumed.
This large number was a matter of considerable surprise to me, but
on making due inquiry amongst the very old aborigines—the young
people of the tribe did not know anything about them—l dis-
covered that they were the remains of some of the small-pox victims
who died during the earlier stages of the epidemic, whilst sepul-
ture was yet being given to those who succumbed to the loathsome
plague.
Canoes.
The aborigines make their unkooies (canoes) from the bark of
the red gum tree; bark of other trees, notably box, is also used,
but merely for temporary purposes, as no other bark but the
former will stand the weather without curling up and splitting.
In all cases each canoe is made from a single sheet of bark without
tie or join. In making these vessels, trees with natural curves are
chosen, as canoes so obtained precludes the necessity of using fire
to soften the bark with the view to giving the required rise stem
and stern.
When the bark for a canoe is cut, stretchers are immediately
placed across it at intervals of 3 feet; this is done to prevent the
bark from curling whilst the sap is in it; short pi'ops are also
placed under the stem and stern to keep them from becoming too
much depressed by reason of their own weight. If at this stage the
canoe should not have the exact shape desired by the maker, he
places heavy billets of wood inside at those parts which require
pressing outwards, and the bark being full of sap the pressure
effects the end aimed at. After this, and whilst the weights are
still in the canoe and the props still in position outside, a coat of
well puddled clay is plastered all over the interior, which effectxially
hinders sun-cracks ; in this condition the canoe is left in the sun to
season. After ten or fifteen days’ exposure the bark has become so
hard that it is able to retain the shape ever after, no matter how


roughly it may be handled. It is therefore launched without the
slightest ceremony upon the waters where it is destined to float for
the few brief years of its existence.
After the lapse of two years or a little more the canoe becomes
heavy and sodden, therefore correspondingly unwieldy, so the
owner in his many rambles keeps his eyes about him Avith the view
of discovering a suitable tree from which he can take a canoe
wherewith to replace his now frail craft.
According to the size of the canoe required, so is the tree
selected from which to take the bark. Heads of families generally
have vessels large enough to move their whole households at once
from place to place; bachelors however, having less impedimenta,
usually content themselves Avith canoes of much less capacity, flnd-
ing such more suited for pursuing aquatic birds during the moult-
ing season, thousands of which they capture in their then most
helpless condition ; in harpooning flsh too, the small canoe is found
most manageable. The aborigines of this lacustrine and riverine
area hold their canoes in higher estimation than they do any other
of their possessions, but this is only a matter of course, for Avithout
these vessels their food Avould be very much more scanty than it
is, and of a much ])oorer quality ; besides, in the flood-time they
Avould be unable to get about by reason of the many waters.
The stick for propelling (it can hardly be termed a paddle) is
about 12 feet long, and 2 inches and a half in diameter; it is
round ; at one end it has three grains affixed, the centi'e one being
half an inch shorter than the outer ones; the latter have a barb
each just aboA'e the points, the centre one is smooth ; the outer
grains are made of Avood hardened by fire, the centre one being of
kangaroo bone ; the pole is made of pine ; the aboriginal name for
the implement is maroong, that being the native name for pine tree.
This instrument has a tAvofold use, that of propelling the canoe
being one, and transfixing flsh Avith the grains being the other.
When bent upon harpooning flsh Avith this grained canoe stick,
they select a stretch of shalloAV water, full of reeds and other
aquatic vegetation, over which the Avary fisherman quietly propels
his canoe, using the plain end of the stick for the purpose ; every
noAv and then he jobs the stick sharply to the bottom in front of
the canoe, thereby disturbing the feeding fish; as a matter of course
they rush aAvay from the neighbourhood of the disturbance, shaking
the plants in their hurry; the moA'ement of the plants above the
water show the keen-eyed fisherman at once the position of his
prey. After the plants ceased shaking the Avily savage pushes
his canoe up gently to within striking distance of the plants Avhich
he saw last in motion, knowing quite well that at the foot thereof
his game is resting ; poising his grained Aveapon for but a short
space, he launches it Avith Avonderful precision, and seldom fails to
bring his scaly victim quivering and glittering into the upper air.


Wlien sailing over deep water both ends of the stick are used;
it is held by the middle at those times, and each end is dipped
into the water alternately; are wonderfully expert in the
management of their canoes, living them along with amazing
velocity, and a directness of bearing truly splendid.
Fibre Plants and their manipulation.
Of fibre plants there are three which the aborigines utilise in
the manufacture of twine and cord. The Kampung ( Typlia mul-
lora) root furnishes the fibre most commonly employed in mak-
ing the thread which is used for netting browbands, waistbelts,
and bags of all sorts and sizes. The largest mohoor mokoors (bags)
are used for transporting their multifarious belongings from one
camp to another, whilst the smaller ones take the place of the
pockets of civilization. Each male is provided with one of the
latter, which is carried over the point of the shoulder or round
the neck, as the fancy of the wearer inclines. This fibre is pre-
pared for use after a very simple though primitive fashion, thus :
After the root is baked (it produces food as well as fibre), it is
not cut up into short sections for convenience in eating, as doing
so would render the material comparatively worthless, by reason
of its shortness; therefore each root is taken separately, the skin
peeled off, and the remainder, which consists of farina and fibre,
is twisted up into a knot, oftentimes as large as a good-sized fist;
in this condition it is crammed into the mouths agape for its recep-
tion. Sometimes both hands are ludicrously employed in the
performance of this feat. When one of these immense mouthfuls
has been sufficiently masticated to extract all the farina, the
residuum, which is the fibre, is ejected in the shape of a small knot of
beautiful whitish tow. These knots of tow are carefully packed
away in bags as they are formed, said bags being utilised for
pillows until the time comes round for twine-making. When
about to make twine, these tow knots are steeped in water for a
night, which effectually softens any starchy matter they may
contain. They are then teased out and well scra])ed with mussel
shells, until they are perfectly cleansed ; the clean flax is then
tied up in small neat hanks, ready for the twine-maker’s
operations.
Considering that these aborigines do not possess any appliances
other than those furnished by Dame ISTature, it is truly wonderful
how deft they are in the fabrication of cord and twine. They
make these of sizes varying from those of a thickness equal to our
clothes-lines down to the veriest tiny twine. Whatever the size
may be, the cord or twine in all cases consists of two plies only,
and the most singular thing about it is, that both strands or plies
are twisted at one time, and as the hand is drawn back from
twisting them, the retrograde action twines them together into the


finished cord. The work is done on the bare thigh, thus : Two
flat hanks are loosened out, the ends of which are held by the left
hand, the rest is laid straight across the thigh and kept apart by
one of the fingers of the hand holding the ends ; the palm of the
right hand is now moistened and placed over the flax on the thigh,
when it is rubbed sharply towards the knee. By this action, both
of the flax hanks are twisted into firm threads, the finger which
had kept the hanks apart is now withdrawn, and the right hand
is pulled back with a sharp jerk, which results in the two threads
being beautifully twined together into a neat cord. The end of
the shortest hank (they always commence with a long and short
hank) is now teased out, and the end of another hank is mixed
with it, the two rubbing actions being again performed with a like
result, so it continues, two rubs and a join alternately.
This process they will continue hour after hour, until the thigh
becomes quite painful to the slightest touch ; the thread-making
is therefore thrown aside until the tender limb returns to its
normal condition.
Boongoor, a fibre rush, is another plant from which they pro-
cure flax. This plant grows at the bases of sandhills, but not so
low down as to impinge on the flooded ground on which the
sandhills usually abut, but still near enough thereto to receive the
benefit of the water by capillary attraction. A-S it grows, this
.rush is a rigid, harsh-looking plant, without the flexibility common
to rushes which grow in moist situations.
In preparing fibre from this plant, they cut it as close to the
ground as possible, so that the flax may be of a fairish length ; it is
then tied into bundles 6 inches in diameter, after which it is
soaked in water for two days. When the soaking has been pro-
perly effected, it is placed in an oven and baked for four hours—it
is then in a fit condition for the next process, which is scraping.
The scraping is done with the view of removing the husk and
pithy matter; the instruments used in this operation are mussel
shells. Whilst the scraping is in progress the rushes are con-
tinually being dipped into water, the softening properties of which
aid materially in the proper cleansing of the flax. When it is quite
finished it is laid on the grass to dry, which it soon does, as it is
spread out in small parcels, each parcel being merely sufficient to
form one of the neat hanks of the correct size required in the
manufacture of the cord or twine they may have in view. When
dry, it is made up into the hanks and stored away until required,
From this fibre, nets and fishing-lines are made, as also nets for
taking ducks. It makes a most serviceable thread for either nets
or fishing-lines, having the power to resist the rotting influence of
water to a very great extent indeed.
The next and last of their cord-making plants is the giant-
mallow ; the fibre from this plant is of a much coarser texture


than those already described, thei-efore it is only used for making
very thick coarse cord, which is worked up into nets for capturing
emus.
The process of separating this fibre from the plant is the same
as that adopted in the manipulation of the rush, with this one
difference, after the mallow stems are taken out of the oven, they
are well bruised with mallets, before they are dipped and scraped.
The emu nets made from this mallow fibre are frequently
150 yards long, the mesh being 6 inches wide. When completed,
an emu net looks exactly similar to our sheep nets and quite as
strong.
Enmeshing Emus.
The locality of a drove of emus is noted, and such natural
features as the country in the vicinity presents, such as the near
convergence of a lake and lagoon, or a river and a lagoon, are utilised
for side or guiding lines to the net, the latter being fixed at the
narrowest point of convergence; as a matter of course, in all cases,
the ground between the lines at the point selected for fixing the
net must be narrow enough to be s})anned thereby. The net is
firmly fixed by means of good stout stakes, well driven into the
ground. When all is in readiness, several of the elderly aborigines
limpen (hide) in the long grass at each end of the net, whilst the
younger members of the tribe stretch themselves out in two long
lines, having the form of a Y, with the apex cut off, the narrow
opening of this mutilated Y fitting on to the natural converging
lines. Previous to these lines being formed, scouts warily taking
advantage of all the inequalities offered by bank or rise, stealthily
creep round the unsuspecting emus ; when their ’purpose has been
achieved, they await quietly in ambush, for the preconcerted
signal to startle the game towards the net prepared for their
reception.
The signal being given, the scouts rise from their concealment,
and with shout and gesture so frighten the gigantic birds that
they start away with the velocity of a locomotive engine, the thuds
from their great feet as they run almost making the very ground
to tremble. If it so happens that the birds take off in the desired
direction no word is spoken, the scouts merely keep following
them up as fast as possible. If, however, the game should swerve
from the right line, then those whose side line they are approach-
ing show themselves, and if that should not turn them, then
shouting and gesticulating are resorted to, which in most cases
have the desired effect; sometimes though the effect is greater than
was desired, in this case, the young men forming the other side
line show themselves, Avhilst now the panting scouts coming up
behind make as much noise as their labouring lungs will allow
them.
26
THE ABORIGINES OF THE LOWER MURRAY, LOWER


When the birds have got within the water lines, the whole
force in the field, with the exception of those lying in wait at the
net, rush madly on, with the din of a j)ack of demons let loose, which
induces the emus to put their best feet first, and so they run
blindly into the net, when the old savages waiting to that end
rush forward with a joy only known to savages, and club the poor
enmeshed birds. It is but seldom that any escape out of the toils to
warn their fellow emus of the fate to which they are all liable if
due care and unwearied watchfulness be not continually exercised.
As many as a dozen emus are frequently taken at one time in
this manner, when of course there is nothing but feasting thought
of in the camp for many succeeding days, or indeed as long as
tlieir supply lasts, or till it becomes putrid, which is not by any
means an uncommon result after successful hunting expeditions.
Of Nets :
Their construction, and methods of application. Weirs how contrived,
and of what utility.
Duck nets are usually 100 yards long, by 2 yards deep. In
making these nets, the aborigines do not use a gauge, as is
usual with Europeans—they simply judge of the size by the
finger and thumb ; the knot however is precisely similar to that
made by European net-makers, the meshes are as regular in size
as though a gauge had been employed, and the finished net is as
uniform throughout its length and quite as strong as those made
by men whose sole occupation is that of net-making. Fishing-nets
are about the same length usually as those for catching ducks,
but they are not so deep, being only 4 feet wide; the mesh is
also different, being 3 inches wide, whilst the former is 4 inches.
The same sized twine is used for making both nets.
Nets for taking crawfish are only 10 feet long, with a width of
2 yards, the mesh being only a quaiter of an| inch wide. These
crawfish nets are made by the women only, it being deemed
beneatli the dignity of aboriginal manhood to make nets for catch-
ing such insignificant game as Yapple (crawfish). The women also
net all the bags, waist-belts, brow-bands, (fee., no matter whether
they are to be worn by the nobler sex or not. The long nets,
however, are made entirely by the men, with the exception of the
flax preparation, that part of the business being generally per-
formed by the women.
When a duck-trapping expedition has been arranged, all in the
camp—men, women, and children—get in motion early in the
morning and start off to the lagoon which has been selected for
the scene of their operations.
On their arrival at, or rather near the lagoon, the women make
a sort of impromptu camp, where they, together with the children


remain, for the twofold purpose of being out of the way, and to
make fires at which to cook some of the game they are about to
take.
Four of the old men then go otF with .the net to the point on
the lagoon where they purpose fixing it. It is here stretched
across, and close enough to the water to hinder the ducks from
escaping underneath. In the meantime, the young active men of
the tribe range themselves at regular intervals along both sides of
the lagoon, high up amongst the branches of the trees with which
the margin is fringed, each one having a light disk of bark, 6 or 7
inches in diameter, ready to laimch at the birds as required.
When they are all properly placed, one who has been sent off for
that purpose startles the ducks. As is natural with these birds,
the moment they are put to flight, they fly off along the course of
the lagoon, following its sinuosities very closely. Should it chance,
however, as it frequently does at those times, that the birds wish
to leave that lagoon for another in the vicinity, one of the
aborigines in the trees nearest to the point from which they wish
to break whistles like a hawk, and hurls his disc of bark into the
air. The ducks, hearing the whistle, look sharply about, and
seeing the whirling disc, fancy it a hawk; consequently a simul-
taneous stoop is made down close to the surface of the water to
escape their fancied enemy ; then they continue along the course
of the lagoon, the whirling disc and the shrill whistle of the native
having materially accelerated their flight. When this panic has
subsided and they again begin to soar, another whistle, with the
accompaniment of a gyrating disc, soon brings them to the desired
level, and thus the sport continues until, after having run this
exciting gauntlet, the poor birds find themselves suddenly en-
veloped in the folds of the treacherous net, when the four guardians
thereof, with the assistance of as many hands as can be in at the
finish, take but a short space of time to secure the flapping prey,
amid an abundance of pleasurable ejaculations and much tongue
clucking from the women and children, who gloat over the fat,
plump birds as they are drawn from the net. Hundreds and
hundreds of ducks are captured in this manner during the months
when the waters are confined to the rivers’ beds. Of course when
all the reedy plains are inundated the ducks have too much scope
to be taken so readily; besides, when the waters are out, the ducks
are engaged brooding, or in guarding and feeding their young.
The fishing-net is made use of in two ways; the first and
common method is what civilised fisherman term hauling. It is
conducted in the following fashion: —
A lagoon known to abound in fish, and perhaps not more
than waist deep, is chosen as the scene of their operations.
When the aborigines have arrived at the chosen spot, those who
are about to work the net tie pieces of calcined clay, weighing


about a pound and a half each, at intervals of 4 feet, all along
the bottom line of the net, these pieces of clay having been brought
by the women from the nearest cooking mound for that purpose.
On the upper line of the net they fix small bundles of reeds at
every 6- feet throughout its length; these reed bundles, as a
matter of course, act as floats. Thus prepared the net is ready for
work. One man now stands on the edge of the lagoon, holding
one end of the net, whilst another holding the opposite end in his
hand, and the greater bulk of it in his arms as well, stalks very quietly
into the water, describing a considerable semicircle in his progress,
paying out the net as he goes along. When the net has been
nearly all let out, he comes back to the bank from whence he set
out, about thirty paces from his companion, then the work of
hauling begins in earnest. During this operation, those holding
the ends of the nets gradually converge until within 2 yards of
each other. Should the haul be a successful one, all the available
muscle in the shape of women and even children too is called into
requisition, and much clucking of the tongue ensues, as the bellying
of the net becomes more and more perceptible, denoting the finny
multitude enclosed within its meshes; the hauling and tugging
however, goes on all the time, until at last, with one prodigious
and final tug, the glittering denizens of the lagoon are triumphantly
landed on the grassy margin in one struggling mass of dazzling
glitter. On many occasions I have seen three, and four hundred-
weight of fish drawn from lagoons at single hauls, consisting of
cod, perch, catfish, blackfish, and turtle. It is quite a sight to see
them all tumbling and jumping about on the grass, codfish from
50 pounds downwards, and perch, both gold and silver, from 10
pounds down to 2 pounds; the large mesh of the net prevents
the landing of small fish, unless on very rare occasions.
When it does happen, however, that some few small fish are
landed, the aborigines do not take the trouble to throw them into
the water again, and as they disdain to be bothered with small fry
in the fish season they are left on the bank for the delectation of
crows and gulls.
As soon as the result of a good haul has been examined, the
men pick up their spears &c., and stalk off to the camp in a most
majestic manner, leaving the women and children to bring on the
heavy wet net and the spoil thereof. In due time the women and
children straggle into the camp by twos and threes, groaning and
whining under their respective burdens.
When a small assemblage, such as two or three families, happen
to be encamped in near proximity to a lake, they fix a net in
zig-zag lines about 20 yards from the shore, or perhaps a little
further out than that should the lake be a shallow one, and from
this net daily supplies of fish are drawn, consisting principally of
perch and catfish; occasionally a monster codfish is enmeshed, when


of course the net suffers considerahly, and in most instances with
the loss of the fish. An accident of this kind gives rise to much
aboriginal language of, to put it in the mildest form, a demonstra-
tive description, as it entails the labour of taking up the net for
repairs, which otherwise would in all probability not be moved for
a month or more. Nets so staked are visited morning and evening,
and on each occasion from eight to a dozen fish are taken, varying
in size from a minimum of 2 up to 10 pounds in weight.
Where the lower rivers run through the reedy country, the
banks thereof are 3 or more feet higher than the plains behind
them. These elevations look almost like artificial dykes, so per-
fect are they in their regularity. At irregular intervals all along
these dykes, no one of the intervals being greater than a mile and
a half, there are openings or creeks, 7 or 8 feet wide, and
as deep as the country behind. Through these openings, when
the rivers are in flood, the waters rush out, inundating many hun-
dreds of square miles, and this country remains so submerged
from August till January.
Whilst the waters thus cover the reedy plains, the various
kinds of fish find delectable feeding gi'ounds in the semi-tepid
shallows, and the aboriginal fishermen, as a natural consequence,
have abundance of sport and profit, too, in pursuing the finny
game. Then it is that the canoe and grained paddle are utilised
to perfection.
When the river's begin to fall, the waters of the reedy plains
find their way back to their parent streams, by the creeks
in the dykes, and, naturally, the fish follow the receding waters.
The wily aborigines, wise in their generation, when they see that
the waters have decidedly begun to fall, prepare a lot of stoutish
stakes, with which they form weirs across the dyke creeks.
These stakes are driven firmly into the ground, about an inch
apart, so that anything having a greater bulk than an inch aper-
ture will allow to pass must perforce remain on the landward
sides or the weirs. Without any great stretch of imagination one
can easily fancy the shoals of fish which are held captive behind
the weirs, and what a very simple matter the taking of them
must be. When fish are required, an aboriginal takes his canoe
into the midst of one of these shoals, and with his grained canoe
pole harpoons as many as he wishes, or until he becomes tired of
the fun.
The waters continue to run through the dyke creeks for five or
six weeks, and during all that time the aborigines slay and feast
as only savages can, and are therefore sleek and glossy, by reason
of the vast quantity of adipose matter which they devour in
these times of abundance. When the waters have all receded
from the reedy plains, behind every weir fish of all kinds and
sizes are left in thousands to rot and fester in the sun, or to be devoured


by crows or other carrion-feeding creatures, which are attracted to
these points in countless numbers; but, notwithstanding their
combined and loathsome efforts, the atmosphere round about be-
comes most pestilential in the extreme, and, consequently, to be
decidedly avoided by those possessing anything like sensitive
olfactories.
Had the aborigines the very least foresight during the fish
season, they might cure sufficient food to supply their require-
ments through the dreary months of winter, in portions of which
game is not over-abundant, and hunting then, too, is most toil-
some. Native salt abounds in this area ; it is therefore im-
providence alone which prevents them from making the necessary
provision. Ignorance of the preseiwing properties of salt, ere the
advent of Europeans, might be very well brought in as a plea by
them for not making due provision in anticipation of hard and
hungry seasons. Since their intercourse with white men, how-
ever, that excuse is no longer tenable ; still for all that, their
improvident habits continue to obtain.
The lyoors (women) scratch or scrape the lagoons for the
delicious little crawfish which they catch by the pailful. These
delicate little shellfish are highly esteemed by the aborigines be-
cause of their piquant flavour, which I imagine to be entirely due
to the fact of their eating them without other preparation than
the removal of the shell. These little creatures being so much in
request, the lyoors devote a considerable portion of their time
catching them. They prepare the net for this purpose by tying a
hoop round its bottom edge and the two ends, which gives it the
appearance of half an oval; the top of the net is 8 feet long.
It is worked by two lyoors, each having a bag hung round the
neck to receive the result of their labours. They go into the
shallow lagoons, one at each end of the net, and scrape it along
the bottom ; they perform the operation very quietly, as very
little disturbance indeed would send all the crawfish in the imme-
diate vicinity into their hole, which of course would render their
labours nugatory. They do not take the net to the bank to empty
it, they merely raise it gently from the water and remove what-
ever spoil it may contain to the bags suspended from their respec-
tive necks, and so they continue until they have captured as many
as they deem sufficient. An hour’s scraping frequently results in
as many of these delectable crustacese as will fill a 6-gallon
measure. It is only during the warm weather that these little
crawfish can be taken by scraping the lagoons ; in the cold weather
they are all in their holes, so that when a noble (I) savage has a
longing for a meal of these favourite shellfish whilst they are
hybernating, his poor drudge of a wife has to turn out in the cold
to procui-e the delicacy for him by groping with her hands down
the holes of the little creatures ; and as the entrances to the holes


are all under water, it is a cold and tedious undertaking to captui'e a
dish of them sufficient for a meal worthy to be set before her lord.
They also have a net very nearly as fine in its texture as coarse
gauze, with which, shortly after the spawning season, they take
millions of young fry, many of them being less than an inch long;
besides these, at the same time, they catch immense numbers of
young lobsters and prawns, all of which are mixed up together
and put into the pot as they are taken from the net, tadpoles and
all, of which latter there are dozens taken every haul. This dish
is esteemed a luxury of the highest order by the aboriginal epicure.
The aboriginal pot for cooking this collection of fry is made
from an elbow or large root of a tree ; it is scooped out until it
becomes a mere shell of wood —coolaman is the aboriginal name for
this vessel. When a lot of this fry has to be cooked, a quantity
of red hot coals are prepared, over which is placed a layer of cold
ashes sufficiently thick to cover the coals; the coolaman is then
set on the top of this hot bed and filled with fry to its utmost
capacity, the fry is well pressed down, so that but little water is
required to fill up the interstices. After a considerable expendi-
ture of aboriginal patience the water in the wooden pot becomes
warm enough to turn the shrimps red, when of course the mess
is cooked. During the whole process the water never actually
boils, the faintest simmer being the nearest approach to the boiling
point which it attains.
When cooked, this mess looks altogether so disgusting that I
never had the temerity to taste of it, although I have eaten most
kinds of aboriginal food, and frequently with enjoyment.
Games.
In the matter of sports, games, and pastimes, the aborigines
have not any great diversity, but such as they have they enjoy to
the very utmost; indeed they frequently continue some of their
games until fatigue culminates in exhaustion. If they only dis-
played one half the zeal in procuring and conserving food for
consumption during the cold wet months of winter that their
various games call forth, there would not be a tithe of the misery
in their midst that now prevails, and wdiich is principally due to
the many privations of that inclement season. The preparation
and conservation of food for hard times should be a duty of the
highest moment to them, but such being deemed an irksome task it is
consequently distasteful, whereas playing games, however hard they
may work in doing so, is merely recreation, and not at all incumbent;
play is therefore held in high esteem and enjoyed accordingly.
During summer, when food of all kinds is abundant and pro-
curable with little labour, the friendly tribes have great gatherings,
at wffiich wrestlings and other games constitute the business of the
season.


The aborigines are great wrestlers, and, enter into the exercise
with every zest; their method is different from that which obtains
in the wrestling counties of England, or, as far as I know, in any
other country where the exercise is indulged. Their system is as
follows ;—A stalwart aborigine goes out quietly from the camp to
the ground which has been carefully prepared for the games ; he
is perfectly nude, with the exception of his waist-belt and opossum
skin armlets ; when he reaches the arena he walks round it after
the fashion of a race-hoi-se getting his preliminary canter; during
this walk or march there is abundant opportunity for examining
his finely developed figure, the muscles down the back stand out
as distinctly and hard as though they had been fashioned from
straight, clean saplings, whilst his limbs, though somewhat lack-
ing size, look hard and firm as ropes stretched to their fullest
tension.
When he has satisfied himself as to the arena he stalks
majestically into its centre, gives one defiant shout, and stoops
forward, places his hands on his thighs, just above the knees,
and in that position remains perfectly still, as though he were
merely a bronze statue, instead of a muscular savage full of life, with
the excited blood coursing exultantly through his throbbing veins.
His patience is not tested very severely, however, as his defiant
challenge has scarcely died away when an equally muscular
competitor starts out from the camp at a smart run, which he
continues until within about two yards of his challenger, when he
stops as suddenly as though his progress had been stayed by a
bullet. His position when he thus suddenly halts is precisely
similar to that of his adversary ; for a few moments they remain
in this stationaiy attitude, then they begin to sway from side to
side, glaring at each other the while, as though they were veritable
enemies about to begin a conflict which could only terminate in
the death of one or both. All at once, wuthout any signal, they
make a simultaneous spring at each other, coiling their sinewy
arms and legs round each, as opportunity ofiers, endeavouring by
every ruse to gain the first advantage in the struggle. When
locked together in the struggle they twist and screw their oily
bodies into all sorts of contortions, raising each other from the
ground as opportunity offers by sheer force of muscle ; the raised
one, however, generally managing to get his legs firmly twisted
round the body of his friendly competitor, and when in that
position no powers of muscle, however well exerted, will put him
to the ground ; that is to say, unless his antagonist goes with him,
and then, of course, it is a drawn match, and a result of this kind
is always avoided if possible, as defeat even is not greeted with
greater derision than is a climax of this nature.
The struggle continues with apparently very equal success for a
considerable time, neither gaining any material advantage. A


casual observer would be inclined to tliink it an interminable
affair, but this idea would only be of limited duration, for as the
struggle advances the wind of one begins to fail more rapidly than
that of the other; the end then soon becomes apparent, the
winded one is raised from the ground for the last time ; he is not
quick enough to grapple his wearied legs round his opponent, so
with a huge and final effort he is flung into the air, coming down
with a thud of sufficient force to shake the very ground.
The victor walks quietly to a little distance and squats himself
down in silence; the spectators, however, are more demonstrative;
the sleeping echoes, therefore, are roused with exultant shouts.
After a fairish interval has elapsed the victor, nothing loth,
shakes himself once more together, gives his waist-belt an extra
twist, walks into the arena and round it as before, only in this
instance he gesticulates violently whilst challenging any other man
to meet him in the wrestle, letting it be well known all the time
that if any man has the temerity to attempt his proved prowess,
it will not be by any means beneficial to that man’s physical
welfare. With this flourish he again pauses in the middle of the
arena, with his hands on his thighs as before.
And so the fun goes on, the victor meeting rival after rival,
until he disposes of all who are courageous enough to try con-
clusions with him, or he himself is brought to grief by some one
abler or fresher.
These muscular encounters generally end in many bruises, and
not unfrequently collar-bones are broken and shoulder-joints
dislocated ; still, these mishaps do not deter them from repetitions
of the play whenever opportunity offers, said opportunities merely
depending on a goodly muster of aborigines, warm weather, and
abundance of easily procured food.
Ball-playing is another game to which they are exceedingly
partial. This game they make much more boisterous and noisy
than they do the wrestling bouts, but, notwithstanding this,
it results in very much fewer serious mishaps. The women
participate in this game as well as the men. I have seen as
many as 200 (including both sexes) engaged in this game at one
time.
The ball is composed of old opossum skin tightly rolled up,
and covered with a fresh piece of skin firmly sewed together with
opossum tail sinews ; before they begin to play they arrange sides,
each side having a captain, whose place it is to guide and control
his oftentimes unruly squad.
When all is in order, a lyoor starts off' with the ball in her hand;
she walks a little way out from her own side and towards that of
her opponents, drops the ball with seeming carelessness, but ere it
has time to reach the ground she gives a dexterous and by no
means a gentle kick, which being correctly aimed sends the ball


spinning high into the air. Thereupon the fun begins in downright
earnest. Such screaming, jumping, and frothing at the mouth by
reason of the excitement I am certain was never seen at any other
game outside the walls of Bedlam, and then again, such inter-
mingling of limbs, brawny and bronze, nude and glossy, or such
outre groupings were never yet beheld under any circumstances
other than those attendant upon an aboriginal ball match. They
have not any appointed goal to which the ball has to be driven;
the whole of the play merely consists of keeping the ball in
motion, and preventing its coming to the ground, whilst the
struggles of the game all tend to keep the ball from being captured
by the opposing side.
Those holding the ball throw it from one to the other of their
own side, and it is whilst this is going on that the non-possessors
strenuously run and jump to intercept it in its flights. As the
eyes of the players are never by any chance bent on the ground,
tumbles during a game are numerous and frequently ludicrous,
more especially when one goes down, and so becomes a stumbling-
block over which a dozen or more come toppling in a heap; these
incidents, however, add mirth unto the fun, without creating the
least ill temper.
Ball-playing is frequently kept up from noon until dark, and
even at that late hour it is given up with reluctance.
The many laughable incidents which occur during the game
provide ample matter for conversation round the camp fire, besides
afibrding abundant opportunity for high feconde to which they
are particularly addicted, both old and young—in fact it is a
trait peculiarly characteristic of these people.
Another of their games at which they spend considerable time
is Wotchwie, that being both the name of the game and the toy
with which it is played.
The toy is made of an elongated (not exactly oval) piece of
wood, its extreme length being 5 inches, and its greatest
diameter an inch and a half from the centre, which is the thickest
part; it is fined down to a point at each end; to one of the ends
a slender wand two feet and a half long, which had been previously
toughened by fire, is firmly attached by means of twine and gum.
So fixed, the toy is complete.
The game can be played by any number; both sexes, from eight
years of age up to the ngarumhin (old man) and galour (old
woman) join in it. When they start from the camp to commence
the game, they select a .stretch of three or four hundred yards of
fiat, smooth ground, at one end of which a mark is made by way
of a startpoint. When all is properly completed the game begins
after the following fashion ;
One takes a short run up to the starting mark, and when he
reaches that he throws his wotchvne from him, so that it strikes


the ground in a particular manner, an awkward cast is certain to
result in a broken toy, when the tiny thing bounds away with a
velocity almost incredible, the long tail-like wand being visible
all the time that the momentum continues, twirling and twining
above the grass, more like a sentient creature than an inanimate
toy. These toys frequently go quite 400 yards in their eccentric
running bounds. The game consists merely in each striving to
make his toy pass that of his fellow. As the breakages during
the progress of a game are numerous, each player provides himself
with several wotchioies before the game commences. '
Doubtless this icotclmie racing seems a simple enough kind of
pastime when thus desciibed on paper, still I have seen as muclt
excited enthusiasm engendered in watching the fluctuations of the
tiny hoppers as e’er a rink of curling gave rise to on a well-frozen
Scotch loch.
Spear-throwing also induces much good-natured rivalry. When-
ever the tribal chivalry chance to meet for pastime, all the males,
from those on the confines of puberty up to the hoary-headed sage,
put forth their skill on those occasions, and proud is the victor
who walks off triumphantly master of the field.
These matches are conducted as follows :—A thickish disc of
red gum bark is prepared : it is about a foot in diameter, and
being green is not easily split when struck by the spears. A
stalwart youth walks off with the disc forty or fifty paces from
where the competitors are drawn up in line. When he lias arrived
at the desired position, which is about 10 yards beyond the
parallel of the end of the line, he pauses, then with the disc raised
aloft in both hands, and at the word of command, he hurls it from
him with all his force; the impetus thus given is sufficient to
make it roll with no mean velocity from one end of the line of
competitors to the other. It is during the rapid progression of
the disc that the competitors launch their spears at it, each one
doing so as it passes his line of vision. By the time the disc has
ceased rolling, it presents the appearance of a gigantic shuttlecock,
the spears sticking therein representing the feathers, and the bark
the cork basis. When one makes a bull’s-eye (as riflemen have it),
he is greeted with loud applause, and it is most farcical to see
how modest he endeavours to appear under the laudation, striving
to make it appear but a common occurrence, therefore not worth
making a noise about; although perhaps, if the truth were known,
he never came even near doing such a thing before.
Another favourite amusement of theirs is the skipping-rope ; not
the tiny clothes-line affair with two handles of wood, so much
affected by school girls ; no, indeed, their skipping rope is 20
or more feet long. It is made of a duck net loosely twisted ;it is
worked by two young men one at each end, and just far enough
apart to allow the sag to touch the ground. As it is being swung


round, the sldppers jump in one after another, until there will be
as many as a dozen skipping away at once. As they become
tired they jump out, but the vacancies thus caused are always
hlled up as soon as made, by fresh muscle and wind, abundance of
which, in the shape of stalwart young men and vigorous girls,
who are both ready and willing to make a display of their agility,
and merely await the longed-for opportunity.
Thus the rope is kept going, until those swinging it become
tired, when they cease, and two fresh hands take their places ; and
so the fun continues, till they are all pretty well fatigued by the
violent though pleasing exercise.
They do not award any trophies for superiority in their various
games ; even the historical “ pickle parsley for their pains ” is not
given, therefore the victors have to content themselves with a
consciousness of their superiority, and without doubt this sense of
premiership lends considerable self-importance to the deportment
of the successful ones during these tribal gatherings, as indeed I
have frequently seen demonstrated, yes, even to the verge of the
ludicrous.
Crime and its punishment.
Not having any Courts of justice, as a natural consequence the
laAvyer element does not obtain amongst these aboi’igines, nor do
they possess any Judges or specially nominated patriarchs to
whom disputed points can be referred; but notwithstanding all
this, they manage to exist in a peaceable enough manner, in fact
the ])aucity of disputes or rows is most wonderful considering the
unrestricted method of their growth fi’om childhood to maturity.
They do not consider any offence criminal unless it be that of
murder, and when such has been perpetrated, the whole tribe sits
in judgment on the culprit; one of the old men, generally a friend
of the murdered man, officiates as Crown Prosecutor after a mild
sort of a fashion. In these cases, however, the legal acumen
required under the circumstances is of the smallest; because, as
a rule, the culprit never thinks for a moment of denying his
culpability, so the tribe merely assemble to hear any extenuating
j)lea which he may have to offer. Should the culprit’s plea not be
of any avail, and his crime be adjudged deserving of punishment,
he is straightway condemned to stand up as a target, within easy
spearing distance, and there to remain perfectly nude with only a
simple shield to protect himself, for about twenty minutes, whilst
the young men of the tribe essay their marksmanship. . The
dexterity usually displayed by such criminals in turning aside the
spears which are hurled at them, by the aid of the shield alone, is
truly marvellous, and in the most of such cases brings their
persons through the trying ordeal in safety, with the exception
perhaps of a few ffesh wounds.


It is only when the ordeal is too long drawn out, and the dexter
arm becomes fatigued in consequence, that a fatal result ever
ensues.
The running of this gauntlet is of frequent occurrence, as will
be readily understood when I say that about every sixth man has,
some time or other killed a fellow.
When a culprit has passed through one of these trying ordeals
he is received by his fellows as though he was as free from guilt as a
new born babe, in fact, I am rather inclined to believe that he is
held in higher estimation than ever, by reason of the dexterity
which brought him so safely through the supreme trial. In the
absence of Courts, lawyers, and other such civilizing institutions,
gaols, or other contrivances for securing offenders, would be out of
place, besides in their simple code of ethics there is not any crime
sufficiently heinous to warrant confinement, unless it be that of
murder, and in a murder case the trial takes place immediately on
the discovery of the crime ; in most instances of the kind too, the
culprit voluntarily gives himself up to be judged.
During my long experience of the aboriginal tribes I can only
cite one case of a murderer endeavouring to evade the penalty of
his crime by flight, and most wonderful to relate his endeavour
was in every way successful, for he contrived to ingratiate himself
into the favourable notice of a tribe at feud with his own, and by
whom he was so much thought of and admired, his adoption as a
member of the tribe took place ere he had been many days
amongst them, after which, of course, he was safe enough so far as
any fear of his being given up to aboriginal justice was concerned.
This red-handed ruffian became the moving spirit in every mis-
chief concocted against the stock and persons of those who took
up country on the hunting grounds of his adopted tribe. Retribu-
tive justice however, overtook the vagabond in the end, the Vic-
torian black troopers came over to New South Wales after him,
he having inveigled one of the said troopers fellows away on a pre-
tended fishing excursion, and when in the middle of a dense reed
bed the pseudo fishing party threw the unsuspecting trooper to the
ground, where they held him fast whilst the renegade excised the
poor fellow’s kidney fat. After the perpetration of this ruthless
cruelty they started off in haste, leaving their mutilated victim to
die in solitude mid the reeds; fortunately however, the butchered
trooper had sufficient vitality remaining to enable him to crawl to
the camp, although suffering the acutest agony, where, before he
died, he gave an account of the murderous assault, together with a
lucid description of the perpetrators.
But a short space of time elapsed after the recital of this dia-
bolical outrage ere the aboriginal troopers had started on the trail
of the murderers ; they soon discovered where the vagabonds had
crossed the river, and made but very small bones of crossing in


pursuit, horses, accoutrements and all, taking all sorts of care during
the passage not to allow their ammunition to get wet.
A ride of about a dozen miles brought them to the camp they
were in search of, and just as they were about to gallop into it one
of the troopers descried the renegade creeping away through the
tall saltbushes; pursuit was soon given by the whole troop, which,
when the renegade perceived, he stood up from his crouching posi-
tion and ran as only an aboriginal can run when dear life is the
guerdon, but his rvinning, swift as it was on this occasion, availed
him but little, as the foremost trooper even although going at full
gallop, took aim across his bridle arm, and so sent a bullet crash-
ing through the skull of the dastardly savage. As he reeled to the
earth the troop gave one shout of savage triumph as they rushed
up pell mell to their now prostrate foe, where they threw themselves
from their horses in a crowd, and with flashing sabres smote the
carcass of the wily murderer until it was reduced to pieces not larger
than a palm’s breadth, deeming that proceeding —butchery though it
was—but a fitting caution to all coveters of other people’s kidney fat.
When a trial for murder has resulted in the condemnation of
the criminal, the capital ordeal follows immediately on the passing
of the sentence in the presence of all the assembled tribe, including
both sexes. In fact, such occasions take the shape of high holiday
spectacles, and as such are appreciated amazingly ; criticisms are
freely made, laudatory or the contrary, according as a well or
ill-thrown cast is made ; remarks too on the dexterous use of the
shield by the culprit are openly interjected, culminating in a spon-
taneous shout of applause whenever a well-aimed spear is caught
and smashed on the shield.
The most patriarchal aborigine in the tribe is selected to act as
umpire on these occasions, and in the absence of time-pieces the
ordeal is either lengthened or curtailed according to the interest
that he takes in the proceedings. In general the ordeal lasts a
good long twenty minutes, to which the culprit could doubtless
readily testify; in most cases he is on the verge of fainting before
he gets notice that his penalty has been duly paid. When this
good news reaches his ears, he with much gladness throws himself
prone where he had stood, panting and exhausted. Thereupon one
of the softer sex belonging to him, wife, sister, or ward, goes up to
the prostrate and quivering ordealist and forthwith proceeds to dry
the fervid perspiration with which his wearied body is plentifully
suffused, speaking such comforting words of praise to him the
while as makes him almost forget the painful trial through which
he has so successfully passed.
Meanwhile the spectators have all dispersed by twos and threes
to their usual avocations, commenting noisily upon the bravery
and expertness displayed by him who had so successfully undergone
the supreme trial.


Of the Aboriginal Dog, how utilised. —Of Fleas and
OTHER NOXIOUS PARASITES.
The only animal these aborigines possess in a state of domes-
ticity is the indigenous dog, Canisfamiliar is Atistralis, and of these
quadrupeds they keep perfect packs. They are used for the run-
ning down of game, and although not particularly speedy, are
found very useful in following wounded animals not sufficiently
maimed to allow of their being easily overtaken by the hunters.
In the cold nights also these animals are of singularly good ser-
vice, as they tend in no inconsiderable degree to keep up the tem-
perature in the loondthals, where they sleep in common with their
owners. This character of bedding is very much alfected by the
galottrs (old women), who in consequence value the dogs inordi-
nately ; so woe betide the man, either white or black, who should
by chance or otherwise destroy a dog the property of a galour, for
she would surely brain him if ])ossible with her yam-stick.
I remember on one occasion in the old bye-gone days of the
Colony, where a pack of these wretched curs pertaining to an
aboriginal encampment, Avhich was close to a shepherd’s hut,
playing the very mischief amongst a flock of fattening wethers.
As a matter of course, I felt considerably irate thereat, and in very
palpable terms made the aborigines aware of the fact. The men
of the tribe saw and acknowledged the harm which had been done,
and by way of making some kind of ame'nds empowered me to
poison the mangy brutes, at the same time giving me many cautions
about the galours, lest during the distribution of the baits they
should fall upon and maltreat me with their potent yam-sticks.
Having the terror of the yam-stick when wielded by irate galours
brought thus vividly before me, ere making a start to the camp
with the baits I provided myself with a gun for protection ; not
that I had any intention of using it on the angry old women, but I
was perfectly well awai'e that such a weapon in the hands of a
white man was more powerful to keep them in check than airy
other argument that could be adduced.
In due time I reached the camp, with forty baits. At a glance
the old dames knew that the bag contained poison, so without
more ado they immediately began to call their wirrangins (dogs)
into the loondthals, thinking by that means to prevent me from
having a chance to administer the baits, and when I told them that
I had come for the express purpose of killing their dogs because of
the havoc made by them amongst the sheep, they actually laughed
me to scorn in concert. In trying to reason the point with them,
they did not give me the ghost of a chance, their concerted volu-
bility being greater than any one man could pretend to cope with,
even although backed up by the possession of a gun. I was nearly
beginning to look upon my errand as a profitless one indeed,
when old Finhoceroo crossed the lagoon, on which the camp was


situated, and stalked majestically into the middle of the billings-
gating galours. His opportune arrival on the exciting scene was
hailed by me with considerable pleasure, and the heated dark-skinned
dames also seemed to think his presence a fortunate occurrence, as
they one and all immediately began to pour forth tlieir great
grievance to him. He however soon brought matters to a very
definite conclusion, by commanding the oldest galour present (poor
old Nip Nip) to take the baits from me one at a time, and straight-
way give them to such dogs as I should point out. When the
earnestness of what old king Finhoceroo said became apparent, the
noise in the camp changed from angry vituperation to direful woe, in
the midst of which, and not caring to refuse the old king, NifNijxiQxnQ
meekly to me for the baits, which she administered as I desired. After
concluding this very satisfactory piece of business, I left the camp, mid
a perfect deluge of opprobrium. For many weeks after this poison-
ing episode, the galour portion of the tribe grieved abundantly
mourning at morning and eventide, some of them indeed to
the extent of cauterising their wrinkled bodies in the plenitude of
their sorrow. For many years afterwards, the canine massacre
was vividly remembered by the galour mind, and even when
bidding old Nij) Nip a final good-bye, and whilst her rheumy eyes
were welling over with genuine tears because of my departure,
she could not help referring to the day of the dog-slaughter by
the side of the lagoon.
In rough cold winter weather, Avhich is the black spot of
aboriginal life, when hunting is out of the question and food
resources are of the smallest, these dingoes are converted into
rations, and really, when well cooked in one of their ovens, these
dishes of dog are tempting enough to look at, and I think there is
small doubt about their tasting well, that is of course reasoning
from the gusto with which the aboiigines consume them; I, how-
ever, never had sufficient coui’age to j)artake of this dog meat, but
I have seen plenty of it taken from the ovens, and it always looked
white and delicate as chicken.
A puppy dingo, when in good condition, is esteemed quite a
luxury, tlierefore an aboriginal having such a dish fancies that he
is faring most sumptuously.
It is not by any means an uncommon thing for a galour to have
as many as two dozen dogs, and it is certainly a rarity to find
one possessing a lesser number than half-a-dozen ; from this fact,
it can easily be imagined the enormous dimensions which packs
assume when all the members of a tribe are assembled in one
camp.
In connection with these dogs and the habit the aborigines
have of making bedfellows of them, there is one feature which I
think both striking and peculiar, and that is this fact, —until the
advent of Europeans these people had never seen or heard of


fleas, although of other kinds of parasites common to the filthy
portion of civilization they possess legion. These latter have
been a chronic source of annoyance to them, from the remotest
period of which they have any knowledge, and although they have
waged a continuous war against them, even from one generation
to another, still the filthy pests have held their own.
With the exception of the hair on the face and head, the
aborigines remove every vestige of a capillary nature from the
body, even to the covering of the pudenda. The depilatory operation
is effected by means of a small fire-stick, and is therefore both slow
and disagreeable ; this tedious and unpleasant process however, is
borne without murmui', as it is done with the view of ridding
themselves of the parasitic pests. Besides these measures, they
manipulate each others’ heads as it is said it is the habit of
monkeys to do for a similar purpose, but notwithstanding all this,
the poor aborigines continue persistently to scratch, which
indubitably induces a creepy feeling of disgust to permeate the
person of any cleanly inclined beholder. These indigenous para-
sites would be borne by the aborigines pretty well, as every
successive singeing afforded some measure of respite ; the ffeas,
however, are quite beyond their patience, respite from them there
is not any, and they cannot lessen their numbers, do whatsoever
they may to that end. Their numberless dogs provide the very
best breeding-grounds, whilst their opossum cloaks offer them
harbour which cannot be excelled.
Of the Sun, Moon, and some Planets.
The aborigines imagine the sun to be a large fire, kindled in the
tyrrily (sky) by Ngondenont (their good spirit) daily, accounting
for its origin in the following fashion:—ln the long past and
almost forgotten time, the only light which shone upon the world
came from the mitian (moon) and toorts (stars) alone at that time;
there were not any people on the tungie (earth), it being inhabited
by beasts and birds only. One day during this period of semi-
darkness, a hurwie (emu) and a koortinie (native companion)
quarrelled very violently, and the latter whilst in the very height
of her passion, threw one of the simple-minded kurwie’s eggs up to
the vast tyrrily, where it broke on a large pile of firewood, which
Ngondenont had seemingly prepared to that end. The concussion
produced spontaneous fire, and the whole world was incontinently
flooded with light. Ngondenont immediately saw the great
advantage that this light would be to the dwellers upon the earth,
therefore, he thereupon vowed that the world would never more
be left in continual darkness as it had been up to that time, for he
would light the fire that seemed so good every day, and the vow then
made by the good spirit has never been broken to the present time.
They prove this quaint myth of theirs by pointing out that in the


early morning ere the fire is well kindled the nowie (sun) diffuses hut
little warmth; as the day advances however the heat becomes greater
and greater until noon, when its fervency culminates; from that
time the warmth gradually lessens as the fuel becomes more and
more reduced, till the pile is completely burnt out and darkness
covers the face of the tungie, when it is night. During the
dai’kness however, Ngondenont has his attendant spirits employed
preparing a fresh pile of wood for next day’s consumption.
The mitian (moon) they imagine to be composed of some shiny
substance, such as a large slice of halkoolhan (gypsum), and in
order to prove that in this matter they are also correct, they hold
that there is not the very slighte.st degree of warmth emanating
therefrom, it merely glitters and shines coldly, and a large piece
of kalkoohan would do the same ; indeed, they illustrate this theory
of theirs by holding a piece of gypsum in the rays of the sun or
within the influence of fire-light, and triumphantly ask what better
proof could be desired.
According to their computation each moon lasts polite kiup
murnangin, nga polite kixip muriiangin (three hands and three
hands) that is thirty fingers, in this case meaning nights. They
compare the moon to an opossum cloak, after this fashion: —
When a native has a rug to make, he does not wait until he
has acquired sufficient skins to complete it, for as soon as he has
two or three skins he sews them together, and wears them
mantilla fashion across his shoulders, going on day by day adding
thereto, but wearing it all the same time until at last it becomes a
finished cloak. Shortly after the completion of the cloak, or indeed
frequently before that end has been attained, from the constant
wear, as a matter of course it gradually begins to fray at the edges,
more especially those skins which were worn mantilla wise at the
beginning, until by continual use, like the moon, it is worn out,
necessitating the commencement of a new one after the same manner.
According to the mythology of these people, panmarootoortie
(the Pleiads) are composed of seven mooroongoors (virgins), being
sisters who were translated to their present proud position in the
sky because the whole of them, from the eldest even to the youngest
born, retained their virgin purity until the advent of grey hairs.*
When Ngondenont with unqualified pleasure saw that these
virgins had attained the meridian of life and still remained chaste,
he deemed them far too good to associate longer with their
dissolute tribe, therefore he forthwith translated them to the
tyrrily, where he fixed them, in order that they might ever after
be enabled to view the actions of their heretofore sisterhood, and
* It will thus be seen that, although their notions of chastity with regard
to every-day life are of the very haziest, the author of this myth had
glimmerings (to say the least of it) of better things.


SO be ever ready to guide them straight should temptation induce
any of them to swerve from the path of rectitude; besides, the
lyoors could always see them by loolsing upwards, and would
therefore be scai'cely guilty of any gross indiscretion in the very
faces of the 'panmarootoortie whose lives whilst on the tungie were
without stain or reproach.
Booronghootchal (Yenus) is sent in the early morning by
Ngondenont to let the tungie know that he is about to light up the
glowing nowie, so that his ivartongies (people) may prepare for
their daily avocations. In the evening this planet is termed
Worka JForka, at which time his fort is the well-being of
gestation, whether of man or beast. Therefore gravid lyoors
when they observe him bright and unclouded, looking calmly
down on the tungie like a panoo mitian (small moon),
imagine that their wishes, whatever they ■ may be, with
regard to their prospective ofFsjiring will be granted them. On
the otlier hand, however, should VForka Worka be looked at
when dimmed and diminished by reason of the intervention of a
murky atmosphere, the fate of the unborn wnll be a fitful one,
therefore expectant mothers are elated or depressed accordingly.
The aborigines do not possess any ceremonies or incantations
Avherewith to propitiate this birth-governing Worka Worka, even
although they deem his influence all-powerful in making or
marring the careers of the unborn.
Op the Seasons.
The aborigines divide the year as Europeans do, that is, into
four seasons:—
Kurtie (Summer) is distinguished by a general display of flowers,
and by their gradually changing into seed-vessels and fruit, and by
the brown tints Avhich the ripening grasses assume, together with
the flight of all fledgelings, and the abandonment for good of the
maternal pouch by the young kangaroo.
Weat (Autumn) is known by the cottony gossamer substance
which floats about in the atmosphere during that period in this
area, by the hybernating of snakes and other reptiles, which then
seek out their quarters for their winter’s repose.
Miangie (Winter) begins with the first tenangin (frost), and con-
tinues until the mild lengthening days of spring puts it to flight.
There is but small chance of this season passing unnoticed, as
the cold wet dreary days and nights thereof are frequently borne
by the poor aborigines whilst in a state of semi-starvation as
regards both food and warmth, therefore the first indication of spring
makes them jubilant to a degree, as then the near approach of food
in abundance and of all kinds seems tolerably tangible, and no
longer mere visions of the brain induced by partaking of infre-
quent as Avell as insufficient meals of very indigestible food.


Balcroothakootoo (Spring) is defined by the advent of succulent
herbage upon wliicli the ngarrow (bustard) loves to graze, by the
pairing of birds and consequent egg harvest, and by the emergence
of the infant kangaroo from the parent pouch for the first time.*
They have no single term which includes all the seasons, such
as our year.
Marking Time.
Their method of computing time is by novjies (suns or days,
mitians (moons) and kiirties (summers), but not having anything
but oral words to depend u])on, their data as may well be supposed
is oftentimes far out in the point of time; the reliance therefore to be
placed on any dates which they may give with regard to accuracy,
if even not more than a very few years back, can only be of the
smallest.
Computing Numbers.
After getting beyond twenty, or at most thirty in numbers, they
become very hazy, and to get themselves out of the fog they say,
CO CO (many) which may mean ten, or five hundred, or in fact any
other quantity, and there are not any means short of actual inves-
tigation whereby it is possible to know whether the greater or lesser
number is meant.
Lack of Comparison.
The entire absence of this organ in the aboriginal cranium tends
materially to the creation of the above difficulty, as, for example,
ask an aboriginal which one of two flocks of ducks is the largest,
and his reply will be politula co co (they are both large), and this
reply will be given, or one similarly lucid, in every other matter
of comparison which may come under obseiwation, whether of
numbers or quality, only in the latter case the noun talko (good)
will be substituted for co co.
La ARP.
Laarp is the excrement of a small green beetle wherein the
larva thereof is deposited. At certain times these insects congre-
gate in myriad.s, and make their deposits on the young mallee scrul)
shoots which have sprung up after a previous season’s bush fire.
* The aborigines are not by any means bad observers of natural Iristory,
and they emphatically hold that marsupial generation is altogether distinct
from that of any other genus of mammals ; that there is not any period of
partnrition unless the first appearance of the young from tlie pouch can be
termed such. Besides, they say that even if the kangaroo possessed the
extremest delicacy of touch imaginable (which the great horny terminals
to their paws clearly forbid), how would it be possible to place the
inanimate embryo on the teat of a young doe that never had suckled a
young one, when the opening of the marsupe is so constricted that the
insertion of even the point of a pen-holder would be all but impossible, and
the embryo is frequently found on tlie nipple when the pouch is so con-
stricted ; this fact indeed has come under my own observation on more
occasions than one.


The deposits are made in such large quantities an aboriginal
can easily gather 40 or 50 pounds weight of it in a day. As the
aborigines are extremely fond of this sweet substance, during its
season they do very little else but gather and consume it, and they
thrive on it most amazingly. In appearance the laarp is not
unlike the manna which some of the Eucalyptus genus shed in the
summer months; the taste is also something similar, with the
addition of a slightly acid flavour. These laarp deposits are made in
the dry summer, and are procurable from their first appearance
until the early autumn rains commence, when they are at once
dissolved and washed away.
It frequently happens that the laarp deposits are 15 or 20
miles distant from water (the most arid spots in the mallee are
those generally chosen by the insect, if the young mallee shoots
be available); but notwithstanding the distance and the absence
of water, every member of the tribe who can crawl at all, even
including children, start off to the laarp field in the j oiliest of
spirits, carrying all manner of things wherein to pack the expected
treasures. Seeing them in their high glee preparing to start on one
of these expeditions is a most amusing sight, and conveys to the mind
of the observer the impression that he is looking upon the happiest
community of people in existence ; there is however, another side
to the picture, which is certainly the reverse of pleasing. Ere
half a dozen miles have been travelled by the jolly laarp seekers,
the frail and weak of the party begin to groan and moan as none
but aboriginal human nature can; finally of course they knock up
entirely, and so come to a stand-still; the strong ones however do
not pay the least attention to these laggards, but continue in their
course quite unconcerned.
The willing spirit of the weakly would-be searchers after this
aboriginal sweet has to succumb to physical incapacity, therefore
they have to sit down in their tracks, to recuperate their failing
energies to enable them to return to the camp, from which when
all too late they discovered they should not have started. The
strong ones also, who had stepped out so valiantly at the start to
the laarp field, present a very different appearance on their return;
their high jubilant spirits have quite evaporated by reason of the
thirsty toil experienced on their weary tramp, they consequently
struggle back as moody and sulky as well could be, by ones, by
twos, and threes ; the units preponderating considerably, surliness
not being conducive to social intercourse, and it is only after several
hours of sulky rest, together with much gluttony, that they can
be brought to describe the trip and the condition of the laarp field.
Notwithstanding the hardships and privations experienced on
the first expedition, as soon as ever their aboriginal nature has
recovered its normal tone, a fresh excursion is organized similar


to the preceding one, excepting only that the frail ones and the
children remain behind on this occasion, delectating with much
gusto on the fruits of the first expedition.
As long as the laarp is obtainable these people continue day
after day to tramp backwards and forwards to the ground where
it is produced, and it is only when the rains come and dissolve it
that they leave and return to their usual avocations.
Should the laarp harvest extend over six or eight weeks, which
it frequently does, the aborigines become quite fat and sleek,
although they partake of very little other food all the time, thus
demonstrating how very great the nutriment must be which this
saccharine substance contains.
Poetry.
The poetical faculty is altogether lacking in the aboriginal
character, consequently they do not possess any poems, either
martial or national, and the entire absence of everything in the
shape of sentiment, in the intercourse of the sexes, leaves the most
fruitful of all poetical fields but a barren waste. Their tchowies
(songs) to which they dance their corrobories never comprise
more than two lines, and even those do not rhyme; the measure
however is always most perfect. As a rule, their brief songs have
reference either to something good to eat, to some successful mid-
night foray, or to some grossly lewd subject, and those partaking
of the latter nature meet with the greatest appreciation.
Tchotvies are not transmitted from one generation to another,
because, when the maker of a tcliowie dies, all the songs of which
he was author are as it were buried with him, inasmuch as they,
in common with his very name, are studiously ignored from
thenceforward, consequently they are quite forgotten in a very
short space of time indeed.
This custom of endeavouring persistently to forget everything
which had been in any way connected with the dead entirely
precludes the possibility of anything of an historical nature having
existence amongst them ; in fact the most vital occurrence, if only
dating a single generation back, is quite forgotten, that is to say,
if the recounting thereof should necessitate the mention of a
defunct aboriginal’s name.
Corrobories.
Their corrobories, with regard to diversity, are about as meagre
as are their tchowies ; they merely consist of a series of grotesque
contortions and coarse postures, all however requiring consider-
able muscular exertion in their performance, and all (strange
though it may seem) performed in most execllent time. When seen
for the first time, a corroborie does certainly offer a considerable
'degree of interest; I of course do not mean such as are got up


expressly for display before tlie “ wliitefellow,” but those only
which are performed by them in their savage state and purely for
their own special edification, when seen thus for the first time,
the performance is without doubt a very novel one.
On my way home from a distant out station on one occasion
(I was obliged to travel long after dark) 1 heard the sounds of a
corroborie, coming from the direction of a lagoon which I knew
well; this lagoon was about a quarter of a mile from the track
which I was following, and in the middle of a reed-bed. As I was
acquainted with a cattle path through the reeds to the lagoon,
I determined to make one at the performance. I therefore tied
my horse to a tree and followed the path through the reeds. I
did not make much noise in my progress, as it scarcely would
have been safe for me in those old days, had my presence as an
uninvited spectator been suspected.
When I got within sight of the fire I deemed it prudent to get
on ray hands and knees, and in that uncomfortable position I
wormed my way through the long reeds to their very edge, when
the brilliantly lighted camp burst upon my view. As a matter
of course when I found myself in such close proximity I lay very
still indeed, not daring to move, lest the keen-scented dogs might
be attracted to my post of observation.
Within a few minutes of my reaching the edge of the reeds, the
aboriginal foot-lights, or fires with the same end, were freshened
up, and the lyoors (who were seated in a semicircle a short distance
from the lights, and whose duties consisted of the orchestral
portion of the performance) gave a few .spasmodic thuds
on the *mullangie (opossum skin drum) by way of calling
the performers to the front; thereupon a hoary-headed
savage, with a withered leg, stepped forward ■\birraioarie
(time sticks) in hands, which he chinked in concert with the mul-
Ici'iigie thuds, at the same time beginning a tchowie in a low mono-
tonous tone, which ere long gradually swelled in volume; at the
end of the first bar the lyoors chimed in, and the dancers sprang
into the the lighted space, flourishing their weapons in savage de-
light as their lithesome limbs quivered in time to the savage music.
The hoary leader of the band, becoming warm and exited, rushed
backwards and forwards along the crescent row of lyoors, singing
out the tchowie as though his life depended on his performance,
whilst flakes of foam spirted from his lips as it might do from the
mouth of a hunted boar, by reason of his exceeding fervidness. The
lyoors taking their time from him, became equally energetic in
*Mullangie —This primitive instrument is formed by merely folding a cloak
tightly up into a bunch, it is beaten by the open palm, and very musical.
fßlrrawarie, time sticks, are made of two sections of wood 10 inches long
and 2 inches in diameter, hardened by fire ; they are held one in each hand,
and when struck together give forth a sharp metallic ringing sound.


their performance upon the mallangies, and their high shrill treble
mingling with the leader’s bass, made altogether the most hideous
accord that it was ever my ill fortune to listen to. Meantime the
dancing had become as vehement as the music, the writhing and
quivering of forty pairs of legs in unison, strung up to high pres-
sure pitch by their savage tchowie and its barbarous accompani-
ments, made such an exhibition as it seldom falls to the lot of civi-
lized man to witness now-a-days. The time now became faster
and more fast, till at length the motion was altogether so rapid
that individual legs could not be distinguished. Looking at the
dancers when they had attained to this phase of the corroborie
seemed like viewing a monster heap of serpents, heaving and coil-
ing together in the throes of vital agony. But, alas ! even abori-
ginal muscular humanity cannot keep up such high pressure motion
for ever, so with a deafening clang, produced by the hirrawaries
and mullangies conjointly, the tchowie ceased instantaneously, and
the sweltering dancers sank as one man exhausted in their tracks.
This grand finale was just about as much as my senses could
well sustain, so I gladly crawled from the vicinage of the savage
dancers, regained my horse, and rode quietly home.
Op generating fire.
The aboriginal method of generating fire I imagine, pertains
exclusively to the Australian tribes, at least I never heard of the
same system being followed by other races. Their method is
as follows : —A hard dry log is selected, having a deepish sun-crack
in it; this crack is filled to within half an inch of the lips with dry
grass well teased out to make it soft; then the operator having a
piece of dry wood 14 inches long, and from 2 to 3 broad, fined
down to a blunt edge on one side, holds this stick firmly by
one end, and by both hands, and rubs the blunt edge backwards
and forwards across the crack immediately above the part contain-
ing the dry grass. At first the rubbing is performed very slowly
but with considerable pressure; as the crack however, begins to get
filled with the filings, the rate of motion is accelerated until the
filings quite fill the crack to the top, then for about the space of half a
minute the rubbing is done so rapidly it is almost impossible to
distinguish the rubbing stick. At this stage the operator suddenly
pauses without lifting the rubber from the groove, which by this
time he has cut across the crack, and gently fans the filings undei
the rubber with one hand, and if the smoke continues to ascend,
the operator knows that the result is satisfactory, as fire has been
produced, therefore, with great care he lifts out the diy grass upon
which are the ignited filings (it is these filings which take fire,
and not the rubber, as many would be inclined to suppose), folds
the grass carefully about them, and gently waves them in the air,
when, in a very little time, the grass bursts into flame.


The whole operation is most simple, and takes much less time
to perform than I have taken to describe it, so easily is it done ;
indeed, I have many times had an aboriginal do it merely to get
a light to my pipe. The best timber for effecting this purpose is
red gum, pine, and salt-bush; this latter is specially good for
making the rubber, and is consequently always employed for this
purpose when comeatable.
Op Baangals.
In nearly every tribe there is one member who is esteemed
learned beyond the average aboriginal; his profession is that of
Baangal (doctor or magician), and he is supposed to be endowed
with powers far beyond the finite grasp of humanity in general;
he is therefore looked up to by the rest of the tribe with con-
siderable awe; no one would knowingly offend him, as the least
slight even would be sure to bring condign punishment on him
who offered it.
The functions of these wise men are various, amongst which,
bleeding and other surgical operations are not the least. As they
elect to cure evei’y ill to which aboriginal flesh is heir, from a
simple headache up to the severest form of pulmonary consumption,
they are seldom without a fair share of patients ; the patients have
the most ]>erfect faith in their ministration, consequently they
are as passive and docile in their hands as any doctor could wish;
of course this implicit belief tends in a great measure towards a
cure, whatever may be the ailment. When a patient recovers,
tlie Baangal receives credit the most ample, which he accepts with
the becoming grace of a duly qualified professor who is getting no
more than his just meed. But, on the other hand, should grim
death steal in and snatch the poor victim from under the very
eyes of the Baangal, he does not get any blame, as the death is
certain to be attributed to the malign influence of magic practised
by the Baangal of some Bukeen (wild) tribe, to that end, and of
which he is ignorant, therefore unable effectually to cope with.
On these sad occasions, however, he tells his tribe that he will
visit Konilcatnie (water spirit) down in the deep waters of the
lake, or river, and from him learn from whence the magic came
which killed their brothei’, and then they can take ample and
swift vengeance on their hidden foe.
When the curious ones of the tribe wish to discover that which
is beyond aboriginal ken, they depute the Baangal to arrive at the
desired knowledge through the medium of Konilcatnie; thereupon,
he disappears most mysteriously, and many days frequently pass
befoi'e he returns, in a manner equally full of mystery to that -of
his departure. On some of those occasions he brings the desired
information, on others again, he merely intimates that the matter
sought for was not for them to pry into, therefore had better be


forgotten at once and for good, as the Konikatnie bears but badly
any opposition to his expressed wishes as rendered by the Baangal.
Of course any information he may be pleased to give at those times,
as being the result of his interview with Konikatnie, is fiction, pure
and simple, concocted by himself whilst absent from the tribe.
The Baangal is perfectly aware that if he would retain his
power in the tribe, he must from time to time fabricate such
romances as are calculated to have that effect; and, without doubt,
the ability which these wise men display in this description of
literary composition is truly marvellous.
Arabian tales of good and evil genii are as nothing compared
to the wonders related by these impostors, and the dense ignorance
of these people, together with their extraordinary superstition,
induces them to give perfect credence to whatever the charlatan
may be pleased to advance.
The manner in which they graduate for the office of Baangal is
veiy peculiar indeed, and requires a vast amount of moral courage
on tlie part of the would-be Baangal, to carry out the programme
to a successful issue.
When a Baangal dies and has been buried, a looncltlial (hut) is
neatly erected over the grave, and whoever has the temerity to
seek the vacant office of the defunct must go at sundown, the
first night of the new moon, and place himself in the mausoleum,
and there remain until sunrise the following morning.
This proceeding has to be continued every night until the moon
has waxed and waned, and if he successfully completes the loath-
some ordeal he is deemed to have graduated satisfactorily, and is
consequently inducted forthwith to the office, with its train of
honors, duties, and privations.
The Baamjals are all under the firm conviction that they possess
the power of causing sickness, even unto death, and the laymen of
the tribes are quite certain that such is actually the case. This is,
therefore, the principal cause of the aw'e these impostors inspire
their more ignorant fellows with. They, how'ever, never put this
pretended power in practice on memljers of their own tribes, at
least they pretend never to do so. Upon the Bukeens, on the
other hand, they are continually trying the potency of their magic.
The mode by which they carry out this fell art of theirs is ex-
tremely novel, although it has but a small modicum of the
supernatural about it, as the following will plainly show :
Should a Baangal in the course of his wanderings drop across
an old encampment of Bukeens, he searches carefully about for
some dsbris (such as bones) of the food they have eaten, but
.should his search for bones or some other kindred substance be
unsuccessful, as frequently happens (from the fact of its being the
habit common to all the aboriginal tribes to destroy by fire the bones
of the game on -which they have fed before they abandon a camp).


he anxiously scans the ground all round for feculent excrement,
and should any of the Bukeens, from laziness or other cause, have
omitted to use his paddle or to have used it carelessly, the
vigilant Baangal pounces upon the unhidden faeces as a miser
would on a treasure. After he has secured his savoury find, he
lubricates a piece of opossum skin with the kidney fat of some of
his former victims, and carefully wraps it round his treasure,
after which yards of twine are wound round and round, each wind
being what sailors term a half hitch, thus independent of the
preceding one or the one which follows. If bones are found, their
manner of treatment is the same.
At night, when all in the camp are quiet, the Baangal carefully
takes his prize from the mocoor mocoor (bag), beginning a low
monotonous chaunt, whilst he thrusts one end of the prepared roll
into the fire ; the fire is small by design. During the process of
gradual combustion the chaunt is continued, sometimes low as a
weak child’s wail heard a considerable distance off, and again
swelling iip into the sonorous tones of a strong man’s agony, yet
never losing its weird monotony. The chaunt consists of sound
principally, with an occasional interjected request to Konikatnie.
Should he wish to kill the Bukeen outright in one night, he keeps
up the chaunt, and pushes the burning roll forward into the
glowing embers. As it consumes, and when the last vestige of it
has disappeared in unsavoury smoke, the life of the BaangaVs
victim has ceased.
Should the Baangal, however, wish to prolong the dying
agonies of his foe, he merely burns a small portion of the roll
nightly, chaunting his incantation during the process; and should
months pass ere the roll is totally burned, so long will the torture
of his victim continue.
All aboriginal deaths, unless such as are caused by violence
alone, and indeed every ailment by which they are stricken from
time to time as well, are attributed to the malign powers possessed
by hostile Baangals, and all the arguments, and ridicule in creation
will not cause them to alter their one iota.
When discussing the matter with them, and to prove the im-
posture practised on them by their Baangals, I have offered
myself as a subject to be operated on by any of their Baangals
they might select, telling them that it would not be necessary to
complete the process to prove their case, the mere fact of my
being made slightly ill would be proof to me perfectly conclusive
that their Baangals were all they claimed them to be.
To them this offer of mine seemed so ridiculously absurd, they
merely laughed at me, saying,— Bumbuma wirrumpola nginty
(stupied ears you). Too much you whitefellow. Not that one
Baangal belonging to you. What for you humhmna poorp%
(Stupid head).


Philology.
According to various philologists, the structural basis of most pri-
mitive tongues is to be found in sounds and sights in nature, and in
natural feelings. Thus, the sound noticed most frequently as arising
from the wind blowing through some common medium is likely to
be adopted as its name; the same thing holds good with regard to
animals, they being usually designated by their respective calls. Heat
and cold are named according to the ejaculations induced by each.
Trees, grass, water, fire, and earth are called after some plainly
seen peculiarity.
In this manner or method, it is quite possible for a language to origi-
nate, and to become after many centuries of practice, quite copious
enough for all common purposes in life’s every day intercourse.
This principle however is altogether lacking in the dialects of
these aborigines—natural objects, feelings, and appearances, have
never seemingly been called in to aid in their construction; had
they been so, the numerous aboriginal dialects would have been much
less meagre, and more similar than inquirers have found them.
The lack of similarity is most astonishing, considering how closely
the territories of these tribes approximate ; that it is so, however, is
an incontrovertible fact, to which any one can speak who has had
the opportunity of familiar intercourse with the various tribes.
Every tribe speaks a perfectly distinct tongue, which is altogether
unintelligible to aborigines out of its own pale; and when I state
that about every 50 miles square of this lacustrine area possesses a
tribe, having a dialect of its own, it can well be imagined the
diversity of tongues by which the philologist who undertakes the
task of reducing the languages of these tribes to rule is met; {in
fact it will be seen at once that such a project is not very feasible.
Were the terms meaning the same things, in the various tribes,
traceable to common roots, then of course the difficulty would be
surmounted easily enough; but as this is not the case in any
instance, the inquirer is at a loss to know from whence the words
proceed which go to the formation of the numerous dialects, or
in what manner they were originally evolved.
To show how very dissimilar the dialects are, I give below a few
examples taken from two adjoining tribes ; but before doing so, I
may here again state that, in all cases, the negative of the dialect
spoken is the name of the tribe which speaks it.
English. Watty Watty Tribe, Litchoo Litchoo Tribe.
No Watty Litchoo.
Yes Ever Hgo.
Yes Eyer N’go-
Sun Euroka Nowie.
Moon Mitian Bocobothal.
Belly Wotchowoo Bingee.
Cold Yebra Mirrinumoo.
Dog Wirrangin Cul.


These examples though few, are quite ample enough to show
how very unlike these dialects are, and the same dissimilarity holds
good throughout the dialects of the whole of these tribes. Thus,
therefore, one glance will suffice to show that it would be very
absurd to endeavour to compile a work on these diverse tongues,
with the view of its having general application; an endemic pro-
duction of the kind would be pi’acticable enough, but then the
value thereof would be absolutely nil outside the precincts of the
tribe from whose dialect it might be compiled. The Ngalla
Wattoos, it is true, w’ere linguists sufficient to be able to converse
with the various tribes all round their own. Had these travelled
men still been extant, their extended tribal knowledge would have
been of incalculable service to the inquirer in matters pertaining
to the multifarious dialects of the aborigines ; as, however, the
occupations of these men vanished as settlement advanced, the
task to the philologist now-a-days is both wearisome and unsatis-
factory.
The paucity of words which go to the formation of any one of
these dialects precludes the remotest possibility of anything like
a readable translation of even the commonest conversation, as the
same word is frequently applied in many different ways, and it is
only by the inflections, prolongations, &c., thereof thatwhat itmeans
to imply can be understood ; therefore, unless to the initiated,
a sentence translated into English verbatim would be all but un-
intelligible. Of course there are many common simple sentences
such as any one, however obtuse, might readily understand, but
to obtain anything approaching to a gener-al knowledge of these
dialects, so as to be enabled to apply it wdth any hopes of success,
a life’s experience, together with continual intercourse, supplemented
by unflagging observation, is absolutely necessary. It would be
quite impossible to teach these dialects by rule, without first form-
ing a code of signs, whereby to denote the various accentuations,
inflections, prolongations, &c.
These dialects are quite innocent of everything in the shape of
grammar, grammatical relations being denoted by prolongations,
accentuations, or position, each or either of wdiich changes the
meanings of different words entirely.
In illustration of the extreme meagreness of these tongues, I
give the few following examples :
Kayanie, w'ater.
Tolkine kayanie, thirsty.
Mirnen kayanie, tears.
Kooroomhoo kayanie, milk.
Birra, dead.
Birra wotchowoo, hungry.
Bocoin vMchowoo, stuffed with food.


It can readily be seen from the foregoing that the dialects of
these people are about as meagre in quality and quantity as they
can well be. If they were but ever so little more so, it would be
most difficult, if not altogether impossible, for the aborigines to
convey their thoughts or make their requirements known to each
other.
From the Middle Darling, right through to beyond Cooper’s
Creek, and stretching thence to Lake Hope, in South Australia,
the aborigines all speak the same tongue, or nearly the same; at all
events, over that area of Central Australia they can readily under-
stand each other without the intervention of Ngalla Wattows*
I attribute this circumstance to the fact of that region being a
very dry and arid one, having but few permanent waters in sea-
sons of droughts, so that all the native tribes of that inhospitable
country are compelled, during such seasons, to assemble round
these waters, there to dwell together, oftentimes for many months
at a time, and doubtless, on occasions of excessive drought, for a
year, or perhaps even longer than that. At such periods a general
amnesty must prevail amongst the tribes so assembled, otherwise
total extermination would quickly ensue.
The fact of the tribes inhabiting so extensive an area all speak-
ing one tongue induces me to imagine that the inhabitants of
Australia, originally spread over the country from the neighbour-
hood of the Gulf of Carpentaria, breaking up into small sections,
such as families, so that food might be found for all, this breaking
up taking place after getting well south to the country of rivers
and creeks, then each section or family diverging to the right or
left, as the fancy inclined them, thus forming the nuclei of the
various tribes as found by the colonists; the dissimilarity of the
various dialects to what I deem the parent one, that is, the one
spoken by the inhabitants of Central Australia, being fully
accounted for by the persistent endeavour to forget, which I have
before shown to be one of the leading characteristics of the
aborigines.
Should my theory of the course followed by the earliest of this
race be correct, it would not be altogether beyond the pale of pos-
sibility to trace these people back even to pre-historic man, whose
remains have frequently been found in Europe, side by side with
the kitchen midden, stone axe, and spear-barb, all of which pertain
in exact similitude, at this day, to the aborigines of Australia.
Personal nomenclature is, in almost every instance, due to
individual characteristics, or peculiarities perceivable in physique
* I am indebted to my old friend, the late John M'Kinlay, Esq., the
eminent explorer, for this interesting fact.


or manner, as the few following examples will clearly enough
show:—
Mirmile Mirnew Squint-eyed.
Kyup Mimew One-eyed.
Tandy Murnangin Left-handed.
Mirmile Tchantchew Crooked Nose.
Cowendv/rn The Creeper.
Walpa Chinangin Burnt Foot.
Boheroin The Breaker.
Waiheroo Woorinew TTgly Mouth.
There are numerous other names which doubtless arose from
equally perceptible features, but being rather objectionable. I do
not care to quote them.
Names of places generally arise from local features, or from
some occurrence vivid enough to be worthy of note. Below are a
few examples by way of illustration :
Chittoo Beal End of Gum Timber.
Worhin 8010 Black Stump.
Na nowie The Sun.
BocoinTcherik Broken Reed.
Mirmile Maroong Crooked Pine.
In the aboriginal alphabet, there are neither f nor x, p being
used for the former and k for the latter.
In concluding this paper, I may venture to say that these tribes.
when I first became acquainted with them, were numerically
stronger, besides being physically a finer race, than any other
tribes in the Colony, the abundance of easily procured and
nutritious food being the main factor of this result.
The white man’s universal civilizing agent, rum, however, with
its attendant evils, has unfortunately reduced this once athletic
and numerous people, until now not a tithe of the original num-
bers remain, and the scanty remnant are but sorry specimens of
the muscular athletes from whom they are descended.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4.
56
THE ABORIGINES OF THE LOWER MURRAY, ETC.




