

|»M WM I 1 N' - ? £
iiSI , mm l I
I I mmm * SP ' | r.
£a. . .fl. tv, n *1 ■




CHARGE
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
AT THE
SECOND TRIENNIAL VISITATION
FREDERIC, BISHOP OE SYDNEY,
METROPOLITAN OF AUSTRALIA,
FEBRUARY, 19, 1862.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY BEADING- AND WELLE ANK
BRIDGE STREET.




TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
THE CHARGE,
PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST,
IS INSCRIBED, WITH SINCERE AFFECTION AND RESPECT,
THEIR FAITHFUL FRIEND AND BROTHER,
F. SYDNEY.




CHARGE,
My Reverend Brethren,
In the providence of God we are again
permitted to meet, and in conformity with the time
honored custom of our Church and the practice
which from the beginning has prevailed in this dio-
cese, I proceed to address you upon those topics in
which we are mutually interested, and on some of
which my opinion may he desired.
We meet under circumstances of peculiar inte-
rest to myself. The seventh year of my Episco-
pate has passed, and for reasons to which I shall
presently allude I am about to return to England
for a season. The absence even of a year will
probably be marked by some changes, and voices
familiar amongst us now may soon be heard no
more.
I desire to address you under the influence of
this feeling, as one whose office engages him to
watch for your souls, whose account must be given
to the Chief Shepherd when he shall appear, and
whose earnest desire and prayer is, that on your
behalf and his own, it may he given with joy and
not with grief.
In the first place, it is due to Almighty God
Our Heavenly Father that I should express my


gratitude to Him for the many mercies He has
showed to us, for the measure of health and
strength He has bestowed, for the quietness and
union which it is our privilege at this time to
possess, and for the cordial co-operation which is
afforded to various plans for the furtherance of
Christ’s Gospel amongst us.
There is much to encourage us in looking at the
results of the last seven years of the Church’s
labours.
The members of the Church of England in
nearly every district in the diocese have been ac-
tively engaged in maintaining and extending the
ordinances of religion. The Clergy have been for-
ward in directing and encouraging their labours,
and have been liberally supported by the laity. A
detailed statement of the various Church works
which have been carried on in the diocese will be
gratifying to all who desire to see the knowledge of
God and of his blessed Son extended amongst us in
connection with our Scriptural and beloved Church.
The number of Churches and School-Churches
opened within the period I have referred is not less
than 86, or at the rate of one for each month in
these seven years; nor are there any signs of a
diminution of zeal and endeavour to overtake the
still existing wants of the diocese.*'
These statements are not made through strife
or vainglory, to disparage the efforts of others, or
to magnify our own; but in order that the mem-
bers of the Church may know what has been done.
♦ See Note A.


and may in every part of the diocese find encourage-
ment in overcoming difficulties, and in pursuing
labours, which their brethren elsewhere have en-
countered or brought to a successful issue. We
ascribe these results to Him whose blessing alone
can make us “rich in good works,” and whose
glory is the aim and end of our undertakings.
It will he found on examination, that in a con-
siderable proportion of the work the Church has
been assisted by the Church Society, and that
though the grants made by the Society bear a small
proportion to the whole amount expended, yet the
encouragement afforded by it, has been one of the
principal causes of the success which has crowned
our efforts to supply the spiritual necessities of the
population.
I take the present opportunity of commending
this Society to your prayerful support. In my
opinion, it has proved invaluable to the Church of
England. Its management under its able Secretary
and numerous and regular Committee, is wise and
liberal, and combines due economy with great gene-
rosity. The interests of every part of the Church
are represented on its Committee, and yet it is
worthy of observation that while five-sixths of the
free contributions are collected in Sydney, by far
the greater part is expended in the country districts.
I feel assured that no one can examine the work
of the Society without being deeply convinced of
its great usefulness, nay, of its absolute necessity;
and that the manner in which its operations are
conducted, is such as may challenge the approval


and favour of all who are interested in the work of
the Gospel in this country.
I am thankful to say that the Society is very
generally supported. Nearly every parish contri-
butes to its funds ; yet it must be added, that com-
paratively few make vigorous and sustained efforts
on its behalf. It is evident however, that the sym-
pathy and support of the people may be obtained
to almost any extent whenever they are sought.
The Reports of the Church Society have con-
tained urgent appeals to the Members of the
Church, and especially to the Clergy on the subject;
and I now wish to express to you, my Reverend
Brethren, my earnest hope (that I may not be so
bold as to say my parting injunction) that you
would give to the Church Society and its kindred
association for maintaining the ordinances of
religion at the gold-fields, that support which
they can justly claim at your hands.
The Word of God lays down these principles of
action. “We are members one of another.” “If
one member suffer, all the members suffer.” “ That
there may be an equality.” How can these rules
be better exemplified than by endeavouring to
supply the wants of our brethren in the bush or at
the gold-fields ? Where is the equality, if they
who have the stipend, the parsonage, the Church,
and the school provided by the liberality of the
Government, give little or nothing to supply the
wants of those whose income is precarious, and
whose dwelling may be a bark hut, or a house
hired at a cost which they can ill afford ?


I speak not of all. To their honour, and to the
great advantage of the Church Society, some
parishes have contributed very liberally, asking for
nothing again, and have well vindicated their
claim to Government support, by giving to the
extension of religion more than they receive.
In truth, if it were not for the aid supplied by
some of the older parishes, the operations of the
Church Society would be seriously impeded, if not
brought to a stand. The assistance given by
endowed parishes (if we may so term them) is the
principal source from which the unendowed
parishes are aided.
Grants for the stipends of the Clergy in the
interior, for Church building, for Catechists, can
now be made, because certain parishes supply free
contributions to the amount of from two to three
thousand pounds per annum.
But take away the Government stipends which
are received by the Clergy of those contributing
parishes, and their present contributions to the
Church Society will be diverted into another
channel; their charity will begin and end at home.
The instances would be very few indeed in which a
parish would be found able and willing to supply
from voluntary sources its own requirements and
at the same time to contribute to the wants of
others.
This furnishes a sufficient answer to the fallacy
which is occasionally put forward, that because
much is voluntarily given towards the extension of
religion by a Church which receives state-aid, more


would be contributed if that aid were withdrawn.
On the contrary, if state-aid were withdrawn, one of
the supports would be removed by which the volun-
tary efforts of the Church are sustained.
The effect of such withdrawal has been lament-
ably apparent on our gold-fields. The character of
a gold-field population, especially when first col-
lected together, is such as to make the presence of a
clergyman most desirable, and yet, from that popu-
lation, experience has shewn that little indeed can
be obtained towards the support of the ordinances
of religion.
The consequences of the withdrawal of Govern-
ment aid may be seen from this fact, that on one
gold-field where two clergymen of our own Church
and several Protestant ministers of other denomina-
tions were settled, one clergyman and one Wesleyan
minister alone remain. It is surely a melancholy
spectacle to see multitudes of our fellow-country-
men and of strangers from many lands, collected
together in masses without any means of religious
instruction, while large sums of money are expended
in the endeavour, not always successful, to maintain
order by means of the military and police.
On the general subject of state-aid I have on a
former occasion expressed my opinion, and have
seen no reason to change it. We are not legisla-
tors, nor are we responsible for the defects of the
legislation of the colony. If we believe it to be the
duty of a state to maintain the truth in religion,
we can have no doubt that it is the duty of the state
to maintain the Church of England.


If the state has committed the fault of support-
ing error, the blame rests not with us but with the
law. We do not consider the aid we receive to be
so polluted as to oblige us to refuse it, or its recep-
tion to be immoral because it is given to others in
common with ourselves. And while we conceive
that no blame attaches to us for participating with
others in the Government grant, we also affirm that
what we do receive is a small and inadequate return
for the benefits we confer.
Apart from the engagements entered into by
the Crown and the Legislature, we claim the sup-
port of Government because the highest' ends of
Government are advanced by us. The benefits of
state-aid are not wholly on the side of its recipients;
the clergy give a full equivalent for what they re-
ceive, and the state is, in my opinion, under greater
obligations to them than they are to the state.
But it is urged by the opponents of state-aid
that they have no objection to the clergy receiving
stipends proportionable to their services, and that
in truth they desire the abolition of state-aid for
this very reason, that the clergy may be better paid;
believing that when they are wholly dependant upon
the free-will offerings of the people, they will be
more adequately remunerated than at present.
If it were quite certain that the clergy would
receive a higher rate of remuneration under what is
called the voluntary system, we should still be very
reluctant to place them in such a relation to their
people.
On this subject statements on either side are


likely to be regarded as the expression of feeling,
rather than the conviction springing out of the con-
sideration of argument, or the observation of facts,
and I am not unmindful of the objections against
endowments ; hut my belief concerning the volun-
tary principle is, that it has a tendency to lower the
high tone and independent character of the Chris-
tian ministry, and that such an effect is not uncom-
monly produced.
If it he argued that the recipients of endow-
ments are more likely to neglect their duties than
than the ministers who are remunerated on the
voluntary plan, we may admit that where men are
not actuated by the love of God and of the souls of
men, this may he the case. But the labours of such
men are of little value under any system of pay-
ment. On the other hand there are clergymen
whose powers of usefulness can only he exercised
under the protection of endowments, not being of
such a popular character as to cause them to he
generally appreciated ; while we may surely affirm
of any faithful and conscientious clergyman, that
he will not labour less happily or usefully to him-
self or others, because his independence is secured,
and his income is not affected by the caprice of his
hearers.*
It seems to he taken for granted that the present
mode of paying the clergy is to he discontinued. I
do not think that the majority of educated and in-
telligent persons in this colony are in favour of the
abolition of state-aid; and no one who is practically
* See note B.


acquainted with the condition of our population in
the interior, and who feels that God ought to he
better served, and that the souls of men are pre-
cious, can for one moment imagine that the aboli-
tion of state-aid will help to supply the spiritual
necessities of the people; on the contrary his ob-
servation of the benefits arising from the possession
of a Government stipend and of the destitution of
thinly peopled districts where no such aid is given,
will convince him that Government aid to religion
ought to increase with the increase of the popula-
tion.
I confidently expect that if any settlement of
this question is attempted, the clergy will decline to
be parties to an arrangement by which their own
personal advantage is secured at the cost of the
Church.
The parishes, and not the particular clergymen,
are the parties with whom the compact has been
made by which a measure of Government aid has
been secured* If in order to get rid of annual
payments it is proposed to capitalise them, the
principal sum should be secured as an endowment
for the whole Church and not he lost in payments
either of gratuities or of annuities to individuals.
The subject of education is one of deep and in-
creasing interest. The results of efforts made by
the Church of England during the last few years
are very gratifying.
The number of Scholars in our Day Schools is
7000; of the Sunday Schools the Registrar-General
complains that an accurate return has not been


made, a complaint which I regret to hear, and for
which I trust there will not hereafter he any just
ground. I know that these Schools have increased
in number, and that they are now flourishing in
some parts of the Diocese where they did not here-
tofore exist. In many places they form the only
means hy which religious instruction can he con-
veyed. Where the National School teacher is pre-
cluded from giving more than general religious
instruction, and the doors of the National School
are closed on the Lord’s Day, the Sunday-school
becomes the only Scriptural School.
Dor this reason it should he highly esteemed
amongst us. It is a nursery for the young disciple;
a field in which the graces and gifts of the most
experienced may find full and healthy exercise.
A prosperous Sunday-school is one of the most sure
signs of a well ordered parish, and one of the best
means of conveying a blessing to young and old.
Let the interest which the clergyman takes in it be
deep and real, the teaching earnest, animated, and
consistent, and the school must prosper. If it does
not, the pastor has need to enquire whether the
fault is not with himself, and to recall the injunc-
tion of Him who said, “ feed my lambs.”
The mode in which the grants voted hy Parlia-
ment for primary education are distributed, is
another subject on which a wide diversity of opinion
prevails.
The claims of the National Board Schools are put
forward with a pertinacity and zeal which betoken
a strong desire that the views of the writers should


be adopted by the Parliament, and probably with the
expectation of influencing the decision of the
Legislature.
Our objections to the National Board Schools
continue unchanged.
They are in effect secular schools. There is no
recognition of the need of divine teaching by
offering up prayer; the Bible is not taught in the
school by the teacher; and this dishonour put
upon the Word of God is productive of serious
practical evils.
The child feels that the knowledge of- secular
things is of more moment than any other. The
Bible does not occupy its proper place, or indeed
any place in the system of school instruction.
With the letter of it, with the use of it, with
that view of its doctrines which his Church holds,
he can never become familiar; he is unable to refer
to it; and that which is taught may not be proved
by means of it.
The effect of this system is not yet fully
developed. It is certain that a system from which
the Bible is avowedly excluded, cannot be compared
with that admirable National scheme which has
made the Parochial school the glory and the
strength of Scotland, and if a parallel be sought in
North America, a well qualified witness (Mr. Tre-
menheere) gives a most unfavourable report of the
effects of the secular system on the religious cha-
racter of the people of New England. The Sunday-
school does not succeed in supplying that religious
instruction which should be given in the daily


school. The time is too short, and the daily
scholars do not generally attend the Sunday-school.
That considerable advantages have arisen from
the establishment of National Schools we may ad-
mit, while we affirm that these benefits have been
purchased at too great a sacrifice. We acknow-
ledge the difficulties which the national system is
intended to meet, but we deny that there is not
another and a better way of overcoming them.
The recent adoption of the system of non-vested
schools is an evidence of this. If these schools were
under the same regulations as in Ireland, the
patrons would prescribe the religious instruction to
be given in them; they would be Denominational
Schools. The recent increase in the number of
National Schools is chiefly owing to the alteration
in the system by which non-vested schools have
been taken into connexion with the Board. In
other words it is by the adoption of a denomina-
tional arrangement, that the National Board hopes
to maintain its position in the country.
That which the Church of England claims is the
power of communicating religious instruction to
her own children by her own teachers, that is, by
teachers of her own communion and her own train-
ing ; that prayer and the reading of the Scriptures
shall form part of the school routine, and that the
buildings in which the daily instruction is given
may be used as Sunday Schools, and if required, as
temporary places of worship.
While we put forth these claims on behalf of
our own children, we are prepared to give to the


whole school that amount of knowledge of the his-
tory, geography, and morality of the Bible which
forms the general religious instruction and moral
lesson of the National School; and while no child-
ren, whose parents object to the special religious
teaching, should be compelled to be present at it,
every facility should be afforded for their instruc-
tion by their own ministers.
A Church of England school so conducted is a
non-vested school (in the sense in which the term
is usually understood) of which the authorities of
the Church of England are the patrons. What we
ask for ourselves, we readily accord to others ; and
though it may be objected that in such an arrange-
ment the advantages will be chiefly with the mem-
bers of the Church of England because they form
the majority of the population, it can hardly be ex-
pected that we should forego an advantage of this
kind in a country where majorities bear rule, and
where universal suffrage is the foundation of all
legislation.
Let it then be remembered that while we claim
to educate our own children in our own way, we
offer a pledge to other denominations that we will
give to them as much religious instruction as they
can conscientiously receive from us; we offer to
Homan Catholic children all the advantages of the
National School, and to Protestant children of other
denominations the privilege of instruction in the
Word of God. There is nothing in this scheme to
which the supporter of the National School can ob-
ject, and it secures what the National system fails


to do, the support of the great majority of the mem-
bers of the Church of England and of the conscien-
tious members of other Protestant denominations.
If a modification of the present mode of distri-
buting the educational grant is intended, if some
adaptation of the Privy Council system of grants-in-
aid should he attempted, or a combination of edu-
cational efforts he proposed, it will be essential to
the success of any scheme that the Executive, or a
minister responsible to Parliament, shall he charged
with its administration. Nor will it he prudent to
exclude from the consideration of an educational
measure these facts, that the clergy are the most intel-
ligent, the best qualified, and the most economical
helpers of a government in the education of the
people, and that no system will ever gain the confi-
dence of a large proportion of the population if it is
attempted to exclude from our schools the distinctive
religious teaching of the Church.
There are those, no doubt, who declaim against
what they are pleased to call priestly interference
and intolerance, hut they are not generally persons
with whom the religious and moral interests of a
people can he safely trusted. On the other hand
the most earnest and consistent supporters of the
National system complain that the clergy do not
join them, and would gladly avail themselves of their
aid in carrying on the instruction of the people.
Let it then he supposed that some modification
of the present distribution of the Parliamentary
grants is possible; let a practical and well con-
sidered scheme be proposed; let the conscientious


convictions of the members of the Church of
England be respected, and due regard be paid
to the position the Church herself holds and
the influence she possesses in the Colony, and
there will not be wanting on her part a con-
ciliatory reception of such proposals, with the
sincere desire that the question may be satis-
factorily arranged.*
I regret that the attempt to introduce Synodical
action into this diocese has hitherto proved unsuc-
cessful. The chief difficulties have been the
differences of opinion amongst ourselves, the un-
founded apprehensions existing in the minds of
some conscientious opponents of the Bill as to its
effects on other denominations, and the hostility
with which any measure for the advantage of the
Church of England is regarded by the Roman
Catholic authorities.
Eor differences of opinion amongst ourselves we
must all be prepared. Those differences made
themselves apparent in the Conference; the prin-
ciples out of which they sprung were fully discussed,
and the decisions were carried by a considerable
majority in our own diocese, and unanimously
adopted in the Diocese of Newcastle.
It was hardly to be anticipated that the
opposition of members of the Church of England
would follow the proposed measure into the Legis-
lature. The petitions against the Bill, it is true,
were very few in comparison with those in its
favour, but were sufficiently numerous to afford
* See Note C.


reluctant members a reason for not supporting the
measure.
The passage of the Bill through the Legislative
Council was most successful. The voluminous
evidence, and the careful analysis of it, shew the
amount of attention given to the subject, and the
result of that evidence and of the debates which
followed, was to change indifference or hostility into
warm, intelligent, and able support. Only four
members of the Legislative Council were finally
found to vote against it.
Some of the alterations which had been made
in the Bill during its progress through the Legis-
lative Council, did not appear to the members of
the Church in the Diocese of Newcastle to be in
conformity with the conclusions of the Conference.
Objections were taken to these alterations, and as
the objections were likely to assume the form of
opposition, by petition to the Assembly, it was
deemed useless to proceed with the measure there,
and after its introduction it was withdrawn.
The opposition of conscientious members of the
dissenting bodies was no doubt founded on mis-
apprehension. It was said, and frequently reiterated,
that the measure was intended to give some supe-
riority to the Church of England. It was never
shewn that any part of the Bill could by any pos-
sibility have this effect. The promoters of the Bill
disavowed any intention or wish of this nature.
The Bill itself limited its effects to members, and
only to some of the members, of the Church of
England; while the principal advocates of the


measure in the Legislative Council were men whose
known opinions and frequent disclaimers of any
such design, should have satisfied thoughtful per-
sons that the charge was unfounded.
The opposition of the Church of Rome is much
more intelligible. The well-being of the Church of
England, Reformed and Protestant, the object of
the Synod Bill, was not likely to he regarded with
favour by the authorities of the Church of Rome.
The effect of the Synod Bill was apparent to
them. It would unite and strengthen the Church
of England. On the eve, therefore, of a general
election, the members of the Church of Rome were
required by a pastoral issued by the head of their
denomination to vote against the supporters of the
Synod Bill.
Before an opposition arising from so many quarters
it was deemed advisable to give way. The great
majority of the members of the Church of England
desired the introduction of Synodical action ; it was
an object on which much time and labour had been
expended, hut if the object could only be gained at
the cost of increased division amongst ourselves,
and by stirring up strife with other communions, it
was prudent to wait and ascertain what were likely
to be the effects of time and further deliberation.
In the meanwhile the Home authorities, who
had been applied to by the Church of England
Synod of Adelaide, with a petition that their fun-
damental regulations might he embodied in the
Letters Patent of their Bishop, gave it as their
opinion that the preferable course would be to apply


to the Colonial Parliament for a Bill, giving such
powers to the Church of England as had been
sought by us in our proposed Synod Bill,
The despatch in which this course was recom-
mended, has since been communicated to the
Government of New South Wales.
I continue to think that the sanction of the
Legislature is necessary for the introduction of
Synodical action.
The mutual or consensual compact may serve
the purpose of the Church under favourable cir-
cumstances, when the resolutions of the Synod
are not opposed. But the danger is that the
arrangement will fail whenever the self-interest
or self-will of an unprincipled or impracticable
member of the Church is arrayed against the Synod.
Such a Synod wants the power to compel a re-
cusant or unfaithful member to submit to its
decisions.
With the benefit of our past experience, fortified
hy the expression of opinion by the Home Govern-
ment, and relying somewhat on the beneficial effects
of time and calm reflection, I am not without good
hope that our next application to the Legislature
may be successful, particularly if the Bill is de-
prived of some of the portions which were objected
to in the last, and which may not be essential to its
successful working.
In this matter, my proposed visit to England
may be of much service. There is every probability
that a third, if not a fourth, Bishopric will be
erected in the Colony. In this case, a Provincial


Synod may without difficulty he held by permission
of the Crown, and judging from that which has
already taken place in Canada, Her Majesty’s con-
sent will not be withheld from the formation of a
Provincial Synod in this Colony.
The prospect of a division of the Diocese of
Sydney is one of the reasons for my desire to re-
visit England.
The effort which has been made to provide an
endowment is very gratifying. If successful, it will
he the first time in the history of the Church in
these Colonies that the funds for the endowment of
a new Bishopric have been contributed within the
Colony itself.
I anticipate great good from the division of the
Diocese. The maintenance and extension of the
ordinances of religion will be effectually secured in
the severed portion of the Diocese, wdiile the time
and interests of the Bishop of Sydney will be wholly
given to the affairs of the remaining portion.
The new Diocese of Goulburn will contain about
one-fourth of the present population of the Diocese
of Sydney, but a much larger proportion of the area
of the Colony. It will comprise all the districts
South and West of Goulburn, and has at present
20 clergymen within its limits.
It is a part of the Colony in which the operations
of the Church Society have been very useful, and
have tended much to facilitate the formation of the
new Diocese. Whoever is placed in charge of it
will find that although much is to he done, great
things have already been accomplished, and his


endeavours to supply that which is still wanting will
be facilitated, by the presence of a body of clergy with
whom any Bishop might be thankful to co-operate,
and from whom I shall separate with regret.
In effecting this division of my Diocese, I am
carrying out the intentions of my revered prede-
cessor, the anniversary of whose death, nine years
ago, is close at hand. One passeth away and
another cometh, but our work abideth for ever.
Other men laboured, and we have entered into their
labours. I desire so to build upon the foundations
laid by him, that our work may be approved by the
common Master and Lord of all.
I trust that the building of the Cathedral will
proceed steadily and uninterruptedly to its comple-
tion. It is highly gratifying to observe the prompti-
tude and liberality with which the provision of
suitable memorial windows has been made; and now
that the plan of the interior is finally arranged,
comparatively little is required beyond the time
necessary for carrying out the design. The funds
will, I doubt not, be forthcoming.
It is a source of gratification to me that the
establishment of Moore College, which is well
known to have been one of the purposes of the late
Bishop, has been attended with success, and with
advantage to the Diocese. The number of students
is at present six, of whom three are intended for
the Diocese of Melbourne.
The necessity for Theological Colleges, as sup-
plementary to the University, is now very generally
acknowledged.


The chief and proper end of the University is
that education and formation of character by which
the future usefulness of the life is secured.
The intending barrister or physician does not
enter upon the duties of his calling immediately
upon the attainment of his degree. Neither does
he expect to find within the precincts of the Uni-
versity all that further preparation which is
necessary to qualify him for the practice of his
profession. He seeks special instruction, and places
himself where he has the opportunity of observing
and treasuring up the rules of his profession.
Similar are the advantages of a Theological
College. The candidate for the Ministry has re-
ceived that degree of training which the University
imparts, and in the quiet retirement of the Training
College, surrounded by those influences which are
likely to make his work the end and pleasure of his
life, with opportunities for engaging in parochial
labours, and for the development of whatever
powers he possesses, he goes forth knowing what
is to he done, and what he himself is capable of
doing. That which in a parish he would have
learned in time hut through many mistakes, and
not without some injury to others, he has acquired
under the direction of a competent guide, before he
is called to the actual exercise of the great and
solemn responsibilities of the Ministry.
It is my wish that certain advantages should be
afforded to those graduates of the University who
may hereafter enter Moore College from St. Paul’s;
but in all cases I deem it desirable that previous to


ordination some time should he passed at the
Theological College; and there are persons who can
obtain the training necessary for the Ministry in no
other way.
In truth, we cannot afford to dispense with any
means for increasing the numbers of well-qualified
clergymen.
In parts of this Diocese the clergy are still little
more than travelling missionaries. Time for pas-
toral visitations and for study can hardly be found.
It is a state of things disadvantageous to the people
and to the clergy. It is no doubt better that the
ordinances of religion should be occasionally sup-
plied than that the people should be wholly deprived
of them, but the parochial system is the perfection
of the Ministry, and is as capable of application to
Australia as to England, if only the numbers of the
clergy were increased.
The probability of an adequate supply of clergy-
men will eventually depend upon the maintenance
provided for them, and nothing permanent or
satisfactory can be hoped for, unless a system of at
least partial endowment is established. A popula-
tion which will not properly maintain its clergy,
cannot expect to have a Ministry respectable for
education, ability, and learning. It is not a re-
quisite for the Ministry in the Church of England
that a clergyman should be a poor man, and every
one who enters the Ministry within its pale may
reasonably expect to be maintained in it. If he
serves at the altar he should live of the altar.
This question of the maintenance of the clergy


is one for the laity to consider, and some have
already given more than consideration to it, and
have endowed their own portion of the ministerial
field. A plan has also been propounded by which,
if vigorously pursued, the partial endowment of
the Church may ultimately he secured.
I repeat that this matter concerns the laity.
Their interest in the well-being of the society is as
great as ours, and nothing can more effectually
debase religion and ruin a country than the degra-
dation of the Ministry. He who wished to corrupt
the worship of God and break the national covenant
between God and Israel, knew well the effect of his
acts when he made priests of the lowest of the
people.
The part of the laity is to provide that the
clergy may give themselves to the word of God and
to prayer; that they may not be compelled to
resort to agriculture or tuition for a maintenance,
that their minds may be kept free and unembar-
rassed, and they themselves devoted to the duties
of their high and sacred calling.
And, my reverend brethren, if you hear this
character, if it is evident to your people that you
can say “ we seek not yours but you,” there will
commonly he found a disposition on their part to
discharge the obligations imposed upon them by
the relation they hear to you.
There are obviously strong moral and social
reasons for maintaining a body of clergy in the
country, and if we approve ourselves not only to
God but to men by the hlamelessness and useful-


ness of our lives, we afford additional security for
the continuance of that aid which the Government
has hitherto bestowed.
I need hardly say that I do not put forth this
as a motive for devotedness to your calling, but to
remind you what is expected from you, how likely
you are to secure the lesser good in aiming at the
higher, and that if you seek first the kingdom of
God and the righteousness thereof, “ all these
things shall be added unto you.”
What, then, is the true value of the Christian
ministry ? Undoubtedly the influence for good
which it exercises upon the Church and the world.
Its field is the world. Its mission is to bring out
of the world a people prepared for the Lord, and to
build up that people as a temple of the living God.
Its work is carried on by public and private prayer.
One main part of this work is set forth in the
Apostle’s exhortion to Timothy, “Preach the Word.”
The public preaching of the Gospel is the first, the
greatest, and most effectual means of doing good.
Nothing else can be substituted for it, yet it should
not by any means he substituted for all other means
of doing good.
Let the ministerial example of the Apostle be
followed, and the faithful pastor will he carried by
it from house to house, from one individual case to
another, day and night, with tears and prayers,
warning, reproving, exhorting, with all long suffer-
ing and doctrine.
The private admonitions, the secret intercessions,
the ready sympathy, the watchful vigilance amount-


ing to godly jealousy, the exact discrimination dis-
playing an intimate acquaintance with every mem-
ber of the flock, these and other manifestations
of the Apostle’s mind shew that he lived in and
for his work, that his large affections and ad-
mirable gifts were in every way and at all times
consecrated to the great business of saving the
souls of men.
Let the same mind he in you, my brethren; as
respects your office let your aim be to stand perfect
and complete in all the will of God.
If then you examine the Epistles and record of
the life of St. Paul, and observe the manner in
which his work was carried on, and his directions
to Timothy and to Titus, you will assuredly give
the foremost place to the preparation, the compo-
sition and the delivery of your sermons. Study,
prayer and pains are the chief requisites, combined
with a sincere desire for the salvation of your
hearers, and earnestness in your exhortations to
them to flee from the wrath to come.
The world occasionally complains of the dull
and aimless character and monotonous delivery of
the discourses which are heard in our modern pul-
pits, and that the advocacy of religion is feeble and
ineffective. These complaints may be exaggerated,
but if the evil did not exist to some extent, they
would hardly be made.
It would he well, at all events, if the questions
were more frequently asked, what end has this dis-
course in view, why is it preached, and what better
will they be who hear it ? We shall do wisely, so far,


to profit by the complaints which reach us as to
aim at the improvement of our sermons.
All our studies should indeed he drawn that
way ; from all sources, from reading, from observa-
tion and reflection, from experience, above all from
prayerful study of the Bible, we should endeavour
to win souls to Christ that they may be saved.
And here, let me observe, that if men are to be
won, they must be able to hear; and that a clear,
distinct enunciation of that which is spoken is of
as much importance as the matter itself.
It can be of little consequence what is said, if
it cannot be heard or understood.
Again, if men are to be won, their attention
must be arrested and retained, they must be in-
terested, and feel that they are instructed. They
will be won who are impressed with the earnest-
ness, piety, and sincerity of the preacher, who are
conscious that he is seeking their highest good, and
is chiefly anxious that they may be saved.
We have a great advantage, my reverend breth-
ren, we are not lecturers to instruct or amuse,
we are not moral philosophers delivering dry dis-
courses on ethics; we are more than these, at
liberty to avail ourselves of all the sources of in-
terest and instruction within our reach, but able to
speak with an authority which belongs to the am-
bassador of Christ, and upon subjects which, when
duly set forth, can never fail to awaken the most
powerful emotions in the human heart: “Be ye
reconciled to God.”
If this language of the heart is illustrated and


adorned by a consistent and holy life, by the sym-
pathy and patience and love of the pastor, it will
prove effectual to the saving of many who hear and
observe it.
But if, unhappily, the love of the world or the
love of ease, an unchristian temper, or any manifest
inconsistency in the life, should stand forth in pain-
ful contrast to the eloquence and fervour of the
pulpit, the preacher is in danger of that judgment
pronounced on him who offends one of Christ’s little
ones, “ it were better for him that he had not been
born.” Let it never be forgotten by us, my breth-
ren, that we are persons under continual observa-
tion, and that however painfully we may feel our
own deficiencies, it is expected of us that we should
be able to say to the world around, “ those things
which you have both learned and received and
heard and seen in me, do.”
I will not repeat what I have said on a former
occasion touching the pastoral work of the parochial
clergyman. His visitation, as well of the whole as
of the sick, the Schools, the Bible and Confirmation
classes, the Communicants’ and the District Visi-
tors’ meetings, the cottage readings; these, varied
according to the circumstances of his parish, will
occupy the thoughts and time of the faithful pastor.
I am thankful to know from the confirmations
which have been recently held, that the number of
persons offering themselves has in most parishes
increased. There are some exceptions, and there
are cases in which the proportion of males to
females is very small.


I feel assured that if due diligence is used in
seeking out those who are of fit age to he confirmed,
a considerable increase to the number of candidates
may be obtained. It is not sufficient to give notice
that a confirmation will be held ; personal enquiries
should be instituted throughout the parish for all
who have not been and ought to be confirmed.
The opportunity for imparting religious instruc-
tion which is afforded by the previous preparation,
is of itself a sufficient reason for using more than
ordinary diligence in obtaining candidates for con-
firmation, and no clergyman who feels the import-
ance of becoming personally and intimately
acquainted with the young members of his flock,
will willingly neglect so precious an opportunity of
influencing them for their everlasting good.
In this, as in all other parts of the ministerial
work, the great advantage of systematic pastoral
visitation is at once felt. When the time of pre-
paration for confirmation approaches, the diligent
pastor is at little loss whom to invite. He knows
his flock ,even to the servants, “whom if the parson
do not know, (in the quaint language of George
Herbert), he were not fit to be a parson.”
The clergy of the Church of England have a
great power and a great privilege, if they regularly
and in their pastoral character visit all the families
of their charge. I say their pastoral character, not
simply as friends or ordinary visitors, but with the
intention of imparting religious instruction by their
conversation, and in some cases at least by reading
the Scriptures and prayer. This duty cannot be


neglected without great loss and danger. For a
clergyman who, as is commonly said, does not go to
visit a parishioner until he is sent for, will com-
monly go too late. He will go to a person of whose
state of mind he is ignorant, and who may he
beyond the reach of instruction and exhortation.
It is in pastoral visitation that some of the most
valuable materials for the public ministry are
gained, and without it I do not see how the confi-
dence of the people is to be obtained.
It is the highest commendation which some
parishioners can give, that their pastor leaves no
member of his flock unvisited; it is the chief com-
plaint which others make that this duty is not
performed; and my experience leads me to the con-
clusion that while many deficiencies will be over-
looked in one who is diligent and faithful in the
discharge of this service, in the minds of the flock
nothing can compensate for the neglect of it,
I have said that the work of the Church is to
l)e carried on not only by public and private minis-
tration, but by public and private prayer.
On the subject of public worship, I will only
make this remark, that it were much to be desired
that the observance of some of the days appointed
for special services were more general.
Christmas Day and Good Friday are not the
only seasons in which the people might be induced
to assemble themselves together, in order that the
great facts of our religion might be more deeply
impressed upon them by prayer and hearing of the
Word.


Epiphany and Ascension Day, and the whole
season of Lent, should he observed in every parish
as means of edification and instruction.
We deprive our congregations of a great
privilege, and fail in presenting to them the true
character of the Church of England, if we neglect
these occasions of assembling them together.
Private prayer for ourselves, for our parishes,
for our brethren, is the appointed means of obtain-
ing spiritual blessings. It is in the closet that our
difficulties will be removed and our triumphs
achieved. Heaven is opened to the effectual fer-
vent prayer of the righteous man, and the desired
blessings descend upon the Church and the world
at his intercession.
No one can read the Epistles of St. Paul atten-
tively without observing how largely this subject of
prayer enters into his spiritual and ministerial life.
His continual request is that others would pray for
him ; his constant resource in his anxieties on their
account is to pray for them. He is evidently one
who believes that “ God is, and is the rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him.” Those saluta-
tions at the close of the Epistles to the Romans
and the Corinthians which surprise us by their
number and the intimate knowledge they be-
token, are but another form in which the great
love and earnest prayers of the Apostle were
displayed.
In this respect also is he worthy of our imita-
tion. Let us he mindful of our brethren and of the
wants of the whole Church of God. Let our sym-


pathy flow forth in this channel, and blessings will
be received and dispensed by us.
May I request you, my dear reverend brethren,
specially to remember me, even as I trust to bear
you in prayerful remembrance at the throne of
grace, that we may be kept in holy union, abiding
in love and abounding in good works, studying to
set forth the glory of God, and to set forward the
salvation of men, “ that whether I come and see
“ you or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs,
“ that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
“ striving together for the faith of the -Gospel.”
In connexion with the subject of public worship,
I may here remind you that the compilation or adop-
tion of a collection of Psalms and Hymns has been
frequently mooted amongst us.
I have hesitated what course to take, not so much
from an inability to make up my own mind, as from
a desire to recommend to you that which would he
most acceptable to the members of the Church at
large.
I have examined some collections and have
asked the advice of some of the clergy, and am of
opinion that Mercer’s Hymn Book, in use at the
evening services, at St. Paul’s Cathedral, is the best
adapted for public worship.
As far then as my sanction may influence my
reverend brethren in their choice, I wish it to be
known that I recommend the adoption of the selec-
tion I have named, and I trust that our Diocesan
Committee will add to our stock of useful publica-
tions by introducing this Hymn Book, which from


the good taste which has presided over the selection,
from the beauty of the music printed with the
hymns, from its adaptation, to our Church services,
as well as from the cheapness and variety of the
forms in which it is published, is a valuable addi-
tion to our service of song.
I will also take this opportunity of expressing
my earnest desire that some arrangements may be
made for the preservation and due use of the library
now in the Church Society’s rooms. That library
would receive many additions from time to time,
if it was known that the books were properly cared
for and used under such regulations as would
ensure their safety. The associates of Dr. Bray
have again offered a selection of Books, in addition
to their former contributions.
It may be found practicable to combine a library
of reference with one for circulation, and to obtain
for the latter a supply of modern theological works.
We have much in our library that is useful for re-
ference and for testing the quality of that which
more recent times have produced, but we need some
mode of circulating modern works amongst the
clergy. In all subjects interesting to the public
mind, the clergy should be prepared from their
information to give a right direction to the current
of thought. Without reading and the opportunity
of reading this cannot be done, and in such a centre
of population and intelligence as the city of Sydney,
it ought not to be left undone.
Many of the clergy would, I think, hail it as a
great benefit if, for example, the means of becoming


acquainted with the best publications which the
Essays and Reviews have called forth were placed
within their reach. It would at once he seen that
though some of the statements of the authors of
the Essays and Reviews are as startling for their
impiety, as shocking to our moral sense from the
inconsistency of those who make them, the truth
has nothing to fear from such assaults. With
greater learning, with a reverence becoming the
subject, and an ability commanding universal
regard, have such writers as Ellicot and Garbett and
McCaul dealt with the Essays and Reviews.
A host of smaller publications, with the promise
of more formal and elaborate refutations, shew us
that the heart of English divinity is sound, that the
nation is not disposed to receive again the impieties
of the English infidels of the last century, even
though they are decked out in the latest German
modes of thought and speech.
Eew Christian doctrines have probably been so
accurately defined before as after a controversy has
arisen concerning them, and one result of these
otherwise painful productions may he, that the
Church will obtain a clearer perception of what is
meant by the Inspired Word of God.
It is surely a great error, to say the least, to
make what is commonly called the inspiration of
genius to differ nothing from the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, save in the subjects chosen by the
writers. To charge the Bible with mistakes in
science or chronology, is to accuse the Almighty
Himself of ignorance and error. To affirm that


we with our imperfect data can correct the state-
ments of Scripture on creation, or that the
acknowledged facts of geology cannot be reconciled
with the plain narrative of Moses, are gratuitous
assumptions, wholly unworthy of men who pro-
fess to tread in the steps of Bacon, Newton, and
Locke.
It is a great thought of Augustine’s, found in
the 12th book of his Confessions, chapter xxvi., —
“ that if he had been enjoined by God to write the
“ hook of Genesis, he would have chosen to have
“ composed it in such a manner for depth and
“eloquence, that they who did not understand
“ creation, should nevertheless not be able to reject
“it for being above their capacity; and that what-
“ ever different truths any man, or number of men,
“ might discover, or have discovered to them, should
“be contained in the conciseness of the text.”*
This, as a writer who quotes the remark
observes, seems to have been his real opinion of
the book of Genesis, and appears to me to contain
the true mode of solving the questions which from
time to time arise between revelation and science;
modern discoveries are contained in the conciseness
of the text.
If it were not so, and it became necessary to
reject the early chapters of the book of Genesis
because of a supposed impossibility of reconciling
them with the facts of science, the whole Bible
must be rejected as untrue. Our Lord and the
Apostles continually refer to the Mosaic history as
* Note D.


true; their own credibility is inseparably connected
with the truth of the Mosaic record.
We receive all the parts of Holy Writ as alike
true, proceeding from the same source, inspired by
the same Spirit.
On this ground we are safe and are conscious of
our security. When once it is left, we embark on
a treacherous sea of conjecture, strewed with many
wrecks, where those who once gave fair promise of
usefulness have lost all, have spent an aimless life,
and died a hopeless death.
How different the confidence of one who has
received with intelligence, and yet with simplicity,
that which God has spoken.
He bows his reason in submission to its revela-
tions ; he yields his will to its directions ; with
deep humility and gratitude he accepts the offers of
salvation through the atoning blood of the Lamb of
God. He relies upon the promises of grace and teach-
ing conveyed by the Holy Spirit, and leaning only
upon the hope of divine mercy through Christ
Jesus, he passes through the valley of the shadow
of death, with the assured expectation that he shall
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
My dear brethren, it is to this hope that we
ourselves must look to come; it is to this that we
must desire to lead the people committed to our
care.
It has been necessary in every age, from the
time of Celsus downwards, to listen to the objec-
tions of the sceptic and the unbeliever, but the
truth of God remains the same. Modern cavillers


have only gone over the same ground and revived
exploded and oft-refuted errors: the foundation of
God stands sure. We know whom and what we
have believed, and are persuaded that what an all-
wise God has revealed is true, and that what a
gracious Father has promised will he fulfilled.
Let it be our aim and prayer, my reverend
brethren, to bring our people to this steadfastness
of faith and confidence of hope. While we seek
their instruction and confirmation in the truth of
that which is commonly received amongst us, let us
especially aim at their conversion to God, their
knowledge and love of the Saviour, and their con-
tinual growth in grace.
Many intellectual difficulties disappear in the
presence of that great question, “ what shall I do to
be saved?” The fact that the anxieties of such a
state of mind can only he satisfied by the gospel of
the grace of God, forms one of the strongest eviden-
ces of the truth of that Gospel. He who has
become united to Christ the Truth, receives all
connected with Him with unhesitating trust. In
His light he sees light.
May you, my dear brethren, enjoy this confi-
dence yourselves so fully, and he so certainly
persuaded of the truth of all you teach, that you
may speak to the conviction and salvation of those
who hear you; may invite them to be partakers of
your own hope and joy, and to he your companions
to that good land of which the Lord has spoken.
I desire earnestly the success of your ministry.
Thg commencement of that success is in our own


character, it is carried on by our own life. What
we are some will he. Let us then, my brethren,
ask that we may be humble, earnest, consistent
and prayerful; let us not he satisfied with anything
less than the salvation of souls, the turning of men
from darkness to light and from the power of Satan
unto God.
Oh yield yourselves, my dear brethren, wholly
to this holy happy work of bringing men in safety
to the shores of everlasting life. It is the work of
Christ; it was the work of the apostle; no higher
glory could St. Paul desire than that by all means
he might save some; no greater triumph can the
universe behold than the salvation, the rescue of a
soul—of one soul. It is this and nothing else, and
nothing less than this which awakens the joy of
heavenly hosts : “ there is joy inilie presence of the
angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.”
May it please Almighty God, by the working of
that divine power which brought light out of
darkness, so to accompany your ministry with His
presence and blessing that you may be wise as
teachers, and turn many to righteousness, and in
the day of the Redeemer’s coming may “ shine as
the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars
for ever and ever.”




N 0 T E S.
/P 62 ,
NOTE A,
List of 88 Churches and School-Churches opened or in progress
in the diocese of Sydney, since the year 1855.
In Sydney—
St. Paul’s, Rcdfern, August 24th, 1855
St. Philip’s
St. Michael’s, Surry Hills
St. John’s, Bishopthorpe
St. John’s, Darlinghurst
St. Matthias, Paddington
St. Barnabas, Parramatta-street.
Suburbs—
St. Mary’s, Waverley
Lord’s Forest
Hunter’s Hill
St. Jude’s, Coogee
St. Paul’s, Canterbury
St. Silas’, Waterloo
Petersham
North Shore School-Church
Manly Beach
Amside, St. Peter’s
St. Luke’s, Burwood.
County of Cumberland —
St. John’s, Parramatta
St. James’, Smithfield
St. Paul’s, Castle Hill
Broughton Chapel, Moore College
Holdsworthy
Banks Town
St. James’, Pitt Town
St. John’s, Wilberforce
Cornwallis, | Near Richmon d
Enfield. f


County of Camden —
Picton
All Saints, Sutton Forest
St. Michael’s, Wollongong
Fairy Meadow j Near WoUo ngong
American Creek;
Terry’s Meadows
Shell Harbour
Christ Church, Kiama
Fox Ground l NearKiama
Geringong I
Shoalhaven
Ulladulla
St. Andrew’s, Braid wood
Panbula
Monaro—
Bomhala
Mount Casper
Deligate
Jejedzerick, Cooma District
Queanheyan, Christ Church
Ginninderra
Goulburn —
Old Township
Tarago
Tiranna
Kippelaw
Gunning
Collector
Tumut —
All Saints
South Gundagai
Wagga Wagga
Uranna
Alhury
Corowa
Deniliquin
Western District —
Hartley
Rylstone
Mudgee
Duhho


Molong
School-Church near ditto
Orange
Two School-Churches near ditto
Wattle Mat j Gold Field
Avisford )
Lachlan River, district of
Weddon district I j ditto
Gold Field J
Burrangong
Churches in Progress—
Watson’s Bay-
Botany
Sackville Reach
Moruya, nearly completed
Berrima, 3 school-churches
Burrowa
Windellima
South Gundagai
Of these, 58 are substantial stone or brick buildings, 30 are of wood.
St. Philip’s cost £15,000, St. Michael’s, £5OOO, the wooden buildings from
£BB to £250 each.
The following Churches have been enlarged in the same period; —
Holy Trinity, Sydney
St. Mary’s, Balmain, re-built
St. Stephen’s, Newtown
All Saints, Marsfield
St. Ann’s, Ryde, re-huilt
St. Luke’s, Liverpool
Karelian
St. Peter’s, Oampbelltown
St. Saviour’s, Goulburn
All Saints, Bathurst
The estimated accommodation afforded in these 88 new, or enlarged
Churches, is about fourteen thousand sittings.
NOTE B.
Extract f rom the Charge of the Archbishop of Dublin, 1835.
The temporal endowments of the Church may be regarded in two lights,
viz., as a benefit either to the actual holders of the endowments, or to the


community for whose sake they were bestowed. It is plain that the latter
view is that which ought to be considered primary and essential, and also as
the more consonant both to the safety of the establishment, and to the dignity
of the Clergy. I say that this is the most correct and truest view that can
be taken, because any one who founds—e.g.—a College, or School, or Profes-
sorship, is always supposed to have in view, as his primary and essential
object, the benefit, not of the individual tutors, masters, &c., who may from
time to time be the immediate holders of the endowments, but of the public
who are to profit by their instructions. He is regarded as a benefactor to
the students , not (except incidentally) to the professors or other teachers.
And the same is the view which I think is the most fair, as well as the most
prudent, to take of the endowments of the Church. Let its claim of pro-
tection for those endowments be rested on their utility, and be set forth as a
claim (which in truth it is) on behalf of the people rather than of the Clergy.
With whatever sacred inviolability, distinct from this plea of usefulness, the
endowment of the Church may, in the judgment of any one, be invested, I
would only suggest—without entering into any discussion of questions under
that head—that the claim I have recommended to be put forward is the only
one that is likely to be urged with practical effect. If the Church endow-
ments be upheld, we may be assured it will have been from a conviction on
the part of the Legislature and the nation of their being needful for the
benefit of the congregations. Should this plea fail of effect, we may be
assured no other will avail.
NOTE C.
The following quotation from Mr. Tremenhere’s notes on public subjects,
made during a tour in the United States in the year 1851, is well
worthy of the attentive consideration of all who take an interest in the
question of Primary Education for the youth of this Colony. He says :
“ I took all the means in my power to ascertain what were the various
currents of opinion in the United States with respect to the actual effects
traceable upon morals, character, and religion, of the mode of religious teach-
ing in the public schools. On a question so delicate and difficult, and invol-
ving so much of political as well as other considerations, there will of course
be many and great differences of opinion. Many gentlemen of distinguished
ability, for the conscientiousness of whose convictions it is impossible not to
entertain the greatest respect, while by their personal character they inspire
the highest regard, informed me that they could discover nothing objection-
able in the principle, and could recognise no injurious consequences as trace-
able to the system in its mode of action. Others, equally estimable and
equally eminent, informed me that they looked upon it as “ a great expert-


ment,” of the ultimate results of which upon the religious character of the
people they confessed their apprehensions, hut that in the actual state of
public opinion they considered no other system possible. Other gentlemen
again, both lay and clerical, with equal opportunities of observation and
means of arriving at a right conclusion, spoke in the most distinct and
emphatic manner of the visible effect which, in their opinion, the small
amount of instruction in the distinctive doctrines of Christianity, and the lax
mode of teaching them in the Sunday-schools, were producing on the reli-
gious convictions and moral practice of the mass of the people.
“ Dr. Spears adverts to the abandonment by the clergy, with whom he
discussed the question, of their endeavours to found denominational
schools, on the ground that they were unable to see their way towards
obtaining the pecuniary means for them. I heard the most earnest desires
expressed by many clergy of the New England States, of the State of New
York, and of Pennsylvania, for the establishment of such schools, could the
means be found, for the sole reason that they were distinctly sensible of the
effects the present system was producing in loosening the hold of definite
Christian principles on the minds of the people. In an interview I had the
honour of having with the Bishop of Massachusetts, he stated that he should
undoubtedly prefer, in the interests of religion, parochial schools, but that,
under present circumstances, he considered them, except in a few instances,
unattainable. Some of the principal clergy of the Church of England in
New York are exerting themselves with some measure of success with that
object, and their views were expressed to me very strongly in the same sense.
The portion of the press devoted chiefly to religious matters has frequently
adverted to the same point; and at a recent public meeting, composed of
persons of all religious denominations, the apprehensions above described
were expressed, as resulting from the imperfect religious education of the
people. lam able to state on what I believe to be undoubted authority that
the Bishop of Pennsylvania (who was absent from Philadelphia dining my
stay there) is anxious, for the same reasons, for the establishment of similar
schools.
“ I might multiply the individual opinions of observant and calm-judging
men in various parts of the United States, who expressed themselves to me
to the same effect, but probably the experience of the gentleman who fur-
nished me with the following statement of his opinions will be sufficient, in
addition to what I have above stated, to show in how grave a light, and with
what apprehensions for the future, (apprehensions which have been publicly
expressed in terms far stronger than I have thought it necessary to repeat,)
the present experiment on so momentous a subject as the religious education
of the people is considered by large classes of persons in that country.
“ The Rev. Dr. Edson, Rector of St. Anne’s Church, Lowell, to whom I
was directed as thoroughly conversant with this subject, expressed himself to
me to the following effect :
“It was twenty-seven years last March since I first came to Lowell,
which was then a village of about six hundred inhabitants. Public worship


was then held for the first time in the village, and the service was performed by
myself. Lowell is now a town of about forty thousand inhabitants. I have
resided here as a Minister of the Episcopal Church ever since, and during the
whole time have taken an active part in Education as a member of the School
Committee, and otherwise. Seeing that the system of public schools estab-
lished by law was the only one possible under the circumstances of the
country, I have applied myself with all the zeal in my power to make it
efficient; and I have endeavoured to cause the deficiency of religious instruc-
tion in the day-schools to be supplied, by encouraging Sunday-schools to the
utmost of my opportunities. To the children of my own flock I have given
all the doctrinal instruction in my power in the Sunday-school, and by other
means. I have interested myself generally in favour of Sunday-schools,
seeing in them the only mode under our system to imprint on the minds of
those who most require such teaching, the principles of revealed religion.
My experience, however, of now nearly thirty years, as a pastor, has, I am
sorry to say, forced upon me the painful conviction that our public school
system has undermined already among our population, to a great extent, the
doctrines and principles of Christianity.”
NOTE D.
Extract from the Confessions of St. Augustine : chapter 26.
Yellem, si tunc ego essem Moyses, et mihi abs te Geneseos liber
scribendus injungeretur, talem mihi eloquendi facultatem dari, et eum
texendi sermonis modum, ut neque illi qui nondum queunt intelligere quem
ad modum Deus creat, tanquam excedentia vires suas dicta recusarent; et illi
qui hoc jam possunt, in quamlibet veram sententiam cogitando venissent
earn non prsetermissam in paucis verbis tui famuli reperirent; et si alius
aliam vidisset in luce veritatis, nec ipsa in eisdem verbis intelligenda deesset.
READING AND WELLBANK, PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
48




