

Bio
o x
c=.)
ittunra |ftoorc
gin ®ctritr glnstralicm S&U*rtJj*t
S. $♦ goyce




THOMAS MOORE
AN EARLY AUSTRALIAN WORTHY
Archdeacon F. B. BOYCE
It is over two generations since Thomas Moore died,
and I find that there is scarcely anything known of him
by men and women of to-day. A clergyman educated at
Moore College told me recently that the College was
named after Charles Moore, a former mayor of Sydney,
and after whom Moore Park was called. His life
has been a forgotten past, except to the smallest of
circles, and that has heard next to nothing of his
history. I have therefore endeavoured, with much
trouble, to dig up any particulars that I could find
and place them before the Church. They are but
scanty. He lived partly in the time when there were
no newspapers. When “The Sydney Gazette,”
Australia’s first journal, appeared, in 1803, it was not
so large as some of our little parish papers to-day,
and it was not until the twenties and thirties that
journalism expanded into fair proportions. Other
records were few. What I have found I now give,
hoping that the brief chronicle may do some justice to
an early Australian, and possibly be some inspiration
to others to humbly and bravely do their duty in the
time that God has given them.
Thomas Moore was born in 1762. In thinking of
him the mind has to revert to the early days of
colonization. We read of him as in 1796 the ship’s
carpenter of the Britannia , a little vessel of 276 tons.
It had come out from England to Sydney in 1791, and


arrived after a long and wearisome voyage of about
eight months. After the fair weather and foul, after
the many storms and tempests the ship must have
encountered, what a delight it must have been to those
on board to have rested in Sydney Cove. As the
little vessel, not so large as many of the present ferry
steamers, sailed up the harbour there must have been
not only rejoicings in its beauty, but the quiet satis-
faction among brave men at the safety after the perils
of the mighty deep. The Britannia did not then
return to England, but made voyages to nearer places
—the Cape, Batavia, and India—to purchase and
bring back food and other necessaries for the infant
colony.
SAVED FROM PIRATES
The seas were very lonely until some Eastern port
was neared. A notable instance of trouble was in
the Straits of Malacca, in one of the last of Moore’s
voyages. There the little vessel was attacked by
pirates, who engaged it for six hours. A vigorous
defence was made, in which, doubtless, he took his
full share, and the enemy was beaten off. I wish
that there were more particulars of this fight. In the
good providence of God the ship was saved. Had it
been taken with its crew, it is safe to say that there
would have been no Moore College, and St. Andrew’s
Cathedral would have missed its greatest benefactor.
The Straits were so effectively blocked by proas full
of armed men, and each proa mounted with a twelve
or nine-pounder, besides swivels on their
that the ship was obliged to relinquish her passage to
Calcutta and went instead to Batavia.
SETTLES IN SYDNEY
Soon after her return to Sydney, on i ith May, 1796,
from another voyage, we find that Moore resolves to
This short biography was first printed in the Sydney Diocesan Direc-
tory of 1913. It is now re-published with some small additions,


settle in the new land and leaves the vessel. An at-
tachment to Rachael Turner may have influenced him
in this decision.
It is well to remember here that he was one of
Australia’s earliest colonists. He was, therefore, one
of our pioneers, and a brave and hardy one and no
coward. No man who was unenterprising, no one
who loved ease and comfort, would ever have ven-
tured on so great a voyage to a new and almost un-
known country. He must have been deeply imbued
with the noblest instincts of the Anglo-Saxon race,
and of those of the British seaman in particular. Such
men may well be ranked as among the true makers of
Australia.
He married Rachael Turner on iith January, 1797.
The ceremony was performed by Rev. Richard John-
son, 8.A., our first clergyman. The record can be
seen in the Registrar-General’s office; but it does not
say where the ceremony took place, yet it was most
probably in the wattle and dab church, the first St.
Philip’s, that was burnt down in the following year,
and the service consequently doubtless read from the
Prayer Book used in that church and now carefully
treasured in a third and splendid St. Philip’s. No
doubt Moore and his wife were friendly with
Mr. Johnson in the small settlement, and were helped
by him in serious and holy thoughts.
Moore’s industry and reliability are soon recog-
nized, as on 2nd September, 1796, he is appointed by
Governor Hunter “ master boat builder.” Two years
later the honour comes of an appointment to the Vice-
Admiralty Court that had to adjudicate on the Harwell
mutiny. The Court, consisting principally of naval
officers, sat for several days before a verdict was
given. To have held such a position in the young
community is an emphatic testimony to his judgment
find high character, thus early acknowledged. He


had soon established a position as a worthy citizen of
prominence. On sth October, 1799, Governor Hunter
confirms a grant of land to him of 470 acres in the
district of “ Bulanaming,” a part of which lay between
Petersham and Cook’s River.
In the latter part of 1800 Rev. Richard Johnson, 8.A.,
returned to England, and Sydney was left without
any resident clergyman. Rev. Samuel Marsden
officiated from Parramatta. From Mr. Moore’s dis-
position we can think of him as taking a keen interest
in the changes that came. There was most probably
a warm-hearted farewell to Mr. Johnson.
THE COLONY OF HIS DAY
We may pause to picture him living in the twelve-
year-old Sydney of that time. In 1796 the white
population of the whole continent was only about
4,000, and four years later would not show a very big
difference. The population was about as large as
that of an average up-country town of to-day, where
all persons would know one another. The free
colonists were very few, and the prisoners were
many. The military would be in the ascendant. An
English mail would be rare. The shipping was so
small—there was none from the coast —that the
arrival of a vessel would be an event that would
cause excitement.
The isolation from the distant world was most
marked. There was no newspaper. It was bush,
bush all round the town, which then would almost
wholly lie scattered between what is now Circular
Quay and King Street. Brickfield Hill was a bush
track. There had been the one and only church—
that opened in 1793 —and burnt down five years later.
In this community Moore saw early Australian life in
a most interesting period, and we can think of him
as personally knowing and mixing with the men,
more or less famous, who dwelt in the Sydney of that


time. He might often have talked with Flinders, the
heroic navigator; he probably heard George Bass, in
whom we know that he later took a deep interest, tell
with his own lips how he bravely discovered in the
little boat Tom Thumb the straits that bear his name.
He must have known of attempts to find a way over
the Blue Mountains, and other difficulties of those
days. Collins and King and Grose and Balmain and
Macarthur and Johnson and Marsden and other
notables were probably among those with whom he
talked. In all the history that may be written the
names of these men will ever be surrounded with a
halo of friendly interest that will increase as time
passes on.
Alas, the moral state of the town was at the lowest.
Crime and profligacy with drunkenness were rampant.
Constantly things were done that must have deeply
grieved Moore and his wife and filled their souls with
righteous anger. Ido not know whether there was
ever an open protest on their part, or only the quiet
and telling example of an upright life. This, how-
ever, is certain, that in the moral chaos he played
some part to raise the country of his adoption to a
nobler plane.
PROGRESS
I did not find in the early accounts anything re-
corded against him unworthy of an honourable citizen.
I wish I could find out more as to his religious life and
convictions at this time. I have little doubt that
Johnson and Marsden helped to influence him aright.
Mrs. Moore was a loyal helpmeet. Family prayer was
regular in the Liverpool home, and thus a daily wit-
ness given to Christ and ITis Church and a daily
blessing asked. Who can tell how gracious and far-
reaching the answers have been.
In the first decade of the new century we have still
only occasional references to him. In 1805 we see


his name included in the roll of officers and super-
intendents on His Majesty’s civil establishment in the
colony. Another reference is through a long list of
necessary repairs to public buildings in the growing
colony, which he signs in 1806 with Mr. Richard
Rouse. In it the church is not forgotten, and those
were days when the State was ready to help her. It
says: “The Parsonage house wants new doors, win-
dow and fence, plastering, whitewashing, and tiling-
repaired.” As to the new church—St. Philip’s—in
Sydney, it says; “The wall at one end down; and the
tower; the roof only half up.” It says of the Church
of St. John’s, at Parramatta: “The church covered in,
but no pews or anything but a pulpit; tower not half
built, walls broke, and will require rebuilding.” This
report at least shows at that time Moore’s care for the
well-being and general interests of the church.
In the following year the returns show that he held
1,920 acres of land, mostly for pasture.
THE REBELLION AGAINST BLIGH
There were stirring times in the colony in January,
1808. The feeling against Governor Bligh was grow-
ing into anger and resentment, and his deposition
was regarded by many as a necessity. There was a
division of public opinion; but a large majority were
against Bligh. Which side did Moore take in what
was not a mere riot, but may be safely called the only
rebellion on Australian shores? I find him early in
the month signing with others a very temperate and
respectful letter to the Governor, asking that shipping
here might have the same privileges as those in Eng-
land, and that trial by jury might be instituted. Both
requests appear most reasonable. Trial by jury!
Does not the nature and spirit of the Englishman here
show itself? Certain doings of Bligh intervene. In-
dignation in the community rises higher. A day or
two before Anniversary Day Moore signs, with scores


of others, a memorial to Colonel Johnson imploring
him to depose Bligh. On the morning of the 26th
Johnson with his soldiers go to Government House
and arrest the Governor, and a new Government is
formed. Those were indeed exciting times. The
next day I find that Moore, with others, signed a letter
to Johnson approving of his action. That he took a
prominent part is evident, as Bligh, from on board the
man-of-war in which he had been placed and deported,
issued a notice including him with a few others who
must not be allowed to leave the colony. He hoped
for their punishment. But, of course, his power was
gone. Personally, my sympathies have always been
somewhat with Bligh, and I wish that there had been
more patience. He, though tactless, was one of the
bravest of men, having been thanked on one occasion,
directly after the battle of Copenhagen, by Lord Nelson
on the quarter deck. But one must readily admit that
so many leading men, including the military, would
never have risen into rebellion as they did without
some very weighty reasons.
The next mention of Moore is in May of the same
year. He is now a shipowner, but ships were very
small in those days. He sends his ship after the
Barrington , which the convicts ran away with, and he
is paid £496 for her hire and services rendered.
In October, 1809, he resigned to the Government
his post of Master Boat Builder, which he had held
for about thirteen years. One person described the
office as superintendent of the dockyard.
Governor Lachlan Macquarie arrived about the end
of 1809. Energetic, and with large ideas for the
advancement of the colony, he soon made his mark and
created a new order of things. Pie seems to have
early recognized the integrity and capacity of Moore,
whom he found in the front rank of the citizens.
On 17th May, 1810, he makes him a magistrate,
THOMAS MOORE


with authority specially to officiate at George’s River
and Liverpool. The office was very different to that
of Justice of Peace now, as he would frequently have
to sit on the bench and adjudicate. Two others were
made magistrates on the same day—Mr. D’Arcy
Wentworth, the father of the famous statesman, and
Mr. Simeon Lord, the progenitor of a well-known
family here. The public notice of the appointment
goes on to say: “ Those gentlemen are accordingly
to be respected and obeyed as magistrates from this
date.”
LIVERPOOL LIFE
In the same year a great change in his life comes by
his move to begin the town of Liverpool, proclaimed
a township by Macquarie on 15th December, 1810.
At this time no way over the Blue Mountains had
been discovered, as every attempt had failed. It was
not until three years later that Blaxland, Lawson,
Wentworth and Evans were successful. So the
colony was circumscribed in its known area. Mac-
quarie was anxious that men should push out into the
country to make the most of the land he had, and he
no doubt was a factor in influencing Moore to leave
Sydney and to go to what was then “up country” and
the bush, Moore before had interests in George’s
River, but now he goes to a further point, and a new
town is laid out on what then appeared a most favour-
able situation. Other settlers come, the blacks slowly
disappear.
Among the first things is the erection of a school
and master’s residence. It was a two-story building.
It would be a Church of England Denominational
School, and thus in it there would be the regular
teaching [of the Scripture, and it would be opened
every day with prayer. Moore played an active part
in the matter and his name is on the list of subscribers
to the cost. To the time of his death he took an


earnest interest in this school. He would frequently
visit it and help it by word and deed. One aged and
highly respected resident of the town still lives who
was a scholar, and has a kindly recollection of his often
coming to the school and showing a warm concern in
its doings. In 1839 the average attendance was 74.
The master was Mr. Thomas Wellard, and his wife
assisted as mistress.
The particulars preserved of his life at Liverpool
are very few. He was not, however, cut off alto-
gether from Sydney, 20 miles away. He took part in
several movements. A new court house is needed
there, and the Government, instead of doing all the
work, merely gave a subscription, leaving colonists to
do the rest privately. Moore subscribes £4.0, and
becomes one of a small committee chosen to carry out
the erection. The other members were men who
have left their mark on early Australia. Another
movement, in 1817, was the founding of a bank, “The
magistrates” attend the first meeting, so most probably
he was present. His name is in the original list of
shareholders. The bank was the Bank of New South
Wales. A further movement was the formation of an
auxiliary to the British and Foreign Bible Society,
also in 1817. He was among the first contributors.
Later, at the end of 1824, o*r early in 1825, he joined in
promoting the formation of an auxiliary to the Church
Missionary Society. Earlier we find him presiding
over a meeting in Sydney, held to forward missions
abroad. The sending of the good news of the Great
Redeemer’s work to the heathen world was evidently
very near his heart. To the end of his life the inter-
est was maintained. He would have known all lead-
ing particulars of Marsden’s seven voyages
to New Zealand, most probably have heard them from
his own lips, and the importance of all were doubtless
written in his mind. Yet he saw the many difficulties


and great needs of the church in its early struggles
and foundation in a new land like ours, and was ever
ready to render generous help.
In Liverpool he took an active part in promoting
the erection of St. Luke’s, one of the oldest churches
in the Commonwealth. It bears the date 1819, but
was opened later. He worshipped there and was a
trustee, etc. It still stands, substantial and true.
Rev. Robert Cartwright was its clergyman. Services
had been held previously in the school house.
The advancement of the town of Liverpool was
naturally an object dear to him, who was virtually its
founder. His patriotism shines out when he presides
there, as it happens to be recorded, at a dinner to
celebrate the anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo.
In other ways he showed a public spirit, and I have
little doubt was an example of good citizenship. He
regularly sat on the Bench in his magisterial capacity,
and we may believe that his sentences on prisoners
were always tempered with mercy.
An incidental reference to him is in the “Life of Mr.
G, W. Walker,” who, with a companion, visited the
Colony on behalf of the Society of Friends. I quote it
as indicative of the character of Mr. and Mrs. Moore
in the evening of their life. Walker writes on 13th
September, 1836, saying: “Went by coach to Liver-
pool, a town of some importance in New South Wales,
containing at that time 500 inhabitants. 9 mo. 16 —
We breakfasted with Thomas Moore and his wife, the
oldest inhabitants in Liverpool, having been the first
to locate themselves in what was a wilderness.
Thomas Moore is a magistrate, and an active promoter,
by his influence and example, of the welfare of the
community. After reading the Scriptures my com-
panion had some appropriate counsel to offer, under
the renewed feeling of gospel love, which was well
received.” . ... vi?..; W; A...


NOBLE GIFTS
I can only applaud gifts to charity, and the govern-
ment, by its ever increasing monetary help to the
poor, is following in the path of duty. But I venture
to think that gifts to the church are nobler, wiser and
more fruitful. Apart from its care for immortal souls,
its teaching helps in a vitally important way to form
character on right lines. It promotes honesty, thrift,
thoughtfulness and kindliness, and is the uncompro-
mising foe of intemperance and impurity. It leads to
all round steadiness. Persons so trained and of such
a character, and the church is ever influencing
thousands from childhood upwards in that direction,
are not of the class as a rule that needs charity.
They are self-reliant and saving. Is not prevention
better than cure ?
The year before his death he gave the St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, that was to be, a property in George Street,
Sydney. When the Rocks area was resumed by the
Government ,£20,000 compensation was paid for it to
the trustees. The interest is about £7BO a year, and
a most valuable addition to the Cathedral funds.
Generations in the future who attend and love the
Cathedral will bless the name of Thomas Moore for
his generous and splendid help.
He also gave to Bishop Broughton, for whom he
had a warm regard, 6,395 acres of land, the Moore
Bank Estate, having an extensive frontage to George’s
River, The rents and other income of 2,080 acres of
this, including a residence, were to be given to Bishop
Broughton and his successors towards their stipends.
The income from the rest was to be applied by the
Bishop in helping the stipends of clergymen who
needed assistance. The Moore Bank Estate is the
greatest of his benefactions.
HIS DEATH
Mrs. Moore died in 1838. A tablet to her memory


in St. Luke’s, Liverpool, says of her that. “She was a
most affectionate and virtuous wife, a tender mother,
and was kind to the poor. She was united to her
husband for 42 years, during which time she was a
constant attendant at the house of God, and a strict
observer of family prayer, and died in peace.”
No doubt the passing away of his faithful helpmate
was a sad and sore trouble for Mr. Moore. He was
aged and probably feeble. Yet he was not idle. As
to the church, in his last year, records show that he
was present at two meetings at least. He survived
his wife about two years. He died at his house
in Liverpool on 24th December, 1840, at the age
of 78,
He was buried in St. Luke’s Cemetery. Rev. John
Duffus officiated. There is no memorial to him in the
church, but the structure over the grave is massive.
The inscription strangely says that he died in 1841
instead of in 1840. A large oil painting of him, taken
in his later days, is at Moore College.
HIS WILL
In his will, saying: “Mindful of the uncertainty of
this mortal life,” he bequeathed his possessions to the
Church of England people of this country. They are
his heirs. It was a far-sighted, wise and generous
distribution of property, and could only tend to the
glory of God and the welfare of his fellows : and after
about three-quarters of a century his benefactions
remain, and his wishes are being carried out. How
safely and surely the church guards her trusts ?
The whole will stand as a great memorial to his
name.
He who gave in his life deemed it a sound principle
to give also at his death. In making a will is it not
right to remember that men are but stewards, and
that if it be well to give a tenth or more when in
health, the same rule should stand in dividing one’s


substance at the end. How changed for the better
would be the finances of the church if a fair proportion
of her sons did their duty by remembering her in their
wills ? Every case needs separate consideration.
But in some that 1 know it would have been far better
if children had not had great wealth left them, but had
been required to do some work rather than remain in
idleness. I knew one instance in which £520,000 was
left among six sons and daughters; the money was
the reverse of a blessing. The lives of most were
shortened by riotous living. Only one, a daughter,
retained her patrimony. What a great help it would
have been to the Home Mission Society, otherwise
known as the Church Society, if the odd £20,000 had
been left to it! The interest on the sum would all
through the years have been as a blessing in many
ways. I know that wives and children must be pro-
vided for, but often there is an excess, and Moore’s
example may well be borne in mind.
His will was proved in Court on 2nd February,
1841. The executors were Bishop Broughton, Alex-
ander Macleay, and Robert Campbell. Mr. Robert
Atkins has kindly given me particulars.
There was to be a College for youths of the “ Pro-
testant persuasion . . . according to the principles of
the United Church of England and Ireland.” His home
at Liverpool and some other property he devoted to
this object, and the Trustees, with the discretion
allowed them, founded Moore (Theological) College.
The endowment has been insufficient; bursaries for
students without means have been sadly needed,
buildings, and other help; but Mr. Moore’s money has
been a valuable foundation.
The will confirmed to the Church other property.
Portion of it was for the maintenance of the “Protestant
Bishops of Australia,” Bishop Broughton at the time
being Bishop of Australia, The income from thq


other portion under the will was to be given in four
equal shares :
(i) To the Australian Diocesan Committee of the
S.P.C.K, and S.P.G. This was the nucleus out of
which the Book Depot grew, which was carried on
for many years in Sydney. The income is now devoted
by the Committee to objects also within the scope of
the bequest.
(2) To help the stipends of clergymen recommended
by the Bishop. No one was to have from the fund
more than TlOO per annum, nor was any stipend to be
augmented to over ,£4OO, so long as there should be any
such clergyman enjoying a less salary than T4OO.
(3) To poor widows of clergymen selected by the
Bishop. Not more than TlOO a year to be given to
any one.
(4) To the relief of pious and necessitous persons,
holding communion with the Church of England, not
less than £lO nor more than £2O yearly.
I may add that all accounts are printed annually with
the Synod reports. As the years pass, the property
may increase in value, and thus no one can forecast
the value of the gifts. Yet with the growth of popula-
tion, with the millions that there will be, all will be
needed and will no doubt be wisely used, and, of
course, on his own lines. Indeed, it may be safely
said that Thomas Moore’s noble benefactions will be
an ever widening power for good in the ages to come.
CONCLUSION
The College called after him, removed to Sydney
in 1889, and which by his will he founded, has educated
and trained between 300 and 400 of our Australian
clergy and some of the very best. It was opened on
Ist March, 1856. Dean Cowper temporarily acted as
Principal, having three students, until the arrival of
the gentleman selected for the post, Rev. William
Hodgson, M.A., a very distinguished Cambridge man,


Mr. Hodgson abty presided over the destinies of the
College for eleven years. Bishop Barker paid a warm
tribute to Moore when, on 14th January, 1857, he laid
the foundation stone of the College buildings at
Liverpool, a few yards from where he had lived. The
Bishop said :
“. . . The design for the furtherance of which we
meet to-day has its origin in the provident munificence
of a man of our own communion. He had made much
in this country, and he set a noble example to others
in the disposal of it. He gave it back to this country
in various ways. He provided as he might for the
poor members of his own Church, for the widows of
the clergy, and for the clergy themselves. He gave a
house and lands for the Bishop’s future residence in
this neighbourhood, and he left a portion of his estate
on the condition that the house and proceeds should
be applied to the education of young men. ... I am
reminded of the obligations under which the diocese
is placed by the beneficence of the late Thomas Moore.
His is a notable instance of the advantage offered by
this country to those who have little but their own
good name and their own hands to rely on. He affords
an example also of the manner in which a timely gift
may confer the most important benefits upon the ages
to come. Generations will hereafter reap the advan-
tages of his bounty.”
So I close the record of an honourable and strenu-
ous life. He had done his duty as a Churchman and
a Citizen. He had witnessed for his Master, Christ, in
Australia’s darkest times. He had proved his Christian
character. His name, his fine example, should ever be
lovingly remembered.
St. Paul’s Rectory, Sydney
January , igi4
ROWELL AND RONS, LONpOfl


