

INSPIRATION NOT THE GROUND.
OF OUR FAITH.
A. SERMON
Preached at the Congregational Church , Davey Street, on Sunday
Evening, the 30th August, 1883 ,
BY THE
bev. geo. clabke.
Tasmania.
Hobart: J. Walch & Sons. Launceston: Walch Bros. & BirchalL
[Price, Sixpence.]




INSPIRATION NOT THE GROUND,
OF ODR FAITH.
A BEEMOU
Preached at the Congregational Church, Davey Street, on Sunday
Evening, the 30th August, 1885,
BY THE
IRIEV. GKEO- GLABKE.
Tasmania.
Hobart: J. Walch & Sons. Launceston: Walch Bros. & Birchall
[Price, Sixpence .]




INSPIRATION.
h^SS/fSsio
S 5 77
“Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.”
2 Feter I. 2i.
The text is somewhat differently rendered in the Revised
Version, though with the same substantial meaning. There we
read :—“ For no prophecy ever came by the will of man, but
men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Ghost.”
There has lately been a disputation among us on the subject
of Inspiration, upon which I have no desire to comment, except
to say that I suppose no serious and sensible man, to whichever
side he may lean, can look at it with much satisfaction. It is
surely a wild notion that in half an hour and twenty minutes of
subsequent rejoinder, in such circumstances, with an audience
for the most part untrained in the very elements of critical dis-
cussion, and by so confused and summary a process,—that in
half an hour, I say, a theory of Inspiration can be stated and
defended, its grounds set forth and established, its range defined,
and the objections to it anticipated and neutralised. I cannot
enter into the mind of any man who fancies that that is the
way to serve the interests of truth, on whichever side the truth
may lie. However, in what I have to submit to you to-night, I
shall let that disputation and the wisdom of it alone, and I
speak of Inspiration simply because the fact of its having been
discussed has provoked a certain interest in the subject, and
made it the topic of conversation beyond the circle of attendants
at the meeting on Tuesday night.
Let me, at the outset, very distinctly state my object. There
is something that I shall have to repudiate, but it is not my
aim now to prove or disprove any conclusion. I want rather to
put before you the considerations that must determine any con-
clusion, the things that have to be taken into account, and
duly weighed, before any rational conviction on the subject is
possible. It is of the lines of thought along which we must
travel, and not of the end to which they may lead, that I wish
to speak. I want to lay down principles, not to work out their
result.


You will find no more definite statement of Inspiration in the
Bible than this : “ Men spake from God, being moved by the
Holy Ghost.” There is no laying down here of the reach and
limits of Inspiration, no measure of its effects, and no explanation
at all of the manner and mystery of its working. Something is
said of certain men, namely, that they were moved to speak by
a Divine Impulse or Agent. We need not affect to be wise in
our speculations about this mystery above what is written. We
are not required to have a philosophy of it. We are not obliged
to say, at the demand of infidelity, how far Inspiration goes,
and where it stops, and within what limits it must be confined,
though I think it had its limitations. If in any sense or measure
it can be said of the men who wrote the Scriptures, that they
“ spake from God, being moved by the Holy Ghost,” that is
enough. It at once lifts their writings to a place in our rever-
ence that sets them apart from all other writings, and it invests
them with an authority, as far as religion is concerned, that is
sufficient for life and godliness. We are not called to determine
the how or the how much of Divine impulse and Providential
guidance there was in the writers of the Bible, before we accept
the fact that such impulse and guidance was really given to
them as was sufficient for the Divine purpose.
Now, from the nature of the case, we cannot come to a
rational conclusion about the Divine Inspiration of any set
of men through the mere exercise of the intellect. It is an
investigation that involves moral considerations, of which the
moral sense alone can judge, The conscience has a very potent
voice in deciding the matter. There must be moral earnest-
ness, moral candour, moral sensibility, and moral insight, as
well as clear thinking, if we are to get at spiritual truth of any
kind, and most assuredly at the truth of such a complex ques-
tion as this. Without earnestness, sincerity, and reverence, all
error is possible to a man in religious things, let him have
whatever intellectual accomplishments he may ; and without
this fundamental possession there is no depth of folly or false-
hood into which he may not fall. There is no way of guarding
the clearest truth of morality and religion from misconception
and abuse by a dishonest or even a frivolous heart. If people
like to dress up a caricature of Christianity they can. The


Bible is naked and defenceless against ridicule, if anyone
chooses to pervert it, and mock at it. We cannot dispense with
this requirement of moral sensibility in any matter of religious
judgment, and least of all in the combination of judgments
which the study of Inspiration as an argument involves. If we
would come to it with any honest purpose, we must come with
a love of truth and goodness indefinitely great, with a humble
readiness to yield our reverence to anything that may give sign,
or promise, or proof of the Divine, yea, with such a magnetic
attraction towards truth and goodness as shall help us, almost
instinctively, to recognise these qualities wherever they are
presented to us. The conditions of the investigation are moral,
as w r ell as intellectual, and moral even more than intellectual.
I go on to say that any theory of the Inspiration of the Bible
that is the least worthy of consideration must be a final
inference, and not a first assumption. Its proper place is at
the end, and not at the beginning of the argument. It must be
squared with ascertainable facts, and not compel the facts to be
squared with it. Inspiration is not a preliminary subject at all.
It is not a basal question. It is not properly an outside
question. If it is anything it is not the portal of the
temple, but what we learn when we have passed
within. It is, so to speak, a family question, and such as can
only be discussed by those who are already agreed about cer-
tain matters of fact. Before these are determined it is not of
the least avail as a weapon against infidelity. If, for instance,
you cannot convince a man on other grounds that the Gospel is
not a fancy picture, but a real portrait of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and that its report of what He said and did is true, can any-
thing be more irrelevant and absurd than to try and dispose of
his objections by dogmatically telling him that his exploded
Gospel is inspired ? There must be some common ground for
both sides to make an argument possible, and some premises
admitted. Otherwise it is as if war were declared between the
dogs and the sharks. The disputants cannot get at one
another. There is no common element in which they
can fight out their quarrel. This putting of Inspiration in
the forefront of evidence, and when as yet nothing has been de-
termined about the record, simply as a record of facts, is a kind


of inversion of the whole question that only serves to muddle
the controversy from beginning to end, and reduces it to a
wrangle out of which no conclusion is possible. There are
many things that, as matters of argument, must be settled before
you can discuss the Divine authority of the Scriptures. For
instance, What is Scripture ? It may be some, or it may be all
of the accepted books. The Bible, as you know, is not one
book, but a collection of books, the first of which is separated
from the last by fifteen hundred years. The collection of the
Old Testament writings into a single volume cannot be put
earlier than some two centuries before the Christian era, and it
was probably not settled and completed before the time of
Christ, while the collection of the New Testament documents
was as late as say a hundred and fifty years after they were
composed. The collection, or canon, or rule of what is to be
accounted sacred, was in both cases a result very slowly reached,
and in regard to some books, not without great hesitation. Now,
consider that the Bible does not itself tell us how many books we
are to receive as Holy Scripture. The Scriptures do not even
recognise their own existence as a whole. The Old Testament
makes no mention of itself as a whole. The New Testament makes
no mention of itself as Scripture at all, either as a whole or in part.
It is useless to talk about the Inspiration of the Bible until you
have settled what is the Bible. If you tell me that Ecclesiastes and
the Song of Solomon have no right to their place within these
covers, it affects them, but it does not touch the rest of the
sacred books, only it should be understood that they are to be
left out of the argument. You have to ascertain the genuine-
ness and authenticity of each book, its transmission, its design
and meaning, its character, its claims, and so forth. So far as
argument about Inspiration is concerned these questions must
be disposed of first. To whichever side of the controversy
we may be predisposed, we gain nothing by making
the logic of our belief stand on its head. The difference is
wide asunder as the poles between our saying—the Scriptures are
inspired and therefore they are true, and saying—the Scriptures
are true and therefore they are inspired.
So far then we have looked at two of the conditions that bear
upon the right conduct of any enquiry about the claims of


Inspiration. The moral nature must have full play in the
process, and the facts must be ascertained before you infer your
theory about them, and not the theory assumed before you
know the facts. A third and very essential point is that we
should understand the structure of the Bible, and keep clearly
and steadily before us the progressive character of its revelations.
It claims to be the disclosure of a process. It is not the
record of one Divine revelation given to men once and for all,
but a series of revelations, increasing from age to age in their
fulness. It is not merely God’s word to man, but even more,
it is man’s word to God. It does not represent the Divine as
standing alone, but always as mingling with the human. It
shows us the leaven in its working. It is emphatically a mirror
of God in history. It is a revelation of man as well as a
revelation of God. If God had only spoken to us from heaven
we should have had one thing, we should have had the Divine
thought. But we want another thing; we want the Divine thought
in contact with humanity, to see how it acts, and manifests itself
there. Without both these elements we should have had a
Hebrew Koran and no more. So the Bible professes to show us
the thought of God and the experience of man blended together,
and it is this combination that marks off the structure of the Bible
from that of all other sacred books, and that makes it an appeal
of permanent interest and living power. It begins with a word
fitted to humanity in its moral infancy, and the answer of moral
infancy to that word. It tells of a growing word to the growing
child, and how the child responded. It is a fuller word to the
youth and manhood than to the infancy of the race, and at
each successive stage there is a stronger grasp of the word than
before. To ignore this progressive unfolding is to expose the
Bible along the whole line to fatal assault. The Scriptures
are the record of a growth, and it is the growth they testify that
we are to try and understand. You can study a mechanism by
merely taking it to pieces, but you can study an organism only
by watching its development from the simplicity of the germ to
the final complexity of the finished structure. The race of man
is an educated race. Instruction of any kind must be fitted
to the capacity of the learner. You have to accommodate both
the matter and the manner of your teaching to a child’s


immaturity, or you cannot really teach .him at all. Collective
humanity has also its stage of infancy, and youth, and manhood.
In many respects the early generations of our race were infantile
men. They could only at first take in truth in its simplest
rudiments. It had to be accommodated to the crudeness of
their understanding, and the inexperience of their spiritual
faculty. Unless the light had been adjusted to their power of
seeing it would have blinded them altogether. More light was
given as the eyes of men were better able to bear it, and the
Scriptures represent the Divine communications as having been
given gradually, and in successive portions, until they reached
their fulness in the manifestation of the Lord Jesus Christ.
tTe scheme of God’s way was so projected as to train man from
small beginnings, and on an ascending scale of truth and duty,
and such a plan is in harmony with His ways elsewhere,
wherever we can trace them. All things, not only in the
education of the race, and of the individual, but in the
evolution of every living thing, nay, in the very structure of
the world we inhabit, have advanced in the same gradual
way. It is so with science and art, civilisation and government,
general intelligence and morality. The communication of
the knowledge of God to man was, of necessity, relative and
progressive. It could not but be imperfect through all the in-
termediate stages between the first and the last. It is only the
last term in a series that is perfect. It has never been for
any age absolute truth and absolute right. It must have been
graded to the capacity of each succeeding time, or it would
have subverted human faculty. The generation of the Exodus
could not possibly have understood the teaching of Isaiah, and
the contemporaries of David could have made nothing of the
Gospel of St. John. And if there was this progress in the com-
munication of doctrine, it could not have been otherwise with
the requirement of duty. To disregard the relation of require-
ment to knowledge would have been essentially unjust. No
doubt things in the olden time were permitted to pass unre-
buked that would be for us altogether wrong. We cannot take
the morality of the Hebrew monarchy, for instance, as the
standard of Christian duty, nor is it right or reasonable for us to
apply to those ancient men the principles that we have only


learned from Jesus Christ. If we do, we must condemn them
all through, and our judgment is unrighteous judgment. The
date of any permission, or precept, or example given to us in
the older Bible, its place as a term in the series, and the state
of knowledge at the time, are very important considerations in
our judgment, if we are to judge with any kind of fairness.
Again, I say, God’s revelation has never been absolute, but
always relative. Defective truth and defective morality in its
earlier stages are involved in the progressive training of the
race. Man-like conceptions of God, in speech, feeling, and
action, that we can no longer tolerate, are quite appropriate to
the earlier stages of the discipline of humanity; and to treat the
Bible as if it were one dead level of communication, as if it had
no perspective, or as if it were a statute book that might have
been given all at once, ignoring its progressive character, and
making the defects of preceding stages an argument against In-
spiration in its writers, is simply to betray radical ignorance of
what the Bible is, God’s process of educating our race has been
by giving us the knowledge of Himself bit by bit, on an as-
cending scale of doctrine and duty, and that must govern our
conception of what the Bible is, and our judgment of what is
fitting or not to any claim of Divine Inspiration in the writers.
Leaving now this progressive, gradual, and adaptive
character of God’s revelations as they are recorded in the
Bible, I pass to another question that is not less vital to
the argument. I ask you to put it as sharply as you
can before you. With what kind of truth is Inspiration con-
cerned ? We know that it is concerned with moral and
religious truth, and with the progressive unfolding of moral and
religious truth, but as a Divine impulse and Providential
guidance, acting on the souls of men, we do not know that it
concerned itself with every other kind of truth. Consider who
or what is strictly the subject of Inspiration, or, as I have called
it, of Divine impulse and Providential guidance. We often in
our common speech transfer to effects what really belongs to
their causes, and as popular speech, with no perceptible harm or
confusion. I speak of a book, for instance, as intelligent or
stupid, lively or dull, tame or passionate, prosy or eloquent,
just or unjust, humane or cruel, and so forth. But is it really


the book that thinks, and knows, and feels, and uses moral
judgment, and is the subject of moral sentiments ? No. We
know that such qualities belong really to the writer of the book,
and that in the book we only see the signs of his thought and
feeling reflected in his work. So it is with Inspiration. If we are to
be strict and accurate in our language we must ask, not, Is the
Bible inspired ? but,Were the men who wrote the Bible inspired ?
The Bible is the product of Inspiration. The proper subject of
Inspiration is the mind of the writers. Inspiration is God’s move-
ment on the living soul. It has its seat in a person and not in a
thing. It is holy Men who spake as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. Was that being “ moved” the sway of moral and
providential impulse, or the coercion of crushing and all-subduing
force ? Are we to take the Bible as the result of free and
spiritual motive power, or, as the result of mere mechanical
dictation ? Was the inspired man no more in the hand of God
than the pen is in my hand, or, what is almost as mechanical,
the amanuensis who writes on a sheet of paper the exact words,
neither more nor less, that I tell him to write ? Did it allow
the sacred writer no choice of his own, no range of liberty, but
supersede all personal will by the pressure of some Divine
coercion ? That Inspiration meant rigid dictation is very nearly
the theory that Calvin formulated for the first time fourteen
centuries after the New Testament was written. It was part of
his philosophy of the Divine will which made it sheer, sovereign,
irresistible power. It was Calvin who set up a theory of
mechanical infallibility for the Bible, as against the infallibility
that Roman Catholics claimed for the Church, and his concep-
tion, disavowed in words, still lingers loosely and almost uncon-
sciously, in the thoughts of some Christians to this day. Now
the importance of clearing up this point is immense. If, on
all subjects, the literal accuracy of every sentence in the Bible,
from Genesis to Revelation, is to be insisted on, and the truth
of that theory, and the truth of Christianity are to stand or fall
together, I do not hesitate for a moment to tell you that, as
matter of argument, you cannot keep your Christianity.
If you insist upon it that to be inspired means to be
absolutely infallible, I ask infallible in what ? Is it in moral
and religious truth ? or is it also in scientific truth,


circumstantial truth, grammatical truth, philosophical truth, truth
in geography, geology, zoology, in dates, numbers, names,
genealogies,—in truth, in short, of every kind ? Is it scientific
truth to talk of the sun rising and setting, of the sun, moon, and
stars being ministering lights to our little planet, of the earth
with its pillars and foundation, of the hare chewing the cud, and
the bat being a species of bird ? Is it circumstantial accuracy
in all the Gospels to report the title on the Saviour’s cross, and
yet for each to give it differently ? To say nothing of inciden-
tal variations, were they always mechanically exact in their
reproduction of the very words that our Lord used in His
discourses ? Is there infallibility in translations of the Bible, or
in its text ? Did not our Lord and His Apostles habitually
quote as Scripture the Greek version of the Septuagint which
is a looser translation of the Hebrew Scriptures than any that
we should tolerate in these days ? Do those who talk about
infallible accuracy know anything about various readings ? If
we must be certified by such mechanical accuracy that we
have an inspired word, either in the Old Testament or the New,
what are we to make of the oral Gospel, which was the only
Gospel of all the Churches to the last years of the Apostolic age?
Such a Gospel could never have had the verbal accuracy that
can only be secured by written documents. It is, under the
guise of reverence, a most presumptuous and rationalistic theory.
How dare any man say in effect: “ I will not take the Bible as
the gift of God and the expression of His will unless I am
guaranteed by God himself against mistakes, even in things of
circumstance, that have nothing to do with religion. I will
not drink of the water of life if it holds any earthy particles in
solution. I will have no heavenly treasure, or acknowledge it
to be heavenly treasure, if you proffer it to me in earthen
vessels.” Can anything be more contemptuous, or ungrateful,
or conceited ? As argument it is not honest. Facts are
against it on every page, and you can take up no position
more fatal to the interests of Christianity. It is to place it at
the mercy of arty vulgar unbeliever, and, on such premises,
the wayfaring man, though a fool, can make very short work of all
your Scriptures. No assumption can be more suicidal to the
advocacy of their Divine authority. Some of you may remember


that a few months ago I made reference to a remarkable
pamphlet, published by the Christian Evidence Committee of
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. It is an
address to the workmen of Bristol, by the Rev. J. M. Wilson,
head master of Clifton College, and it has on the face of it this
startling title : —“ The Theory of Inspiration ; or, Why men do
not believe in the Bible.” The title, however, is as true as it is
startling. The theory of mechanical Inspiration, which we are
supposed to hold, is the reason why thousand of honest men do
not believe the Bible. They could not with such a postulate
be honest and examine the Bible, and believe the Bible; and to
this day it is one of the greatest stumbling blocks that a false
defence of the Holy Scriptures ever put in the path of men.
Hear how Mr. Wilson puts it. Pie makes two quotations, and
this is the first: —“ The purely organic (that is mechanical)
theory of Inspiration rests on no Scriptural authority, and, if we
except a few ambiguous metaphors, is supported by no historical
testimony. It is at variance with the whole form and fashion of
the Bible, and is destructive to all that is holiest in man and
highest in religion.” These are the words of one writer.. Now
I will read you the words of another: “It will not do to say
that the Bible is not verbally inspired. If the words are not
inspired, what is?”
“Now, who are these writers ? Who is this Secularist who thus
denies the verbal Inspiration of the Bible ? He is the greatest
living authority on the history of the Bible, the Professor of
Divinity at Cambridge, Canon Westcott, whose textbooks are
used by all candidates for the ministry in our Church, and are
almost universally studied by Non-conformists; one, I need
hardly say, who holds the Inspiration of Scripture not less
tenaciously than I do. And who is this theologian, this cham-
pion of the faith, who so stoutly asserts verbal inspiration as the
theory held by Christians ? He is the well-known Secularist
writer of America whose works are diligently circulated among
some of you, Colonel Robert Ingersoll. But I ask what right
has he to put into the mouths of Christians a definition of In-
spiration which is so utterly unsubstantiated by Scripture, by
historical testimony, repudiated by the greatest living theolo-
gians, and by the vast majority, if not the whole, of the
educated Christian ministers in the world ? ”


Igo heartily with what Mr. Wilson afterwards says ; —“ Do
you ask me, Can I then become a Christian without having
first believed in the Divinely guaranteed accuracy of the Bible?”
A thousand times I answer Yes. . . . You may become a
Christian, most men do become Christians, from finding in the
life, and sayings, and death of Jesus Christ something that
touches them, something that finds them, something that is a
revelation of Divine love to the human heart. Men find that
there is something in them, dear and precious to God. And
then love springs up in them, and a new life begins. They
look out on the world with larger and more loving eyes. They
see God in their brethren, God in nature, and God in their
Bibles. In their Bibles they read of the Christ whom they love.
Those pages are filled with power that moves the soul ; never
man spake as this man, never book spake as this book. And
this, and this only, is the theory of Inspiration that Christians
must needs possess
Finally, I hope you understand that I have not been trying
to prove the Inspiration of the Bible, but to lay down principles
that must govern all right consideration of the subject. I have
tried to show you, ist, that it is a process of enquiry that
demands the exercise of our moral sensibilities quite as much
as any clearness of the logical understanding ; 2nd, that no
theory is worth regarding that seeks to square the facts to its
assumption, but must be inferred from an honest and a patient
examination of the facts before us. Inspiration is the end and
not the beginning of the argument; 3rd, I have insisted upon
the human as well as the Divine elements of the Bible, and
upon their interworking, and mutually responsive action, upon
keeping clearly and steadily before us the progressive character
of the series of revelations which it records, observing that from
the necessity of the case the communication of Divine truth
could only keep pace with man’s capacity to receive it, and
that, as justice demands, the requirement of duty was always
measured by the advance of knowledge ; 4th, and lastly, I have
tried to impress upon you the fatal argumentative consequences
of identifying Inspiration with any theory of guaranteed mechani-
cal infallibility through the whole range of objects which
the Bible touches. I think that these principles are of great


importance, and that, acting upon them, you may by God’s
blessing be kept out of many confusions that after all are
the most prolific source of modern scepticism. It is at the end
and not at the beginning of our enquiry that we are landed on
the full conviction of the text, that of old there were holy men
of God who “ spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,”
Printed at “ The Mercury ” Office , Macquarie-sireet, Hobart.




