

td o
THE WORLD-RENOWNED ITALIAN HERO,
The mighty Warrior, the champion of Freedom, the terror of the tyrant, the man of indomitable and urn-
quenchable courage, the lion~hearted Patriot, the imperishable example to all the nations of the earth , at the
sound of whose magic name of dauntless daring (with a mere handful of Italian Volunteers), amid a whirlwind of
swarming French and Austrian troops, gained a whole series of magnificent and brilliant victories, and received
more honors in his life-time than any crowned head before him. To GARIBALDI— the friend of the human
race _l aure ls and flowers, but no tears. To the man who won a kingdom, refused untold wealth and position,
and under a death warrant took the field and delivered Italy, when weltering in ignorance, crime, and infamous
corruption the world has ever known—no tears. “May Australia’s children never understand the horrors of
foreign or home despotism, and may the record of the man we mourn make of them so many heroes or martyrs
when Freedom is at stake.” -
SO WRITE THE CHILDREN OF ITALY*
GARIBALDI— the poor fisherman’s son—at 21, the mate of a small brig; at 30, a cattle-drover in South
America; at 45, a candle-maker in a back street in New York; at 52, a poor farmer on the little rock at Caprera.
His name, his virtues, can never die 1 Let time alone unfold the glorious results of General Guiseppe Garibaldi’s
grand achievements. “He was a man, so good, so great, that take him for all in all, we may never look on his
like again.”
Oh ! there’s a name which thrills each heart
With fierce and quenchless fire,
Which rouses in our Saxon breasts
The spirit of our sires.
The men who raised their banners high,
All glorious and grand,
And sternly smote the dastard foes
Of Freedom’s mother land !
The old blood leaps in ev’ry vein,
All flush’d with joy’s rich wine,
As we around the hero’s name
The hearts’ love laurels twine.
For came he not when nations sobb’d
In darkness and in shame,
When thoughts of vengeance, deep and dire,
Burn’d in the heart like flame ?
One blow, and lo ! the tears were gone,
While hands were clench’d for strife,
As Freedom gripp’d her deadliest foes,
In struggle for dear life,
God’s sun went down ’mid blood red mists
Of passion, hate, and scorn,
To rise in all the golden light
Of Freedom’s cloudless morn.
For years and years the world had deemed
These men were soulless slaves,
That dared to stand with blushless checks
By their forefathers’ graves !
We deem’d they knelt, and cring’d, and fawn’d
On those whose ruthless hand
Had scourg’d, and chain’d, and trampled down
The Caesar’s fallen land.
But now, we grasp their sunburnt palms
With sturdy Saxon pride,
As with the Roman soul of old,
They stand by Freedom’s side.
Oh ! how our souls with rapture thrill’d.
How fl ushed our eyes with light,
As Freedom march’d with giant strides
From darkness into light.
There was no heart so poor, or low,
But glow’d with glory then,
To see the creatures stand erect—
No longer slaves, but — Men .1
We held our breath ’twixt hope and fear
Lest wrong should victor be ;
But, oh ! how swift we upward sprang
When Italy was free !
We laughed for very joy, and sang
On Freedom’s sunniest bough,
And wove rich garlands of our love,
To wreath around the brow
Of him, the darling of our hearts,
Who led his legions on,
And woke anew the olden dreams
Of each Italian sou.
For ages shall that hero’s name,
Dear Freedom’s watchword be—
The glory of the true and brave,
The land mark of the Free !


Mr. William Denton, the celebrated lecturer, com-
menced hie course of popular scientific lectures,
entitled, “ The Story of the Earth,” in the Town Hall,
last night, before an excellent audience, the front seats
being so largely attended that many had to sit on the
steps of the platform. Mr. Denton is a gentleman of
some 50 years of age, and his voice betrays his
nationality ; Boston, Massachusetts, owning him for a
citizen. Without any very striking originality or
oratorical power, he yet, by an earnest and impressive
manner, aided by the use of graphic and simple
language, to the exclusion, as far as possible, of scien-
tific terminology, arrests and holds the attention of his
listeners.
The title of the lecture delivered las.t night was
“ The fiery beginning o|jour planet.” ‘ lecturer, on
making his appearance, met with a : u greeting.
The world we inhabit, though to us r.n immensity
scarcely to be conceived in onß.thoughts, is yet but an
atom, scarcely visible when the vastness of the great
universe is taken into consideration. Still within our
planet is gathered many objects of the greatest in-
terest. After summarising the principal physical
features of the earth’s surface, he said that for
the story of the world’s progression to its present
state we must look to the rocks. First, we
must consider the action of the water upon
its various component parts. He had never been in a
city in which the people were better situated for pur-
suing the study of geology than Hobart. Here the
alternation of the rocks, the various stratas that com-
pose the crust of the earth, could readily be seen.
Here could be seen rocks which had been belched out
of the hot interior of the earth, remains of immense
lava flows, which at a comparatively recent period had
poured out of the craters of volcanoes which have now
disappeared, or immense crevices in the underlying
rocks, which'in olden times had allowed the hot fluid
to come bubbling out from the fiery interior of the
earth. In Northern America there was a district,
which for 300,000 square miles was covered with a bed
of lava. Even in Victoria there were 12,000 square
miles underlaid by volcanic rock and lava. Explain-
ing the characteristic features of water-formed and
fire-formed rocks, and their difference in appear-
ance, he remarked that he had always found granite to
be the highest rock ; all the great European and
Asiatic mountain chains had as their highest rock
granite. When they found a crystalline rock like
granite they might know that it had been formed by
the action of fire, and was not like that formed by
water, interlaid with sedimentary deposits, but was a
hard, brittle mass. Granite, or a rock closely allied to
it, formed the base of the crust of the earth, and the
foundation on which the other rocks were laid by the
water. In proof of his assertion that the heat increased
as the centre of the earth was approached, he referred
to a case which illustrated his meaning. In a district in
Siberia, where the “air hit shrewdly.” and the ground
was frozen, a merchant sunk a well to the depth of
90ft., and found the temperature much higher than
above. The shaft was sunk deeper, and the tempera-
ture increased in warmth till it was many degrees
higher at the bottom of the shaft than on the surface,
and this in ground frozen down to a depth of 500 ft.
He gave an interesting account of a visit he had paid
to the Savage mines on the celebrated Comstock lode.
He went down the shaft till the heat became oppres-
sive ; then there was a rest, and he saw a number of
men stripped to their waists and perspiring. He asked
The reply was. “ Oh,
e tools
<4 rool n q intervals they went ud to
, 6 them fr T m \
drink M i i ’ and } he y had iced water to
H ?! “fural artesian wel'“" W h L'th^nl a k
11 the b K.hu b, atT Q %imre h ?he d skin rfl hVlT 11 A
■e reaching down Ho the 1 1m tJn-
o crevices the vvaters traffied a'nd thThLr Int ° these
11 fire had driven it bac !’» the bubbling mass of
t vapour. At Salt Lake City htThad Water and
brought into exiatence in such a wav a g< ? Ser
t and volcanoes were evidences of kach springs
noes were from SO t’n if at T' s °. f s «me extinct volca-'
bL"kSk; ,*
semibed’’ AState™ l ? ‘‘ i ‘ tht ’ mo,t ß™Pffi£Bydel
! someoTihe^r'ii W f gmn ’ and after describing
fTi * • , freatest volcanoe.qm the world an account
of the terrible earthquake of Lisbon in 1669 was Sven
travelling at the rate of 20 miles a minntVjf Ti f
one-twelfth of the planet, and destroyed 60 000 men"
women, and children in a few minutes. 7 In Aiders the
. aEE£/ el \i B c i! y ft man ° y^ ba!
blood red ; ,t S, “ Ireland ’lhT'eef ta “' d
rolled into the market place"; 1. d£ Ih VVee, Indie™
the safeguard of the 1/
me to be from metals. Vapours were cast off which
if they did not find an exit by these crevices’T the
earth’s crust, would gather together and w ffh
a mighty force, _ shatter the world into a million
atoms. In closing his lecture, Mr. Denton e-
pressed his desire to see young people present
at h.s lectures, as he thought there could not be a
better thing tnan to early inculcate a love of natural
o C o I nTd C^bl^,“k“ intl •• “ ed « d J <i» «"l they
could to help the young people in the direction of
acquiring good and useful knowledge, as there were
traps and snares laid for them in eVery fooTof tl e
ground they walked upon. J tue
described by‘Z llw°V hydr ° g ” lish ‘- “ d
10-night, the subject of the lecture will be, “The
Australia!” 1 " 6 llfS ’ a “ d the ° Cean that once covei 'eti
■■ LUO ItiOl Ud J Ui 5
1888, will long be remembered
TEE GAZETTE. fit** pawa. Early in thfe morning
I . . ——• 7 /o£/ e J es were opened and upturned
Appointments Mr. A. H. Boyd to be deputy- wards to guage the weather, and
registrar of births, deaths, and marriages, and of morn being considered “ fair”
deputy clerk of the peace for Emu Bay, stipendiary adults as well as juveniles w
ate , at , Burnie > vlsl t in g magistrate at Wynyard running about <‘fixino’up” for
a P d Waratah, commissioner of court of requests ,r OOC i outino- Sbmtlv ~f+o r Q
at Wynyard, and registrar of general sessions at Sfntpipl? , y dfte * d
Burnie ; Mr. A. K. Chapman to be resident stipen- rt eU H S assembled near the C
diary magistrate at Branxholm, visiting magistrate t l| land g ate > where vehicles of a
at Scottsdale, Moorina, and Ringarooma, and com- . uesigns, mustered to*
missionerof court of requests at Scottsdale; Mr. their freights. A large number of
A. E. Anderson to be bailiff of the court of general; were also in saddle. The nun
sessions at Sorell, invited guests were augmente
I, 7 he following persons have been appointed col- Kaikora, Hampden, Ongaiiaea a
lectors under the Census Act : —Eor East Devon— pukuraUv—Aboift ift o’clock tin
James Noyes (being in addition to those previously cavalcade was set in rncfmn
appointed). For Morven-Josh. Stanley, Robert m Sal mT(I W w?
Crawford, Richard Marshall, Robert Saunders, r nfuL W !' Wilhamsor
George Hnxtable. For Deloraine-John Robert ‘ f Pf Wa , Dlstnct
Hart, James Cameron, James Abey, Robert , P a , sln o thiough the town, vo
Poole, Joshua Higgs, Henry L. J. Edgecombe, Job c “ eenn g greeted the procession,
Hunter, Patrick Lane, Alfred Peart, Robert wllole arra y dashpd along the ma
George Horne, Daniel D. Griffin, Leslie Lawton f° the sylvan retreat, the cascade
Horne. For Richmond—Frederick Green, John foot of the Manganoaka Bridgt
Laurence, George A. Stokell, Charles Griffiths, 8 miles from Waipawa. Upon
John Griffith. For Wellington—Denis Normoyle, 1 it was found the camp consisted
Thomas lam, Charles J. McKenzie, Arthur Col- 27 conveyances and a large nui
horn, Stuart J. Anderson, S. B. Emmett, C. P. saddle:horses. .Tim liifffi JL* u.
Emmett, A. TatW, 17 Gmbb. W. R,! *
T. Coram, Arthur T. „„„•lifeS^'T, 6 ;’,,. 8 '
Blyth, William P. Crowder, Haughton Forest, J, svumimn £> rambling on the hills,
W. Allanby, John Evenden, J. J. McCluskey, nil . merous games-, including ra<
Henry G. Rudd, Thomas Wilts, William Wood, P nzes (taking the children accor
Samuel Drake, John Blockwood. For Glenorchy— a S e )- Three “ spreads” took place
Wm. Thos. McYilley, Albert Cato, George W. t!l _e stay, and every body was w
Bindley, Thos. Munro Hull, Richard McVilley, plied with golonshus” viand
Douglas T. Wilkinson. For North Hobart—Robert beverages. Too much praise cat
Brooke, Henry Rodd, Henry Probatt, C. B. Pitman, bestowed upon the Rev J, C. Ecc
. 11. -Pybus, James Stewart. For Fast Hobart— his amiable ladv * also MpsdnmpQ
Marryatt Hornsby, Robert Plunkett, Samuel Living- Ruthbone Todd' Collett Inrl
stone. For Central Hobart- W. G. Beaumont J. B. ' ’•Jc u ■ a ? d .
Edwards, James Willison, Charles Gillham. A. C. 1 „ ®fv I ° defatl ” able in
Pratt, James McArthur. For South Hobart— t 0 j SI , P , P r 1 6 an , ta ,°, f botb
jeor ooutn nopart — j , u ti -it- ,V „
John Connors, Thomas Ashe, Thomas Todd. For and old - Messrs B. Waldrom, H
West Hobart—A. C. Weare, E. W. Thomson, bone and others, delighted the
Robert Crowhurst, H. F. Luckman, Ewd. Chidgey,’ sters b y scrambling sweetmeats
Audley M. Stuart. For Cumberland—D.C. Purdie, the day. Midday was yery wan
Macquarie Harbour (being in addition to those the siielder afforded by the trees
already appointed for Cumberland). For Queen- locality was much appreciated-and
r.°w Ug A h^ "J 1 o J ’ Bu ™ ett > Francis AHison, C. Waßer taken advantage of. While n
!:V' S Gulf, sen. For North underlie partfally umbra-ious b
Launceston — Robt. 0. Howard Edwin H T)iy * j j -c 0 „
William L. Stokes, Henry G. lndrew For CentS W ° W6r ° reminded ° f the P ° etlC effl
Launceston- George Stewart, RoualdSmith, Thomas “ All bounteous Nature calm and g
d ' Brien. For South Launceston— Upon the eye sight steals.
William F. Wathen, George Good, Predk. C. These are the beauties that we lovt
Greene, William Sessions. For Selby—John Smitbj And these Zealandia yields.”
Winfam M? W> Jobn^™ fcehead . Lament, ’ Between 4 and 5 o’clock a move wa
w:"z sss s°rs h j’ £m ! h s r , bus
NiniM Harriso.., Charles Griffiths, George Griffith”: torc.l.ly of thee
Charles Leslie. For West Devon—J W Dale R ,t. D ® 8 , 1 Sonl ie vl^;l o°
Robson, W. B. Bilton. Magnus M. Smith. Walter Elsewhere W “1 be found one or tw
