

THE DEMOCRATIC ELEMENT IN
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
BY THE
HO N. C. C. KI N GSTO N, Q.C.
Premier of South Australia
REPRINTED FROM THE “ REVIEW OF REVIEWSFEB. 1896
Fum
—-K




THE DEMOCRATIC ELEMENT IN
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
BY THE
HON. C. C. KINGSTON, Q.C.
Premier of South Australia
REPRINTED FROM THE “ REVIEW OF REVIEWS ,” FEB. 1896
Qlbelaibe
L. Bonython & Co., “Advertiser ” Office, King William Street




PREFACE.
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania
have now made provision for the popular election of represen-
tatives to frame a Federal Constitution for Australia, and the
Comvention is appointed to meet on 29th March next.
Uinder these circumstances some additional interest may attach
to tthe paper on “The Democratic Element in Australian
Fedeeration,” which I published in The Review of Revieivs after
my ireturn from the Hobart Conference of 1895, at which the
scheme to which effect is now being given was agreed to.
I have, therefore, yielded to the suggestion that I should
republish the paper to emphasise the necessity of the greatest
attention being given to the constitution of the Federal Parliament.
To my mind nothing is of more importance. If, as ought to be
the case, this Constitution is established on the most democratic
basis, the people will have nothing to fear from the Parliament,
but much to hope. They have now and within the next few
weeks, by virtue of the popular franchise given to them by the
Hobart agreement, the all-important privilege of settling this
matter for themselves. It was in the hope that this paper might
direct the attention of the democracy to a few essentials in the
constitution of a Democratic Parliament that I originally wrote it,
and it is for the same purpose that I now republish it.
C. C. KINGSTON.
/anuary 1897.




THE DEMOCRATIC ELEMENT IN AUSTRALIAN
FEDERATION.
BY THE HON. C. C. KINGSTON, Q.C., PREMIER OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
IDELY diverse views are held, and even by prominent
v-<-' ) politicians, as to the probable date of the accomplish-
ment of Australasian Federation. To use a hackneyed phrase—
Federation has long been “in the air.” Various attempts have
been made to bring it within the national grasp. The most
notable of these resulted in the Commonwealth Bill, adopted by
the Sydney Convention of 1891. This constitutional work of
admitted merit received but scant parliamentary attention, and
even less popular notice. The reason is not hard to find.
Framed by delegates appointed only by local Parliaments,
none of which had been charged by the constituencies
with the duty of such appointment, it lacked the true demo-
cratic inspiration. Not only was the absence of the popular
mandate the cause of popular indifference, but its attempted
anticipation provoked active hostility. After almost five years’
vain struggling against these obstacles, a fresh start has been
made on a more promising course by the passing in New South
Wales, South Australia, and Tasmania, of the Federal Enabling
Bill, agreed to at the Hobart Conference in February, 1895.
Whilst I write, Mr. Turner is fighting hard to overcome the
objections raised by the Victorian Legislative Council to similar


legislation which has already passed the Victorian Assembly. The
Hobart Bill provides :
i. For framing a Federal Constitution by a popular convention
of ten representatives of each colony, directly chosen by assembly
electors on the principle of one voter one vote.
2. For submitting the constitution so framed to Assembly
electors in each colony for acceptance or rejection by direct vote
on the same principle.
3. For transmitting the constitution so framed and accepted
for enactment by the Imperial Parliament on the addresses of
both Houses of the local Legislature.
The Federal Outlook.
The mistakes in connection with the initiation of the Common-
wealth Bill are thus avoided, for the people are to be consulted at
every stage. But there still remains room for the widest specula-
tion as to the probable date of the realisation of Federal hopes.
Some imminent common danger may yet be needed to weld our
separate and comparatively powerless States into one compact all-
powerful Federation. But surely constitution-building can better
be undertaken deliberately, in time of peace, than in haste and
panic. Who knows how soon the peace of the Empire may be
disturbed, or how narrowly this disaster may have been only
recently avoided ? A new factor has lately been introduced into
the consideration of Federal prospects by the adoption of free
trade by New South Wales. Intercolonial free trade has ever
been one of the chief objects of Federation. The other colonies
are now enabled to exploit New South Wales markets, whilst
preserving their own intact. Certainly the value of this privilege
is considerably diminished by the fact that it is shared with all the
world, a condition of things which it is to be hoped would be
altered under Australian Federation, by protection against out-
siders. Still, many urge that the strength of the chief commercial
incentive to Federation has been materially reduced by the recent
alteration of the fiscal policy of New South Wales. I think,
however, that too much weight can be attached to this view.
Certain it is that many reasons exist why the Federal effort should
be continued. With these it is not my purpose to deal in detail.


Eveen so far as South Australia is concerned, whilst not under-
rating the value of the Barrier trade, New South Wales is not the
onHy colony with which freedom of commercial relationships is
earrnestly desired. Questions of defence, economy of finance,
the i regulation of competing railway tariffs, the adjustment of
intercolonial differences, the establishment of Federal Courts,
unilformity of legislation, a broader and higher sphere of national
life,, and other matters, some precisely specified in Federal
proposals and others dwelt on at large by Federal orators,
comstitute too numerous, important, and attractive a list to justify
our' calling a halt in the Federal march.
Democratic Elements.
But whatever varying estimates may be formed of the time
when the Federal goal is likely to be reached, it is evident there
should be no delay in bringing public attention to bear on the
question of some of the principles which should regulate the
advance.
The object of this paper is to suggest that Australian democracy
should require the Federal advance to be made under democratic
conditions, and democratic conditions only. Ample provision for
insisting on these conditions is provided.
Four colonies —New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Tasmania —-are ranging themselves into line for the initial
step under the provisions of the Hobart Enabling Bill, viz., the
election of the delegates to the Popular Convention. Authority
has to be sought from the people for setting the Federal machinery
in motion. No delegate can take his seat in the Convention
except as the representative of the people of a State elected by
their direct votes. No property qualification is required. No
plural voting is permitted. As a further safeguard, no line or
word of the constitution framed by the Convention can become
of any force or effect unless deliberately accepted on referendum
to the people of each State, and by their direct votes. From a
Convention so elected democracy has everything to hope. In a
constitution so framed, there should be nothing to which demo-
cracy can object. There can be nothing if Australian democrats
appreciate, not only the powers which are conferred on them by


the Hobart Bill, but their duty to exercise them, and the mode in
which they should be exercised. I shall be well pleased if this
paper, in the slightest degree, conduces to these ends. I doubt
whether the public generally have hitherto taken sufficient interest
in the main principles of Federation. When the Sydney Conven-
tion met in 1891, the fundamental principles of the proposed
constitution had hardly been mentioned, not to say discussed.
The Melbourne Conference which preceded it had chiefly been
the occasion of oratorical display. Since the Sydney Convention,
popular efforts have been mostly confined to the advocacy of the
popular Convention and Referendum embodied in the Hobart
Bill. No doubt much has been said about the advantages of
Federation in general. But there have been few attempts to define
democratic essentials in a Federal Constitution, or to provide for
their insistence. If this state of things be continued, the results
may be most lamentable. Federation is often advocated from the
purest motives, in connection with the development of our national
life. But are there none supporting it in the hope that it may
prove a check to democratic advance ?
Democratic Risks.
The greater inertia of a large Federal Parliament, as compared
with a small Provincial Assembly, will materially increase the
difficulty of experimental legislation. The legislative sanction to
the trial of what some call “fads” and others reforms must be less
easy when many are to be converted from the policy of laissez
fairs than when the assistance of a few will suffice. Who can
doubt that legislative experiments have been tried in different
Australian Parliaments with the best results, which would have
waited long for the sanction of a Federal Assembly? We are all
concerned lest, in the sacred name of Federation, there should be
foisted on Australia a reactionary anti democratic constitution
unworthy of a free people. Federation per se must, for the reason
I have mentioned, have a distinctly conservative effect. We must
be careful, or the enactment of a Federal Constitution for Australia
may be made the excuse for withdrawing from the provinces some
of the democratic advantages which they enjoy under their provin-
cial constitutions. South Australia claims, by legislation through


a long course of years, to have established her constitution on
broader democratic lines than those of any other colony in the
Australian continent. I believe that in this respect she has the
sympathy of a large section of the people in the other colonies
who desire to secure similar constitutional advantages. None can
doubt that the form of the Federal Constitution will have great
effect on the provincial constitutions. In the natural order of
things federal and provincial constitutions must be to a certain
extent assimilated. Concessions to democracy contained in a
Federal Constitution cannot well be denied in provincial legis-
lation. On the other hand Federal limitation of popular rights
must ever constitute a powerful argument for provincial conserva-
tism. Now is the time, therefore, for the greatest democratic
vigilance. No doubt every power which is proposed to be given
to the Federal Parliament will be closely scrutinised before being
parted with. lam sanguine that the American plan of preserving
the residue of powers to the local legislatures will be followed, as
proposed in the Commonwealth Bill, rather than the Canadian
plan of giving everything not specifically reserved to the Federal
Parliament. Whilst recognising the necessity of Federation for
national purposes, we should cherish the equally important prin-
ciple of home rule in all local affairs. The provinces must
maintain, so far as possible, consistently with true Federation, the
glorious privilege of managing their own affairs. But before
considering the question of the distribution of powers between
the Federal and local Parliaments, the important question arises
of the constitution of the Federal Parliament itself.
The Need of Vigilance.
It is to this point that I desire particularly to direct the attention
of the democracy by this paper, and to which I practically confine
my remarks. This is no time for indifference. To my mind
Federation is bound to come sooner or later. There are, to my
knowledge, many friends of the people who, having little sympathy
with Federation because of its necessary conservative tendency,
shrug their shoulders when it is mentioned, and, scoffing at its
probability, refuse to discuss or consider its possible form. To
such as these it is idle to talk. If all were so constituted the


advent of Federation would be a sorry day for democracy. But
to others, happily more thoughtful and numerous, I feel that a
humble effort to point out what I venture to consider a few
democratic essentials to the constitution of a Federal Parliament
may hot be entirely wasted. Fifteen years’ continuous service in
the South Australian Parliament, and seats in the Federal Council
and in the Sydney Convention, have compelled my best attention
to the matter. The time has gone by for the utterance of Federal
platitudes. I take it that there is a general consensus of Australian
opinion in favour of Federation on approved lines. What those
lines are to be is now the question. The people of the different
States are shortly to be called upon to elect the persons by whom
the constitution is to be framed. If any advantage is to result from
the Hobart concession of the right of popular election it must
consist in the securing of effect being given to the popular wish.
To this end public thought must be aroused, reason appealed to,
and sentiment awakened. We hear it often said that Federation
is not a party question. May it never be made an idle pretext
for the making or unmaking of a ministry ! But if liberal or
conservative views are earnestly entertained every effort will, and
should, be made by their respective holders to secure their fullest
recognition in the proposed national constitution. Their incon-
sistency prevents any honest attempt at constitutional assimilation.
So it seems to me that if the cry against party politics in Federal
affairs means more than I have suggested, it savours somewhat of
an unholy and impossible alliance. So also with the oft repeated
suggestion that the “ best men ” only should be selected as
Federal delegates. This is little better than idle “gag.” The
“ best men ” from the tory standpoint must be the worst from the
radical point of view, and vice versa.
Democratic Ideals.
The existence of the Commonwealth Bill renders further efforts
at constitution-building comparatively easy. It has been well put
that the Sydney draft must form the basis of any future Federal
legislation. Probably the popular convention would revise it in
committee, and adopt its revise as the Federal Constitution.
However this may be, the Commonwealth Bill to-day affords a


spendid text for the catechism of candidates for the popular
convention. By the extent of their agreement or disagreement
wi:h its various provisions, we shall be enabled to gauge their
clams to the favourable exercise of the conservative or democratic
suFrage; and, taken in connection with their political character and
capacity, their right to be considered the “ best men,” It would
net be tolerated that men should be selected to draft a provincial
constitution irrespective of their constitutional views. Why then
should the cry be heard in connection with the larger national
question ? He that is not with us is against us. Already, as I
shill presently show, there has been sounded the note of attack
from legislative strongholds of provincial conservatism. The
enemies of democracy are on the alert. Two points in the
popular fortress are especially likely to be assailed. These I
consider essential to the true democratic constitution of a Federal
Parliament. They are as follows ;
i. A uniform Federal franchise for both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, such franchise to consist of adult suffrage exerciseable
or the principle of one adult one vote.
2. Payment of members of both Houses of the Federal Parlia-
ment.
To my mind it is impossible to over-estimate the importance
of a uniform Federal franchise. The nature of the franchise,
speaking generally, determines the character of the elector; the
character of the elector determines the character of the elected;
tht character of the elected determines the character of the legis-
laton ; the Federal legislation affects all. It is useless for any
sirgle colony to return democrats on an extended franchise if
coaservatives are returned from all the other colonies by force of
a Imited suffrage.
The Federal Franchise,
Each colony, therefore, has the keenest interest, not only in the
naure of the franchise on which its own representatives are
reurned, but also in the nature of the franchise on which all
otier representatives are elected. This is a matter in which the
snaller States are specially concerned, on account of their more
United representation in the House of Representatives. Of what


avail would be the protests of four Tasmanian or ten South
Australian democrats elected on manhood suffrage in a house of
100 members, or as opposed to a possible phalanx of thirty-five
conservatives returned by one colony on a property vote. A
Federal franchise varying in its nature with the States constituting
the Federation, is no more capable of defence than a provincial
franchise varying with the constituencies constituting the province.
It would not be tolerated that West Sydney should return mem-
bers to the New South Wales Parliament on the principles of
adult suffrage, whilst in the rest of the colony a high property
qualification was required from all voters. If such a thing were
permitted, of what practical use would be the extended franchise
possessed by West Sydney! Her democratic representative would
undoubtedly be swamped in the local Parliament by the conser-
vatives returned from other parts, and they would be outvoted in
all issues between democracy and conservatism. So, also, of what
advantage will it be for any particular State to return members to
the Federal Parliament on a liberal franchise if they are to be
swamped and outvoted by the representatives of other States
returned on an altogether different basis ? When the question is
thus analysed, I may, perhaps, be pardoned for thinking that the
necessity of uniformity is apparent. Indeed, it is possible that
some may suggest that it is unnecessary to contend for so palpable
a truth. But the history of Australian Federal effort shows that
this is not so. No absolute uniformity is provided for in the
Commonwealth Bill. The various Assembly franchises of the
different States are stereotyped in their application to the Federal
House of Representatives. To local Parliaments, very differently
constituted in different States, is left the choice of senators. It is
not so long since that a meeting of the Federal Council, discuss-
ing the question of uniformity, practically agreed that the mode of
selection of members of the Council was chiefly a matter for local
settlement by each individual colony.
The report of the proceedings of the Hobart Conference
discloses the fact that there was not entire unanimity amongst the
Premiers present, on the question of the mode of election of
members of the popular convention. This, too, although
uniformity was only proposed to the extent of requiring election


by the electors of the House of Assembly in each State. Since
then, we have seen a proposal, made by the Victorian Legislative
Council, to dispense with even this approximation to uniformity
by the substitution of election of representatives by the local
Parliament. Happily, this reactionary proposal was defeated by
the firmness of Mr. Turner. But I noticed, with some concern,
the expression in another colony of liberal indifference in relation
to this matter, which it was suggested was one for Victoria only to
decide.
Varying Franchises.
No doubt the necessity for absolute uniformity, in relation to
the election underthe Hobart Enabling Bill, is not so strong as in
regard to a Federal Parliament; for the Convention has no
legislative power, and the referendum to the electors for the
Assembly in each colony prevents the probability of an objection-
able constitution being foisted on an unwilling people. There is,
however, ample room for argument, that it would have been better
if the delegates in each colony had been elected on precisely the
same franchise in each State. The resolutions of the Hobart
Conference embodied, however, as much of agreement on these
subjects as it was possible to arrange under the circumstances.
Each member of the Conference desired to further the cause of
Federation, and to this end was prepared to make some con-
cessions. But, though rigid insistence on personal or provincial
views would not have been justified, and was not attempted, it
seems to me now that an appeal to the Australian people for
Federal direction has been provided for by the Hobart Enabling
Bill, that every effort should be made in all the colonies to secure
effect being given to democratic views and particularly in relation
to a uniform Federal franchise. So far as the Federal House of
Representatives is concerned, it is probable that there will not be
so much difficulty as in the case of the Senate. The Common-
wealth Bill provides that the election of members for the .House
of Representatives shall be made by the Assembly electors in
each State. This, of course, does not constitute absolute
uniformity. When the Commonwealth Bill was drafted, this
provision meant a closer approximation to uniformity than it
would mean if construed to-day, for South Australia has since


adopted adult suffrage. On the other hand, plural voting, which
was then in force in some colonies, is in course of gradual
extinction. Its total abolition is provided for in regard to all
voting under the Hobart Enabling Bill, and this will constitute a
precedent for a similar provision in the Federal Constitution.
The great distinction between the various provincial franchises for
the local Assemblies consists in the fact that South Australia has
provided for adult suffrage, and this has not yet been accomplished
in any other part of Australia, or in Tasmania. I may be pardoned
for thinking that in this respect South Australia, though only
following New Zealand, is in advance of her neighbours. However
this may be, there is a strong movement in other States for a
similar reform. The Ahctorian Assembly only lately passed the
necessary Bill. Mr. Reid has been warmly urged to introduce it.
South Australians are naturally working to secure the extension of
the reform to Federal questions. Already upwards of nearly
60,000 women voters have registered themselves as electors, com-
pared with 77,000 men. New Zealand statistics supply the most
encouraging figures as regards the numbers of women who vote in
proportion to those registered. It is a national question of the
highest importance. The elections for the popular Convention
will constitute a golden opportunity for the joining of hands
between South Australian women and their politically less favored
sisters. South Australian women, as electors for the House of
Assembly, will have the right to vote for Federal representatives.
Their representative organisations have decided to fight for a
similar concession to the women of the other colonies. It will
therefore be surprising if a solid vote is not cast in South Australia
for adult suffrage as the uniform Federal franchise ; and, though
one colony alone can do little, there is no prospect of South
Australia standing alone if Australian women appreciate the
opportunity which will shortly be afforded them of advancing the
great cause of the constitutional emancipation of their sex. The
women of South Australia, by their direct votes, will, no doubt,
exercise the greater power within their sphere of voting ; but the
women of other colonies, by combined and strenuous effort, may
also, though less directly, exert a potent influence in securing the
enactment of adult suffrage as the Federal franchise. The contest


for a uniform Federal franchise in relation to the Federal Flouse
of Representatives will—very possibly—be chiefly waged round
the question of the admission of women to political rights. lam
most hopeful of the result. The limits of this paper forbid the
full discussion of this question; but the views of the South
Australian democracy may be gauged from the recent triumphant
passing of the Adult Suffrage Act.
The Federal Senate.
The question of uniformity as applied to the Senate is a greater
difficulty. The Commonwealth Bill provides for the election by
both Houses of the local legislature ; this is practically copied
from the American constitution. No provision is made as to the
course of procedure in the event of both Houses failing to agree
upon a choice. It appears as if a deadlock would result. No
attempt is made to embody in the Commonwealth Bill the
provisions of the Acts of Congress of 1866 and 1873, by which it
is declared that, in the event of both Houses failing to agree on
the choice of senators, the members of both Chambers shall meet
in joint assembly, and a majority shall make the choice. This
avoids the possibility of a deadlock, and gives the controlling
power to the popular and more numerous House. As the Bill
stands, any Legislative Council might insist on the appointment of
a particular senator, however obnoxious to the popular Chamber,
and in default of acquiescence could deprive the State of repre-
sentation in the Senate even at the most important juncture.
That this is not altogether improbable is evident from the fact
that in 1890 our Legislative Council deliberately wrecked the
Federal Council Bill, because the House of Assembly would not
concede to the Council the privilege of appointing one of the two
Federal delegates. But apart from this difficulty, uniformity in
the choice of senators is absolutely incompatible with elections by
the local legislatures. This arises from the want of uniformity in
the constitution of the legislatures themselves, and particularly on
account of the varied constitution of their Legislative Councils.
In South Australia, with a paid and elected Upper House,
democracy has little to fear and much to be thankful for. But
how different is it in other colonies ! Even in Victoria, with our


unpaid Upper House, and other electoral conditions favoring a
monopoly of seats by wealthy or leisured classes, I may be
pardoned for thinking that popular sentiments are not unfre-
quently refused all practical expression. Mr. Reid’s recent
contests with the New South Wales Legislative Council are of a
character from which democrats may readily draw the most
important lessons in connection with nominee councils. It is one
thing to give certain powers to our paid Council, elected by
convenient constituencies on a liberal franchise ; it is another and
very different and dangerous thing, to confer the same powers on
an unpaid Chamber, whether nominated, or elected by con-
stituencies under Victorian conditions. Some idea of the probable
results of confiding the choice of senators to the local Parliaments
may be gathered from the composition of the Sydney Convention
of 1891, the members of which were elected by the provincial
Parliaments. Most of those who now occupy the leading positions
in Australian governments, and are chiefly identified with demo-
cratic advance, were conspicuous by their absence.
As one result of the constitution of the Sydney Convention, we
find in the Commonwealth Bill the proposal perpetuating the
choice of senators in the mode in which the members of the
Convention were themselves appointed, i.e. , by the local Parlia-
ments. May this be a happy augury for the alteration of this
provision by a Convention elected by the people ! May election
of Senators by the people be insisted upon by the people’s
representatives in the Convention that is to be ! This is the
course which was decided on by our Assembly when dealing with
the Commonwealth Bill in 1891. A proposition to substitute
direct election by the people in convenient constituencies, for the
proposed election by the Parliament, was carried on the motion of
Mr. Holder by a large majority.
Reactionary Forces.
To my mind South Australia would hardly be justified in
entering a Federation in which, as provided in the Commonwealth
Bill, the choice of senators is controlled by, or shared with,
Legislative Councils such as are to be found elsewhere. The
result, as regards all subjects relegated to the Federal authority,


could not fail to be the wholesale sacrifice of present popular
constitutional advantages. The probable working of the scheme
proposed in the Commonwealth Bill emphasises the necessity for
absolute uniformity. The South Australian Parliament might be
reasonably expected to elect delegates with fairly liberal views.
No different result would be allowed by the liberal majority in the
Council. But with the knowledge we possess of the tory
majorities which rule in other Australian Councils the Senate
would be swamped by conservatives, and South Australian bitter
experiences of unreformed Councils would be repeated in the hall
of the Federal Senate. The classes of men elected by local
Parliaments and returned by direct popular vote are very different.
Democracy has everything to fear from the one, and to hope from
the other.
That this is appreciated we may infer from the hesitancy of
some colonies at the Hobart Conference in relation to the mode
of appointment of the delegates to the Convention. This is
emphasised also by the action of the Victorian Legislative
Council in seeking to provide for the appointment of senators by
the local Parliaments instead of popular election. They were
defeated in this, and the provisions of the Hobart Bill, as already
accepted by them in four colonies, constitute a valuable precedent
for the choice of senators by direct popular vote. But the contest
will, undoubtedly, be renewed in regard to the commonwealth
provision for choice of senators by the local legislatures.
Conservatism will fight hard to retain it. “The elect of the
elected” will probably be the cry. May Providence deliver us
from “ the never - ending audacity of elected persons ! ” The
protection of State rights is urged as the chief justification for the
constitution of the Senate. Surely the people of Australia may
be trusted to make their own choice of their guardians of State
rights in all national questions. If they surrender this privilege of
choice to others, and particularly to local Parliaments embracing
nominee or unpaid Councils, they will not fail to shortly find that,
under the pretext of providing for the care of provincial interests,
a Senate has been called into existence which will constitute a
standing menace to democracy and a constant source of
obstruction to popular advance.


So far as the American precedent is concerned, it may, perhaps,
be cited as a warning to avoid, rather than an example to follow.
Is there not some force in the startling charge that “ under the
American constitution, the power has departed from the people
beyond hope of recovery, save by a revolution ?” Further, we
have it on the authority of Bryce and of Bourinot, that an agitation
some time since commenced has already made much progress in
the United States, to change the present practice of electing
senators and to give the power of election directly to the people.
Pa*id Representatives.
The next democratic essential in the constitution of the Federal
Parliament on which I desire to touch is payment of members, as
applied to both Houses. To my mind this has been most wisely
provided for in the Commonwealth Bill. There is, however, no
room for doubt that it will be made the subject of strenuous
conservative attack. An onslaught has already been made by the
Sydney Legislative Council on the principle as applied to the
delegates to the Popular Convention. So determined were mem-
bers in their objection that Mr. Reid, in order to save the Bill,
was compelled to consent to the excision of the provision, whilst
promising to make the necessary payments under executive autho-
rity. In South Australia our local conservatives are rallying round
the standard of abolition of payment of members of the Legislative
Council. Very possibly in the Federal arena the attack will be
confined to an attempt to exclude the Senate from the benefit of
the system. I note with interest that the members of the Sydney
Legislative Council openly avowed that their action was prompted
by dislike to the system of payment of members in all its forms.
Indeed, the following remarks are debited in HanSard to the
mover of the proposal for excision ;
In this colony everyone must acknowledge that payment for legislative
work has been an unmixed and undeniable evil. I think we would be failing
in our duty if we did not record our sense of the injury that has been done
to the public life of this colony and of all Australia by the continuance of
the system of payment of members.
I doubt if these sentiments are generally entertained in New
South Wales, though I cannot pose as an authority on that subject.
But I claim that South Australia is in a better position to speak a


regards the effects of payment of members than any other colony
on the Australian continent —for this reason : that in her Par-
liament only has payment of members been extended to the
Legislative Council. I do not hesitate to say that the result
has been most satisfactory from the democratic standpoint. In
fact, it has constituted the greatest reform ever effected in
connection with our Legislative Council. To day, as a result,
there is a liberal majority in the Chamber, where previously
progressive measures were only received to be slaughtered. This
majority consists of thirteen representatives of all classes, and
particularly of producers and other workers, men who in character
and intelligence would be a credit to any Parliament.
The Result of Payment of Members.
It is freely admitted that no such majority would be possible in
the absence of payment of members, and that, under such circum-
stances, ten at least of the gentlemen referred to could not have
afforded to have placed their valuable services at the disposal
of the country. Their place would have been monopolised by
plutocratic conservatives. In this connection it is interesting to
note that a gentleman who is now contesting an Assembly elec-
torate in opposition to payment of members of the Council himself
admitted, when making his maiden speech in the Council of which
he was lately a member, that he never would have been able to
have offered himself for election as a representative farmer, had it
not been for the system he now condemns. These are facts with
which most South Australians are acquainted, but which I bring
under the notice of a larger circle in the hope that they may teach
a valuable Federal lesson to democrats. I might cite details,
showing the direct legislative results of the system. For instance,
I might mention the proposals for progressive taxation of large
landed estates and of absentees, which were negatived by a
majority comprising members elected to an unpaid Council, and
were passed the next session when some of these gentlemen were
replaced by others who could not have stood but for payment of
members. So also with the proposals for industrial conciliation.
Time after time these were passed by the House of Assembly,
only to be thrown out in the Legislative Council, until the full


effect of payment of members was realised by the return of liberals
sincerely desirous of promoting industrial peace. It is a paid
Parliament in both its branches, which is entitled to the honour
of having lately passed the Adult Suffrage Bill and the Bill calling
a State Bank into existence, and of providing for State advances.
None of these reforms would have been possible in South Australia
with a Legislative Council constituted as prior to payment of
members. It is a paid Parliament which is entitled to the honour
of having first passed the Hobart Federal Enabling Bill, providing
for the unqualified recognition of the right of the people to
consultation at every stage of the Federal Constitution. How
different has been the treatment of this really democratic measure
in our liberal Council and in the unpaid and conservative Councils
of New South Wales and Victoria. No more striking illustration
of the necessity for a uniform Federal franchise could be desired.
I can hardly believe that an attack on the principle of payment of
members will be seriously made as applied to both Chambers of
any Federal or Provincial Legislature. But with the most bitter
recollection of the state of things which existed in our Council
before payment of members, and with the warmest appreciation
of the highly improved condition of affairs from the liberal stand-
point which now obtains, and venturing to contrast the position
in our paid Council with that of other unpaid Chambers, and this
to the entire advantage of South Australia, I urge all liberals to
resist by every constitutional means the attempt which undoubtedly
will be made to deny remuneration for their services to members
of the Federal Senate, if not to both Houses of the Federal
Parliament. Forewarned is forearmed. Let no democrat lay the
flattering unction to his soul that the matter is of minor importance
because one House only is likely to be attacked. If a conservative
majority be gained in either House conservatism will have obtained
all the means of achieving its purpose. Its policy of negation
can as well be effected by a stolid and solid majority in one House
as in two. Active and absolute retrogression is probably beyond
the wildest tory hopes. The command of both Houses is necessary
to active reform and liberal advance, and a fatal mistake will be
made if payment of members, as essential to this command, is
denied to either House of the Federal Legislature.


There are other points in connection with this constitution of
the Federal Parliament to which I should have liked to have
directed attention. In particular, I could have wished to have
dwelt on the inexpediency of denying provincial legislators seats
in the Federal Parliament. Possibly experience may show that
the dual membership cannot be conveniently held, but this is a
question which may well be left to the candidate and the con-
stituency. The degradation of the local Parliaments which to
some extent must result from Federation, need not be emphasised
by an express declaration that the membership of one constitutes
a disqualification for the other. The harmonious working of both
might possibly be promoted by a common membership. If we
reflect that on the lines of the Commonwealth Bill 150 members
will be required to give their services in the Federal Parliament,
and in most cases at a distance from their homes, sufficient
difficulty will be encountered in securing suitable men without
disqualifying all members of the local Parliaments. There is some
similarity in the relations between the Federal and Provincial
Legislatures and between local Parliaments and minor local bodies,
such as municipal corporations and district councils. It frequently
happens that municipal and district councillors are also members
of the local Parliament, and so valuable are their services in both
capacities that no suggestion of preventing the common member-
ship would be tolerated for an instant. Why, then, should such
a provision be made in the larger sphere of Federal usefulness?
In conclusion, let me say that I have purposely refrained from
discussing doubtful questions of democratic policy., I take it that
democratic aspirations are generally understood, and I have taken
this opportunity of giving publicity to a few thoughts which have
occurred to me on matters which are deserving of the immediate
and most careful and intelligent consideration of the people,
in connection with the approaching constitution of a Federal
Parliament.
J. L. Bonython & Co,, Printers, Adelaide.


inn
iHiniinii i
3 1508 01368555 2
