

i i
y r=H
| W5e "iBremen' |
g |
MAY, JUNE. JULY. 1920
, |sllg^lfgSlßSllS^llsgif^l|sgSnisl




I [
SHIP'S STAFF:
Capt. A. E. Morgan, O.C. Troops.
Lit. A. J. Higgs, Adj.
W.-O. F. M. Ross, S.S.M.
Sgt. G. R. C. Wilson, Orderly R. S.
Sgt. R. C. D. Williams.
Sgt. A. Kosky, Orderly Sgt.
Capt. D. R. Crooks, 0.8. E., Q.M.
R.Q.M.S. Kirby, J.D., Asst.
I Tub BREMEN I
I BIOORAPHER_[
H.M.A.T. BREMEN.
Capt. of the Ship: Commander Collyer, R.N.
MEDICAL STAFF:
Maj. M. G. Sutton, S.M.O.
Capt. W. G. Oakley, M.O.
Capt. G. J. W. Sarby, M.O.
Maj. M. Fitzpatrick, M.C., M.O.
Sister Bayston, Matron.
Sgt. C. Coleman, Red Cross Rep.
Sgt. J. I. Bulluss, Asst.
Sgt. R. P. Cahill, Y.M.C.A. Rep.
FOREWORD
Troops, H.M.A.T. Bremen.
Captain A. E. Morgan, O.C
such as this journal should be kept.
I wish it all the success it deserves.
Now that the War is over, the
thoughts of each one of us turn to the
life before us. The courage and pa-
tience and grit that have characterised
the A.I.F. in the past few years will be
tested in another way.
THE position of O.C. Troops on a
"mixed" ship is not always an
enviable one; but with good officers
and a staff keen on their work, it has
many compensations.
The voyage out has been, in many
ways, a very pleasant one. Splendid
weather, good concerts, delightful
dances, and other social events, have
helped to pass happily what might
otherwise have been a monotonous
trip.
I want to wish you all the best of
luck, and to our Naval friends, who have
joined so heartily in all that was going,
I wish them, too, a happy time in Aus-
tralian waters.
It has been a unique experience for
many of us. Places of great interest
have been visited, and a variety of inci-
dents have happened en route that
come seldom to the average person,
and it is a good thin? that a record
This Souvenir will be handed down,
I don't doubt, as an account of the his-
toric voyage to Australia of the last.
Family Ship leaving England after the
Great War.


"A LIFE ON THE OCEAN WAVE."
We offer no apology for our title nor for
the issue and name of this journal. The
former gives promise to travel, and visits to
odd places, the seeing of sights in lands both
strange and beautiful, and who doesn't love
a life of changing scene, and even mild ad-
venture?
As regards the journal, that is another
matter. We have started on a voyage of
some 13,000 miles as many another transport
and family ship has done before us, and we
know that almost without exception a jour-
nal, a chronicle of day-to-day happenings, and
an expression of the many individual and
collective mental processes and changes go-
ing on has sprung up on these transports.
Similarly on board the Bremen was the
wish expressed for a journal, and all able did
his or her bit, notwithstanding the presence
of numerous cockroaches and dozens of
babies to look after, to ensure the success
of the "Biographer."
The name itself is almost self-explanatory.
Literally it signifies "the account of the life
on the Bremen." And so it is.
As most biographies give the fullest ex-
pression to all those interesting little de-
tails of a particular life, so will the "Bremen
Biographer" endeavor to portray the wit and
wisdom, pastimes and pleasures and general
well-being or otherwise of those on board our
temporary home.
Quite a considerable portion of the matter
in this journal was written and published on
board, but the present form and arrangement,
with a number of new articles, was under-
taken after the arrival in Melbourne.
The long time between arrival and publi-
cation is greatly regretted, but owing to the
fact that most of the printers were already
booked with business orders for months
ahead, was unavoidable.
We thank contributors, we thank those who
would have contributed had not something or
other prevented their doing so; we trust that
all concerned will derive as much pleasure
from the perusal of the journal as we did in
the preparation of it.
RAMBLES ROUND THE SHIP.
By "AN A.I.F. TOURIST."
One day I got lost. Away forrard past the
carpenter's store, smelling of tarred rope and
ship chandlery, I came across a company, a
sort of voyaging submerged tenth, "dossing"
in hammocks, and who were seemingly by
the Bremen world forgot. I was informed by
one of the doleful company that they were
the "fifth class passengers"! I learned later,
too, that there wasn't one among them who
could recognise a good cheese when he saw it
—or smell it afar off—and have come to the
conclusion that cheese, like cavaire, sauer-
kraut and Carlton ale, is an acquired taste.
Going down this particular companion-way
it was all I could do to keep from slipping
and breaking my neck! Once down, I care-
fully picked my way across the hatch, in and
out the maze of clothing and linen hanging
everywhere to dry.
Presently I came upon a seated maiden who
was administering Glaxo to a bonnie baby
(for Glaxo builds bonnie babies, as you know).
Not knowing where my rambling had brought
me, imagine my surprise when I foun<| I was
in "Leicester Square." Thus humor triumphs
over discomfort, and I believe the clothes
dried tolerably well there, too.
Every day at noon an eager crowd gather-
ed round this particular spot—the mileage
chart in the second saloon. Here one could
see at a glance how many miles of ocean we
had ploughed since yesterday, and calculate
how many weeks more to endure.
Of such absorbing interest was this count-
ing of the distance run, that a sweepstake was
organised and a tenner was won by a young
lady, in guessing the time we would arrive
in Capetown.
I hope her luck continues!
♦ * *
Down into the very innards of the' throb-
bing old tub my wanderings one day took
me. There, amidst the pounding engines, I met
that quaint and interesting personage, the
"freezer greaser." Perhaps you've never
heard of him? Then let me warn you to keep
friends with him at all costs (tho' costs in
this case, I know, would not be much more
than a bottle of the best). For such is the
power he holds that it's quite possible you
may be "gassed" ere you can reach the iron
ladder to safety and fresh air. By simply
loosening a nut, his noisy den. becomes filled
with the most over-powering smell of am-
monia .it's possible to imagine. I've "whiffed
it," and my sympathies go out to others who
may have "got it" unawares.
Still, here's to the "freezer greaser." He's
a humorist.
* * *
Not being a married man with a family
"still on the bottle," my visit to the Food Pre-
paration Room was quite by accident. What
a job those nurses have! Threescore and
more babies, all under 12 months, to be fed
every three hours, and every week they
weighed 'em up to see if everything was O.K.
Listening just outside the portal I heard the
mystic formulas being given by the mothers:
"Bozs. Cow and Gate," "Glaxo, three months,"
"Albumen water, please, Sister." How small
I felt beside these raisers of Australia's sons


"KILLEM AliLi''
By V.D.R.
Spells Sudden Death to Vermin.
If your bedroom they approach,
I am a Doctor, as you see
And your privacy encroach,
I do a roaring trade.
Or your food they try to poach,
My suit's as white as it can be,
Cock, or hen, or chickenroach
Tho' getting rather frayed.
Can be killed by "Killemall,"
Kills 'em as they scale the wall;
I specialise in baby's ills,
Kill's 'em once for good an' all;
From curly head to toes.
Price is quite in reach of all,
I dole 'em out the sugared pills
'Tisn't large, in fact, it's small.
To banish all their woes.
— (Advt.)
At pulling teeth I'm pretty fair,
At "wisdoms" I'm a don —
Love is blincl—but what an eye-opener
The patient's hardly in the chair
Marriage is!
When pain and molar's gone.
And whosoe'er may come along
This will never be a dry ship, so long as we
For poultice or potation
I'll quickly clap one hot and strong
have Hennessey aboard.
Upon the right location.
•
The ladies, too, that come before
DON'T GROUSE, but live in the present, as
My searching diagnosis,
the couple did who had a house given them!
and daughters, and as I pondered on the help-
lessness of the young of the genus homo
when their age is counted in months, this re-
quest broke on my ears, "Orange for my
twins, please, Sister Mae"!! Ye gods! What
courage, what self-sacrifice. Surely if the Re-
patriation Dept. doesn't double the gallant
sergeant's war gratuity, shame will be upon
them, for he deserves it.
* ♦ *
Altho' my rambles at times brought me to
places of interest and otherwise, there was
one spot I visited a number of times with
cheery alacrity. This place stood back to
back with the Isolation Ward, right over the
stern, and there, with careful thumb-and-fin-
gerings, our genial O.C. dealt out the ever-
welcome Bradbury's or "Aussie" notes, ac-
cording to the port of call. Dozing in comfy
deck-chairs, one was prone to forget the pay
staff hard at work up there. Their efficiency
left nothing to be desired, however, and W.-
Officer John Bird and his staff are to be con-
gratulated on the way they maintained the
financial stability of the ship's company.
Did you observe the odd contrast? The
Y.M.C.A. alongside the ship's canteen! Sort
of "Lamb lying down with the lion" idea, for
Sgt. Cahill was ever ready with gift stuff to
dispense to all and sundry, free, while the
canteen . But don't let's talk about such
memories. A memory is "a thing you forget
with," according to a schoolboy I know, and
for once let's use it as such.
Their real or fancied ills galore
I settle by hypnosis.
> So patients, do not be afraid
Or look at me askance,
I tell what's wrong with man or maid
With but a single glance.
And now that I have made a name,
My surgery in Aussie
Will, with the Diggers, spread my fame
From Cape York down to Tassie.
A GLOSSARY OP BABY LANGUAGE.
To single men and maids mystified by the
conversations of mothers with their babies
the following (compiled by father of 13),
will be of assistance:—
Ga-boo.—How are you?
Phlizz.—What about some more Glaxo?
Bah-ah-gee.—Please shave before you come
kissing me.
Gr-r-r-r-r. —I think I'll stop yelling and
go to sleep.
Nyahah.—That's funny, do it again.
Hahbuzz. —Keep feeding me that way. It's
funny blowing bubbles.
Wow-ow-ow. —-There's a pin sticking in me.
Go-00-ah. —l've a pain under my pinny.
Er-er-telio. —Please close the port-hole,
there's a draught on my foot.
Ow-wow-yow (prolonged, and with physi-
cal jerks).-—Have you forgotten there is such
a place as the Food Preparation Room? ? ?
PRIVATE T.W. "DOCTOR" A.A.M.C.


AMUSEMENT AND SPORTS ON THE
"SECOND" DECK.
Patrons: Capt. Collyer, H.M.A.T. Bremen;
Capt. Morgan, O.C. Troops.
Sports Officer: Lt. Hennessey.
Committee: R.Q.M.S. Kirby, Chairman;
W.O. Stewart, Treasurer; Sgt. Ayres,
Secretary; W.O. Spanger, P.O. Parsons,
Sgt. Hood, C.P.O. Reece, Mrs. Millingen,
Miss P. Haskell.
Blessed with an energetic Secretary who
seemed never to be still, or to take
any meals or go to bed, but was
always "running" somewhere or some-
thing, from raffles to "Grand" concerts
—backed by an almost as hard-working
committee, no wonder the amusements and
sports went with a swing. One day each
week the promenade deck was thronged with
a happy, sporting crowd, and the fine atten-
dance on each occasion, the shrieks of
laughter and merry banter of the onlookers
spoke volumes for the excellent way the
events were managed, and the keenness of
the contests.
Herewith the results of two of the sports
meetings:
2nd JUNE, 1920.
Ladies' Nail Driving (Photo Frame)
Mrs. Hooley.
Egg and Spoon Race (Photo Frame)
Miss Bishop.
Egg and Spoon Race, Gents ("The Cast-
aways")—P.O. Simmons.
Apple Bobbing (Japanese Cigarette Case)
—Sgt. Dennis.
Gents' Potato Race (Cigarette Case) —-
P.O. Simmons.
Ladies' Hair Dressing ("The Broken
Road") —P.O. Oakley.
Chalking the Pig's Eye (Flat Ash Tray)
Sgt. Jones.
Wheel-Barrow Race "The Stolen Ship" and
"The Edge of Beyond")—P.O.'s Hodge and
Marchant.
Ladies' Potato Race (Leather Bag and
Purse) —Miss Mather.
Mixed Wheel-Barrow Race ("Omar
Khayam" and "Humor of Lamb") —Sgt.
and Mrs. Peterson.
16th JUNE, 1920.
Whistling Race (Ash Tray, "Lion's Head")
Sgt. Peterson. %
Cockfighting ("The Sowers") —P.O. Par-
sons.
Sack Race. Gents (Ash Tray, "Lion's
Head") —Sgt. Hayman.
Children's Race (Playbook)—Freddie
Sharpley.
Ladies' Tug-of-War (Leather Purses)
Sgt. Letch's Team.
Gents' Tug-of-War (Cigarette Cases)
P.O. Hurst's Team,
Ladies' Hair-Dressing (Ash Tray, "Lion's
Head") —Mr. Mcßain.
Threading-the-Needle ("Happy-go-Lucky")
Mr. Jennaway.
Apple Bobbing, Ladies (Hand Bag)—-Mrs.
Peterson.
Siamese Race ("The Heather Moon" and
Hand Bag)—Sgt. Hay man and Miss Allen.
Ladies' Sack Race (Hand Bag)— Miss
Gorrv.
"A MALE EMANCIPATION LEAGUE"
I write in the privacy of my hot-box and
can hear the chug-chug of the engines below,
the swish of the waters alongside, and the
voice of some children at play in the alley-
way beside my cabin. My heated brow and
sunburned nose is soothed by the briny
breeze blowing thru the porthole, and I feel
content. It is the time of the year when the
fancy turns to the beauties of nature and the
probable winner of the next big race. I feel
I have a call and must burst forth, even as
the lark at dawn —and a ship's officer in a
bathroom- —I must sing! So be it. This, then,
is the burden of my song:—
The fathers gathered round about
To see who could propose
A remedy to cure their ills:
To rectify their woes.
One said: "I bath the blooming kids."
Another: "I've no time
To call my own from break of day
Until to bed I climb.
"I therefore think we should combine.
Now here's a splendid plan-
A Male Emancipation League;
Let's preach the Rights of Man."
With shouts of acclamation, they
Decided to begin it.
They took an oath to see it through,
And every man was in it.
They made old Jimjones president,
A mighty man was he;
He turned the scale at fifteen stone,
His height was six feet three.
Jimjones addressed the meeting,
Saying "Listen to me, boys,
No more we'll second fiddle be,
We'll be the leading noise.
"No more we'll cart the kids about,
Or hush their baby squeals;
No longer tickle-ickle them,
Or wait to get their meals.


"For we are men, full-blooded men,
The Lords of this creation,
No matter whether rich or poor,
No matter what our station.
"From this day on we'll be supreme,
We'll give our wives due warning
That we shall do just what we will
And not come home till morning.
"This League will revolutionise
The, world, and we—great scott! 'll
Have to double off and get
The baby's feeding bottle."
Now this is the tale as was told to a chap
By a seafaring man from Kaloo,
He didn't like it, so told it to me;
I won't have it, so tell it to you.
—A.E.M.
A WET THOUGHT ON A DRY SHIP.
There's a dirty little cottage on the road to
La Bassee
That I visit every morning if we chance to be
that way;
And the liquor that I quaff there comes from
Burton! Yes, it may,
To that dirty little cottage that is marked
"Estaminet."
There's a shrapnel-splintered doorway where
there's hardly room to pass,
But still its cosy in the corner with a pint or
two of Bass;
But the chief attraction in it is a lively little
lass
Who smiles and takes your money "Trente
centimes, M'sieur," per glass.
You can drink that liquor freely till you've
done in all your pay,
If it ever saw old England it has come a
long, long way;
For it's weak and quite exhausted in that
small estaminet,
In the dirty little cottage on the road to
La Bassee.
DOMES OF SILENCE.
I notice that the chess fiends have begun
to sit around and gaze fixedly at sundry
weirdly carved pieces of box wood.
After due consideration they move from
one black square to a white one. This is the
signal for the opposing player to have his
innings of thought. It is a great game.
A friend of mine took it up the other day
and had a couple of contests. I noticed him
the night after wearing a worried look and
sitting alone on the hatchway.
Approaching him, I asked, with kindly in-
tent, how he had finished up. He sighed
mournfully, and replied that the other chap
had taken his "Queen." Hearing a burst of
laughter from under the stairs leading to the
promenade, I turned, looked, and understood.
Oh! You lovers!
HINTS TO YOUNG TRAVELLERS.
By " TWO KNAVAL KNUTS."
The young traveller must bear in mind
at the outset of the voyage that he is but
one of a herd. His ambition should be to
assert his individuality, and thus attain a
position of enviable notoriety. To this end
a variety of means may be employed. Per-
haps the most effective pose is that of an
old and hardened traveller. This can be
effected at once on arrival on board, when
the heated and panic-stricken crowd are
struggling madly with their luggage at the
gangway.
Assuming a nonchalant air, walk jauntily
over the side and deposit all your impedi-
menta exactly where everyone must fall over
it. This will cause a chorus of remonstrance.
When you consider enough attention has been
drawn, you have only to remark, "If you
will kindly wait a minute, my fellow will
be here," adding a few remarks indicative
of a serene mind amid tumult. At the same
time, you will certainly have an opportunity
of calling one of the ship's officers "Steward!"
Do not fail to seize the chance; but it is
as well to fade away subsequently.
You have now made a good start, and
though you will probably lose most of your
luggage, never mind —it is worth it. The
next thing is to appropriate the best suite
of cabins. There will be an altercation while
you are being turned out. This is your cue
for explaining that you have always had the
best suite in other ships—a statement which
will give you a distinct cachet.
At dinner the first night, be in good time
to secure a seat next the captain. You will
be relegated to another seat later, but it is
essential to produce a first-night impression.
You should retire early in order to give
the other passengers a chance to discuss
unrestrainedly your eccentricities —they are
sure to ask who the man was sitting next
the captain? A supply of Bronzo (N.B. —
Handsome men are slightly sunburnt) will
enable you to contrast favorably with the
pallid countenances of the raw hands. An
early retirement from the breakfast table
will not be noticed in the general rush, and
even if it is remarked on maliciously by the
officer still smarting under the "Steward!"
incident, your Bronzo will carry you through.
We now pass on to a few details of con-
duct. Stay as long as possible in the bath-
room (not necessarily in the bath), and when


you emerge do not to say how re-
markably warm the sea is. Some mug is
sure to contract pneumonia from having a
cold bath 011 the strength of this remark.
At breakfast walk in breezily, and ask any
total stranger, with porridge in front of him,
whether he has had it or is going to have it?
—thus demonstrating that you are a hearty
fellow who does not stand on ceremony.
A good joke is always appreciated in an
Australian ship. A particularly humorous
one is to tell a group of diggers that America
won the war. You should wear a New York
accent for this joke, and be heavily insured.
It is a good plan to flavour your conversa-
tion freely with sporting terms. Thus a
"Tally Ho!" or "Gone Away!" will go far
towards drawing attention to some victim en-
deavoring to make an unobtrusive exit from
the saloon during the hurricane season.
Again, do not say: "I found two cock-
roaches in the rice to-day;" but refer to your
discovery as "a brace of cockers."
Lastly, on disembarking, remember that
your fellow-passengers are indebted to you
for enlivening an otherwise tedious voyage.
Do not wait to be presented with some token
of esteem; it is more modest (and lucrative)
to collect the debt quietly in the form of
watches, rings, etc., which they will leave
lying in their cabins for you. Write a short
note of thanks at a later date, taking care
not to furnish your address.
It is scarcely necessary to add that a good
memory for faces is a priceless asset to the
young traveller; it enables you to recognise
your late shipmates should you chance to
meet again, and thereby avoid the betise of
describing a gold hunter in the presence of its
former owner as a gift of the Royal Humane
Society.
"Hoc quae fecit nunquam deciderit!"
A TIP FOR FIANCEES.
Platonic affection is first cousin to Painless
Dentistry.
I wonder if this ship is called "she"
because she is so hard to manage. I wonder!
A SOUP COOLER
(Patent).
Bremen's Electric Fans.
"They say" is a tough old liar.
He who praises in presentia
And abuses in absentia,
May he have the pestilential
—-German.
It's better to fall in love than just to fall
anyway!
THE NEPTUNE STUNT.
After leaving Las Pal mas, all on board,
and especially those who would be "crossing
the Line" for the first time, were timorously
yet eagerly looking forward to the ever
mysterious visit of King Neptune, whose
realms we would soon be approaching.
Punctually on our arrival at his watery
frontier 5 deg. 35' N., Neptune Rex and his
suite mysteriously appeared over the ship's
side.
After parading the ship, presumably as an
awe-inspiration, he interviewed the Captain
with a view to arraigning all trespassers on
board before his Royal Court.
The following proclamation soon appeared
in all parts of the ship, and His Majesty
retired to quarters provided for him in the
foc's'le.
PROCLAMATION.
"Whereas it has been brought to my notice
that certain persons (passengers, loafers and
stowaways) 011 the Transport s.s. "Bremen"
unlawfully and with malice aforethought are
travelling and thereby committing tresspass
over those domains over which I hold
sovereign rights and control, to wit, those
latitudes lying between the parallels of
5 deg. 35' S. and 5 deg. 35' N.
"Therefore be it known to those present
that on the 12th day of June, 1920, at noon,
a court will be convened and holden upon
therein before-mentioned Transport s.s.
"Bremen" at which the aforesaid malefactors
will be arraigned and called upon to answer
these and such other charges as may be laid
against them.
"Given under my seal this 10th day of
June, 1920.
Witnesses—
Bibulous Bacchus
Hotstuff Aphrodite.
(Signed) Neptune."
At ten precisely, a school of porpoises was
seen on either side of the ship, possibly a
royal escort, and His Majesty emerged from
the foc's'le. In his right hand he gingerly
carried a home-made, or rather ship-made,
trident, and a crown cut from a kerosene tin
surmounted his okum locks which fell
rather dankly on his shoulders. Anyhow, he
looked a royal enough sight in his hessian
robes, and if he wasn't very exciting his
retinue made up for it. There were barbers,
who looked more like chefs, armed with
huge wooden razors; latherers, with their
buckets of soot and flour and water —
magnificent mess for a lather, as you who
went thru it will agree. A doctor, looking
suspiciously like Bullus the Wag, carried a
large tray of doughy looking "pills," while
his "offsider" jcarried a thermometer big
enough to take the temperature of an
elephant. Following, were a few Yenuses,


including Hotstuff Aphrodite herself—
brawny, hairy-legged, and in bathing togs!
While bears, scouts, and policemen, court
criers and Neptune's legal advisers brought
up the rear. Oh, what a motley crew!
After traversing the hurricane deck, they
gathered in form of a Court in the after
well-deck, where a platform had been
erected and a large canvas bath rigged and
filled by the Naval Ratings—ever the handy-
men—aboard.
It was obvious "from the jump off" that
this Court meant business.
Those pills, that lather, those razors, were
not ingeniously, mysteriously manufactured
for nothing. In fact they aH worked over-
time, and the scouts kept the Court well
supplied with "offenders," some of whom
came quietly whilst others, unwilling, had
to be forcibly "put thru it."
Trespassers, on being brought before the
Court, had their charge read out to them,
and punishment awarded. "To receive a
pill" or two according to ' temperature,'
to be shaved well and truly; tipped back-
wards from the Royal Barber's chair into
the bath; there to be thoroughly soused, and
finally deposited on deck." Some sentence!
And the way they carried out the sentence on
the first "case"— W.O. Ross—"put the wind
up" many a late war-hero. But his "charge"
wa3 undoubtedly a serious one-—"For having
taken tea many times in the second class
ladies' saloon." Yes, even that!—then he
deserved the No. 9 which it was alleged was
in the pill the "Doctor" administered with
fiendish glee.
Still it must be recorded he took his medi-
cine even as did Danker, in fine good part,
though at times it was thought he would lose
an ear or get scalped by mistake, and gave a
splendid filip to the fun, which continued fast
and furious for over an hour.
The end of the ceremony brought almost as
much excitement as the commencement. The
trespassers, seeing they easily outnumbered
Neptune and his overworked party, decided
that it was high time they were "hoist with
their own petard" and given a dose of their
own prescription.
The ensuing melee is hard to describe, for
the whole Court was dumped! Holus bolus!
Latherers and lather, doctor and pills, bar-
bers, bears, and Venuses became a struggling,
splashing, shouting mass till the bath was
close to bursting. Indeed, when a halt was
called to the morning's fun, it was found the
bath had sprung a bad leak, and would not
have lasted much longer. ».
The crowds that looked down from the
decks, the rigging and every "coign of van-
tage," rocked with laughter at one of the
finest performances of this ancient equatorial
ceremony they could wish to have seen.
FIVE YEARS.
[These lines were written on seeing again
for the first time in five years the stars of the
Southern Gross.]
Five years away—and there the stars of
home
Are twinkling bright across the trackless
main,
Then come (when sinks the sun far o'er the
sea)
Thoughts of the homeland stealing back
to me.
Five years away—and what those years have
wrought
Bring mingled thoughts of joy and sadness
blended;
For comrades lost we shed a tear, but still
Are proud that theirs were lives so nobly
ended.
Five years away—and how our lives are
shaped,
Torn from the pleasant paths to fields of
war!
The sword again the form of ploughshare
takes,
The giins are silent and the conflict o'er.
Five years away—and once again we turn
Our faces homeward o'er the Southern Sea,
Where friends await us and with welcome
warm
Will cheer and help when once again we're
free!
Five years away—and what those years have
done
To fill our lives with hope and happiness;
But time alone will show how good may
come
From what seems ill to our shortsighted-
ness.
Five years away—and now with comrades
tried —
Our wives—our children —all the years
have given.
Again we turn with hope and confidence
To forge anew the chains the years have
riven.
Five years away—and now the stars of Home
A kindly welcome shed upon our way.
"Old friends! We greet you. Cheered are
we to see
You watching still. Vous-etes bonne
compagnie!"
—V. R. Padman.
"I pity unlearned gentlemen on a rainy
day."—Lord Falkland.


SOME NATIVE ANIMALS OF AUS-
TRALIA.
(A short article which it is hoped will
interest those about to visit Australia for the
first time.)
One of the chief characteristics of Aus-
tralia's indigenous fauna is its distinctness
from that of other lands.
Up to the time of the arrival of the first
English settlers, in 1788, there were no
domestic or utility animals, or any of the
wild forms that are met with in other coun-
tries on the Continent.
This strange absence is attributable to the
fact that Australia is an island. Since re-
mote ages separation from other countries
my many miles of ocean has prevented migra-
tions.
The most interesting are perhaps the egg-
laying mammals, the platypus and the spiny
anteater. The former is very curious, being
a mixture of certain peculiarities of birds,
animals and reptiles. It has a bill like a
duck*s, small, webbed feet set close to a short,
furry body, ending in a flat tail like a beaver's.
They live in burrows, which have their en-
trances under water, in the banks of fresh-
water rivers where worms and water insects
are plentiful. Two or three eggs, soft-skinned
like a snake's, are deposited in the burrow,
and, when hatched, the young are suckled
like kittens, and the duck-like bill does not
for some time replace the small teeth they
have at first.
The spiny anteater is a small porcupine-
like animal with a rounded beak and a long
tongue covered with a viscid secretion, which
forms a very effective instrument for the cap-
ture of ants, on which he lives. He is also
armed with strong claws which enable him
to "dig himself in" vertically with great
rapidity. When attacked, he rolls himself into
a ball.
With few exceptions, the native animals
are marsupials (the word is coined from the
Greek, Marsipion, a pouch), carrying the
young in pouches in front of their bodies.
The largest is the kangaroo and, though
well-known, is difficult of description. An
Irishman, seeing a kangaroo for the first time,
described it like this: "Phwat was he loike?
Why shure, whin he ran he hopped, and
whin he sat down he was shtandin' up." And
that just about fits him.
The "old man kangaroos" grow to six feet
in height and travel in great, bounding hops
assisted by a strong, thick tail, which, by the
way, makes excellent soup. They are hunted
on horse-back with dogs, and sometimes in
motor cars, and they give exciting chase out
on the grassy plains where they graze in
thousands. When brought to bay, the bigger
'roos often catch the dogs and, rip them to
pieces with their powerful hind paws. Their
hides make fine leather.
The other members of the kangaroo family
include the wallaby, a small-sized 'roo, and
the tree-climbing 'roo, which scales the lofti-
est eucalypts, browsing on the topmost
branchlets.
The wombat, a harmless, root-eating bur-
rower, the Tasmanian Devil and the Tas-
manian Tiger, wild-dog types and the only
carnivorous marsupials, are found only in
Tasmania. Like the Dingo of the mainland,
they have a predatory nature; the farmers
are killing them off, and they will soon be
extinct.
The opossum family is famous for fur,
and on that aceount suffered very much until
protected by an Act of Parliament. Nearly
all these animals are easily tamed, harmless,
and make great pets. He would be a very
strange boy who lived near the Australian
bush and had not caught for himself a ring-
tailed 'possum for a pet, or a koala or native
bear, a pretty teddy-bear-like animal that
lives entirely on eucalyptus leaves.
The flying-foxes or fox-bats are met with
in Queensland. They are inordinately fond
of fruit, and their nocturnal visits to the
orchards are usually most destructive. Dur-
ing the day they hang head downwards from
the branches of trees, asleep.
The flying squirrel (or phalanger) is an
arboreal marsupial, somewhat misnamed, as
it neither flies nor is it a squirrel, though
similar. On each side a fold of skin is
stretched between the fore and hind phal-
anges. This enables them to glide from tree
to tree in quite long flights. A description,
however small, of Australian fauna would
not be complete did it not include the emu, a
bird, something like the ostrich, though lack-
ing the fine feathers, it enjoys, with the kan-
garoo, the distinction of being one of the
largest of the native fauna. On that Account
these two are placed on the. coat-of-arms of
the finest country in the world.
We're now on a ship called the Bremen
That used to be sailed by Hun seamen,
She deserves every praise
For changing her ways.
And taking home cargoes of freemen.
* *
Should your pudding a cockroach include,
Just remember a cockroach is food
To niggers, b'lieve me,
They're a delicacy,
And "hens," so they say, taste as good!
X * *
This two-funnelled packet, the Bremen
Once did thirty knots at top steamin',
So fast did she bunk,
I got in a funk,
Then woke up and found I was dreamin'.


A FISHY FISH.
By A. FYSH.
(Written one sultry day in the Tropics
whilst enviously watching the flying fish from
the hurricane deck.)
I wish I were a flying-fish to skim the break-
ing wave.
I'd love to do as they do—behave as they
behave.
I'd learn to dodge the Dolphin dour, and
cheat him of his lunch,
And then teach all the others how to trick
him—in a bunch.
I'd dive deep down the azure depths of Nep-
tune's cool domain,
And find that soft, pink coral cave where
mermaids entertain.
From off their tails some shiny scales I'd
souvenir—in play;
That is, of course, providing all the Mermen
were away.
An oyster I'd a visit pay, and watch him
make the pearls
That some day will bedeck the necks of
wives of belted earls.
The star-fish and the sea-egg I would visit
at their meals,
And in and out the wavy sea-weed chase the
conger ells.
In all the arts of flying I would always be in
front,
With spiral dives and side-slips and every
cunning stunt.
And then some day I'd startle the fiancees
on the poop
By deftly dodging Dolphin, and, nose-diving,
loop-the-loop.
There's so much that's nice
In the worst of us,
And so much naughtiness
In the best of us,
That it ill-behoves any of the
First, second, or third class of us
To talk about the rest of us—what!
THE SHIP WE'RE LIVING ON.
As our gallant skipper, Comdr. Collyer, re-
marked in an after-dinner speech, when the
"Heads" were entertained, "It is good to be
going home in a German ship with a British
crew, rather than in a captured British ship
with a German crew." And, after all, now
one looks back, she's not such a bad old tub
despite her 24 years and 24,000,000 odd
cockroaches.
When she first took the water she was con-
sidered ten years ahead of her time, and in
the early days was used by the Kaiser as his
flagship at the Kiel Royal Regattas. "Trip-
ping the light fantastic" on the promenade
deck, "on the footsteps of the Kaiser," might
have added to our pleasure but that we know
him now so well! However, she's had an in-
teresting past, doing for many years the New
York-Hamburg trip with accommodation for
200 Ist class, 150 2nd class, and 1200 3rd
class immigrants, with occasional visits to
China and Australia.
Then came the war, and she was interned
in Bremer Haven until May, 1919, when she
was handed over to the British Admiralty un-
der the Armistice terms. Since then a couple
of trips have been made to Australasian
waters—the first to Australia, the second to
New Zealand with 919 "families," including
170 babies.
There will be no prize given for the answer
to "How much Glaxo was consumed on that
trip"!
This is her third trip out, and whereas on
the return trips previously she carried home
cargoes of wheat, this time she will be re-
conditioned in Sydney, and return as a fully-
fledged P. & O. passenger boat.
This will be her last trip under the P. &
O. Company, as she then goes back to the
Government.
Here are a few points that might be of
interest: Her speed as a passenger ship is 13
knots, with cargo 12 knots; and" the roll and
weird list to port that ofttimes slithered the
deck chairs and dozing damsels into the scup-
pers is quite unnoticeable with 6000 tons of
wheat aboard. Indeed, according to the look-
out man —who ought to know if anyone does
—her gait home is as sober and steady as a
six-foot policeman in a prohibition State!
Her gross tonnage is 11,540, which in-
cludes, of course, the 20-ton foremast. She
has twin screws and is 550 feet long.
The crew reminded one rather of the fa-
mous whisky—Black and White—lls of the
total 333 being natives of Goa, in Portuguese
India.
The saddest particular, according to some,
was that she was a DRY ship; but one cannot
conclude without recalling what excellent
"lemon squashes" were turned out by the
second saloon barman and his dusky offsider.


"THE TIEADS' ENTERTAINED.' 4
On Monday, the sth July, the ship's cap-
tain, the O.C. troops, O.C. Naval Ratings,
and several other service knuts risked their
necks by climbing down the companion-ways
which lead to the bowels of the ship, where
are situated the messes of the 2nd class male
population, with whom they had graciously
consented to dine.
Our naval friends, with a bundle of bunt-
ing and their usual readiness on these oc-
casions, transformed our ugly "saloon" into
a fairy bower of color and animation. An
excellent menu (appended) and a lengthy
programme of interesting and amusing
speeches were equally appreciated by every-
one, and one of the pleasantest of Bremen
evenings resulted. The only casualties re-
ported seem to be those caused through im-
bibing "dry fiz," one man being nearly gass-
ed by a gulp of dry ginger ale, while many an
iron constitution went rusty with H2O.
After the toasts of "The King," "The
Commonwealth," arid "Our Guests" had been
honored, the chairman, W. O. Ross, showed
great ingenuity in finding excuses for bring-
ing people to their feet. As a rule the
victim was more than equal to the occasion,
and we believe that the ship's Sergeant-Major
has revised his opinion as to the number of
flies on the Adjutant.
The food preparation room's chief source
of worry (W. O. Hunter) afforded us all a
striking example of the science of "silent elo-
cution" by merely exhibiting for our benefit
the results that can be obtained from Glaxo.
(Result: 16 stones and three chins!)
The dramatic touch was supplied by Sgt.
Letch who, in proposing the toast "Our
Guests," referred to the O.C. troops in terms
of eulogy. Apparently quoting from some
classic work, he continued, "Some day, good
old captain —But the remainder of
his quotation, if there was any, was drowned
in "loud laughter," as Hansard would say,
"the good old captain" joining in heartily.
The meeting concluded by an enthusiastic
expression of appreciation for the work of the
Chief Steward and his staff.
"EAT, DRINK, AND BE MERRY."
THE WIIEREWITHALL.
Pullet d'Albat-Ross.
Sauce Bullus.
"May the wing of friendship never
moult a feather."
Pudding?
Sweets!
San fairy Ann! ! !
DESSERT.
Danker's Windfalls, i.e., 2 pairs Naval
Oranges and King Almonds.
Cafe des Crooks. Glace Morgania
Hennessey's 3-Star I.D.T.
Cigarros (Flora da Higgsa).
Woodbines and Very Dry Ginger Ale!!!
Wine, Women, Mirth and Laughter.
Sermons and Soda-water the day after.
The recipient of a generous issue of
tobacco and Red Cross flags from the Q.M.
Store was heard to remark: "It's just as well
the Q.M. Staff aren't all crooks!"
THAT ELUSIVE HORIZON.
During the week a fierce controversy raged
.as to the distance of the horizon —"that line
where meets the sea and sky"—from the hur-
ricane deck, a height of 25 feet from the
ship's water-line.
All sorts of answers were elicited, and even
bets could be had, so sure were some that
it was 15, and even 20, miles away. Many,
of course, were pure guesses, or not very
well-considered opinions, and it was decided
to "take the matter to higher authority," to
have this very interesting and much-debated
nautical point finally settled.
The second nevigating officer kindly con-
sented to do his best for us, and the result,
worked out to three decimal points, was
a surprise to most of us. His answer was,
"In NORMAL, clear weather, horizon visible
5.7 36 miles."
(A quick way to find the distance approxi-
mately is to take the square root of the height
of your eye in feet, plus a half, and call the
answer miles. —Ed.)
Hors d'Oeuvres.
Consomme Semper Idem.
DEFINITIONS.
Fillet Poisson Mysterieux.
Optimist —a man who expects to get a bar-
gain from a Jew and sell it to a Scotchman
at a profit; or one who buys hair restorer
from a bald-headed barber.
Rosbif Torpedo Ribbed.
Legumes Mixemup.
Pomme de terre Pontoon.
Collyerfleur avec Noble sauce.
Pessimist —a man who lives any time
with an optimist!


THOSE GOLDEN EAGLES.
(Ex-Las Palmas.)
If you asked one of the bird fanciers who
invested in a feathered songster at our last
port of call what he bought if for, he would
probably reply: "I like to hear 'em sing."
Now could he truthfully say he'd bought
it for a song? I ask you!—even a mere song?
I believe the lion is the only animal that
gets things (usually his dinner) for a mere
song. Howeverly—
"A fellow whose name rhymes with Carey's,
With form and a face like a fairy's,
Was seen by a few,
One morn about 2,
Trying to coax a song from his canaries."
And this gentleman, an officer, had, it is
alleged, a glass of "something" in one hand
and bird seed in the other. Such tender re-
gard for his dearly be-bought.
But here is the strange part about this inci-
dent. Having given the wee birdy a sip from
the glass, a song was at last coaxed, with the
result that it sounded suspiciously like a
hiccough!
As this is a dry ship, this would seem to be
a serious matter and ought to be stopped.
Anyway, I would warn all canary (?)
owners not to leave them out the rain.
First, because birds catch sore throats, tho'
a canary would suffer less than an ostiich or
a giraffe in that respect. Secondly, because
kalsomine (especially shade yellow) does
wash out, and so we've enough spadgers m
Aussie already anyhow.
The following pathetic story in rhyme is
founded on fact. It has since befen reported
that the same bird is now back in Las Palmas
singing the jazz stuff the Sister taught her,
in the shade of a biscuit tree in the little
back garden of her former owner, Don Pedro
Carlos Miguel, the olive oil merchant.
Have you heard of the canary Sister Nolan
bought on spec ?
She got it at Las Palmas and she hung it up
on deck.
It really was a lovely bird —a priceless little
thing,
So Sister thought she'd teach it how to
whistle, chirp and sing.
At night time from her cabin such weird
noises could be heard;
The Captain said, "Don't be afraid, it's
Sister with her bird.
She's only whistling jazzes (now in London
all the rage)
To a blessed old hen-sparrow she's got
locked up in a cage."
The bird, it heard this rude remark, and
fairly got the pip,
"If that is what they think of me, I'll leave
the blooming ship."
So when we got to Durban, we heard a
shriek —a cry I
As Dickie's cage door opened and she sang
Tosti's "Good-bye"!
OUR ATTEMPT TO REACH AUSSIE BY
AIR.
By LIEUT. G. H. M. St.G. POTTS, A.F.C.
After the inevitable press photography
stunts and the embarrassing scrutiny of the
usual crowd of rubber-necks, we pushed off
from Hounslow Aerodrome on November
21st, 1919.
After 4 months of preparation we felt
quite satisfied w T ith our chances to pull off
the stunt. Our bus, a Blackburn "Kangaroo,"
had proved its mettle doing North Sea patrols
"pendant la guerre," and our two "power
eggs" carried 250 h.p. Rolls Royce motors—
the finest aero-engines in the world (and
I'm not being paid for this testimonial).
We took off with Leiut. Rendle, chief pilot,
at the wheel, Capt. Wilkins, navigator, Lieut.
Williams, 2nd pilot, and the writer, engineer.
A cargo consisting of engine spares, emer-
gency rations, sleeping hammocks, a sport-
ing rifle, mosquito nets, fishing lines, one
clean collar and a shirt, as personal ward-
robe, and lots of hope. The Channel crossing
was made in 6 minutes, and a course set for
Lyons. Over Amiens we ran slap into a
snow storm —impossible to climb over it, so
we "barged" through. The thermometer
dropped to 12 degrees F.—the water, boiling
out of the radiator, froze in large blocks on
the overflow pipes, and for over an hour the
crew gave a perfectly good imitation of
Zulus on an iceberg. After flying blind for
two hours we sneaked down through a break
in the clouds and landed at Romilly Sur
Seine.
Our next hop was to Lyons where a short-
ago of petrol made it necessary to alter our
original plans, and break journdy at Istres
instead of running thru to Pisa.
Our first attempt to run from Istres to
Pisa developed into a whole family of Med-
iterranean thunderstorms.
The thunderstorms won in the 3rd round,
and we retired to Istres again, where a
jambed throttle made a landing somewhat
difficult.
On our next attempt, darkness compelled
us to land at St. Raphael. The Commandant
of the aerodrome evinced great interest in
Australia, and our chief pilot, in the course
of conversation, tried to describe the Aus-
tralian Duckbilled Platypus. His oration,
into which he worked most of his vocabulary
of 50 French words .and numerous gestures,
left his listeners wkere they started, tho'
they grinned sympathetically and thanked
him "mille fois!"


From St. Raphael we set out over the
Gulf of Lyons for Pisa. A persistent head-
wind pulled our ground speed down consider-
ably, so much so that the 2nd pilot was
firmly convinced that a small steamer 4,000
feet below was rapidly overtaking us. Dur-
ing this stage of the flight we passed over
Monte Carlo, Cannes, and several other
famous watering places.
On arrival at Pisa we found the aero-
drome deserted. Some time later, two des-
cendants of Caesar arrived on the scene and
made noises like a fish shop. Our Italian
was nil, so we in turn quoted passages from
Caesar's Gallic wars—the result was disap-
pointing. Our two friends smiled, but the
man is not yet born who can determine the
locality of the nearest pub from a smile. A
R.A.F. representative eventually arrived, and
our troubles for the moment were at an end.
The following day we had an uneventful
spin to Rome. St. Peter's, the Capitol, the
ruins of the Colliseum, here and there the
remains of the old city walls—the ancient
stronghold Of Romulus and Remus—bristled
with easily recognisable places of great his-
torical interest.
Capua, a small town some 12 miles from
Venice, was a next stopping point, and from
here we made a most satisfactory run to
Taranto.
As our next stage was a sea run of 650
miles, we gave the old bus a thorough run
over in the afternoon, and next morning at
7 a.m. hopped off for the Suda Bay aerodrome
on the Island of Crete.
Two hours after starting, Corfu, the
famous Grecian summer resort, showed up
beneath us.
Desire for a cigarette was the strongest
sensation registered on this 7-hour flight.
The writer did pull out a cigarette and a box
of matches, but as the 2nd pilot pulled out
his revolver at the same time, the craving
for nicotine died suddenly. After all, smok-
ing is rather unnecessary when one's cock-
pit is unpleasantly near the petrol tanks.
On arrival at Suda Bay, we found the
aerodrome under water. We were fortunate,
however, in striking fairly solid ground, and
made a good arrival.
Next morning, when taxi-ing across the
'drome to take off, the starboard under-
carriage subsided into the mud, and even
with full throttle on both motors, the 'Roo
refused to hop.
For two days we dug.
Planking rails and galvanised iron sheets
were used to make a track, but all suffered
the same fate —swallowed up in the mud.
The problem was at last solved by securing
the services of 80 Bulgarian prisoners of
war. They pulled the Kangaroo out of the
mud, and raced across the aerodrome as if
they were taking it home as a souvenir.
The following morning we pushed off from
Suda Bay for Saloum, on the African coast.
An hour and a half after starting the return
oil-pipe on the port motor broke. As this
practically crippled the lubricating system,
we had to attempt a return on the starboard
motor. When half a mile from Suda Bay,
the port motor seized, the bus went into a
flat spin, and for 20 seconds four healthy
Aussies would have sold out for a very small
sum. Our C.P., however, managed to get
us out of the spin, and in landing down wind,
the starboard tyre burst and swung us into an
8 feet high mud bank! The same four
Aussies sat in their cockpits for a few
minutes and then heaved a sigh of disappoint-
ment as the £lO,OOO prize floated tantalizing-
ly out of sight and reach.
* * *
[On arrival in Australia news was re-
ceived that the Australian Government had
awarded each of the disappointed aviators a
£4O consolation prize.—Ed.]
MEDICATED MEMOS.
The hospital, fortunately, has not had its
accommodation strained at any time. The
only serious cases were three operations for
appendicitis, which were very successful.
According to the night orderly, the only
in-patients were a few suffering from minor
complaints. One man has dyspepsia, brought
on by thoughtlessly putting away a square
meal in a round stomach. Another, a third-
class patient who had by mistake consumed
a first-class dinner much too rich for him,
avows that a boil in the kettle is worth two
on the neck!
A sergeant from the orderly room, who
had taken by accident some ink (kept un-
wisely in a Guinness' bottle), was given a
few nibs, which made him "right" in no
time; whilst another, who swallowed (of all
things) a spoon! will not be able to stir
for some time.
It will also be observed, by the way, that
the orderly himself is suffering from a chron-
ically facetious disposition.
With regard to the dispute about the over-
all—it has been found that it won't fit Cap-
tain Oakley, but probably Fitzpatrick.
M.0.: " But would you, in civil life, come
to me for a trivial thing like that?"
Digger: "No, sir, I wouldn't; I'd send for
you!"
WANTED.—Soldier with fa>rming experi-
ence; milker, steady, sober, to Milk Arrow-
root Biscuits. Apply, in person, the Hospital.


SEPTIMUS' SUGGESTIONS.
I hadn't been aboard long when I came
across Septimus. He was a seventh child born
in September, hence the classic moniker; and,
as is proper with such a name, he preserved
an aloofness almost mysterious.
Of course, he played chess and blinked at
the pawns through pince-nez and generally
had the appearance of being a chap of deep
thought and profound philosophy.
On getting into conversation, I found that
he pondered, like lots of "advanced'
thinkers, on the next war, and it was he, not
I, who started the one-sided discussion on
"Hybrids and their usefulness in War time.
"You know," said he, "what useful
animals mules were in the war."
I agreed.
"Well now," getting aggressive, "the guns
and G.S. waggons they pulled were elabor-
ately camouflaged, leaving the mules easy
targets. Why couldn't they cross them with
zebras, and make them self-camouflaging?
"Wonderful thought, Sep.," I said. "Got
any more?"
"Rather," said Septimus, waxing enthus-
iastic as I seemed sympathetic. "When I
think of the messenger dogs shot on the
parapet, I always wondered why they didn't
cross them with giraffes. A ' dogiralfe
could then have had a good look round with-
out leaving the trench!"
Again I couldn't but admit the excellence
of the idea, though it was rather a weird
notion.
"And then again," breaking in on my
thought, "when I looked at- the carriei
pigeons, winged by Fritz fluttering down,
the messages under their wings to fall into
enemy hands, I have writhed at the in-
eptitude of the powers that be. Why can't
they cross 'em with parrots—then they
could carry their messages verbally."
"Marvellous!" I gasped, astonished no end
at this extraordinary fellow.
"Of course," he continued, raising his eye-
brows and gazing dreamily seaward after
passing his fingers through his brushed-back
hair, "hybridism would be invaluable from a
commercial view point. Think of the bee- —
at present only able to collect the nectar in
daylight. Now if (here it comes, I thought)
they cross bees with glow-worms, the
4 Globee' could gather the honey at night
with ease, and double his output!"
I was speechless.
"And then there's the —" but the gong
for dinner went, and I rushed off, glad of an
excuse to escape from Septimus' Burbankian
suggestions and interview something edible.
—"Dope."
" THE ISOLATION WARD."
When travelling at sea, one meets so many
different sorts.
There's some indulge in grumbling, whilst
others join in sports;
But just the jolliest clique you ever saw of
those on board
Is the Quadruple Alliance in the Isolation
Ward.
We've orderlies and doctors; there are nurses
in galore;
The matron, she's a bosca, the best you ever
saw.
The people "Poor things up there, I'm
sure they must get bored,
Locked up in that old smutty place, the
Isolation Ward."
A certain member of us—he's as happy as
could be—
And his name it isn't Irwin, neither Rich, nor
Ted Halley;
His smile is just beguiling, by the nurses he's
adored;
In fact, that's why they come here—to the
Isolation Ward.
The meals are really splendid, and for break-
fast there is trout,
And with our mid-day luncheon we've a good
old Guiness stout.
At evenings we have dinner fit for any duke
or lord —
Why, Windsor Palace can't compare with
lots in our old ward!
After we have dined, in our saloon we may
be found,
Where, by the way, there's hardly room to
swing a cat around.
We chat and sip black coffees —much plea-
sure they afford!
Then drink liqueurs and smoke cigars—to
fumigate the ward.
The rumours of "flirtation" that most of us
have heard
Could not be on our old deck —-we haven't
got "a bird"!
And if, perchance, one came our way, we'd
throw her overboard,
For that's a written order of the Isolation
Ward.
To think that there will come a day when we
will have to part!
The thought of which is quite enough to
break our blessed heart.
The night before we leave the boat we'll say
a prayer to Gawd,
We never may be in another Isolation Ward.
" R."


AUSTRALASIANS IN ANTARCTICA.
Sir Douglas MawsoiTs Expedition of 1911-13.
(Written by a fellow-passenger who was a
member of the expedition, this brief account
of what Australasians have done among the
icebergs and floes of the snow-covered con-
tinent round the South Pole will no doubt
prove a cooling contrast to the sweltering
heat we have just experienced in the Tropics.)
The expedition, with the exception of
three members (two of whom lost their
lives), was manner by Australians and New
Zealanders. The Aurora left Hobart during
the second week in December 1911, and ar-
rived at Macquarie Island at Christmas, after
a stormy voyage through the "roaring for-
ties" and "howling fifties." A wireless sta-
tion and party of five, among which was the
writer, were left there to make this barren,
hurricane-swept rock their home for two
years.
Continuing her voyage the Aurora made
a landing a few days later on the Antarctic
Continent at Adelie Land. Here a large base
was established and 22 men left for explora-
tion and scientific work. The Aurora then
proceeded west along the ice barrier, and
after a journey of 1500 miles, landed a sec-
ond party. These men, however, found, to
their dismay, that they had been landed on
a huge iceberg, with the temperature at times
as low as 60 deg. below Zero, and it was
mainly due to the leader's daring and re-
sourcefulness that they managed to accom-
plish a hazardous transfer to the mainland.
The first and second parties, collectively,
made some very valuable scientific dis-
coveries. A party consisting of Mawson,
Ninnis and Mertz, however, met with dis-
aster. Ninnis fell down an unfathomable
crevasse, most of the food and dogs going
with him, never to be seen again. Later on
Martz died from malnutrition, and so Maw-
son was left to come back alone. He made
a lonesome and almost incredible journey,
through blizzards of driving snow and miles
of jagged ice-fields, suffering untold priva-
tions and misery. His dramatic arrival at
the base, when all hopes of him had vanished,
and just as the Aurora was leaving for Aus-
tralia, was very pathetic.
A small party had been left behind to
search for him, and so had to spend another
year on the bleak ice barrier. The number
two party were safely embarked and return-
ed to Australia.
Next year the men left on Macquarie Is-
land and at the main base were safely taken
aboard, and returned to Adelaide without
incident.
The expedition was a great success, much
valuable scientific information being added
to the world's store of knowledge. There
are vast tracts of territory on the Antarctic
Continent which still remain unexplored.
There is a cave on Macquarie Island where
some years ago a number of shipwrecked
persons lived through the vicissitudes and
discomfort of a two years' sojourn. A pass-
ing vessel, noticing distress signals, sent a
boat ashore and took the survivors off. Two
people (one being the only woman of the
party) died from sheer joy whilst being con-
veyed from the shore to the vessel.
Their knives, forks, general utensils, etc.,
made from birds' and seals' bones, still re-
main in the cave, grim reminders of those
who were rescued, and those unfortunates
who lie buried in the tiny graveyard nearby.
A COMPETITION HELD ON BOARD.
The Q-Answers sent in are both clever and
amusing, and judgment on their excellence
is left to our readers. Here they are:
From the Bridge—
Why was the Southern Cross?— Because
the Jupiter.
From the Marconi man—
When is the wireless?— When reduced to
an aeri-ell.
Why is the wireless?— Because the gener-
ator.
From the Purser who knows—
What is the ship's screw?— Two bobs a
minute* after leaving Durban.
From the look-out man—
Who did the sea-gull?—Allbiitross!
From the observant passenger—
Why did the butterfly flutter by?— B-
ecause it saw the dragon-fly drink the flagon
dry.
From the 3rd Officer—
Why did the cuckoo?— Because he gives
away what he kneads most himself.
From the Orderly Room—-
Why did the penholder?— Because he
thought her typewriternough for it, and
didn't want to letter go.
From Everybody—
What did the saloon bar?— Heads, both
The and Big.
From the Homesick—
What gives heartsease?—Tu-lips.
From the Officer of the Watch—
Where do the crows-nest?—ln the cross-
trees.
From the Barman—
Why did the barmaid ale? —Because that
Rum Stout Porter Bitter Rye.
In the street of "By.and by
One arrives at the house of "Never."
-—Cervantes.


NEW AMSTERDAM ISLAND.
Away down South in Lat. 37 deg. 51, Long.
77 deg. 32E., on the Grand Circle route, we
passed this lonely island, desolate-looking
and cold, its rocky shores in places fringed
with masses of impsssable kelp, its summit
2760 ft. high shrouded in clouds of leaden
mist. The island has an interesting history
having been discovered by Magellan's Com-
pany on March 18th, 1522. Magellan died a
short while previously, on their trip round
the world.
Not long afterwards it was named by Van
Dieman, after his ship, whilst on a voyage
from Holland to Java.
In 1892 the French navigator Bourdonnais
hoisted the French flag there, and it has re-
mained in French possession ever since.
Previous to this, in 187 3, a British warship
visited the island and Lt. Henry Hosken made
a thorough survey, naming the landing place
Hosken point.
Following the hoisting of the French flag,
Eure established a depot for ship-wrecked
crews in a cave about 800 yards from Hosken
Point. Outside the cave are two tarred posts
and a board with the following inscription:
"FRANCE, VETEMENTS POUR NAU-
FRAGES, EURE, JANVIER, 1893."
Inside the cave are the following provisions
for the use of any who might be unfortunate
enough to have to spend an enforced picnic
there:
1323 lbs. preserved beef.
1102 lbs. biscuit.
10 woollen shirts.
10 pairs cotton drawers.
10 blankets.
1 soldered box, containing 4 pkts.
of matches.
Also some cots, a cooking pot and a quantity
of dry wood left by fishermen.
The wisdom and thoughtfulness of thus
establishing a depot has since been well
proved. When the s.s. "Meridian" was
wrecked in the vicinity, 105 people lived on
the island for some months, until rescued by
an American whaler.
Beside the stock of food in the cave, rab-
bits and cattle are found everywhere, quite
tame, and living on the grassy slopes of the
southern side. Rock cod, lobsters, and cray-
fish abound about the landing place, and
there is a plentiful supply of fresh water ob-
tainable from rills in the steep cliffs.
The island is also conveniently situated for
correcting the ship's reckoning before ap-
proaching the coast of Australia.
We went close in to see if there were any
ship-wrecked people ashore, but having fired
two rockets and two detonators without ob-
serving any response, we turned away, and
steamed for "home," the island soon becom-
ing lost astern in the mist and driving ram.
THE TRUTHFUL TRAVELLER
All my life I've been a rover,
I have ranged the wide world over,
And I've had the very devil of a time.
I've philandered through Alsatia
With the Nautch girl and the Geisha,
I have heard the bells of San Marino chime.
I've hobnobbed in Honolulu
With the Zouave and the Zulu;
I have fought against the Turks at Spion
Kop j;
In a spirit of bravado
I've accosted the Mikado
And familiarly addressed him as "Old Top."
I've been captured by Banditti,
Kissed a Squaw in Salt Lake City,
Carved my name upon the tomb of Li Hung
Chang;
And been overcome by toddy
Where the turbid Irrawaddy
Wends its way from Cincinatti to Penang,
I have crossed the far-famed ferry
From Port Said to Pondicherry;
In a droshky shot the rapids at Hong Kong;
I have pounded to a jelly
Dancing Dervishes at Delhi,
And I've chased the chimpanzee at Chilta-
gong.
5.
I have slain the Beri-beri
With a ball from my knobkerry;
I have climbed the Pole and leapt across the
Line.
I've seen seals in Abysinnia
And volcanoes in Virginia,
And I've dived into the shark-infested Rhine.
From the Pemmican's fierce claws
And the Tiffin's gaping jaws
I have never shrunk in abject terror yet;
In the jungle I have tracked them,
And attacked them and then hacked them
Into mincemeat with my trusty Calumet.
I have interviewed the Mullah,
Kruger, Menelik, Abdullah,
Lobengula, Sitting Bull and Clan-na-Gael;
When I think of where I've been,
What I've done, and what I've seen,
I'm surprised that I'm alive to tell the tale.
—"Ancient Mariner."
The young son of one of our most success-
ful card fiends was asked how it was his
father had such bad luck with the gee-gees,
yet always had phenomenal good fortune
with the pontoon pack.
The boy ingenuously replied that father
couldn't shuffle the horses!


WITH APOLOGIES TO RUDYARD K.
If you can keep your feet when all about
you
Are losing theirs and cursing themselves
blue;
If you can sleep in comfort when she's rolling
And make allowance for her pitching, too.
If you can fall and not be bruised in falling,
Or, being heaved about, don't heave in
turn;
If you can smile when all the kids are
bawling,
And help the mothers bath 'em in return.
If you can stand the joke when Doctor
"stabs" you—
Inoculates your arm with loving care,
And keep a pleasant face when all around
you
The coal-dust coats your bunk and fills the
air.
If you can always do just what you ought to.
And doing it the best it can be done,
You're worthy of the best "Repat." can give
you,
So go ahead and win, my Sporting Son!
28rd BREMEN PSALM.
The Bremen is my ship, I shall not want
(another).
She maketh me to lie down with green
visage.
She taketh me over the troubled waters.
She restoreth her bunkers with coal-dust,
which sticketh closer than glue or a mother-
in-law. ~
Yea, though I go to my cabin at nightfall,
I will fear much evil,
For cockroach art near me;
And nothing the bed steward doth com-
forteth me.
I feel I eat at table in the presence of mine
enemies.
Only, when the ship rolls, my cup runneth
over.
Surely good health and comfort
Shall come to me later on in my life;
And I will dwell in a house
ON LAND for ever.
—"Dope."
Some smart young A.B's. on the Bremen
Seem remarkably fond of the women,
Each night on the poop
They sit in a group,
And, gee-whiz! The tales they are telUn'!
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Atlas: Your effort was so feeble that it had
to be assisted to the W.P.B.
Glaxo: You'll have to ask the Matron —all
the staff on this paper are single men.
Sleepless: We read yours aloud! Since when
the cat has been marked A.W.L.
Bolsliie: Risk of fire in the W.P.B. in-
fluenced us to consign your ruddy verse
to a watery grave.
Charity: Shades of "John Bull"! Please
don't remind us of such contemporaries.
Nervous: Try again—"Nil Desperado"! We
understand "Glaxo" is a good brain food.
THINGS WE WANT TO KNOW.
1. —Who is Edward the "Roo"?
2. —Who is the gentleman in the first class
for whom the vision from the second class
haunts the main staircase before and after
meals?
3.- —Whether the ex-Air Force officer will
be very proficient in French at the end of the
voyage?
4. —Where did "he" get that hat?
s.—Who is Wandering Willie, and where
did he meet his cousin?
6.—Where the cockroaches go in the Win-
ter-time, and do they take the hens with
them?
7.—Whether there is a passenger known as
La Belle Amie?
8. —As we believe it is the fashion in
Australia to wear trousers the same color as
the hair —black trousers with black hair, and
so on—will the O.C. Troops return to Stone
Age garb to keep in the fashion?
"IT'S THE CLIMATE, YOU KNOW."
Why won't the elder lady folks
Remember it is wise
To let the young ones have their fling,
And please to close their eyes?
Remember, too, when hearts are young,
And Spring is in the air,
Most youthful fancies turn to love—
Hence two in one deck chair!
Surely there's nothing wrong in that,
The sentiment's Platonic;
The weather's cooling every day—
Fear not! 'Twill ne'er get chronic!
AFTER LAS PALMAS.
Benevolent Digger: Have a cigar, Sarj?
Suspicious Sergeant: What's the matter
with it, Dig?
Most married people praise marriage with
tears in their eyes,


CROSSING THE LINE.
On the Promenade Deck.
By CAPT. WILKINS.
The approach to the Line (equatorial) was
heralded by curious murmurings and buzz-
ing sounds emerging from the windows of the
smoking room at an hour when all seemly
lads and lassies had in recumbent pose
sought forgetfulness. Soon after ten p.m.,
the steady tread of martial feet resounded on
the after spa, and main decks and echoed
to the bridge. In vibrant tones a violin led
a choir of maidens' voices sweet in them-
selves; but when baulked by sheets of tissue
paper spread on saw-toothed combs, scarce
merited the censorous demand that all music
cease at 11 p.m.
However, that was all preliminary, and
when the eventful day arrived the ceremony
started with a punctuality characteristic of
the Senior Service.
Assembled amidships, port side, six
nymph-like maids, in flowing gowns and
tresses spread, arranged about a minstrel
fair who led the way. Bibulous Bacchus, at-
tended by a youthful sprite who bore the
seals of office, followed closely on their heels,
while Neptune, in his chariot, drawn by war
lords, proceeded to his special Court on the
starboard promenade.
The Court convened, and proclamations
read, the six seductive maidens, with
practised frankness born of guilt, advanced
in pairs and acclaimed their readiness to
prove that they had never used paint,
powder, nicotine, or dimmed the brightness
of their souls by one vain thought, and so
were eligible to join the "Sirens of the Sea"
brigade.
On giving proof, they were initiated with
special rights, including innoculation with
anti-love vaccine!
Those others, who trespassed for the first
time in Neptune's precincts, were then ushered
to the confines of a prison, and were brought
forth later to stand their trial. Invariably
they pleaded inadvertence, unsatiated long-
ing for love vaccine and a desire for anti-
Bremen mixture. These were administered
and for perquisite a little powder added.
When all the fair sex had been arraigned,
the trusty henchmen of His Majesty un-
earthed a guilty culprit, one named Vaughan,
of naval persuasion, who had dared inflict his
presence. With firm determination the war-
lords brought him forth, and his inadequate
defence Tendered him liable to unlimited
administration of anti-Bremen serum tem-
pered with love-vaccine. (No visible signs
of effect upon going to press.—Ed.) For his
unkempt appearance he was severely lathered
and his scraped, a process that was
repeated when a younger victim faced the
iD-II
Court.
Proceedings were about to close when a
disturbance in the crowd attracted his
Majesty's attention, and a diligent search
revealed yet another culprit—Quacheritus
Loci. His depredations on the "inner men"
of Neptune's subjects by means of psuedo-
sugar pills, had created great activity. He
was duly questioned, proved guilty, and his
sentence promulgated.
The Court was closed, and his Majesty
returned in state from whence he came. His
suite were noticed retiring to the cabins
occupied by Mrs. King, Mrs. Harman, Miss
Bellamy, Miss King, Miss Gibson, Mile. Paris,
Miss Mary Starr, Lt. Comdr. Starr, Lts.
Boyces and Potts and Master Edwards.
When Neptune himself disrobed, Captain
Wilkins stood revealed.
LIGHT ON THE GREEN BAIZE.
Card games are in full swing all round the
ship. Peaceful Patience and Rummy in
"Cocktail Alley" down to tense Poker and
Pontoon on the lower deck, for a pack of
Red Cross cards helps to while away many a
happy hour and hard-earned Bradbury.
Several successful Whist drives have been
held, and the winners on two occasions are
given below. Why they are called "drives"
is hard to say; anyhow they helped to drive
dull care away, and at these pleasant sociable
evenings there was no place for ennui.
The successful ones were awarded prizes
as follows:
First Drive, 12 th June —
Ist.—Miss D. Scotland and P.O. Hurst
(Cash Prize, £1).
2nd.—Sgt. and Mrs. Bennett (Bag and
Purse, and two Books of Poems).
Second Drive, 13th June —
Ist. —Miss P. Haskell (Writing Case).
2nd.—Mrs. Swan (Ash Trays and Photo
Frame).
Third Drive—
-Ist. —Mrs. Squires (Photo Frame and
Pin Tray).
2nd. —P.O. Hodge (Cigarette Case and
Book).
The reports of other games have not been
received, but the third class passengers held
many which were very pleasant and enjoy-
able.
A WHIFF!
A number of girls have been observed
smoking on deck. Cigarettes, of course—not
cigars, despite their cheapness at Las Palmas.
The reason is simply that a cigar turns a
nice girl into a giddy one, and that would
nevah do!


DISPELMANISM.
Something you cannot afford to neglect!
The Course that makes you different.
How often lately has it happened that,
sitting, soliloquising, sweltering on deck,
you have thought what an extraordinary
thing is Memory, and your memory would
have at once called up visions of the adver-
tisements of this or that (generally that)
System of Memory Training in the papers
which, alas! are for a time beyond our
reach?
But have your ever paused to ask yourself
what this means?
Have you realised that if the present rate
of progress is maintained, before long prac-
tically the entire population of the British
Isles will have had their memories so de-
veloped as to be incapable of forgetting any-
thing whatever? And the inevitable result
will surely be this—that the man who will
stand out of the ruck, the man who will com-
mand the Price of Individuality will be he
who has learned not only to remember, but
to forget.
This is where Dispelmanism comes In. By
the aid of a few simple exercises, easily mas-
tered by all except the actively imbecile, ob-
livion can be so cultivated that you will be
able to forget anything, anywhere, at any
time.
No case is too obstinate for successful
treatment. How numerous are the cases on
this very ship of discharged, and about to be
discharged, men, whose avowed ambition on
returning to civil life is to "forget the whole
business"! This is where we can be of as-
sistance. Our System has well been called
Mental Demobilisation. This striking phrase
will help the reader to grasp what Dispel-
manism has done on this ship.
Already, by our help, twenty-seven
N.C.O.'s have been trained to attach no sig-
nificance whatever to the word Bar, and are
quite oblivious to the fact that this is a dry
ship.
After only four lessons, four ladies have
expressed a puzzled concern as to the color,
smell and general appearance of a cockroach.
Sixteen sergeants and nine privates, only re-
cently enrolled as students, have expressed
a quite lively and genuine curiosity concern-
ing the flavor of bully beef, whilst a number
of young lady pupils, comparatively recent
clients (since May 28th) of the Institute,
have almost entirely forgotten the reason of
their journey.
Need we say more? ....
(We needn't—but we will.)
These exercises are so compiled that they
can be practised in the privacy of your cabin
or reclining in your own or someone else's
deck-chair, as they require no physical effort*
whatever. Let us conclude with an apt ex-
ample of what its aid will do.
An elderly Digger—one of our latest stu-
dents —happened to be returning from inocu-
lation. Wishing to banish from his memory
the smell of iodine and other minor horrors
of this arm-puncturing parade, he drew out
his text book (pocket edition, "Little Grey
Books in the Vest" series) and, walking in
the direction of an open hatchway, proceeded
to forget, quickly and thoroughly, the nau-
seating events of the morning.
His success is recorded in these, his own,
remarkable words: "I remembered no more
till I woke in Durban Hospital!"
His friends are now taking the course with
a view to forgetting the mess they found him
in at the bottom of the hatch.
Tills is what we can do for others.
Let yours be our next case.—(Advt.)
WAS IT A RUMOUR OR ONLY A BED-
ROOMER?
Still it is really wonderful how rumours
do start. Here's an example. At Amster-
dam Island, a lady overheard this remark
made by a ship's officer, who, with his
binoculars was scrutinizing the coast. "I
can see a Sandy Cove running in shore, sir,
and a Heavy Swell on the beach." She im-
mediately rushed off to her companion and
told her the officer had said there were two
men probably "ship-wreckeds" on the island!
IS IT A PACT
That the Chief Steward really is fond of
chocolates?
That sonambulants under the subcon-
scious impression that the ship is sinking
must report to the barman in the first saloon ?
That Methuselah has again been smitten by
Cupid's daring dart?
That an extra large cup is to be seen tower-
ing above the others any afternoon about
four, in the ladies' saloon?
A MILD ATROSSITYI
They sat beneath the mizzen,
'Way back in the stern;
He held her hand in his'n
And she held his'n in her'n.


A SUGGESTION TO ANTI-
How can a man live a happy married life
PROHIBITIONISTS*
when his wife eats biscuits in the bed?
We agree that this ship is as dry as a
It might interest the "players with the
cards fifty-two" that the one and only card
hone-mill, a veritable U.S.A. afloat-—but that
game mentioned in the Bible was the oc-
is no reason why ye bibers of drinks of divers
casion when Nebuchadnezzar!
sorts should make the sojourn at Durban an
alcoholiday. Stick to frog's milk or sherbert
—if possible—and don't get marooned.
Those who bet are gamblers (dreadful
word); but as a man who doesn't bet is no
BREMENITIES.
better, we can hardly say anything if the
1 #Jl.wJL!4irX JL JL •
Poker partisans do ruffle the paste-boards
The Bremen's Role—Makes Miles "de Mer."
till the deck swabbers start their swabbing!
The Bremen's Roll —Makes "Mai de Mer."
The Bremen Rolls —Make Meals "de Mere."
*
It's fine to see sewing bees on every deck
Love —the Wine of Life.
—they all seem to realise that "a stitch in
Marriage—the morning after!
time saves an embarrassing exposure."
S. WATERS, PRINT., BRIDGE ROAD, RICHMOND.


.
!■
*
.
... V • ■ ' :
I • I" ' ' .V
'
■ ~ - • , . p ■
'
\
.
'
.
,
.. ' •• r| :
.
*
-
> ■
... .
*
l ii
r ! ,
'
.
'
' ' ' ' \f
' ' •/ ' r ' ' ,p r > '/V4
* ' >''
♦
'
*
-
> 7
• -w-


'jf ' V*> ,'' '
i ' r ' ' : ■ ' ■; - " V ; . , ' ■ ' " " ■ ' • ' '
— -


73
• ' ' # ' ' ■ ■ :
1 ■ " v% ■ ■ > t : 't j J < , "'* v \ 5 V ■^V?*J| , ' ,; ' / x * ■' ■ !
, ■ ; ' ... : ( %. - v ' ■ 1 ; s • ; ,
', - : ■ • . ■ - - ' . . " :
'
■ \ : ■'/'■-•' - : :. ' ■' • "' - ' . ' '■■ - . ' " '. ;■; 7
1
Wi y *V . f
■ ' . V. ■■ ?. .' . ' >' . ,'■ ' " ' .' . / . . ■ - : ; '■' .. ■".'. ' . . .:" " :
. ■ - : ' . ; v . ■ :: ::- '-. / ■■ •. ;. *:
.
