

BULLETIN NO. 13.
COMMONWEALTH FORESTRY BUREAU.
REPORT
ON
A Reconnaissance of the Mountainous
Part of the River Murray Catchment
in New South Wales.
BY
B. U. BYLES, B.Sc.For. (Adelaide),
Research Officer, Commonwealth Forestry Bureau.
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer. Canberra.


FOREWORD.
The original organization of the Commonwealth Forestry Bureau included, among others, a research
branch which, apart from the main problems of sylviculture and forest management, was designed to
investigate the occurrence of the two main forms of erosion in Australia, viz., that caused by water and
that caused by wind. Unfortunately the financial depression synchronized with the launching of the
Bureau and as a result its development has been greatly retarded owing to the impossibility of finding
funds for work of this description. In the circumstances it was fortunate that the services of one of the
specially trained research officers were retained long enough to enable him to make a start on the
investigation of the erosion occurring in the upper water catchment of the Murray river.
The results of Mr. B. U. Byles’ investigation will be found summarized in his report which, in a
typewritten form, has already been circulated among the authorities chiefly concerned. The interest
and the concern that it has aroused is the reason for its wider circulation in a printed form. It is
regrettable that financial considerations prevented the continuation of the work until the whole of the
catchment above the Hume dam had been investigated. The work ceased when less than a quarter of
the area involved had been surveyed, that is, the portion lying at the highest altitudes in the mountains
on the New South Wales side only. Erosion is taking place below the 3,000-ft. contour and there is every
reason to believe that the position on the Victorian side of the river is as bad as on the northern side,
while the area involved on this the south side is much greater. On the evidence of the report it is clear
that an investigation of the mountain catchments of other rivers of Australia where uncontrolled
grazing is permitted under lease, would disclose the same erosion wherever soil conditions are favorable
to it. The trouble does not cease with mountain catchments, for in northern New South Wales river
bank erosion of a serious nature is reported and the consequent silting over of agricultural lands is
causing grave concern. Such erosion may be expected in districts of high rainfall where the valleys have
been denuded of timber and torrential flood conditions are the consequence.
Mr. Byles’ report is a temperately worded statement of the position to-day in the upper catchment
of the Murray. The evidence in other lands as to what must follow further neglect of the problem should
be sufficient to warn authorities to take the matter in hand while there is yet time. The Murray river,
it Australia’s greatest waterway, serves three States ; very large sums have been spent on engineering
works which have for object the development of the agricultural wealth of the valley and the improvement
of the navigation of the river itself. All this work depends on an adequate supply of clear water in the
river and this depends on an adequate cover of forest or other vegetation in the mountain catchments.
The siltation of dams, the diminution of summer flow, the increase in the occurrence and in the severity
of floods from Albury to Renmark are some of the effects that may be anticipated if denudation of the
vegetation from the granite mountain slopes continues unchecked.
C. E. LANE POOLE,
Inspector-General of Forests.
1561.




SUMMARY;
TOPOGRAPHY.
Pages
7-10 The general lie of the land and the particular topographical features described.
ACCESS.
11 Routes of access are listed and described.
GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS.
12-14 All the highest country including the steepest slopes is granite, the non-granite country is
metamorphic and consists mainly of quartzites.
TREE COVER.
15-16 The various forest types are enumerated and described in detail.
17 Serious erosion is taking place over small areas in the alpine woody scrub type above 6,000
feet altitude.
19 Swamps in the plateau regions have dried up considerably in the last 30 years—the extensive
clearing of the snow gum is the probable cause.
21-23 Extensive destruction of the most valuable timber species, alpine ash (Eucalyptus gigantea),
has taken place as a result of successive severe fires. On some areas the removal of the
natural cover of alpine ash has been so complete that gullying has started in the
soft deep granite soil on 30-degree slopes.
24 Destruction of the radiata-viminalis stands in the wet country in the Geehi region has reduced
the present cover to a stand of 5 to 10 trees per acre with a very heavy undergrowth of
bracken.
THE GRAZING INDUSTRY.
25-26 The present use of the land, viz., grazing, is discussed for the whole of the southern highlands
in general and the Khancoban district in particular.
27 The present system of land tenure is described. All the mountain country is held under some
form of grazing lease. The terms of the lease do not permit destruction of timber, nor the
lighting of fires in the summer months, but actually fires are lit as often as the lessee thinks
fit and these fires destroy thousands of acres of timber each year.
27 The advantages and disadvantages of the present system of leasing are discussed.
EROSION.
28 Erosion at present going on may be classed under these heads, viz. :
(1) On the loose sandy granite formation in the main divide at elevations over 6,000
feet, caused by the destruction of the alpine woody scrub type.
(2) Erosion in the rotten granite deep soil formation in parts of the Ash belt caused by
destruction of the alpine ash by fire.
(3) Gullying in freehold country at elevations below 2,000 feet,
1561.—2


1,40,15 ... .
29 The protective efficiency of the catchment as it existed in 1928 when this matter was last
discussed is not being maintained and six reasons are given—
(l) The bush fires which every dry year sweep through the mountain country killing
thousands of acres of living timber.
(2) A degradation process started a long time ago in all the timber stands, in the
alpine ash and radiata-viminalis-eurabbie types in the wet region
surrounding Kosciusko this degradation process is now taking place at a great
rate and has, in certain areas, reached the stage where ash trees have completely
disappeared and erosion has started in the soft deep granite soil. Further, the
velocity of this degradation process increases in geometrical proportion and will
be far and away greater in the next twenty years than it has been in the past
twenty years.
(3) The gullying and the erosion in the low country (below 2,000 feet) has increased
considerably as a result of the heavy rains of last winter. This is shown by the
fence posts now hanging in mid air and having fresh soil still adhering to them.
(4) Landslides which have taken place since 1928. One in particular having occurred
in the valley of the Geehi River in the spring of 1930, and which caused the
river to be thick with mud for over two weeks after the slide occurred.
(5) Destruction of the alpine woody scrub cover at altitudes over 6,000 feet which has
been considerably increased by fires since 1928.
(6) The extension of gullies and gutters which have started on the grass slopes of the
Kosciusko tops.
NEED FOR CONTROL OF THE CATCHMENT.
30 The need for effective control of the catchment is obvious. The most suitable method of control
is considered to be the maintenance of the catchment as a grazing and forestry proposition
so as to give the largest value as summer grazing country and at the same time to afford
the necessary protection to the catchment.
FIRE CONTROL.
30 Ninety-nine per cent, of the fires are lit by human agency either to clear away the collection
of rank impalatable grass or to remove scrub from the stock-routes.
REMEDIAL MEASURES.
A. — Fire Protection.
31 (1) Construction of tracks to enable rangers to get about the country and get gangs of
men on to the scene of fires. At present, even if rangers and fire-fighters were
available, it would be impossible to get them near the fire owing to the rough
nature of the country.
(2) Appointment of rangers to supervise burning off on grass lands, to see that these
fires do not get away into the steep country, and to patrol the country during
the summer months.
(3) Improvement of existing stock routes so that there will be no necessity to burn the
. scrub in order to make them passable.
(4) Investigations and studies to be made to determine the exact effect of repeated
light burning upon the growth of grass and scrub.


Pages B. — EROSION.
(1) After a sufficient degree of fire protection has been attained, planting or sowing of
the bare eroded areas in the ash belt.
(2) Investigations to be made to ascertain the efficacy of certain shrub types, bracken,
&c., in the control of run-off and erosion.
C. —Grazing.
(1) Delimitation of land to be used for grazing and land which on account of steep
slope is to be reserved from grazing.
(2) Provision to be made to enable the level grazing land to be burnt and the fires
controlled so as not to burn the timber on the steep slope country.
(3) Local control of grazing land under a system more adaptable to changes in local
requirements. 6
(4) Investigations and studies to be made into the following subjects
{a) Composition of the pasture on the grazing lands and the relative
palatability of the various grasses and edible shrubs.
(b) The conditions controlling the growth of the more palatable species and
the effect of clearing and burning on their survival and growth.
(c) The possibility of introducing better species of fodder grasses, herbs and
shrubs.
(d) Development of a system of grazing which will do away with the necessity
of periodical burning.
Control by the Water Authority over the freehold land below 2,000 feet is necessary in order to
stop the serious gullying and erosion.


PREFACE.
This report on the mountainous part of the Murray Catchment in New South Wales is the result
of a reconnaissance carried out in the summer of 1931-32 and occupying six months.
Access throughout the area is extremely difficult and the only means of transport are horses ;
throughout the job I travelled with one saddle horse and one packhorse, but owing to the strenuous nature
of the work and the somewhat poor natural feed available in the mountains, frequent changes of horses
were necessary.
The existing tracks are listed in the report; my method of working was to travel these tracks with
the horses, pitch my camps in suitable places, examining the country around the camps on foot. Apart
from the tracks shown and the easy country of the Murray plateau and Tooma River basin, very little
of the country is accessible on horseback ; some of it can be travelled with good horses but it is not a
practicable method for many days at a time ; a very large part of it is inaccessible even to the best horses.
The local inhabitants have no call to go down into the deep valleys such as the Little Gorge, Burke’s Gorge
and the Indi River Valley, consequently they do not visit these places and have no knowledge of the
country in them.
Travelling the valley country on foot is extremely hard work on account of the steepness of the
slopes and the very heavy scrub ; moreover, in work of this nature it is necessary to descend from the
top of the ridge into the valley bottom and return again to the top of the ridge all in one day ; in many
cases this involved twelve hours of the most arduous walking and climbing.
On account of the local inhabitants’ lack of knowledge of the steep country —where the erosion
and forest destruction is at its worst —any inspection or reconnaissance work carried out in this country
must be undertaken by men who are able to find the way about by themselves without any reliance on
local guides.
B. U. BYLES.
Commonwealth Forestry Bureau,
Canberra.
23rd May, 1932.


Report on the Murray River Catchment in New
South Wales.
TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION.
The mountainous portion of the Murray Catchment forms a narrow strip on the western slope of
the main divide ; the total length from north to south is about 80 miles, while the width varies from 2 to
18 miles, with an average width of about 14 miles. On the east the main divide forms the boundary for
a direct distance of 40 miles from the Bulls Peaks to the Pilot, Mount Kosciusko being pretty well in the
middle ; north of the Bulls Peaks the boundary is the divide between the Murray and Tumut Rivers
extending for 40 miles to Pilot Hill in the Bago Plateau.
The drainage system is made up of three main rivers : the Tooma River to the north, Swampy
Plain River in the centre, and the Indi River in the south. The Murray River in name extends only
as far as Bringenbrong, above which the two main heads are the Swampy Plain and Indi Rivers.
Starting from Bringenbrong, which is on the low country at an altitude of about 800 feet, and
following the Indi upstream, the course is south south-east until Tom Groggin is reached, a direct distance
of 28 miles ; from here the course is practically east until within 2 miles of the summit of the main divide ;
from here the course is practically north-south, parallel to the divide, not more than 4 miles from it.
The geographical head of the Murray maintains this course in Limestone Creek for a considerable distance
into Victoria ; the political boundary, however, is a comparatively small creek which joins the Murray
some 4 miles south of the Pilot Trig. Station. Near Tom Groggin two substantial tributaries join the
Indi —these taking the drainage from part of the southern end of Kosciusko massif; these are the only
two important tributaries on the New South Wales side.
Following the Swampy Plain River upstream from Bringenbrong, the course is south-east until
Geehi is reached at the foot of the Kosciusko slopes ; here the river forks, one branch—the Geehi River
coming from the plateau region to the north, and one —the Geehi Creek—coming in by a big sweep from
the southern end of Mount Kosciusko ; in addition to these, the Bogong Creek comes in from the plateau
region on a course parallel to that of the Geehi River. One fairly substantial creek—Back Creek flows
into the Swampy Plain River near Khancoban and takes the drainage from the foothill region.
The Tooma River joins the Murray near Tintaldra ; following upstream the course is north-east
through the low country until the foothills are reached at Possum Point. From here it continues
south-east as far as Black Jack Gorge where the main river heading in the plateau country comes in.
Tributaries on the north side are Tumbarumba Creek, Burra Creek, Paddy’s River, Maragle and Maragle
Back Creeks, all of which take the drainage from the southern slopes of the Bago Plateau.
The Tumut-Murray Divide.
In the north is the Bago Plateau sloping to the north and east into the Tumut River, to the west
into the low country at Adelong, and to the south to the Tooma River Basin ; the plateau is mainly gently
sloping country from 3,500 to 4,500 feet elevation.


The Tumut-Murray divide south of the Bago Plateau is a very level ridge and practically flat,
with slopes less than 15 degrees; the altitude runs from 3,000 to 4,500 feet at the Nurenmerenmong
Trig. The easy sloping country extends for about 3 miles on the east, after which are 30 to 40-degree
slopes dropping about 1,500 feet to the Tumut River ; on the west side the easy slopes extend all the way
down the Tooma River Basin.
At the south this ridge rises suddenly from a general level of 3,600 feet to Manjar at 5,225 feet.
Manjar is actually the most northern point of the Murray Plateau, which is the source of the Tooma, Tumut
and Geehi Rivers From Manjar south the Tumut-Murray divide is a flat top at 5,200 feet elevation
and running up to 6,000 feet at the Bulls Peaks.
The Main Divide.
South of the Bulls Peaks the Main Divide is a level ridge top relieved by occasional small rocky
knobs ; the altitude is 6,000 to 6,500 feet. The steep slopes of the Snowy River on the east come right
to the top of the divide, but on the Murray side are large extensions of the flat ridge top forming
promontories into the valley of the Geehi River. In the neighbourhood of Mount Twynham the broad
ridge top ceases and steep boulder-strewn slopes lead up to the Kosciusko massif, the general altitude
of which is between 6,500 to 7,000 feet. The top of the Kosciusko massif itself is flat with slopes about
20 degrees on either side. Townsend is a point on a rocky spur running out into the Geehi River. South
of Kosciusko the Main Divide is a sharp rocky ridge adorned with rocky knobs 100 to 200 feet high ; the
divide falls steeply to Dead Horse Gap at 4,400 feet elevation.
South of Dead Horse Gap the divide is a level narrow ridge running in a huge sweep round the
head of the Cascade Creek ; the altitude is about 5,000 feet; south of the Cascade section is another drop
of about 1,000 feet to the Tin Mine section where the divide is a level flat-topped ridge at 4,000 feet
altitude with steep and very sudden slopes on the west and gentle slopes on the east; this section continues
all the way to the foot of the Pilot, where medium slopes lead up to the summit at 6,000 feet.
Concerning access along the divide, there are only three places where any difficulty would be
experienced in constructing a fair road ; these are the northern aspect of Manjar, the northern aspect
of Twynham, and the southern aspect of Rams Head just south of Kosciusko. With the exception of
these places a wagonette could be driven all the way from Pilot Hill on the Bago Plateau to the western
end of the blazed line of the State boundary.
In the central part of the area the ground rises from the open country of the Murray valley in the
neighbourhood of Tooma and Bringenbrong by successively higher parallel ridges until the top of the
Main Divide is reached. The slopes from these ridges as well as the fall from ridge top to the valley
bottom increases as the Main Divide is approached.
Rivers.
See table on page 9 for size of the three main rivers, with annual flow in relation to area of
catchment. From these it will be seen that the Tooma River has the largest catchment and the smallest
total annual flow, and the Swampy Plain River the smallest catchment and the largest total annual flow,
while the Indi River occupies an intermediate position ; this is just what one is led to believe from a
knowledge of the topography and vegetation of the area. More than half of the catchment of the Tooma
River is country at middle altitude, while the bulk of the Swampy Plain River catchment consists of the
highest country surrounding Kosciusko and in consequence the heaviest snow country in the New South
Wales catchment.


These relative characteristics of the three rivers are well shown in their stream beds. The Swampy
Plain River from Khancoban to Geehi is a swift stream with frequent rapids and large boulders ; above
Geehi both the main tributaries are steep mountain torrents with no stretches of “ still ” water and only
a small number of pools ; the river beds are made up of boulders averaging 6 to 8 feet in diameter and
there are frequent rock bars causing the formation of cascades ; pebble and sandy beaches are absent, and
access up the valley bottom is extremely difficult on foot and impossible by any other means.
The catchment of the Tooma River is made up of two distinct parts, that draining the mid-mountain
country north of Black Jack and that draining the Murray Plateau ; the streams coming from the
northern part are comparatively slow-flowing streams and the beds are made up of small pebbles with
frequent sandy beaches. The southern part in the plateau country is a slow meandering stream, which,
however, falls very suddenly in the region known as the World’s End between Black Jack and Jagumba,
where the fall is 2,000 feet in a direct distance of less than 6 miles ; from the mouth of the Black Jack
Gorge to the junction of the Maragle Creek the river is a very swift one with boulders 2to 3 feet. This
section is, however, not nearly so torrential in nature as either the Geehi Creek or the Geehi River.
Taken over the whole length, the main Indi is the most placid stream of all; two tributaries—the
Snowy Creek and the Leatherbarrel draining the southern end of Kosciusko—are swift streams, but
neither are comparable to the Geehi Creek or Geehi River. The altitude at the junction of Limestone
Creek is 2,600 feet and at Tom Groggin 1,500 feet, representing a fall of 1,100 feet in a direct distance of
about 25 miles. The course of the river is an extremely tortuous one, so that the actual distance is
probably nearer 150 miles. There are very few rapids and no cascades. In the lower section between
Tom Groggin and Bringenbrong there are large stretches of “ still ” water, while in the section west of
the Pilot the stream runs in places between mud banks and the flow is scarcely perceptible. The
Limestone Creek, which is the real head of the Murray, was outside the field of my reconaissance, but
from the general lie of the country I do not think that it is a very fast-flowing stream.
The Plateau Country.
There are two plateau regions, the Bago Plateau situated between the head of the Tooma River
basin and the lower course of the Tumut River, and the Murray Plateau on which rises the Tumut River,
Tooma River, Geehi River and Bogong Creek. The Bago Plateau is between 3,500 and 4,500 feet
altitude ; a very large part of it is covered by the Bago State Forest, and practically all of it is well timbered
with ash, mountain gum and snow gum. The Murray Plateau is from 4,000 to 6,000 feet, with the
bulk of it above 4,500 feet; it was formerly timbered with snow gum, ash occurring only at the lower
elevations. The plateau country at the head of the Indi is situated well down in Victoria.
Table showing
the Comparative Sizes of the Three Main
Rivers.
Area of
1910-1913.
1906-1913.
1910-1920.
—
Catchment.
Square miles.
Average flow
Equivalent
Average flow
Equivalent
Average flow
Equivalent
in 1,000 acre
feet per
rainfall in
in 1,000 acre
rainfall in
in 1,000 acre
rainfall in
inches on
feet per
inches on
feet per
inches on
annum.
catchment.
annum.
catchment.
annum.
catchment.
Indi River
524
350
12.5
381
13.6
432
15.5
Swampy Plain River
320
609
35.6
614
36.0
Tooma River
713
388
10.2
633
16.6
This table is compiled from figures supplied by the New South Wales Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission ; unfortunately the shortness of the records makes any definite conclusions
impossible. The table does, however, show the great intensity of rainfall on the catchment of the Swampy
Plain River compared with the other two rivers.


The Murray Plateau.
The north-south distance is about 11 miles and east-west distance about 14 miles. The plateau
is bounded on the east by the Main Divide, the average elevation of which is about 6,200 feet; on the
west the plateau is bounded by a ridge, running from the Dargals to Toolong Trig. Station (Finlay’s
Lookout), and which continues from there to the Swampy Plain River a little way below Geehi ;
immediately to the east of this Dargal’s Ridge is situated the Tooma River, the upper part of which, with
its tributary the Pretty Plain Creek, runs in practically a straight line from north to south and parallel
to the ridge ; from this river, 4,500 feet at top, 4,000 feet at bottom, the ground rises in succeeding low
ridges to the Main Divide on the east.
On the south the country falls away suddenly from the ridge at the head of Bogong Creek ; in the
Geehi River basin the steep country begins at a spur immediately south of the Grey Mare Hut; the
plateau country is, however, continued along the tops of the Main Divide east of the river.
On the north the steep part of the Tooma River commences a little way north of Toolong Crossing,
but in the basin of Ogilvie’s Creek the plateau country continues to within 1 mile of its junction with the
Tooma River. The Jagumba Ridge carries the plateau country a long way to the north where it drops
off very suddenly to the lower valley of the Tooma River. Another northerly extension of the plateau
country runs out to Black Jack and Manjar where again it falls off very suddenly to the Lower Tooma
River ; this region is appropriately named the World’s End. On the Tumut River side the plateau
country is continued along a broad level spur to within a mile of the Tumut River at the “ 15-mile ”
crossing.
The creeks in this region are slow meandering brooks, winding through swamps and meadows ;
the swamps occur mainly in the higher country near the Main Divide and in the basin of the Valentine
and Rocky Plain Creeks.
Separating the creeks, and especially in the region between Bogong Swamp and the Tooma River,
are rocky ridges and knobs 200 to 500 feet high ; slopes on the sides of these ridges and knobs are up to
30 degrees, but they are all short slopes. In the northern part of the area the ridges are flat topped and
free of rock outcrops and the slopes are more gentle. East of Straight Creek the country consists of rolling
hills and shallow gullies, the hills being crowned with large granite boulders.
Except in the rocky hill portion between the Bogong Swamp and the Tooma River, access all
through the region is easy and car roads could be constructed at a comparatively low cost.
Slopes.
The steepest country is on the slopes below Kosciusko ; here the fall from Townsend to the Geehi
Flats is 6,000 feet in a direct distance of 4 miles, and in the valley of the Geehi River from Geehi to the
junction of Valentine Creek, where slopes are 30 degrees to 40 degrees. In the Pilot region the Indi River
comes within 2 miles of the Main Divide with a fall of 2,000 feet. The slopes in this section are around
35 degrees, but there is not nearly the length of slope that there is in the Kosciusko region. The Middle
Bogong Creek basin comprises slopes 30 degrees to 35 degrees, while the fall from the northern end of the
Murray Plateau is 30 degrees to 40 degrees. No serious slopes are encountered in the region north of the
Tooma River at Byatt’s Selection.
In the foothills, i.e., hills below 3,000 feet, to the west of the area, slopes up to 35 degrees may be
encountered, but the average slopes are less than 30 degrees ; the fall in one slope is, however, seldom
more than 400 feet.


ACCESS.
The nearest points for approach of motor vehicles are Possum Point on the Tooma River, Khancoban
on the Swampy Plain River, Wollondiby near Jindabyne on the Snowy River, on the
Eucumbene, Snowy Plain on the Gungahlin River, and Kiandra. Motor vehicles may" also be taken
along the Tumbarumba to Lobb’s Hole track as far as the fall-over to the Tumut River, and to Reid’s
Selection at Maragle ; in addition light horse-drawn vehicles can be taken to Byatt’s Selection on the
Lower Tooma River, a distance of 30 miles from Tumbarumba. Bullock teams may be taken via the
Yellow Bog stock route to Wheeler’s Selection and the Round Mountain, the distance being approximately
28 and 32 miles respectively from Tooma, which is 23 miles from Tumbarumba ; the track is a very bad
one and only light loads can be carried ; the only team traversing this route at present is that belonging
to Will Wheeler who makes one or two trips each year with salt.
The Grey Mare Hut and Mawson’s Hut on the Murray Plateau may both be reached by bullock
teams from Adaminaby; salt is regularly brought in this way, and in addition there is a bridle track leading
from Mawson’s Hut to Snowy Plain, a distance of 26 miles. The Pretty Plain Hut is accessible only
by pack horses, the usual route being from the road head at Will Scamell’s homestead up the Swampy
Creek ; this track crosses a very steep ridge between the Swampy Plain Creek and the Khancoban Creek,
and the construction of a dray road would be difficult.
Geehi can be reached only by pack horses; the distance is about 12 miles from the road head at
Khancoban. Groggin is reached by bridle track from Geehi, a distance of about 16 miles. There is also
a cut track from the upper settlements in the Indi Valley. Groggin may also be reached from Omeo in
Victoria, a distance of 50 to 60 miles ; carts and agricultural machinery were brought in by this route
when Groggin was first settled ; the track is now passable only for pack horses. From Groggin a bridle
track leads to Dead Horse Gap at the head of the Thredbo, and another up the Indi to Upper Groggin
and from there to the Cascades region ; a poorly defined bridle track leads from Dead Horse Gap to the
Pilot and so to Omeo. A track was recently cut from Geehi up the main spur to the top of Kosciusko;
it is very steep, but fairly heavily laden pack horses can be taken up it. A 4-ft. track was cut many years
ago from Groggin to the Limestone Creek; it is now impassable for horses owing to fallen logs and
wash-outs but could be put into use at a fairly low cost.
From Jindabyne a motor road leads via Wollondiby to the Thredbo River, a distance of about
14 miles ; from there a bridle track leads to Dead Horse Gap, a distance of about 10 miles. The top of
the divide at the head of the Ingegoodbee River may be reached by a rough bridle track from Ingebira.
In addition to the above, the following routes may be taken on horseback :—Dead Horse Gap to
Kosciusko; Kosciusko along the Main Divide to the Tin Hut and Mawson’s Hut; from the Murray Plateau
to the pinnacle of Robertson’s Ridge; and from Pretty Plain along Scamell’s Ridge to Khancoban.
The Murray Plateau is accessible on horseback throughout, and from Black Jack there is a steep
but good bridle track to the Lower Tooma River ; a good bridle track leads from the Round Mountain
to Kiandra, a distance of about 26 miles, involving a fall and ascent of 1,600 feet to and from the Tumut
River.
The Main Divide from Kosciusko to the Tin Hut can be easily followed on horseback. Access to
the Murray Plateau may be gained across the head of the Tumut River. A stock route was planned from
Nurenmerenmong along the ridge to Black Jack. It has never been used, but may be easily followed on
horseback.
1561.—3


Access for Extraction of Timber.
The timber from the Tooma River basin north of Black Jack-Jagumba and from New Maragle
btate Forest to the fall of the Tumut River could be extracted by the simple construction of dray roads.
Timber from the Yellow Bog State Forest and the area adjoining it on the east could be extracted by an
improvement of the existing road. From Khancoban State Forest it is necessary to cross a steep ridge
about 300 feet on the east side and 500 feet on the west side ; construction of a road from this State forest
would be very expensive. The area of ash at the head of the Pinch River might be approached by a road
up the Ingegoodbee River. I have not seen the country in the middle valley of the Ingegoodbee, but I
am told that it is very rough, and, consequently, road construction would be expensive.
As far as concerns the ash, eurabbie, peppermint, viminulis and dalrym'pleana, in the valleys of
the Bogong Creek (Burke’s Gorge), Geehi River (Little Gorge), and Geehi Creek, and the slopes from
Kosciusko to Geehi and Groggin, as well as the timber on the slopes from the Cascade region to the Indi,
extraction must be regarded as impossible until a much later stage in the economic development of the
country. Extraction of timber from Burke’s Gorge or the Little Gorge would involve hauling it from the
top of the ash belt 500 to 1,500 feet to the top of the ridge, and then hauling it to a road leading down
from the top country. Alternatively a road could be built up the valley ; the cost of this would be
prohibitive, as the valley bottom consists of interlocking spurs with 30 degree to 40 degree slopes and
frequent large rock outcrops , the same thing applies to the Kosciusko slopes, as these are broken by cross
gullies up to 1,000 feet in depth.
Timber could fairly easily be hauled oil the lower slopes into Geehi or Groggin, but there remains
the problem of getting it down the valley from there. The present track from Geehi and Khancoban
involves a climb of about 800 feet from the flats at Geehi to the top of the Geehi Wall; the alternative
would be to construct a road down the valley where side slopes are around 30 degrees.
The northern part of the Tooma River basin, the Murray Plateau, the Main Divide, Robertson’s
Ridge and Scamell s Ridge are accessible on horseback ; the upper slopes in the snow gum country are
accessible on horseback, as are the lower slopes round Geehi and Groggin ; apart from these, the slopes
and valleys can be reached only on foot, and even that is extremely hard work.
GEOLOGICAL FORMATION.
Theie are two main geological formations, viz., granitic and metamorphic.
The granitic formations consist almost entirely of a biotite granite, a very acid granite with coarse
crystal structure ; mixed through the granite are small veins of a fine-grained granite-aplite, but the
occurrences are too small to be of any importance. In addition to the above, there is a red quartz felspar
porphyry which occurs over a comparatively small area at the Granite Knob, on the Dargals Mountain,
and in one place on Reads Spur, in the central part of the area.
The metamorphic formation consists of quartzites ; these vary from very hard (almost slatey)
rocks to soft rocks which when weathered have the appearance of a soft sandstone. The harder of the
metamorphic rocks often break up into particles 2 to 3 inches across and form small screes.
Basalt occurs in small areas as a capping on the tops of mountains and ridges.


Distribution op Main Geological Types.
The reconnaissance was not sufficiently detailed to enable me to show the boundaries between
the metamorphic and granitic formations ; the main distribution is as follows
Metamorphic-Quartzites.— Near Khancoban: The Indi Ridge above about 2,000 feet altitude ;
the crest of the Razor Back and extending east to within 1,000 to 1,500 feet altitude of thStop of
Robertson’s Ridge ; this area includes the basin of Khancoban Back Creek, Wall’s Creek, and Bogong
Creek ; the quartz-felspar at Granite Knob forms an island in the middle of it; this area also includes
the lower part of Khancoban Creek and Swampy Plain Creek.
The Indi Ridge (metamorphic formation) extends west to the Indi River and south to the Youngal
Massif, including Youngal Ridge and the slopes from Youngal to Geehi.
Another area of metamorphic formation occurs at the lower end of the Geehi River Basin (the
Little Gorge), and covers the lower slopes for 1,500 feet above valley bottom on both sides of the river.
The foothill regions in the Leatherbarrel and Snowy Creek basins and the whole of the Indi River
basin south of Upper Groggin are metamorphic. The slopes on the New South Wales side of the Indi
River form the largest area of metamorphic formation in the country inspected ; the granite on the Snowy
River side comes to within 100 to 200 feet of the top of the divide but to the west it is all metamorphic.
The Pilot Mountain consists of hard slate-like quartzite.
Small areas of quartzite occur on the Murray plateau and in the head of the Little Gorge south of
the Grey Mare Hut.
Distribution of Basalt Formations.
Basalt occurs as a cap on the following hills and mountains :—Jagungal, Mount Toolong (not
Toolong T.S.), Lett T.S., the top of the main 15-mile spur and small areas in the parishes of Hay and
Nurenmerenmong.
Distribution of Granite Formation.
Practically all the country not included in the above is granite.
The granite formation covers all the country above 5,000 feet altitude with the exception of the
Pilot Mountain and small areas of basalt in the north ; it includes the following areas :—The main
divide from the Cascade region to Bulls Peaks and the Tumut-Murray divide from Bulls Peaks to Bago ;
the slopes from Townsend-Kosciusko to Geehi; all the steep slopes in the Geehi Creek Basin ; the bulk
of the slopes from the main divide to the Geehi River ; Robertson’s Ridge and the upper slopes on both
sides of it, the Dargals Massif and the slopes down to the Swampy Plain Creek ; most of the Murray
plateau ; the fall from Black Jack and Jagumba to the Tooma River, and all the area north of Black
Jack to Jagumba.
Soils.
The surface soils in the region may be classed generally according to the climatic type in which
they occur ; this corresponds broadly with the tree cover tyoe.
(1) Alpine Shrub Type over 6,000 feet.
Surface layer, 8 inches to 12 inches, is a black mass of semi-decomposed matter ; below is a soil made
up very largely of fragments of the parent rock. In the case of granite formation the sub-soil is an
almost white sand with a large number of granite particles 2 inches to 6 inches diameter, in slate formation ;
the sub-soil is a compact yellow-brown clay.


(2) Snow Gum-Snow Grass, Top Country over 4,500 feet.
The surface soil is a light black sandy lpam, sub-soil is a yellow clayey grit in granite formations,
and somewhat less gritty and more clayey in slate formation.
(3) Alpine Ash Type, 3,000 to 4,500 feet.
Surface soil is a loose gravelly loam, dark brown or black in colour and 12 inches to 18 inches deep.
Sub-soil in granite is a yellow-brown coarse grit with a small amount of clay. In slate formations the
sub-soil is a yellow-brown loam.
This soil occurs also in the radianta-viminalis type in the heavy rainfall area surrounding Geehi.
In the drier radiata-viminalis--dairympleana types the surface soil is more shallow and compact.
(4) Stringybark, Maculosa, Elaeophora Types.
In the foothills below 3,000 feet.
Surface soil is a compact brown clay loam in slate formations and a sandy loam in granite
formations ; sub-soil is a light clayey loam yellow to brown in colour. In slate formations rock particles
are distributed all through the soil.
(5) Rockless Granite Soils in the Lower Country.
Deep grey soils occur on all level country and flats in the Tooma River Basin ; rock particles are
completely absent. This is a very poor soil and produces only a low stand of dives, elaeophora and
maculosa.
GEOLOGICAL FORMATION, SOILS, AND EROSION RISK.
Observations in this area confirm the general conclusion that it is the granite formations which
give the greatest erosion risk. On the ridge tops solid granite is found in extensive outcrops, and where
it does not actually outcrop it is found fairly near the surface. This rocky granite type is found also on
slopes in the upper part of the snow gum belt and on the slopes in the zone above the tree line, but is very
seldom found in the ash belt. The absence of the rocky granite type in the ash belt is probably due to
more complete weathering taking place in a warmer climate; it may also be influenced by the topographical
position of the ash belt, the ash belt being generally situated on the upper half of the slope where the
soil is made up partly of colluvial material brought down from higher elevations.
On a 3,000-ft. slope, such as that from the Pinnacle to Geehi, the soil zones are roughly as follow :
(1) Snow Gum Belt. Loose sandy loam over a yellow clayey sand with underlying rock at
2 to 3 feet.
(2) Ash Belt and Upper Part of Radiata, Eurabbie and Viminalis Belt. —A loose black gravelly
loam over a coarse yellow-brown clayey sand up to 4 feet deep, over rotten granite
of very great depth.
(3) Lower Part of Radiata, Eurabbie and Viminalis Belt, and Radiata-Dives Belt. —A gravelly
loam over a sub-soil containing a large proportion of rock particles and large rocks.
In many places this type is situated in the metamorphic formation.
Of all these soil types the one where erosion is most to be expected is the deep clayey sand over
rotten granite as found in the ash belt,


Of the 700 square miles covered by this reconnasisance, approximately 500 square miles consist
of granite, and of this approximately 100 square miles is situated over 5,000 feet. Out of a total area
of 87 square miles of ash, approximately 60 square miles is situated on granite formation. From this
it will be seen that nearly all the high country consists of granite, as does the bulk of the sloping ash
country. r 6
To sum up.-—The area, which by its geological formation is most susceptible to erosion’ covers a
very large proportion of the area, is situated in the high country with the steepest slopes and greatest
rain and snow fall, and covers a large proportion of the timber type which is, q.v., most susceptible to
fire damage. *
FOREST TYPES AND TREE COVER.
Following is a list of the tree species found on the area :
Common Name.
Scientific Name. Abbreviation.
Snow gum
. . Eucalyptus coriaceae .. ..' S.G.
Dwarf snow gum
E. coriaceae , var.
alpina, or E. nipho- S.Gd.
phila
Alpine ash
■. E. gigantea
ash
Brown barrel
.. E. fastigata
.. F.
Dargo gum
E. perriniana
.. per.
Eurabbie
.. E. bicostata
eur.
Ribbon gum
E. viminalis
vim.
Narrow leaved peppermint
.. E. radiata
rad.
Candle bark
.. E. rubida
rub.
Mount mallee
E. kybeanensis
.. kyb.
Brittle gum
E. maculosa
mac.
Broad leaved peppermint
E. dives ..
■ ■ ■ ■ . . div.
Long leaved box
E. elaeophora
el.
Apple box
■. E. bridgesiana
bd.
Stringybark
E. macrorrhyncha
.. sty.
Narrow leaved sally
E. stellulata
stell.
Broad leaved sally
E. camphora
.. cam .
Species not yet identified
.. No. 9.
In the text following the abbreviated names only are used.
These species fall into the following broad forest types :
(1) Alpine Woody Shrub Types.
Trees absent. Cover consists of a dense scrub 3to 4 feet high made up of the following principal
species and a number of subsidiary ones :
Acacia alpina.
Baeckea gunniana, var. latifolia.
Phebalium ovatifolium.
Grevillea australis.
Grevillea victoriae.
Orites lancifolia.
Lissanthe montana.
Oxylobium alpestre.
Oxylobium sp., possibly 0. ellipticum , var. alpinum.
Podocarpus alpina.
Also Celmisia longifolia, a tufted herb which forms dense beds of several square yards in area.


(2) Snow Gum Type. — S.G.
Consisting of the ordinary snow gum or any of the variations between it and the dwarf snow gum.
(3) Mountain Gum-Snow Gum. — M.G.-S.G.
This includes the type S.G.-M.G. where the snow gum is the preponderant species.
(4) Ash.
Generally found pure but sometimes mixed with M.G., forming the ash-M.G. type, or mixed with
rad., forming the ash-rad. type.
(5) Mountain Gum-Radiata. — M.G.-rad.
Containing all variations up to rad.-M.G.
(6) Radiata-Viminalis. — rad.-vim.
Containing all variations up to vim.-rad. and containing more or less eur. with which it forms a
rad.-vim.-eur. type and a rad.-eur. type.
(7) Radiata, Dives, Elaeophora, Maculosa. — rad.-div.-el.-mac.
This is a very broad type and includes all variations in which any two of the species occur.
(8) Stringybark, Elaeophora, Dives .-Sty.-el.-div.
Likewise a very broad type including many variations.
(9) Stellulata Camphora. — stell.-cam.
Including pure stell. and pure cam.
Euc. fastigata occurs as a pure stand or mixed with vim. there is only one occurrence in the whole
area, and that is on the northern side of the ridge between Geehi and Groggin.
Euc. perriniana occurs as a minority species in the S.G. type in the Pretty Plain region, and the
head of the Little Gorge ; from a distance it is difficult to distinguish from Euc. stellulata. It occurs also
on the top of the divide in the Pilot region
Euc. rubida occurs as a minority species in the rad., el., div. eur. types ; it also forms a S.G.-rub.
type on flats in the Indi River below the junction of Limestone Creek, and elsewhere.
Euc. kybeanensis occurs as a minority species in the S.G. type and at 4,000 feet on the river slopes
at the head of the Little Gorge, these are the only places where it was found. When burnt it forms a dense
mallee up to 8 feet in height.
Euc. bridgesiana occurs as a minority species in the wetter parts of the rad., vid., el. types, mainly
bordering the cleared freehold country.
No. 9 occurs up to 3,000 feet in stands of div.—rad. and poor ridge top ash stands.
(1) Alpine Woody Shrub Type.
Distribution.
This type originally covered the top of the main divide from the South Rams Head to the Kerries
(Gungartar T.S.), the divide between Kosciusko and the Kerries is, as shown in the chapter on topography,
a flat-topped narrow tableland, so that the area originally covered by this type was considerable.


Character of the Stand.
The scrub grows to a height of 3 to 4 feet, in some cases it may be as much as 6 feet in height;
the character of the scrub is semi-recumbent, and on slopes the main steps are horizontal with the tops
turned upwards. The ground is completely covered and on rocky sites outcropping boulders are covered
partly or wholly.
This scrub cover with its underlying bed of semi-decomposed organic matter, forms a perfect
protection to the loose sandy granite soil which is characteristic of this part of the main divide ; not only
does the scrub protect the soil from the effects of heavy rain and strong winds, but it protects it from the
eroding effects of melting snow, and provides a layer of absorbent organic material which passes the water
into the soil and prevents rapid surface run-off.
Destruction by Fire and Subsequent Erosion.
Approximately two-thirds of the area originally covered by the alpine woody shrub type has been
completely cleared by the action of fire ; the result of this clearing varies with the type of shrub covering
which in turn depends largely upon the depth of soil on which it is growing.
Two broad sub-types of the woody shrub cover may be recognized, one having a thin covering of
snow grass beneath it and growing on the deeper soils, and the other with no grass beneath it and growing,
on shallow rocky soils.
All the species forming this cover are very fire-sensitive, once burnt out they do not coppice and
their powers of seed production are slight; some species when burnt do give a thin regrowth of seedlings
but with the majority one severe fire kills all the scrub and leaves nothing but dead stems on the ground.
Where grass formerly grew beneath the scrub it may thrive after the fire and completely cover the ground.
Where, however, the soil is too shallow to support a growth of grass, there is nothing to succeed the scrub ;
the dead stems and roots decay and are blown away; the organic layer, with no cover to protect it and no
live roots to hold it together, dries up and is blown away; the loose sandy soil exposed in its turn is also
blown away, leaving the final product, bare granite rocks and stones, with no trace of vegetative covering.
The worst effects of this destruction are seen on the prevailing granite formation ; the same process
takes place on the areas of slate formation which occur in the region, the organic layer is removed and the
clay beneath it is washed away, so exposing the bare slate below.
The area where this destruction has gone furthest is on the northern slopes of Mount Twynham,
and more especially in the saddles between rocky knobs on the west of the divide, here the wdnd velocity
is greatest and the removal of the surface soil most active.
The same process has been going on in the head of Watson’s Gorge, Watson’s Crags and the area
lying to the north. Fortunately the area where destruction has reached the final stage is not very great,
but nevertheless the process is going on over all the country covered by the shallow soil alpine wmody
shrub type, and an inspection of these small areas leaves no doubt whatsoever as to the final result if this
process is allowed to continue unchecked. Perhaps the most serious feature of this degradation
process is that at altitudes over 6,000 feet, vegetative conditions are extremely difficult, and even
with the organic soil still in place, the re-establishment of a scrub cover is a very difficult process ; once
the organic soil is removed, vegetation can be re-established only by the difficult and costly process of
building stone walls to protect the plants from the wind.
(2) Snow Gum Type.
The range of pure S.G. is from 4,500 feet to 6,000 feet; this includes the ordinary variety and the
var. alpina between which all variations are to be found. On the Kosciusko massif east of the divide
S.Gd. goes up as high as 6,600 feet; this i e not the case on the western side.


The S.G. type naturally covers all the upper slopes and tops of the main divide with the exception
of that part of the Kosciusko massif above 6,000 feet, and the region between the Cascades and the Pilot
where the altitude is 4,000 to 4,200 feet and the tree cover S.G.-M.G. It covers the Tumut-Murray
divide from Bulls Peaks to Black Jack, north of which the divide at 3,600 to 4,200 feet is covered with
M.G.-rad. In addition, small amounts of S.G. occur on the flats at Geehi and Groggin.
Character of Stand.
In only one place did I see a snow gum stand in the almost natural state, with old trees 30 to
40 feet high and girths around 12 feet; in this case there were practically no dead trees, but all the trees
were badly burnt at the butt. Under the stand was a light growth of snow grass.
In all other places the stand has been killed partly or wholly by fire ; the species is a very fire-
sensitive one as far as concerns the part of the tree above ground ; it coppices very abundantly after
burning but successive burnings kill it altogether. In the ultimate stage of destruction there is nothing
left but the remains of the old coppiced stumps at ground level in the form of a ring of wood up to 5
feet in diameter ; on a large part of the country (especially the more accessible country) these stumps
have disappeared, and no sign at all of the original stand is left.
The old stand mentioned above is situated in the comparatively low rainfall region of the Pilot;
under the stand there is no scrub, and it is difficult to say whether the original stands in the wetter regions
carried scrub or not; lam inclined to think that they did not.
The transition under the action of periodic burning from the original old tree stand of snow gum
to the final stage of cleared grass land is accompanied by very important changes in the undergrowth;
the rapidity of the reconnaissance made a satisfactory study of this subject impossible, but the following
general conclusions have been reached :
When the original S.G. stand is killed by fire, a fairly dense undergrowth comes in and covers the
ground, this scrub consists of a large number of species of which the following are the most important
Bossiaeafoliosa, Drimys aromatica, Pimelia sp., Goodenia hederaceae, Craspedia spp., Helichrysum scorpiodes,
Orites lancifolia. In this stage snow grass is present only in a small quantity ; the S.G. coppices and forms
a dense scrub which is burnt out by succeeding fires. In a later stage of degradation a large number of
grasses have come in, of which the following are the most important:—
1. Poa caespitosa var. latifolia.
2. Danthonia spp.
3. Stipa sp.
4. Calamagrostis quadriseta var. montana.
5. Carex appressa.
most of which have soft broad leaves and are palatable to cattle.
With the further clearing of the S.G. coppice and scrub these broad-leafed grasses gradually
disappear and the final stage (pure snow grass) is reached.
Extent to which the Snow Gum Type has been killed by Fires.
The S.G. has been killed on all the level and gently sloping top country ; this includes the whole
of the mam divide from Kosciusko to Bull’s Peaks, about half of the Murray plateau, all of Robertson’s
Ridge, and all the S.G. part of Scamell’s Ridge. On about half of the Murray Plateau, especially the
region near Round Mountain, the S.G. has been replaced by S.G. coppice scrub, this is mainly on the
steeper slopes and rocky knobs.
scrub ° n the SG ’ Sl ° PeS ° f the G ° rge and Burke ’ S G ° rge the P resent cover consists of coppice and


Clearing of Snow Gum and drying up of the Murray Plateau Country.
As shown in the section dealing with topography, the Murray Plateau consists of level and gently
sloping basins separated by low ridges and rocky knobs 200 to 500 feet high. In many cases the S.G.
on the ridges and knobs is still extant in the form of coppice with scrub ; in some places, however, the
S.G. has been completely cleared from the rocky knobs as well as from the basins and lower slopes. The
most notable example of this is the block covered by Snow Lease No. 29/57, in the Parish of Jagungal
covering 7,000 acres, between 5,000 and 6,000-ft. elevation ; this block is very favorably situated, being
accessible by cart and bullock teams from Jindabyne and Adaminaby ; it was first taken up about the
year 1900, and has been more thoroughly cleared than any other block on the Murray Plateau. lam
told by men who worked on this block over 30 years ago, that their first job was to burn and keep on
burning the woody shrubs and snow gum ; at that time it required a very experienced horse to cross
the swamps, once a horse put his hoof off a tussock of grass it would sink up to its belly in the swamp ;
now in an average summer a bullock dray can be taken across the former swamps and not sink more than
a few inches. Last January, I rode diagonally across this block, crossing all the main swamps and creeks
on the way; in the former swamps the dry peaty material could be heard crackling under the horse’s
hoofs.
On this particular block rocky hills have been cleared where the site is not capable of supporting
a continuous cover of grass ; as a result the sandy soil is laid bare and in many places is blowing away.
Not only on this block, but throughout the Murray Plateau, the country is, on the testimony of men
who have mustered cattle there all their lives, definitely drier now than it was 30 years ago. They
point out again and again swamps and creeks which were formerly impassable but where now a man can
ride without any danger of sinking. Consequent upon the drying of the swamps, the creeks are getting
lower, and I can foresee the time when some of them will not last through the summer months.
Admitting then that this top country has dried up very considerably in the last 30 years, it remains
to find the cause. It may be due to a climatic cycle, but this is not shown by rainfall records in the
surrounding low country, and there are no rainfall records for the mountain country itself. One fact is
certain, and that is that there has been a steady diminution in the amount of vegetative covering on the
area, and I think it is safe to say that this has at least had a very great effect on the steady drying process.
Again I wish to point out that the extreme stages in this drying process have been reached only
on a small area ; the process is, however, going on over all the high plateau country, and these small areas
show how far it will go if allowed to continue unchecked.
The effect of this drying process on the grazing value of the land and on the water-retaining value
of the catchment is discussed in later chapters.
Grazing Value of the Snow Gum Type.
The snow gum country constitutes the most valuable grazing land in the mountains ; this is
discussed fully in the chapter on grazing.
(3) Mountain Gum-Snow Gum Type. — M.G.-S.G.
This type, characteristic of mid-mountain elevations of fairly low rainfall, is not largely represented
in the area under review.
The M.G.-S.G. type occurs on the top of the main divide from south of the Cascades to the upper
slopes of the Pilot; it covers all the upper slopes from this part of the divide on the fall to the Indi, and
also covers a large area of the gently sloping and medium sloping country between Tin Mine Creek and the
Pilot; it occurs also on the south aspect slopes of the Pilot. All the areas referred to above are in a
fairly low rainfall zone on quartzite formations with shallow stony soils. The altitude range is 3,000
to 4,500 feet.


The M.G. S.G. type also occurs in patches on the Black Jack to Nurenmerenmong section, but
here the prevailing type is M.G. pure or M.G.-Radiata, the M.G.-S.G. coming in only on small areas of
shallow soil. Small areas occur also in and around the ash belt on the Murray Plateau between Old
Toolong and the Round Mountain.
It is noticeable m Burke’s Gorge, the Little Gorge, Kosciusko slopes and the Geehi Creek basin
there is no distinct M.G. belt below the ash ; M.G. is here found scattered at the bottom of the ash and
among the ash on the western aspect, but for the most part the ash gives place at lower elevations to
the rad. type ; further south as the rainfall decreases M.G. takes an increasingly important part in the
stands.
Character of Stand.
Height 60 to 70 feet, exceptional trees 80 feet, girths sto 8 feet. All the S.G. are crooked and
badly formed ; among the M.G. are some straight trunks up to 30 feet high, but the majority are crooked,
knotty and unsound. The trees have been damaged by fire and the stands severely thinned, but in no
cases have the stands been completely killed ; fires have been responsible for a large percentage of burnt
butts, piped stems and white ant attack.
The timber value of the stand is very low ; the S.G. contains posts and telegraph poles, while a
few short logs could be obtained from the M.G. The volume of cord wood per acre is, however, high and
the type offers a good supply of raw material for the pulp industry when development of access .n.W
that practicable.
U ndergrowth.
Undergrowth is very light, the principal species being Hop Scrub, Daviesia latifolia, Daviesia ulicina,
Acacia penninervis, snow grass and a prickly leafed member of the family Papilionaceae. The Hop
Scrub is never more than 2 feet in height.
(4) Alpine Ash Type.—Ash.
The upper limit of ash is from 4,500 feet to 4,800 feet, depending on aspect and situation ; the
lower limit varies from as low as 2,800 feet to 3,500 feet, in most places the bottom of the ash belt proper
is 3,300 feet, but in gullies, and especially in gullies in the high rainfall region west of Kosciusko, it is
found as low as 2,800 feet.
The mam ash belts are situated on the north and west slopes of the Murray Plateau, in the basin
of the Bogong Creek and Geehi River, and on the slopes surrounding Geehi and Groggin. Going from
Groggin to the junction of Limestone Creek the rainfall becomes progressively less and the area of
ash consequently diminishes and the quality becomes poorer. These belts are areas where ash naturally
forms over 50 per cent, of the stand, and include areas where the stand has been partly or wholly killed by
fire, also small areas such as gully bottoms where a pure stand of another species such as mountain gum
or Vimmahs may be found ; these ash belts may also include small areas of snow gum on ridge tops.
Following are the chief areas of alpine ash :
(1)
Slopes between Kosciusko and Geehi
(2)
Basin of Geebi Creek
(3)
(±)
Upper Basin of Snowy Creek
Upper Basin of Leatherbarrel Creek
>21
square miles.
(5)
Slopes west of the Cascade Region
(6)
Upper basin and middle slopes of Geebi River-Little Gorge
a
22
square miles.
(7)
Upper basin and middle slopes of Bogong Creek-Burke’s Gorge
14
square miles.
(8)
Basin of Kbancoban Creek-Kbancoban State Forest
''
(9)
Eastern slopes of Jagumba Range- Yellow Bog State Forest
square miles
Total area approximately 87 square miles.


In addition to the above, ash occurs on the ridge slopes of the Murray Plateau between Old Toolong
and the Round Mountain, and in the valley of the Tooma River in the region known as The World’s End ;
the area of these ash stands has been included in Nos. 7 and 8 above.
The most valuable milling stands occur in the Khancoban State Forest and Yellow Bog State
Forest, both of which were assessed by the New South Wales Forestry Commission in 1928; in
these areas stands average 130 feet in height and contain up to twenty millable trees per acre ; trees have
been badly damaged by fire, and there are small areas of totally fire-killed ash.
Character of Stands.
Heights are from 100 to 150 feet, girths from 8 feet to 14 feet; on account of the degraded nature
of the stands it is impossible to get an accurate idea of the form of the trees ; the height growth, however,
is a sound indicator of the site possibilities, and judged on this evidence the best areas are in the Khancoban
State Forest, Yellow Bog State Forest, Geehi River basin and the more sheltered slopes below Kosciusko.
In the Bogong Creek basin are stands with good straight clean stems, but there are also areas on shallow
soil quartzite formations where the height growth is low and the trees very branchy and crooked.
South of Kosciusko the quality of the stands falls off very rapidly, due doubtless to lower rainfall; the
stands in this region show an unduly large proportion of crooked stems and the height growth is inferior.
Undergrowth.
In the northern part of the area the characteristic undergrowth is hop scrub, ( Daviesia latifolia)
with a small amount of Acacia penninervis and Acacia mollissima, and a light covering of snow grass.
The hop scrub is seldom more than 2 to 3 feet high and the wattle up to 6 feet.
In the wetter regions of the Bogong Creek, Geehi River and Kosciusko slopes, the same scrub
species occur, and in addition Prostanthera lassianthos, Coprosma hirtella, Cassinia sp., Bedfordia salicina,
Veronica derwentii, Correa lawrencia ; in the gullies and moister south aspect slopes is a dense growth
of tree ferns and in the larger gullies sassafras, Athosperma moschatum, grows up to 60 feet in height.
In these places the hop scrub grows up to 15 feet in height and forms an almost impenetrable scrub.
Destruction of Ash by Fire.
Alpine ash is one of the most fire-sensitive eucalypts ; when lightly burnt the tree may survive
by throwing out epicormic branches, but a severe fire kills the trees completely and it has not the power
of reproducing by means of coppice shoots.
Four stages of fire-destruction of ash are to be seen, viz.:—
(1) Original old trees killed and living regeneration of saplings or poles.
(2) Original old trees killed and succeeding crop of poles killed but containing living sapling
or seedling regeneration.
(3) As No. 2 but saplings killed, and containing living seedlings.
(4) As No. 3 but with seedlings killed.
The above represent destruction by successive fires at intervals of five to ten years. When the
old trees are killed, a good crop of seedlings comes up in their place ; these grow until the next severe
fire comes along and kills them ; in some cases they reach only the sapling stage, 15 to 30 feet, before
being killed out or they may grow to a height of 70 feet and then be killed. Alpine ash bears seed when it
has reached a height of about 60 feet at an age of 20 to 30 years; if the intervals between severe fires
are longer than this then there will be seed ready on the trees at the time of the fire to produce a new
crop. If, however, severe fires succeed at intervals of five to ten years, the new crop does not reach
seed-producing age and as the old trees have disappeared there is no more seed available for the re-stocking
of the area.


That fires of a severity sufficient to kill ash trees 150 feet high and 14 feet girth have increased
tremendously in the last 100 years, is shown by the abnormally small number of fully grown or even half
grown trees. An ash stand subject only to light fires consists of about 30 mature trees per acre, with here
and there clumps of poles and saplings ; such stands are found on Bago State Forest, Yellow Bog State
Forest, and Khancoban State h orest; they are deteriorating through the action of fires in giving access
to white ants in the trunks of the trees and in destroying seedling and sapling regeneration. Such a
stand is, however, deteriorating at a comparatively slow rate and the effect of the fires is seen in burnt
butts and absence of regrowth. In the Geehi section of the area under review there are two factors which
have operated to make the fires far more severe and destructive than in any other ash area in New South
Wales. Firstly, owing to the proximity of the high Kosciusko massif the rainfall is higher than in other
ash areas, consequently the scrub is heavier and the amount of inflammable material greater. Secondly
the slopes, between 30 and 40 degrees, are steeper than in other ash areas ; a large part of these slopes
face the west from whence comes the wind during the fire season. The net result is that the ground is
covered with a very heavy layer of inflammable scrub ; the wind travelling up the narrow valleys reaches
a very high velocity so that the fire, when burning up the slope, takes everything in its path.
Extent of Fire Destruction of Ash.
Of the 87 square miles of ash, about 20 square miles carries less than five old crop trees per acre; this
area of 20 square miles is situated on the slopes from Robertson’s Ridge, on the Kosciusko slopes, and in
the basin of the Geehi Creek, these areas are the steepest in the catchment.
Destruction of Ash and Erosion Risk.
This area where the ash has been totally destroyed is, as shown above, situated on the steepest
slopes in the catchment, and is in the heavy rainfall region surrounding the Kosciusko massif ; it also
coincides with the belt of granite formation. The four most potent factors are thus in operation together.—
(1) a very fire-sensitive species ; (2) very steep slopes averaging 30 to 40 degrees ; (3) heavy rainfall
probably not less than 60 inches per annum ; and (4) granite formation with loose sandy soil over 20
feet m depth. The extent to which erosion has taken place as a result of these factors is discussed in the
following section:—
Erosion of Slope—Country in the Ash Belt.
All naturally occurring forests are the result of vegetational changes throughout a very long period
of time ; starting from bare ground one vegetative type succeeds another, as the ground becomes covered
by vegetation so the soil and moisture conditions improve by the constant addition of organic remains,
and thus each succeeding vegetation type is more highly developed and more luxurious in character than
the preceding one. This process gradually becomes slower and slower, until a climax is reached when
the vegetation is practically m equilibrium with the natural conditions in which it is growing.
In this country between 3,000 and 4,500 feet elevation the naturally occurring climax type is a pure
orest of a pine ash, this climax type is possible only if fires are absent or occur at long intervals,
since, as we have seen, alpine ash is a species very readily killed by fire. Before the advent of white
man in Australia, fires did undoubtedly occur, they were lit by the blacks on the grass country of the plains
and no doubt some of them reached the mountains but the interval between successive severe fires was
great and this fire-sensitive species was able to develop.
Since white settlement began, fires have increased in number until at the present time severe fires
occur every five to ten years ; the result is that the climax type (alpine ash) is unable to hold its own
and a retrograde movement has set in. The four stages shown on page 21 are successive stages in this
re rograde movement; so far the ash has completely disappeared only on very small areas, but it is


important to note that a movement such as this increases as it were in geometrical proportion; it is slow to
start and the early stages are scarcely perceptible, so by the time the movement has become obvious its
velocity has become considerable.
The lowest stage so far reached in this retrograde movement is No. 4 above, viz., entire absence
of all ash trees including seedlings on small areas of 50 to 200 acres, the only ground cover consisting of
a very light scrub of hop bush and wattle.
Washouts may be seen up to 100 yards long, 30 yards wide and 15 to 20 feet deep ; these are
extending further up the hill with each winter’s rain. Such washouts frequently start in the hole caused
by a fallen dead tree.
On quartzite formation the same deep wash-outs do not occur, but slopes of moving scree form in
all the gullies ; one example of this is seen on the slopes to the Bogong Creek below the well on Scamell’s
Ridge ; here the slope is from 30 to 40 degrees and the ash has completely disappeared, the only covering
being sparse snow grass and herbs.
As with the erosion in the alpine woody shrub type, however, the area affected is not at present
a large one, but the fire destruction of ash has, in some places, reached the erosion stage, and it is only a
matter of time when all the ash country on steep granite formation will have reached the same stage, by
which time the present eroded areas will have reached the stage in which whole hill sides are transported
into the valley bottoms.
Extent of Merchantable Ash.
The only areas carrying merchantable stands of ash are Yellow Bog State Forest and surrounding
ash areas, Khancoban State Forest and surrounding ash areas, and the Bogong Creek basin ; in addition
to these there is a small area of comparatively unburnt ash in the Little Gorge on the left bank of the
river north of Watson’s Gorge. There is also a small area of unburnt ash on the fall to the Indi River
south of the Cascade track. The ash other than that in the above areas has been so badly destroyed by
fire that the amount of merchantable ash is almost negligible.
Mention should also be made of an area of about 5 square miles of ash in the head of the Pinch
River on the Snowy River side of the main divide between the Pilot and the Cascades ; this area, although
actually outside the Murray catchment, is situated partly on the broad plateau which in that region
forms the divide between the Snowy and Murray Rivers and should be taken into account in any plan
of management for the country within the Murray catchment.
(5) Mountain Gum-Radiata Types.— M.G.-rad.
This type is found in the Black Jack to Nurenmerenmong section ; on the gently sloping and
medium sloping country at the head of Pound Creek, Freedamper Creek and Maragle Creek ; it is also
found to a small extent below the ash belt in the Geehi section, but it does not cover extensive areas
merely coming in on dry sites.
Character of Stand.
In the Black Jack to Nurenmerenmong section, the M.G. is 100 to 120 feet high with girths 6 to
10 feet; the rad. is 60 to 90 feet with girths 4to 7 feet; a good stand carries 30 trees over 4 feet girth
per acre and 80 trees under 4 feet girth. The stand has been severely thinned by fires, and there are all
age classes down to small saplings ; the chief scrub is a light cover of Daviesia latifolia and snow grass.
Timber Value of the Type.
As it exists at present the timber value is low owing to burnt butts and white ant attack; the
rad. would yield small mill logs, and a few straight sound logs could be got out of the M.G. ; as with the
M.G.-S.G. type, however, it offers a very good supply of raw material for pulp manufacturing.


This type, situated as it is on accessible country, with slopes less than 20 degrees, constitutes the
most suitable country in the area for conversion to coniferous species should that be desired ; in the better
stands, however, the cost of clearing would be very heavy.
(6) Radiata-Viminalis Type. — rad.-vim.
This type is very widespread throughout the area ; it reaches its best development in the high
rainfall area below the Kosciusko massif at elevations from 1,300 feet up to 3,000 feet; in this region
it is invariably mixed with eurabbie, which occurs all through the stand on both aspects. South
of the Kosciusko massif, the rad.-vim. type occupies the south aspect slopes from the valley bottom
up to about 3,500 feet altitude ; the eurabbie cuts out as soon as the Kosciusko high rainfall area is passed.
To the west the rad.-vim. type occurs in the foothills and gullies as low as 1,000 feet where, in the
neighbourhood of Khancoban, the rad. is replaced by stringybark; in this region eurabbie is confined to the
gully bottoms, coming out on to the south aspect slopes at about 2,500 feet elevation. Khancoban, it
should be remembered, is in the wettest part of the foothill region ; eurabbie does not occur further to the
north.
The rad.-vim. type occurs on south aspects in the foothills west of the Dargals to Granite Knobs
Range ; except in the gullies the height is only about 100 feet; in some of the gullies, notably that of
Khancoban Creek, exceptionally fine stands of viminalis up to 150 feet high are found. In the foothill
region north of Dargals, viminalis disappears off the slopes below 2,500 feet and is found only in the gullies.
A rad.-sty. type occupies the south aspect slopes, up to this elevation.
Fire Damage in the rad.-vim. Type.
While less sensitive to file than the alpine ash type, the vim.-mi.-eur. type in the wet region
surrounding Kosciusko has suffered very serious degradation. The trees produce epicormic shoots after
urning, but m spite of this they have been killed in very large numbers so that the present state of the
type m this region is five to ten crooked, burnt and deformed trees per acre over a very heavy cover of
bracken. In this type the bracken, forming a dense scrub sto 6 feet high, has so far prevented erosion
rom setting in, but bracken is not a permanent cover and after the passage of even a light fire the soft
surface soil is exposed to the eroding effects of wind and rain.
(7) Radiata, Dives, Elaeophora, Maculosa Types.
These species form a large number of types and sub-types which are characteristic of the foothill
region ; height growth is between 50 and 70 feet. All the foothill region below about 3,000 feet is covered
by these types, together with No. 6 and No. 8 ; these forest types are too well known to need further
comment; one’interest.mg; feature, however, is a 20 to 30-ft. dives-maculosa type which is found at
elevations of 3,000 to 3,500 feet on west aspects of the Indi River valley near the junction of Limestone
Ueek ; this is unquestionable evidence of very low rainfall in this region.
(8) Stringybark-Elaeophora-Dives .
These three species form the tree cover in the foothills in the somewhat drier region north of
fmo m f! a ; h l3 , A ng to ,r te that “ the Valley 0f Swam P y Pla » *»■ h replaced at about
1,000 feet by rad. ■ in this valley sty. does not go up above Khancoban. In the basin of the Tooma
to s vTI, /f ;: t’ St!l : g ° eS UP the mam slopes on north as P ecta t 0 3,000 feet, or it might be better
*° „ y a * at Kha “™ban in the Swampy Plain Kiver valley radiata goes down to 1,000 feet on north
p , w ereas in the Tooma Kiver basin it goes down only to about 2,500 feet on north aspects.


(9) Stellulata, Camphora.
Ihese two species occur pure and mixed on river and gully flats all through the area ; Camphora
is confined mainly to lower elevations and wet situations ; in the Khancoban Creek valley it grows up to
lower^lopesk C ° nfined to the b ° ttom of the gully but goes some way up the
Stellulata grows at higher elevations, and in addition it is the principal wet flat species at elevations
round about 4,500 feet.
Present Use of the Land—The Grazing Industry.
In order properly to understand the grazing situation in the mountains, the mountain country as
a whole must be considered in relation to the grazing industry in the rest of the State.
The great grazing resource of the mountains is the snow gum country and the alpine woody
shrub type of country, i.e., broadly speaking, all the accessible and reasonably sloping country above
about 4,500 feet altitude.
As far as grazing is concerned, the “ Southern Highlands ” of New South Wales may be said to
extend from Mount Bimberi in the south-west corner of the Federal Capital Territory southwards to the
Victorian border in the neighbourhood of Pilot Mountain ; the north-south length of this belt of country
is about 85 miles, the average width in the part on and north of the Murray Plateau is about 6 miles south
of the Murray Plateau the average width is only about 2 miles. This is by no means one continuous belt
of high country, but is broken into big valleys 2,000 to 3,000 feet deep.
In the north this highland zone is crossed by the main Tumut to Cooma road at Rules Point and
Kiandra ; this road gives easy access for stock to the Long Plain and Kelly’s Plain lying to the west of
.ben, and to a large area of country forming the Kiandra tops. In addition to the main road, this
region can be reached by the Tumbarumba and Kiandra stock route which crosses the Tumut River at
O Hare s Bridge. This northern part is therefore very well provided with means of access. Coming
further to the south the Murray Plateau can be reached from the Monaro side by very rough dray tracks,
while in addition the northern part can be reached by a rough dray track from the Murray side. The
southern part of the Murray Plateau is accessible from the Murray only by rough tracks covered with logs
and scrub. A motor road gives first-class access to the Kosciusko tops and the slopes on the east. The
tracks to Geehi and Groggin are very rough and include several deep river crossings. Owing to the
accessibility of the Kiandra-Long Plain region, many improvements in the way of fences have been erected
and the wild dogs have been controlled. Consequently we find that the Kiandra-Long Plain country
is used mainly for sheep, while the small area of country outside the dog-proof fences to the north is used
for cattle. In the more accessible cleared country on the Murray Plateau sheep are run, while the less
accessible country with rough hills is used for cattle. The top of Kosciusko and the slopes to the east
are sheep country, but the slopes to the west and all the country to the south, owing to rough tracks, river
crossings and wild dogs, is cattle country.
With both sheep and cattle the mountain grazing is of two kinds.—(a) Regular summer grazing
carried out in conjunction with country at lower elevations where the sheep are grazed during the winter
months, (b) Drought relief grazing, carried out only in drought years when western or Monaro country
on which the stock usually run in summer has dried up and is incapable of carrying the usual stock.
The regular grazing is carried out by men whose property is situated fairly close to the mountains,
the country in the upper Murray Valley, and on the Monaro side only as far away as Cooma. In contrast
to this, the stock grazed on the area in drought years may come from very remote parts of the State ;
in this case the stock (usually sheep) are trucked to Tumut or Tumbarumba and driven from there.


The Grazing Industry in the Khancoban District.
The winter grazing country consists of first-class river flats and extremely poor slopes, most of which
are timbered, consequently there is not enough space to go in for extensive breeding, and the industry
is devoted mainly to fattening store cattle which are brought from the Monaro, New England or even
Queensland, fattened in the mountains, and sold as fat stock. Corryong in Victoria is the great market
place for store cattle ; fat cattle are trucked at Cudgewa and sold in Melbourne. It is interesting to note
that all the fat stock from the mountains go to the closer market at Melbourne and not to Sydney.
The summer grazing season in the mountains is from November to April inclusive, varying of
course with the altitude and position of the area ; the Kosciusko country has the shortest season, being only
three months —January, February, and March ; cattle are taken on to the lower elevations of the Murray
Plateau as early as November, but the sheep do not go up to the higher country till the end of December.
In most cases the stock are wintered on cleared freehold country at low elevations ; most of the foothill
country is held for winter grazing, but its carrying capacity is very low. There are thus two distinct
divisions in the mountain grazing problem —one is the management of the snow gum-snow grass country at
high elevations, and the other is the management of the foothill kangaroo grass country.
The grazing of mountain pastures is still in a very primitive state; it is a branch of primary
production which so far has not been influenced or even touched by scientific investigation. The men
engaged in the business have been doing it since childhood, and although they know the practical side
of the job from Ato Z, they are very loth to consider new ideas ; old ideas and practices are accepted
without question, and there is no attempt to probe into things and find out the why and wherefore. Many
and strangely conflicting are the ideas of different men upon the same point, and having met and talked
with nearly all the old hands in the hills, I have come to the conclusion that their stock of fundamental
knowledge concerning the grass lands from which they get their living is practically nil. One fact they
know for certain, and that is, which areas produce fat stock and which areas produce stock not so fat.
Contrary to the idea held by many people who have not lived in the mountains, the mountain
pastures are not overstocked; they are actually understocked, and therein lies one of the greatest problems
of grazing management.
The chief grass species in the snow gum country is snow grass (Poa caespitosa) ; this grows with a
tufted habit and has hard leaves which are circular in cross section ; the top dies back every winter, new
shoots coming up in the spring ; stock graze it very lightly, and unless very heavily stocked it is difficult
to see where they have been feeding. There is always a large carry-over of herbage at the end of the
season, and this is present in the following year as a collection of dead, very woody leaf stems which are
completely unpalatable to stock and prevent them from eating the new season’s shoots with which the
dead stems are mixed ; consequently, in order to get good palatable food, this collection of rank old grass
must be disposed of ; the only method practicable under present circumstances is burning.
In addition to snow grass, there are other grasses and a number of palatable herbs, listed under the
description of the snow gum type ; unfortunately, however, as mentioned above, there has never been
any investigation made of this alpine grazing country, and consequently there are no data concerning
the relative palatability of the different grasses and herbs ; my own observations point to certain of the
broad-leafed grasses and sedges as being sought after by cattle, but I have not studied the matter for a
sufficient length of time to be able to form very definite conclusions.
In the kangaroo grass foothill country, the same problem is confronted, viz., the carry-over of
rank woody grass stems which make the whole pasture unpalatable ; again, burning is the remedy adopted,
and stockmen say that cattle do very well on such country the year after it is burnt, they do less well in
the succeeding year, they will not keep fat at all in the third year, while in the fourth year they
practically starve.


Land Tenure.
Nearly all the 700 square miles of mountainous country covered by my reconnaissance is crown
land ; there are small included areas of freehold, but these form a negligible percentage of the whole.
Consequent upon representations made by the River Murray Commission, the Lands Department permits
no further alienations in fee simple of land within the catchment of the Hume Weir, and withholds from the
lessees the right to clear timber on their leases. The land is disposed of under four different kinds of
leases, viz. :
(1) Snow Lease. For pastoral occupation only, no interference with timber is permitted;
acquired by tender for a certain period not greater than fourteen years. Practically
all the high country over 4,000 feet altitude is held under this type of lease ; the terms
of the current leases are from five to seven years and the annual rental from 2.5 d. to
6d. per acre. Size of blocks varies from 3,000 up to 10,000 acres.
(2) Permissive Occupancy.— Also for pastoral occupation only, no interference with timber is
permitted. The rough snow gum country, 3,500 to 5,000 feet altitude, and the steep
slopes in the ash type are held under this variety of tenure. A few of the existing
permissive occupancies were acquired by applications. The tenancy is from year to
year and the rental from O.ld. to 2.3 d., per acre according to the quality of the land.
Blocks vary in size from 1,000 acres to 60,000 acres.
(3) Occupation Licences.— Tenancy from year to year, no interference with timber is permitted.
Occupation licences cover very large areas of country of very low grazing value, rentals
vary from .06d. to .12d. per acre per annum and the size of the blocks from 14,000 to
20,000 acres. Most of the foothill country is held under this variety of tenure.
(4) Annual Leases.—Do not carry timber rights. Small areas of foothill country adjoining
the freehold land are held under this variety of tenure ; the rentals vary from Id. to
3d. per acre.
Practically all the mountain country is held under some form of lease or other; the steep rough
country is taken up in large blocks at a very low rental for the sake of the few small areas of good grazing
country that it contains.
The stock graze over nearly all the snow gum country and the more level parts of the foothill
country. In the steep slope country they run only a little way down from the plateau on top and only a
little way up the .gullies from the flats below, such as Geehi and Groggin. Under this system the stockman
gets his land for a period of years or on a year to year tenure, and may stock it or not stock it as he likes,
the only condition being that he runs his own stock on it; he may not, without permission, take in stock
on agistment.
Disadvantages of the Present System.
Naturally in such inaccessible country the perfect system is very difficult to achieve and the present
system has many disadvantages, amongst which the following are the most important:—
(1) A centralized control from Sydney which is unable to take account of sudden changes in
local conditions and local requirements for grazing country ; a grazier may lose all his
grass through fire and be in urgent need of relief country, yet the process whereby he
gets the use of relief country may take several weeks or even months to complete.


(2) Lack of field supervision to ensure observation of regulations governing the leases ; this
is the most serious drawback and leads to a great number of abuses. Tenders may be
called for a block of snow country and the interested parties may refrain from tendering,
whereupon, the block falling vacant, they may avail themselves of it without paying
any rent. There is no doubt that this has happened and that men are using country
for which they pay nothing at all.
(3) A wealthy pastoralist may “ sit ” on a large block of good grazing country without making
any use of it, while other men are forced thereby to go without country of which they
have a very great need.
Under the terms of the leases the lessee is not allowed to interfere with the timber nor to light fires
during certain specified summer months ; yet, through lack of field supervision, he does in fact light fires
and so destroys timber as much and as often as he pleases. In some cases the timber is deliberately killed
on the leases, and once the fires are lit the lessee has no interest in whence they go or where they stop.
The Foothills—lncluding the Low Elevation Freehold Country.
Between the main mountains and Albury is a range of hills running almost parallel to the Murray
River ; the altitude runs from the river level at about 700 feet up to 3,000 feet. This area was outside
the scope of my reconnaissance, but from previous acquaintance with the area and from observations
made in passing from Tumbarumba to Khancoban, the following general facts are obtained :
Topography. —The country consists of partly wooded hills with slopes of 20 to 30 degrees and 500
feet in height, and cleared country with slopes 10 to 20 degrees.
Geological Formation. —A large part of the area, comprising the lower course of Paddy’s River and
Tumbarumba Creek and all the country between Tooma and Khancoban and west to Glenken is granite
with the characteristic deep rotten granite soils on the lower slopes and shelves.
Tree Cover. — Con sists of dives, macrorrfiyncha, macidosa and elaeophora ; stands are from 40 to 70
feet in height.
Use of Land. —The cleared country is used for grazing cattle and sheep and the river flats for
topping off cattle and for dairying.
Erosion. —Severe gullying on the flats and lower slopes has taken place all through this country,
more especially on granite formation. Where the hills and slopes are freehold they have been cleared
bare of all tree growth and practically every gully and gutter spreads a fan of sand on to the low country.
Gullies with almost vertical sides and up to 50 feet deep have been carved out and the sandy soil washed
down to lower levels.
From the point of view of siltation of the Hume Weir, this gullying and erosion in the foothill
country is of very great importance, and I am told that the same erosion is taking place in gullies actually
debouching into the weir itself.
Erosion.
Three types of erosion have already been described, viz. :
(1) Erosion on loose sandy granite formation above 6,000 feet and caused by the fire destruction
of the alpine woody shrub type.
(2) Erosion in the rotten granite deep soil formations in parts of the ash belt caused by fire
destruction of the alpine ash.
(3) Gullying in the low country including cleared freehold property.


catchment*^ 1011 tW ° other typ6S ° f erosion at P resent taking place on the
(1) On the Grass Country of the Kosciusko Tops.- Where sheep and cattle tracks run up a slone
even if the slope be as low as 10 degrees, they form channels for the run-off from melting snow which
every year scours them out deeper and deeper. The formation is granite and consists of deep beds of
morainic deposits ; once the turf cover is broken through, the loose soil is washed away from between the
s ones and rocks and gullies develop very rapidly. A good example of this gullying is seen in the tourist
track which was cut from Mount Kosciusko to the Blue Lake ; on this track all the soil has been washed
away, eaving nothing but a mass of granite boulders. The same type of erosion is taking place on all the
narrow sloping stock tracks in this region.
(2) Landslides on the Lower Slopes of the Deep Gorges.- Two large landslides have occurred in the
valley of the Geehi River within the last three years. One of these took place at a bend in the river
some 3 miles above Geehi; the formation is granite, slope 30 to 35 degrees, the forest cover consisting
of an open burnt stand of radiata and eurabhie. The vertical height from the river to the top of the
slide is 300 feet; an area of about five acres of ground slid bodily into the river, damming it back with
a wall of earth 20 feet high. The river cut through the earth wall but is still slightly diverted from its
original course. This landslide occurred in the spring of 1930, and at Khancoban, 15 miles downstream
the river was thick with mud for two weeks after it occurred. Boulders 2 feet across* were carried a quarter
o a mile down the bed of the river, while coarse sand may be found as far down as Geehi.
A similar landslide occurred further up the river some way above the junction of Watson’s Goree
the vertical height of this slide is about 500 feet and the area affected considerably greater than the one
above Geehi.
Is the Protective Efficiency of the Catchment being Preserved ?
In the course of correspondence between the Commonwealth Forestry Bureau and the various
water conservation authorities at the time of the Empire Forestry Conference in 1928, it was frequently
stated by the water conservation authorities that the position of the preservation of the catchment was
satisfactory as long as the “ catchment is preserved in its present state of efficiency,” and the assurance
of the Lands Departments that no more land would be alienated in fee-simple and that lessees would be
prevented from destroying the timber was accepted as sufficient guarantee that the status quo was being
maintained and would continue to be maintained. 8
From my observations on all the mountain country and a good deal of the low country on the New
South Wales side of the catchment, I am convinced that the efficiency of the catchment as it existed in
1928 has not been maintained, and, moreover, that it is decreasing slowly but surely. The following are
the facts which have led me to this conclusion : 8
(1) The bush fires which every dry year sweep through the mountain country killing thousands
of acres of living timber.
(2) The degradation process which started a long time ago in all the timber stands, and which
in the alpine ash and radiata-viminalis-eurabbie types in the wet region
surrounding Kosciusko is now taking place at a great rate, and which has, in certain
areas, reached the stage where ash trees have completely disappeared and erosion has
started in the soft deep granite soil. Further, that velocity of this degradation process
increases in geometrical proportion and will be far and away greater in the next twentv
years than it has been in the past twenty years.
(3) The gullying and erosion in the low country (below 2,000 feet) has increased considerably
as a result of the heavy rains of last winter. This is shown by the fence posts now
hanging in mid-air and having fresh soil still adhering to them.


(4) Landslides which have taken place since 1928. One in particular occurred in the
valley of the Geehi River in the spring of 1930 and which caused the river to he thick
with mud for over two weeks after the slide occurred.
(5) Destruction of the alpine woody shrub cover at altitudes over 6,000 feet, which has been
considerably increased by fires since 1928.
(6) The extension of gullies and gutters which has started on the grass slopes of the Kosciusko
tops.
The Need for Effective Control of the Mountainous Part of the Catchment.
That burning and destruction of tree cover on the catchment should be controlled and prevented
as far as possible admits of no doubt whatsoever. As has been shown above, the continued burning has
caused a severe retrograde movement in the vegetation on the catchment; this retrograde movement
will not stop until the factor causing it (the fires) has been eliminated. If allowed to pursue an
uninterrupted course, the result will be the reduction of the ash and wet country radiata-viminalis
types to a state of low scrub insufficient to protect the steep granite slopes against erosion; what the
eventual state will be is hard to say but there is no doubt at all that it will involve large land slips and
considerable areas of eroded ground.
In this connection it is interesting to compare the mountains of the Murray with certain areas in the
Taurus Mountains in Turkey which I visited in 1930. In the Geurenli Range of the Taurus Mountains
the forest between 5,000 feet and 7,000 feet consists of Cedrus lebani and Abies cilicica, the formation is
limestone and the soil a heavy red clay loam over a heavy red clay ; the climate is somewhat similar to
that in the Murray mountains with three months’ snow in winter and a very dry summer. In the Geurenli
plateau, 4,000 to 7,000 feet altitude, the destruction of forest cover has gone very much further than it
has in our mountains and every stage of the retrograde process may be seen from the original timber stand
with the ground covered with a thick layer of organic soil, to completely denuded slopes with hardly a
scrap of vegetation and severe sheet erosion removing all the soil and small rocks from the hillside.
In all the countries bordering the Mediterranean, the same destruction of mountain forest vegetation
has been going on; the more enlightened governments of France, Italy, and Cyprus are spending large
sums of money in an endeavour to repair the damage.
In the mountains of the Murray catchment the damage is, by comparison, only just beginning and
the problem is one of prevention rather than cure ; surely it is better to stop the process of forest
destruction than to watch it go on and leave to future generations the work of repairing the damage that
should never have been allowed to take place.
The first problem confronting anybody undertaking the preservation of the catchment is that of
fire control.
Fire Control.
I am quite safe in saying that 99 per cent, of the fires in the mountains are lit by human agency.
People living in the mountains may talk about lightning, glass bottles and spontaneous combustion, but
anyone getting to know them well soon realizes what the mountain folk do not admit except among
themselves, viz., that nearly all the fires are deliberately lit by stockmen for one reason or another;
when a fire has broken out the locals know very well who lit it and if it happens to burn one of their own
paddocks they feel justly annoyed, but having no definite proof, their only satisfaction lies in the hope that
they may be able to get even with the man who lit it the following summer.
Why do stockmen light the fires ? The reason is given in the section of “ Grazing,” viz., to clear
away the collection of rank unpalatable grass which has accumulated during past seasons. In addition to
this fires are lit in order to clear the scrub away from tracks along which stock are driven. Anyone


knowing anything about the stockmen’s job can readily sympathise with both these motives ; in one case
the accumulation of dead grass makes the production of fat stock impossible, while in the other case the
dense scrub makes the job of driving stock a very slow and difficult one.
The only cases when fires are lit in the steep ash and rad.-vim. country are when a track passes
through such country and the growth of scrub has made access difficult. Most of the fires are lit in the
snow grass country or in the kangaroo grass foothill country ; in both cases the fires spread into the
steep slope country which is not used for grazing and the man who lit it cares not where the fire stops.
The fires in the foothill country generally come back in to the fences of the cleared country, the owners
of the cleared country then turn out and “ trail ” the fire along their fences, sending it off into the hill
country where, in their opinion, it will do no harm.
As a remedy for this continual burning it has been suggested that the cattlemen should be cleared
out of the mountains and grazing stopped altogether ; in my opinion this would be very bad policy for
two reasons. Firstly, a large unoccupied area would be created and fires would inevitably get into it from
outside ; when fires did get into it their control would be a physical impossibility on account of the complete
lack of access. Secondly, the grazing land of the mountains is a very great asset to two of Australia’s
most important primary industries, wool and meat. Without the relief country provided by the mountain
grass lands, the loss to sheep owners in drought years would be very much greater than it is already;
to sterilize such an asset is surely very bad national policy.
The Remedy.
The millable timber on the area will not, on account of its inaccessibility, be merchantable for a
great number of years and to close the area against all occupation would be a very uneconomic policy,
while at present the area is yielding a certain revenue from grazing ; the logical thing therefore is to
develop and control that grazing along lines which will ensure the proper protection of the catchment.
The total grazing revenue obtained from the area at present amounts to nearly £2,000 per annum •
this is all paid into consolidated revenue as part of the Lands Department collections. If this sum were
spent upon organization work in the area, considerable progress could be made towards the control of
fires and the better development of the grazing country. The revenue is not great and in order to do all
the necessary work a special grant would be required ; but with the present revenue alone considerable
work could be done and knowledge and experience gained which would further increase the revenue from
the area.
Following is the chief work requiring to be done :
Fire Protection.
(1) Construction of tracks to enable rangers to get about the country and get gangs of men on
to the scene of fires. At present, even if rangers and fire-fighters were available, it would
be impossible to get them near the fire owing to the rough nature of the country.
(2) Appointment of rangers to supervise burning off on grass lands, to see that these fires do not
get away into the steep country, and to patrol the country during the summer months.
(3) Improvement of existing stock routes so that there will be no necessity to burn the scrub
in order to make them passable.
(4) Investigations and studies to be made to determine the exact effect of repeated light
burning upon the growth of grass and scrub.


Erosion.
(1) After a sufficient degree of fire protection has been attained, planting or sowing of the bare
eroded areas in the ash belt.
(2) Investigations to be made to ascertain the efficacy of certain shrub types, bracken, &c.,
in the control of run-off and erosion.
Grazing.
(1) Delimitation of land to be used for grazing and land which on account of steep slope is to
be kept free from grazing.
(2) Provision to be made to enable the level grazing land to be burnt and the fires controlled
so as not to burn the timber on the steep slope country.
(3) Local control of grazing land under a system more adaptable to changes in local requirements.
(4) Investigations and studies to be made into the following subjects :
(a) Composition of the grazing lands and the relative palatability of the various
grasses and edible herbs.
(b) the conditions controlling the growth of the more palatable species and the effect
of clearing and burning on their survival and growth ;
(c) the possibility of introducing better species of fodder grasses, herbs and shrubs ;
(d) development of a system of grazing which will do away with the necessity of
periodical burning.
The Need for Control of the Low Country below 2,000 Feet.
The need is no less than in the mountains but the problem is an entirely different one. In the
mountains all the land belongs to the Crown and is leased only on short-term pastoral leases ; in the low
country the bulk of the land is freehold. The problem is how to induce the owners of this land to stop
the gullying and erosion which is going on in their properties. The remedy for this gullying is to plant
in them quick-growing grasses such as paspalum grass, trees such as willows and poplars, and quick-growing
species of edible shrubs. Before any satisfactory progress can be made, it will be necessary for the Water
Conservation Authority to have some kind of control over this freehold land in order to make the land
owners carry out this work or to carry it out for them. A necessary preliminary, however, is to complete
inspection of this part of the catchment in order to determine the extent of the gullying and the approximate
cost of remedying it.


LIST OF DETAILED REPORTS FORMING APPENDIX TO GENERAL REPORT ON THE
RECONNAISSANCE OF THE MURRAY CATCHMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Indi River Basin.
(1) Fall to the Indi from Tin Mine Creek to Limestone Creek.
(2) Basin of Tin Mine Creek.
(3) Basin of Pilot Creek.
(4) Cascade Track to Tin Mine Creek Basin.
(5) The Pilot Section- Summary.
(6) Basin of Cascade Creek.
(7) Basin of Camp Creek.
(8) Basin of Leatherbarrel Creek.
(9) Basin of Snowy Creek.
(10) Basin of Geehi Creek.
(11) Basin of Cootapatamba Creek.
(12) Basin of Bridge Creek.
(13) Basin of Pheasant Creek.
(14) Fall from Hannel’s Ridge to Geehi River.
(15) Basin of Wall’s Creek.
(16) Geehi Region. Summary.
(17) Basin of Read’s Creek.
(18) Basin of Kosciusko Creek.
(19) Main Divide north of Watson’s Crags.
(20) Watson’s Ridge.
(21) Read’s Spur.
Basin of Bogong Creek.
(22) Upper Section.
(23) Left bank from Spur No. 7 to Granite Peaks.
(24) Middle section.
(25) Lower section.
(26) Suggested lines of access.
Geehi River Basin.
(27) Country south of Jagungal.
(28) Area between No. 7 Spur and sheep yard spur.
(29) Basin of Dicky Cooper Creek.
(30) Basin of Windy Creek.
(31) Basin of Three Rocks Creek.
(32) Watson’s Gorge.
(33) Gorge below Gunga Din.
(34) Basin of Grey Mare Creek.
(35) Basin of Camp Creek.
(36) Basin of Middle Creek.
(37) Destruction of Alpine Woody Shrub and subsequent erosion.
(38) Clearing and drying up of the plateau country.
(39) The Fall to Khancoban Creek from Granite Knobs.


Tooma River Basin.
(40) Tooma River Basin north of Black Jack.
(41) Basin of Pound Creek.
(42) Area covered by A.Ls. 19/24 and 24/6 and Cn.L. 19/4
(43) Basin of Black Jack Creek.
Manjar Creek Basin and fall to Tooma River.
