

THE
CUZCO TORPEDO,
AN
EXPLOSIVE MAGAZINE.
Sydney :
JAMES MILLER & CO., Steam Machine and General Printers,
7<S Clarence- Street.
1885.




THE CUZCO TORPEDO:
AN EXPLOSIVE MAGAZINE.
WEDNESDAY, 17 DECEMBER, 1884.
Wk have determined to set our “ Torpedo ” in motion, not so
much for the amusement of passengers as to air the vanity of
contributors. Most journals are announced with a great
“ flourish of trumpets” and a lot of promises (rarely or never
fulfilled). We mean to avoid this pitfall by promising—
nothing at all. If we succeed in waking up the passengers
on board the Cuzco, many of whom (except at meal times)
seem to be half asleep, we shall feel comforted.
If we succeed in bringing to the front an embryo Dickens,
a Mark Twain, a Thackeray, or even a William Shakspeare,
we shall not have toiled in vain.
If we succeed in immortalising the “ Orient Company,
Limited ” (and ourselves in particular) we shall die happy. By
a strict attention to truth, by rigorously excluding all person-
alities, and by providing the best article for the money at
store prices, we trust to obtain the patronage of the nobility,
ladies, and officers on board.
A PEEP AT SUEZ,
BY THE MYALL,
[The great disappointment felt by passengers at not being.able to
land at Suez may make the following extract from the diary of
an “ Orient ” traveller acceptable.]
The first difficulty a would-be visitor to Suez experiences
when on board a steamer at anchor is to secure a boat to take
him ashore. Seven or eight of us succeeded, however (after
a lot of haggling), in persuading ai> Arab to take us to the
landing place, a distance of seven miles from the ship. I
don’t think I ever enjoyed a sail so much before. The air
was deliciously cool, moon was gently shining on the
waters, the silence (except for a monotonous dirge, sung at
times by the boatmen) was unbroken. All seemed to speak
of silence and repose ; the gliding motion of the boat as it
sped on its way gently—now on one tack, now on the other—
appeared to have a sort of dreamy sleepy influence upon us
that made it seem almost sacrilege for the most mundane
amongst us to break the silence of the night. After about
two hours beating we reached the landing pier, adjoining the
splendid hotel built by the P. and 0. Company in the good days
of Suez, before the genius of De Lesseps pierced the canal which
has made Port Said its great rival. Good-bye to idle dreams
and fancies, no sooner were we landed at Suez than we found
ourselves once more to be of the earth and earthy. Here we
were beset by a number of guides, who, all in most execrable
English, vaunted their knowledge of our mother tongue, and
of the town. With some little trouble and a liberal use of
our walking-sticks we managed to secure one guide, the great
difficulty being in not having a dozen. What a strange city
is Suez, everything seems to speak of the Arabian Nights or
something still more ancient. The narrow, crooked streets,
if such alleys deserved the name, hardly permitting two to
walk abreast, were crowded with Arab boys, veiled women,
priests, donkeys, and filth. The houses built of mud, ap-
parently without any regard to order or decency, many falling
into decay, others commenced without the energy or enterprise
to finish them. The merchant, Oriental fashion, squatted
cross-legged in front of his shop (if such hovels as most of
them inhabited could be so called) there retailed his Turkish
delight, coffee, sherbet, and goodness knows what not besides,
to all appearance careless as to whether he was patronised or
not, his one thought apparently being devoted to the hookah,
ease, and sleep. ■ The only ones possessing any energy seemed
.to be the street Arabs and donkey-boys ; the latter were
eternally worrying, one’s life out to patronise a “ Doctor
Kenealy,” a “ Meester Teechborne,” a “ Who-a Emma,” in
fact every celebrity in Europe was there waiting to be sat
upon and whacked. These poor little donkeys, if I may pray
to be excused calling such celebrities v by *such a name, were
about the size of large Newfoundland dogs, and would, were
your legs at all long, leave them* scraping on the
ground. I, after trying a “ Queen Victoria,” infinitely
preferred walking, but found it very difficult to impress
the fact upon about twenty ragged, dirty-faced boys
and men, who dogged my footsteps all the town. The
street arabs too, with their eternal cry of “ backsheesh, •
backsheesh,” seem to think the unwary traveller specially
provided by Providence for them only. Were the same per-
spverance devoted to any legitimate trade that they devote to
begging, all would, I feel confident, ultimately die millionaires.
I must confess that when compared with the Egyptian
beggars our London ones are mere novices. Being the
month of Ramadan, no one 'of the faithful was per-
mitted to eat, drink, or smoke from sunrise to sunset; this
for a month is a fearful ordeal, especially to the weak and
sickly ; however, when once the sun has dipped under the
horizon, night is turned into day, singing, dancing, eating
and drinking are then indulged in ad lib. Our guide, a tall
lanky fellow, with a big stick, rejoicing in the name of
Achmit, appeared to possess no knowledge of the town,
beyond that of the stores and shops, and to these he led us
round, mercilessly trying to persuade us to purchase all
sorts of rubbish at ruinous prices, no doubt for his special
benefit in the shape of “ backsheesh ” from the vendor—
Anglice “ commission for touting.” This we found rather
monotonous at length, so showing him our sticks and boots in
rather a menacing manner, we gave him to understand we
wanted something more exciting for our money.
( To be continued in our next.)


THE FIRST SALOON “LOOKING UP.”
The voyage hitherto having been very dull on account of
mal-de-mer, and our proverbial English “ have-nothing-to-do-
with-your-fellow-traveller ” manner not having quite worn off,
a meeting of first saloon passengers was held one day when
we were in the Canal, with a view to devise some means of
enlivening us on the rest of the passage. Mr. Morrison was
elected chairman of the meeting. A committee was elected
consisting of Messrs. Cleave, Baldwin, Morrison, Waite,
Peirce, Worrall, and Wright. Messrs. Morrison and Baldwin
to be chairman and secretary respectively. It was decided to
have various amusements, with the consent of the Com-
mander, such as cricket and quoit matches, concerts, athletic
sports, and dramatic entertainments.
A meeting of the amusements committee was held on
Saturday, December 13, at which the secretary was instructed
to ask the co-operation of the second saloon committee in
carrying out the programme of amusements. The piece
selected for the dramatic entertainment was “ Whitebait at
Greenwich,” one of the good old-fashioned farces, and not
calculated to be too great a task on amateurs. The secretarv
was instructed to arrange for its production at as early a date
as possible. A programme of sports was arranged, which
will be found on another page. In consequence of the
absence of shops or stores (civil service or otherwise), it was
decided to have no prizes, the committee thinking that
successful competitors would find sufficient remuneration in
the fact that they were champions of the Cuzco in their
various walks, or runs,\r jumps, as the case fhight be. No
date is fixed for the sports, but it is hoped that the weather
will not prevent their being held on Wednesday afternoon.
The question of concerts was adjourned sine die , and the
secretary was instructed to seek out what various talent,
musical or literary,,and in fact talent of whatever kind there
might be on board. In conclusion, the writer trusts that the
last four weeks of will not be so slow as the first
two ; he hope's everyone has done with sea and all other sick-
ness, and he would impress upon his readers (if he has any)
that the way to make a sea voyage enjoyable for himself is to
do what he can to make it enjoyable for others. Such is the
advice of
Smoke Boom.
SECOND SALOON DRAUGHT TOURNAMENT.
The first heat of the tournament has been played with
the following result :
Williams beat R. Hill
Low „ Rreltejohn
Fletcher „ Thomas
Stonchouse „ Meggi't
Lemesson „ T. Hill
Ede „ Clayton
The following have been paired off for the next heat :
Low to play Williams
Ede „ Lemesson
Fletcher „ Stonchouse
Two prizes will be awarded —first, eight shillings ; second,
four shillings.
[We hope to meet the winners at the bar of the Cuzco
Ed.]
POETICAL EXPLOSIONS.
"JACK.”
A Digger’s Yarn, by “The Myall.”
(After Dagonet Ballads.)
Well, ma'es, it sounds a bit strange, but what I believe is this here,
That plenty dumb critters below have got a brain just as clear
As any man round this camp fire, ’tis but instinct says you, well then
I’d rather by far have that same than the brains of many men ;
For the brains of most men I know seem to teach them but what’s
bad,
To thieve, lie, and drink, and to swear ; if dogs, we’d shoot them as
mad ;
You do a good turn for a dog. that same he’ll never forget.
But just do as much for a man, ’tis ten to one you’ll regret.
I remember some years ago, when up on the Palmer Rush,
“ Flash Bill,” as we called him then, he’s killed himself since through
the lush,
Had a “ happy thought ” one day ; wi’h stones he would fix his dog’s
head,
Then sling him into the creek, and bet as to when he’d be dead.
With that, he caught hold of the cur—a poor little whining wretch,
And, singing to one of his mates some handy sized quartz to fetch,
Prepared the poor brute for the sport; all our camp turned out to see.
On the diggings anything fresh is sure to be hailed with glee.
In a minute or two poor Jack was battling away for life ;
It seemed though as if before long he’d soon give over the strife,
When, all of a sudden, the stones fixed round his head by “Flash
Bill”
Got loose in the nick of time ; Jack swam for shore with a will;
But the brutes as lined the shore ’gan to pelt him with rock and
stone ;
Then my blood commenced to boil, and, though I stood there all
alone,
I out with my precious Colt, and, with looks they understood, said,
“ The next as throws at that pup shall swallow ;.n ounce of lead !”
(To be continued in our next.)
QUOIT TOURNAMENT.
This tournament was played one day last week, the result
being as follows :
First Prize Mr. Fletcher
Second Prize Mr. vieggitt
Third Prize Mr. T. Hid
CUZCO CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor Cuzco Torpedo.
Sir, —Holding the opinion that it is every man’s duty to
look after the welfare of his future wife’s husband, I advise
you to raise your life insurance at once, that is if the sub-
scription fee allows such a thing. “ Wake up the passengers,”
indeed! May be a very dangerous game, that, let me tell
you. If we do indulge in a “ snooze," we sleep like the
British Lion, sir, with one eye open, and you may perhaps
find you will have to “ die happy ’ before having had time to
immortalise the “ Orient Company, Limited,” or to bring out
any embryo “ God-knows-who.” Anyhow, if you make any
more of those witty bon mots of yours, re our natural cravings
at meal times, you had better add another wing to your villa,
in Port St., as I know T a good many besides “yours truly”
who are longing to pay you a visit when the port light gets
“ on the wane.” , I am, &c.,
One of the “ Gentry,”
(Member of the hungry table.)
[We certainly thought the address “ to our readers” would
please everybody. In the interests of the Torpedo's circula-
tion we “pandered all round”—never again. “ The first duty
of a public man is to despise popularity.” We beg to inform
“ One of the Gentry” (member of the hungry table) and his
many friends that we have secured the services of a fighting-
editor! ! !— Ed. Cuzco Torredo.]
2
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


OPENING OF THE PHILHARMONIC SOCIETY’S
NEW HALL.
By
OUR OWN THUMBNAIL CRITIC.
The limited space of my thumbnail does not allow me to
give proper details of the architecture in this modern structure.
Suffice it to say that the “ maritimesco ” design has been well
carried out, at d that the exits are roomy and airy. The
numerous accidents I hope to have the pleasure of reporting
when panics occur at other places of amusement, will thus, at
this hall, alas, be limited. The Chairman was seated precisely
at seven, and, amid ringing cheers from the packed audience,
delivered his opening speech. There was scarcely a dry eye
to be found, and I regret that a drop from mine happened to
fall on my nail and blotted out my shorthand report of his
touching address. The concert opened with a well selected
programme, which gave us all an opportunity of admiring the
extraordinary acoustic properties of the new hall. The pro-
gramme was full of variety and surprises. We must specially
mention “ The Emigrant,” and ditty “ Tell me,
Phyllis,” both of which were given in very realistic style.
The deceptive rendering of the former made the listener
almost believe that the singer really was an emigrant, and the
sailor song was given lustily and with powerful es/>rit, as if
the performer was standing before the mast in a howling gale.
The most appreciated number on the “ bill of fare,” “ Tinkle,
Tinkle Turn,” (treating the audience to plenty of “rum” at
the end of each verse) was very gracefully rendered by the
favourite comic singer of the Society. The cantata “ Powder
Monkey,” also deserves a word of comment. The behaviour
of the “ gods ” was very commendable, and may well serve as
an example to the frequenters at the M. and D. Society’s
Hall.
CUZCO DEBATING SOCIETY.
On Friday evening the Cuzco Debating Society commenced
business in earnest.
The Chairman (Mr. Inglis) in his opening address ex-
pressed his pleasure at the good muster present; he trusted
the subject for debate, “ Is Australia a suitable country for
emigrants?” might be the means of drawing out useful
information, and as all present were bound to the antipodes,
he felt sure it must prove interesting.
Mr. Fletcher then opened on the negative side. He
admitted many people had by dint of hard work “ made a
pile ” there, but at the cost, in many cases, of a life of toil
under a tropical sun, spent in such arduous labour as fencing
or digging. Mr. Fletcher further contended that the scenery
was monotonous, the people uncouth and half civilized, with
a tendency to turn black in consequence of the heat.
Mr. Lucre then followed on the opposite side. He had
been over thirty years in the colonies, and did not think the
heat had altered his complexion much, nor were the returning
colonial gentlemen to his mind “half civilized.” He had
been fortunate himself to make two or three fortunes in New
South Wales, and anyone keeping *from the drink, with
ordinary exertion, might easily do well. •In England, he added,
the poor are delighted if they have money enough to purchase a
bullock’s heart, in Sydney we throw them over the pier head.
Mr Wahlin followed, saying he came prepared to assist
Mr. Lucre’s side, but on hearing him say that in Sydney
“ they threw their hearts over the pier head,” he certainly
could not speak in support of such heartless colonies After
a few further remarks from Mr, Lemesson, Mr. Prettejohn,
and a summing up from the chairman, the result was decided
in favour of Australia as a suitable country for emigrants.
THE CUZCO MUSICAL AND DRAMATIC
SOCIETY.
OUR “ THUMBNAIL CRITIC.”
By
On Monday evening the above Society opened their season
with a grand entertainment in the second-class saloon. A
first-class stage —thanks to the courtesy of the officers and
our jovial bo’sun and his merry men, —was fitted up. The
leading members of the “ upper ten,” having now returned
from their summer cruise in the Mediterranean’s blue waters,
the eye on entering the hall was dazzled by the grand display
of fashion and wealth. The ship’s bunting also lent ail
additional charm. Mr. Helby (the purser) had kindly con-
sented to occupy the chair, not an enviable position when the
Red Sea heat 'is considered. The programme (copies of
which were sold at 6d. each in aid of the “ Shipwrecked
Mariners ”) was a capital one, and never allowed the interest
to Hag for one moment. It is to be regretted that the
principal pianist of the Society, suffering from the weather,
could not appear ; but, happily, no break in the programme
was caused thereby, as another well-known artist filled up the
vacancy very efficiently. Each item was rendered with taste
and accuracy, and the enjoyment of the audience seemed to
be unanimous. The recitations of Mr. Inglis might have
caused tears to flow, but fortunately the heat prevented such
exertion.
The second part opened with the well-known strains of
“ See the conquering hero comes,” at the end of which Mr,
Percy Montague, not unknown among us, appeared on the
stage and gave his much-talked-of recital from Hamlet in a
way that astonished all present.
After the Chairman, on behalf of those present, had
addressed a few words of thanks to the performers, Mr. Inglis
proposed a vote of thanks to Mr. Helby for the kind manner
in which he had taken the chair, and also to the many ladies
and gentlemen present who had braved the heat to patronise
the Society.
OFFICIAL APPOINTMENTS.
(SECOND SALOON.)
During the past week the following officers have been
appointed :
Cuzco Musical and Dramatic Society.
Mr. Inglis, Chairman.
Mr. Wahlin. I Mr. Ede.
Mr. Meggitt. | Mr. Williams.
Cuzco Debating Society.
Mr. Meggitt. Mr. Inglis.
Mr. Prettejohn. Mr. Wahlin.
Mr. Fletcher.
Sports Committee.
Mr. Fletcher. I Mr. Thomas.
Mr. Meggitt. | Mr. Holder.
Police Force.
Mr. Rooke, Superintendent.
Mr. Birkett. I Mr.* Lachlan.
Mr. Clayton. | Mr. Holder, Sergt.
Mr. Inglis, Chairman of Public Meetings.
Mr. Wahlin, Vice-Chairman „
Mr. Ede, Secretary „
3
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
R.M.S. CUZCO TOILET CLUB.
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s
HAIR CUTTING, SHAVING, SHAMPOOING,
and
SINGING SALOON,
Situated Mid-ships.
Subscriptions taken for the Voyage.
W. H. TOMPSON,
From H. P. Truefitt,
London.
THE CUZCO MARINE THEATRE
Will positively open for the first (and probably the last) time
on Boxing Day, December 26th, with the thrilling, side-
splitting, exciting, sensational, romantic, and highly moral
Farce,
WHITEBAIT AT GREENWICH,
as rehearsed daily in the First Saloon for years.
Characters :
Miss Lucretia Buzzard Mrs. Waite
Sally Miss Mayer
Mr, Glimmer Mr, Stuart
Mr. Buzzard Dr. Baldwin
John Small Dr. Molyneux
Doors open at 7.30. Commence at 8.
Whitebait at Greenwich is good for Invalids !
Come in your thousands !!
Whitebait at Greenwich is not a Dye !
Book Early ! !!
Whitebait at Greenwich can be taken in small doses !
Bring your Babies ! ! ! !
Whitebait at Greenwich, as patronised by Dukes, Earls,
Marquises, the Army and Navy, Nobility Gentry and
Mashers !!!!!!
Whitebait at Greenwich beats the World !!!!!!!
Beware of Spurious Imitations !
Whitebait at Greenwich. When you ask for it on
Boxing Night see that you get it !
EDITORIAL SMOKE.
Since our address was issued we have met with so many
promises of support (may they all be fulfilled) that, at
enormous expense, we have secured the services of the
following :
A sober sporting gentleman to furnish the ship’s daily
“ go-as-you-please.”
A veracious correspondent to elaborate, at a reduced rate,
any musical gatherings to which he may gain admission.
A poet to be kept on the premises, warranted harmless.
* * * *
Amongst many other valuable prizes we offer the follow-
ing :
A purse of copper—for the most thrilling account of the
Cuzco’s run since leaving Gravesend.
Six cigars (Port Said brand) —for the best poetical effusion.
Four oranges—for the raciest local sent in.
A box of matches (wax vestas) —for the best conundrum
having some local interest.
Contributions in prose, verse, or paper are solicited, and
should be placed in the Editor’s box not later than Monday
night, as we go to press every Tuesday morning.
«= * * #
The Torpedo, in making its first bow to the Cuzco public,
begs to thank all those who have so kindly assisted at its
birth.
Our editorial box (fitted up with all the latest improve-
ments), thanks to Mr. Pullman, our genial chief steward, is
posted in the second saloon entrance, hungrily awaiting con-
tributions.
# * # #
Just before going to press we found a sum of money in the
above box. A thousand thanks to the generous but anony-
mous giver. Money is always preferable to cigar ends, orange-
peel, or pipe-stems.
* * * #
Unable to keep o.ur editorial “ hair on,” we paid the Cuzco
hairdresser (W. 11. Tompson, from Truefitt’s) a visit. We
found in Ids “ sanctum” everything conceivable, from tooth-
picks to linen coats. His manipulation of the scissors and
razor was immense ! (Advertisements in this style “ worked
out.” Barkeepers please note. . . .)
* * # *
We regret to say our sober sporting correspondent, who
was going to furnish us with a record of the ship’s daily
“ go-as-you-please,” has, up to tbe time of going to press,
sent nothing in. We fear the heat has affected his spirits—
he takes it neat.
* # * #
Just as we were passing through “ Hell’s Gates,” we
remarked to the chief steward that the “ Torpedo ” had just
gone to press. “Ah! I suppose it’s in the ‘ devil’s hands
now ; I’m not surprised, as we’re so near the ‘ Gates of
Hell,’” he replied. We thought this flash of wit (any in
darkness apply to editor) worth a “ stop press” insertion.
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.
4


CHRISTMAS DOUBLE NUMBER.]
THE CUZCO TORPEDO:
AN EXPLOSIVE MAGAZINE.
WEDNESDAY, 24 DECEMBER, 1884.
Notwithstanding our “ devotion to truth,” the cornet on
board, the heat, and the scarcity of “ copy ” from the first
saloon (may it be more plentiful next week), our Torpedo has
“ gone oft ” well, and not, as envious critics hinted, “hung
fire ” Within five minutes of the Torpedo's publication, the
whole of the first edition (one copy) was gone—on deck.
Since our 'Torpedo's first appearance on the journalistic
horizon, life on board the Cuzco is at length worth living :
its appearance seems to have given passengers an object to
live for—beyond eating and sleeping. It seems to have
bound the first and second saloons together by giving both
one great central object of admiration.
Our modesty, unfortunately, prevents our enumerating the
many other blessings conferred by our “ Explosive Magazine.”
As tending also to promote the pleasure of passengers, the
Torpedo cannot too highly praise the kindness of officers one
and all, the attention shown by stewards at meal times, and
the skill of barmen in mixing “ cock-tails ” —the great source
of our inspiration.
We must admit also that a great stroke of genius was
shown by putting all “ obstructionists ” in office, and absorb-
ing the most pugilistic (and therefore the most dangerous)
element in the police force.
Before closing our editorial remarks we beg to wish one
and all on board the Cuzco a right jolly Xmastide, and trust
upon Xmas Day “ good digestion may wait on appetite;” and
the Cuzco “medicine man’s ” billet prove a sinecure.
A PEEP AT SUEZ.
By
THE MYALL.
('Continued from our last.')
Our guide immediately changed his tactics and commenced
showing us the few objects of interest in the town, such as
the Mosque, where, before admission, all have to leave their
boots outside ; I, infidel like, carried mine under my coat,
not liking the appearance of the religious gentry hanging
about. The railway, the bazaars, and the al fresco concerts
were next the objects of our attention. These latter seemed
to be very much enjoyed by the mob, perhaps they were very
edifying to the initiated, but a little went a very long way
with us, more especially as the tune of all their native
melodies was a stale one to many of our number, it bearing a
strong family likeness to the “ Old Hundredth.”
These sights and sounds exhausted, we were anxious to see
the “ Dancing Dervishes,” and accordingly our guide Achmit
led us down a long crooked passage, dimly lighted by a few
dirty, untrimmed oil lamps. Imagine to yourself a narrow
courtyard, confined by high mud walls, in the centre of the
yard, almost mixing with the spectators, some thirty-five
or forty dark complexioned Mahomedans, dressed in long-
flowing, snow-wliite robes, with the usual white turbans on
their heads. These were ranged in two circles round the
high-priest (so I call him for want of a better name), who,
beating a little drum held in one hand with a stout stick held
in the other, seemed to act as a sort of “ M.C.” In a remote
corner, led by one of the native fiddles, was the choir, drawling
a most monotonous dirge. On a given signal the Dervishes
commenced bowing to the ground, all uttering at the same
time a grunting hum, hum, hum, reminding one forcibly of
the sound made by the machinery of a steamer when in motion.
The bowing soon increased at such a rate that any ordinary
man would have been exhausted in five minutes ; the longer
they continued the greater seemed to be the speed they worked
themselves up to, until at length it became so great that
their features were almost unrecognisable. Two men walk
round to steady those novices who are beginning to feel giddy,
by gently placing one hand on the head and the other under
the chin, but still a motion of some sort is kept up, if only
with the feet. All of a sudden, at a given signal the Der-
vishes redouble their already frightful pace, eyes commence
starting from their sockets, tongues hang protruding from
their mouths, the features of each have a frightful demoniacal
look fearful to witness ; the delight of the spectators is immense,
they seem to look upon the devotees with admiration, envy, and
respect, as though the poor devils (or rather Dervishes) were
already tasting of the bliss of Paradise. The face of each Dervish
now wears a truly diabolical expression, terrible to witness, but
still all keep on at express speed, the sweat coming out in big
beads on their foreheads and then trickling down their
faces, almost blinding them. At length the air becomes
unbearable ; unfortunate novices, unable to keep up the
killing pace, drop with a heavy thud to the ground. The
sight becomes revolting at last, reminding one of “ Dante’s
Inferno” rather than anything earthly, and before witnessing
the conclusion of this exhibition of fanaticism, I am perforce
obliged to seek the fresh air and leave the sickening spectacle
THE END.
CUZCO DEBATING CLUB.
An immense number of passengers assembled at the second
debate of the season, on the proposition —“ Is man happier
married or as a bachelor ?” Although extra accommodation
was provided by meins of forms, &c., hundreds were unable
to obtain admission. The approaches, and even the roof of
the hall, were thronged with eager listeners. We noted also
that, notwithstanding the heat (we were still close to “ Hell’s
Gates,”) all the married gentlemen brought their “ better
halves ” with them—a great moral support. The Chairman,
Mr. McAllister, congratulated the second saloon committee
on the energy displayed by them in providing .entertainment


for the passengers, and after mentioning the rules of debate,
called upon Mr. Wahlin to address the meeting in favour of
the marriage state.
This speaker regretted for the first time in his life that he
was a Swede ; although he might be cut to pieces by Mr,
Inglis and his supporters, he should glory in suffering
martyrdom in such a noble cause. The married man had
joys the bachelor never dreamed of ; the bachelor flew to his
bottle of “ fizz ” (an expensive luxury), the married man to
the far more exhilarating and much more economical “ kiss
from the lips of love.” Adam, although apparently sur-
rounded by all that could make life happy, pined for a com-
panion, and suffered an operation to obtain a wife. In
conclusion, the speaker stated that he had a very heavy
battery to support him, so, in closing, he would simply quote
the words, “ a wife was heaven’s last and best gift to man.”
Mr. Inglis, in reply, said that on looking around him he
much regretted having to say some very unkind things of the
fair sex, but duty must be done. Mr. Inglis said, let us now
strip off all romance and talk sense. What did falling in
love mean ? Falling from a state of reason to one bordering
on insanity. A pretty face, a charming figure, an engaging
manner were quite sufficient to produce this disease of the
mind, the result, a binding together of two really quite
unknown to each other until the fatal knot was tied—alas !
too tightly to undo. Marriage was a great lottery in which
(like all lotteries) the blanks far outnumbered the prizes
Children were very amusing at three or four, and
lie regretted they were not born ready clothed at that
age. He described, in heartrending terms, the infant’s
midnight meal, nursing at 2 a m, (possibly by papa), the
sorrows caused by an undutiful child ; expatiated on the
tyranny of the average mother-in-law, and reminded his
hearers how many noble lives had been ruined by an un-
sympathetic wife. A bachelor’s was a butterfly existence, he
could “ flit from flower to flower,” and like the married man
sip the economical nectar from the “ lips of love.” In ton-
elusion he said the bachelor’s life need not be a lonely
one as he could find congenial society, amusements, and
luxury not to be enjoyed by a married man with double the
bachelor’s income. Mr. Fletcher, following, said that the
question of marriage was an old one. He very much doubted
whether a man on £IOO a year could enjoy his club. He
certainly might indulge more often in the theatre and live
better on a small amount than the married man. All had
to face danger in the cause of duty, and the man who feared
to risk marriage for fear of endangering his happiness, did not
deserve to enjoy the pleasures of home. He thought a man, after
the anxieties of the day, was amply recompensed by the welcome
of a wife. Dr. Worrall remarked that a man could push his
way in the world better if not handicapped by a wife and
family, and was followed by Dr. Baldwin, who described
falling in love as an indescribable sensation. Though he was
infinitely happier as a married man, he often wished some of
his old bachelor days could be recalled. He reminded his
single friends of, the difficulty of obtaining comfortable
lodgings and an attentive and obliging landlady. Mr.
Montague said that all previous speakers had looked only at
the happy side of the question. He stated that it was his
firm conviction that as a general rule a single girl might be
true but a married one was generally deceitful. He reminded
bachelors that the lodgings difficulty could be overcome by
changing and changing about till suitable “ diggings ” were
found. Dr. J. F. Molyneux said that the bachelors’ cause was
a bad cause nobly supported. Though he had no personal
knowledge of the married state, he had a profound admiration
for the fair sex. He felt sure that a woman’s influence on a
man was softening and elevating. He concluded by saying
that he would be married to-morrow, if the girl would only
say “Yes.” Mr. McAllister (the chairman) thought that
there were orders of men who would bo better not married,
instancing the priesthood, and though there was no doubt
that the best works the world had known had emanated from
men who were not happy in their married life, he was per-
fectly sure that for the great majority of mankind it was best.
After a few more words from Mr. Wahlin, in which he quoted
a Swedish proverb, to the effect that “ a sorrow shared was
only half a sorrow, but a joy shared was a double joy,” the
meeting divided, the result being that 33 votes were recorded
in favour of marriage and 13 in favour of a single life.
Dr. Morrison then moved a resolution, namely, a vote of
thanks to the chairman, which having been put to the meeting
and carried unanimously, the debate terminated amid loud and
prolonged applause.
Tattling Telephone.
POETICAL EXPLOSIONS.
“JACK.”
A Digger’s Yarn, by “ The Myall.”
(Continued.)
Before they had time to reply, I jumped in and saved the dog,
Just as his strength was “ bust up,” he was going down like a log ;
“ Flash Bill ” and his crew looked amazed as I leapt ashore with
Jack,
But not a word one of them said, they each stepped hastily back ;
They saw what there was to expect in going too far with Ben,
And I shouldn’t have been over nice in the humour I was just then ;
But Jack he kept licking my hands, and his large eyes seemed to say,
“ Yes, you’ve saved my life, old man, I shall never forget to-day.”
When this same pup was two years old, you wouldn’t find far or near,
A dog half as plucky as Jack —of blacks he’d never afear ;
In camp Jack was good as two men, no need to keep watch at night,
He’d warn you of danger’s approach, his bark was true as his bite ;
To hunt, there wasn’t a dog as. could manage the pace with him,
And often “old men” kangaroos I’ve seen him tear limb from limb ;
He knew all their fly little ways, and when to the water they’d
make,
The toughest “ old man” in the scrub, his death-grip never could
shake.
Many and many's the time I’ve returned to camp dead beat;
His loud bark of joy, as he sprung and danced with glee round my
feet,
Have made me forget all ray toil —made me a different man.
I can’t express all I mean—a bit of a scholard p’raps can ;
Then after supper at night I’d take a draw at the clay,
And tell my troubles to Jack, he’d listen to what I would say,
With a paw fixed on each knee, and a wistful turn of his head,
“ I’m sorry for you, ’deed I am,” that’s what his looks always said.
(To he continued.)
A BARBER-OUS BALLAD.
THE BARBER.
By
If wanting a shave, or shampoo,
Pray hasten at once to my shop,
You’ll soon see what Tompson* can do
To those needing a “county crop.”
Whilst on board the Cuzco, for me,
Nothing, indeed, can be harder,
For the sake of a “bob,” to see
Passengers robbing the barber.
* From H. P. Truefltt’s.
Athletic Sports.—Just before goins: to press we hear
these sports are again postponed till will our First Saloon
friends kindly inform us ?
2
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Cuzco Torpedo.
Dear Sir, —On opening the first issue of your new
periodical this morning I received a shock to the nervous
system which prostrated me for the greater part of the day.
However, I am now sufficiently composed (thanks to the kind
assistance of Mr. Astley) to protest against such perpetra-
tions as the following :—On the title page of your paper,
printed in large letters, are the words, “ Weekly Journal !”
which I consider are a disgrace to the flag between them. I
do not know who is responsible for this astounding mistake,
but either his education has been sadly neglected, or he must
be a native of the land of Erin—’Erein lies the fault. Is he
not aware, sir, that the word ‘‘journal” literally means
“ daily.” (Derivation, Latin, diurnus. Vide Davidson, &c.)
How then, I ask, can a ‘‘daily” be “weekly?” I cannot
understand, sir, how you (famed as you are for your deep
learning tluoughout the entire length, breadth, and depth of
this ship) could permit this gross error to appear. 1 hope
and trust that the offensive words will be either obliterated or
altered in your next issue, and that your “ weekly journal” may
gain strength as it grows older is the fervent wish of
Yours, common-sensibly,
A GNAT-STRAINER.
[We are sorry for “ Gnat-strainer’s” common sense. On
referring to our office boy, he informs us that a journal is a
paper “ published daily—or otherwise ” ; ours is otherwise.
For fear of damaging “ Gnat-strainer’s ” nervous system
beyond repair, in future we shall style the “ Torpedo ” “An
Explosive Magazine.”— Ed.]
“ To the Editor of the Cuzco Torpedo
Sir, —On the 16th instant a discussion wag held in the
Second-class Saloon on “ Is a man happier married or as a
bachelor ? ” Not having the privilege of attending, I had to
content myself by listening from my elevated position on the
sky-light. Mr. Inglis, who led off for the bachelors, tried to
score a point by saying it was thanks to a woman we lost
Paradise. I say, Mr. Editor, it was thanks to a bachelor—
the Devil ; and if I prove that the Devil is and was a
bachelor, my object is achieved. First : be it remembered
that the Devil is a man, he is always spoken of as he, him,
his, &c. Secondly ; be it known that that there is no female
devil. While the angels are always represented with girls’
faces (and we are certain that no angel ever had a moustache
or wore an eye-glass), the devils are always represented with
beards and horns. Thirdly :be it remembered, and this is
my most important point, that the devil was not married, ergo
a bachelor. No mention whatever is made of a Mrs. Devil
or a Miss Devil. The only mention of a female in connection
with the devil is his grandmother, ,and even this only by
tradition. Indeed, so great is his abhorrence of females, that
although thousands of men (bad men I admit), are asking
him to take charge of their mothers-in-law, he turns a deaf
ear to all their prayers. Now, in the name of honesty and
common sense, on what other ground could this be explained
except on the supposition that he is a bachelor ? With these
convincing remarks
I beg to remain,
Your humble servant,
“ A HUSBAND THAT IS TO BE.”
DRAUGHT TOURNAMENT.
The final heats of this tournament have resulted as
follows :
Third Heat.
Low beat Ede
Fletcher, a bye.
Second Heat.
Low beat Williams
Ede „ Lemesson
Fletcher „ Stonehouse
LADIES’ QUOIT TOURNAMENT.
Tins tournament was held on Friday, on the deck of the
Second Saloon, between the married ladies and the single.
The maids were Miss Mayer, Miss Key, and Miss Cutler.
The married ladies were Mrs. Fletcher, Mrs. Meggitt, and
Mrs. Stonehouse. Great interest was excited on board the
ship by this match. After some very exciting play, the
married ladies (thanks to Mrs. Fletcher’s scoring) wen. We
trust the ladies will next attack the gentlemen in their own
stronghold.
THE JOLLY STEERAGE.
A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to you all.
Here’s luck ! We are all happy and active now as we glide
along through the blue waters of the Carribean Sea, or what-
ever you like to call it, my geography is not quite up to the
“ London Matric. pass.” We are the merriest heap in the
whole ship I’ll bet a couple of dollars if anyone likes to hold
the stakes. By-the-bye, we could do with a few steaks in the
steerage, although we can hardly complain of the grub, which
is always rich, rare, and spicy. We lay great importance on
the fact that the officers look so well after our general health,
as is evidenced by our well-appointed dietary. There is
nothing like porridge for breakfast, but I think the most of
us can dispense with this luxury if the captain would be kind
enough to substitute ham and eggs, and a little roast chicken
chucked in wouldn’t be refused, at least I wouldn’t refuse it ;
but you must always remember that we form a very fastidious
community, we steerage ‘‘ blokes.” We are not badly off for
soap, although we do belong to the “ great unwashed,” but
the great difficulty is in finding a washing house. We have
not got the latter luxury in the steerage, but if the officers
are as agreeable as we are, we don’t mind using the first
saloon ; and if there are any ladies on board who wish to let
us see what they can do, and how they were brought up by
the hand (we poor rascals were all brought up by the foot),
let them set to, in proper Scotch style, and show us a bit of
the “ Hie’lan’ Fling ” in a dolly tub. We would also hint that
there are many holes want a bit of darning, and agreater num-
ber of buttons on our pants would make us all fit to attend the
Grand Saloon Concerts, and also some of the big sprees. We
understand that the ladies and gentlemen in the saloon are
going to give the steerage a grand feast, seeing that it’s Christ-
mas time, and we are all delighted. We were quite sure their
generosity would eke out before we got very far from happy
old England, “ the land of home and beauty.” We are all
dancing mad in anticipation of the fun we are going to have.
The “ Tug of War,” oh, my, we are all in for that ; I’ll back
the steerage against the whole ship. Of course we have got
the crew in the forecastle, and a finer- set of men never sailed
on any craft that carried sail. If any man thinks that this
is unseemly flattery he is greatly mistaken ; the steerage has
a far better opportunity of judging than the aft passengers.
We like to be polite, but any man who doubts it will have to
show us what he can do with a pair of gloves. If the latter
3
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


articles are too hard, then our only remaining little protection
i 3 the —well, an honest man’s hand. By the way, we are
glad that such good harmony exists amongst us ; the latter
us, remember, refers to the steerage only. No cross words,
no fighting, no lying or swearing ; in fact, I’m surprised at
the scarcity of profane language on board ; the latter seems
to be the commodity one would expect to find in abundance.
Our ladies in the steerage, as far as I am able to observe, are
kind, good hearted, and always amiable, and to see them
cropping up on deck at about 6.30 a.m. sets a noble example
to many. We can also compliment them when doing a
little at the light fantastic, when “ their feet beneath
the petticoat, like little mice, steal in and out.” By-the-
bye, I forgot that we are going to hold a tremendous social
and dramatic concert, and our only drawback is the fear about
the use of the piano. If the officers only knew how a few
were striving to drive away the monotony of a long sea
voyage, I feel confident they would not hesitate to grant us a
great boon, and that is the use of the piano. We wouldn’t
knock the article into matchwood, for depend upon it there is
a great amount of talented musical ability amongst us.
A.W.B.A.
CUZCO MUSICAL AND DRAMATIC SOCIETY.
By
OUR THUMBNAIL CRITIC.
The life of your “ T.C.” is not such a happy one as his
gentle readers may believe. The editor swallows a lemon
squash (all money dropped in the editor’s box he has
failed to account for up to the present), takes his scissors in
one hand and a bundle of old papers in the other, and seeks
out a cool, shady place, where he quite leisurely mixes a very
digestible concoction of his colleague’s best puns and wittiest
paragraphs But it is not so with a truthful and industrious
critic like your “ T.C.” He has to sit on a hard bench,
scratching his head until the splinters make his thumbnail
ache, chewing a new pencil (which is more than his salary
can bear), twisting off his waistcoat buttons, and staring up
at the cruet stands hanging under the skylights (as if Apollo
and the muses had any innate partiality for vinegar or
dried up mustard) before he can find even the first opening
sentence to his report. Now, no neat little “ would-be stars”
of the fairer sex, calling at his office for private preliminary
rehearsals, nor any debuting “Bassos a la Foli” button-
holing him outside the bar, that is not as yet, though we
hope our artists will take this hint, and benefit by the easy
road to fame and fortune I have pointed out. But there are
times when the sun shines also on his existence, as, for
instance, when he is told off to report such delightful enter-
tainments as the one given by the above-mentioned Society
on Saturday last, their second entertainment of the season.
The concert was in fact a success without a parallel. The
stage and decorations were the same as on the last occasion,
and the chair was ably and gracefully occupied by Mr,
M‘Allister, of the first saloon. I cannot enter into parti-
culars of the concert or the programme, which presented a
series of new features and really welcome gems. The recep-
tion of each artist was of the heartiest description, and in
almost every case an encore became an absolute necessity.
The concert opened with a pianoforte solo by the Society’s
principal pianist, whose “ Silvery Waves ” rippled over the
notes like a rivulet of melody. Fresh interest for this concert
was added by the fact that two prominent members of the
“ Philharmonic Society ” gave their valuable aid to the same.
Only to hear “ The Blue Alsatian Mountains ” by one of
these gentlemen was worth all the miles some of the listeners
had travelled to listen to it. One or tw T o comic songs, sung
by an eminent guest, at present starring our provinces,
created roars of laughter ; and “ Simon the Cellarer,”
although sung by an amateur, simply took the audience by
storm. The dramatic part of the entertainment was
represented by two recitations. One of them—the well-
known speech of “ Sergeant Buzfuz ”w r as rendered in
costume (wig and lady’s fur-lined cloak), in such natural,
thrilling style as to cause the fair widows present to
beam brightly on Mr, Inglis (how we envied him), but
one gentleman fancying himself the accused Pickwick,
he kept rising every now and then to address the Chair, but
each time was called to order by the Chairman, who didn’t
seem inclined to accept any explanation, but rather to regard
the gentleman in question as suffering from the influence of —
well, let us say the heat*bf the hall. A hearty cheer greeted
the reciter after the finish, which he certainly deserved, at least
if the Turkish bath effect it must have had upon him is taken
into account. The heat of this hall is really something fearful,
and we are glad to state that efforts are being made to gain
permission to build a new and cooler one before the next
concert takes place. We have heard the quarter-deck square
rumoured as a likely site for the new hall. The entertainment
was brought to a very happy close by the Chairman proposing
a vote of thanks from all present to the performers, seconded
in suitable terms by Mr. Williams, on behalf of the Second
Saloon committee. A word of comment is due to our able
police force, and their gallant superintendent, for the ability
and energy displayed both within the hall and outside the
carriage entrances. We observed a nice improvement to their
uniform, namely, a red and black rosette, worn on the left
breast, which (I mean the rosette), had been presented to the
force in lieu of the last week’s wages.
T. C.
SHOVEL-BOARD TOURNAMENT FOR PAIR
CHAMPIONSHIP.
Final Tie.
Mr. Stuart ) , . f Dr. Worrall.
Mr. Sparrow 3 ea ( Mr. Ogilby.
The play of the champions w r as remarkable for steadiness,
brilliancy, and consummate judgment, and their -well earned
victory was greeted with rapturous applause. The victors
were decorated by the ladies, who had been interested specta-
tors of the contest, with the Cuzco Grand Order of Merit,
and were further presented with the freedom of the vessel.
N.B. —This latter privilege allows them to take and stand
a drink at their own expense.
FIRST SALOON CHIT-CHAT.
Since writing to you last very little of any local interest has
happened. Your correspondent’s den lias been nearly
deserted, as its usual habitues find the place rather warm, so he
has had no chance of picking up stray bits of information. The
First Saloon folks thoroughly appreciated the bill of fare pro-
vided by the Second Saloon committee on Saturday night, and
many enquiries have been made as to when the next concert
will be. Cricket and shovel-boards have been in full swing.
When the end of the voyage arrives it will be found that
batting average will be low, bowling average remarkably good.
At shovel-board a tournament is in progress for the single
championship. So far the running is hardly in accordance
with previous form. Winner in your next probably. A
Christmas-tree is one of the amusements looming in the
4
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


immediate future. (Boxing-day is at present the day named.)
It has been organised by ladies in the First Saloon to amuse
their fellow passengers, and to make the season more easily
recognisable. Your reporter lias been interviewing some of
the promoters with the intention of find’ng out for whom the
presents on it are intended. Every child on the ship is to
have something, as are the officers, stewards, &c., and to
every “ boy” in the Saloon under the somewhat immature age
of GO is to be presented a pin-cushion, or some other article
of “vertu.” The tree is not of the kind commonly seen in
England, An orange-tree purchase! at Port Said forms the
base, and on this the ship’s carpenter has raised a marvellous
superstructure. May every one get something, and may
what each one gets give satisfaction.
Thursday, Christmas Day, service, perhaps, on the quarter-
deck. Fancy, Christmas Day, and the w r eather like this.
Whitebait at Greenwich, is to be played on Friday night.
The athletic sports are to commence on Friday. In con-
cluding these scrappy remarks, the writer wishes every one a
happy and jolly Christmas, and requests that you, Mr.
Editor, won’t send your Torpedo after him for being so late
with his copy or you may chance to blow up the
Smoke Room.
Will “ WUI-o’-the-Wisp” kindly send his name, as we have
something to whisper in his,ear.
. UNTHOUGHT THOUGHTS.
Bv a Thoughtless Thinker.
I
What is the use of Philosophy if it cannot put up with
necessity ?
Do you call a man a fool because he talks nonsense, or does
a man talk nonsense because he is a fool ?
[We are in great distress to know whether these are
conundrums. If so, please forward answers.— Ed.]
FROM ENGLAND TO AUSTRALIA.
Ox Friday, 28th of November, 1884, the good ship' Cuzco
steamed out of Plymouth Sound with fine weather and a calm
sea ; the last vestige of old England’s shore faded in the blue
mist of evening some three hours afterwards. As usual, when
a number of Britishers are thrown together for the first time,
the typical stand-offishness was, with a few notable exceptions,
in full swing, and the first few days were therefore character-
ised by that absence of harmonious working which alone can
ensure the defeat and final expulsion of the demon ennui.
Saturday passed away without any occurrence capable of
stirring us up, Sunday too was void of interest, further than
the distant coast of Portugal, and towards evening the famous
heights of Torres Videos, could yield. The first of December
was doubly memorable in that we passed through Trafalgar
Bay, sacred as the spot where victory and death were wedded
in the person of the greatest of nqval commanders, and
obtained our first sight of that “dark continent,” where lie
the last earthly relics of so many noble martyrs to humanity
and science. Many ladies and gentlemen were patriotic
enough to remain bn deck till far beyond the “ witching hour,”
that they might catch a glimpse of the famous “ Rock ” by
the light of a cloudless moon. During the following morning
a magnificent panorama (no connection with the Westminster
Aquarium or any other Co.) of the snow-clad peaks of the
Sierra Nevada, brought out in bold relief by the clear blue
sky, rivetted our attention. The next night will be sadly and
solemnly remembered by many as that of their introduction to
a heavy swell, which, though not of the same genus as that
celebrated in song, was equally objectionably, and when we
rose, that is those who could rise, in the morning, the Cuzco
was still continuing her “ game of dreary pitch and toss,” and
now many of our company can supplement the statement, in
which our dear old humorist with such heartfelt pathos informs
us that this classic game is “ apt to bring a loss on the good
dry land,” by feelingly adding—and on the sea also. Decem-
ber the 6th we passed Malta about 1 p.m. Unfortunately a
mist was hanging over the island. The morning of tho 9th
saw us safely moored in the harbour of Port Said, where we
were allowed a few hours leg-stretcher on shore, while pro-
visions were being laid in for the engines. Port Said is said
(copyright reserved) to be the offspring of the canal, if so,
the veracious historian is bound to state that a copious use of
the mother would materially benefit the child. To us Port
Said seemed chiefly remarkable in the extraordinary number
and vigour of the ancient and fishlike* smells which seem of
sufficient consistency to greet the unwary dla Maori. Rim-
mel, prince of perfumers, would make a fortune here. (N.B,
—B’s and S., especially B’s, will be taken for all advertise-
ments in lieu of the current coin of the Cuzco—for this trip
only.) And this reminds the writer that he is now very
muchly athirstj he will therefore on deck and seek one to
whom the “ freedom of the ship ” has been presented, leaving
his fellow travellers for the present up to the ancles in
Egyptian sand, and to the mercies of its saltatory inhabitants.
CROW'S NEST.
{To be continued.')
* We do not-consider ourselves any greater than Shakspeare, and
do not therefore wish to change his word, but we consider the word
fishlike to be incomparably weak. It is evident that he was never in
Port Said, if he had ever been there he would have had to coin a
word by which to express his admiration in suitable language.
HORRIBLE MURDER OUST BOARD THE CUZCO.
For the latest and fullest details see page 6.
A CUZCO CHRISTMAS CAROL.
THE MYALL.
CHARADE.
My first it is half-way done,
My second is coveted sore,
My whole it has gone with a run,
And I never shall handle it more.
(Answer next week.)
W.
Several welcome contributions have, in consequence of
pressure on our space, to be held over for our next issue,
Though far away from England’s shore,
And those at home we love so dear ;
Tho’ ocean billows round us roar.
And nought but sea and sky are near.
Yet may all souls on board this ship
Find Christmas free from care’s alloy,
And deep from pleasure’s fountain sip
A hearty draught, brimful of joy.
For life is short, and tears, alas !
Too oft on human cheek are seen ;
Let’s trr to make this Christmas pass
As one to keep in mem’ry green.
That when we reach the “ yellow leaf,”
And draw on recollection’s store ;
We’ll think the time was all too brief
We spent with those the Cuzco bore.
5
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


SHARK CATCHING EXTRAORDINARY.
(Full details next week.)
FOR’ARD.
Good morning, Mr. Editor ; you would like to know some-
thing of life for’ard ? Well, I’ll give you a little idea of
what has struck me particularly since coming on board the
Cuzco. Life in the steerage begins very early in the morning,
and the busy hum, often assuming the character of a thunder-
ing noise, lasts till late at night. Indeed life is never
altogether doimant with us, thanks to some young Garibal-
dians, who evidently wish to show the influence of a southern
clime on the development of their lungs. The baby cries,
the mother, by way of soothing, gives it a spanking, the babe
will not be silenced by such arguments, cries the louder,
other babies join in the chorus ; soon a competition between
English and Italian lungs arises ; the passengers begin to
grumble, to remonstrate, to shout ; some of them, forgetting
clause 21 of the abstract, which interdicts the use of profane
language, begin to swear.
Ding, ding, dong!
Lights bright, a-a-a-l-l-s well!”
All’s well, indeed, but it might be “ weller” if young Italy would
show more discretion, and allow us the enjoyment of a few
hours sleep.
At four o’clock in the morning the time for sleep is quite
gone ; scrubbing, washing, and sweeping of our dining-rooms
and corridors commence. The crew is running about with
brooms, brushes, and scrubbing utensils, whistling, shouting,
and waking up the passengers that, like myself, prefer sleep-
ing on deck. Come down, Mr. Editor, and see where we
wash. This establishment (certainly not incapable of im-
provement) is the joint dressing-saloon of the steerage ;
notice the sideboard horizontally fixed to one of the walls,
with three circular apertures to receive our silver bowls, with
just space enough between to allow us to poke each other’s
ribs comfortably. Opposite to this is a salt-water, and out-
side a fresh-water, pump. The supply from the former is
unlimited ; at the latter, however, a veteran, with a sceptical
countenance, armed with can and funnel, metes out the allow-
ance of the, here, so very precious fluid, so little thought of
on shore.
Here’s a scene for you, Mr Editor—you know nothing of
aft: Little bottles, large bottles, little men, tall men, lean
men, stout men, sleepy men, jolly wide-awake men—all half-
dressed armed with bowl, bottle, soap, and towel, crowding,
jostling, pressing for the board with the three apertures
Tra-ta-ta-tra-ra-tra-tra-ta-ta.
Notice the rush that takes place at the sound of the trumpet
which announces that breakfast is ready ; happy those who
have not to wait for a vacancy at the washing-stand. Break-
fast consists, to-day, of porridge, molasses, and coffee ; there
is plenty, and to spare, but for some unknown reason there
is a mad rush, as if it were a case of “ the de’il catch the
hindmost. A breakfast does not last much over five
minutes, when a few basins of hot water are placed on the
table. Everybody dips his plate and spoon (both very
German silver of course) into them, and dries and puts away
the “ plate,” ready for dinner, and goes on deck.
PORPOISE.
A report has gone round the ship that we are going to
have a fancy dress ball. The sooner the better.
CUZCO CRACKERS TO CRACK AT CHRISTMAS.
(2) My first is oft useful at sea,
My second is needful on shore,
My whole was renowned for esprit,
And yet will be seen never more.
(3) When I utter my first I am glad,
But m> second soon turns me to stone ;
My whole often drives people mad,
Which shows little reason I own.
(4) What machines are most wanted on board Cuzco to
insure a very pleasant passage ?
(5.) Why is the ship’s cat the most intelligent creature on
board the Cuzco ?
(6) When might the owners of Cuzco be called medical
men ? Yorick.
(7) Why is flirting out of the question on board the
Cuzco ? Smoke Room.
(8) Why ought the Torpedo staff to be kept well supplied
with drink ?
(9) Why should abstainers have rejoiced when the Cuzco
entered the Suez Canal ?
(10) Why was the Cuzco in the Suez Canal dangerous to
Egyptian credit ?
THE MYALL.
HORRIBLE MURDER AND CANNIBALISM ON
BOARD THE CUZCO.
About half-past seven on Monday morning, as a poor
fellow was harmlessly proceeding along the deck to get some-
thing for his little ones, in No. 16 cabin, a female commonly
known on board by the nickname of “ Minnie,”
rushed on him without a moment’s warning, and in
consequence of the savageness of her attack, the poor
wretch was lying all but lifeless in a few moments.
Strange as it may seem to our readers, it is never-
theless a fact that, although several sailors and early
rising passengers were present, none dared or cared to inter-
fere. “ Minnie,” not satisfied with her fiendish work, de-
liberately carried the now lifeless corpse to her husband
(known to many on board as “ Tom ”), and together they
were distincely seen by several witnesses, who are prepared, if
the Captain Avishes, to come fonvard and give evidence, to eat
a portion of the body. It is needless for your correspondent
to enlarge further on the horrible deed, a feeling of sadness
and gloom has naturally fastened on all,
[lmmediately on receiving the above from our penny-a-
liner, (unfortunately for us he’s very much in our debt) we
communicated Avith Mr. Hooke, our active superintendent of
police. He immediately instituted enquiries, and Avas able
shortly to inform us that “ Minnie ” and “ Tom ” are tAvo very
active cats for’ard, and their victim Avas a sleek old mouse.
What does our correspondent mean ? Our office boy says
“ its a ’oax.” We trust not. —Ed.]
Ansavers to conundrums to be placed in the editor’s box
not later that Monday next. Those sending in the greatest
number of correct solutions will have conferred on them “ the
freedom of the ship.”
6
THE CURCO TORPEDO.


LOST.—A Gold Ring, supposed to have gone overboard.
Anyone finding the same, and returning it to Mr. Stuart,
will receive his blessing, and be asked no questions.
WANTED,—Some good Cigarettes or Cigarette Tobacco.
Port Said and Suez brands distinctly objected to. Send sam-
ples to No. 85 Cabin, 2nd Saloon.
RECKETT’S STARCH.
For full particulars of the marvellous virtues possessed by
this Starch, apply to
Mr. Annanias, Cabin 46, Second Saloon.
THOMAS WEBB & SON’S SHOW-ROOMS,
269 George-street, Sydney,
and
41 Little Collins-street East, Melbourne,
Contain the most magnificent display of Glass and China in
the southern hemisphere.
Don’t forget to pay them a visit.
EDITORIAL SMOKE.
Some of our find-fault-with-everything readers say that,
judging from our “ Editorial Smoke,” we must have got our
cigars at Port Said. We can assure our readers such is not
the case. Anyhow, if those faultfinders are better provide*!
than ourselves with the “ genuine article,” they are requested
to pass it along,
# # # #
It has also been remarked by some hypercritical male first-
salooners that our editorial leading article is all “ gas.” We
trust they find its light beneficial. We regret very much that
their’s should be so modestly hidden under a bushel.
* * * *
The Torpedo was nearly “busting up” for want of paper
(we don’t mean greenbacks.) Our generous purser, how-
ever, came nobly to the rescue—“ May his shadow never grow
less.”
# * * *
We also beg to thank Mr. Ede, our caligraphical co-
operator ; ’tis his hand endows the Torpedo with that
“ artistic merit” so universally admired.
* * # #
Although our vessel is said not to have crossed the “ line”
until Monday last, at 6 a m., we have it on the evidence of
trustworthy witnesses that the “ line” was certainly over-
stepped by several passengers at Port Said. We leave the
solution of this difficulty to our geographical or astronomical
contributors.
* * » #
Monday morning last, in company with our worthy second
engineer, Mr. Anderson, the Torpedo staff paid the “ Cuzco
Inferno” a visit. Next week we will enlarge. To anxious
friends we beg to state the ship’s doctor pronounces us “ out
of danger.”
* * * #
J- his grand double Christmas number, and the hot weather,
have cost us pounds—of flesh.
**# - *
The Torpedo is always to be found on the second saloon
table up to noon. Would-be wits are kindly requested to
refrain from worrying the staff any more by remarking that
our “ truthful Torpedo ” is lying on the table ; such remarks
are dangerous, and might cause an explosion—of wrath.
* * * *
To-morrow will be Christmas Day, let us close our
“ Editorial Smoke” with the following touching lines, pro-
vided by our harmless poet :
On this Christmas Day,
Let us all be gay,
A jolly old-fashioned party
And though on board,
We trust to the Lord,
None bored may be, but —“ right hearty.”
The nett result of the sale, of programmes last Saturday
was os. This and the former 6s. have been handed over to
the Purser for the benefit of marine charities. Every little
helps.
# # * #
In consequence of the engines stopping this morning at
7 a.m., as we -were “ getting out ” the Torpedo , we unfortu-
nately lost the first mail for the after saloon.
ON BOXING DAY,
At 10.30 a.m.,
In the Cuzco Auction Mart (Second Saloon.)
To Bric-a-brac lunatics, Art frauds, mashers,
Spooning Couples, and others contemplating matrimony
or suicide.
A number of useless articles (too numerous to mention) will
be offered for sale, as above, by
Cuzco Torpedo & Co.
N.B.—Cash on the.fall of the Auctioneer.
Be in time.
Intending sellers (of Cuzco public) to place list of articles
they would be glad to see the last of in the Editor’s Box.
ATHLETIC SPORTS,
to be held on
SATURDAY, 27TH DECEMBER.
Programme ;
8. Cockfighting
9. Sack Race
10. Chalking Line
11. Thowing the Sand Bag
12. Three-legged Race
13. Pick-a-back Race
14. Cup of Water Race—
ladies only.
1. Wheelbarrow Race
2. Walking Match, eight
times round quarter-deck
3. 200 Yards Race
4. Obstacle Race
5. Tug of War, teams of 8
6. Potato Race
7. Egg and Spoon Race
All entries must be made on or before Friday evening, 2Gth
inst., to Mr. Inglis.
On Thursday morning, when 300 miles from land, a lovely
butterfly, of the “ gad about ” order, alighted on deck. We
regret to say a little boy having incautiously shown a pin, he
(the butterfly) immediately emigrated..
* * * *
• We regret very much to hear that two members of the
police force have been compelled to resign (without the option
of a fine) during the w r eek, the one for reading novels in his
bunk when supposed to be on duty. The other offence was
more serious, telling the Inspector “to go hang himself ”
when called out for morning drill. Official appointment—
Mr. Thomas to the police force.
Grand Prix and Legion of Honour, Paris, 1878.
Gold Medal, Sydney Exhibition, 1879-80.
Gold Medal, Melbourne Exhibition, 1880-81.
Gold Medal, International Health Exhibition, 1884.
7
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.




THE CUZCO TORPEDO:
AN EXPLOSIVE MAGAZINE.
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1884.
Since our last issue several important events have taken
place. First and foremost, Christmas Day has come and
gone. It was a very trying day to all on board, especially to
our staff ; they tried everything in Mr. Astley’s bar, and
were found wanting—assistance very early in the day.
When it came to dinner time, notwithstanding the noble
efforts of Mr. Bulman, our indefatigable Chief Steward, many
passengers said “ they passed ” and gracefully hurried on
deck—no doubt, to see if the gale was abating. The
refrigerated roast beef of Australia had no attractions for
them. During the past week a great “ democratic wave” has
passed over the vessel, breaking down to a great extent the
“ caste” of classes ; for instance, Christmas Eve the ladies
of the first visited the performance on the forecastle. Box-
ing Night the ladies and gentlemen of the first and second
classes joined forces, and, notwithstanding the heat, enjoyed
the dancing immensely. As a sign of the times, we think
this political fact worthy of note.
During the week we have received more than the usual
number of abusive letters. We beg to refer all kind and
profane friends to our fighting editor ! his address can be had
on application. To-morrow will be New Year’s Day ;to old
and young, rich and poor, on board, we hope the coming year
may prove full of blessings ; that those seeking health may
find it, that those seeking wealth may acquire it, and that
those seeking happiness, the world’s best gift, may not search
in vain.
CUZCO CHRISTMAS-TREE.
Christmas Eve was, no doubt, the brightest, happiest day
the little ones on the Cuzco have enjoyed since coming on
board. A child’s lot at sea is, at best, not a happy one, but
when we saw the tiny cherubs, last Wednesday, sitting around
and discussing amongst themselves the “ Tisrnas-tree,” and
all its treasures, their little eyes dilating and brightening in
anticipation, their hands, feet, and tongues, all going at once,
we truly wished ourselves a child again. At length' the long
wished for hour, six bells, sounded, and the little ones, in
their best “ bib and tucker,” escorted by their proud mamas
and papas, all went aft. What qhildish amazement and
delight when the dear little ones toddled, or were carried,
round the tree ! It was as good as a sermon to us hard-
hearted, callous wordlings, After a poetical address from
“ Father Neptune” (ably personated by Mr. Brown) to all
‘present, the distribution commenced. The tree was an orange
one, procured at Port Said, and in remarking that it w r as
loaded with presents (subscribed to by the first saloon) we
state the bare truth. The dolls were particularly worthy of
mention, being all very elaborately dressed, and showing what
could be done by willing hands with the most unpromising
materials. The Christmas-tree was presided over by Mrs.
Pritchard, Mrs. Holloway, and Mr. Helby, and when we
mention that there were over 500 presents, that all the
children on board, the officers and crew, anl each of the
first saloon passengers received something, not to mention
many of the steerage, it will be understood their work was no
sinecure. Dr. Molyneux returned thanks to Mrs. Pritchard
and the first saloon ladies, on behalf of all present, in a very
happy speech, saying “ that the idea originated with Mrs.
Pritchard, was by her kept watered, until it blossomed forth
bearing the noble fruit they had that night the pleasure of
carrying away ! Three lusty cheers for Mrs. Pritchard and
the ladies followed these remarks. It is often said“’tisa
woman’s heart, and not the head, which guides.” Thank God,
it is so, for ’tis such loving hearts as we have on board the
Cuzco that, thinking only of the happiness of others, un-
consciously help to make life worth living.
THE MYALL.
MORE STEERAGE NEWS.
As most of the passengers abaft of the bridge have no
idea how the little world for’rd goes on, I propose to give
them a brief insight. Life in our cabins is indeed peculiar.
We have lively characters and dull ones. Among the former
are some colonists who are returning from seeing their friends
in the “ Old Countrie” to again resume their various avoca-
tions in the land of their adoption. Most of them are men
who jean talk freely—and it is to be hoped truly—of their
exploits. We have a curiosity in the shape of a primitive
farmer from “ Paddy’s land,” who has a craze for changing
his sleeping quarters, under the delusion that ghosts are
nightly visiting him. He has changed his bunk many times,
yet still he is not happy. This worthy dreams too, his night-
mares generally running in the one direction, viz., that some
disaster is about to befall the ship. They usually come on
between eleven and twelve o’clock p.m., and upon his awaking
we are treated to a series of pitiful wails, which are often
joined by the blasts of a rather hoarse bugle from the oppo-
site side of the cabin. Another auxiliary now and then
assists, in the shape of a gentleman whose leather
lungs bellow forth scraps of the latest London “ topi-
cals.” This trio is helped throughout by other singers,
till our enclosure becomes anything but conducive
to sleep. Near the bow we have some of the sons and
daughters of sunny Italy. They are, however, disappointing.
In vain you look for the beauty of person and the picturesque
costume which the masters teach us comes natural to all
Italians. Among the Britishers are many gallants whose
attention to the fair sex is worthy of notice as being studied
and unremitting, and if one may judge from the nightly


promenades, &c., the ladies on their part enjoy the business
thoroughly. Our dull characters are “legion.” They
“ hunk-up” or lie about the decks all day, seeming to sleep
eternally—meal times excepted, for at these hours wonderful
activity is displayed. At the blast of a bugle not a moment
is lost in getting into position, and there being no such
inconveniences as napkins, tablecloths, an 1 such like, hot
soups, savoury stews, &c., are ladled out with wild flourishes
of the arm, indifferent as to whether those at the tables are
scalded, or that the company’s highly-wrought mahogony
seats suffer from stains So proficient indeed have some
members of our mess become in the use of the ladle that they
can fill a plate with soup at a distance of eight feet from
where they stand, and scarcely spill a drop. The industry,
generally, at meal times is marvellous - eating, drinking,
perspiring, loud talking, and burn drum hold sway, the worthy
stewards all the while flitting about through the vapours like
evil spirits. It would be a somewhat lengthy matter to give
the various callings of our members. Suffice to say that we
have from tailors to blacksmiths, and even some of a learned
profession. There is but one grievance I would let you know
we suffer from, and that is the want of ventilation. Our
ports have remained permanently sealed throughout the
voyage, with the exception of about one day. The heat, at
night especially, is almost beyond endurance. Could not
something be done ?
BUSH.
SOMNAMBULISM.
What might have ended in one of the Cuzco’s passengers
paying “ Davy Jones’s locker” a visit was nearly occurring
last Tuesday. It seems that about half-past two in the
morning a gentleman in the second saloon was startled by
feeling some one crawl across his body ; on awakening he
observed his own son (somewhat given to somnambulism)
with the head and body half out of the port-hole ; another
minute and it might have been too late. Needless to say
precautions have been taken to prevent a recurrence.
THE “ CUZCO INFERNO.”
It being considered the “ correct thing” for the Torpedo
staff to pay a visit to the Cuzco engine-rooms, in the interests
of passengers—the “ deed lias been done —but, speaking
personally, it’s the last time. In future, if I have to select
between a railway accident, a mother-in-law, and a visit to an
engine-room, I’ll select one of the two first calamities in
preference. Formerly I used to swear by steam—don’t be
shocked ; I don’t mean to say my profanity was evolved at
express rate ; on the contrary, I mean I was ready to stick
up for, and speak highly in favour of, steam-boilers and
machinery on all occasions—never again. Knowing nothing
about machinery, or boilers (except that when placed in
kitchen ranges they generally burst), it was considered I should
be quite unprejudiced in my remarks, and the most likely man
to work up an instructive report. About half-past eleven in
the morning, accompanied by the office boy, a big note-book
(to look like business), and the sober portion of the Torpedo
staff, we went to inspect the machinery. Mr. Anderson, the
second engineer, accompanied us, and we followed him like
lambs. Our first halt was to procure cotton-waste—this is
presented to all victims on such occasions (the supply of silk
handkerchiefs being, I suppose, used up) ; were buckets sup-
plied at the same time, I think they would prove very
acceptable. Having descended, saturated our cotton-waste,
and ordered a fresh bale, we silently melted away, whilst Mr.
Anderson explained to us that the Cuzco was fitted with three
patent boilers, which, having been used in the low-pressure
safety valve, are immediately condensed and allowed to keep
passengers awake by their eccentric action at night. As it
was impossible to hear a word Mr. Anderson said, thanks to
the horrible noises, we gathered the above information from his
deaf and dumb motions, at least our Sporting Editor, who
carried the big book, made notes to the above effect, and I’ve
simply worked on them. This interesting lecture finished, we
were next shown how the fresh water, with which passengers
spoil good whisky, is made, and after that we were taken to
the “fiery furnaces.” On opening our eyes in the stoke-hole we
found we were surrounded by chalk circles ; these chalk
circles are peculiar to certain parts of the ship, and in the
stoke-hole are very often known to “ bleed” passengers—we
were “ bled !” Mr. Anderson then took us to the “ shooting
gallery.” We thought the furnace-rooms, where our ther-
mometer registered 200 degrees in the shade of the coal
bunkers, pretty sultry, but that was deliciously cool compared
with this spot. The “ shooting gallery” is so called because
in it is the shaft, around which the screw revolves on its axis
once in twenty-four hours ; it has also another motion, which
our Sporting Editor forgot to note. As pieces of us were now
dropping off freely, we began to fear that nothing would be
left of us soon but our boots. Mr. Anderson, noticing this,
had us carried off to the refrigerator ; in a few minutes, I’m
glad to say, the cool atmosphere had the effect of stiffening
us, in fact we not only stiffened, but got frozen like so much
Australian meat. Being carried on deck, and hung in the
butcher’s shop to thaw', a kindhearted friend, admiring the
martyrdom we had gone through in the cause of Truth and
Duty, poured the exhilarating “ lemon squash” down our
throats and restored us at once sufficiently to register a vow
on the butcher boy’s cleaver never, never more to visit the
Cuzco, or any other “ Inferno,” not even to procure “ copy”
for the Torpedo. The Myall.
POETICAL EXPLOSIONS.
“JACK.”
A Digger’s Yarn. —By “The Myall.”
(CONTINUED.)
Well, to cut a long story short, the gold on “ Mulligan’s Rush”
Got poorer and poorer each week —fact it didn’t pay to crush ;
Cartage and crushing were dear, cost nearly two pounds to the ton,
And, when flour and meat were all cleared, a week’s work saw noth-
ing won.
I got tired of this at last, so made up my mind one day
I’d prospect with Jack all alone, to find some stone as would pay ;
The danger I well knew was great, as one says, “ the blacks had been
bad,”
But what won’t a miner risk when he thinks good gold’s to be had ?
A week or so after this, one night I’d made everything snug,
Fixed a grass bed by my fire, and covered myself with my rug,
Hoping, in sleep, very soon to forget all my trouble and toil,
The sinking I’d been at all day, when the sun was fit to broil;
I was just dozing off, and dreaming I’d hit on a patch
Of purest alluvial gold, like of it none could match.
Asleep. I half opened my eyes to gaze on this mass of gold ;
That instant Jack sprang to my side, with a howl that of danger told.
Before I could fire a shot I went down like a lump of lead,
A boomerang’s cursed work—l reckoned myself good as dead —
For, coming down the mountain side, though my eyes were dazed and
dim,
I could see six or seven blacks, le-1 on by “ Cannibal Jim
With a yell they went for my camp, but soon made a backward track ;
They guessed I was pretty near dead, but hadn’t quite reckoned on
Jack;
Like a lion at bay he stood, for my sake willing to die,
For his sake I fervently prayed for once he’d turn tail and fly.
(TO be concluded in our next.)
2
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


THE BIRTH OF THE NEW YEAR.
’Tis midnight 1 And upon the air around,
With sweet and solemn sound,
There falls upon my wakeful ear
The chime of Cuzco’s bells, which hail the new born year.
Dear bells ! I love them —even when their chime
Rings out the knell of time,
And warns us that a year is gone,
Faded, as fade the mists before the light of morn.
Above me smiles the imperishable sky,
Its glorious canopy
Studded with myriads of stars
That draw our weary souls from out their prison bars.
Ocean sleeps, bathed in Dian’s silver light ;
But, through the serene night.
Mysterious forms flit here and there,
And ghostly shadows fill the silent midnight air.
The shades of vanished hopes which the year’s birth
Called forth, instinct with mirth,
Doomed, ere the months were spent, to die
As dies a morning dream before the waking eye.
A solemn—aye, an awful—thing it is,
At such an hour as this,
To look back on a wasted past,
And know the coming year may haply be our last.
Who can be sure that, in the newborn year,
Pregnant with hope and fear,
Death will not take us by the hand
And lead our shrinking souls across the border-land.
How many a friend, this year, has passed away,
Mid tears of agony,
Whose loss, although we may conceal,
Has left a void which time can never wholly heal.
CROW'S NEST.
NEPTUNE’S CHRISTMAS ADDRESS TO THE CUZCO
CHILDREN.
I COME to join the children here,
And share with them the Christmas cheer ;
I come, with my own eyes, to see
Your faces, and your Christmas-tree.
To hear your happy laughter,
To see your sparkling eyes,
To think upon you after,
As I view the starry skies.
And think how often kindly hearts
May be the cause of so much mirth ;
In such work angels play their parts—
A glimpse of heaven upon this earth.
Oh, may such hearts be ever blest,
And later find e’erlasting rest.
BROWN.
Dr. Pierce, after a capital contest*won the single Shovel-
board Championship, and munificently gave the proceeds and
something more to the Marine Charities.
* * * *
We very much regret to say that nobody cracked our
“ Crackers” correctly.
* * * #
Pressure on our space compels us to hold over until next
week our “ Thumbnail Critic’s” report of the Philharmonic
Concert, and the opening of the Cuzco Marine Theatre.
CUZCO CRACKERS TO CRACK,
(11) Why are the passengers on board the Cuzco very
ignorant ?
# # *
(12) Why is the police force highly necessary on board
the Cuzco ? The Myall.
CUZCO CRACKERS CRACKED.
(1) Passage money.
*(2) Reaconsfield,
*'(;->) Gladstone.
(4) Singers.
(5) Because it can most successfully sound the Purr Sir
(Purser.)
(6) If they docked her (Doctor) when in London.
(7) Because the u mails” are all in bags down the hold.
(8) Because their’s is such dry work.
f(9) Because she then took a pil-o-t (pilot) on board.
(10) Because she made a run upon the Banks of Egypt.
* A little more local next time, please.
f Will the gentleman who sent this conundrum to us kindly furnish
his name—not necessarily for publication, but as a guarantee of his
sanity ?
FISHING EXTRAORDINARY.
On Wednesday morning, the 24th inst,, the engines having
been stopped for cooling, while every one was doing his best
to kill the weary after-breakfast hour, the cry of “ a shark
astern” fell on our ears pleasantly as the pop of a champagne
cork. All was excitement in a moment, everyone crowding
aft to catch sight of the dreaded monster ! Immediately on
hearing the shout, our gallant captain—to whose genial
courtesy all on board will, I am sure, join with me in testifying
—appeared on the scene with his gear, and in a wonderfully
short space of time a most tempting piece of raw pork was
dangling over the stern ; nor had we long to wait in suspense,
for as soon as he saw it up sailed our friend, not hurriedly,
not as would the human shark, grabbing at illgotten gains,
but deliberately, as conscious of his undisputed monarch v of
the watery waste, and, much as an alderman would suck down
a morsel of the precious “ green fat,” so did he suck in the
toothsome bait, which well nigh proved his death warrant.
“ Haul in the slack,” was now the cry which came ringing
along the quarter-deck, and a few strong hauls brought the
head, with its wide gaping jaws beset with a row of most
villainous looking teeth, above the surface. Intense excite-
ment reigned as the noose was being got ready, but, alas for
human hopes, the soft metal of the hook bent straight, and
with a mighty flop of bis tail our captive jerked himself free,
and we were left, like Lord Ullen, lamenting. Many were
the wishes for the welfare of the maker of that hook - “that
his head was in the shark’s mouth,’’ “ that his own hook was
in his own head,” being but kindly specimens of the interest
displayed. But enough of anathematizing; the veracious
disciple of Macaulay must carry out the important task which
fate has thrown upon him, without further regrets or circum-
locution. For full five minutes after the events recorded
above gloom and sadness darkened every countenance, when
suddenly the welcome cry was heard “ Here he is again,” and,
as by the touch of a Torpedo, we were re-electrified (your
correspondent humbly asks to be excused, but it is so hot, and
he is so ; but no he will not hint as a favour that which
should, long ago, have been forced on him as a reward). A
scene similar to that above described was again enacted, and
3
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


our shark, which proved to be a poor relation of our first
acquaintance, immediately swallowed the offered breakfast.
“ Haul in the slack” was again the cry, and haul it was with
a will, A noose was soon made, and, after a few attempts,
safely slipped down the main line and so over the head to
behind the pectoral fins and then drawn tight, and a couple
of minutes afterwards our captive was safely on deck, and
letting out astern with an energy “ worthy of a better cause.”
Off with his head—we mean tail - was the next order, and in
ten minutes, and one hundred and forty-six strokes of a
blunt axe, the tail was severed and his claret tapped.” “ Haul
him for’ard” shouted the ‘ bo’sun,” the crowd of men, women,
and children seeing the shark moving was seized with panic
and fied. Alas, the capstan was in their path, a beautiful
“ spill” ensued, in which we are glad to say no bones were
broken. The example was a female measuring about eight
feet ; three of the curious sucking-fish were attached to the
shark’s tail, and, as illustrious visitors, were immediately
treated to gin and water. They are now as well as can be
expected, as is also
CROW'S NEST.
FIRST SALOON CHIT-CHAT.
Since my last scrawl Christmas Day has come and gone,
and of the day itself perhaps the less said the better. It
was slow and dull in every, way, .and no one seemed sorry
when it was over. ; •
The Eve was one of the happiest, merriest days since we
left England, as (thanks to the ladies'in general, and to one
in particular who suggested it) there was a Christmas tree on
the quarter deck. The children of all ages seemed to enjoy
it; with the youngsters the tree was the cause of enjoyment;
the children of an older growth enjoyed the enjoyment of the
youngsters. I question if orange tree ever bore such satis-
factory fruit as did this orange Christmas tree.
Boxing Day was another quiet day. The long-looked-for
“ Whitebait ” was to have been cooked, but something went
wrong. Was it mal-de-mer , too much Christmas, or stage
fright ? To compensate somewhat for the loss of the dish,
an impromptu dance was arranged, which all seemed to enjoy.
Apropos of dances, what a pity it is we have so little music
and musical talent on board. It has been whispered that we
have more of both ; if so, why does it not come out of its
shell ?
Saturday was another day of disappointment. Rumour
had it that “ Whitebait ” was really in season, and that to
make it more palatable and easy of digestion a short musical
programme had been arranged. In the morning and after-
noon it did seem so, but, alas ! at sea man proposes and the
clerk of the weather disposes, and towards evening back went
the fish to its favourite Greenwich. Now it is a question
whether there will be another opportunity of producing it this
voyage.
What a small congregation was assembled on Sunday at
service time. Has the novelty of service at sea worn off, or
do some object to service in the open air ? Whatever be the
reason, service in the saloon is better attended. Possibly,
some come for the “ punkah,” or to see the pictures.
This week promises to be a little more lively. Monday
began well. What with athletics in the afternoon and a
short concert, followed by “ Whitebait,” at night, the Cuzco
quarter deck hardly knew itself.
Speaking of the quarter deck, might I venture to suggest
that after “ seven bells ” in the midnight watch, a political
discussion carried on in high-pitched voices is not generally
conducive to sleep. Who were the politicians I wonder ? I
know they made a noise, and satisfied no one unless them-
selves.
I regret I can’t tell you anything about the concert or
theatricals: I was hard at it, worrying (what is left of) my
brains for copy. I heard that everybody was satisfied, even
pleased, and that the amateur cooks did not spoil their
“ Whitebait.” As to the athletics, I shall leave your
“ S.S.C.” to report on them. It isn’t in my line, not much.
If I puzzle out any more copy now, I shan’t have any head
left for next week. May each and all of us have a very
happy and prosperous New Year says the man in the
Smoke Room.
WINTER MEETING CUZCO ATHLETIC CLUB,
1884-85.
Ox Monday afternoon in glorious weather and a very
smooth sea the Cuzco sports commenced, and were con-
tinued on Tuesday. Messrs. Pritchard and Meggitt acted
as judges to the satisfaction of everyone, Mr. Baldwin was
indefatigable in the rather onerous posts of clerk of the
course and timekeeper. Mr. Morrison was the starter, and
was always successful in getting the competitors away. Up
to time of going to press the following “ finals ” have
been recorded :
Chalking the Line—winner, Dr. Worrall, Distance, 6 feet 2
inches.
Throwing the Sand Bag—winner, Mr. Ogilby, Distance, 21
feet 11 inches
Potato Race—winner, Mr. Ogilby. Time, 40 4-sths secs.
Walking Race—winner, Mr. McLachlan, Time, 4 mins. 23
3-sths secs.
The other competitors seemed to be under the impression
that this was a running match, or a “ go-as-you-please.”
EDITORIAL SMOKE.
Christmas day all the for’ard passengers were treated to
a bottle of ale or stout at the ship’s expense. It is not
often a ves'el “ shouts,” but the Cuzco certainly did on
this occasion,
* * * #
Chiistmas moaning we had the piano brought on deck
specially for morning service. A breeze springing up and
manv of the passengers consequently being “ down,” service
was “ taken as read,” a plan muchly approved by some of
the bail men on board,
* * * *•
We have shown Mr. Williamson, the genial Chief Engi-
neer, our article on the “ Cuzco Inferno.” After a perusal
he has detected one or two technical errors, alight in them-
selves, but certainly inadmissible in a magazine so devoted
to accuracy as the “ Torpedo.” We hope before next week
to hear further from our worthy “chief.”
* * * *
The Marine Theatre advertisement read “When you ask for
Whitebait at Greenwich on Boxing night see that you get it.”
Hundreds certainly asked for it, but their appetite for
Whitebait had to remain unappeased. When it w-is served
up on Mondav night it proved a “bonne bouche” worth
waiting for.
4
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
TO BACHELORS AND OTHERS! !
TO KE KAFFLEO FOB,
AN ELABORATE PATCHWORK QUILT,
The work of a short lifetime, containing
3,404,832 PIECES
(more or less),
of Silk, Velvet and Satin. A thing of beauty, &c, (to the
winner), a joy for ever !
Mrs. Jervis has generously offered to raffle the above, and
give the proceeds to the Marine Charities.
TICKETS, Is. EACH.
A grand opportunity to those about to furnish.
LOST,
From No. 63 Cabin (2nd Saloon), a Diamond Scarf Pin,
in the form of a Star. The finder will be rewarded on
returning it to Mr. MACLACHLAN, or to the Purser.
BOITES?
WHEREAS, on Tuesday evening, December 30, a chair was
broken by some one violently sitting upon it: Be it known
that a Reward will be given on receipt of such information as
shall lead to the capture and conviction of the offender. The
only description which can be obtained of him is, that he is
about 6 ft. 3 in. in his socks. Information to be given to
Mr. Vincent, or to Mr, Rooke, Police Superintendent.
ORIENT HOTEL,
SECOND SALOON STREET.
The following Fancy Drinks can be supplied on the shortest
notice : —John Collins, Stone Fence, Gin Sling, Cocktails,
Lemon Squash, Brandy Smash, Cobblers, &c., &c.
Good Accommodation for Single Gentlemen.
The front bar is open from 7 a.m. to 10.30 p.m., excepting
from 9 to 10.30 a.m., and from 2.15 to 4 p.m.
N.B. —No Credit Given.
The Mutual Assistance Society always in attendance.
The real reason of the postponement, as at all respectable
theatres like ours, was “ severe indisposition” of two of the
gentlemen performers. The severely indisposed gentlemen,
however, when the dancing commenced the same evening,
voluntarily played the part (without any rehearsal) of the
“ Bounding Brothers.” The wonderful agility they dis-
p'ayed astonished all present and disproved the rumour
that they were suffering from a malignant attack of stage
fright.
# * * #
Have you seen the chart of the very eccentric acting
boiler invented by a gentleman on board 1 If not, apply to
the “ Torpedo.” “ There are millions in it.”
* * * *
The subscriptions for printing the “ Torpedo” are coming
in capitally. All who wish to possess this immortal work
should give in their names at once. Remember (as the
tract dropped in at our Editorial Box by some kind friend
this week stated) “ Delays are Dangerous.” N.B.—“ Poor
Trust is dead, bad pay killed him.” —Shakespeare.
# * * #
One gentleman upon whom we waited for a subscription
told us our “ Torpedo” was no use to him, if he bought it
he could never take it away “ ’twas so heavy.” Poor joke,
but very good when the gentleman’s weak intellect is con-
sidered.
# * # #
Hatchet throwing, though an American institution, is an
amusement largely indulged in by our friends of the first
saloon. For instance, the other day a gentleman of a tropical
clime and imagination stated as a positive fact that one Box-
ing Day, being on board a steamer bound for Sydney, it was
impossible to enter the harbour because of the champagne
bottles floating between the Heads. Another gentleman
present immediately “ capped” this by swearing “ he was on
board that steamer and remembered distinctly the captain
dared not let go the anchor, the corks were so thick.”
Why don’t these gentlemen take a lesson from -the truthful
“ Torpedo ?”
• # * *
In twenty-four hours the “ little stranger” ’B5 will be
born and we shall have made his acquaintance; may he
prove kinder to us all than ’B4 (whose acquaintance many of
us will be very glad to cut) has proved. Once more to quote
from our harmless poet, kept (in drink) on the premises :
“We hope our friends on board may see
The New Year from all troubles free,
And that the stranger ’B5
Will with good luck be 1 all alive.’ ”
The sale by auction on Monday morning was a grand
success for all but the auctioneers, who not only had to
perjure themselves and lose their voices trying to benefit an
ungrateful public, but also to pay for their own drinks. This
was “ the unkindest cut of all.”
No doubt most of our passengers haye observed a quantity
of thick, yellowish matter floating around the vessel this last
week. To those not aware of the fact we beg to inform them
that the visitor still “ fooling around ” is a souvenir of the
Java earthquake.
5
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


“C’r’ect Card.”
D. IJSTGrLIS & CO.,
(I*ate J. A. INGI.IS,)
28 JAMIESON STREET,
SYDNEY.


2nd
Innings.
b Merrifield...
... 0
run out
... 2
b Merrifield...
... 1
ct Worrall ...
... 0
ct Osborn
... 2
ct Merrifield
... 0
ct Merrifield
... 0
b Hclby
.. 0
5
notout
... 2
ct Trouncer ...
... 0
run out
... 1
hit wicket ...
... 0
ct Trouncer ...
... 0
b Stuart
...
... 0
b Stuart
... o
run out
... o
1st Innings.
Stuart, ct Merrifield
... 13
Ogilby, run out
... 3
Trouncer, b Helby ...
... 9
Vincent, b Helby ..
... 1
Oldershaw, ct Merrifield
... 1
Baldwin, ct Helby...
... 0
Morrison, b Helby ...
... 0
Cadman, b Helby ...
... 0
Merrifield, b Stuart
Helby, ct Ogilby ...
27
... 2
... 2
Osborn, run out
... 5
Worrall, ct Morrison
... 6
Waite, ct Trouncer
... 0
Holmes, b Stuart ...
... 0
Williams, ct Ogilby
Sparrow, b Stuart ...
... 1
... 0
16
THE CUZCO TORPEDO:
AN EXPLOSIVE MAGAZINE.
WEDNESDAY - , JANUARY 7, 1885.
It has been suggested that our editorial article would be more
interesting if containing a little less “ Torpedo” and “ self,”
and a little more “ Cuzco.” Very well, we’ll do our best to
give a description of the bridge, which has carried us over so
nobly. The Cuzco was built in 1871 by the world wide re-
nowned firm of Elder and Co., of Glasgow. Her length is
384 feet, and beam 42 feet, and her registered tonnage is 2439,
but she has carrying capacity for 4000 tons. As a model the
Cuzco is a splendid specimen, difficult indeed to beat; she is
barque rigged. The Cuzco will always be remembered as the
first ship to bring a regular cargo of frozen meat from Aus-
tralia to England, and also as being the first vessel built with
a spar deck. As most of our readers know, the Cuzco (origi-
nally the property of the Pacific Steam Navigation Co , and
running between the West Coast of South America and Eng-
land) was bought in 1879 by the Orient Co., and has since
been running continuously between England and Australia.
The crew on board all told numbers about 130, and are indeed
the type of men to inspire confidence, being commanded by
such caretaking officers as Captain Ridler and those assisting
him. The refrigerator on board is one of “ 'Bell-Colman’s
patent,” and is capable of discharging 65,000 cubic feet per
hour at a temperature of 50 deg. below zero. The cargo
chamber is capable of carrying 5000 carcases of mutton and
20 tons of ships’ provisions.
The engines are of the compound surface condensing type,
and are fitted with Durham’s Patent Marine Governor, which
prevents them from “ racing.” We have three double-ended
boilers (multitubular) carrying 60 pounds pressure to the
square inch. The engines are nominally of 550 horse-power,
but capable of working up to 4000. The high pressure
cylinder is in. diameter, and the low pressure The
diameter of the propeller is 19 feet, and the pitch 27. The
average revolutions of the screw per minute are from 54 to 55,
the indicated horse-power at that being about 3000.
The consumption of coal per day at 12 knots per
hour, is 47 tons. There is a small auxiliary
boiler on board for working steam-winches and for condensing
water at sea. And now one word mdre ; before many hours
the passengers of the Cuzco will be scampering away from
this good ship. Before doing so, allow the Torpedo to give one
and all a farewell benediction and wish them the luck they
deserve. As to the Torpedo, born and reared on the Cuzco,
we feel sure its modesty, its devotion to truth, its avoidance
of personalities, its absence of political or any other principles,
the benefits it has conferred, the weary hours it has whiled
away, the noble lessons it has taught, must have endeared it
to the hearts of all on board and caused it to be regarded by
them as the blessing of tbe nineteenth century.
CRICKET ON THE CUZCO.
On Tuesday last a match was played on the Quarter Deck,
which, after some exciting play, resulted in a draw in favour
of Mr. Stuart’s team. Subjoined is the score :
STEERAGE SILHOUETTES.
THE “ PORPOISE.”
BY
Here is a good place at the stern end of the skylight, Mr.
Editor. Let us sit here and I will introduce you to our fellow
passengers, this being the best time for the purpose. All of
them have to come on deck by half-past nine, as that is the
time for the general inspection. It is also fumigating day,
so that there is no possibility of stopping between-decks, un-
less you desire to be poisoned by sulphurous vapours. Here
comes the first with cup and plate in hand ; you can see the
little old man with his weather-beaten face every morning bring-
ing his meal on deck ; if you want to know why you’d better
ask him. This here— k ‘ Good morning, I’m all right, thanks”
—this here is our “ popular man.” He wishes everyone
“ Good morning,” is civil, especially to the ladies, who do not
seem to appreciate his good qualities. He smokes his Port
Raid cigarette, is fond of Bass’s, and will disappear as soon as
inspection is over. This is our “ masher, par excellence ,” his
grey imperial and moustache in good trim, his cheeks cleanly
shaved. Look with what a grace he wears that red handker
chief round his waist, and how becoming his blue flannel shirt
which encircles his symmetrical body. The red cap with
tassel, too, lends an addition charm to his appearance. If
you turn to the left you will see a sturdy little man of Teu-
tonic race appear. I know him by his voice. Yes, he that
says “ You shut up.” He is a jolly little German, and as


most of the passengers are cracking jokes with him he is very
liberal with his “ shut up.” Here he is with his two pillows
under his arm, peeling an orange as usual. The] young man
that follows him is another deserter from Bismarck’s legions.
He cannot speak our language as yet, but is highly amused
when some of us try to speak a few German words and do not
pronounce them with the right Teutonic twang. He is mostly
in company with the “ jolly little German,” and is considered by
some to be his son, at which the other fellow is somewhat
annoyed, as it might injure his reputation among the ladies.
“ Good morning, Miss. Yes, splendid weather indeed.”
This is one of the ladies who insists that the “ jolly little Ger-
man ”is the father of that young man. Mark how she teases
him, and how earnestly he pleads his age against such a sup-
position. That one close to their right is a young “ Hun-
garian,” with a book under his arm which he seldom reads,
cigar in mouth, orange in hand, and oranges in pocket. His
way of pronouncing our mother tongue, and his huge straw
hat always remind one of a Dutch apple woman. He is a
talkative little fellow, but quite harmless. That man yonder
is known as “ the tall fellow with the moustache the one he
is talking to is “the man with the white helmet.” Next to
them, standing on the hatchway and looking over it, is our
“ silent member he wears that head gear with turban
as a protection against the effects of the sun.
Here comes a noisy lot, the foremost is called
“Sonny,” because he calls the “jolly little German”
“ father.” The other is known as “ Ally Sloper,” who wjth
his brother are the jolliest fellows on board. Here you see a
favourite game carried on, pitching pennies. If you have a
few stray ones you can easily get rid of them. There is a
“ Nap ” party over yonder, another, a third and fourth on the
fore deck. All these are but amateurs, who play for pastime.
The real “Nappers” you see in the steerage. Some of these
lost every penny before reaching Port Said, and could not go
ashore. Hush ! hush ! don’t go there. In that corner a
young couple of lovers are spooning, and it would be sacrilege
to disturb them. Of course they are “ engaged.” “ Iloni
soil qui mal-y-pense Oh! my dear Sir, if you want to
court we are not without fair ladies. If you turn this way you
will see a very lovely girl, you will admit, and ten to one
Tra-ra-ra, tra-tra-tra ! !
Oh, dinner’s ready; I must leave you now, or I might be
late. Hotch-potch to-day; have some? No! Well, I’ll
see you again, Mr. Editor.
THEATRICAL AND MUSICAL NOTES OF THE
WEEK,
By
OUR “ THUMBNAIL CRITIC.”
The past week, the last of the old year, has been full of
sesthetical events. Though it might have been supposed that
the extra amount of roast beef, plum pudding and., “fiz”
by which Xmas week always endeavours to smother man’s
idealistic longings, would have weighed too heavy for the
feeble wings of the “ Cuzco ” larks to lift, we are happy to
report that, thanks to the sacred fire burning in the hearts of
all our artists, thanks to rhubarb pills and divers sorts of
spirits, our isinging birds have warbled on with unfailing
vigour.
First, we had the second concert of the Philharmonic
Society on Christmas Eve, a most successful and enjoyable
entertainment, although your poor Thumbnail had to dodge
the drops of a fast falling shower from blotting out the eulo-
gistic report, covering the nail before even half of the concert
was over, A new feature was brought out, namely, the “ Glee
party,” conducted with "great spirit by Mr. J. Searl, and
deserving unstinted praise for an excellent performance. Not
less appreciated was Mr. Searl’s rendering of the ever welcome
and patriotic “ Death of Nelson.” The programme, com-
prised, however, A'aried in character to suit all tastes. There
were solos, duets, trios, glees, recitations, readings, in fact all
that could be desired to make the evening’s enjoyment com-
plete and without a flaw, Last but not least, the programme
finished with a screaming side splitting burlesque, acted by
the clever brothers Messrs. E. and F. Jewell, who had to
reappear after the fall of the curtain to obey an enthusiastic
call from the audience.
Then we had on Monday night the much advertised, very
much postponed, and exceedingly much doubted opening of
the Cuzco Marine Theatre, with the very much rehearsed 18
carat farce, “Whitebait at Greenwich,” as the “piece de
resistance ” of the occasion. The stage was splendidly
decorated and very ingeniously arranged, doing credit to the
well-known designing skill of our architect Mr.-JBoVn. The
first part of the entertainment, comprising the usual propor-
tion of ballads, sentimental and comical, may safely be
described as typical of the Cuzco style, the performers being
all popular favourites, who by this time have made any special
mention by me unnecessary, being well-known, loved, and
admired by every soul between the forecastle and the pro-
peller, from the scullery boy to your humble T.C. However,
“ Whitebait at Greenwich ” deserves special mention, as it
proved the first saloon has a quantity of dormant dramatic
talent which only requires working to show some rich veins.
Mrs. Waite proved herself no novice on the stage ; her
Miss Lucretia Buzzard was life-like. Miss Mayer, as Sally,
pleased the audience muchly by her “ chic.” Dr. Molyneux’s
appearance alone as John Small was sufficient to convulse the
theatre with laughter, which never ceased till the curtain fell.
Mr. Buzzard, as presented to us by Dr. Baldwin, was a
capital piece of acting, and Mr. Stuart showed himself quite
at home in the part of the eccentric Glimmer.
Before closing our remarks we must specially mention Mr.
Vincent, an actor as well known in London as Melbourne.
His rendering of Queen Mab was an intellectual treat.
SHARP PRACTICE.
The last meeting of the Cuzco Debating Society was a
sharp practice night. This afforded some capital amuse-
ment. Mr. Williams was in the chair and explained that
the subjects of debate would be placed in one box and the
names of speakers in another, and the one whose name
might ue drawn must rise and speak at once upon the subject
drawn. The first name drawn was Dr, Baldwin’s, and the
subject the appropriate one of Bational Dress for Women.
Dr. Baldwin treated us to a very clever lecture on ladies’
garments, speaking in favour of the divided skirt, and the
Argosy braces as tending to remove a great deal of weight
from the hips. Wasp waists and high heels came in for his
especial condemnation.
Mr. Waite followed, saying: He did not see why ladies
should wear skirts at all. He looked upon them as a mere
encumbrance.
Mr, M‘ Alister spoke in favor of corsets and high heels; as
a married man of twenty years’ standing, he thought he
could speak with some weight,
Mr. Wahlin, as a long sufferer, objected stiongly to pins
in ladies’ garments.
2
THE CUZCO TORPEDO


Mr. Morrison did not know why Mr. Wahlin should have
suffered from ladies’ pins if he had always done his duty and
kept at a respectful distance.
Dr. Baldwin then replied all along the line.
The next subject drawn was : “ Ought parents to permit
flirtation V’
Mr. Wahlin in a very romantic speech spoke in the affirm-
ative, saying : Our parents did it, and why should not we 1
If only for the pleasant memories it occasioned, he, as a
father, should alwa s be an advocate of flirtation.
Dr. Baldwin said : Flirtation was defined as “ attention
without intention.” For himself be thought by all means
it should be permitted.
Mr. Waite thought if there was no flirtation there would
be no marriage, and therefore the world would soon come to an
end.
Mr. McAlister thought innocent flirtation should be per-
mitted as tendi g to mutual happiness.
Mr. Inglis said, he did not think any sane parent would
prevent his daughters from flirting, but thought the sons
should be forbidden, as their “attention without intenion”
often landed them at the hymeneal altar before they could
“ put the brake on.”
The next subject drawn was : “ Is the stage elevating?”
Mr. McAllister’s name being called, he rose and said : If
we consider the stage of the past, especially the time of
Charles the IT., he certainly should say no ! The stage was not
elevating, but if the present day was considered, he thought
the style in which plays were presented certainly tended to
elevate all round. No one could go and see a Shakesperian
play for instance, as now-a-days put upon the stage, without
feeling it affected the heart and tended to purify.
Mr. Waite thought the stage was elevating and tended to
improve the masses.
Mr. Inglis said, speaking for himself, the stage had often
elevated him from the mundane earth to a seat amongst the
“gods,” and as regards the effect upon actors themselves he
could assert he had often seen actors and actresses very much
elevated both on and off the stage.
Mr. Fletcher thought that the stage had anything but an
elevating effect upon actors and actresses.
Dr. Baldwin suggested that the looseness of the stage in
the time of Charles 11. was cause by the revulsion of feel-
ing after the asceticism of the puritans.
Mr. Montague thought the stage was very elevating.
Mr. Wahlin regretted that such theatres as the Gaiety at
London and elsewhere should so coincide with Mr. Waite’s
views as to discard skirts almost entirely.
Mr. McAllister then very ably r plied, and as the heat
was extremely trying, proposed the meeting should then
close with a vote of thanks to the Chairman.
This was agreed to, and a very pleasant evening’s amuse-
ment (barring the heat) came to a conclusion.
THE MYALL.
CUZCO CRACKERS CRACKED.
11. Because, when asked the simplest question they are
“all at sea.”
12. Because buoys are always hanging aft, and without
having committed any crime, are always liable to be thrown
overboard by the passengers.
The following notice was posted, by order, in the different
saloons last Friday : —“ Captain Ridler begs to return his
sincere thanks to Mrs. Jervis, on behalf of the seamens’ chari-
ties, fora donation of five pounds seven shillings, the proceeds
of the patchwork quilt generously raffled by Mrs. Jervis.”
POETICAL EXPLOSIONS.
“JACK.”
A Digger’s Yarn, by “ The Myall.”
(Concluded.)
Five minutes at least did poor Jack fight like a demon for me,
The odds though were six to one, the end I could plainly see ;
Though covered all (Tver with wounds, his teeth, again and again,
Would meet in some black-fellow’s flesh, making him yell with the
pain.
I wasn’t afraid to die, but it made my very heart bleed,
To be lying uselessly by with Jack of my help in such need.
“ Good-bye, old fellow,” I moaned, for I felt 1 was going fast,
His piteous bark replied, “ I’ll fight for you, mate, to the last.”
Before long I heard what I guessed was my poor Jack’s dying moan ;
Yes, he’d fought game to the last’ till his head was crushed by a
stone.
I guessed ’twould be my turn next and gave myself up then for dead ;
I was wrong : bang 1 bang ! from the scrub filled me with new hope
instead.
I opened my eyes amazed, Oh, God, I could see o’er the plain,
The troopers spurring like mad, and making for me might and main,
My foes with a yell of despair, like deer climbed the mountain side,
Well knowing what quarter they’d get could a bullet pierce their
hide. ,
Thank God ! I was saved ; in time the troopers had come to my aid.
The black devils who sought my life dead as poor Jack were laid.
The captain, turned nurse, I soon found was a mining chum of yore ;
Before long he had bound my wounds, and washed from my face the
gore.
Though I couldn't manage to walk, I just crawled to poor Jack’s
side,
And putting my arm round his neck, like a child I sobbed and cried.
It seemed I had lost all I loved ; I felt with his dying breath,
I parted with wife and mate, though dog, still true to. the death.
(The End.)
FROM ENGLAND TO AUSTRALIA.
Your correspondent having with difficulty allayed the burn-
ing thirst, which the mere thought of Port Said had generated
within him, will now proceed to extricate his fellow sufferers
from the unenviable position in which he was obliged to leave
them at the end of his last communication. Many of them
had spent the time in purchasing little odds and ends, photos,
&c., as mementos of their visit, though why anyone should
seek to remember a place which is a living insult to any well
brought up nose, passes the comprehension of yours truly.
Others, more wisely, had employed themselves in sampling
the oranges, dates, &c., of the many vendors of such wares,
which were both cheap and excellent—an uncommon mixture.
Nevertheless, when we were all safe all board again there was
an evident desire on the part of all to shake the (coal) dust
from their garments. Numbers of cattle, sheep and goats
were to be seen here, and as sand and salt water exclusively
form the view on every side, it is difficult to know upon what
they subsist, unless they eat the former and drink the latter.
There .were but few r regrets to be hoard when we left our moor-
ings at 5.15 p.m. and steamed into the canal, in which we an-
chored for the night about a couple of miles from the town.
The passage of the canal was safely accomplished by the morn-
ing of the 12th when we anchored off Suez to take in the
mails, which had come by rail from Ismailia during the night.
This latter is a pretty little place, embosomed in palm trees,
and, of course, with a Khedival palace, and is now famous
as the starting point of the expedition against Arabi the
Blessed, who, by-thc-bye, if he had used ordinary precautions
would have cut our handful of men in pieces at Tel-el-Kebir.
Shortly after passing through the Bitter Lakes, our novices
had an opportunity of seeing a caravan, camels and all, which
was waiting to cross the canal at one of the pontoon bridges.
3
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


Doubtless some of the young and ardent spirits on board
would gladly have accompanied these free children of the
desert a day’s journey or so into the wilderness, but the pace
at which the} travelled decided your “ special,” eager as he is
to obtain the latest foreign news for your paper, to remain a
while longer with the Cuzco. At Suez we observed some
gentlemen of a piscatorial or zoological turn of mind engaged
in the contemplative amusement of fishing ; the quarry, we
believe, averaged 1 2-sth inches in length, and numbered two.
Their name, however, as we understand, made up for all
deficiencies in size, but we really cannot inflict it on our
readers, even if we had a spare pen which we haven’t.
We got under weigh again about 11 o’clock, and after
going a few miles down the gulf were pointed out a
grove of palm trees near the water’s edge, in which
we were assured lay a well which had been dug by
Moses. VVe were not informed what he drank while
he was engaged in digging the well, but as Bass’ ale was not
at that time imported, he must have been nearly as dry as the
surrounding country, poor fellow. Two days after leaving
Suez, being fairly in the Red Sea, Ave made the acquaintance
of the tropics and flying fish, the former by r the sense of feel-
ing, the latter of sight. On the 16th, to the delight of all
on board, Ave passed through the Gate of Tears, evidently Avell
named, since Avrccks were numerous everywhere along the
desolate course of the Straits, and bade fareAvell Avithout
regret to the Red Sea. Two days subsequently we left Cape
Guardafui astern and prepared ourselves for a run of some
6000 miles without seeing land. Early on the morning of
the 22nd your correspondent Avas, as in duty bound, at his
post, in order to be present at the ceremony of crossing the
line. During the morning of the 24th the captain stopped
the ship in order to let our artist make a sketch of the ocean,
and the time Avas also profitably employed by the capture of a
shark, but as a talented correspondent has already given you
a full account, Ave will say nothing on this subject, except
that his statement abounds with errors, in fact, he must have
been in bed at the time that it Avas caught. He never mentions
that its breakfast had consisted of eggs, at least there were
dozens inside it ; nor that it Avas a new species, to Avhich the
zoologist to the expedition has Avith creditable conciseness
given the name CharaUnscyllinotarias Cuzcoensis.
Christmas Day passed without anything remarkable occur-
ring, except that it Avas the dirtiest day since leaA’ing honoe.
Hereabout Ave passed for successive days through large
quantities of floating ashes, relics aa t c Avere told of the great
Java eruption of August, 1883. With the exception of a
very pleasant new years’ dance, little occurred until the
3rd instant, Avhen Ave joyfully hailed the sight of the Austra-
lian coast after 16 days of sea and see-saAV.
Soon after signalling “All’s well,” at King George’s Sound,
Ave lost sight of land, and entered the great Australian Bight ;
as Ave had the fore and aft sails set, we presume the Cuzco
was reaching to windward ; anyway, from personal knoAvledge
we can assert that some of the passengers were retching to
leeward. The folloAving day was A\et and thunderous ; Dam-
pier discoA'ered all the land hereabouts ; this is the reason
that it is ahvays damp here. During the afternoon of the
6th avc ran into, but did not injure, an almost incredible
number of wildfowl, the precursors cf land, Avhich sure enough
appeared about 5 o’clock, in the shape of Kangaroo Island, so
called because there are not, nor ever were, kangaroos on it ;
lucus a non lucendo, as Homer says. We dropped anchor
off Port Adelaide at 4 o’clock on the morning of the 7th, and
so rejoiced Avas everything on board seemingly, that even the
inanimate things on board found A'oices to bid us rise in
melodious (?) language. We got off again at 1.30, so that
there Avas but little time for sight-seeing on shore, but a
goodly amount of flowers and fruit, which were brought on
board, compensated for this disappointment. Nothing rp-
markable on the voyage up to Melbourne, where we arrived
on Friday morning, and remained till the following afternoon,
so that we had a favourable opportunity, which was eagerly
embraced, of seeing the commercial capital of Australia.
Want of space prevents my giving my first impression thereof.
The passage from Melbourne to Sydney, which was made in
49 hours, was also uneventful, if we except the encountering
of some weather, which even yet removed some now well-
known faces from the table. Taking it all in all a more
pleasant and favourable voyage of 46 days could not have
been wished for ; and to all the officers and employees on
board the„ Cuzco the thanks of those who entrusted them-
selves to their care are justly due, and are here tendered by
CROW'S NEST.
FIRST SALOON CHIT-CHAT.
And lioav did everybody enjoy the fancy-dress ball on Ncav
Year’s Eve? Considering the very short notice given of it,
and the limited stock of dresses, in my humble opinion it was
a success. Pity though there Avere not more dances.
Many thanks to our three friends from for’ard who came
Avith their violins and supplied the music. More power to
them. May their elbows never want greasing.
Who wore the prettiest dress ? Tis hard to choose. The
Spanish Duenna, the Italians, the ill-fated Mary of Scotland
(or Avas it Marie Antoinette ?) Whichever the character,
may her representative be far happier than either of them.
That Turkish dress (?) Avas a good one, and a successs, but it
looked—oh, so hot ! I did pity the Avearer. The Bedouin
Friar, or whatever he was, looked cool and comfortable in his
dress ; and noAv I’ll give you a secret: ’twas composed of a
bath-towel. Hoav the players enjoyed their kiss-in-the-ring,
and what a noise they made. Who originated it ? Some say
it Avas a staid friend from the far north, others that it Avas one
from the Emerald Isle. I knoAV they both enjoyed themselves.
The numbers of headaches on Ncav Year’s morning could
hardly be accounted for by the dancing. What was the cause ?
I heard that speech-making and mutual congratulations
went on till an early hour in the morning. What a pity I
can’t get hold of a full, true, and authentic report. On dit,
some remarkable speeches were made about 3 a.m.
Adelaide. —Not much to say about Adelaide, except this :
If the Torpedo staff find the Adelaide fly so bothering, sind
indulge in profanity to such an extent, Avhat will they think
of the Sydney mosquito ; and lioav will they find Avords in
which to express their feelings ? We took on an Austral
passenger at Adelaide. They seem to have had very lively
times. Dances, concerts, cricket, and two suicides !
What is the general idea of Melbourne ! Mine is that it is
a place of dust and mud and streets in a continued state of
repair, especially at crossings. Hoav like, yet lioav unlike
dear old London. Mem. for Melbourne, Don’t ride in a
buggy, unless you Avant to be shaken to pieces. And now I
suppose I must say farewell. Our good ship is nearly at her
journey’s end. May none of us ever sail in a less comfortable
vessel. My OAA r n idea is, you Avill have to go a long way
before you find a better victualled ship, and I have had some
experience. As for the officers, one and all, Avell I won’t
make any distinctions, but just say “They are all jolly good
felloAvs.” To each and eA'ery passenger luck and prosperity
in the colony and a speedy return to their native land to such
as desire and deserve it, is the hearty Avish of the man in the
Smoke Room.
4
THE CUZCO TORPEDO


Date.
Temp.
Nov. 26
27
28
56
29
56
30
59
Dec. 1
60
2
63
3
63
4
63
5
6
7
65
8
68
9
76
10
11
12
76
13
69
11
77
15
16
80
17
76
18 '..
79
19
Date.
Dec. 20
21
22
23
Temp.
82 „
82 „
24
25
7>
11
26
11
27
28
29
30
31
Jan. 1
69
11
11
11
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
66
63
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
12
11
It
S.S. « Cuzco,” Jan. 12th, 1885.
Dear Mr. Inglis, —Allow me on behalf of the passengers
to thank you sincerely for the able way in which you have
edited The Cuzco Torpedo. It certainly has helped greatly
to galvanise the dormant energies of all on board and “ The
Myall” contributions have tended muchly to our amusement
and edification. At the same time permit me on behalf of
the passengers to convey our sincere thanks to Mr, Williams
for the noble manner in which, notwithstanding some very
sultry weather, he stuck to his pen end copied the many
manuscripts sent in.
Trusting you may ?ome day reap your just reward,
I remain,
Dear Mr. Inglis,
Sincerely yours,
J. D. OGILBY.
D. K. Inglis, Esq.
The following may interest some “ Cuzcoites
LIST OF OFFICERS.
J. K, Ridler ... ... ... ... ... Commander
J. F. Anderson ... ... ... ... Chief Officer
H. G. Darby ... ... ... ... ... Second Officer
E. A. Sylvester Third Officer
A. C. Cornish... ... ... ... ... Fourth Officer
D. Williamson ... ... ... ... Chief Engineer
T. Andei’son ... ... ... ... ... Second Engineer
F. H. Reid ... ... ... ... ... Third Engineer
S. B. Kingsbury Fourth Engineer
E. A. Harris ... ... ... ... ... Fifth Engineer
R. Rentoul ... ... ... ... ... Sixth Engineer
W. F. Helby Purser
Dr. J. F. Molyneux Surgeon
F. Bulman Chief Steward
SECOND SALOON.
Mr. G. Ambrose Melbourne
Mr. S. Birkett Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. Bowden Sydney
Miss Bowden ... ... ... ... Sydney
Mr. A. C. Clayton Hobart
Miss Cutler Adelaide
Mr. C. Dennis Melbourne
Mr. T. Dickinson Sydney
Mr. C. Z, Ede ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher and Family ... Sydney
Mrs. Ford and Child Melbourne
Mr. D. Forgie Brisbane
Miss Gray Melbourne
Mr. H. F. Helder Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. J. Hill Melbourne
Mr. R. Hill ... ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr, T. Hill ... ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr. C. Hope “^Sydney
Mr. D. K. Inglis Sydney
Mrs. Jervis and Child Sydney
Miss Joiner Adelaide
Miss Key ... ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr. A. Lemesson Sydney
Mr. W. H. Low ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr. G. H. Lucre and Son Sydney
Miss Mayer Sydney
Miss Manger Sydney
Mr. T. G. Me Lachlan Melbourne
Mr. and Mrs. E. W. Meggitt Sydney
Mr. T. Prettejohn Melbourne
Mr. A. Rooke ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Mr. P. Schmit Sydney
Mrs. Sidky p ort Said
Mr. and Mrs. E. Stonehouse Adelaide
Mr. J. W. Thomas ... ... ... ... Launceston
Mr. C. E. Tucker Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. L. Yal6e Sydney
Mr. T. H. Williams Melbourne
Mr. P. Zossenhein Melbourne
Third class—l 9 for Adelaide, 56 for Melbourne, 84 for Sydney.
FIRST SALOON.
Mr. and Mrs. McAllister Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. W. R. B. Brown ... Sydney
Mr. P. Cadman Sydney
Mr. G. S. Campbell ... ... ... ... Sydney
Mr. B. C. Cleave ... ... ... ... Sydney
Mrs. Holloway ... ... ... ... Port Chalmers
Mr. Spencer Holmes Sydney
Mrs. B. May and Child Melbourne
Dr. Merrifield Sydney
Mr. R. Morrison Melbourne
Mr. J. 0. Neumann Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. J. D. Ogilby ... ... ... Sydney
Mr. R. B. H. Oldershaw Wellington
Mr. H. S. G. Osborne ... ... ... Auckland
Dr. Peirce, Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. P. Pritchard Sydney
Mr. D. Smith... ... ... ... ... Wellington
Miss Smith • ... Port Said
Mr. H. G. B. Sparrow ... ... ... Sydney
Mrs. Stacey - ... Port Said
Mr. J. D. Stewart > Adelaide
Mr. P. Trouncer Sydney
Mr. and Mrs. Vincent Melbourne
Mr. and Mrs. G. A. Waite Sydney
Mr. R. Williams ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Dr. R. Worrall Sydney
Mr. E. W. Wright ... ... ... ... Melbourne
Dr. and Mrs. Baldwin Sydney
TEMPERATURE OF SEA AT 8 A.M., EACH MORNING
OF DATE.
5
THE CUZCO TORPEDO.


Date.
Distance
Eun.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Wind.
Remarks.
Nov.
27
At Noon 65
fromGraves-
end.
* •
W.N.W
Cast off from buoys at Gravesend at 6 a.m., and proceeded slowly
as far as Tongue lightship
99
28
229
N.W.
Anchore-1 in Plymouth Sound at 9.54 a.m. Left Plymouth at
29
305
0-16 p.m.
•9
4551 N.
7-39 W.
N.W.
Moderate N.W. winds and fine weather
99
30
300
4M2 N.
9-46 W.
N.W .’first 12 hours
Passed Cape Finisterre at 3.43 a.m. Fine weather and smooth sea
Dec.
1
then E. & N.E.
288
36-44 N.
8-21 W.
N.E. to E,
Passed Burling Rocks at 9 p.m. 30th Nov, Passed Sagares and
Cape St. Vincent at 9.12 a.m. December 1st. Signalled
283
36-24 N.
2-44 W.
Sagares at 9 25
99
2
N.E. to E.
Passed Cape Trafalgar at 9.42 p.m., Dec. 1st ; Europa (Gibraltar),
269
2-48 E.
at 11 a.m., Dec. 2.
99
3
37- 0 N.
N.E.
Moderate winds, head sea, ship pitching
99
4
286
37-37 N.
8"45 E.
N.
Moderate head wind anl sea
»
5
288
36. 4 N,
14 24 E.
E.
Passed Cape Bon 9.38 p.m., 4th Dec., and signalled off Dimitri at
11.15 p.m. on 5th Dec. Weather dull and squally, with thick
283
19-52 E.
haze
99
6
34-33 N.
E. to S.
Passed Malta and Gozo about 1 p.m. Light breezes and gloofny
weather
99
7
252
33-27 N.
24-46 E.
N.E.
Strong'to fresh winds. Weather unsettled
99
8
235
32-21 N.
29-14 E.
N.E.
Fresh winds with hard squalls and overcast.
99
9
182
At Port Said at 9.3 a.m. 9th December; made fast to buoys at Port
Said. Since noon of 8th had very strong N.E. winds and head
sea ; ship slowed during night in order to enter Port Said at
daylight, owing to head sea difficulty in obtaining pilot.
10
99
Entered Suez Canal 5.8 p.m. After series of detentions arrived at
12
32-33 E.
Suez 7.20 a.m. on December 12.
99
12m. fr Suez
29-44 N.
Left Suez at 11.6 a.m. 12th, after embarking mails (454 bags).
99
13
309
25"24 N.
35 '31 E,
N.W.
Moderate winds, fine weather.
99
14
304
21-01 N.
38-17 E.
N.
Moderate winds and fine weather.
99
15
290
16-47 N.
40-44 E.
S.
Light to moderate breezes.
99
16
248
13-21 N,
4301 E.
S.
Fresh head winds, and increasing to strong breeze and high head sea.
9)
17
263
12-14 N,
47- 2 E.
E.
Passed Babelmandeb Straits at 4.38 p.m. 16th December, and con-
18
51-48 E.
tinued to Gulf of Aden. Moderate winds, clear weather.
99
292
11-35 N.
E.
Passed Cape Guadafui, and entered Indian Ocean at 9.2 a.m. 18th.
5?
19
293
8-37 N.
55"45 E,
N.E.
Light winds and fine weather.
99
20
295
5-30 N.
59-35 E.
N.E.
Light winds and fine weather.
91
21
311
2-30 N.
63-50 E.
N.E. to E.
Moderate unsteady winds, with very heavy rainfalls.
99
22
324
0-44 S.
68- 9 E.
N.E.
Light breeze and fine weather.
99
23
349
3 58 S.
72-59 E.
Variable.
Light changeable winds, rain-squalls and cloudy.
99
24
257
6'55 S.
76' 6 E.
N. to N.W.
Ship stopped to overhaul engines for about four hours.
99
25
294
9-56 S.
80- E.
N.E. to Calm.
Light breeze and fine weather ; heavy rains, overcast, and head sea
26
263
83-22 E.
rising.
99
12-50 S.
S.E.
Moderate to fresh winds and head sea, ship pitching.
99
27
277
s 15-41 S.
87* 7 E.
S.E.
Moderate Trade winds.
99
28
264
18-23 S.
90-44 E.
S.E. Trade.
Moderate Trade winds.
99
29
259
21- 3 S.
94-20 E.
S.E.
Slight head sea ; cloudy; occasional squalls. In company with
98-28 E.
another steamer, name unknown, bound E.
99
30
292
24- 5 S.
S.E.
Moderate Trades ; fine clear weather.
99
31
301
27-12 S.
102-39 E.
S.E.
Moderate Trades ; fine clear weather.
Jan.
1
307
30-17 S.
107-28 E.
W.
Moderate wind, fine weather.
99
2
303
33-25 S.
112- 8 E.
W.S.W.
Strong wind; fine.
„
3
301
35-18 S.
117-32 E.
Very Variable.
At 8.17 a.m. passed Chatham Islands ; at 1.26 p.m. Eclipse Island.
99
4
296
35-21 S.
123-35 E.
N.
Fine and cloudy.
99
5
283
35-40 S.
129 22 E.
Very Variable
Fine.
99
6
277
35-40 S.
135- 3 E.
S.
At 5 p.m. sighted Cape Borda Lighthouse ; fine.
99
7
184
Light Airs.
At Adelaide. Left at 1.24 p.m.
99
8
281
38-21 S.
141-10 B.
Light Variable Airs.
At 8.52 p.m. passed Otway and signalled,
99
9
225 '
At 2.30 a.m. passed Heads. At 7.40 all fast to pier at Williamstown.
99
10
255
38-18 S.
148-30 E.
Light Breeze.
At 2.20 p.m. left pier. At 6.20 passed Heads.
99
11
N.E.
At 2.59 a.m. passed Wilson’s Promontory. At 6.55 p.m. Gabo Island,
99
12
289
34-20 S.
15111 E.
At 7.21 a.m. passed Cape St. George. At 3.30 arrived Sydney Harbour,
LOG OF THE CUZCO
6
THE CUZCO TORPEDO


“ Where are you going, my pretty maid?” i Why are you off there, my pretty maid 7”
“ off to Jamieson-street,” she said. | “ To secure some ‘ Minto’ blocks,” she said.
The above very sensible young lady had just paid “ MIKTTO ” a visit of inspection. Her woman’s keen penetration observed at once
that this land must (like all of the land near Sydney) rise enormously in value before long.
This Estate is situated alongside the Minto Railway Station, (beyond on the Great Southern Line.
The land is high, and the soil most suitable for fruit growers, farmers, poultry keepers and orchards. In several ca c es the blocks are cleared ready for immediate
cultivation. The blocks are from three to seven acres in size. (See opinions of the press). Terms (extending beyond three years) are
£2O per Acre, £1 deposit, 12s. 6d. monthly. No Interest, and Torrens’ Title.
If the “'Cuzcoites ” wish to make their pile quickly all they have to do is invest a few pounds in a Minto block, and they will then soon realise, a mint o money
(pun registered). For further particulars, also plans of some remarkably good investments on ridiculously* easy terms at Tilba l ark, Canlcy \ ale, Granville,
Riverstone, Fairfield, Coogee, Penrith, Guildford and in the city, call or send to
D. INGLIS & Co., “ LATE d. A. INGLIS,”
28 .T A -MT-Kiff ON- STEEET, STTIDICTIBir.
*The loop line from St. Peters to Liverpool will bring the Meadow Bank Estate six miles nearer Sydney.
EDITORIAL SMOKE.
Thanks to “ Scotlands Sons,” the New Year was heralded
in on board the Cuzco with full honors. “ First fitting #
as an institution we admire, and regret it does not take place
oftener than once a year.
* * # *
a good thing it was that on New Year’s morn the
editorial staff lived within the “ carrying radius,” otherwise
the temptation to drown some of us would have proved irre-
sistible. Certainly far more expeditious than “ assisting ”to
our various cabins.
# * * *
Several ladies have written to know the meaning of
“Bones? ”in ourJast issue. Where ignorance is bliss ’tis
folly to be wise. All we care to remark is “ Bones ” is bad
business for us.
« * « *
Will the gentleman who so generously stuffed the editor’s
box with cast off wearing apparel kindly call upon us, accom-
panied by an undertaker ?
1 J * # st #
The Torpedo literary prizes will be “ thrown for ’ on
reaching Sydney, winners to have the privilege of •‘shouting.”
° # * * *
Mrs. Jervis’s very generous present to the Seamen’s charities
resulted, when raffled, in adding five pounds seven shillings to
the funds. Something tangible about this.
#
The First Saloon’s Sports Committee is a capital body of
men to arrange “ how not to do it.” Altho’ Monday last
was a splendid day to run off the “ finals” (after the several
postponements), yet this very business-like committee posi-
tively agreed, without a dissentient voice, to postpone the
“ finals” till next voyage, or the Millenium.
* # * *
Naturally, this disinclination of the “first”" to meet the
“second” is a “moral victory” for the second saloon
athletes. It’s not necessary to wait for the next voyage, or
the Millenium, to prove that.
% * * * ■ |
What’s become of “ Cox ancl Box ?” Has Mrs. Bouncer
thrown them overboard ?
* * * *
If economy in trifles is the stepping-stone to fortune, we
feel certain there are several gentlemen in the first and second
saloons who will amass millions, provided they live long
enough. If ever “ landed” for a trifle (rare occurrence) their
iaciaf expression reminds one forcibly of the careful Scot in
London, when “ bang went his saxpence.”
* * * *
We wish to thank Mr. Helby for acting as treasurer to the
Torpedo Fund, and for furnishing the “ log” ; also to record
our grateful acknowledgments to Mr. Williamson, the “ chief,
for his information about the machinery on board. Also to
Mr. Anderson, the second engineer, and Mr, Silvester, the
third officer, and our many “ specials” who- have helped to
make the Torpedo an infallible reference upon every nautical
subject, from pitch and toss to manslaughter,
*•* • * *
Before we quite put our pipe out, and Extinguish the
Editorial Smoke, our irrepressible, but harmless, poet wishes
to remark (common metre.)
Farewell, Cuzco, we may never
Pffcc your snow-white decks again,
But we’ll not forget the Cuzco
Lonskas she ploughs the Ocean mam.
JAS. MILLER i; CO., Printers, 78 Clarence Street, Sydney.
7
THE CUZCO TOBPEIX)






