

OTVFp
INCIDENTS
r
No. 2. DUNORLAN TRACTS. One Penny,




“JESUS ONLY.”
Incidents
IN AN
Eventful Life.
FIVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOURTH THOUSAND
LONDON: MORGAN & SCOTT, Ltd.,
(Office of “ 'SEIjc Gtfcrtetian,”)
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
And may be ordered of any Bookseller.
1908.
Wo. 2. DUWORLAW TRACTS.
ONE PENNY.


This narrative was first delivered as
an address in the Baptist Chapel, Queen
Square, Brighton. It was afterwards
published in The Christian. The present
pamphlet is a reprint from the same,
with some alterations and additions. It
is sent forth with many prayers in the
hope that God will use it for His own
glory in the salvation of sinners.
HENBY REED.
Dunorlan Villa,
Harrogate,
July, 1873.


INCIDENTS IN AN EVENTFUL LIFE
£ 3S S-
In the year 1826, at twenty years of age, after
having served an apprenticeship in a merchant’s
counting-house in Hull, I left my native place,
Doncaster, for Tasmania. I sailed in a vessel
called the Tiger, on board of which was a young
man named Vallance, with whom I formed a
friendship.
We landed kt Hobart Town, and I obtained a
situation as clerk in a store at Launceston, 120
miles distant, on the north side of the island.
There were no conveyances of any description in
those days, so that I must either buy a horse
(which I could not afford), or walk. Travelling
was then attended with a good deal of danger.
Bushrangers were out; these were convicts who
had escaped, armed themselves, and taken to the
bush. Their lives were forfeited, and consequently
they were desperate and reckless. The natives,
too, were very troublesome. A fearful war of
extermination was going on against them, and
they, in return, invariably destroyed the white
men whenever they could.


I made up my mind to walk the 120 miles, and
my fellow-passenger offered to accompany me.
Having been only a few days in the colony, we
were unacquainted with the state of things in a
convict population, but knew enough to convince
us that watchfulness and care would be necessary.
The night before starting, we met a gentleman in
Hobart Town, who kindly invited us to stop a
night at his house, which lay on our way. We
reached the place in safety. The sitting-room was
given us to sleep in, two rough sofas with a mat-
tress and blanket on each, were to be our beds for
the night. There was a large wood fire which
gave much light, and on each side of this we
placed a sofa, putting a chair between for our
clothes. We thought with this precaution, and
having our guns within reach, there could be little
danger of being robbed by the convicts during
the night.
However, we had not been long in bed before I
noticed that the clothes seemed to move, and,
looking at them closely, I saw that they were
literally departing, one garment after another. I
immediately jumped up, and made such a noise,
that it brought in Mr. Thrupp, our host. When
I told him how the clothes had disappeared, he
rushed out of the house into the hut, to see if any
of the men were absent. He found one missing.
The room in which we slept was unfinished : the
boards being only laid on the floor, not fixed; and


this man had got into the cellar, turned them
up, and, with a hooked stick, pulled down our
clothes.
We got to the end of our journey in due time,
and after a few months, my friend Vallance took
his passage back to England in a ship called the
Cumberland. Afterwards I heard that it was
taken by pirates, and all on board were made to
“ walk the plank.” This was done by laying a
plank across the side of the ship ; they were then
made to w T alk on it, and as soon as they had got
over the water, the pirates tipped up the plank,
and they w r ere drowned. This pirate vessel was
afterwards taken, I believe, by a man-of-war, and
a bucket was found on board with the name Cum-
berland on it, which led to the discovery of the
vessel having been destroyed by them. Pirates
generally fire or scuttle the ships they take, so that
all trace of them may be lost.
I shall now tell why I have related this. A few
days since, as I was standing at the window of our
lodgings in Brighton, a dray passed, marked
“ Vallance & Co., brewers.” I thought, “Is this,
I wonder, any connexion of poor Vallance’s ? ”
for he had told me that he came from Brighton,
and that his friends were brewers. I immediately
inquired if any of that name were still alive, and
was told that an old gentleman, upwards of seventy,
resided in West Street, next to the brewery. I -went
to see him, and found that he was the brother of my


friend. I asked him if what I had heard was right,
about his having “ walked the plank ; 51 and he
said it was all correct, and that the discovery was
made in the way I have told. He said his poor
mother for ten years would never believe he was
lost, but kept looking for his return year after year.
How marvellous are the ways of God, in sparing
one and taking another !
After this I had occasion to go to Sydney on
business, and returned by a vessel called the
Hetty, Captain Hassel. Upon our arrival at the
Tamar Heads, the wind and tide prevented our pro-
ceeding up the river to Launceston, and we an-
chored, waiting a change. Being very anxious to
reach town, with great difficulty I persuaded the
captain to lend me the ship’s boat; he could not
spare a man to go with me, so I started alone.
I had about forty miles to go ; in the river there
are a number of reaches opening out into large
bays. I left the ship about five o’clock. There
was a moon ; but the night came on stormy, with
heavy squalls. After puffing to the windward
of Middle Island, I set sail, and had a prosperous
voyage, until I got through Whirlpool reach. The
land being high, and sailing close to it, I was pro-
tected from the violence of the storm : but when
I entered Supply Bay, I was exposed to the fury
of the blast. Suddenly I heard amongst the trees
the noise and roaring of a violent squall. I im-
mediately put up the helm, but before the boat






got her head to the wind, the squall reached me,
and over she went, I found myself on the keel of
the boat. How I managed to get there is a mystery.
Surely God must have given some angel charge
over me ; blessed be His holy name ! There was
much sea on as I drifted into the open bay, and it
required great care to retain my position on the
bottom of the boat. I had hoped that the wind
and tide would have drifted me near the shore, so
that I should have been able to swim to it; instead
of which I was so long drifting about the bay that
I became benumbed with the wet and cold, and
must soon have fallen into the water and perished ;
so I determined to try and pull off my clothes and
attempt to swim on shore, though I had little hope
of reaching it, being a poor swimmer, and the
distance appearing great. With difficulty I got all
off but one stocking ; in trying to take it off, I lost
my balance and fell into the water. I struck out
for the shore, but was soon completely exhausted,
and with a “ God be merciful to me ” on my lips,
I went down, expecting death ; but to my sur-
prise and joy, my feet touched the bottom, the water
reaching up to my neck. I then knew that I was on
a spit of gravel which ran from the land a great
distance into the bay, and by keeping on the centre
of it, I reached the shore. It must have been about
midnight, so that I was probably five hours on the
bottom of the boat.
That part of the country where I got on shore


was forest land, and uninhabited. I knew there
was a log-hut some miles higher up, and I thought
by keeping near the river I might be able to reach
it; but I soon found exposure to the cold wind
doubled me up, and I w r as compelled to seek the
shelter of the forest. Guided by the moon, I
travelled in the direction I thought the hut w ? as
in. Oh what a journey was that! Naked —a
thick forest —a cold winter’s night! I fell again
and again, but got up, and with fearful energy and
desperation went onward —onward, until I came
to a creek up which the tide flowed. It was low’
water ; the banks I found steep, and covered with
soft mud, a deposit left by the tide. I easily slid
down into the water, but with difficulty climbed
up the opposite bank. I now’ knew r my whereabouts,
and soon made the hut, and cooied ; on which I
heard a voice say, “ It’s a bushranger.” I squatted
behind the paling-fence that enclosed the garden,
lest they should fire on me, and “ cooied ” again ;
then to my joy one of them said, “ It’s Mr. Reed’s
voice.” I cried out, “Is it you, Cordell ? ”
“Yes, sir,” he answered. I asked, “Is there any
woman in the hut, for lam naked ? ” He said,
“ No, sir.” Then I W’ent forward and found
Cordell, a river pilot, who with Iris convict crew
had been forced to take refuge there in consequence
of the stormy weather.
It was now towards morning, so that I had been
between five and six hours travelling through that


bush. Nothing but the mighty power of God
could have sustained me and preserved me alive
all through that terrible night; and yet I never
acknowledged His hand in it or thanked Him for it.
The convicts in the hut treated me with the greatest
kindness. One lent me a shirt, and another a j acket,
and another a pair of trousers, and I was soon
clothed in the regular convict dress, and they were
not long in making me a cup of hot tea. During
the morning the Hetty appeared in sight, and the
pilot brought me alongside of her. When I got on
board the captain could hardly have been more sur-
prised if a spirit had appeared to him. He had
come upon the boat, bottom upwards, in the river,
and seen some of my things floating about, so
that he concluded I was certainly lost. This ad-
venture made no change in me. I went on seek-
ing happiness in the world, but found it not. I
had abundance of this world’s goods, and was pros-
perous, for so young a man, beyond all my ex-
pectations. I tried billiards (I was a great billiard-
player), card-playing, racehorses. Another man
and myself kept racehorses and ran them on the
course. We lost. Some time afterwards he put
an end to his existence by blowing his brains out,
yet I never thought of God —never thanked God ;
but there was an aching heart in the midst of
prosperity, and, with all that the world could do
for me, my soul Avas not satisfied. Troubled I was,
though I knew not why.


Just at this time —early in the year 1831
having occasion to return to England, I took my
passage in a vessel called the Bombay. Now I
come to an eventful period of my life. It was the
middle of winter, in a cold, southern latitude, off
Cape Horn (so cold that two of our men lost their
lives through the frost). We met with a heavy
gale, and the sea ran high. As the wind went
down we ought to have made sail; but having a
Lascar crew, it was impossible to get them aloft,
the weather was so severe. The consequence
waSj that when we got into the trough of the sea
the ship had little way upon her, and a heavy sea
striking her, carried away one of our counter-
planks. We were in danger of sinking, and, like
Paul and the crew and passengers who sailed with
him, we lightened the ship by throwing overboard
the cargo.
It was during that night that God met with me.
I went down into my cabin without any thought of
eternity or my soul; but when I had shut the door,
and was alone, in a moment my whole life appeared
to pass in review before me. Things that I had
forgotten came vividly to my mind ; events that
had transpired long before, and had apparently
been blotted out of the book of my remembrance,
came back with wonderful vividness. I saw all
the mercies and all the deliverances ; and when I
saw them, oh how astonished I was at the ingrati-
tude of the wretch who had been watched over by


that loving God, and had not even thanked Him !
I saw now that it was God who had delivered me
from shipwreck and bushrangers and natives and
sickness and venomous reptiles (for I was badly
stung by a scorpion), and for the first time in my
life I realized in that cabin that there was a God. I
professedly believed it before, but had never known
it, never realized it. Let me ask you, Did you
ever realize that there is a God ? I did that night;
I knew there was a God, and that He was searching
me, and bringing into remembrance my past life,
and showing me His loving-kindness and sparing
mercy ; and when I saw it, I wept bitterly.
Perhaps some will wonder at this marvellous
awakening of my mind to eternal realities. The
secret is contained in three words —a praying
mother. I remember her saying to me, “ Henry,
I always felt that I had hold of thee, however
distant; for I was conscious that I had hold of
God, and that God had hold of thee.” That
mother was left a widow when I was about five
years old ; and during my boyhood, while sleep-
ing in a little room adjoining hers, I have heard
her groans and prayers in the middle of the night,
for I believe she used to rise from her bed to plead
with God for her family during the night-watches.
When I was awakened, I had no fear about
going to hell; but the feeling was, that 1 had been
the most ungrateful fellow that ever lived, and
God was the best of beings. I had no notion of


the plan of salvation, but I then gave myself to
Him, promised to serve Him, obey Him, and do
His will; and I was honest, and meant it.
We used to play at cards every night, I gave
them up, and avoided conversation such as a
Christian man ought not to hear. I endeavoured
to do I thought w r ould please God, was full
of good resolutions, and began to read the Scrip-
tures. I was in this state of mind when the vessel
called to repair at Bahia, in the Brazils. When I
landed, my best resolutions passed away like chaff
before the summer wind. I was “ led captive by
the devil,” fell into sin, and oh ! how wretched
and miserable I was ! When I embarked from
that port for England, there was this alteration
in me —formerly, I knew not w r hat fear was when
on the ocean ; now T , the slightest appearance of a
storm alarmed me ; before, I feared not death nor
eternity ; now, I dreaded them above all things ;
before, I professed to believe in a God ; now, I
knew there w r as a God, and that I w r as unpre-
pared to meet Him ; and I feared and trembled,
and w r as wretched. I made resolutions again,
more strong and determined, if possible, than
the others.
When I landed in England, I was again over-
come by sin. My experience was exactly that of
the seventh chapter of Romans—“ The good that
I would Ido not; but the evil which I would not,
that I do.”


I remained in England for some time, and then
returned to the colony in the same state of mind.
It was a fearful place at that time ; all was sin
and iniquity. A friend of mine, a magistrate,
who had more outward decency about him than
others, was nicknamed in consequence “ Lot.”
He afterwards told me that he cared not for be-
ing branded as “ Lot but he knew that in the
midst of that Sodom of iniquity, he did not deserve
the name, for he had no real religion about him.
When I got there, I determined at any sacri-
fice to serve God ; and having a strong mighty
will of my own, I set about doing it. But oh,
what a life did I lead ! —all bondage. Oh, how
the chains and fetters worked into the very flesh
and bone of my soul! I was a wretched man.
I prayed much, and fasted much, and performed
all manner of works ; but still I was overcome
by sin, and I had no notion of salvation by faith.
At last I thought I should never be able to find
what I was seeking in the midst of all this deprav-
ity ; and though I had a good business, and was
making money, I thought, What is the use of
money if my soul is to be lost ? I knew now there
was a God, and I used to look at eternity as a
finite being can look at it, and reason in this way :
“ Wliat ! shall my existence run parallel with the
Almighty’s ? Shall I never die ? Is eternity—
fathomless, shoreless eternity —before me ? ” It
is before you, and what will that eternity be to


you ? “I know not; it is all dark. I have no
peace ; I have no meetness for it.” And oh !
when I realized that eternity, I determined at
any cost to know that I had a scriptural hope of
an eternity of glory.
I made up my mind to give up everything and
return to England. Then it was suggested to me
that if I did so, I must make a long voyage, and
subject myself to hearing many oaths and curses.
Sin had become hateful to me ; I hated it with a
perfect hatred, though it still overcame me ; so I
thought, “ Well, I will try and avoid the annoy-
ance of wicked men. I will buy a ship (and I
bought one called the Norval). I will have a crew
and captain of my own ; and if any man dare to
swear on board that ship, he may look out. I
will be the master, and if any one dare to insult
my God, we shall have a controversy, he and I.”
Accordingly, I made preparations and set sail.
On board the ship, I thought, “It is only right
that I should have some kind of religious services
with the crew during the voyage. What can I
have ? ” I had a book with me called The Whole
Duty of Man, and I thought I could read to them
a chapter from the Bible, and then a chapter from
this book. I thought I had no right to force the
consciences of the sailors, but that the attendance
ought to be voluntary ; so, in order to induce
them to come, I said that I would give an extra
glass of grog to every man who came to the service.


I always had my congregation every Sunday
morning, and the steward stood at the door of
the cabin and poured out to each man a glass of
spirits as he left.
On landing in England, I took a house in Re-
gent’s Park. I had never been accustomed to
enter any places of worship except those of the
Church of England, and I wandered about the
West End from church to church, hearing the men
preach one after another ; but I did not find what
I wanted. My great idea still was to please God ;
and I tried to do so by praying and reading much,
and by doing good unto others in various ways.
No one ever spoke to me about my soul, but light
began to shine into my heart. It was very faint
at first, but it- found an entrance. I saw that I
was seeking salvation by works ; that I had done
wrong in leaving Tasmania, and that the voyage
to England was all works. I ought to have
sought God where He had placed me. I thought,
“ Well, if I have done w r rong, I will go back.” So
I went back. I came home by Cape Horn ; I
went back by the Cape of Good Hope ; so that I
literally circumnavigated the globe in my restless
desire to find peace to my soul. Some folks
would hardly go a couple of hundred yards on a
wet night for such a purpose; but I went eight-
and-twenty thousand miles, through many a
storm and many a tempest.
By the time I got back to Tasmania, the light


had wonderfully increased, and I saw clearly the
way of salvation : that “it was not of works, lest
any man should boast.” At times, in secret,
I felt wonderful peace and comfort, and used to
shed tears of joy. Then I thought, “ Surely lam
right; my only trust is in Jesus. lam right.”
But again the thought would be suggested to me
(oh, how vividly I remember it !) “You are all
wrong : your imagination has pictured the death
of Christ and the cross of Christ, and the suffer-
ings of Christ; and while you gaze upon them, and
perceive that all this was for you, you of course
feel, and so you would if any friend had done as
much for you. They are merely natural feelings,
and have nothing to do with saving grace, with
being bom again.”
Through reasoning thus, I threw all my confi-
dence overboard ; but I made up my mind that
if such a thing were to be obtained on earth as an
assurance that I was a child of Gcd I would have
it. I might do with uncertainty about earthly
things, but I should be worse than a fool if I lived
with even the shadow of a doubt whether it would
be heaven or hell for me throughout eternity. I
went so far as to write a consecration in my blood,
calling on angels to witness it—only to be broken
—only to be broken !
I also commenced reading the Bible on my
knees, weeping and praying, and crying to God as
I read it. I prayed until large sores formed -on


my knees, and I had then to lean against the
wall, and there to cry out to God for mercy. I
came to the conclusion that it was His will that I
should have w T hat my heart longed for, the wit-
ness of the Spirit to the fact that I was “ bom of
God.” I sought also for this assurance by signs.
One night I was remarkably filled with the love
of God (still I was tempted to think it might
merely be natural feeling) ; I was going to visit a
dying man, and I said to God, “ I shall take it as
a sign that I am right, if this man finds mercy and
dies happy.” My unbelieving heart was even
more than satisfied that he was truly awakened,
and truly converted. But was I now at rest ? I
was worse than ever. I thought, What a rotten
foundation on which to rest the hopes of a human
being for eternity, was the conversion of that man.
My health was getting much impaired through my
distress of mind and continual fastings and pray-
ers ; my friends were in great anxiety, thinking
my mind would give way; but my deliverance
drew nigh.
One night, after my wife was asleep, I rose and
left the house, to meet two converted convicts in
a schoolroom (for several at this time had got
awakened and saved) ; and it was during that
night, between two and three o’clock, while in
prayer to God for light, I had such a view that it
is “ by grace we are saved,” grace —free, unmerited,
“ without money and without price and that I


must have no secret trust in my fastings, prayers,
or tears, in sufferings of body, in having forsaken
all, gone round the world, and been persecuted ;
there must be no dependence in any or all of these
things : but I must go naked, helpless, and having
nothing, and look to Jesus for all. I saw it, I
looked, and I lived ! Christ took possession of
this poor weary, troubled heart. The storms had
come, but I found Him not in them ; the fire had
passed over me, but I found Him not in the fire ;
but when “ the still small voice ” came, then I wept
for joy ; and I have never since had even a temp-
tation to doubt the reality of the work then wrought
in my soul by the Holy Spirit. I could now praise
God, and say, “ Father, Father ; my Father ! ”
Have you ever experienced this change ? I do
not ask if you have come through the same agony
of mind that I endured ; but have you renounced
yourself and all your works, and all your doings,
and come helpless, guilty, and lost, and accepted
Christ as your Saviour ? He has said, “ Him that
cometh unto Me, I will in no vise cast out.” If
you have never come before, oh come now. If
you come as I tell you, guilty, helpless, hell-de-
serving, and look alone to Him, you will find, what
I found, salvation !
After this my career became a very remarkable
one. In the midst of all that depravity and wicked-
ness of which I have told you, a glorious work of
conversion broke out —such a work as I have never


since seen, and never expect to see again. The
most abandoned men became the most faithful
to God, so that it was their meat and drink to do
His will. There was nothing they thought too
much to do for Him who had done so much for
them. We used to meet together every morning
at five o’clock, summer and winter, to plead with
God ; and on one occasion I did not think sixteen
miles too great a distance to travel to be present
at that meeting, although I confess I did feel a
little fear. I will tell you how it was.
There was a man hanged and gibbeted for mur-
der —the last, I believe, who was gibbeted in the
British empire. But for God, I had been the man
he murdered. It was an atrocious crime. He had
planted himself by the wayside, having made up
his mind to murder the first individual who passed.
I had gone that way but a short time before ; the
next who came was, I believe, the man he shot.
He fell from his horse, but was not dead. On his
knees he entreated for life, but the murderer had no
mercy ; with the butt-end of his gun he struck him,
and left him for dead, and he died soon after. There
was a gibbet erected opposite the spot, and, after
the execution of the murderer in Hobart Town, his
body was brought over, and hung there in chains.
Hundreds came to see him gibbeted, and Christ
was preached to them. Oh, what a subject was
that corrupting mass —the consequence of sin !
Well, on the morning of which I have spoken


I had to pass close by this gibbet. The scud was
flying across the moon, and as it passed over, the
dim light just revealed the body swaying to and fro
with the wind ; and as it moved, the iron chains
creaked and jarred with a most dismal sound. I
felt inclined to hasten on. I was on a splendid
horse, and if I had just said, “ Go on, Jack,” on he
would have gone, and the devils would have laughed
to see me flying like that. I thought, “This will
never do —a fine triumph for hell.” So, instead
of galloping off, I stopped, got off the horse’s back,
knelt down in front of the gibbet, and had it out
with hell. Then I shouted “ Hallelujah ! ” and
rode on to the prayer-meeting. Oh, friends, we
want reality ! The Lord grant that you may every
one have it now !
About this time Port Philip was discovered by
Batman, and I went over to devise some means for
preserving the natives from destruction. There
were then but two or three huts in the place ; Bat-
man’s, Falkner’s, and, I believe, another. I had a
letter from Batman to his brother (who with Buck-
ley and three Sydney natives occupied his hut), to
afford me every assistance in his power in carrying
out my object. I had prayers in the hut with these
five men every day, read the Scriptures, and
preached Christ to them ; the Sydney natives un-
derstanding a little English. No doubt this was
the first time the gospel was ever proclaimed in
Victoria. The Yarra Yarra tribe corroboried to me


where the city of Melbourne now stands, and alone
I accompanied them up the river, and lived with
them for a short time. Having thus gained all the
information I required for carrying out the objecl
contemplated, I returned to Launceston, the Lord
having mercifully preserved me whilst living with
them in the wilderness.
I will now tell you of some convicts with whom
I spent the night before their execution. There
were seven men tried and condemned to death, and
I was requested to visit them. One of them was
named Hudson. He had been a soldier, and had
been transported for mutiny. He was a verj
violent-tempered man, and they put him in the
chain-gang. In these gangs the men wore theii
chains night arid day. They were fastened on
them, and their clothes were made to unbutton
down the side, so that they could take them off at
night without removing the irons. Often the con-
stant friction on the flesh hurt them very much,
and I have seen them with pieces of old rag wrapped
round these irons, to prevent them chafing the
skin.
Hudson was in one of these chain-gangs. The
overseer ordered him to carry a heavy weight over
a newly macadamized piece of road. He remon-
strated, “ It will cut my feet if I walk across this
road.” “Go to the office,” said the overseer;
which meant that, when he got there, he should
be tied up to the triangle, and get so many lashes


for disobeying orders. Feeling the injustice of
this treatment, he took up a piece of wood and
struck the overseer. For this he was tried, and
ordered to be executed.
He was very dark and ignorant when I first
visited him, but the fight began gradually to dawn
into his mind ; and as fight shone in, the burden of
sin began to be realized. Oh, poor Hudson ! Me-
thinks I see him now. He was very pale and
anxious-looking, and, laying his hand on his heart,
he said to me, “ 0 sir, what a burden I have got! ”
This increased until he said, “ 0 sir, unless the
Lord takes away this burden, it will kill me ! Oh
what a burden I "have got! ” But at last the Holy
Spirit revealed Christ to him, and the burden was
taken away ; and then, oh what peace ! Oh how
that pale countenance shone with the glory of
the Lord ! Oh what a mighty change took place in
that man !
There was another man amongst the seven,
called Gardener. He was ordered for execution for
murder. The upper part of the body of a man had
been discovered in the river, and was identified as
that of a fisherman named Mogg, who lived with
Gardener. He w T as taken up by the police on sus-
picion of having committed the murder, and was
tried ; and although there was only circumstantial
evidence of his guilt, he was ordered to be executed.
A large iron bolt was discovered in the hut in
which they lived, the head of which apparently


fitted the fracture made in the skull of Mogg ; and
they also found a jacket which had been washed, but
still showed stains of blood. Gardener said repeat-
edly, “ If they hang me for Mogg, I am a murdered
man.”
One day Hudson said to me, “ Mr. Reed, I want
to ask you a question. Do you think any man
can he saved who commits murder ? ”
I said, “ Gardener told you to ask that question ? ”
He answered, “He did, sir.”
The time of execution drew nigh, and Gardener
went on saying, “ If they hang me, I am a murdered
man.”
One day I was visiting in the jail, and saw him
in the yard, where the prisoners were allowed to
walk about, guarded by soldiers. I said to him,
“ Gardener, you say that you are a murdered man.”
He answered, “ I am, sir, if they hang me.”
I asked him to go with me into one of the cells,
which he did. He was a fine man physically. I
said to him :
“ Gardener, do you believe that there is a God ? ”
“ Yes, I do ; I know I did not make myself ;
there must be a God.”
“ Do you believe that God knows all things ? ”
“ I suppose He does.”
“ Then He knows who murdered Mogg ? ”
“ I suppose He does.”
“ Do you believe He could bring that murder to
fight ? ”


“ I do not think He will.”
“ I did not ask you that. Do you believe He
can 1 Answer me that question. You say you be-
lieve there is a God, that He knows all things, that
He knows who murdered Mogg, and that, if you are
hanged for it, you will be a murdered man. Do
you believe He can bring the murderer to light ? ”
“ He can if He likes, but I do not think He will.”
“ Well, I believe that He knows all about it, and
that He can bring it to light; and if you are inno-
cent, I should like it to be clearly proved. Let us
kneel down, and ask God to bring that murder to
light.”
He knelt with me reluctantly, and then I left.
After this I was absent from home for a few
days, having gone to Hobart Town to obtain a
reprieve for one of the seven men, whom I had dis-
covered to be innocent of the crime for wiiich he was
condemned. On my return, the first thing I heard
was that Gardener wanted to see me as soon as I
arrived. I went directly to the jail, and asked
him what he wanted. He said, “ Come to-morrow
morning, and bring pen, ink, and paper with you.”
There was a little room called “ the office,” where
they used to give the condemned the sacrament
before their execution. When I went the next
morning, I asked the jailer to take Gardener into
this room.
Wlien he came in I said to him, “ Gardener, you
want to confess the murder of Mogg ? ”


He said, “ Since you prayed with me in that cell,
a voice has been calling upon me night and day to
confess ; and though I felt that I should rather be
torn limb from limb than do it, yet I cannot resist
this voice that speaks to me.”
THE CONFESSION
“ One day, as I was walking up the Cataract
Hill. I thought I heard a voice behind me saying,
* Gardener, give Me thy heart.’ I turned round to
see who was speaking to me, but there was no one
on the side of that hill but myself. I knew it was
the voice of God, and I stood to consider if I should
give Him my heart or not. I made up my mind
not to do it just then. That night I saw Mogg,
my partner, sitting over the fire, counting his
money. He had seven one-pound notes ; and as
soon as I saw the money I had a desire to possess
it. [I asked him if he had ever had such a feeling
before, and he said he never had.] I thought,
‘ How shall I get it ? ’ * The best way is to kill
him ; dead men tell no tales.’ ”
“ Had you no compunction ? ” I asked,
“ None,” he replied.
“ I waited three days and three nights for an
opportunity to kill him ; and on the third night,
as he was sitting by the fire mending his net, I
thought, ‘ This is a good opportunity.’ 1 went
out into the yard, got an axe with which we used to
chop the wood, and coming quietly behind him,


I hit him on the back of the head, and he fell dead at
my feet. I then buried him in the back yard.
But when he had been there ten days, I thought
the police would be looking for him, and perhaps
they would search the premises, so I made up my
mind to take him up again ; and when night came
I did so. Fearing I might be noticed if I carried
him all at once, I cut the body in two, and threw
one part at a time over the cataract into the river.”
“ But,” I said, “ you told me, if you were hanged,
you would be a murdered man.”
“ They found me guilty,” he answered, “ of kill-
ing him with the bolt of the ship. The bolt had
nothing to do with the murder ; it was with the axe
I did it; and the jacket had nothing to do with it
either.”
But I must come to the last night of these men’s
existence in this world. One man’s life is spared,
and there are now six of them. They said to me :
“ Oh, Mr. Reed, we wish you would spend the
last night with us.”
“I would do anything for you,” I answered ;
“ but how can I ? ”
I spoke to the jailer. He said, “ There is only one
way in which you could do it. You must be shut
up with them in one cell” (these cells were very
small, wretched, ill-ventilated places) ; “ you must
be locked and barred in with them.”
I looked at them ; they begged hard ; it was their
last night, an,d some of them had not found Jesus.


MR. REED SPENDING THE NIGHT IN A CONVICTS’ CELL.




I said, “ Well, lads, I will spend it with you.”
I shall never forget that night. The door was
bolted and barred ; there were the seven of us.
Oh, what a night it was ! While we were in an
agony of prayer, one of the men cried out, “ Oh,
give over ! If you don’t give over, I shall have to
be carried on to the gallows ! ” Gardener threw
himself on the cell-floor, groaning with anguish.
He was a heavy man, and heavily ironed, and the
noise of his fall, with the groans that came from
that heart, I shall never forget. But he was a
proud man. He immediately got up, and stand-
ing erect before me he said—
“ Mr. Heed, don’t you think I am afraid to die.
I am no more afraid of going on to that gallows, and
being hanged, than I am of taking my breakfast.”
He was a fine, bold fellow, poor, dear Gardener ■
I said to him ;
“ Gardener, why do you go on in this awful way
if you are not afraid to die ? ”
“I will tell you,” he answered. “To-morrow
morning, at eight o’clock, I have got to meet God,
and I am afraid of meeting Him ; that is it.”
Ah ! we shall have to meet God, every one of us.
Ave you ready to meet Him ?
When the day broke, the wards of the lock were
turned, the bolts were withdrawn, that heavy little
cell-door was opened, the men were taken out
into the yard to have their fetters knocked off by the
blacksmith, and then they were taken into the little


room to have the sacrament administered to them
before their execution. The chaplain was there,
and when he saw these six fine fellows, not one of
them over forty years of age, he wept, and I wept.
Hudson, who was standing close to me, turned
round, and with a face more like that of an angel
than of a man, said to me :
“ Oh, sir, why do you weep ? I cannot weep. Oh,
the glory that is within me S What is the time ? ”
I looked, and told him. “It is six o’clock.”
“ Six o’clock, sir ! Oh, I wish it was eight!
The minutes appear like hours to me. At eight
o’clock I shall see Jesus, the Saviour, who has
washed me in His own Blood ! Oh, I long for eight
o’clock ! ”
He lost sight of the gallows and everything else.
He was to see Jesus at eight o’clock, the Saviour,
who had washed him in His own blood.
I went with them on to the gallows. When
they were about to put the cap over Hudson’s
face, he stooped down and kissed this poor hand :
it was his last act; and then he said, “ God bless
you ! ” to the people, with such an earnestness
that the words struck into many hearts, and souls
were aw'akened through them.
Gardener asked permission to speak a word.
He said, “ Take warning by me. I murdered
Mogg : not because I wanted food, for I had plenty;
not for drink, for I was a sober man ; but I saw the
money, and coveted it. Beware of covetousness ! ”


Those six men’s bodies were put into shells, and
a dear Christian brother, Thomas Wilkinson (a de-
voted worker in the East-end of London forty years
ago), and myself, followed them to their long, long
home.
Hudson had requested me to write to his two
sisters in England, who resided at Norlan, near
Halifax, to send them a Bible, and tell them all
about his conversion. I did so ; and some years
after, when I returned to England, and was in
Halifax, one day the servant said :
“ Two women want to see you, sir.”
When they were shown in, they said, “ We are
Hudson’s sisters ; and his execution, and that
letter, and the Bible you sent, have been the means
of our salvation. We have found mercy.”
Now, I often think that when I depart to be with
Christ, Hudson will be one of the first to welcome
me into the realms of glory.
In conclusion, bear with me while I put this
solemn question to each of you —If you knew for
certain that to-morrow morning, at eight o’clock,
you had to meet God, wiiat would your state of
mind be ? Would it be like poor Gardener’s, full
of terror, agony, and alarm at the prospect of
meeting that God against whom you have sinned,
and whose Spirit you have resisted ? Or, like Hud-
son, would the knowledge that to-morrow morning,
at eight o’clock, you w r ould see Jesus, cause your face
to shine like an angel’s ? Would the intense desire


to behold Him who has redeemed you, and
washed you in His own blood, swallow up even
death, and make the moments appear like hours 1
Never in my experience have I met with an in-
dividual who could say that in no circumstance of
life had he ever been spoken to by the Spirit of
God ; that from his birth he had never been the
subject of even one good desire. Often have I put
the question, but invariably in substance received
the same answer, “ They had been striven with.”
I entreat and beseech you, therefore, by the
mercies of God, in the gift of His Son, as you
hope to escape “ the worm that dieth not, and the
fire which shall never be quenched,” “ .Resist not
the Spirit.” He now speaks to thee, “My son,
give Me thy heart.” What say you ? “ Take it.
By Thy grace, I make a full surrender, and receive
Christ as my Saviour.” If this is a reality in the
sight of God, then thou art a child of God ; for it is
written, “ As many as received Him, to them gave
Hepporerw r er to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe in His name.” Amen and Amen.
May it be even so !
“ Now unto Him that is able to keep us from
falling, and to present us faultless before the pre-
sence of His glory with exceeding joy, to the only
wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.”


DYING TESTIMONY OF THE LATE HENRY REED,
Who jell asleep in Jesus at his residence, Mount Pleasant, Laun-
ceston, Tasmania, October 1 Oth, 1880.
WHITTEN WITH HIS OWN HAND.
August 24th, 1880.—In bed, and speechless ; but mind and
memory clear. Glory be to God !
I want to say that the glorious manifestations of a Triune
God to my soul, and my happy and glorious state, do not arise
in any measure from stimulants or spirits, for I have not taken
either. Indeed, I have taken no medicine of any description
for a long time, except a dose or two some days back of liver
medicine. I state this because the devil may suggest, “ Such
experience arises from spirits.”
I know that “ the blood of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth
me from all sin.” I have laid myself a living sacrifice (by
God’s command) upon the altar, which is Christ, and, God says,
“ holy, acceptable unto Him.” And while God says lam holy
and acceptable, because laid on that altar, I believe Him. I
want no death to help to make me holy ; I am made holy by
the power of the 'Holy Ghost, through faith in the precious
blood of Christ. lam filled with the Spirit, and can rejoice,
and do rejoice, morning, noon, and night, with a joy unspeak-
able and full, full, full of glory. Christ fills my soul. I be-
lieve it is our glorious privilege thus to live in health and strength.
Let the surrender of everything be honest and real in the
sight of God, and let the acceptance of Christ as “ made of
God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemp-
tion ” be also reality, and any one may experience the same.
I solemnly protest, on the very border of eternity, against all
profession, or doctrines of any description, not manifested and
proved by holiness of heart and holiness of fife. I believe in
no final perseverance not accompanied by a holy life. Peter
says, “If ye do these things ye shall never fall.” Every real
child of God loves God, and Jesus says, “ If ye love Me, keep
My commandments.” It is possible to hold the truth —God’s
truth—in unrighteousness, and be eternally lost.
To teach that our judicial state in the heavenlies is not affected
by an inconsistent walk, is full of danger and rank antinomianism :
living faith in a living Saviour, and a holy obedient life, go to-
gether, and he that separates them shall endanger his own soul
and those that hear him.
Witness my hand, ye holy angels, and the spirits of the just
made perfect, on the very borders of glory, to the above truths.
Henry Reed.
Tuesday Morning, August 24th, 1880.
“BE YE HOLY.”
Dying, I hold my written views of the Sabbath, and the ob-
jectionable ways of raising money resorted to by the churches.
H. Reed.
August 24th, 1880, 11 o'clock a.m.


On the next day he wrote the following paper ;
After all I have said, preached, and written, for upwards of
forty-five years, I wish it to be distinctly understood that the
ground of the hope that Is within me (which hope is full of im-
mortality and eternal glory) is not “ repentance toward God,”
although it is written, “Except ye repent, ye shall all like-
wise perish.” Nor is it faith, although it is written, “ Without
faith it is impossible to please God.” Nor is it in becoming a
new creature, although it is written, “ Except a man be bom
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” Nor is it in holiness,
although it is written, “ Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” They are, indeed, great and glorious gifts, all pur-
chased by blood Divine, for which I adore and praise a Triune
God. Still, none of them atoned for my sins. Repentance did
not die for me ; faith did not die for me ; the new creature did
not die for me ; holiness did not die for me. My confidence is not
in the gifts, but in the Giver—the Eternal Son of God, who took
my nature, and in that nature, as my Substitute, atoned for my
sins. On His finished work alone does my soul rely for pardon,
holiness, and heaven ; and He only “is made of God unto me
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.”
In conclusion, I again solemnly declare my conviction that
when “ Christ in you ” is a great reality in the sight of God,
there will be “ the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the
Holy Ghost given unto us.” And if love, there will be obed-
ience. For “he that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.” He
may profess the truth, but without obedience he holds the truth
in unrighteousness, and will most assuredly perish ; for although
he may be able to say at the last great day, “ In Thy name we
cast out devils ; in Thy name we did many wonderful works,”
Jesus will reply, “ Depart from Me, I never knew you, ye workers
of iniquity.”
If the above (which I believe to be according to God’s Word)
be indeed God’s truth, oh, for the sake of His well-beloved Son,
in whom He is ever well pleased, may He give the Holy Spirit
to all who read this, that they may have heavenly understand-
ing, and live for ever.
“ SANCTIFY THEM THROUGH THY TRUTH.”
“ Now unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of His glory with
exceeding joy, to the only wise God, our Saviour, be glory and
majesty, dominion and power, both now and for ever. Amen.”
Mount Pleasant, August, 25th, 1880. Henry Reed.
Readers who have been Interested in this little pamphlet
can obtain an account of Mr. Reed’s life, written by his
Widow. Price 2s. 6 d. See outside of cover.
Morgan & Scott, Ltd., 12, Paternoster BuUdings, London, E.O.
32
“ Presented Faultless ”


00637689


!Price 2s. 6d.
HENRY REED
BY HIS WIDOW.
Preface by General Booth.
“ The book is rich in stirring incidents of early
Tasmanian history. It is the pen portrait of a
man.”— The Victorian Independent.
“ The whole story is full of untiring enthusiasm
and good works that could only have been prompted
by a deep and genuine love for the Master.”-— Aust.
Christian Endeavourer.
“The book is full of interest even for young
people, and should find its way into every Sunday
School library and prize list. Its stirring incidents
and hairbreadth escapes will suit their love of
adventure, whilst its high moral tone will nourish
all that is-best in them.” — The Queensland Baptist.
Incidents in an Eventful Life.
Price Id.
MORGAN & SCOTT, LTD, London, E.C.
May be ordered of any Bookseller, or of
Mrs. HENRY REED, Launceston,Tasmania.
