

REPORT
OP THE
PERMANENT COMMITTEE
TO THE MEMBERS
OF THE
GENERAL ASSOCIATION
FOR THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
AT THEIR FIRST ANNUAL MEETING,
HELD AT THE
LONDON TAVERN, BISHOPSGATE STREET,
ON FRIDAY, 13th JUNE, 1856.
LONDON:
J. UNWIN, GRESHAM STEAM TRESS. 31, BUCKLERSBURY
1856.




REPORT
OF THE PERMANENT COMMITTEE
TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
GENERAL ASSOCIATION EOR THE AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES.
■ a y
.jy
The Committee have now the satisfaction of meeting the
Members of the Association at their First Annual Meeting,
for the purpose of reporting to them the various steps they
have taken, and the subjects which have engaged their atten-
tion during the year which has elapsed since the first institution
of the Association.
It will be in the recollection of Members, that the General
Association for the Australian Colonies was instituted at a
preliminary meeting consisting of gentlemen from or connected
with the Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, and Tas-
mania, held at the New Hummums Hotel, Covent Garden, on
the 30th March, 1855; at which a temporary Committee was
appointed, with power to address circulars to such persons as
they might think likely to join the Association, and to call a
General Meeting in order to appoint a permanent Committee
as soon as the Subscribers should amount to fifty. The objects
of the Association, which was to consist of Colonists and others


interested in the welfare and prosperity of the Australian
Colonies, were, “ to attend to all matters connected with those
Colonies ; to take steps for furthering such matters, and, more
especially, to promote the passing of the several Constitution
Bills; to obtain a revival of Postal Steam Communication;
and to enter into correspondence, when necessary, with the
different departments of Her Majesty’s Government, with
Members of Parliament, and others.” On the 9th of May
following, another meeting of the Subscribers to this Asso-
ciation was held at the same place; and it having been
ascertained that upwards of fifty Subscribers had then come
forward, the General Association for the Australian Colonies
was thereupon declared to be formed—its duration, however,
being limited to one year from that date; and a permanent
Committee was appointed to conduct the operations of the
Association, consisting of three gentlemen from each Colony,
with power to add to their number, three forming a quorum.
Mr. Rutledge was requested to undertake the duties of Hono-
rary Secretary and Treasurer to the Association, and was
constituted ex ojjicio a permanent member, and acted in that
capacity until October last, when, having occasion to travel
on the Continent, Mr. J. A. Youl consented to act in his stead.
Connected with the appointment of the permanent Committee
there was a request, amounting in fact to a condition, that
they should submit any documents they might address to the
Government, or Parliament, on any of the matters within the
province of the Association, to a meeting of the Subscribers
duly convened by circular, and that such documents should
be deemed to be disallowed unless they should be approved
by the majority of the Subscribers present at such meeting.
It will no doubt be satisfactory to Members to learn that at
present the Association numbers, besides a large body of
influential Colonists, upwards of twenty gentlemen who have
held seats in the different Legislatures of the Australian
Colonies.


The first step taken by the permanent Committee thus
appointed, had reference to the Constitution Bills for New
South Wales and Victoria which were then pending; and
although those Bills proposed several important alterations in
the Constitutions of both these Colonies as passed by the
respective Legislatures, which were deemed by the Committee
most undesirable, and repeated efforts were made both by an
influential deputation from the Association to Lord John Russell,
then Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, as also through
the medium of Sir John Pakington, and other members of
Parliament, these alterations were for the most part persisted
in, and finally became law. One material advantage, however,
resulted from this agitation. Lord John Russell, though he
O 7 O
persisted in passing the Bills as altered by the Colonial Office,
without any material modifications, agreed that they should be
accompanied with a despatch which should have the effect of
preserving inviolate the faith of the Crown to its public officers,
who should be displaced by the advent of responsible Govern-
ment, and of preventing any organic changes in those Con-
stitutions from being assented to in the Colonies. It is due to
Lord John Russell to state, that although be continued in
office but a very few days after the passing of these Bills,
this pledge was faithfully redeemed by him before he resigned
the seals of the Colonial department.
The next object to which the attention of the permanent
Committee was directed, in the year 1855, was the necessity
of constituting a Federal Assembly, with powers to legislate
upon all intercolonial subjects; but though it is evident that
the Constitution of the Australian Colonies will not be com-
plete until such a federation is constituted, either directly by
Parliament or indirectly under an authority from Parliament
given to these Colonies, —the late period of the then session of
Parliament, the indisposition of the home authorities to take
up this question until a desire for such an institution shall be
expressed by the Local Legislatures, and the almost undivided


attention which the revival of Postal Steam Communication
has required this session from the permanent Committee, —will
necessarily postpone the further consideration of this important
subject until a future session of Parliament.
It may he as well, however, to state that the Committee
had an interview during that year with Lord Canning, the
Postmaster-General, at which they complained of the want of
a Postal Steam Communication with the Australian Colonies,
and strongly urged upon him its speedy re-establishment, but
without, as it subsequently appeared, any effect. They also
addressed a letter of remonstrance on the same subject,
under date 15th August, to Sir William Molesworth, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, which will be found in the
Appendix.
During the early part of the present session, the necessity
of taking immediate steps for the re-establishment of a Steam
Postal line adequate to the present condition and growing
wants of the Australian Colonies, was strongly impressed on
the Committee, when they saw that notwithstanding the liberal
grants made by the Colonies of Victoria and New South Wales,
amounting to £70,000 per annum, the Treasury Minute, pub-
lished in February last, instead of proposing the immediate
revival of a Postal Steam Service, only recommended, as a
preliminary step, a reference to the Governments and Legis-
latures of the Australian Colonies, whose views, strange to
say, it was admitted by the same Minute, were “ utterly
conflicting and irreconcileable ” as to the route to be selected.
Being satisfied of the great delay with which such a reference
must be necessarily attended, —even though it should result
in an agreement among the various Colonies of the Australian
group, as to the amount of contribution to be given by each,
and the line of route for a common Postal Steam Service, —
your Committee came to the conclusion that the best course to
be adopted was to endeavour to set aside the recommendation
of the Treasury Minute, and to propose instead—the imme-


diate adoption of a Postal Steam Service by the shortest route,
and by an independent line of steam vessels, of adequate
tonnage and of proper speed. They, accordingly, after due
deliberation, and with perfect unanimity, framed a Memorial
on the subject to the Lords Commissioners of her Majesty’s
Treasury, in which they insisted that a trunk-line from London
to Melbourne, via Suez and Diego Garcia, was the most direct
route, and the best suited for the whole group of the Austra-
lian Colonies; that this Service might easily be performed by
vessels of not less than 2,200 tons burden, and of a speed
of not less than 10 knots an hour, in forty-five days; and that
the mails to South Australia, Tasmania, New South Wales,
and New Zealand, ought to be sent from Melbourne to their
destination by branch lines of local steamers, to be organised
by the several Governments of these Colonies.
Upon the subject of this Memorial, the Committee had inter-
views with the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the First
Lord of the Admiralty; but the answers of those Ministers
were so little satisfactory, that they framed Petitions to both
Houses of Parliament, similar in their recommendations and
prayers to the Memorial, and obtained a promise of support
from many influential members of both Houses, who were
prepared, in case the views of the Association should not be
attended to, to make substantive motions on the subject.
Meanwhile, however, it was suggested that a Public Meeting
should be convened, under the presidency of the Right Hon.
the Lord Mayor, at the London Tavern. The Earl of Hard-
wicke. Lord Stanley, M.P., and several other influential
members of Parliament and other gentlemen having agreed
to propose and second the necessary resolutions, this meeting
was accordingly held, on the 14th day of April last, and a
Petition to both Houses of Parliament, enforcing the prayer of
the Memorial and Petition already referred to, unanimously
adopted.
Copies of the Memorial to the Lords of the Treasury, as


well as the Petitions which have emanated from the Associa-
tion, are appended to this Report, for the general perusal and
information of the Subscribers.
These Petitions were immediately afterwards presented by
Lord Ellenborough to the House of Lords, and by Sir John
Pakington to the House of Commons. Since then, the Right
Hon. the Lord Mayor, and a deputation composed of the
members of all the Australian Legislatures who were present
at the Public Meeting, have had interviews with Lord Palmer-
ston, the Duke of Argyle, and Mr. Labouchere, and the
Chairman and other members of the Committee have had
several interviews with Mr. Wilson, M.P., Secretary to the
Treasury; the result of which has happily led to the abandon-
ment of the old Treasury Minute, the rejection of the tenders
made in pursuance of it, the issue of a new Treasury Minute
authorizing the immediate establishment of a Postal Steam
Service between Suez and Melbourne, or Melbourne and
Sydney, via Point de Galle, outward and homeward, in vessels
of not less than 2,200 tons, and at a rate of speed of not less
than 10 knots an hour. An advertisement for tenders in
accordance with this Minute has been issued by the Admiralty,
which tenders are to be sent in by the 12th instant. Thus,
after a series of efforts of several months’ duration, a first-
class Steam Postal Service is about to be organised; and your
Committee have had the gratification of inducing the Govern-
ment to rescind a useless and mischievous reference, which
would probably have had the effect of postponing this great
desideratum for a long, if not for an indefinite period.
Objections have been taken to the form of the advertisement
for tenders thus issued, —on the ground that this New Postal
Service is to commence at Suez, instead of Southampton.
Some of the Committee have had an interview on this subject
with Mr. Wilson, who contends that, inasmuch as the Penin-
sular and Oriental Company are paid already for the convey-
ance of the Australian Mails as far as Suez, this new Contract


must necessarily commence from Suez, as the point of depar-
ture; that any Steam Company desirous of competing for it
successfully with the Peninsular and Oriental Company, can
only calculate on payment for the Mail Service from Suez
to the terminus of this Mail line in Australia; and that their
calculations must have been founded on the same data, if
the point of departure had been Southampton. Mr. Wilson,
however, has made a distinct promise that any Steam Com-
pany obtaining this Contract may convey the Australian Mails
from Southampton, if they will carry them gratuitously to
Suez, and enter into the necessary guarantees for their safe
conveyance to that place. This will give any new Company
the advantage of having the Mail in the Mediterranean as
well as in the Indian Seas, and will prevent any disappoint-
ments or penalties that might result from their not arriving at
Suez in time for the Mails conveyed by the Peninsular and
Oriental Company.
Such have been the results of the labours of the General
Association for the Australian Colonies, during the first year
of its existence. In terms of the original resolutions it must
now dissolve, unless a new term of existence be given to it; it
is for the Subscribers to say whether the advantages which
hitherto have attended its career, are such as to justify its
continuance. One of the great Colonial questions to which it
has directed attention, viz., the creation of a Federal Assembly,
is yet unsettled. This is a question of increasing urgency, and
it must be obvious, until such an Assembly is created, either
directly by the Imperial Parliament, or indirectly by delegating
the authority to create it to the Legislatures of the Australian
Colonies, that their Constitutions will be defective in all that
relates to the great intercolonial interests which already exist,
and are continually arising. Other questions and emergencies,
at present not foreseen, may also soon occur, and the requisite
power to deal with them ought not to be delayed any longer.
Doubtless, an Association of this kind commands an influence.


not only with the Government but with members of the
Imperial Legislature, which can never belong to any single
individual, whatever may be his Colonial position or experi-
ence ; and your Committee now leave it to the determination
of those gentlemen who have hitherto given their support to
this body, or who, being Colonists, or connected with those
Colonies, are inclined to join it, whether it is to be continued
for a further and definite period.
It is only necessary to add that the
Subscriptions received amount to ... £233 0 0
The Expenditure to 182 3 9
Leaving a balance in the hands of the
Treasurer of
£5O 16 3
(Signed) By order of the Committee,
W. C. WENT WORTH,
Chairman.


The Report having been read, the following Resolutions were
moved, seconded, and adopted unanimously —
1. That the Report now read be adopted.
2. That the necessity of an Association for the due protection
of Australian interests having on several occasions during the
past year been abundantly manifested, the dissolution of this
A ssociation would be highly inexpedient; and this Meeting there-
fore resolves that it be now constituted into a permanent body.
3. That the following Gentlemen constitute the Committee for
the present year (three from each Colony), viz. —For New South
Wales: W. C. Wentworth, Robert Graham, G. Leslie. For
Tasmania: J. A. Youl, F. A. Du Croz, John Dunn. For Vic-
toria: T. Learmouth, sen., H. G. Ashurst, G. W. Cole. For
Adelaide: E. Stephens, A. L. Elder, W. 11. Dutton; with power
to add to their number. Three Members to form a quorum.
4. That James A. Toul, Esq., be requested to act as Honorary
Secretary and Treasurer to the Association.
5. That the subscription of each Member of the Association be
henceforward Two Guineas per annum, payable in advance.
6. That the best thanks of this Association are due, and are
hereby offered to the Eight Hon. the Earl of Hardwicke, Lord
Stanley, M.P., Sir John Pakington, M.P., and the Eight Hon.
the Lord Mayor, for their zealous and able co-operation in the
re-establishment of the Postal Steam Communication with the
Australian Colonies, now about to be organized; and that a copy
of this Resolution be transmitted by the Chairman to the above
individuals.
7. That the best thanks of this Meeting are due to the Chair-
man, W. C. Wentworth, Esq., and the other Members of the
Committee, for the zeal and assiduity evinced by them for the
protection of the interests of the Colonies during the past year,
“ and in particular for their exertions to procure the re-establish-
ment of Steam Communication with Australia.”
8. That the best thanks of this Meeting are due to the Hono-
rary Secretary and Treasurer, James A. Youl, Esq., for the zealous
and untiring discharge of the duties of the office he has undertaken
to fulfil.


appendix.
THE FOLLOWING ARE THE DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN THE
FOREGOING REPORT.
Memorial to the Lords of the Treasury.
TO THE EIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS OR HER MAJESTY’S
TREASURY.
The Memorial adopted at a Meeting of the General Association for the
Australian Colonies, held in the City of London on the 4th day o
March, 1856; W. C. Wentworth, Esq., late member of the Legislature
of New South Wales for the City of Sydney, in the Chair.
Humbly Sheweth,
That your Memorialists approach your Right Honorable Board with the
painful conviction that the great Imperial question of Steam Communication
with Australia has met with unmerited neglect on the part of Her Majesty s
Government. , , ,
That in the year 1852, after many years of previous hesitation and delay, a
Postal Steam Service was at length organized on alternate months, via the
Cape of Good Hope and the Isthmus of Suez.
See Proceedings That the Bi-monthly Service vid the Cape of Good Hope was a mere
of Parliamentary experiment undertaken contrary to the publicly recorded opinion of the Right
Steam'Com nuui i Honorable the present First Lord of the Admiralty; that such Service was
cation, Session tried under two different Companies and Contractors, and in each case was
1801, p. xxxi. characterized by failure and disappointment to the public.
That the Bi-monthly Service via Suez was, during its continuance, carried
out in a more regular and reliable manner, hut that the route was so devious,
and the stoppages so numerous, that the passage to Melbourne occupied sixty-
four days; the speed maintained, if measured by direct distance, not exceeding
six-and-a-half knots per hour, whereas the usual speed on other contract lines
is ten knots or nautical miles per hour,
v.. Annendix That such last-named Service, in the month of November, 1804, was without
No. L notice wholly suppressed, nominally on account of the requirements ot the war,
hut your Memorialists are prepared to substantiate that the exigences of the
public service in no way rendered this measure necessary.
„ . ai That since the above period our Australian Colonies have been wholly deprived
No. 2,giving state- 0 f a p Postal Steam Communication, and the result has been that the transit ot
of M ail° letters has been effected with extreme uncertainty and irregularity the outward
Jackets during Ma q s having been delivered, upon an average, at Melbourne in 84 2 days, and
1855 ' the homeward Mails, from the same place, in London upon an average of 93* days,
v.. Treasury That your Memorialists now collect with extreme regret from your Lordships’
MmrUe p 8&9 publislie d Minute, that in lieu of immediately re-establishing a Service which
ought never to have been discontinued, you propose first to make a reference
to °the Colonies, in order to ascertain the exact amount of subsidy each Colony
is willing to contribute to the cost of a Postal Steam Line.


That your Memorialists beg respectfully to represent to your Lordships that
such reference must, under any circumstances, be attended with a delay which
cannot be estimated at less than eighteen months, even though the various
Colonies concerned should then agree amongst themselves as to the amount of
their respective contributions.
That your Memorialists in consequence feel it to be their duty to impress on
your Right Honorable Board that the Colonies expect that their Steam Postal
Service will be re-established by the Imperial Government without any further
unnecessary delay, and great disappointment will arise if these their just hopes
are not realised.
That your Memorialists would urge on your Lordships that if the Contract s ? e . Appendix 3,
Steam Service between Liverpool and New York were casually interrupted, the a* 6
Executive would not allow a week to elapse without arranging for its immediate hdtish Imports,
~ . , . ~ „ . , _ ~ . ° compiled from
resumption; but in the case of Australia, your Lordships have already permitted Parliamentary
its Mail Service to continue in abeyance for seventeen months, and are now about BjCports '
to protract its final re-establishment for a further indefinite period, notwith-
standing that its trade with England is proved by Parliamentary Returns to
be scarcely less important than that with America, and the regular and speedy
transmission of its monthly supply of Gold, averaging a million sterling, would
be of incalculable importance to this country.
That at no period of our Colonial history has the Imperial Government required. The Colony of
from any Colony, pecuniary contributions for postal purposes; and that, in the }Tave°voted°
present instance, to make the voluntary and munificent offers for contribution of £50,000 per
the Australian Colonies, a special ground for indefinitely postponing the re- Treasury Minute.)
establishment of their Postal Service, originally suppressed without sufficient
cause, does not appear to your Memorialists consonant with principles of equity
or sound policy.
That if your Lordships desire such contributions, they will be best secured
by a Treasury Minute, graduating the scale of Postages for each Colony, according
as your Lordships may find that the monies voted by their respective Legislatures
are adequate or otherwise; but to refer the question in the manner proposed by
your Lordships’ Minute, will probably be to throw an apple of discord amongst
the Colonies, without obtaining therefrom any practical result.
That your Memorialists observe, with great concern, that your Lordships select Treasury Minute,
no definite route for the conveyance of the Mails, but trust to secure by a system F
of pecuniary penalties their regular delivery within the contract time.
That your Memorialists entreat your Lordships to remember that the very See Appendix 4.
recent history of the Cape Line amply evidences that really heavy penalties are
never enforced, while lighter penalties, such as are provided for in the present
notice for tenders, have been paid with a smile by the Contractors; and there-
fore that a mere system of penalties affords no practical guarantee of any kind to
the public for the due performance of a Mail Service.
That your Memorialists submit, with all respect, that the right way to ensure
the rapid and due transmission of the Mails is not to rely altogether on penalties,
but rather to select the shortest route; and, as is usually done in other branches
of the Contract Packet Service, to insist on the employment by the Contractors
of First-Class Vessels, with adequate Steam Power, and well-tested speed.
That your Memorialists have satisfied themselves that the shortest route is via See Appendix 5.
Suez and Diego Garcia; such being, according to official computation, 3,019 miles
shorter than the passage by the Cape of Good Hope; and 2,338 miles shorter


than that via Panama, the latter traversing 76 degrees of longitude more than
the eastern route.
See Appendix 6, That your Memorialists are also convinced it is for nautical, as well as other
ofthis Island,°and reasons, highly desirable that the Postal Steamers, without touching at Ceylon
Hs capacious har- as heretofore, should proceed direct from Suez to Melbourne, stopping for
coaling purposes only at the Island of Diego Garcia, a dependency of the
Crown, situate in the midst of the Indian Ocean, half-way between Arabia
and Australia, and possessed of a most excellent and capacious harbour.
See Appendix 5. That the route via Diego Garcia being the shortest of all routes by 2,338
Appendix 1 ? 8 t 0 m^ es > i® evident that, at the required rate of ten miles an hour, the Mails admit
of being forwarded by it nearly ten days sooner than they can be conveyed by
any other line; and if the rate of speed were accelerated to eleven or twelve
miles per hour, as is quite practicable, the period of transmission would be
reduced in proportion.
See the Chart That your Memorialists would also observe that, viewing the geographical
hereto annexed. p oS ;t; on 0 f Di e g o Garcia, a short branch might with facility be organized from
this island, which would bring the Mauritius and the Cape of Good Hope into
close communication with Australia, and at the same time realize for the two
Colonies first named a speedy and cheap steam connexion with the mother-
country, of which great advantage they now continue wholly deprived.
That if your Lordships entertain any doubts as to the superiority of the
route to Melbourne, via Suez and Diego Garcia, your Memorialists trust your
Lordships will refer this question for the consideration of the Hydrographer
Royal, in order that thus their confident opinion may be corroborated by official
testimony.
See Appendix 8, That your Memorialists are ready to prove that by adopting this route, and
of tolances'and 11 insisting at the same time on an average speed of ten knots an hour from Suez
time required for to Melbourne, the Mails may easily be delivered in Melbourne within forty-four
transit of mails. q a y S f rom t} ie q a te of their leaving London.
That, by the same route, telegraphic intelligence from Australia might be
received within forty-two days.
See Chart. That a trunk line to Melbourne, as being the most central terminus for the
Australian Colonies in general, is all that is at present absolutely necessary, and
that it should be left to the several Governments of Australia and New Zealand
to direct the organization of the requisite branch lines.
In conclusion, your Memorialists submit that the wealth, intelligence, and
great commercial importance of Australia fully entitle her to the best and
speediest Postal Service which it is possible to organize, and they would add,
that the just expectations of her population will be satisfied with no less; they
contend that the close union by steam of Australia with the mother-country will
be attended with great results, and they believe that a measure so Imperial in
its object, merits, at the hands of the British Government, at least the same
degree of support which, in the case of other and less important steam lines, has
already so materially assisted the development of our commerce, and the extension
of our civilization.
Trusting that this their appeal will meet from your Right Honorable Board
that consideration which they feel it deserves, your Memorialists earnestly pray.
Ist. That your Lordships will, without further reference to the Colonies,
withdraw the notice for tenders now advertised, and invite tenders for
the immediate establishment of a regular and reliable Monthly Postal
Steam Communication with Australia.


Sailed.
OUTWARD.
Arrived.
Days
January
6
Lightning
March
22
.. 75
February 6
Boomerang
May .
11
.. 94
March
6
Blue Jacket
May
13
,. 68
April
5
Marco Polo
June
26
.. 82
May
5
Oliver Lang
July
31
.. 87
June
6
Donald McKay
August 26
.. 81
June
20
Ben Nevis
October
5
108
July
5
Champion of Seas
Septem. 26
.. 83
July
20
Shalimar
October 15
.. 87
August
5
James Baines
October 23
.. 79
Average, 84£ days.
2nd. That in order to obtain the delivery of letters in Melbourne within
forty-four days from their leaving London, you will select the shortest
route, viz., that via Suez and Diego Garcia.
3rd. That to secure a uniform speed of ten knots an hour in all weathers,
you will not rely altogether on a system of penalties, hut rather stipulate
that the steam vessels employed by the contractors he first-class ships of
2,200 tons burthen at the least, and be capable of performing, when
tested for speed in the usual manner, not less than twelve knots or
nautical miles per hour.
And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c.
Signed by Order of the Meeting,
W. C. WENTWORTH,
Chairman.
APPENDICES TO THE PRECEDING MEMORIAL.
Appendix No. I.
Suppression of the A ustralian Postal Steam Service.
Their Lordships are referred, on this head, to the communication addressed
by this Association on 15th of August, 1855, to the late Sir William Moles-
worth, as Secretary of State for the Colonies; as also to the excellent letter
addressed by the London Australian Postal Association on the same subject,
under date 4th December, 1855, to the present Secretary of State for the
Colonies.
From these documents it appears, that although the Australian Postal Line
was peremptorily suppressed, the China Line was maintained intact, the relative
importance of the two lines being amply evidenced by the fact, that in 1853 the
Australian Imports from England came to £14,500*532, while the China Imports
amounted only to £1,787,675. Hence it may be said to be proved to demon-
stration, that whatever may have been the exigences of the war, there was
no necessity for the suppression of the Australian Postal Line, for had the
comparatively-speaking unimportant China Mail Service been selected for dis-
continuance, it is clear that the due transit of the Australian Mails need never
have been interrupted. This becomes even more apparent, when it is considered
that the relative lengths of the two lines are about equal, and employ the same
number of Steam Ships.
Appendix No. 11.
Statement showing the Average Duration of the Passages of the
Australian Mail Ships, during the Year 1855.


HOMEWARD.
Sailed. Arrived. Days,
April 10 Lightning July 2 ... 83
Boomerang Septem.2o ... 105
Marco Polo October 22 ... 94
Oliver Lang Novem. 29 ... 99
White Star Novem. 28 ... 92
Donald McKay Decern. 29 ... 91
Ben Nevis Jan. 18 (1856) 94
Champion of Seas January 26 ... 92
Shalimar February 4 ... 86
James Baines March 5 ... 98
Average, 93) days.
Appendix No. 111.
Statement of Declared Value of the Imports of British Goods
into the Australian Colonies during the Year 1853,
With a Comparative Statement of the Imports by other Countries of the same Goods.
[Extracted from a Return made to the House of Commons, May, 1854.]
Colony of Victoria £7,056,334
Note.— The Colonists of Victoria give their total Imports
for 1853 at £16,842,637, and for the quarter ending
Ist April, 1854, at £5,070,381.
Colony of New South Wales 4,527,083
„ South Australia 1,182,455
Van Dieman’s Land 1,408,927
New Zealand 230,816
~ Western Australia 100,917
Total of British Imports £14,506,532
Note. —The following are the British Exports to the leading parts of the
world, on an average of seven years, 1847 —1852, as extracted from Mac Culloch
(Edition, 1854): —
1. United States £13,055,462
2. East Indies 6,755,831
3. Germany 6,388,092
4. Holland 3,422,650
5. British North America 2,936,352
6. Turkey and Greece 2,798,597
7. Brazil 2,768,125
8. France 2,115,296
9. Chili and Peru 1,980,285
10. West Indies 2,087,725
11. China 1,787,675
12. Russia 1,530,056
13. Portugal 1,037,839
14. Spain 857,532
15. Cape of Good Hope 744,638
16. Mexico 536,904






Appendix No. IV.
As to the Enforcement of the Performance of a Mail Service by
a System of Pecuniary Penalties alone.
In one of the strongest cases of neglect and default ever made out against mail
contractors, viz., the Royal Australian Mail Company, (contractors for the Cape
route,) the heavy penalties incurred ivere never enforced. The General Screw
Steam Company also, their successors in the same contract, although guilty of
several defaults, never paid any penalties.
Penalties at the rate of £3O per diem were indeed exacted from the owners of
the sailing packets established vid the Cape in the year 1853, upon the plea
that the Royal Australian Mail Company having failed, that route was not
adapted for steam navigation.
These penalties, however, were all paid with alacrity; in fact, they consti-
tuted no penalty at all, but were merely deductions from the mail money agreed
to be paid to each ship. In one case, a shipowner tendered a vessel to perform
the passage in seventy-three days, as is believed, without much, if any, hope of
performing the voyage in that time. The tender was accepted by the Post
Office, and the vessel, partly from dull sailing, and partly from overloading, was
thirty-seven days over the period contracted for. In this case, the ship received
£lOOO mail money, and paid £lOll penalties, shewing a loss of £ll to the
contractor. The sum, therefore, actually paid in this case was a penalty of six
shillings and twopence for each day of default; by payment of which large sum
the owner was enabled to style his ship “ Her Majesty’s Royal Contract Mail
Packet,” and, under cover of that epithet, to earn a large freight by filling her
with a full cargo of merchandise and passengers.
With these facts before them, the Committee of the Australian General
Association are anxious to impress on Her Majesty’s Government, that pecuniary
penalties in themselves are no guarantee to the public for the performance of a
mail contract, while it is clear that the mulcting of a contractor in any sum,
however large, is no compensation to the public for the irregular and uncertain
transit of their letters.
Appendix No. V.
Comparative Distances of the various
culated from Dover to i
Routes
to Australia, cal-
Melhourne.
'drographer Royal
(Extracted chiefly from the Distances calculated by the Hydro
tary Steam Committee, 1851.)
for the Parliamen-
Duration of
Passage.
The late mail route, vid the Cape
Ditto vid Singapore
13,367
11,521
d. n.
80 0
64 0
The route vid Diego Garcia, recommended by the
Association
10,348
44 0
The route projected vid Panama at 10 knots, (4 days
for stoppages allowed)
Distance from Dover to the Mauritius vid Diego Garcia
Ditto to the Cape
12,686
56 21
6,987
28 0
38 0
Distance from Melbourne to the Mauritius vid Diego
Garcia ..
23 3
Ditto to the Cape
32 7
Ditto to Ceylon via Diego Garcia 5,416
23 13


Appendix No, VI.
Diego Garcia.
The following particulars with regard to this island are extracted
from llorshurg, by which it will be seen that no place can by
nature be better adapted for a coaling station; —
“ Diego Garcia, or Great Chagos Island, extends from lat. 7° 13' S. to 7° 26' S.,
its length from north to south being about fourteen or fifteen miles, and the
general breadth from three to four miles, having the form of a crescent, with the
convex side to the eastward. This remarkable island may be considered as a
steep coral wall standing in the ocean, for the whole interior of the island is a
lagoon or natural harbour, nearly of the same length and breadth as the island
itself, as there is no part of the circumjacent wall above half a mile broad, and
the greater part of the eastern side is only about one-tenth of a mile in breadth.
This island, or, rather, contour of an island, is low, generally 8 or 10 feet above
the sea at high tides, but inundations of the sea appear to have pervaded the wall
in some places, and imparted their waters to those in the harbour. Although
low, the island is covered with tall cocoa trees, which make it visible five or six
leagues at sea.
The only safe channel into the harbour is between West Island and the
sand projecting from Middle Island, above half a mile to the S.W., leaving a
channel near a mile wide between it and West Island, which is safe to approach
on the N.W. and N.E. sides. There are no soundings until a ship is close to the
entrance; the water then shoals suddenly, from 100 fathoms, no ground, to 20,
10, and 7 fathoms.
A variety of fish abound in the harbour, and excellent green turtle visit the
shores on the outside of the island; the land crabs, which feed on the cocoa nuts
as they fall from the trees, are also wholesome food; and good fresh water may
he had in almost every part of the island, by digging eight or ten feet deep.
“ The S.E. winds prevail here from April to November, hut are strongest in
June, July, August, and part of September, during which time the current
generally sets between West and N.W., from twelve to twenty miles daily. In
March and April, the winds are often very variable and light; October and
November are also changeable months, hut more unsettled and more squally than
the former. In December and January, the N.W. winds prevail almost con-
stantly, producing a current to the south-eastward.”
Inquiries instituted by the Association enable them to state that
the island is now occupied by some Mauritius houses, who have
there establishments for the manufacture of oil from the cocoa
nuts growing on the island. The harbour is described by a resident
as well sheltered, and the island free from hurricanes; it is also
stated that a wharf for the rapid coaling of steamers could be easily
constructed. No place could possibly be better adapted for a coal-
ing station. (See the Admiralty Chart of this island left here-
with.)


Dover to Marseilles, as follows: —
H.
Dover to Paris
.. 9b
Paris to Marseilles
.. 19 (
Stoppage at Paris
Stoppage at Marseilles
.. 2)
Marseilles to Malta
Stoppage at Malta
Malta to Alexandria
Alexandria to Cairo, by Rail
•• 1
Cairo to Suez
•• /
Time.
1).
H.
1
7
2
7
0
6
3
10
0
8
0
11
1
8
5
11
0
12
8
15
0
12
12
3
0
12
5
18
42
10
1
14
44
0
Appendix No. YII.
Rate of Speed maintainable by Ocean Steamers.
In their memorial, the Association have named 10 knots per hour as the usual
Contract Postal Rate ; they add, however, in that document, their belief that a
much higher speed might with facility be maintained.
It is understood that the passages of the more recently constructed large
steam-ships of the Contract Steam Companies would, if analysed and distinguished
from the performances of the slower and smaller steamers of ancient construction,
show an average between 11 and 12 knots per hour. It has been stated to the
Committee that the “ Atrato,” on one voyage from Southampton to St. Thomas,
averaged 14 knots, while the “ Himalaya” is well known to be capable of equal
speed. The “ Persia,” also, a ship of 3,400 tons, constructed for Cunard’s Line,
averaged also 14£ knots on her recent trial trip. In his evidence before a Par-
liamentary Committee (Holyhead and Kingstown, 1853, p, 103), Mr, Penn, the
highest naval engineering authority in England, asserts the possibility of con-
structing a vessel to proceed at the rate of twenty-five miles per hour, while
Mr. Lloyd, Head of the Steam Department of Her Majesty’s navy, corroborates
his statement (p. 104).
Having these facts in view, the Memorialists trust that, in the future contract
for the conveyance of the Australian Mails, a higher rate of speed than 10 knots
may be stipulated for, in which case they look with confidence to the passage to
Australia being brought considerably within 44 days.
Appendix No. YIII.
Calculation of the Time required for the Conveyance of the Aus-
tralian Mails between Dover and Melbourne, at a speed of Ten
Miles per Hour, via the Isthmus of Suez, and the Island of
Diego Garcia.
Speed per
Hour.
Stoppages at Alexandria and Cairo, 12 hours
each, and at Suez 8 hours
Suez to Aden
Stoppage at Aden
Aden to Diego Garcia
Stoppage at Diego Garcia
Diego Garcia to King George’s Sound
Stoppage there
King George’s Sound to Melbourne ..
2,074
10,348
Allowance for accidental delays
10
7i


D. H.
Period for transmission of Mails direct, via Diego Garcia .. 42 10
Period for transmission of intelligence by Electric Telegraph
between England and Australia, via Diego Garcia .. .. 41 3
EEMAEKS.
The assertion that the passage between Melbourne and London
might be effected in forty-three days, has taken many persons by
surprise; in fact, some individuals, accustomed to the present
long duration of the voyage, have wholly refused to credit the
possibility of such a performance. If, however, it be remembered
that the distance in question is not much more than three times
that between Liverpool and New York —a passage which has often
been performed in ten days—it will be seen that at the same rate
of going the transit to Melbourne might be effected in about
thirty-three days. Viewing, also, that one-tenth part of the direct
route to Melbourne, that is, upwards of 1000 miles, passes over a
line of rail in good working order, it would appear, on reflection,
that in lieu of a forty-four days’ passage being a wonderful per-
formance, in reality it leaves neither the progress of science or the
enterprise of the age much to boast of.* At the rate of eleven
knots the passage would be performed in thirty-nine days.
The following is a Copy of the Petition presented to the House
of Commons, by the Eight Hon. Sir John Pakington, on behalf
of the Association :
To the Honorable the Commons of Great Britain and Ireland in
Parliament assembled.
The Petition adopted at a Meeting of tbe General Association for the
Australian Colonies held in the City of London on the 4th day of
March 1856; William Charles Wentworth, Esq., late Member of
the Legislature of New South Wales for the City of Sydney in the
Chair.
Humbly Sheweth,
That your Petitioners are impressed with the conviction that the present
position of our Postal relations with Australia demands the earliest consideration
of your Honorable House.
That in order to satisfy your Honorable House on this head, your Petitioners
crave leave to state succinctly the manner in which the Imperial question of
Steam Communication has been dealt with by successive Governments.
That in the year 1846 it was officially intimated to our Australian Colonies
that a Steam Line was about immediately to be established ; but the assurance


so given was not realised until 1852, when after six years of unnecessary delay,
a Postal Steam Service was at length organised, on alternate months, via the
Cape of Good Hope and the Isthmus of Suez.
That the Bi-monthly Service, via the Cape of Good Hope, was avowedly an
experiment undertaken contrary to the publicly recorded opinion of the Right
Honorable the present First Lord of the Admiralty ; that such service was tried
under two different Companies and Contractors, and was ultimately permitted to
drop, after having been characterized in each case by failure and disappointment
to the public.
That the Bi-monthly Service via Suez was, during its continuance, carried out
in a more regular and reliable manner, but that the route waS so devious, and
the stoppages so numerous, that the passage to Melbourne occupied sixty-four
days; the speed maintained, if measured by direct distance, not exceeding six-
and-a-half knots per hour, whereas the usual speed on other contract lines is ten
knots or nautical miles per hour.
That such last-named Service, in the month of November, 1854, was without
notice wholly suppressed, nominally on account of the requirements of the war,
but your Petitioners are prepared to demonstrate, in the clearest manner, that
the exigences of the public, service in no way rendered this measure necessary.
That since such suppression as aforesaid, Her Majesty’s Mails have been con-
veyed with the utmost regularity to India—to China—to America—to the West
Indies—to the Brazils, and even along the distant Coasts of W T estern America,
but Australia has been wholly deprived of all Postal Steam Communication; and
hence the letters of our great Colonies of the South have been exposed in their
transit to delays and irregularities, which have not only seriously affected com-
mercial operations, but have also subjected private individuals in their social
relations to grave annoyance and harassing anxiety.
That your Petitioners did hope and expect that her Majesty’s Government
would have used their most strenuous endeavours to re-establish, at the earliest
period, an important Service which never should have been suppressed; but it is
with pain they now collect from the Treasury Minute laid on the table of your
Honorable House that the Executive, instead of the immediate renewal of Postal
Steam Communication, propose, in the first instance, a reference to the Colonies,
in order to ascertain the exact amount of money each Colony is willing to con-
tribute to the cost of a Postal Steam Line; —a reference which, under any
circumstances, will be attended with a delay of not less than eighteen months,
even though the various Colonies should ultimately agree amongst themselves as
to the amount of their respective contributions.
That your Petitioners contend that this reference, if made at all, should have
been made before Her Majesty’s Government pledged itself to establish and
maintain a Steam Line, viz., in the year 1846; but how far it is just or con-
sistent first to establish a Steam Service, then to suppress it, and afterwards to
assert in a carefully-worded State Paper that the same cannot be re-organised
without a subsidy which has never been exacted from any other Colony of the
Empire, your Petitioners leave it to your Honorable House to determine.
That your Petitioners would urge on your Honorable House that if the
Contract Steam Service between Liverpool and New York were casually inter-
rupted, the Executive would not allow a week to elapse without arranging for
its immediate resumption; but in the case of Australia, Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment have already permitted its Mail Service to continue in abeyance for


seventeen months, and have also now virtually decided to protract its final re-
establishment for a further indefinite period.
That these continued delays are the more vexatious, inasmuch as the Colony
of Victoria has already appropriated £50,000 a year, and the Colony of New
South Wales has voted the annual sum of £20,000 towards the expense of such a
Postal Steam Service as your Petitioners recommend; so that these two Colonies
alone, with the aid from Imperial funds proposed in the Treasury Minute, have
subscribed probably the whole amount which will be demandable in the terms of
that Minute from the entire Australian group; or, at all events, so large a
portion of the whole as to leave no ground for reasonable doubt that any further
contribution which may be required will be immediately voted by the Colonies of
Tasmania, South Australia, and New Zealand.
That your Petitioners submit, however, that in the event of any recusancy on
the part of any of these last-named Colonies, their just quota of contribution will
be best secured, not by a continued suppression of their Mail Service, but by a
Treasury Minute graduating the scale of Postages for each Colony, according as
it may be considered that the monies voted by its Legislature are adequate or
otherwise.
That, viewing the position taken in the premises by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, your Petitioners have felt it their duty to address to the Lords of the
Treasury a Memorial urging the immediate re-establishment of a Postal Steam
Service; to which said Memorial, with the Chart and Appendices thereto
annexed, they crave leave to refer your Honorable House.
That your Petitioners observe, with great concern, that the Lords of the
Treasury, in their published Minute already referred to, neither fix any rate of
speed, nor select any definite route for the conveyance of the Mails, but, leaving
the Contractors in this respect wholly unfettered, propose to secure solely by a
system of pecuniary penalties the rapid and regular transmission of our Aus-
tralian letters.
That your Petitioners entreat your Honorable House to impress on their
Lordships that the very recent history of the Cape Line amply evidences that
really heavy penalties are never enforced, while lighter penalties, such as are
provided for in the recently issued notice for tenders, have been paid with a
smile by the Contractors; and therefore that a mere system of penalties affords
no practical guarantee of any kind to the public for the due performance of a
Mail Service.
That your Petitioners submit, with all respect, that the right way to ensure
the rapid and due transmission of the Mails is not to rely solely on penalties, but
rather to select the shortest route; and, as is usually done in other branches of
the Contract Packet Service, to insist on the employment by the Contractors
of First-class Vessels, with adequate Steam Power, and well-tested speed. „
That your Petitioners have satisfied themselves that the shortest route is that
via Suez and the Indian Ocean; such being, according to official computation,
3,019 miles shorter than the passage by the Cape of Good Hope, and 2,338
miles shorter than that via Panama; the latter traversing 76 degrees of longitude
more than the eastern route.
That your Petitioners are also convinced it is for nautical, as well as other
reasons, highly desirable that the Postal Steamers, without touching at Ceylon
as heretofore, should proceed direct from Suez to Melbourne, stopping for coaling
purposes only at the Island of Diego Garcia, a dependency of the Crown, situate


in the midst of the Indian Ocean, half-way between Arabia and Australia, and
possessed of a most excellent and capacious harbour.
That the route via Diego Garcia being the shortest of all routes, it is evident
that, at the required rate of ten miles an hour, the Mails admit of being for-
warded by it many days sooner than they can be conveyed by any other line;
and if the rate of speed were accelerated to eleven or twelve miles per hour, as
is quite practicable, the period of transmission would be reduced in proportion.
'Diat your Petitioners would also observe that, viewing the geographical
position of Diego Garcia, a short branch might with facility be organised from
this island, which would bring the Mauritius and the Cape of Good Hope into
close communication with Australia, and at the same time realise for the two
Colonies first named a speedy and cheap steam connexion with the mother-
country, of which great advantage they now continue wholly deprived.
That your Memorialists are ready to prove that by adopting this route, and
insisting at the same time on an average speed of ten knots an hour from Suez
to Melbourne, the Mails may easily be delivered in Melbourne within forty-four
days from the date of their leaving London.
That, by the same route, telegraphic intelligence from Australia might be
received within forty-two days.
That a trunk-line to Melbourne, as being the most central terminus for the
Australian Colonies in general, is all that is at present absolutely necessary, and
that it should be left to the several Governments of Australia and New Zealand
to direct the organisation of the requisite branch lines.
In conclusion, your Petitioners desire to remind your Honorable House, that
our trade with Australia has now assumed such vast proportions that it is im -
possible Her Majesty s Government can be permitted any longer to continue to
trifle with her Postal relations.
That this allegation of your Petitioners as to the extent of our Australian
commerce, is supported by the trade returns published by order of your Honorable
House, whence it appears that in the year 1853 the export of British manu-
factures to Australia amounted to the astonishing sum of £14,506,532; whence
it follows that such export nearly equalled our average export to America; that
it more than doubled our exports to India and Germany; that it was six times
greater than our exports to Prance and the West Indies, and seven times in
excess of our exports to China.
Your Petitioners would further observe that the gold yield of Australia during
the past year exceeds twelve millions sterling, and that the rapid transit of this
large amount of treasure is intimately connected with the value of all public
securities, and is at this moment of the greatest importance to the trading
interests of the country.
Having these facts in view, your Petitioners submit to your Honorable House
that the wealth, the intelligence, and great commercial importance of Australia,
fully entitle her to the best and the speediest Postal Service which it is possible
to organise, and they would add, that the just expectations of her population
will be satisfied with no less; they contend that the close union by steam of
Australia with the mother-country will be attended with great results, and they
believe that a measure so Imperial in its object merits at the hands of the
British Government, at least the same degree of support which, in the case of
other and less important steam lines, has already so materially assisted the
development of our commerce, and the extension of our civilization.


That, under these circumstances, your Petitioners approach your Honorable
House with this their humble complaint, and earnestly pray,
That you will take into your early consideration the great injury sustained
by the general interests and the commerce of the Empire through the
present total suppression of all Postal Steam intercourse with Australia;
and that you null be pleased to vote an humble address to Her Majesty
the Queen, praying that she will graciously be pleased to direct that all
proper steps be taken for the immediate re-establishment of a reliable
monthly Postal Steam Communication with Australia by the shortest
route, and at a speed of not less than ten knots or nautical miles per
hour.
And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c.
Signed by Order of the Meeting,
W. C. WENTWOETH,
Chairman.
A Petition in terms analogous to this was presented to the
House of Lords by the Eight Hon. Lord Ellenborough.
The following Petition was also adopted at an influential Meeting
held in the City of London, the Eight Hon. the Lord Mayor in
the Chair, viz.:—
To the Honorable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland in Parliament assembled.
THE HUMBLE PETITION of the Merchants, Bankers, and other
Inhabitants of the City of London, at a Meeting held at the London
Tavern, on the 14th day of April ; the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor
of the said City presiding.
Humbly Sheweth,
That your Petitioners approach your Honorable House with the painful con-
viction that the suppression of Postal Steam Communication with the Australian
Colonies was wholly unnecessary, and that the interests of these Colonies, and
still more of the Empire at large, demand its immediate re-establishment.
That the reference lately made to them, in order to ascertain the amount of
contribution each Colony is willing to give towards this Postal Steam Service, is
wholly unprecedented; that the actual state of the postal income of the United
Kingdom requires no such contribution, the excess of postal income over postal
expenditure, including the expense of the extensive Postal Steam Services already
organised to most of our Colonies, as well as to the United States and other
foreign countries, being at this moment more than adequate to defray the entire
cost of a first-class Postal Steam Service with these—by far the most important
of all the Colonies of our extended Empire,
That if Her Majesty’s Government, however, persist in exacting from Australia
alone this subsidy, the appropriations already made by the Legislatures of the
Colonies of Victoria and New South Wales, amounting to £70,000 a year, are


amply sufficient with the contribution of an equal amount from the postal
to at onCe for the of a
bteam Postal Sen ice to Australia of the very best description.
should hp n - - + oP r on o l yoUr Petitioners the shortest and most direct route
i ident i;r o f s t?° n y w r t jeSty,S Government, together with an Zt
pendent line of steam packets, of not less than 2,200 tons burden each and
c. r .ble of , rate of .peed of at let 10 nautical mite per hour, '
—“ a “ I’“* “Ivertfecnent for tenders from the Admiralty was
issued during the war, when most of the first-class Steam Vessels were in full
,S h dVertiS T nt C ° ntem P lates only a prospective and uncertain
S r °t:-: nd Pr ° VideS but ver y insufficient penalties for
ZZIZ andT r * T* t that * ***** * immediately
tTpTw ? . new advertisement issued, inviting a Postal Steam Service by
the shortest route, and at the before-mentioned rate of speed as a minimum.
lhat by these means your Petitioners have ascertained that the Postal Steam
Communication, with Melbourne as a central terminus, after malT all Z
7 delaJS ’ be eff6Cted in fort y-fonr days, and in about
ajs a r with New South Wales, Tasmania, and South Australia the onlv
other important Colonies of the Australian group, by means of branch
which can be readily organised by the vessels of the numerous Colonial Steam
Companies already employed in the coasting trade of these Colonies.
And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c.
(Signed,) DAVID SALOMANS, Lord Mayor,
On hehalf of the Meeting .
A Petition was presented to the House of Lords in analogous
terms by Lord Ellenborough.
Ihe following is the copy of the Letter addressed by the General
Association for the Australian Colonies to Sir William Moles worth
as Secretary of State for the Colonies
Suppression of the Australian Postal Steam Service.
Genebal Association fob the Austealian Colonies
Committee Rooms—3l, Charing Ceoss,
London, August 15th, 1855.
. As tim Minister of the Crown to whose care the interests of the
Colonies are specially confided, I am requested by the Committee of this Asso-
datum to entreat your attention at this juncture to the unsatisfactory position in
vvhmh losta! Communication with the Australian Colonies has so long been
permitted to remain; and, m doing so, the Committee take the opportunity of


expressing their high appreciation of the many services you have already rendered
to Australia., and the confidence \vh : ch your complete acquaintance with its
position, value, and resources, leads them to entertain that you will mark your
accession to office by no longer allowing so vital a point as Steam Communication
with the mother-country to remain in abeyance.
Since the month of November last, our usual Mail Steam Service has been
wholly suppressed; and letters have, in consequence, during that period been
conveyed to their destination with all the irregularity and uncertainty necessarily
incident to the transit of Sailing Packets. The Colonists cannot admit that the
exigences of the war, grave as they have been, were at any time so urgent as
to call for their exclusion from the benefits attending speedy and certain
communication with the mother-country, especially as these are continued to be
enjoyed, to their full extent, by other Colonial possessions of less commercial
importance. You will not, therefore, be surprised to learn that universal dis-
satisfaction prevails throughout Australia on this most important subject.
The earnest remonstrances which have already reached this country from the
Colonies are well known to your predecessor in office, and will corroborate the
accuracy of our statements in this respect. Representations have also been made
by Members of this Association to the Colonial Office, the Admiralty, the Post-
office, as well as to the Treasury; and from all these departments we have
received repeated assurances that the question was considered of the gravest
importance, and would have early attention. In both Houses of Parliament
these assurances have been repeatedly renewed, in reply to the inquiries of
individual Members. It is consequently with sincere regret and astonishment
that, at this advanced period of the year, we find no arrangements whatever
have as yet been made for the early re-organisation of an Australian Postal
Steam Service.
The uncertainty attending Postal Communication effected through the medium
of Sailing Vessels is so obvious, that we feel we need not insist upon it. At
present, it is true, our Mails are carried by the fastest sailing clippers in the
world, the owners contracting to deliver them in sixty-five days; but this speed
has only been attained in one or two instances; while, in others, eighty, ninety,
and even ninety-five days, have been occupied by the voyage. There is every
reason to believe that by the Overland Route, and by steamers of a similar
character to those employed in other Ocean Postal Steam Lines, Mails could be
delivered in fifty days, and to such a service we consider the Australian Colonies
are fully entitled.
You are doubtless aware, that the matter has received much attention from
the different Colonial Legislatures. The Colony of Victoria, as a mark of its
ardent anxiety for the resumption of Postal Steam Communication, has not only
voted £50,000 per annum for that object, but has also passed an Act of Council,
charging that sum on the general revenue, placing it at the uncontrolled disposal
of the Governor. New South Wales, and the other Australian Colonies, are
prepared to contribute in the like liberal manner. We would submit that these
grants, with the assistance naturally expected from Great Britain, are on a
scale of such magnitude as to warrant the immediate establishment of a most
efficient Postal Steam Service.
In conclusion, permit me to hand you a list of the Members of this Asso-
ciation, amongst whom you will find the names of several gentlemen who have
recently occupied seats in the Legislatures of the Colonies of Victoria and New


South Wales, and of others who have taken a prominent part in the leading
questions of public interest in these Colonies. The views, therefore, which I
have been requested by the Committee to express, may be said to give a faithful
representation of the feeling of the Colonists on a question, the importance of
which to Australia it would be difficult, if not impossible, to exaggerate. It is
that importance which has induced the Committee to address you in the earnest
terms of this communication, and which now leads them to hope that the subject
will have your serious and early attention.
I have the honour to subscribe myself.
Your most obedient and humble Servant,
WILLIAM EUTLEDGE,
Honorary Secretary of the General Association
for the Australian Colonies.
J. Unwin, Gresham Steam Press, 31, Bucklersbury, London.


