

y/ ?<£*6j94s7
o fa/
WHAT HAPPENED AT
TOWER. HILL ?
FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
rr rw.
VICTORIA


WHAT HAPPENED AT TOWER HILL
M. C. DOWNES
Fisheries and Wildlife Department
Victoria
1961
Reprinted 1967


¥HAT HAPPENED AT TOWER HILL?
Between Warrnambool and Port Fairy in the Western District
of Victoria, the Princes Highway tops a gently rise to reveal a
deep circular valley holding in its depths a lake with islands
formed from small conical hills.
This is Tower Hill,one of the most recently active of Vic-
toria's past volcanoes - a monument to the great volcanic er-
uptions which shaped the plains of the Western District in past
ages, But Tower Hill is also a monument to other l'ess natural
processes. Its history is a graphic demonstration of the de-
struction of vegetation and wildlife which resulted from settle-
ment of Victoria by the white man.
The Koroit Borough Council under whose control Tower Hill
was placed in 1892, has requested the Fisheries and Wildlife
Department to report on the possibility of restoring Tower Hill
to its original condition. In order to appreciate what would
be best for Tower Hill it is necessary to delve into the past
and examine the collection of old paintings, photographs and
records which the Department has been able to gather together
for the first time.
WHAT IS TOWER HILL.
Tower Hill has been described as a 'nested caldera'. The
steep outer lake banks and the gentle slopes of the surrounding
country formed the lower slopes of a large volcano which formerly
rose to a peak high over the present lake and islands. From a
vent in this peak, volcanic ash was blown out to cover the sur-
rounding countryside. Eventually the whole summit collapsed
down the throat of the volcano, so deep that the lake now lies
in the caldera which was formed. But there was still activity
underneath, enough to open small vents to form craters and ash
cones in the bottom of the caldera. These became the islands
in the lake today. On them may still be seen the scoria heaps
and bare craters. All this probably took place during the
period aborigines lived in the district, may-be only a few
thousand years ago.
JAMES DAWSON AND THE ABORIGINES
The aborigines of the 'Peak whurrong' or Kelp-lip tribe,
(so called from the broad leafed sea-weed so abundant along the
seashore of their territory) knew Tower Hill intimately and had
names for many parts of it. They named the banks of Tower Hill
'Koroitch' from the nettles which grew so abundantly there.
The island was called 'Parrang kuutcha', from an edible root, a


crater on the island 'Yatt mirng' meaning 'white eye', while
the outlet of the lake received the descriptive term'Kurro bar-
uum' meaning grandmoter of lice'. We are indebted for these
names to Mr. James Dawson one of the early settlers and his
daughter.lsabella, who spent many years studying the aborigines
in the area. Plans for the development of Tower Hill make pro-
vision for these time honoured names to be brought back into use
Dawson arrived in Victoria in 1840 and occupied 'fCangatong
station, some five miles from Tower Hill, for twenty-two years.
In those days of frequent trouble with the blacks, 'Kangatong'
and the Dawsons were famous for the exceptionally friendly re-
lationship which existed between the station and the aborigines.
This was due, it is certain, to the honourable and peaceful way
in which Dawson treated the aborigines.
Dawson knew and loved Tower Hill well. In fact he was so
impressed that in 1855 he commissioned Eugene von Guerard, a
famous painter of the day visiting the colony from Europe, to
paint it in oils. This has been reproduced on the cover.
The outline of the islands and the surrounding land can
quickly be verified as accurate by standing on the spot where
it was painted. It is reasonable to accept the vegetation as
equally accurate. Early surveyor's maps and other descriptions
of the time completely support this picture. Although it is
not obvious in the reproduction a close study of the island re-
veals the heavy growth of eucalypts, she-oaks and wattles on
the slopes and flats of the islands, the extensive tea-tree and
reed beds along the water's edge, and the rushes in clumps
throughout the shallow water of the eastern end of the lake-
There is even a suggestion of the very prolific wildlife which
must have found food and shelter in such luxuriant surroundings.
This painting of a small pocket of Victoria as it was in
its original beauty was a wonderful legacy for Dawson to leave
to future Victorians. The original has been located in Melb-
ourne during the search for details of Tower Hill's history.
As the main evidence around which the development of Tower Hill
will resolve, it is hoped that it will always be available for
study and for those who know and love Tower Hill.
THE ORIGINAL TOWER HILL
During the 1850's the pastoralists were still occupied
with more accessiable runs; land such as the steep bank and the
islands at Tower Hill remained untouched. Parts of the lake
bank had been included in large holdings extending out into
surrounding country.- By 1854 only about 2 of a total of 5i


miles of the water's edge remained as Crownland. In 1857
when James Bonwick described Tower Hill, intermittent thick
forest still remained around the lip of the crater and the is
lands were untouched. His description of the island is worthy
of note.
"A stroll among the gigantic Perns of the
valley, or a ramble among the cones and
craters has peculiar attractions. But
these are not comparable to the winding
path at the foot of the basaltic rises
close to the la,ke. There the graceful
Ferntree waves, almost tropical reeds
rustle in the breeze, leefy shrubs and
trees form delightful bowers and alcoves."
The aftermath of the gold rush began to have effect on
Tower Hill. After 1858 the number of diggers engaged on the
goldfields steadily declined. The tremendous pressure for land
thus created became evident at Tower Hill in increased grazing,
and the burning of the forest commenced about 1860. By 1867,
as shown in a painting by Daniel Clarke of Warrnambool, stark
white tree trunks showed against the grass and bushes on the
main island. The small island at this time was still thickly
vegetated with live trees.
There followed repeated burning then active clearing of
the scrub and removal of dead timber. By 1869 all the timber
on the islands had been killed and the slopes were covered only
with bracken and grass. Photographs and paintings show that
regrowth of trees and shrubs took place for .any years but only
few trees reached any height. Through the 1670's grazing and
burning of regenerated scrub continued. Removal of the dead
timber for firewood increased and loads were boated off to the
mainland, for by this time the heavily wooded slopes surround-
ing Tower Hill were completely cleared.
Eventually regeneration fell away and the islands were cov-
ered with a uniform vegetation of bracken and grass. By the
year 1887 all dead timber of any size had been removed though
occasional large stumps could be seen on the banks.
From the distance of this present age it is easy to see
the pattern and causes of Tower Hill's destruction. What is
more difficult to appreciate is the inevitability of the result
from the circumstances and thinking of these early hectic days.
The grazing and burning which occurred between 1860 and 1867 was
the accompaniment of settlement of most land during that period.
The clearing of the underwood and dead timber during the 70 s


followed naturally even on unoccupied land. The change from
trees to grass was cheaply brought about but control of the ac-
companying bracken was only worthwhile on freehold land. Use
of the land during subsequent years including grazing, firing,
rabbits and the prevaling lack of appreciation of the need for
community responsibility toward public land combined to suppress
most of the original vegetation.
Although there had been interest for some years in pre-
serving Tower Hill, it was not until 1866 that the islands, the
lake and the remaining two-fifths of the bank were temporarily
reserved. The main destruction was well under way by this time.
The reserve was placed under a committee of management, the
Tower Hill Acclimatisation Society, specially founded for the
purpose, Mr. D. J. Homes apparently being the moving force and
first Secretary of the Society.
EARLY MANAGEMENT
It is evident that the founders believed in the preservat-
ion and fostering of wildlife and natural conditions. But more
particularly they believed in its improvement by the introduct-
ion of new birds and animals together with plants they might
require. This improvement on nature by clearing,and the plant-
ing of European grasses and trees accelerated the deterioration
already begun by the intensive pressure for more grazing land.
The difficulty of obtaining money for conservation added
its share. In an effort to protect the area by raising funds
for fencing and supervision, blocks were cleared for cultivation
and grazing rights leased. Naturally the lessees continued to
improve the land by burning, clearing and grubbing of dead tim-
ber to obtain profit for the leases.
Remoteness of the small centralised government in Melb-
ourne meant that control of overgrazing, timber removal and
burning was virtually impossible. All this despite the fact
that the Board of Land and Works,to which the committee of man-
agement was responsible, had clearly indicated its intentions
with respect to the reserve when it refused consent for an ap-
plication to use any part of it as stone quarries, pound yards,
and camping grounds for travelling stock because of its pict-
uresque nature.
During following years considerable numbers of cattle
were running on the reserve, and a caretaker, Colin Fletcher,
from Argyle, Scotland, lived for a year, in a tent on the is-
land with his wife being employed by the lessee at £1.2.6 per
<-eek without rations. His duties were to burn off the under-


wood, to care for stock which were drafted back and forward, to
keep persons from trespassing and to care for any foreign beasts
and fowls that might be placed onfhe reserve.
These included two Angora and six common goats, increased
shortly by seven young ones, five jungle fowl, three pheasants
and two rabbits. It was commented at the time that the goats
effectively cropped down all the young gum tree plants, the
jungle fowl never left the vicinity for fear of the hawks, the
pheasants were taken by the hawks the day after they were in-
troduced and the two rabbits appear never to have increased.
For many years numbers of poor families had lived on the
sloping lake banks, building shanties or living in tents,
Many of these had vegetable patches, ran cows and sometimes
rented their blocks from the Society.
Over the years the Society became inactive. Control of
the area was vested in one group then another mostly represent-
ing councils from surrounding districts. Small portions of
the reserve were sold, new regulations were formulated only to
drift into disuse. At one stage 13 persons petitioned the
Minister for Lands to select Tower Hill island to grow "sugar
beet, flax, olives, hops, mulberries, senna and other herbs".
Permission was refused with the recommendation that the island
be used as a forest nursery. For a time the island was used
as a common where the fee for pasturing a horse was l/-per week
a cow 6d, with foals and calves under six months free.
The appearance of the islands, has remained much the same
from about 1887 until the present day. Only clumps of intro-
duced pines and gums planted in recent years,and a few regener-
ated swamp gums and shrubs break the smooth slopes of bracken
and grass in one or two restricted localities.
WATER LEVEL OF LAKE
The water level of the lake has varied considerably. From
before 1850 until the 1890's the lake was full and the island
cut off from the bank. It is not known when the lake was dry
prior to 1850. A rough bridge was built by the first survey-
ors before 1850 to transport their pole to mark the trig point
on the highest point of the island. On this spot a causeway
was built, known today as Philmore's Crossing. The water lev-
el periodically fell after 1890. The eastern end became swampy
or only temporarily under water during subsequent years until the
1914 drought. After this the eastern end remained dry until
1946, when the level began to rise again. The clear lake at
the western end contained water throughout this dry period.


In its natural state Tower Hill Lake probably over-- flowed
occasionally down through the now drained Tower Hill Marsh to
the Moyne River. But about 1856 Mr. McCartney, whose house
was formerly on the rim of the bank on the south western side
of the lake, put up an embankment and the water would have had
to rise considerally before over-flowing.
Another building formerly situated on the rim of Tower Hill
was Christ Church, overlooking the bank on the south side imm-
ediately adjacent to the bend in the Princes Highway as it
leaves the rim to run down to Port Fairy. In - use as a Church
of England, until 1871, it was a prefabricated iron structure
costing £B3O. It figured as a land mark in the quest for the
elusive 'Mahogany Ship' laying buried somewhere in the coastal
sand dunes. The church site has now been completely removed
during excavation for scoriae.
LATER HISTORY
James Dawson re-entered the story in 1891. He had left
Jvangatong" some years before. After living in various parts
of Victoria and spending some time in Scotland he eventually
settled down in Camperdown. James Dawson was a man of great
James Dawson was a man of great
force of character, keenly interested in the aborigines - he
was appointed "Protector of Aborigines" for a time - and in the
native birds and animals. He was a very keen sportsman and
He was a very keen sportsman and
the numerous specimens he preserved b ore witness to his interest
as well as his skill.
Tower Hill still fascinated him. He visited it again and
was appalled at its destruction. In a letter to the Camper-
down Chronicle, he wrote:
"On visiting the scene lately I was amazed
and disgusted to find everything altered,the fine
trees on the island all gone and the banks turned
into a cabbage garden. But what was a thousand
times worse than this ruthless destruction of
ornamental timber the lower portion of the lake
is made into a stinking mud pool ".
In the years following there was an upsurge of interest.
Sir Bryan O'Loghlen introduced a bill into the Victorian parl-
iament to vest the Crown lands of Tower Hill in the municipal-
ity of the borough of Koroit for the purpose of being maintain-
ed by the municipality^as a public park for public purposes.
One of the main intentions was to include a clause which would
enable the borough to borrow several thousand pounds on the
land to be used in improvement within the park, however, this


was deleted before the Act was passed. A Crown grant was issued
for the land with the condition that it would become ordinary
Crown land again when required.
Scoria from Tower Hill has probably been used for road
making since settlement began. The earliest recorded request
to remove gravel from the reserve portion of Tower Hill was in
1867 but it was not until 1878 that a gravel pit was opened un-
der licence on the north bank. Other applications were refused
until 1883 when a pit was opened, in the south east corner near
the Princes Highway and another in the north west near the bend
in the Port Fairy - Koroit road. By 1864 there were seven
quarries around the Tower Hill bank, three on the reserve and
four on private land.
It was not until 1940 that the quantities of scoria being
removed attracted public attention. Especially in the south
east section of the reserve near the Princes Highway the bank
quarry was rapidly enlarged and a road cut down for access to a
pit opened on the island.
Quarrying on the island ceased in 1941 but continued on
the banks portions of the reserve. These have been great-
ly extended over the years. At the present time on the re-
serve three of the four pits on the banks are actively extend-
ing. On the private land banks three of the original four
quarries have enlarged and coalesced to form one large active
quarry on the eastern bank.*
Now the opportunity has come to bring this area back to
something approaching its original condition. Rabbits must be
eradicated, then a programme started for the restoration of the
vegetation. Only when the habitat is suitable can the wildlife
be expected to return. Local interested societies are start-
ing experimenting with growing the vegetation even now. More
historical detail would be welcomed by the Fisheries and Wild-
life Department. Already, people have given old pictures,
paintings, and weapons from the local aboriginal tribes. It is
hoped that these might find a permanent home in a building on
the Reserve. When this collection is complete, could it not
bear the name of James Dawson - a man who loved Tower Hill so
much that to him we owe the painting which shows the area in
its beauty, and whose wonderful voice was raised in protest when
he saw the devastation some years later?
* 1966 Quarrying has been stopped except for one quarry
privately owned on the south bank.
0000000


TOWER HILL
TOWNSHIP kj
OF
1 KOI^ iT \ A
pi /
s^"~"
PRINCES HIGHWAY
1 35 BOUNDARY OF GAME RESERVE
CHAINS
CAR TRACK
WALKING TRACK
A.Q. ACTIVE QUARRIES
DiQ. DISUSED QUARRIES


31508023237291
I
I
I
I
