

EEPOET OF THE COMMITTEE
VICTORI A A TASMANIA CONFERENCE
transfer vj (Purely prap ertir
APPOINTED BY THE GENERAL CONFERENCE, 1884.
Pok many years past the relation of the church properties
throughout Australasia to the Australasian General Conference
and Annual Conferences has attracted attention. Most of
the properties in all the several colonies are held upon .the
trust of the English Model Deed, and are therefore held for
and on behalf of the English Conference, giving that
Conference not only the right to make appointments to the
various churches, &0., but also requiring the consent of the
British Conference to the sale of any properties.
' In 1855 the British Conference constituted the Aus-
tralasian Missions into a distinct Connexion with a Con-
ference of its own, having an affiliated relation to the British
Conference. In 1873 the Australasian Conference was
formed into a General Conference with four Annual (Colonial)
Conferences. It was deemed necessary to obtain counsel’s
opinion as to the effect of these changes upon the trust
properties within the jurisdiction of the General Conference.
a case submitted to them in .1873, Mr. (now Judge)
Holroyd and Mr. P. Stevenson Davis advised that it would
“ be necessary to make alterations in the Trusts of the Model
Deed, both as regards property already conveyed, and here-
after to be conveyed. In our opinion, this object can only


be effected by an Imperial Act, or by Acts passed in tbe
several colonies. Very possibly it may be necessary to apply
both for an. Imperial and for local Acts.”
The passing of tbe Methodist Conference Act, 1876, by
the Imperial Parliament was intended to remove these incon-
veniences, but only did so in part. The English Parliament
declined to deal with properties 1 in colonial dependencies which
had local legislature.
The General Conference of 1878 appointed committees in
each of the Australian Conferences “ to take into consideration
the steps which may be necessary to secure our church
property to the connexion,” and the Annual Conferences were
directed to report to the General Conference of 1881. (See
General Conference Minutes, 1878, p. 34.)
The reports of the Annual Conference were duly made to
the General Conference of 1881, when it was resolved— .
“1. That the several Annual Conferences be authorised
and empowered to procure Acts of the Legislatures of the
several colonies within their Jurisdiction, for the settlement of
the church properties therein upon the basis of the trusts
contained in the Model Deed first in use in each colony
respectively, and in conformity with the provisions of ‘ The
Methodist Conference Act of 1876’ and the Constitution of
the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church.
“ 2. That before any Act of Legislature be passed it shall
be submitted to the President of this General Conference
for the purpose of protecting the constitutional rights of the
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church, and that he
shall be empowered to make any protest against any of its
provisions which contravene the constitution or principles of
the said Church.
“ 3. That the draft of a bill prepared for submission to
the several Legislatures of the colonies be printed under the
direction of the Rev. J. C. Symons for private circulation.”
It was discovered that, in order to carry out the resolution of
the Conference of 1881, it was necessary to obtain the con-
currence of the English Conference to the transfer of the
properties, and as no authority was given by the General
Conference to seek that concurrence, the whole question stood
in abeyance until the General Conference, 1884, when the
following resolutions were adopted, and committees appointed
in the several Annual Conferences to carry out the resolu-
tions.


u 1. That it is desirable that the properties connected with
the several Annual Conferences shall, as far as practicable, be
held upon the same trusts, and that for this purpose a Model
Deed be prepared, which shall be made applicable to the
circumstances of each colony.
“2. That such Model Deed contain the following par-
ticulars :
“ (1.) An historical resume setting forth briefly the origin
of the Methodist societies, the formation of the yearly Con-
ference, the creation by that body of the Australasian Con-
ference in 1854, and, the arrangement as to Annual and
General Conferences adopted by the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Conference in 1873, together with so much of the
‘Methodist Conference Act' of. 1876,’ and the ‘declaratory
resolutions of the English Conference of 1876,’ as shall be
deemed necessary, together with the constitution of the
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church, as found in the
General Conference Minutes of 1878 (pp. 25, 6).
“ (2.) The doctrinal statement contained in clause '2O of
the English Model Deed.
“(3.) The appointment, powers, and duties of trustees to
be defined as in the English Model Deed; and the appoint-
ment of trustees for new properties to be made by the
superintendents of circuits.
“(4.) That provision be made for the resignation of
trustees, which may be done by the addition of the words ‘ or
resigning’ in clause 4 of the present Model Deed; and
further, by providing that an entry in the minute-book of the
trustees shall be sufficient evidence of such resignation being
accepted.
“ (5.) That three trustees be the minimum number instead
of five.
“ (6.) That full powers of leasing be given to the trustees,
with the consent of the Annual Conference, for any term of
years, but that power shall be given to trustees to lease for
any one term not exceeding seven years without such consent,
without power of renewal, or granting any farther or other
term without the consent of the Annual Conference; but
such power shall not apply to any property upon which any
church building stands.
“ (7.) That provision be made for the appointment of new
or additional trustees under the local Acts in each colony.


“(8.) That the attention of the legal advisers be drawn to
the explanatory resolutions of the yearly Conference of 1878,
and if it be found necessary in the proposed Model Deed
reference be made to them.
“ 3. That a respectful address be presented to the British
Conference, requesting that a resolution may be passed by that
Conference similar to the one passed by it for Canada,
authorising the transfer of all properties held in connection
with the several Annual Conferences to those Conferences
absolutely, but upon the trusts and in accordance with the
provisions of a Model Deed, to be prepared in pursuance of
the foregoing resolutions, the draft deed of which shall be
forwarded to the British Conference.
“ 4. That a Committee, to consist of the Eevs. A. Reid,
Wm. Morley, R. Bavin, and H. Bull, with Messrs. T. Buddie
and R. Hobbs, be authorised to draw a Model Deed, and
submit a copy of the draft to the Committees on church
property to be appointed by this General Conference for each
Annual Conference; and after receiving the replies of these
Committees, to submit the final draft to the President of the
General Conference 1 for the purpose of protecting Ithe Consti-
tutional rights .of the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist
Church, and, unless disallowed by him within two months
from the receipt by him of such draft* each Annual Conference
shall then have full power to complete its own deed, and, have
it registered and legally settled in accordance with the laws of
the colony to which Such Conference belongs.
“ 5. That the several Annual Conferences be authorised and
empowered to procure Acts of the Legislatures of .the several
colonies within their jurisdiction for the settlement
church properties .therein, each Annual Conference to decide
whether it shall be made a corporate body or not.
“6. That the expenses incurred in carrying out the above
resolutions shall be , borne by the General Conference; except
those incurred in procuring the Colonial Legislative Acts,
which shall be borne by each Annual Conference concerned.
“7. That the following be the Committees on transfer of
church property in the several Annual Conferences, whose duty
it shall be to take whatever steps may be necessary to carry
out the above resolutions.”
(Here follow the names of the Committees.)
Acting upon the authority of these resolutions, the New
Zealand Committee prepared a draft of a new Model Deed,
which was submitted to and considered by the Committees of


the Annual Conferences respectively, who forwarded their
suggestions and emendations to the New Zealand Committee.
These were considered, and a second draft was prepared,
embracing such alterations and emendations as the New
Zealand Committee had adopted, was sent to the Annual
Conference Committees, who forwarded their annotations
upon this second draft to the New Zealand Conference.
These were considered, and a final draft was prepared by
the New Zealand Committee, and submitted to the President
of the General Conference, and approved by him.
It was also sent to the President of the English Conference,
and the following resolution was adopted by that Conference
and printed in its Minutes
“The Conference directs that the official seal of the
Conference be affixed to any document which may be
necessary for declaring its full concurrence in any application
which the General Conference of the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Church, or any of the four Annual Conferences
constituted by it, and severally called the New South Wales
and , Queensland Conference, the Yibtoria and Tasmania
Conference, the South Australia Conference, and the New
Zealand: Conference, may see fit to make to the Legislatures
,of ::the several colonies within their jurisdiction, for such
I powers as may be necessary to the vesting of the whole or any
part of the trust property now held for the use of any of the
said Conferences, or of any ministers, trustees,; or others in
connection with any of the same, in such manner and upon
such terms as shall secure the same to uses and upon trusts
in connection with the said several Annual Conferences,
similar, as nearly as may be, to those for which they are now
secured, but adapted to the constitution and circumstances of
the said General Conference and the said several Annual
Conferences constituted by it.”
The new Model Deed thus prepared, authorised, and
adopted by the New Zealand Conference, the President of the
General Conference, and the British Conference, with such
alterations and Additions only as are necessary to adapt it to
the laws and special requirements of Victoria and Tasmania,
has, by direction of the Victorian Committee, been, prepared
by Mr. Crisp, and after very careful consideration has been
adopted by ! the Committee as the new. Model Deed for
Victoria .and Tasmania, upon and under the. provisions of
which, on the passing of Colonial Acts of Parliament, all the
properties will be held.


The Committee have also had under consideration the
proposed Act of Parliament which it is desirable to seek to
obtain, and recommend the Conference that it shall embrace
the following particulars, viz.:—
1. Power-to enrol new Model Deed within a given
period.
2. Upon enrolment (except as herein mentioned) all
church properties in Victoria to be held upon the
trusts of the new Model Deed, and discharged from all
previous trusts, but not to affect any existing mortgage,
charge, or incumbrance.
3. In case of sale or lease under new Model Deed the
signatures of the‘ majority of the trustees to be
sufficient to pass the legal estate.
4. Upon appointment of new trustees legal estate in
land to pass in new trustees without conveyance.
5. Power for registered -representative of church to
register trusts under Successory Act.
6. Power for registered representative to keep a book, to
be called “The Register of Trustees of the Wesleyan
Methodist Lands in this Colony,’’ the contents of
such book to be taken as conclusive evidence of the
due appointment of trustees, &0., and any extract
therefrom, certified by him, to be taken and received
as sufficient evidence under Successory Act or
otherwise.
7. As to lands for which leave has been obtained to
dispose of under Act 391, and are the subject of
special trusts, provision might be made for excepting
these from the operation of the new Act, save so far
as regards the ultimate limitation letting in the trusts
of the Sydney Model Deed, which might be declared
now to mean the new Model Deed (vide form of
powers of disposition, p. 94, of Minutes of Conference,
1881).
The Committee submit the following resolution for adoption
by the Conference, so that application may be made to the
Legislatures of Victoria and Tasmania for the passing of the
proposed Acts, viz,:—
“Transfer. of Church Proper'
“ That this Conference hereby adopts the new Model
Deeds for the colonies of Victoria and Tasmania,


prepared in accordance with the resolutions of the
General Conference held in Durham-street Church,
Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1884 (vide printed
Minutes of the General Conference, 1884, pp.
28 —30), and subsequently approved of by the
President of the General Conference, and also by the
English Conference (vide printed Minutes of such
Conference, 1886, p. 275), such Model Deeds having
been made applicable to the circumstances of those
colonies as contemplated by and provided for in such
resolutions, and request the Committee appointed by
such General Conference for Victoria and Tasmania
to complete such Model Deeds and to procure the
necessary Acts of the Legislatures in Victoria and
Tasmania for the settlement of the various church
properties within their Jurisdiction.” ,
Mason, Firth and M'Cutoheon, Printers, Melbourni


