

MELBOURNE MEDICAL MORALS
BRITISH CRITICAL OPINION.
BY A BYSTANDER.
Melbourne;
FEROUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST.
1877.




htrK y
-<V~"VS
MELBOURNE MEDICAL MORALS.
I venture to say that there is no surgeon in large practice, no surgeon
to a large hospital, who has not, once or more in the course of his life,
shortened patients’ lives, when he w r as making attempts either to prolong
them or to m_ake them happier * # * Let the liability to these
calamities move you never to decide upon an operation, except in consideration
of the patient s interests alone # * # Therefore, study fairly and fully
beforehand all the things that may occur to you in an operation and after
R- Sie James Paget’s Lecture on the Calamities of Surgery.
W hen The British Medical Journal pronounces an opinion
on any question of practice or of ethics, it may respectfully
be taken as the utterance of the powerful medical union
which it represents. The Bpitish Medical Association ; a
professional compact, organised and upheld to conserve all
that is honourable, and to deprecate whatever is contrary, in
medical ethics. The journal of that great body of medical
men is further maintained to ensure fair, firm and indepen-
dent criticism of medical and surgical work, and no one
ever has said that its judgments upon its own order have
been at any time other than intelligent, fearless, impartial
and just. Therefore, when an organ of medical opinion,
ethics and practice devotes attention to a particular case
of alleged delinquency, either in an individual or in a
wdiole section of the profession, its judgment demands
the most respectful consideration. To pay it the deference
due to its high social rank and great professional authority is
the immediate purpose of the following commentary upon


its leading article in the April number, wherein are so
carefully discussed the merits of Mr. JBeaney’s surgery,
and the demerits of Melbourne professional morality.
Apart altogether from the surgical details of the case,
the attention of the English critic is forcibly drawn towards
the deplorable state of medical ethics which it discloses
as prevailing amongst the profession in Melbourne. No
wonder at all that the revelation filled him with shame !
But the shame which any honourable man would naturally
feel at witnessing an exhibition of the meanest pro-
fessional jealousy, would be merged in indignation when
he perceived that there was a real object to compass, if
possible, the professional destruction of a fellow-prac-
titioner. And his indignation would be intensified when
he further noted that this object was sought to be
accomplished by the vilest underhand means. So it is
here : for what are the simple facts ? A surgical operation
is performed at the public hospital, to which exception
is taken on technical grounds; what, in that case, was
the proper, the honourable, and the manly course for the
objectors to pursue? Obviously, to put their names to
a memorial, addressed to the Hospital Committee, setting
forth their reasons for taking grave exception to the
mode in which the operation had been performed. The
question, in that case, would doubtless have been referred
to a professional tribunal for arbitration; the two parties
would have appeared openly confronting each other before
that tribunal— but without any personal animus being
awakened —and would have stated fully and fairly the
grounds of their opposite opinions. An earnest discussion
would have ensued—perhaps a keen and lively discussion-
hut with sole reference to the surgical and professional
points involved. No purely personal elements would have


■•entered into it at all. The result would have been a
gain to surgery from the public discussion of a very
difficult practical question, by which both the profession
and the community at large would have benefited. This
let it be repeated, is the manner in which honourable
practitioners in the noble art of healing would have acted
in a matter of this kind. But what was actually done
in the case by Mr. Beaney’s professional adversaries ?
Did they accuse him openly of having committed some
grave moral offence or serious surgical error? Nothing
of the kind. In the true spirit of conspirators ashamed
of the plot they are contriving, they, or some of them,
(as the British Medical Journal rightly says,) promoted
hy anonymous letters in the newspapers an inquiry
carried on hy means of detective policemen and a coroner’s
jury, which they ought to have demanded before the
surgeons of the hospital. Anonymous letters, detective
policemen, a coroner’s jury, and all the most secret arts
■of the vilest plotters, whose real dread is, not that the
public may perchance suffer injury at the hands of
inexpert practitioners, but that they themselves may
possibly be detected and dragged to light; and whose
secret hope is, not that the public may be protected
against such injury, but that a fellow-practitioner may
be dragged down to professional and social ruin! Such
are the means employed, and sanctioned by the private
ethical code of at least a section of the profession in
Melbourne. “ 0 shame where is thy blush
But the covert machinery of anonymous letter-writing is
used in other ways besides defaming rivals in the Mel-
bourne newspapers. A private letter is sent to the
editor of the British Medical Journal by a medical man
in Melbourne, ‘ who wishes his name to he kept secret ’’


filled with the most severe charges against Mr. Beaney,.
and particularly charging him with the grossest incom-
petency in the instance in question. Who was this secret
spy, this underhand informer, this cowardly accuser, this
treacherous delator ? The question cannot, of course, be
answered with certainty. But it does not much matter:
for in these cases the truth generally oozes to the surface
in the long run. As Solomon has it, “A Bird of
the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings
shall tell the matter.” Meanwhile, what must be thought
at home of a medical community where the worst arts
of the most infamous secret agency are daily practised
by practitioners against each other? Neither fairness-
nor honesty (as the English critic well observes) marked
the conduct of this anonymous letter-writer; in other
words, his conduct was both unfair and dishonest. What
is to be hoped for from men with whom premeditated
unfairness and deliberate dishonesty are habitual
motives ?
Mr, Beaney is charged by his English critic with*
openly violating the laws of the Melbourne Hospital, by
performing a critical operation without consulting his
colleagues. But let it be noted that this charge is
immediately followed by the statement that his colleagues
“ refused to co-operate for the safety of the patients of
the Hospital with a man whom they wished to represent
as incompetent.” If they refused to co-operate, as is here
truly alleged, of what avail would an invitation to a
consultation have been ? And was not their refusal to
co-operate with a colleague for the safety of the patients
at least as open a violation of the laws of the Institution
as was Mr. Beaney’s performing an operation, on his own»
responsibility, with the express object of saving a patient’s


life ? Was lie to delay the operation, and so keep the
patient in a state of continuous mortal agony, until his
colleagues should have come into a better state of mind
regarding himself and their own duties ? Is it commonly
held to be discreditable to an expert surgeon that he
promptly applies all his skill to save a patient’s life, and
overlooks or forgets for a moment the rules of strict
professional etiquette ? Usually, in such a case, the
skilled surgeon gets credit from the world for humanity,
courage, and energy. But what judgment is passed upon
■other surgeons who, standing by in such an emergency,
absolutely refuse to co-operate with their colleague, in the
secret hope that his incompetency may be made manifest,
to the injury and possible death of the patient ? A
workman engaged on a dangerous task, let us say, breaks
his leg, and is carried to the Hospital; the house surgeon
invites a visiting surgeon standing by to aid him in setting
the fractured limb ; but the latter refuses to lift a finger in
response to the invitation. Why does he refuse ? Simply
in order that the house surgeon, as he inwardly hopes,
may fail through inexpertness in setting the limb, and the
•man may be lamed for life. Then the unfaithful and j ealous
practitioner goes his way, and secretly accuses the house
surgeon of having mangled a patient, and of also refusing
to consult the visiting surgeons before performing a
difficult and dangerous operation ! Exactly in that way,
and with the same degree of justice, was Mr. Beaney’s act
of prompt humanity judged by the secret conclave of his
colleagues. Their own major delinquency in refusing to
co-operate for the safety of the patients was adroitly
passed over, and a minor accusation of having violated the
laws of the Institution was preferred against Mr. Beaney,
based solely on the ground that he had overleaped the
slight barriers of professional etiquette in his eagerness


to bring relief to a terribly afflicted sufferer. Thus it
appears that, even upon the mild and temperate judgment
given in the case by the English critic, the charge brought
against Mr. Beaney of violating the laws is rolled back
upon his secret accusers. Those accusers were the first
and greatest violators of the very laws which they professed
to hold in such reverential respect.
Again, although such accusation, as well as the graver
one of blundering in the operation, was urged to the
utmost against Mr. Beaney, and although his accusers
refused to co-operate with him for the safety of the
patients, yet “they had not the manliness publicly to
refuse to carry on the service of the Hospital under
such conditions.” Of course they had not! For some
men the exhibition of manliness under any circumstances
is a blank impossibility. Their characters are strikingly
in keeping in respect of the persistent display of the
exactly opposite quality. It is but a natural sequence to
this that the very same colleagues are found “openly
caballing against their senior, whom they are bound by
every tie of professional honour to assist and support
as far as possible;” and at the coroner’s inquest, pro-
moted by themselves, they are seen, as “ pathological
experts, turning from witnesses into the most acrimonious
of partisans.” An inquiry involving a question of life and
death is degraded into an occasion for venting acrimonious
partisanship; and, worse even than this, the words of
the colleague whom they are doing all their worst to
ruin are perverted from their plain and simple meaning,
in order that a charge of exulting incompetency may be
twisted out of them. Mr. Beaney had expressed the
natural wish of an expert surgeon to extract the stone
without crushing, obviously meaning (as his British


critic clearly perceives) that this would be the better and
safer course; upon which his accusers 'boldly charge him
with entertaining the self-glorifying design of exhibiting
an unusually large specimen of calculus as an advertise-
ment of his own consummate skill in surgery, even at
the risk of sacrificing the patient’s life! This exquisite
specimen of professional meanness fitly caps the climax
of the plot. It began in private caballing; it was carried
on by means of anonymous correspondence, secret
denunciation, prying detectives, spies, scouts, and suborned
witnesses; it emerged into the light of day in the form
of a coroner’s inquest which was really a criminal
prosecution; it was sustained by open caballing, studied
discourtesy, the violation of every principle of professional
etiquette, and all the resources of shifty unmanliness
and professional spite; it was fortified by all the arts of
cunning evasion and literal perversion; on the one side
it takes the shape of malicious persecution, on the other
that of studied defamation. Such is the practical out-
come of the code of ethics current in certain Melbourne
medical circles. No wonder that foreign professional
observers and critics, noting all these things, confess to
feelings of shame and humiliation, and are obliged to
admit that, in this regard, the medical profession in
Melbourne contrasts most unfavourably with that of
other countries and with other professions.
And now let us ask, what was the outcome of all this
caballing, all this underhand dealing, all this discredit-
able scheming, as regards the principal person concerned?
It failed, signally and completely. Mr. Beaney was
acquitted of all blame, save in the trifling point of
professional etiquette, by the coroner’s jury. His acquittal
received the unanimous approval of the public and the


Press. And the able critic of the British Medical
Journal, after impartially weighing all the facts, is con-
strained to admit that had Mr. Beaney fortified himself
with the opinion of his colleagues and procured their
assistance at the operation,—or in other words, had he
vainly invoked the help of the very men who had
already openly declared their intention of not co-operating
with him at all “no charge could have been made against
him." This is conclusive. Baffled malice and defeated
professional jealousy are all that are left to his adversaries ;
the victory remains with him. He leaves the open
tribunal of the worlds judgment without a single stain
on either his professional or his personal reputation,
whilst his enemies are exhibited to the public gaze as
having, at least in this one instance, foully dishonoured
their noble calling, and given to the world such a sample
of their inner principles and motives as calls up the
blush of shame to the faces of honourable professional
men in distant lands.
The motto at the head of this review, taken from the
writings of the Father of English Surgery, is most appro-
priate in the present instance; for Mr. Beaney most faithfully
followed the admonition therein given. He did carefully
study his case beforehand, by operations in the dissecting-
room; and he was thus able to approach his suffering
patient with befitting calmness and assurance, without a
thought of self-glorification. He trusted to the good faith
of his medical colleagues around him, but forgot the possi-
brlrty of there being a trap laid to ensnare him. For an
instant he was ensnared; but truth and justice were
vindicated at last. The cunning liers-in-wait fell at
length into the trap which they had laid for another.
Thus it is that insulted Justice ever avenges herself at


length. Evil instructions, once taught, “ return to plague
the inventor.”
The case is a memorable one in the medical annals
•of Victoria, alike for the determination shown to crush
a successful practitioner by forcing a conviction, and
for the total failure in which the iniquitous attempt
resulted. An exhaustive inquiry on the spot, followed
by an impartial and thorough review by an able profes-
sional critic at the other side of the globe, failed to
•detect the slightest point in which the surgical operation
-could be asserted to be either irregular or unwarranted.
-Step by step the British Medical Journal follows the
•operator through the painful and difficult operation, and
the result is a “strong conviction that, whether any steps
in the treatment of the case might or might not have
been amended, no foundation was shown for any criminal
• charge.” A slight difference of opinion there might be
as to the best possible method of extraction—surgeons
• of the very highest eminence would take, and have taken,
opposite views on such a matter of practice—but no
honourable man acquainted with the principles of surgery
would dare to assert that the operation in the case in
•question was not carefully studied beforehand, deliberately
planned, and skilfully executed. “It was sought to be
insinuated,” says the British critic, “ that some parts had
been pulled out of the body at the operation; but there
is no reason whatever for such a supposition, which
is, in fact, inconsistent with the details given by the
bystanders.” There was covert insinuation on a material
point in the evidence, let it be observed, not direct
averment • but the insinuation was not alone not sus-
tained by the facts, it was inconsistent with the facts.
In plainer terms, it was insinuation based on premeditated


falsehood. And this was the kind of evidence adduced
to sustain a charge of criminal incompetence against a
practitioner of many years’ practice and experience !'
As regards the mode of extraction adopted, two facts are
brought out by the British critic: first, that it was
identical with the mode recommended in that eminent
surgeon, Sir H. Thompson’s “ Practical Lithotomy”—-the
very foremost modern authority on the subject ; and
secondly, that at least two English surgeons of high
reputation have been equally unsuccessful, and have been
blamed just as Mr. Beaney was, in attempting to perform
a similar operation in precisely the same manner. After
this nothing can he said, excepting that the charge of
surgical incompetency, ineffectually brought against
Mr. Beaney, resolves itself into a charge of both pro-
fessional and moral incompetency sheeted home to his
merciless but signally-foiled accusers.
It is to be hoped that this memorable case will he
about the last of the kind that will he raised by failure
against success, by malice against merit, by jealousy
against established position, in this part of the world.
There has been something too much of it in times gone
by. An evil influence, issuing from a particular quarter,
has made medical life in Melbourne unwholesome and
noxious. The spirit of clique has dominated the profession,
and has ruled both in the Press and the fraternal Associa-
tion. Hence has grown up a species of terrorism that is
alike discreditable to the wielders and demoralising to the
victims. It is high time that this state of things should
be altered. The turning-point has been reached at length,,
and the case here commented on marks it with precision.
Never again, it may be safely predicted, will professional
rivalries —which no doubt will exist to a greater or less-


extent, always and everywhere, while human nature is
human nature— issue in malicious and resultless criminal
prosecutions. Never again, let us hope, will the shamefully
discreditable acts of anonymous correspondence and secret
caballing be employed to crush professional success.
Never again will common sense be set at naught, surgical
shill defamed, covert insinuations motived by falsehood
be made to do duty for plain facts, nor truth be glaringly
perverted, merely to compass the destruction of a profes-
sional rival. The game is played out. And it is for the
purpose of placing that fact on permanent record, as
well as of aiding in some small degree the reformation
of medical morals in Melbourne, that the present pamphlet
has been printed for circulation.




SURGERY IN AUSTRALIA: AN UNFORTUNATE CASE OF
LITHOTOMY.
(From the British Medical Journal, April 1876.)
We have received from Melbourne a long newspaper correspondence -
with reference to an unfortunate case of lithotomy which occurred in the
Hospital of that city in December last, and which was investigated by a
coroner’s jury, with a view to determine whether any criminal responsi-
bility attached to the operator, Mr. Beaney. Accompanying these papers
are—l. A book entitled Lithotomy, its Successes and its Bangers, giving
a verbatim report of the inquest, with a commentary setting forth
Mr. Beaney’s account of the case; and 2. A private letter to ourselves
from a medical man at Melbourne, who wishes his name to be kept
secret, filled with the most severe charges against Mr. Beaney, and
particularly charging him with the grossest in competency in the instance
in question. This writer calls on us for “ a strong expression of our
opinion.” We shall dismiss this letter with the strongest possible
expression of our opinion that it is neither fair nor honest to bring
forward such charges, except in the most public manner and on the
strictest proof. We can necessarily know nothing of the truth or false-
hood of this gentleman’s charges against Mr. Beaney in other matters
than the one investigated by the coroner, and shall, therefore, dismiss
his letter entirely from our consideration, except as a sad proof of the
length to which professional quarrels are pushed in Australia.
The circumstances are shortly these : Mr. Beaney is a surgeon of
some standing, having served as staff-surgeon in the Turkish Army
during the Crimean war, and being a Fellow of the Edinburgh College
of Surgeons. He seems to be in good practice in Melbourne, and
a few months before the occurrence in question was a successful
candidate for the post of surgeon to the Hospital, This success, it is
said, led to ill-feeling between himself and his new colleagues ; and
it is insinuated that, though they did not resign their appointments,
they would not meet him in consultation, in accordance with the law


of the Hospital, which provides that no capital operation (emergencies
excepted) shall he performed except after consultation. The patient
in the present case had been in a country hospital in Australia for
eighteen months without anything having been done to relieve his
sufferings, though he was known to have stone, and was then sent
to Melbourne, to he operated on. He was sounded by the house-
surgeon, a Dr. Annand, who seems throughout to be acting in the
most hostile manner towards his superior officer, Mr. Beaney; and
the stone was ascertained (it is said) to be a large one; but no
communication to that effect seems to have passed between Dr. Annand
and Mr. Beaney. The latter gentleman sounded his patient, and
fixed a day for operating, without asking for any consultation with
his colleagues. Mr. Beaney selected the recto-urethral (Lloyd’s)
operation. The stone was found to be a very large one, and great
difficulty was experienced in extracting it. Ultimately the stone was
pushed out by the use of two scoops introduced behind it from above
and below by Mr. Beaney and his assistant, and was thus extracted,
after the patient had been on the table an hour and a half, according
to two of the witnesses, while another witness estimated the time at
only three-quarters of an hour. The man died on the third day after
the operation, and was buried.
In consequence of an anonymous letter in the Argus charging the
operating surgeon with criminal incompetency amounting to man-
slaughter, the body was exumed and examined on Christmas Day, three
weeks after death. The allegations of incompetency were these;
1. That Mr. Beaney did not ascertain that the stone was a large one,
but stated that he selected the median operation because it was small;
2. That he used unjustifiable violence; and 3. That, when he found the
size of the stone, he did not, as he ought, either break the stone to pieces
or perform suprapubic lithotomy. The jury acquitted Mr. Beaney of
culpable negligence, but protested against the infraction of the Hospital
rules in performing the operation without consultation. They believed
that, had a consultation been held, “in all probability other means
might have been used in extracting the stone.”
The case has a twofold interest—surgical and ethical. We will first
deal with its surgical aspect. The charges above enumerated were
certainly not substantiated sufficiently for legal proof. Mr. Beaney
says that he knew the stone to be a large one. He proves that, on


the day before the operation, he practised in the post mortem room
various methods of lithotomy, which he would not have done had he
not thought the stone large; and, finally, he selected the rectovesical
operation, which is, according to Sir H. Thompson, the best for the
removal of very large stones from a contracted bladder. Even had
Mr. Beaney been deceived as to the size of the stone, he would not
have been the first surgeon of experience who had been so. In a
case published in the twenty-fifth volume of the “ Pathological Trans-
actions ” by Mr. Holmes, where the stone was so large that its removal
was found impossible, its size could not be ascertained before operation.
It is true, that this depended on the stone projecting into the urethra ;
but another case, under Sir H. Thompson’s care, is referred to in the
same paper, where the stone was entirely in the bladder, was still
larger, and yet its huge size could not be determined before death.
No operation was performed in this case, on account of the dying
condition of the patient. Nor is there any proof that unjustifiable
violence was used. Those who have seen difficult cases of lithotomy
are aware that much force is often necessary; and this leads us to
the third point alleged against Mr. Beaney, that he ought to have
broken the stone, or performed the suprapubic operation. We
cannot subscribe to this doctrine. The performance of the high
operation would, we believe, have been inevitably fatal at the end of
a severe operation for perineal lithotomy, in an empty bladder, with
a stone measuring 3 inches, 2f inches, and 2 inches, in its several
directions. Such a stone can only just be extracted from the pelvic
cutlet when the soft parts are in position. In Mr. Holmes’ case,
where the dimensions were 3-8 inches, 2*B inches, and 2-6 inches, it
was found only just possible to push the stone through the outlet of
the pelvis after clearing off all the soft parts. To extract so large a
mass above the pubes would almost necessarily lacerate the peritoneum
when the bladder is empty. Nor is at all clear that, even had
Mr. Beaney had by him a proper crushing instrument (which seems
not to have been the case) he would have improved his patient’s
chance of recovery that way. If Mr. Beaney’s case had been argued by
a properly instructed surgeon, instead of a barrister who allowed that
lie did not know till the previous day what a lithotrite was, the full
discussion of this very point by so high an authority as Sir. H.
Thompson in the second edition of his Practical Lithotomy, etc.
(pp. 108 et seq, 1871,) could not have been overlooked; and, as this
eminent surgeon inclines to recommend in these difficult circumstances


precisely the course which Mr. Beaney followed, since Mr. Beaney did”
succeed in extracting the stone, and since death seems to have ensued,.,
partly at any rate, from previous disease of the kidneys, an adverse
verdict would, in our opinion, have been utterly indefensible. With
regard to the cause of death, the gentlemen who conducted the post
mortem examination attributed it to peritonitis, though they admitted
there was no effusion in the peritoneal cavity and they seemed anxious
to rebut the suggestion that it was due to the condition of the kidneys.
Obviously, in the putrefied state of the body three weeks after death, -
and in the warm weather which prevails in Australia in December, the
point must be very difficult to settle ; nor do wo see the importance of
it. The same considerations apply to the lacerated and indistinguish-
able condition of the prostate and neighbouring parts. It was sought
to be insinuated that these parts had been pulled out of the body at the
operation; but there is no reason whatever for such a supposition,
which is, in fact, inconsistent with the details given by the
bystanders.
We have been thus circumstantial in examinining the details of this
case, on account of its surgical interest, and as a companion to other
well-known cases, such as Mr. Bransby Cooper’s and Mr. Weeden
Cook’s, where the surgeon has been blamed in consequence of accidents
in lithotomy ; and we must express a strong conviction that, whether
any steps in the treatment of the case might or might not have been
amended, no foundation was shown for any criminal charge.
When we turn to the ethical aspect of the case, we confess to a
feeling of shame for the state of professional manners in Australia ...
Though Mr. Beaney is rightly acquitted of criminal negligence, we
find him openly violating the laws of the Institution to which he has
been appointed, in a particular so important as that of consultation
with his colleagues on a case among the most difficult of those which
come before an operating surgeon. Had he fortified himself with
the opinion of his colleagues, and procured their assistance at the
operation, no charge could have been made against him. Nor can
we regard the conduct of his colleagues in a more favourable light.
It is clear that they refused to co-operate for the safety of the patients
of the Hospital with a man whom they wished to represent as
incompetent; yet that they had not the manliness publicly to refuse
to carry on the service of the Hospital under such conditions. It is


clear that they, or some of them, promoted, by anonymous letters in
the newspapers, an inquiry carried on by means of detective policemen
and a coroner’s jury, which they ought to have demanded before the
surgeons of the Hospital, including Mr. Beaney himself, for the full
and deliberate information of the Governors on a point which (as we
have sufficiently shown) only experienced and well-informed surgeons
could decide. We find the junior medical officers, house-surgeon, and
house-physician, openly caballing against their senior, whom they were
bound by every tie of professional honour to assist and support as far
as possible; and we have the very pathological experts turning from
witnesses into the most acrimonious of partisans. As one instance
of the candour with which Mr. Beaney’s actions are judged, we may
mention that his saying, in answer to a suggestion of crushing the
stone, “ that he should like to get it out whole, ’ is construed as
meaning that he wanted the specimen as an advertisement, and
sacrificed the man’s life to this desire, while it may have meant that
he considered (as Sir H. Thompson probably would) that it was the
better course, if possible, to extract it without trying to break it. Yet
w T e are obliged to add that it is said, and not denied, that a cast of
the stone was really exhibited at a bookseller’s shop to excite the
admiration of the populace for this extraordinary operation. In fact,
no one in the matter conies out entirely without discredit, unless it
be the coroner, who seems to have acted with impartiality, and with
as much dignity as his entourage permitted.
We trust these remarks will be accepted in a friendly spirit by the
profession in Melbourne; that they will see the absolute necessity of
loyal co-operation among each other, especially in so important a
matter as the surgical pi’acticc of a great Hospital, and of a style of
professional intercourse that shall not contrast unfavourably with that
which prevails in other countries and other professions.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.


