

DOCUMENTARY REFUTATIONS.
GOULBURN :
PRINTED BY W, R. RII.EY AND CO. LIMITED, HERALD OFFICE, AUBURN-STREET.




F/im
SEVENTH SYNOD OF THE DIOCESE OF
GOULBURN, 1891.
THE BISHOP OF GOULBUEN’S
STATEMENTS AND ACCUSATIONS,
THE REV. A. T. PUDDICOMBE’S
DOCUMENTARY REFUTATIONS.
GOULBURN :
PRINTED BY W. R. RILEY AND CO. LIMITED, HERALD OFFICE, AUBURN-STREET.


TO THE READER.
The Publication of these ** Hesitations ” has been
delayed in consequence of the expense of the
undertaking. As the Bishop’s “ Statements and
Accusations” have now been published at the Cost of the
Diocese in the “ Minutes of Proceedings of Synod,” Mr.
Puddicombe will be very glad to receive (particularly
from those gentlemen who voted for the adjournment
of the Synod), any Contributions towards the expense
to which he has so unfairly been put by being denied
the opportunity of making a verbal statement, in
Synod, in answer to the Bishop's address.
St. Saviour’s Parsonage,
Goulburn, 30th May 1891.


jlcbcntlj §nnotr of tie giorest of (Son l bunt,
1801.
THE BISHOP OF GOULBURN’S
STATEMENTS AND ACCUSATIONS,
THE REV. A. T. PUDDICOMBE’S
DOCU MEN T ARY REE U TAT lONS.
On the 15th January 1891, in Synod, Mr. Puddicombe gave notice
of the following motion: —“That this Synod will be pleased to
permit an adjournment of this House for the purpose of enabling
the Bev. A. T. Puddicombe to refute by documentary evidence the
statements made with regard to him and the imputations cast upon
him by the Bight Bev. the President in his opening address to this
Synod, now in print and being publicly circulated in the
newspapers.”
The Bishop allowed the adjournment of the Synod, sine die,
when Mr. Puddicombe’s motion was next on the business-paper.
Hence the necessity (earnestly deprecated by Mr. Puddicombe) for
publishing these refutations.
THE BISHOP says, with regard to the new Cathedral—
“ From the first movement in 1870 down to the year 1884, the
original idea that it was to be ‘ a Cathedral for the Diocese, and at
the same time a Parochial Church for the city of Goulburn and for
the whole Diocese,' was never questioned. But * the city of Goulburn'
was never identical tvith ‘ St. Saviour's Parish.' In 1864 ‘ the city’
had been divided between the two parishes of St. Saviour and St.
Nicholas.”


MR. PUDDICOMBE proves by reference to the exact words
used on laying the corner-stone 1 and written on the scroll deposited
beneath that stone 2 that the expression "Parochial Church for the
whole Diocese" is a novel importation and was never used by anyone
at the beginning of affairs, the first introduction of this phrase
being in the Bishop’s address to the Synod in 1884 —ten years and
a-lialf after the laying of the corner-stone ! 3
MR. PUDDICOMBE also proves by a letter in the Bishop’s
own handwriting Hhat in the year 1870 his Lordship actually
arranged (after conference with the people of Goulburn) and
repeatedly stated that for Church purposes “ the city of Goulburn”
should be identical with “ St. Saviour’s Parish”—i.e., that St.
Saviour’s Parish should be designated and known as “ the city,” or
“ Goulburn city,” as distinguished from St. Nicholas’, North
Goulburn, and consequently that the expression “ the Parochial
Church of (not “ for”) the city of Goulburn” meant nothing more nor
less than “ the Parochial Church of St. Saviour's Parish.” He
shows moreover that the names of the Clergymen, Churchwardens,
and Sidesmen of St. Saviour’s Parish only (not of North Goulburn)
were mentioned on the scroll deposited beneath the corner-stone."
Mr. Puddicombe also draws attention to the most conclusive fact
5 that the Parish of which he is the Incumbent was specially designated
by the Bishop (in his public written address, announcing Mr.
Puddicombe’s appointment), “ the Cathedral Parish ,” and that
Parish does not include North Goulburn.
THE BISHOP says—“ In 1875, during the Incumbency of
the Very Rev. Dean Sowerby, the Rev. A. T. Puddicombe, in a
printed paper circulated in the Diocese during my absence in
England, spoke of it as ‘ the Cathedral.’ And in the years 1882,
1888, and 1884, after the decease of the Dean, he continued, in a
letter to myself, and in printed circulars to the Clergy and members
of the Synod, to designate it as ‘ our new Cathedral; ’ and said that
it was desired ‘to make the Throne a present to our Bishop for his
Cathedral Church.’ He also prepared a resolution for the Synod,
in which it was stated that ‘ the Cathedral Church of St. Saviour
would stand as a symbol of the unity of the Church in the Diocese
of Goulburn.’ ”
MR. PUDDICOMBE replies that liis speaking and writing of
the new building as “ the Cathedral” in no way implied that it was
not also the Parish Church of St. Saviour’s, for that he and
everybody else invariably spoke and wrote of the old building as
1. See printed " Order of Office” used on the occasion.
2. See " Goulburn Herald” of January 17, 1874.
3. See " Minutes of Proceedings” of Synod for 1881.
4. Appendix A.
5. See " Goulburn Herald” of June 17,1876.


“ the Cathedral’ after the Bishop’s arrival, and everyone
knew that building to be absolutely and (in the eye of
the law) only St. Saviour’s Parish Church ; and Mr. Puddicombe
proves by letters from the Eev. Canon Selwyn of Newcastle 6 and
by the Bishop’s own words to the Synod in 1882 7 tliat his Lordship
both knew and admitted that until an Act of Parliament was
obtained to alter the existing trusts, the new Cathedral, like the
old, being under the Church Act, was the mere Parish Church of a
particular Parish, and not legally a Cathedral.
THE BISHOP accuses Mr. Puddicombe of a “ change of
attitude.”
ME. PUDDICOMBE denies that he has ever changed his
attitude. He asserts that he would use precisely the same language
with regard to the new Cathedral now as he did twenty years ago—
that while acknowledging it to be the Cathedral by virtue of the
Queen’s Letters Patent (and desiring it to be made legally a
Cathedral by Act of Parliament, when the terms of such Act can be
agreed on), he has from the first invariably claimed it as also the
Parish Church of St. Saviour’s Parish of which he is the Incumbent;
and he proves his assertion by reference to a Public Meeting held
in the Mechanics’ Institute, October 31st 1881, the Bishops of
Goulburn and Melbourne, and the Dean of Melbourne being
present. At that meeting, in moving the first resolution which
alluded to the completion of the Cathedral “as being of vital
importance to the welfare of the Parish and of the Diocese,” Mr.
Puddicombe spoke as follows, his sentiments being received with
cheers : — 8 “ They would perceive that this resolution contemplated
the completion of the new Cathedral from two points of view, first
from the parochial point of view, and secondly from the diocesan
point of view ; and it became him as Incumbent of the Parish to
say a few words upon the first point of the resolution, reserving it
for his friend the Eev. G. M. D'Arcy-Irvine, if he were inclined, to
take up the larger point. If they could impress upon the minds of
people the vital importance of finishing this building, something
would be done ; for he was persuaded that the descendants of those
in England who had done such great things in the building and
restoration of ecclesiastical structures, only needed to feel the
importance of the completion of the building to say that with God’s
blessing it shall be done. Now, lie thought all the
members of the Church here knew it was of vital importance to the
parochial work that that building should be speedily finished.
They had in this Parish, including the Parish of West Goulburn,
which was only nominally divided at present, in rough numbers
6. Appendix B.
7. See " Minutes of Proceedings” of Synod 1882, and Appendix B.
8. See " Groulburn, Herald” of November 8,1881.


about two thousand members of the Church of England-—men,
women, and children ; while the present pro-cathedral will contain
at the outside a little over five hundred, so that if all the members
of the church in the parish of Goulburn proper desired to worship
in one place, they would have to say to no less than three-fourths
of them ‘ there is no room for you.’ No one could go into the
pro-cathedral without noticing the absence of the working men, the
engine-drivers, the stokers and fettlers, and the artisans generally.
Where were they ? The answer was ‘ there is no room for them.’
A few of them he trusted found their way in the evenings to the
daughter Church of North Goulburn, and he would there were
room for all of them there temporarily ; but he thought a great
many more had their attention drawn to a building nearer, to
which a spacious gallery was being added all the way round;
while some were in the habit of stopping at a half-way house not so
primitive as its name implied; and a great many he thought
remained at home, fie thought it ought not to be that they should
not have room for tliree-fourtlis of their people ; yet so it was, and
at the present time it was useless to ask the Churchwardens for
sittings, for there were none to be had. Another reason why it
was of vital importance that the new building should be completed
as soon as possible was that the pro-Cathedral was wanted for the
Sunday-school. At present they rented this hall, but although a
portion of the children had been removed to the old school-room,
which he hoped would not tumble down on their heads, the hall
was still crowded to excess. There were circumstances also which
made it otherwise objectionable. This was a state of things which
ought not to be, and with God’s help it should not be much
longer.”
THE BISHOP charges Mr. Puddicombe with making the
alleged “change of attitude” “when he perceived that the
gentlemen of Goulburn were not favourable to his appointment as
Dean, and that he was not to be so appointed.”
ME. PUDDICOMBE avers that the Bishop is wholly
unjustified in saying that “ the gentlemen of Goulburn were” ever
“ unfavourable to his appointment as Dean.” The facts of the case as
proved by him are these:—On the 14tli August 1882 (nearly ten
months after the expression of his sentiments at the public meeting
in the Mechanics’ Institute), a letter signed by thirteen “ members
of the congregation of St. Saviour’s” was addressed to the Bishop,
“ venturing to suggest that the time had arrived when steps should
be taken towards the appointment of a Dean of Goulburn or of a
Canon—Residentiary, and Precentor, without interference with the
existing rights of the present Incumbent” —Mr., then Archdeacon
Puddicombe. As soon as the existence of this letter became known


(for it was quite a private affair, and Mr. Puddicombe states he is
credibly informed that it owed its origin to Bishopthorpe), a counter-
request was drawn up and speedily signed by upwards of two hundred
members of the congregation, objecting to the action of the thirteen
as “ calculated to injure insidiously the position of the Archdeacon,”
and praying his Lordship to “be so good as to withhold his
acceptance of the suggestions referred to until after the congregation
should have had a more public opportunity of expressing their
wishes in regard to the question in which so many felt deeply
interested.” The result of this counter movement was that neither
of the requests was sent in to the Bishop, and the matter dropped. 9
It is therefore most ungenerous of the Bishop to quote a request
which was overruled by so overwhelming a majority as expressing
the wishes of “ the gentlemen of Goulburn;” and for his Lordship
to state that Mr. Puddicombe changed his attitude in consequence
of that request is positively untrue, seeing that Mr. Puddicombe
had always expressed the opinions to which the Bishop now objects
in the most open manner, and particularly in the presence of his
Lordship and other Church dignitaries at a large public meeting,
nearly ten months before the request was even thought of.
THE BISHOP states that Mr. Puddicombe in sending to him
and to one of the Trustees “ his Thoughts in Writing” (this was in
March 1884, although the Bishop most unfairly connects it with
the occurrences of August 1882), “ claimed to be appointed Dean ,
otherwise he should demand that the Cathedral should become his Parish
Church under the Church Act; that he should have the right to
officiate therein as Incumbent without reference to its Cathedral
character and design; except that he should be willing as
Incumbent to permit the Bishop to use the building for purely
Episcopal functions.”
ME. PUDDICOMBE accuses the Bishop of grievously
misrepresenting him in this part of his address to the Synod, and
in proof of this accusation refers to the exact words both of his
“ thoughts” on the proposed Cathedral constitution and of the
letter which accompanied them to the Bishop. 10 From these two
documents it is clear that Mr. Puddicombe made no “ claim” or
“ demand” whatever, but simply suggested what he “ thought”
must be done that there might be “ no opposition to the formation
of St. Saviour’s Church into a Cathedral.” These suggestions were
made “in writing” because a broken thigh prevented Mr.
Puddicombe from being “ personally present at the Conferences
and discussions held on the subject; ” and the nature of his
“ thoughts,” as merely suggestive , is undeniably established by the


following extract from his letter : —“ Though not invited by your
Lordship to express my opinion, I lose no time in doing so, lest my
ideas (the main principles of which, after months of mature
consideration and study of other Cathedral constitutions, I hold
very firmly), should be too late for full discussion in any Conference
which your Lordship may convene in the matter.” As the very first
of his “ thoughts” on the subject Mr. Puddicombe deprecates the
idea of the new building “ remaining a Parish Church to be used
as a Cathedral” as a thing not to be thought of, and (although the
“ rights and privileges” which Mr. Puddicombe believed “ must be
fully recognised and retained” in his case may appear excessive to
those who do not know the powers of a Dean in an English
Cathedral) it is as clear as possible that Mr. Puddicombe did not,
as the Bishop asserts, claim any right to officiate in the new
Cathedral as Incumbent “ without reference to its Cathedral
character and design,” or with any desire to limit the superior
authority of the Bishop. On the contrary he expresses his
opinion that “ the rights of the Incumbent for the time being must
be secured to him” by his being made a Cathedral Official (ex officio)
—i.e., “ by his being made Dean of the Cathedral, if there be a
Dean, or Vice-Chairman of the Chapter if the Bishop be Dean ; so
that in no case shall anyone come between him and what is his
Parish Church but the Bishop." It is well known that it was Mr.
Puddicombe who initiated and collected the greater part of the
Fund for the erection of “the Throne,” which stands in the
Cathedral as the emblem of the Bishop’s authority therein ; and
this he did, it must be remarked, in 1883-4, after his alleged
“ change of attitude” in 1882 !
ME. PUDDICOMBE’S utter carelessness as to any office of
dignity in the Cathedral, except as affording him the opportunity of
officiating in the building as Incumbent without interference with the
Cathedral Scheme , is unmistakably manifested by his conduct exactly
three weeks after he had sent in his “ thoughts” to the Bishop.
On the 2nd of April 1884 (the “ thoughts” were dated March 12th),
three gentlemen deputed by the Bishop and his advisers waited
upon Mr. Puddicombe and produced for his consideration and
signature the oft-quoted paper by which he was to “ withdraw his
claim to be made Dean, on the understanding that he should have
the privilege reserved to him of preaching once a Sunday in the
Cathedral” &c. This undertaking Mr. Puddicombe signed immediately. 11
But with what result ? When the Synod met to consider the
Ordinance embodying this privilege, the clause reserving to the
Incumbent the right of preaching in the Cathedral was struck out
at the instance of the Bishop and his Chancellor, and Mr.
Puddicombe was told that if he wanted to exercise any rights as
11. Appendix D.


Incumbent he must do so in the Schoolroom. Hence the whole of
the Cathedral division and dispute. 12
THE BISHOP lays down the law in Mr. Puddicombe’s case
thus—“ He was never licensed to officiate in the (new) Building,
and he was never Incumbent of the old Church. It will therefore
clearly appear to all unprejudiced minds that, as the claimant
never had any Incumbent’s rights in the old Building, he can
possess no such rights in the Cathedral, even under the terms of
his own contention.”
MR. PUDDICOMBE replies to this, that he was licensed to
officiate in St. Saviour’s Parochial and Cathedral Church in its
intermediate form—i.e., in the Building (commonly known as the
Schoolroom and pro-Catliedral), which represented for the time
being both the old Parochial and Cathedral Church which had been
pulled down, and the new Parochial and Cathedral Church which
was being erected on its site. The Schoolroom was erected on the
pulling down of the old Cathedral, “ for the temporary accommodation
of the congregation ,” and to be used for the double purpose of School
and Church until the new Cathedral is ready for occupation. 13 It
was therefore (as held, the Bishop informs us, not only by our late
Chancellor Campbell, but by the Chief Judge in Equity, Sir J.
Salomons Q.C., and our present learned Chancellor), “to all
intents and purposes the Church of St. Saviour’s” and St.
Saviour’s Cathedral also, while, but only while, St. Saviour’s Church
was being rebuilt.
MB. PUDDICOMBE also replies that if there be anything at
all in the Bishop’s argument it cuts the ground first of all from
under the Bishop’s own feet; for the Queen licensed his Lordship,
by Letters Patent, to the old St. Saviour’s Church and to no other
building. The Bishop’s Letters Patent are consequently, under the
terms of his own contention, more worthless even than Mr.
Puddicombe’s license to the pro-Cathedral, and give him no shadow
of a right to claim an entirely new building as his Cathedral ;
especially when he contends that that new building is not the old
Church, to which the Letters Patent refer, re-built.
In reference to tlie Bishop’s insinuation, more openly made
since the Synod, that Mr. Puddicombe is not licensed to St.
Saviour’s Church in any one of its three forms —old, temporary, or
new, Mr. Puddicombe deems it quite sufficient, for the present,
to quote the following words from a letter in the Bishop’s own
handwriting 14 :—“ On my return from England, in the year
12. See " Minutes of Proceedings” of Synod 1884.
13. Appendix E.
14. See " Groulburn Herald,” July 20, 1886.


following these proceedings, I appointed the present minister as
Incumbent of St. Saviour’s Church. And he was inducted into
possession of it in the usual manner, by reading the XXXIX
Articles therein, as being the ‘ Church in which he was licensed to
serve; ’ and by ‘ publicly and openly making the declaration of
assent to the same in the presence of the congregation there
assembled and at the time of divine service.’ ”
ME. PUDDICOMBE claims to have completely proved by the
above—l. That the words “Parochial Church of the City”
expressly mean Parochial Church of St. Saviour’s—the City Parish,
as distinguished from North Goulburn. 2. That he has never
changed his attitude in any way, but has from the first throughout
regarded and claimed the new Church of St. Saviour as the Parish
Church of his Parish as well as the Cathedral. 8. That the
action of thirteen members of the congregation worshipping in the
pro-Cathedral never moved him in the slightest degree
to change his position. 4. That it is most ungenerous of
the Bishop to make any reference to that action, seeing
that it was instantly overruled by the opposition of
more than two hundred parishioners. 5. That he never made any
demand or claim for a post of dignity in the Cathedral, except
as suggesting the only method whereby a miserable split in
the congregation could have been avoided. 6. That he is, by the
Bishop’s own showing, duly appointed and licensed as Incumbent
of St. Saviour’s Church, Goulburn, and—7. That St. Saviour’s
Church, Goulburn, and the Bishop’s Cathedral are, by the Queen’s
Letters Patent, identical.


APPENDICES.
APPENDIX A.
The Bishop to Hr. Puddicombe
Goulburn, October 20tli 1870.
My Dear Mr. Puddicombe, —
Yesterday we had a meeting for a private conference ; and it
was agreed by the people that an additional Clergyman should be
provided for Goulburn city and that the North Goulburn clergyman
should look after the hamlets and inhabitants in the surrounding
district. Thus there will be one for the city and another for the
northern 'portion of the city and for the hamlets. But in order to
give effect to the above I am first to inquire and to be satisfied that
an income can be provided for the North Goulburn clergyman. The
Dean, the additional clergyman, and I would of course aid the
North Goulburn clergyman in Sunday duties in the nearest hamlets.
On Saturday, the 22nd, I am to meet the North Goulburn people on
the subject, and on Tuesday, the 25th, to hold another meeting in
Goulburn for final arrangements.
As soon as matters are more mature I will draw up a scheme
setting forth the whole of the plans for both divisions of work, and
have it duly signed by the parties concerned to prevent future
misunderstanding. I need not say that my wish is to have you m
Goulburn city.
I think that probably the arrangements here need. not take
effect until the beginning of the new year. But respecting these
things I will write again. Meanwhile I will merely add that the
North Goulburn clergyman will of course retain the N. Goulburn
parsonage. As soon as we remove to the new house the clergyman of
Goulburn city might have the use of our present cottage, which in
most respects is comfortable. May God graciously aid us in these
designs to do that which is best for the glory of His name.
I am, very faithfully yours,
M. GOULBURN.
The Rev. A. T. Puddicombe, Moruya.
N.B.—lt is manifest from the above that the Bishop expressly
and advisedly uses the term “ the city” not to embrace but to
exclude North Goulburn Parish, and to define St. Saviour’s Parish


in particular. Mr. Puddicombe’s license also requires him to reside
“in the City of Goulburn”—i.e., in St. Saviour’s Parish, as
distinguished from those portions of Goulburn which had been cut off
from it.
APPENDIX B.
Canon Selwyn to Archdeacon Puddicombe.
Christ Church, Newcastle, February 27, 1882.
My Dear Archdeacon,
I write you a line to ascertain whether you have had to meet
the same difficulties under which we are labouring here with regard
to the building of our Cathedral; I mean difficulties arising out of
the Church Act.
The land upon which our Cathedral is to be built, and all our
Church lands here, Glebe, Parsonage, &c., &c., are grants under
the Church Act. The Deed of the Bite for Church specifies that
“ a Church” is to be built, such Church to be altogether regulated
by the Church Act. The Deed of the Glebe specifies how its
proceeds are to be applied. Now we want to build a Cathedral to
be under a Cathedral Ordinance of Synod, very different from the
Church Act. We are told at once we cannot do it.
We want to apply the proceeds of the Glebe under the same
Ordinance to build and maintain the Cathedral. We are told we
cannot do it. Are your circumstances similar ? Is your Cathedral
on a grant from the Crown, given for a Church ? Have you any
Glebe, the proceeds of which you are devoting to in whole or in
part building or maintaining the Cathedral, or paying the officials
thereof? '
If so how have you got over the difficulties arising out of the
Church Act ? We are contemplating a private Act to withdraw all
our lands in this Parish from under the Church Act, as the only
means of escaping the difficulty.
Again are your seats to be free when your Cathedral is built ?
If so, there again the Church Act crops up and forbids it.
If you can help me to any solution of these difficulties I shall
be very much obliged.
Hoping you and yours are all well, believe me my dear
Archdeacon,
Yours most truly,
ARTHUR E. SELWYN.
The Bishop of Goutturn to the Synod, July 13th 1882.
“ In the Diocese of Newcastle I observe that, under professional
advice, steps are being taken to obtain an Act of Parliament which


will have the effect of removing the site of the Cathedral from the
operation of the Church Temporalities Act (8 William IY, No. 5),
and of placing the building upon its proper basis as a Cathedral for
the whole Diocese, and not merely a Parochial Church for a
particular district. This design of Newcastle I approve, aud trust
that we may be allowed to unite with them for a similar purpose.”
Christ Church, Newcastle, July 5, 1882.
My Dear Archdeacon,
Yours of the 3rd I received this morning. Our Cathedral
Ordinance is not printed in a separate form, so I send you as you
ask, by this post, three more copies of our Synod Report containing
it.
Your Bishop has been writing to our Bishop on the subject of
the Cathedral, and suggests the desirableness of our going to
Parliament unitedly to be relieved of our disabilities under the
Church Act. This is the course that I think I proposed in my
letter to you. lam inclined however now to think that any action
taken should include all Dioceses and be prospective for all future
cases. Your new Diocese for instance might find itself bye-and-bye
when formed, in need of such legislation.
Our proposed Bill has been drawn already, but it may I think
be materially simplified and improved. Would it not be desirable
and possible to have a Conference with some of your Diocesan
Authorities on the subject ? and if so, no time should be lost. Our
present intention is to go to work directly Parliament meets.
I am, very truly yours,
ARTHUK E. SELWYN.
APPENDIX C.
Archdeacon Puddicomhe to the Bishop.
Goulburn, March 12th 1884.
My Dear Lord,
I was not aware that any practical steps were yet being taken
to frame a Cathedral Constitution ; but having learnt that Mr.
Betts has supplied you Lordship with a draft framed from the
Trustees' point of view, I hasten to send your Lordship and Mr.
Betts some of my thoughts on the subject from of course a parochial
standpoint.
Though not yet invited by your Lordship to express my opinion,
I lose no time in doing so, lest my ideas (the main principles of
which after months of mature consideration and study of other
Cathedral Constitutions, I hold very firmly), should be too late for


full discussion in any Conference which your Lordship may convene
in the matter.
Seeing that I shall be personally absent from such Conferences
and discussions, I beg that you Lordship will permit me to be
represented by Mr. John Davidson.
I am, my dear Lord,
Yours faithfully,
A. T. PUDDICOMBE
Some of My Thoughts upon the Constitution of St. Saviour’s
Cathedral Church.
The Church must be either A, as it is now, a Parish Church to
be used as a Cathedral; or B, it must be converted, by Act of
Parliament, into a Cathedral to be used as a Parish Church.
In the former case the Church would continue to be governed
(qua Parish Church), by the Incumbent and Churchwardens under
control of the Bishop ; and (qua Cathedral), by a Cathedral Chapter
with the Bishop or Dean as its Chairman.
In this case the Incumbent and Churchwardens would retain
to the full all the powers and privileges conferred upon them by the
Church Act, and I do not see how it would be possible under such
circumstances, for a Cathedral Chapter to have any status or
authority worthy of the name. In short, the Chairman of such
Chapter (whether Bishop or Dean), w'ould have no legal right to
interfere in any way with the building or services except by the
courteous permission of the legally recognised governing body.
This would evidently be an absurdity, and the so called “ Cathedral ”
an empty farce.
In the second case however, if the building be made by Act of
Parliament a Cathedral to be used as a Parish Church, there are
certain rights and privileges now possessed by the Incumbent and
Parishioners which must be fully recognised and retained.
Ist. The Incumbent must have full right to enter the building
and every part thereof (the Bishop’s Vestry excluded), for the full
performance of all his functions in accordance with the Book of
Common Prayer, without let or hindrance from any person
whatsoever; provided always that this right must be held in
abeyance whenever the Bishop shall require the building for the
exercise of any peculiarly episcopal functions. This privilege must
be secured to the Incumbent for the time being by his being made
Dean of the Cathedral, if there le a Dean, or Vice-Chairman of the
Chapter if the Bishop be Dean ; so that in no case shall anyone
come between him and what is his Parish Church, but the Bishop.
N.B. —This privilege of the Incumbent of course extends only,
as before implied, to all services and duties recognised by the Book
of Common Prayer. With regard to all extra services (such e.g. as
aW 5 ' u, f Vv*-*-*
'/n d Lamk4
lluAx i|U foX<4


Harvest or Sunday-School Festivals), the Incumbent must of
course defer to the Bishop in or out of Chapter as the case may
require.
2nd. Forasmuch as the Incumbent when receiving Priest’s
Orders, was given “ authority to preach the word of God, and to
administer the Holy Sacraments in the Congregation wliereunto he
should be lawfully appointed ; ” and forasmuch as he then solemnly
vowed “ to instruct the people committed to his charge out of the
Holy Scriptures ; to use all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange Doctrines contrary to God’s word ;
and to use public as well as private monitions and exhortations ; ”
he must have the full right and privilege of filling, or arranging for
the filling of the pulpit, once at least every Sunday, either in the
morning or evening (the Bishop arranging for the rest of the day),
and he must likewise have the right to take his place next to the
Bishop (or any visiting Bishop) whenever the Lord’s Supper shall
be administered.
3rd. The Trustees, Parishioners, and Incumbent having now
the privilege of electing annually one member each of the governing
body of the Church (or three-fifths of the whole body), must have
the privilege of electing annually a certain fixed proportion of the
lay members of the Chapter ; those eligible to vote at such elections
or to be elected being such as are described in the Church Act,
Section 9.
4tli. The Cathedral Chapter (thus representing amongst others
the Trustees and Parishioners), should have the power to determine
whether all the sittings in the Church shall he free or whether a
certain number shall be let to Parishioners, and (if the latter be
determined), to fix and collect the rents.
sth. There should be allotted one offertory collection in the
month as alms for the poor of St. Saviour’s Parish, to be distributed
by the Incumbent.
6th. The Chapter should be the custodian of the fabric and
furniture of the Church, and no alterations should be made in the
furniture or decorations except with their consent and the
concurrence of the Bishop.
7th. All matters not here provided for should be arranged by
the Bishop and Chapter.
My opinion is that if the above-named rights and privileges be
duly secured to the Incumbent and Parishioners, there need be no
opposition to the formation of St. Saviour’s Church into a Cathedral,
to be used as a Parish Church.
I also think that a Clerical Precentor should be appointed by
the Bishop, to be under the control of the Chapter, whose duty
should be to form, train, and instruct the choir, to arrange generally
the musical portions of the Service, and (whenever required)
to say the Prayers. I think that the stipend of such


O f\V
g\§L\o
y
lb
officer might be found partly out of the proceeds of the
Glebe, partly from the Cathedral collections, or (if
there be any), out of the pew-rents. Such officer might fill up
his time by acting as Secretary to the Chapter, by instructing the
children in the Public Schools of Goulburn, by visiting the Hospital,
or in any way which would not interfere with the Incumbent’s
Parochial duties. He might also be required to preach at regular
intervals as arranged by the Bishop.
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.
St. Saviour’s Goulburn, March 12tli 1884,
APPENDIX D.
Agreement Made with the Incumbent of St. Saviour’s to Secure
His Support to the Proposed Cathedral Bill.
Ist April 1884.
The Incumbent of St. Saviour’s Parish withdraws his
application and claim to be made Dean of St. Saviour’s Cathedral,
Goulburn, on the understanding that the said Incumbent may
have the privilege reserved to him of preaching once a Sunday
in the Cathedral, and be allowed to perform such surplice duties
within the Cathedral as he may be requested so to perform by
any parishioner or parishioners. If this is conceded by the Bishop
the Incumbent will not oppose the passing of the Cathedral Bill
through Parliament.
ALFRED T. PUDDICOMBE.
Signed in the presence of
A. Mackellar, I. Shepherd, W. C. Harris.
APPENDIX E.
Resolutions Passed Unanimously at a Public Meeting held in
the Mechanics’ Institute, Goulburn, 16th January 1873,
the Bishop of Goulburn being in the Chair.
(1.) “ That this meeting, while approving of the determination
of the Cathedral Committee to erect the new Cathedral on the
In site of the old, hereby expresses its decided opinion that, in the
interests of the congregation of St. Saviour's, it is necessary to
make adequate provision for the temporary accommodation of the
, congregation.” (2.) “ That in order to provide such temporary
! accommodation for the congregation of St. Saviour’s, it is desirable
that a new and commodious Schoolroom, which has long been
needed, should he erected on the present Church ground ; such
Schoolroom to be used for the double purpose of School and
Church until the new Cathedral is ready for occupation, ”
rUo VXKA 0- P *




