

f'bot'J
' (■ - /
It Crete# (^atljcrtiece*
THE
Position of Catholics
VICTORIA
IN RELATION TO PUBLIC EDUCATION
WILLIAM HENRY ARCHER, Knt.
COMMANDER OF THE ORDER OF PIUS, AND KNIGHT OF THE ORDER OF ST.
GREGORY THE GREAT, ETC., ETC.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY, LIMITED
IW
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1881
Price Sixpence.




' ! sojcte& (&attyolxc&+
THE
Position of Catholics
VICTORIA
IN RELATION TO PUBLIC EDUCATION
WILLIAM HENRY ARCHER, Knt.
COMMANDER OF THE ORDER OP PIUS, AND KNIGHT OP THE ORDER OP ST.
GREGORY THE GREAT, ETC., ETC.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY, LIMITED
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1884


“ I hate uttered nothing at random, but have had reasons both for what
I HAVE SAID, AND MT MANNER OP SAYING IT.”— Cardinal Newman.


ie> *305
THE POSITION OF CATHOLICS IN
VICTORIA.
I purpose this evening, my friends, to aid you to
spend a profitable hour in considering together some
matters of the highest moment and of undying interest
to all true Catholics. I come before you for two
reasons : first, because I have been asked to do so by
our good Jesuit Fathers (and I can assure you that to
be asked by them to treat, among other things, the
subject of popular instruction is an honour that I deeply
appreciate, for they are members of the most remark-
able and able teaching body in the world) ; and
secondly, by now placing myself in your presence, I am
able to resume a course of lectures that I began some
time agfo on Catholic education and civilization.
O
There is a story told of a Professor of the University
in Paris being interrupted in the delivery of a lecture
by a revolutionary rabble that with pike and gun had
suddenly assembled to upset social order in that beauti-
ful city. The Professor prudently took to his heels,
and the students of course followed his example. As
time passed on, however, things settled down in quiet,
and the Professor stood again before a body of his old
pupils and calmly resumed his discourse at the point
where he had left off, as if there had been but a break
of a few minutes. I too began, as I have just said, a
course of lectures in Melbourne, the first of which was


delivered to the students of St. Patrick’s College under
the title of “ Noctes Catholicse.” That lecture was not
interrupted in its delivery, except, I am grateful to
say, in an appreciative fashion; it was repeated in St.
Francis’s Hall to a thronging audience (such as it is our
good fortune to have to-night), and was eventually
printed and went through several editions. Many of
you are no doubt wondering, while I speak, how it is
you did not hear of it and were not present at it; but
the fact is, when I spoke of “ some time ago,” I should
have said a very long time ago; for, to tell you the
truth, it is more than twenty-eight years since I deli-
vered that lecture, and I find myself standing before a
new generation. Under these circumstances, and for
reasons which you will presently see, I do not intend
to take up to-night the thread of my discourse from
the point where I left off.
Very soon after my arrival in this country I read a
book, published at the Argus office, on “ National
Education.” It was written by Mr. C. W. Pusden,
who, in his preface, candidly confessed that, after the
work was prepared for the press, it was doubtful
whether it could be printed ; and the refusal of more
than one establishment to undertake a work of such
magnitude nearly caused him to abandon the idea
of publication. At this crisis, however, a part of the
manuscript was placed in the hands of the publishers,
at whose expense, and by whose efforts only, he assures
us, was its appearance then secured. Now, Mr. Pusden
had been an agent and inspector of the Board of
National Education in New South Wales, and at the
time he published his book was one of the Com-
missioners of the Board of National Education in
Melbourne. There was also another board in this
city, called the Denominational Board, under whose


auspices the Catholics established and controlled their
own schools, with the advantage of Government
inspection. They were simply, in this, following the
course pursued under the New South Wales rule
prior to separation. For example, in 1851 the grant
for denominational schools was thus divided ; —To the
Church of England was allotted forty-eight per cent, of
the grant; to the Presbyterians twenty-two per cent. ;
to the Wesleyans six per cent. ; and to the Roman
Catholics twenty-two per cent. The Catholics com-
prised thirty per cent, of the population, and so lost a
proportion of eight per cent.; while the Presbyterians
were less than ten per cent, of the population and
nevertheless obtained the same as the Catholics, or
more than twelve per cent, beyond their just pro-
portion. This, however, on a census basis, was so
obviously inequitable that, in 1852, there was a re-
adjustment in regard to each denomination, according
to its numerical relation to the whole community.
Such a rectification, in response to the Catholic claim,
was gall and wormwood to all the Pusdens. These
bigoted folk looked on the Church as their great
stumbling-block, and, in season and out of season, tried
with eager hand to move it out of the way. Mr.
Pusden, as I said, was a Commissioner under the
National System; and he was not content to advocate
the cause he espoused in a dignified, argumentative
fashion, but he endeavoured to weaken the moral
influence of Catholicism by resorting in his book to
exploded calumny and ignorant and flippant detraction.
He presented this sorry stuff under the guise of history,
having scraped it from the shallow scribblings of the
inheritors of a false tradition.
For example, Mr. Pusden bursts forth with the
following impertinent question : “ Does it seem


reasonable, or is it religious, that because Dr. Wiseman
was ambitious of a red cap and stockings, any of the
youth of England, even Homan Catholics, should
remain in ignorance of history, or be debarred from
learning that a body is kept in equilibrium by two
equal and opposing forces 1” (p. 336.) This, you will
observe, was rudely asked by a National Commissioner,
himself presumably a man of nineteenth century
culture, respecting the learned author of “ The Con-
nexion between Science and Revealed Religion.” This
specimen I show you as a sample of what I term Mr.
Rusden’s flippancy.
Again, he put forth some pretentious rattle in the
shape of a series of questions addressed to another
eminent dignitary of the Catholic Church, namely,
Dr. Cullen, the late Archbishop of Dublin. These
questions were all worked up to extol the deeds of lay-
men, with the solemn admonition of, “ Let Dr. Cullen
match them with the deeds of churchmen, if he can.”
And he winds up in the same breath with the cry of
“ Why, even Sunday-schools are the fruit of a laymans
labour !” (p. 323.) Mr. Rusden, of course, alluded to
Robert Raikes, a layman and the worthy proprietor and
conductor of an English newspaper, who, in the latter
part of the last century, sought, at his own personal
expense, to reform the youth of Gloucester by estab-
lishing a Sunday school, with the view of drawing the
depraved youth of both sexes from their misconduct in
the public streets. His name is deservedly held in
benediction, for his example has been followed to the
benefit of millions. But Mr. Rusden was wrong in
supposing that all Sunday schools have been the fruit
of a layman’s labour. Cardinal Cullen could have told
that gentleman that another cardinal, an Italian, the
illustrious Saint Charles Borromeo, established Sunday-


schools in Milan three centuries back; and Eustace,
the Protestant traveller, about ninety years since,
mentions the vast area of Milan Cathedral as filled
with thousands of children, who were grouped into
classes, having two or more instructors to each, such
as clergymen and lay persons of both sexes, who were
oftentimes of the first distinction. This beneficial
practice obtained everywhere throughout the immense
diocese of the sainted archbishop. It is but fair to Mr.
Rusden to assume that, when he in enthusiastic tones
extolled laymen at the expense of churchmen, he did
not know that a churchman, and a Catholic church-
man too, had, in the matter of Sunday schools, the
honor of preceding Robert Raikes. This is said by
me in no disparagement to the English philanthropist,
but to give point to an illustration of some portion of
what I term Mr. Rusden’s ignorance.
So much, then, for his ignorance and his flippancy.
I now come to his retailing of calumny. I will take
but one example. He quotes with great gusto from
what he alleges to be “an address made by Eligius,
Bishop of Noyon, a saint of the seventh century.”
This is the passage; “ Redeem your souls from punish-
ment while you have it in your power; offer your
tithes and free gifts; contribute towards the luminaries
(the wax candles) in holy places; repair frequently to
church, and humbly implore the protection of the
saints. If you observe those things you may boldly
appear at God’s tribunal in the day of jndgment, and
say, ‘ Give, Lord, according as we have given.’ ” Then
Mr, Rusden cites the following from “Hallam’s Middle
Ages ” ;—“ With such a definition of the Christian
character, it is not surprising that any fraud and injus-
tice became honorable when it contributed to the riches
of the clergy and the glory of their order.” (p. 40.)


But Mr. Busden’s evil genius would not let him stop
here. The foul fiend had got him in his grip and must
have smiled grimly as he guided the pen that prefixed
the following words to the alleged utterance of St.
Eligius,—“ An annunciation,” says Mr. Busden, ‘‘like
the following would perhaps find few bishops to give
it currency and would require the immaterial logic
of a Newman to be long bestowed upon it, without
proving that it contains either truth or religion.” Here
again you see Mr. Busden must, perforce, gird at the
greatest and choicest in Christendom. He had already
swaggered and thrust himself into the presence of two
eminent Catholic divines and nothing would serve him
next but to approach offensively the master mind of all,
and babble of the “ immaterial logic of a Newman.”
Why, it was but two years before this that John Henry
Newman, from his chair in the Oratory, had delivered a
lecture entitled “ Fable the basis of the Protestant
view,” and treated at length this very matter of St.
Eligius. It was one of a wonderful series on
“ Catholicism in England.” And I would take the
opportunity of here saying to every young man and
young woman who may be anxious to acquire a pure
and beautiful style of English, let them not give, as
Hr. Johnson advised, their days and nights to Addison,
but to one who is greater than Addison—namely
Cardinal Newman. The work I have just mentioned
they will find very precious to this end. It is one that
both learned and unlearned have read and still read
with unbounded delight. Well, as I was saying, in this
work there is a lecture on certain fabular traditions and
one of these traditions is that relating to St. Eligius,
of whom, by-the-by, you will find some most interesting
biographical details in Butler’s Lives of the Saints for
the first of December. Dr. Newman goes to work in


his own quiet, but effective, clear cutting way. He
commences with Hallam and points out that this
author, “ one of the best read, most dispassionate and
deservedly esteemed writers ” of the day “ does not
quote from St. Eligius’ own work or refer to it on his
own authority, but, well read man as he is, still he
simply relies on the authority of two other writers, and
(what many well-read men would have omitted to do)
he candidly confesses it. He refers to Dr. Robertson,
the Scotch historian, and the celebrated German
and critic, Mosheim. I do not see,” continues Dr.
Newman, “ that much blame attaches to this writer
for publishing what you will see presently is a most
slanderous representation, beyond, indeed his taking
for granted the Protestant tradition, his exercising
faith in it as true, his not doubting the fidelity of the
two authors in question, and therefore passing it on.”
I should be happy to follow the Cardinal’s kind mode
of treating a historian, who had like Hallam been only
too trustful; but Mr. Rusden is not before us in that
capacity, but in that of a polemical writer who goes
out of his way to speak disparagingly of the venerated
Newman, whose most popular works he must be
supposed to have read, and who had, in fact, fully
exposed Mr. Rusden’s scandalous stuff that for seventy-
eight years had formed part of the historical chatter
against Catholicism. He should, at least, as a
well-read Anglican, have known that while during that
period Mosheim, Jortin, Maclaine, Robertson, White
and Hallam had contentedly carried on this sort of
“ they say ” gossip, there came one scholar at last in
the shape of the Protestant Dean of Durham, who
instead of blindly following the original statement
thought it worth while first to consult St. Eligius
himself.


The book he looked into was the life of Eligius, as it
O '
was published in the “ Spicilegium D’acherii,” and the
Dean says “ it was with great sorrow and some shame
that I ascertained the treachery of my historical con-
ductor,” Mosheim. “ There was,” he continued, “ unpar-
donable mutilation.” For instance, such passages as
these were omitted : —“ Wherefore, my brethren, love
your friends in God, and love your enemies for God, for
he who loveth his neighbour hath fulfilled the law. He
is a good Christian who believes not in charms or inven-
tions of the devil, but places the whole of his hope in
Christ alone ; who receives the stranger with joy as
though he were receiving Christ Himself, who gives
alms to the poor in proportion to his possessions ; who
has no deceitful balances nor deceitful measures.
Behold ye have heard, my brethren, what sort of
people good Christians are. ... To the end that
ye be true Christians always ponder the precepts of
Christ in your mind, and also fulfil them in your prac-
tice. . . . Keep peace and charity, recall the con-
tentions to concord, avoid lies, tremble at perjury, bear
no false witness, commit no theft. . . . Observe
the Lord’s Day. . . . Do as you would be done
by,” and so on; and then the holy Bishop adds, “If
you observe these things you may appear boldly
at God’s tribunal in the day of judgment, and say
■ Give Lord as we have given.’ ” “ Brothers of the
Oratory,” said Cardinal Newman, “ take your last look
at the Protestant tradition ere it melts away into thin
air.” But alas ! I had not taken my last look, for I
found it in full force and native ugliness at the Anti-
podes.
This was in 1851. You can easily understand that
coming, as I did, fresh from the very presence as it
were of two of the great men alluded to so grossly by


Mr. Rusden, I was strongly inclined to reply to liim
there and then. I had for years been a diligent student
of Newman, and I had sat at his feet by the side of
Father Faber in the Little Oratory in William-street,
London, and listened to him as a son of St. Philip
Neri, and I had also, in the room overhead, heard
him deliver his beautiful lectures on Anglican Diffi-
culties. I was intimate with Cardinal Wiseman,
and had spent many delightful days with him,
especially at St. Edmund’s College, when he took me
down there one Holy Week, heard my first confession,
and received me into the Church. He was indeed
an affectionate friend. I did not, however, follow
up the temptation to enter into a personal controversy
with Mr. Rusden, for I was but fresh in the colony,
and knew little or nothing of that gentleman or his
surroundings. Besides, I was very busy just then, and
for many a long day after, in discharging necessary
duties in carrying out my scheme of national statistics
and registration, under the authority of Lieutenant-
Governor La Trobe; busy, in fact, creating and
developing the department of the Registrar-General.
But I always kept Mr. Rusden’s volume in my
library, as I have it still, and resolved that when an
opportunity occurred I would, without mentioning him
or even alluding to him, give him and others like him
an opportunity of coming forward and challenging
certain broad propositions on behalf of the Church.
Hence my first lecture on Catholic Education and
Civilization in 1856.
My main proposition in that lecture was that u the
Church is not, as commonly said by these apart from
us, an enemy to education and to the progress of civili-
zation. I explained civilization as being, in the sense
of the Church, the development in a people of the


Christian character in all the public and private rela-
tions of life in accordance with the teaching and prac-
tice of her Divine Fonnder. And I proposed to show
how this form of development was her great work in
Italy, Spain, Africa, France, Belgium, Germany, Eng-
land, Ireland, Scotland, and other nations when her time
was come to chase their pagan darkness with beams of
gospel light. I pointed out, on the other hand, what
the world deems civilization is a prodigious develop-
ment of the sciences of fine arts and the multiplication
of all that goes to make up a life of refined physical
and mental enjoyment; and I urged that although the
Church looks on all this as merely secondary, and, so
to say, accidental, and to be used only in so far as the
eternal soul may be benefited, or at most shall not
suffer, yet at the same time it is found that even with
regard to the training of refined, ingenious, and materi-
ally and intellectually great peoples she has been the
most marvellous civilizer the world ever saw.
I began my illustrations with facts in connection
with the last three or four centuries of modern Italy.
I ran hastily through several of its cities. For in-
stance, I touched at Genoa and reminded my audience
of the little boy who played on her shores beside her
shipping four hundred years ago, whose name was
Columbus, and who in a spirit of piety dauntlessly put
forth his fragile bark not only as a navigator, but as a
Tertiary of St. Francis, to discover a new world, and so
piloted posterity to the uttermost parts of the earth.
The mention of one of her charitable institutions, the
deaf and dumb asylum, brought to recollection the
benevolent men of genius who had discovered, and
through many generations had developed the means of
teaching the poor deaf mutes to read and write and
talk by signs, to become proficient in intellectual as


well as in mechanical pursuits, and to comprehend the
abstractions of philosophy as well as to know and
practise pure religion. There was the Spaniard Pedro
de Ponce; and there were the Frenchmen, L’Epee
and Sicard; followed by the more modern philan-
thropist Ottavio Assarotti, who, at the commencement
of the present century, started a school which pro-
duced crowds of professional and other skilled persons
among the ranks of those who at first sight seem so
hopelessly afflicted, and I pointed out that every one
of the teachers I have just mentioned were Catholic
ecclesiastics.
And then, in regard to popular instruction, we found
in Lombardy, from Milan to Venice, there existed fifty
years ago a universal educational system that with a
bountiful plenteousness poured streams of healthful
knowledge throughout the whole dominion. All
children from six to twelve were obliged to attend the
elementary schools and for this purpose in every
commune or parish a register was made out previous to
the beginning of the scholastic year of all the children
of both sexes that had attained the former age. There
were also high schools and adult schools and Sun-
day schools. And this state of things I explained
was not confined to Lombardy. A learned English
educationist named Kay (afterwards Sir James Kay
Shuttle worth), had published a careful comparison of
the social condition of England and of Europe, and
his conclusions were anything but favourable to the
mother country of the English people. These are his
words “ Alas! Catholic countries have far outstripped
us in the eagerness with which they are promoting the
education of the people. They understand the signs
of the times but we have yet to learn them.”
It is pleasant to be able to say now that England


has since given heed to those signs; and one of your
pastors, the Reverend Father Kennedy, and the
accomplished nuns in the midst of yon in Richmond,
the Faithful Companions of Jesus, can tell you, from
many years’ personal experience, how fairly and con-
siderately the Home Government have since treated
even Catholics in their efforts to keep abreast with the
times in the matter of public instruction, and in so far
have set an honourable example to the local govern-
ments of Australia.
In going back to earlier periods, I showed that two
merchants of Florence, who lived in the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries, were the authors of the first
manuals for the commercial sciences. And the mer-
chant princes of Florence, says Macaulay, first en-
nobled trade by making it the ally of philosophy, of
eloquence, and of taste. To this day the system of
bookkeeping by double entry is known as the Italian
method, and that was taught by a venerable Francis-
can friar of Venice, who printed the first work on that
subject in 1494.
I was obliged to be very brief in treating of the vast
scientific and artistic wonders of Florence. Of course
I mentioned Galileo, whose discovery of the satellites
of Jupiter and the phases of Venus were sufficient to
make him world-famous; yet his discovery of the true
principles of mechanics is looked upon by philosophers
as his highest claim to glory. There was also his
assistant, Castelli, whose treatise on “ Running
Waters,” is the first on the subject. The English
professor, Whewell, declared that “ Montucla with
justice calls Castelli the creator of a new branch of
physics.” To this city also came Leonardo da Vinci,
who was one of the greatest mathematicians and
mechanics of his time, as well as architect, chemist.


engineer, musician, poet, and painter. “ Tire frag-
ments,” says Hallam, “of his writings which have
been published strike us with something like the awe
of preternatural knowledge, for, in the compass of a few
pages, he anticipates the discoveries of Galileo, Kepler,
and Castelli; the system of Copernicus, and the very
theories of recent geologists ; he laid down the grand
principle of Bacon that experiment and observation
must be the guides to just theory in the investigation
of nature.”
On reaching Milan we glanced at the famous statist,
Gioja, the author of the Philosophy of Statistics, and
a great work on Economical science. Italy, indeed,
was the first country to found a professor s chair for
the study of political economy. This was done at
Naples by the Abbe Intiere, another ecclesiastic, and
his friend Genovesi was the first professor. This
occurred on the sth November, 1754.
It was a professor of natural philosophy in Pavia,
namely, the pious Professor Volta, who has changed the
face of the world by means of the Voltaic pile. “ The
voltaic battery,” says the great chemist, Sir Humphrey
Davy, “ was an alarm bell to experimenters in every
part of Europe, and it served no less for demonstrating
new properties in electricity, and for establishing the
laws of this science, than as an instrument of discovery
in other branches of knowledge.”
In this chatty way I brought out fact after fact for
an hour or more, in illustration of the proposition I
mentioned at starting, and, in conclusion, I remarked
that I trusted I had shown enough in one night to
prove, to some extent at least, that the church is not—
as she is so often represented to be—an enemy to
secular education or to the progress among her chil-
dren of human knowledge and high civilization; but


that, on the contrary, she has been and is, notwith-
standing that this is not the first and greatest object
of her existence, the faithful promoter of art, science,
and commerce, and of all liberal learning.
You see that I put forth my views in no half-hearted
way. They were at the time pretty widely dissemi-
nated, and I never heard a dissentient voice, or knew
of a hostile criticism from that day to this. It would
be a work of supererogation to show that Catholics in
Australia are, to say the least, as keenly alive as any
denomination amongst us to the importance of affording
their children the advantages of a thorough education
suited to their respective conditions in life. The truth
of that is patent to all.
One instance of the eagerness for school learning
among our Catholics is the fact which I have frequently
heard commented upon among non-Catholics, that of
the existing school teachers there is an excess of
Catholics in proportion to their numbers as compared
with the total population. And it is quite certain that
the intelligent and religious race to which you belong
will never be lacking in the supply of intellectual,
virtuous, and Christian educators of youth. In fact,
you have proved in the open daylight, and in face
of the w T hole world, that in the matter of general public
instruction you, as a body, are well able and exception-
ally willing to run alone. But, unfortunately, there is
a large body of our fellow-colonists who seem deter-
mined to never let us alone. It was so when the
Argus proprietors patted Mr. National-Commissioner
Busden on the back as our assailant in 1853, and I
found it so in 1857, when I took my seat as a member
of the Denominational Board, in the room of the late Sir
John O’Shanassy, who had resigned on his becoming the
first constitutional Premier of Victoria. For notwith-


standing that four-fifths of all the children at public
schools in the colony had been educated under the
denominational system, yet I found that my fellow-
commissioners were apprehensive that the interloping
national system would soon be effectually fingered by
political players to a smart political tune. In the very
first report that I signed (that is for 1856 and 1857),
the possibility of the denominational system being
superseded was freely considered, and we wrote that in
such case “ the country would have to consider whether
the sources of voluntary effort would not be dried up
so as to subvert the principle of self-exertion, which is
perhaps the most valuable part of the education of a
people. Combination is the object aimed at by the
ifiends of secular education ; but combination, to be
effectual, must be by the willing consent of parties, or
it will be evaded, as in Ireland, and will not produce
the good feeling sought to be obtained.” This was a
fair warning, and has proved prophetic. We concluded
our report by saying, “ In former years the Board has
again and again suggested for the public good an
united system of public education on a religious basis;
and it would still urge the adoption of such a system
if founded on equal justice to all on civil grounds.
Whatever course may be taken, the Board will have
the satisfaction of knowing that it has done its duty to
the people in the course prescribed for it by the State,
and that it has successfully promoted the secular
efficiency of the schools placed under its superinten-
dence, without having ever interfered with the con-
scientious principles of anyone, child or parent, in the
colony.” This was an honest and justifiable boast, and
one that could never be truthfully affirmed by the
founders, promoters, and protectors of the present
parliamentary penal schools.


But the nationalists of that day did not go in for
simple secularism. They were prepared to allow
religious teaching to be given in the schools, either
during the fixed school hours or otherwise, and, in fact,
regulations to that effect were issued by the National
Commissioners in Melbourne. The most taking idea
in their scheme for the popular mind was the pleasing
prospect they put forth of a happy school union of all
colonial children conning their lessons together in
brotherly and sisterly love, and the great economy in
expense that was certain to result therefrom. They
ostentatiously urged that it was the Irish National
system they were imitating—a system which had
practically, up till that time, received the sanction of
both Catholic and Protestant educational authorities in
the old country—and they vehemently demanded of
us Catholics why we could not unite with them here on
a similar basis. The answer was straight—namely, that
the religious condition of the populations of Victoria
and of Ireland was not the same. In Ireland the so-
called national schools were in practice almost wholly
Catholic, and as such strictly denominational, and it
would not be so in Victoria under a so-called national
system. And again the Catholics, in common with
non-Catholic denominations, already had their own
schools to themselves and received their proportionate
share of the annual money-grant. Was it likely that
they would voluntarily give up these solid advantages,
secured to them by law, for what they believed to be an
unrealizable dream ? As ta the economical part of the
question they replied that it was the national system
which was unnecessary, as the denominational system
was alone equal to all the requirements of the country,
not only in regard to primary schools, but to industrial
schools, boarding schools, high schools, and training


schools, and the unnecessary expenditure actually
incurred was largely due to the rivalry of the National
Board.
But we might also have shown that, even in regard
do Ireland, the Sacred Congregation of Propaganda
had, with the approbation of the Most Holy Father,
Gregory XVI., resolved that no immediate judgment
should be given in the matter; that it should be left
to the prudent discretion of each individual bishop,
and be judged of by the future experience which time
would supply. The bishops and priests were enjoined,
however, to carefully watch that no taint “be contracted
by the Catholic children from this system of national
instruction, through any cause whatever; and it is
also their duty strenuously to endeavour to obtain from
Government, by degrees, a better order of things and
more equitable conditions.” You see that Home was
sensitively alive to the probable danger of the Catholics
in Ireland being played with falsely. And the appre-
hension was justified by after events. Take a single case.
Dr. Whately, one of the Irish National Board, wrote a
little book called “ The Evidences of Christianity,” and
it circulated, probably in millions, at a small cost, and
was used with the consent of the Catholic hierarchy.
Some time after, Dr. Whately brought out Part 11., in
which, as I stated in my evidence in 1867, he entered into
matters, made statements and drew conclusions that he
must have known would be, and must have intended to
be, most offensive to Catholics. To show that he knew
well what he was about let us look at a letter he sent
to Mr. Senior, and which was not published till after
the death of the writer. It appears in the memoirs
written by his daughter. “ The education supplied by
the National Board is gradually undermining the vast
fabric of the Irish Catholic Church. Two things only


are necessary on the part of the Government. One is
that it adheres resolutely not only in its measures, but
in its appointments in the selection of bishops, as well
as in making Parliamentary grants, to the system of
mixed education. I believe I said the other day that
mixed education is gradually enlightening the minds
of the people, and if we give it up we give up the
only hope of weaning the Irish from the abuses
of Popery. But I cannot venture openly to profess
this opinion. I cannot openly support the Education
Board as an instrument of conversion. I have to fight
my battle with one hand, and that my best, tied behind
me.” And this was written by an Oxford don, and pink
of the Anglican low church episcopate. If it were
not for the testimony of his own daughter I should be
slow to believe in such perfidy. If it were mere current
rumour I should suppose there had been some mis-
understanding, or, at least, some material exaggeration
of a passing expression. But no ! Under his own
hand he stands revealed as our professed friend, and,
at the same time, our would-be assassin. He delibe-
rately adopted the abominable principle that the end
justifies the means, and is, perhaps, its most remarkable
.ecclesiastical embodiment in modern times.
The next most important and successful move on the
educational political board was the passing of the
Common Schools Act. At first it was intended’ to
make it compulsory for all children to be instructed in
secular subjects for four consecutive hours each day.
I waited upon the Chief Secretary, Mr. Bichard
Heales, and explained to him that the passing of such
a restrictive clause would at once cut off the Catholic
body from all chance of sharing in the proposed general
scheme of public instruction, and I suggested to him
that he might probably with advantage alter this, and


substitute the provision of two hours secular instruction
in the morning, and two hours in the afternoon. I
took care to give him as an illustration our practice of
saying the Angelas at noon. He accepted the
suggestion, and stated in the House that he had
done so, and why. This allowed religious bodies
to give any amount of religious instruction they
pleased before and after each two hours. But, as I
told the President of the Boyal Commission on Public
Education (Mr. George Higinbotham) in 1866, there
was a very serious discussion among the Catholic
clergy, when the Common Schools Act came into
operation, as to whether they should not refuse the
grant altogether, and that the feeling of the majority
was decidedly to refuse the aid. I stood nearly
alone in saying that until we had proved that we
could not meet our fellow-citizens in all matters of
business as citizens, and take our fair share of the
burdens of public work for the public welfare, and
get our fair average of what the law permitted us to
take—until it was forced upon us that we could not
go on without some compromise of principle—l
thought it was a thousand pities to create an anta-
gonism. The Bishop came to that conclusion also,
and I sat on the new Board under protest, and for
only so long as the work might be conducted fairly in
spirit, and without any trenching on faith and morals.
I told Mr. Higinbotham that if it were ever made
imperative upon us to omit the teaching of religion
our schools would be forthwith detached. You see
clearly that all along we were on the defensive. Inch
by inch there had been aggression upon us from 1852
to 1862, when the Common Schools Act passed. We
foresaw that the evil day was but postponed. But the
Catholics were still on firm ground, and it was not till


ten years after tliat it was cut from under our feet.
In the meanwhile we had a good breathing time, and
gradually prepared for the long threatened secular
onslaught.
The first meeting of the new Commissioners of Edu-
cation took place in my office on the 14th August,
1862. There were five of us. The two boards—that
is the Denominational Board and the National Board
—were defunct, and we received over as a legacy some
thousands of pounds, which of course became the pro-
perty of the new corporation by the provisions of the
Common Schools Act.
Our first duty as controllers of the new system of
public instruction was to draft fresh rules and regulations.
As you may well conceive this was no light task.
The question of the distribution of public money was of
primary importance, and I brought forward a scheme
of payment by results, that is a rate of payment in pro-
portion to successful work. We caused the inspectors
to examine large masses of children upon hypothetical
standards, and it became manifest to my brother com-
missioners that some fresh incentive should be given to
the instruction of the lower classes of schools in the
rudiments of education, and they were convinced that
it was imperatively desirable to recommend a partial
adoption of the system of payment by results. We
sent our rules and regulations to the Chief Secretary
early in June, and received no reply till the following
October. Sir James McCulloch, under his own hand,
wrote then to say that the Government had under
their careful and anxious consideration our regulations,,
and acknowledged our zeal and industry, but felt neces-
sitated to return the regulations for re-consideration.
“ The Legislative Assembly having,” he continued,
“as the Government conceive, arrived at a conclusion


condemnatory of the system of payment by results,
the Government feel that they cannot with propriety
give their sanction to any code of regulations which,
like these now under consideration, embody the system
itself.” We all saw that a trial of strength was inevit-
able between the Board and the Ministry of the day.
Singularly enough, one of the Ministers was also one of
the Commissioners, and he was a party consenting to
my drawing up a reply to the Government, which
was adopted by the Board without the change of
a single syllable, and which you will find appended to
the second report of 1863. We told the honourable
the Chief Secretary that we stood committed, both by
reason and experience, to a recognition of the plan
proposed, and that the return of our regulations for
re-consideration, accompanied, it is true, by the language
of courtesy, could, nevertheless, be looked upon by the
Commissioners as nothing short, in reality, of an at-
tempt at dictation to them in their duty of determining a
question of first principles. . . . That we did not
consider the Board of Education a department of the
Civil Service, subordinate to a ministerial head, and that
our conduct from year to year should not be directed
or in any way fettered by the ministry of the hour.
. . . That we were not aware that the Legislative
Assembly had at any time arrived at a conclusion con-
demnatory of the system of partial payment by results,
and that, in fine, the Commissioners felt, as men of
honour and singleness of purpose, for the common good
in the cause of public instruction they were committed
to the views expressed in their communication to the
Government. They were, however, willing to modify
the rates to any extent consistent with the retention of
some sufficient stimulus to the teachers to look after
every child in their schools, which stimulus had not


hitherto been in operation, but which partial payment
by results was intended to introduce. We concluded
thus: “With this exception (and with this concession
the Commissioners conceive the Government should be
fully satisfied) the Board beg most respectfully, but
firmly, to state that to their proposed rules and regula-
tions they feel themselves constrained to adhere, leav-
ing it to the Government of the day to say whether it
will require the Commissioners’ resignations for their
maintenance of what, in their consciences, they believe
to be most beneficial for the interests of public instruc-
tion, and for upholding what, as a corporate body, they
believe to be their inherent right.” . . . The
Ministry of the day caved in. But our manful stand
was not forgotten, and four years after, when our five
years’ term was up, all the signing parties to this
remonstrance, except the politician Matthew Hervey,
were quietly superseded. Personally I was rejoiced
to be relieved, for I had, at the very least, borne my
full share, for years, of the almost daily dealing with
large masses of documents connected with, and often
of grave moment to, teachers of all denominations, of
all ranks, and of both sexes, and this responsible duty
had to be discharged in my evenings, and of course
without remuneration.
So matters remained till 1872, the Board, however,
by changes in its members, becoming gradually more of
a secular and political cast.
The long-foreseen, and, on our part, fully-prepared-for
crisis came in 1872. Mr. Stephen and Mr, Francis
brought in a penal school bill at last. I used to see a
good deal of Mr. Stephen at that time, for he was Attor-
ney-General and Minister of my department, I still
being the Registrar-General. He got me to meet Mr.
Francis, to talk over certain practical questions con-


nected with the new measure. Mr. Stephen was a
man of trained intellect, and skill, but intensely pre-
judiced, and he often manifested the bearing of a
confirmed captious dyspeptic. Mr. Francis was alto-
gether of inferior calibre, but I thought the two
a very fit pair to act as the apostles of secularism.
Mr. Stephen avowed that he considered that the
principle of Heales’ Act, which he proposed to repeal,
was, if properly carried out, that of secular education;
and that he believed, as far as sectarian teaching
had been introduced into the schools, it had been
done in violation—or, at all events, evasion—of the
Act. He dictatorially declared, also, that it was not
necessary for the teaching of religion that it should
be taught in the schools. He actually asserted that
he was moved by a deeply religious feeling when he
said that it is undesirable that religion should be taught
by the schoolmaster. So there was no uncertain sound
in his cry for the battle. How the various Protestant
denominations could have misunderstood his meaning
and intentions I cannot make out. And yet some of
them, in their sworn evidence before the recent Poyal
Commission, expressed themselves as deceived. He
did not for a moment disguise his dislike to the Common
Schools Board. Although there were several mem-
bers of Parliament upon it, he treated it as a wholly
irresponsible body. What he actually felt was that
neither he nor any other Minister could count upon
being able always to manipulate it. Then he had got
it into his crotchetty pate that denominationalism was
fast dying out. He believed, or at all events he said
he hoped, that it would die out in the present gene-
ration, and this bill of his would of course largely help
to kick the life out of it. But I must do him the
justice to add that he declared, as if to his own aston-


ishment, lie discovered that there is a great deal of
what he understood to be the true feeling of religion in
that denomination which is generally supposed to be
entirely distinct from all other religious bodies ! You
see he was beginning to thaw a little in our favour;
but, alas ! even this little warmth was imparted by his
propagandist zeal for a universal worship to be secured
through the agency of secular schools. These are his
words : “ I cannot but hope that when those causes
which tend to the encouragement of denominational
feeling are done away with, the denominational
feeling will die out; and thus, when a new genera-
tion of inhabitants arise, who have not been brought
up, as some of us have, in certain forms of religion,
I trust they will be able, if not altogether to aban-
don . . . the forms and traditions of their
particular denominations . . . that they will be
able to pull together in all the essentials of religion,
and possibly to agree in some common form of worship.
There is only one power,” he went on to say, “ that
could control the evil ” —of denominationalisrn—“ that
had raised its head amongst us to such a fearful extent,”
and that power was “ a central authority ” —a Minis-
terial department. The new Minister of State was to
be a perpetual high priest of secularism, ever burning
with an anti-dogmatic zeal (except in respect to his
own particular dogmas), which would enable him to
lead the rising generation to the shrine of some far-off
uncertain universal sort of worship. Is it not strange,
my friends, that such educated, well read men should so
persistently cherish the idea that Catholics are but a
sect like their own innumerable embodiments of fluctu-
ating opinion ? They seem to be wholly ignorant of
the fact that those they call, by way of nickname,
papists and romanists, are, by the very term used.


recognized as belonging to the body founded personally
by our Lord for all time, and governed in His Holy
name by His Vicars—from age to age—in the seat of
the Apostle Peter in Pome.
If they ever knew, they appear to forget that the
hierarchy of Pome which laboured and suffered mar-
tyrdom in the catacombs is, at this moment, in our
midst; and it is high time, indeed, for them to learn
that this same Church must and will gather in and
sustain the elect, here and throughout the universe, as
persistently and unflinchingly as ever it did among the
persecuting secularists of the old pagan civilization.
The other day, one of the most influential journalists,
and a proprietor of one of the most popular newspapers
in Australia—who is credited with strong infidel
opinions—said to me : “You may do what you like
now, but we shall get hold of the next generation.”
That is to say, he expects that the press will upset
and destroy the priest. This reminded me of Mr*
Stephen’s aspirations for the triumph of school secu-
larism, though that gentleman did not go, apparently,
so far as to wish to annihilate denominationalism by
the agency of Free Thought, Agnosticism, Pantheism,
or Atheism.
“As to patronage,” Mr. Stephen said, “ some per-
sons object to a Minister of Education, because they
conceive that he would have too much political power
in his hands ; but I don’t think it possible,” he con-
tinued, “ that any Ministry in this country would dare
to make use of the Educational Department, to any
great extent, for the purpose of retaining power by
Ministerial patronage.” Poor deluded man ! It is
fortunate for his peace of mind that he was removed
to another, and let us hope to a better, world before the
recent Royal Commission brought to the light of day


the shameful abuses practised in this direction by
certain of his political successors.
Well, the Stephen and Francis bill passed in tri-
umph. The Catholics used every legitimate means to
induce the legislature to modify the penal character of
the measure, but without avail. There was a cry in
chorus that ours was not a case of conscience, but
merely a case of cash; and, as we were in a minority,
W T e must therefore go to the wall.
Years passed on, and during that time you know
how nobly our body acted when it once realized the
perils that were besetting our faith. But, thanks to
the vigilance of the episcopate and the zeal of the
clergy, instead of weakening us, this measure of oppres-
sion has drawn us closer together and made us, in
truth, more single in purpose, and more resolute in the
determination of asserting and securing our rights. As
to our schools, I have visited them both in Melbourne
and suburbs, and in Ballarat, and I am rejoiced to be
able to tell you that they are an honour to us. In all
secular matters they are, as far as I have seen, equal to
the best of the public schools; and in regard to the
practice of the minor morals, the cultivation of the
Christian virtues, and the acquiring definite Christian
knowledge, they stand alone in their high perfection.
But for this providential result we have not to bless
the intention of either Mr. Stephen or any of his
aiders and abettors,
We now come to a new epoch.
In the year 1881 we fortunately had a Catholic
Premier ; one loyal and true to the faith of his fore-
fathers—Sir Bryan O’Loghlen. He named a Boyal
Commission to inquire into the alleged grievances of a
portion of the population, and, after much opposition,
succeeded in carrying its appointment. . . . For


two years and a half that Commission worked without
fee or reward. They never even ate or drank at the
expense of the State, except, I think, on two occasions,
when their sittings were prolonged till night. We all
meant business, and ten of us kept to it throughout,
from early in 1882 to the middle of 1884.
The general verdict on our labours has been decidedly
favourable. Both the press and the public have recog-
nized that this Commission did its duty, and that, on
the whole, it did it well. Indeed the Government, as
it went along, took good care to give effect at once to
certain recommendations. And nothing could be more
gratifying among ourselves than the amicable spirit
which was almost continuously manifested between us,
until the question of religious instruction in State
Schools, and the alleged grievance of a portion of the
population came to be discussed. The whole Commis-
sion unmistakably saw that a large proportion of both
Protestants and Catholics in the colony regarded the
want of facilities for giving religious instruction to the
young under the Education Act as a grievance, and
this was a recognition of prime importance. Sworn
evidence from all classes had proved to them that the
alleged grievance was not confined to Catholics, and
that, to remedy such grievance, the Act required
emendation in view of the general public good. The
thing was how best to do it. Five of us took one view
nnd five took another. All agreed, however, that
religion should be taught in the public schools. Half
of us contended that this showed the Catholics had
proved their case, and that they merited more con-
siderate treatment; and the other half as strongly
contended that the considerate treatment we meant was
nothing short of State aid to religion. This cry of
“ State-aid-to-religion ” seemed always ringing in their


ears, and under its influence they thus give vent to
their feelings—
“We have entered most fully into the matter, and have examined
a large number of witnesses delegated by the different Roman
Catholic dioceses throughout the colony. Their evidence shows us
that the Roman Catholics spend large sums of money in maintaining
separate schools of their own. Since 1872, when the Education Act
came into opei’ation, they appear, from returns furnished to us, to
have expended the large sum of <£265,552. They consider them-
selves aggrieved that while they expend so much on the education
of their children without any aid from Government, State schools,
which they have no desire to use, should be supported out of the
general revenue to which they contribute in common with their
fellow citizens. All these witnesses concur in the view that
aid should be granted to their schools in the form of payment by
results.” * * * *
Again—
“ In a Roman Catholic school everything is subordinated to the
inculcation of the doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, it being
the first object of the teacher to make the pupil a good Catholic.
Such being the case, any payment by the State to Roman Catholics
towards the education of their children would be tantamount to
endowment by the State of that particular form of religion. We
fully sympathize with the Roman Catholics in their difficulty; but,
as it is purely a Church difficulty, it cannot be remedied by the
State in a country where State aid to religion has been abolished by
the will of the people.”
Now this abolition, by the will of the people, alludes
I suppose to the repeal of the £50,000 annual grant
under the provisions of the Constitution Act, whereby
the bishops and clergy of various denominations for-
merly received sums varying in magnitude for their
maintenance as ministers of religion, and for the sup-
port of public worship. Ido not see that this measure
goes either for ]or against the propriety of paying, at
all events, school teachers for imparting religious in-
struction. In point of fact, there has never been a
total cessation of State aid to the clergy; for every
year items appear on the Estimates for chaplains in
Government institutions, and are duly passed by the


legislature. So that the practice of the State even
now is not that of rigorous and total exclusion of
State aid to religion. The help is, however, certainly
exceptional, and may not exceed £1,500 a-year, but it
is enough to show that every Government finds it
necessary to make such exception in the public interest.
But it must strike you all as very strange that a
Royal Commission appointed to ameliorate if possible
an existing state of things, should believe itself para-
lyzed by any portion of the statute law. Our laws
are not like the laws of the Medes and Persians, un-
alterable. If they were the present Education Act,
that of 1872, might last with the Catholic Church to
the end of time. But I think we may safely prophecy
the Church will see it out. The anti-Catholic Com-
missioners have actually shown themselves ready to
make a breach in it.
They conclude thus :
“ In any general system of education supported by the State it is
obvious that only such subjects should be taught as are acceptable
to the great mass of the people. In this respect it is a great tribute
to our State-school system to find that the witnesses who are most
opposed to it as a system have no fault to find with the subjects
actually taught; their objection is that something they desire is not
taught—namely, the particular doctrines of their own church. In
other words, their objection cuts at the root of any general system of
State education; and as the only way of meeting that objection
would be to recognize denominational schools as entitled to aid from
the State, we are unable to make any recommendation to your
Excellency on the subject.”
No recommendation! Oh ! lame and impotent
conclusion in appearance; but what a cruel and cal-
lous determination in fact. And yet, in an earlier
portion of the report, these five anti-Catholic commis-
sioners say :
“We have recognized the existence of the principle that all religious
denominations shall be treated upon an equality of independence
and freedom from restraint in matters of conscience.”


How are these conflicting statements to be re-
conciled ? Perhaps a statement of their amending
scheme may clear the matter up. Let us see—
_ “ We therefore recommend that the two hours for secular instruc-
tion he not interfered with, viz., two hours in the forenoon and two
hours in the afternoon, and that provision be made in the school
curriculum for religious instruction of a non-secular character, either
before or after the time set apart for secular instruction, with a con-
science clause for the protection of both teachers and children.
We further recommend that during the time set apart for religious
instruction of a non-secular character, the children of such parents
as desire it may receive religious instruction separately from some
teacher approved by such parents, and that such separate teaching
may include the teaching of the tenets of any sect.”
This means, in plain english, that if the Archbishop
and Jesuit Fathers consented to place the fourteen
hundred children on their Richmond School rolls under
the so-called secular parliamentary system, the Govern-
ment, after building for them two or three palatial
mansions, and, secular instruction being provided for,
would pay, amongst others, even Catholic teachers in
those schools, say about £4 per child per annum,
and authorize such teachers to attend before or after the
secular hours, to teach the “tenets of their sect,”
which, in the case of our folk, implies, as we saw a
little while ago, the making their pupils “ good
Catholics.”
So you see that money paid to teachers who im-
part denominational instruction in the secular schools
does not, in the view of these five gentlemen, come
under the category of State aid to religion; but
if that money were paid to the same teachers in sepa-
rate Catholic schools, who would teach precisely the
same things, it would be state aid to religion, and yet
the sole difference would be that the Government
bricks and mortar are not our bricks and mortar; and
that is all!


Surely the hearts and brains of these good men could
not have worked in harmony, and the minds of some of
the five must have thus become obfuscated. And yet we
tried to keep up a mild and wholesome atmosphere
around them. I was especially encouraged to do so
by the judicious and considerate manner in which the
Commission as a body had acted up to this point. I
therefore, with some degree of hopefulness, tabled the
following motion, —“ That the payment of any teacher
by way of results for proficiency in purely secular
knowledge is not, and cannot be, reasonably construed
into an endowment of the denomination to which such
teacher belongs.” How do you think I was met 1 By
a direct vote against it % No—by no manner of means.
To my great satisfaction they were pleased to admit
that the proposition is self evident. But they con-
sidered it too abstract. I replied that if they affirmed
it I would soon bring the principle before them in a
practical form. They knew what I meant, of course,
and balked at it. They felt I have no doubt, and
especially those among them who are members of
Parliament, that their adhesion, even to what was self-
evident in such a matter, would bring about some dis-
agreeables in various ways, and especially at the next
election. Anyhow they discussed and concussed, as
our Scotch friends say, for I hardly know how long,
till we were all tired, and then the acting-chairman
finally brought forward, what he termed a legitimate
amendment, and proposed that the words of my motion
should be struck out, and a motion to the following
effect substituted, —“ That no school belonging to a
denomination should be recognized as capable of
receiving any monetary advantages from the State.”
This he declared carried. There were nine of us present
and there were five for this so-called amendment, while


four of us refused to vote, as we considered it an in-
dependent substantive proposition, instead of being an
amendment cognate to the original proposition. We
thought my motion had been unworthily got rid of.
If our chairman, Mr. Justice Rogers, had been present
the decision would have been in our favour. I must,
however, do some of these Commissioners the justice
to say that they used very kind expressions towards
us, but, unfortunately, this sort of sympathy is of no
more practical service to us, in face of the proposition
carried against us, than is the active hostility of
our most malignant enemies. Can you wonder if,
at the time, some of us thought that our colleagues,
had lost their heads and that they must be under a
spell %
And now you will naturally ask what is to be the
outcome of all this \ Well, —in the first place, there is
no question about one thing, the plain fact that the whole
Commission acknowledge the existence of the Catholic
grievance. The Commission heard the sworn evi-
dence in our behalf, and they believe it. This gives us a
new departure, a new platform for action. I say action-,
for if there was a time when it was necessary that we
should not fold our arms and sit still, it is now. For
you may depend upon it there will be an effort to
make, a la Rusden, all the public State schools temples
of a united Protestantism, so that we may be left out
in the cold. The pro-Catholic portion of the Commis-
sion voted with their antagonists for the removal of
the Protestant grievance, but the latter did not reci-
procate in the same charitable spirit towards us. Their
defence for this conduct is that Catholics will have the
same opportunities offered to them as the Protestants
will enjoy, and that this ought to suffice. But I
hold that to offer to a suppliant as a boon that which


one has carefully ascertained beforehand he cannot
accept, is not to solace but to aggravate him.
Yes, you must agitate—ardently, persistently. Yoa
have fine halls and schoolrooms all over the country.
Ask from your ecclesiastical superiors for permission
to meet in them regularly for the purpose of discuss-
ing these educational matters, in which both your spiri-
tual and temporal welfare are so deeply concerned.
Collect information and disseminate it. The many
non-Catholics, clerical and lay, who spoke in our behalf
before the Commission shows that there are men of
goodwill in Victoria who desire to see us get fair play.
By your union in the manner I speak of, you will
enlarge your circle and increase the number of those
who sympathize with you, and you will, at the same
time, keep yourselves fully up to the times.
You will do well also to look into the question of
our national income and expenditure. You will find
that the wage classes bear the chief burden of the taxa-
tion of the country, and that the moneyed classes largely
escape. I have been for a long time past elaborating
a scheme of direct taxation whereby every one should
pay approximately according to his means, somewhat
after the fashion of municipal taxation. I find that pro-
perty to the value of scores of millions of pounds
now yields little or nothing to the general revenue.
Look into this, and at the next election ask the reason
why. Of course while you have to pay twice over for
school instruction you will suffer from the robbery, but
the evil would be reduced to a minimum by Equitable
Taxation. Go in for that, therefore, and take care that
every adult, every male among you on attaining the
age of twenty-one is placed on his proper roll, and so
made secure of the franchise. Your right to vote is a
great talent and it should be used under a sense of


deep responsibility. Keep then your eyes open to
discern the signs of the times. For some time past
there seems to have been a dead set against Catholics.
There are no Catholics in the highest positions of the
Civil Service now. There has not been one since the
brutal coup d'etat of Black Wednesday. If you do not
take care you will find at no very distant date the
Emancipation Act practically repealed in your regard
and the doors of the Legislature even slammed in your
faces.
Therefore, I say, agitate, agitate. Agitate for your
holy cause ; a cause that is as just as the day of judg-
ment.
5 mninc ftiruw txox*
36


APPENDIX.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
THE EEPOET OF JOHN WASHINGTON EOGEES, CHAIEMAN
OF THE EOYAL COMMISSION ON EDUCATION.
The necessity of accepting a professional engagement in the colony of Tas-
mania has prevented me from being present at the discussions of Your
Excellency’s Commissioners upon the Draft Report which, at the desire of the
Commissioners, I had, as stated in the Report, prepared and submitted for
their consideration before leaving Melbourne.
I regret that the alterations, in reference to Religion in relation to Education
and those especially having reference to ‘ ‘ the alleged grievance of a portion
of the population,” made by the majority of the Commissioners present at
their deliberations upon the Draft Report, differ so much from what appears
to me to be the weight of evidence taken before the Commission, and from the
conclusions which I have drawn from that evidence, that I cannot give my
assent to the Report, although there are many recommendations in that part
of the Report which relates to the general organization and administration of
the existing system of Education which were embodied in the Draft Report
in which I agree, and which will, if adopted and acted upon, be found to be
amendments upon the existing system.
I shall therefore, I think, best discharge the duty imposed upon me under
Your Excellency’s commission by embodying, in the form of a separate Report,
the conclusions at which I have arrived in reference to matters upon which I
differ from the views expressed in the Report.
The most careful and unbiassed consideration of the evidence taken before
the Commission has satisfied me that the defects existing in the present Act,
upon the subject of religious teaching, have not been sufficiently dwelt upon
in the Report, nor have the claims of the Roman Catholic portion of the
population to relief from the grievances of which they complain been dealt
with as the evidence required.
The Report wisely and properly enunciates the proposition that “the
education of the young, without the inculcation of moral principles based
upon the authority of God, is defective and imperfect. ” It becomes, then, a
question of paramount importance to inquire whether the departmental system of
education, as established under the existing Act, and for which it appears that
the Government expends out of the revenues of the colony a sum exceeding
half-a-million of money per annum, provides for the inculcation of those
principles “based upon the authority of God,” without which, as the Report
correctly states, the education of the young is imperfect.


If it does not do so, then the system as at present established is defective
and imperfect, and, unless the people are content to expend over half-a-
million per annum upon a defective and imperfect system, should be amended.
But the question goes far beyond the mere consideration of a great expenditure
upon an imperfect result.
The important question is whether, if the present system be persisted in
without any amelioration, it will not result in a few years in the production
of a population wholly wanting in the distinctive moral and religious character
which belongs to a Christian people.
The weight of the evidence taken before the Commission certainly tends to
establish the probability of such a result.
The majority of the representatives of various religious denominations ex-
amined before the Commission expressed the opinion that the absence of
religious instruction from the State schools had a very injurious effect upon the
children, and the Protestant Bishop of Melbourne (Dr. Moorhouse) stated
that, whilst he approved in general of the provisions of the present Act
very heartily, it was defective ‘‘ in that it did not permit teachers to give
elementary undenominational religious instruction, that as a consequence the
children sometimes spoke of religion with astounding irreverence, and that
the probable future of the secular system would be the demoralization of the
children and a very serious interference with the moral tone and dignity of the
teachers. ”
Upon the question of fact, as to whether the children have already deterio-
rated in moral conduct since the introduction of the present system, the
evidence of witnesses outside the Department was that the conduct of the
children had already deteriorated. On the other hand, the Government
inspectors and teachers who were examined generally expressed a favourable
opinion of the general moral conduct of the children ; but the departmental
evidence, especially that afforded by the officers and records of the Depart-
ment, greatly impaired the value of that opinion, as the evidence very clearly
showed that the attention of the inspectors and teachers is directed almost
exclusively to the conduct of the children in reference to their school work,
and that there is an indifference to the inculcation of moral principles and to
the character of the children, and a disregard to their conduct out of school.
This ought not to be attributed to any want of individual moral tone in the
officers or teachers, but rather to the system of the Department, which is
shown by the evidence to ignore all responsibility in reference to the children
outside of school, and to be wholly directed to producing a certain amount
of intellectual sharpness, and the acquisition of a fixed amount of secular
knowledge.
It becomes, then, necessary to see whether the cause of this want of
attention to the moral conduct of the children is in the Act itself or in the
administration.
It seems to me that the cause must be sought in the Act itself, by which
the Department is guided in its administration.
The twelfth section of the Act is imperative as to the strictly secular
character of instruction to be given, and in its prohibition of any religious
instruction by the teacher in school buildings—“ln every State-school secular
instruction only shall be given, and no teacher shall give any other than
secular instruction in any State-school buildings.(Sec. 12b
If this enactment were strictly followed, then were any State-school teacher
to instil into the minds of his pupils “ moral principles based upon the
■authority of God ” it might certainly be contended that he was guilty of a
violation of the letter of the law.
This consideration may possibly have been the reason which induced a late
Minister of Public Instruction to eliminate from the reading-books (as stated
in the evidence, upon the application of a small anti-Christian section of the
community) all the passages having reference to Christianity, an elimination of
Christian precepts which, as stated by the Protestant Bishop of Melbourne in
his evidence, rendered the religious teaching which was left in the books
imperfect, “because it, in fact, abandoned the Christian religion for a form


of religious teaching common to Buddhists, Mahomedans, Christians, and
Theists. ”
This consideration may also have weighed with those teachers, and there
were many of them who stated in their evidence that they used the Theistic
religious passages which remained in the books for the purpose of teaching the
art of reading, and not for the inculcation of religious sentiments.
Those teachers would appear to have been more logical than the Minister of
Instruction, who, when he excised the Christian passages from the books,
should, to have acted consistently, have at the same time removed also those
massages which teach a mere Theistic religion as distinct from Christianity,
By eliminating Christianity, and leaving mere Theistic passages, the only
inference which could fairly be drawn would be, that whilst State aid was by
the Act withheld from the Christian religion, the aid of the State might be
afforded to the inculcation of religion so long as it was not Christian. Two
•of the Protestant witnesses examined adverted to this point very plainly, the
one stating that “he found that the name of Christ was as some evil taint
taken from the books,” another stating “no one said that there was no religion
in the books, but every bit of Christianity was taken out.”
There is no doubt, also, that the construction which many have put upon
-the section referred to, as a direct prohibition to the teaching of religion in
State-school buildings, produced the difficulties which, until very recently,
were thrown in the way of the use of State-school buildings for the purpose
of voluntary religious instruction.
It must be equally clear that as one Minister of the Crown was able,
of his own mere will, to eliminate from the school-books all references to
Christianity, so another Minister might at any moment cause to be expunged
all references to religious sentiments, however vague in character, which
remain in the books.
The evidence upon this branch of the subject certainly shows that there
exists in the minds of a very large proportion of those who desire the
advancement of the education of the people a feeling of alarm at the possible
consequences of a continnance of the existing difficulties, and that the parents
of the Colony, speaking generally, entertain a great desire that all the existing
difficulties in the way of the religious education of the young should be
grappled with, whilst at the same time the system of a compulsory gratuitous
system of education should be preserved.
On the other hand, there is no doubt a portion of the population who are
satisfied with the Act in its present form and who desire no change, but these
constitute, if I may judge by the evidence, a small minority, consisting mainly
of the secularists who would destroy all religious influences, and the Jews at
whose instigation the Christian passages in the reading-books were eliminated.
The evidence, however, shows that the vast majority of the population
desire that such amendments should be instroduced into the Act as would,
whilst removing the present appearance of antagonism to religion, afford
facilities for securing religious instruction of a Christian character to the
young.
The evidence shows that the Protestant denominations, speaking generally,
despair of being able to afford religious instruction without some modification
of the present Act, hence their complaint of a grievous defect in the Act;
and they urge, as a foundation to which voluntary assistance may be auxiliary,
the paramount necessity of Scripture readings, from both the Old and the New
Testament, being made a part of the school curriculum.
The Bishop of Melbourne, Dr. Moorhouse, puts the matter in a practical
form, when he stated that “ the voluntary movement lacked a very important
element, viz., that the ordinary teacher did not instruct the children. He
wanted permanent organization—one that could last, and do the work.
The school curriculum should include religion ; nothing else would cover
the ground.”
The evidence is disflnct that a scheme of such readings might be framed
which would be acceptable to the various Protestant denominations—such a
table has, in fact, been prepared by the London School Board.


The children of parents who gave a written notice of their objection to their
children attending such lessons should be excused from attending the lessons.
It would be necessary, also, to excuse from reading such lessons any teacher
who should declare in writing that he had conscientious objections to reading
them.
If a school had one teacher only, and that teacher declared in writing his or
her conscientious objection to reading the Scripture lessons, the Board of
Advice of the district or other local authority should be entitled to approve of.
a person, either clerical or lay, who could read the lessons.
It would, however, I believe, be found that in practice the case of a teacher
objecting to read the lessons on the score of conscience would be of very
rare occurrence.
Again, referring to the evidence, it was pressed upon the Commission by
some well-qualified witnesses that a series of questions should be framed upon
the lessons read, which would interest the children and test their attention
without introducing polemical discussion into the character of the teaching.
This, it was stated, could easily be done.
Many of the witnesses examined expressed decided opinions, which they
said were based upon wide observation, that the Irish National Scripture
Lesson Books would be very generally acceptable to the Protestant portion of
the population as Scripture lesson books in the schools.
Such a system as that sketched out would introduce undenominational
religious instruction of a Christian character in the State schools in a manner
which would supply the defect complained of by the Protestant denominations,
and could neither lessen the time at present devoted to secular instruction nor
interfere with the conscience of those parents who did not wish their children
to attend the Scripture lessons.
To effect this amendment, which the evidence has satisfied me is desired,
speaking generally, by the Protestant portion of the population, it would be
necessary to repeal section 12 of the present Act, and to enact in its place a
section similar to that in the New South Wales Act—an amendment which
would admit of the teaching, as a part of the school curriculum, the broad
principles of the Christian religion apart from sectarian distinctions.
Scripture readings and lessons based upon this principle should then form part
of the school curriculum, the first half hour before the time fixed for the
commencement of the secular lessons being devoted to the purpose, the State-
school teacher giving the prescribed instruction except in those cases in which
the teacher had stated in writing that he had conscientious objections to doing
All statutory and departmental prohibitions or impediments in the way of
the State-school teachers giving religious instruction in school-buildings should
be removed, so that the State-school teachers should be on an equal footing as
to voluntary religious teaching with the rest of Her Majesty’s subjects.
The words in Your Excellency’s commission, the “ alleged grievance of a
portion of the population,” have no doubt been generally looked upon as re-
lating to the Roman Catholic portion of the population only, but, so far as the
present exclusion of Christianity from the State-school system goes, I believe
that if the evidence of the Protestant witnesses be fairly and dispassionately
considered it will be found that the grievance extends to all those, whether
Protestant or Catholics, who believe that it is essential to the best interests of
society that the young should be trained in religious sentiments as the basis of
moral conduct through life.
In the preceding observations, I have submitted to Your Excellency the
relief which, it appears from the evidence, is sought by the Protestant portion
of the population. I shall now proceed to the consideration of the evidence
upon the claims of the Roman Catholic portion of the population.
In reference to these claims, the evidence establishes the fact that whilst the
members of the Roman Catholic Church would gladly recognize the advantage
that would accrue to their Protestant fellow-colonists by the establishment of
Scripture lessons in the school, to be read by the teachers as part of the
curriculum, and would hail with satisfaction the introduction of greater


facilities for voluntary Christian teaching in the schools which would be satis-
factory to the Protestants, yet that such concession to the desire of the
Protestant denominations would not render the State schools such as would
allow Roman Catholic parents to accept them as offering a suitable education
to their children.
The Roman Catholic portion of the population appear to me, from the
evidence, to urge as a grievance that they alone of the taxpayers of the colony
are unable, without violation of their religious conscience, to benefit by the
gratuitous system of secular instruction afforded in the State schools, to which,
however, they, in common with those colonists who are enabled to benefit by
the system, have to contribute.
The Returns show that a large number of Roman Catholic children attend
State schools (the Catholic schools being few in number), but if, as the evidence
shows, the Catholic conscience is hurt by the necessity of sending their children
to State schools, from the fear of penalties and the absence of Catholic schools,
then it follows logically that the greater the number of Roman Catholic children
sent to State Schools the greater is the pressure which the law inflicts upon the
conscience of its Roman Catholic subjects.
They, therefore, propose that they should provide their own school-
buildings, which, however, should be used for none other than school pur-
poses or religious services, and should be subject to State inspection; that
whilst they should select their own school teachers, no teacher should be
employed who had not either obtained a Government certificate as a competent
teacher, or who should otherwise give sufficient proof to the Government of
his or her fitness as a teacher.
They propose that the teachers should be subject to the same superintend-
ence, suspension, and dismissal as the ordinary State-school teachers ; and that
the secular curriculum of their schools should be the same as that of the State
schools, and the examination of their scholars the same.
That the only payment they would ask from the State would be a payment
per capita for the results in secular instruction obtained in their schools. As to
the amount of payment for each scholar, the evidence somewhat varied, some
of the witnesses being of opinion that the rate should be the same as the
cost to the State of each State-school scholar, whilst others were of opinion
that the Roman Catholics would be satisfied with a payment per capita at a
somewhat lower rate.
In reference to the question of payment, it may be well here to state that
from the returns presented to the Commission it would appear that in the
schools established by the Roman Catholic Church since the present Act came
into operation, the cost for each scholar was only £1 16s. 5d., whilst in the
State schools the cost for each scholar was £4 Os. 9Jd. It must be observed,
however, that the very small cost per scholar at the Roman Catholic schools
is attributable in a great part to the fact that the teaching in the schools
has been largely conducted by members of religious orders, both male and
female. If certificated lay teachers were employed, no doubt the cost for
each scholar would more nearly approach that of the scholars in the State
schools.
The evidence taken before the Commission shows that the secular instruc-
tion at the Roman Catholic schools has been quite equal to that at the State
schools.
This proposal of the Roman Catholics would place their schools very much
in the position of non-vested schools, subject to the same control, so far as
secular instruction is concerned, as the ordinary State schools.
As the payment to be made would be in respect of the secular instruction
only, the religious instruction being supplied by the Roman Catholics them-
selves, and at their own cost, the proposal seems to me to be wholly free from the
objection of a return to the system of State aid to denominational education.
The State would contribute nothing to the erection or maintenance of such
non-vested schools, nor would it pay the salaries of the teachers, nor would it
contribute to the cost of the religious instruction. It would pay merely a
capitation fee in respect of secular subjects for those scholar's who attained that


proficiency in secular attainments which the State requires from all the chil-
dren of the colony. The amount per head ought to be less than the average
cost of State-school scholars, as the latter is calculated upon the basis of the
cost of the school buildings from which the estimate for the payment to the
scholars in non-vested schools should be deducted inasmuch as the cost of the
buildings and their repair is to fall upon those establishing them.
As regards any increase of expense to the colony, it is clear that the increase
would not be nearly so great as it would be if the members of the Roman
Catholic Church closed their present schools. If such an event took place,
then the children now educated in them would have to be educated at the
State schools, at the rate of £4 Os. 9fd. per head, the present rate of cost of
State-school children. It should also be taken into account that the State has
already expended in school buildings £1,115,863 10s. 6d., and this would have
to be increased by a further outlay equivalent to about a fourth of that
amount, if the schools, already erected by the Roman Catholics, were to be
closed.
Although the proposal for the payment by the State of a capitation allow-
ance for results in secular subjects of instruction has arisen with the Roman
Catholics, and is at present only required for them (although, as will be seen
further on, I have suggested an analogous system might, on the score of
economy and efficiency, be introduced in sparsely-populated parts of the
country), yet, even if others asked that the same system should be applied to
them, no further cost would be incurred by the State, since those who asked
for the extension of the system to themselves would have to purchase sites
and build schools out of their own moneys, and thus the State would be saved
the cost of providing buildings for such scholars as were taught in such non-
vested schools.
As the capitation allowance would only be paid in respect of those scholars
who attained the Government standard, and as the examination would be
conducted by the Government Inspectors, there could be no deterioration in
attainments in secular subjects.
Another important consideration which should not be lost sight of is, that
at present the State has no power of learning, by inspection and examination,
whether the children at Roman Catholic schools are receiving efficient instruc-
tion, or that the instruction is given in suitable buildings. By the proposed
system the necessary right of inspection and examination would be established.
The evidence given before the Commission by lay members of the Roman
Catholic Church has satisfied me, beyond all doubt, that the present system is
a heavy grievance upon the Roman Catholic portion of the population. In
country districts where there are no Roman Catholic schools, the parents of
Roman Catholic children are constrained, under penalties which may be
enforced by imprisonment, to send their children to schools of which in their
conscience they disapprove. One lay Roman Catholic witness, from a country
district, when illustrating the grievance of which he and others of his
religious persuasion complained, said that “he believed Englishmen, if they
could thoroughly understand the Roman Catholic grievance, would not
pepetrate such a wrong. ”
It would, therefore, seem to me desirable if the dissatisfaction with the
present system in so large a proportion of the population as that of the
members of the Roman Catholic Church can be removed, and a greater political
unity in the whole population be secured by the adoption of a mode that would
really not be inconsistent with the working of a State system of Christian
undenominational instruction, and which would retain in the State a control
over the secular instruction of the youth of the colony, that the experiment
should have a fair trial. No disturbance of the present departmental arrange-
ments would be required, and if the system did not produce the result which
the evidence leads me to hope for, it might be discontinued.
I would again observe that this arrangement need not necessarily be con-
fined to schools established by Roman Catholics. If any other society of per-
sons, sufficiently distinct to afford a guarantee to the Government that the con-
ditions would be complied with, should be willing, at their own expense, to


erect and dedicate to the purpose suitable buildings, to provide proper
salaried certificated teachers, and to conform in other respects to the condi-
tions, they should be entitled to similar payments for secular results for
scholars brought up to the Government standard.
I believe that the proposed system would be so protected by the heavy
expenses which would be incurred by individuals availing themselves of it
(excepting in sparsely-populated districts where homesteads were used as
schools, and where the State would gain a great advantage), that it would not
be likely to be abused, and the only rivalry with the State schools would be
such as would tend to keep the State schools up to their standard.
In dealing with the evidence upon this subject, it is worthy of remark that-
several of the Protestant witnesses expressed a generous sympathy with their
Roman Catholic fellow-subjects as to the grievance of which they complained ;
some expressing their views that concession should be made to the Roman
Catholics if religious instruction to the young could be generally secured. In
fact, the grievance complained of by the Roman Catholics is not more point-
edly expressed in any portion of the evidence than in that of a Protestant
minister, who stated in his evidence ‘‘ He did not hesitate to say that if he-
were a Roman Catholic he would fight to the death against the maintenance of
the Act as at present.”
I regret much that the majority of the Commissioners present at the delibera-
tions upon the Draft Report, whilst proposing some relief to the Protestant
portion of the population, have arrived at conclusions adverse to the claim of
the Roman Catholic portion of the population to relief.
The claims of the two sections of the population are so interwoven that I
doubt whether the concession can be made to the one and withheld from
the other, so that the result of the rejection of the Roman Catholic claims
might be the continued exclusion of Christianity from the schools, which I
believe would, in a comparatively short time, result in serious calamity to the
colony.
I have dealt, in the first place, with the question of religion in relation to
education, including, as it does the consideration of “the alleged grievances
of a portion of the population ” (although the majority of the Commissioners
present at the deliberations upon the Draft Report, altering the order of my
Draft Report, have made it the second part of their Report), because the
evidence has deeply impressed me with a conviction of the paramount import-
ance to the future welfare and peace of the colony of an unbiassed, impartial,
and liberal treatment of the difficulty.
With the recommendations of that portion of the Report —■“ Part I.”—
which deals with “ The whole administration, organization, and general
condition of the existing system of public instruction,” I desire to express my
general concurrence. Many of the imperfections and evils which the evidence
has shown to exist, and which are referred to in the Report, would by the
adoption of the proposed amendment be removed, and I believe that the
general efficiency of the State-school system would be increased, and the
present large expenditure kept under more control, and somewhat, if not
considerably, reduced.
There are, however, one or two points of importance in the evidence which
I think are hardly sufficiently dealt with in the Report, and to which I think
it my duty to refer.
One of the most important of these is the inquiry as to the several degrees
in which centralization and local administration should prevail. The question
is one of degree, inasmuch as a central department, with more or less extensive
authority, will always be necessary to secure a uniform standard of instruction
and discipline.
Although the Commission has by no means entered exhaustively into the
subject, yet the evidence taken has shown that, in the best interests of a
general system of education, it is most desirable to entrust different localities
with as much local control as would be consistent with a general superintend-
ence in the central department. The evidence has shown that the attention
of the central department is principally, if not wholly, directed to producing;


a certain intellectual sharpness and the acquisition of a fixed limit of secular
knowledge, and that there has consequently been an indifference in both
inspectors and teachers to the cultivation of moral principles and conduct in
the children. It was also stated by some of the most competent witnesses—
teachers in State-schools and head masters of public grammar schools—that
the quality of the secular instruction had deteriorated under the present
system ; and the weight of evidence was very distinct that, since the education
had been gratuitous, the parents were far more negligent in compelling the
regular school attendance of the children than under the old system.
Whilst the present system has been accompanied with these results, the
annual expenditure out of the general revenue has increased until it has
reached last year considerably over half a million of money.
By the introduction of a sounder system of local control, and by throwing
some part of the expense of the system upon the local rates, I believe much
greater economy would be secured, and that a practical interest would be
awakened in the minds of parents, which would secure attention to the moral
conduct of the children, the more regular attendance of the children at
school, and, as a necessary consequence, a more effective and valuable
education.
When the system was introduced it was, no doubt, thought that Boards of
Advice would have had more direct control and influence than the evidence
shows them to have had.
The evidence is very clear that there has been a tendency in the Department
to ignore the Boards of Advice. Lately there has been some change in the
policy of the Department in this respect, but the law should be so clear as to
the duties, powers, and rights of Boards of Advice or other local authorities
that the question of their proper weight and influence to the work of the
Department should be placed beyond the caprice of either the political
or permanent heads of the Department.
As the groundwork for a more effective local control, I would submit that
it would be desirable if the boundaries of Boards of Advice or other local
authorities were at once so arranged that they should not overlap different
municipal districts.
This would require that, if there should happen to be only one Board of
Advice within a municipal district that its boundaries should be so arranged
as to be wholly coterminous with those of that municipal district. If more
than one Board of Advice was within one municipal district, then that the
boundaries of all those Boards of Advice should be so arranged as to be wholly
included within the boundaries of that municipal district.
Were this re-arrangement of the boundaries of Boards of Advice at once made,
the improved mode of taking the school census recommended in the Report,
and which I believe would be found to be highly beneficial, would be much
facilitated.
The utter failure of the Department to obtain a proper school census is
pointed out in the Report. If the compulsory attendance of children is to be
effected, a proper census is essential, and I believe that, by the employment
of the rate collectors of the several municipal bodies, a complete school census
could be obtained at a merely nominal cost. But to secure this the boundaries
of school districts must be arranged as I have proposed.
The re-arrangement of boundaries upon the system proposed would also
prepare the way for the substitution of the municipal council for a separately
elected Board of Advice when such substitution should be deemed desirable.
Some witnesses of great experience who were examined expressed opinions
favourable to such a change.
There are many reasons why such a change would be advantageous : one
would be that, in such an event, school buildings, when once erected, would
be vested in the municipality, with the responsibility of repairing and
furnishing the buildings, and of planting and keeping in good order the play-
grounds, out of the municipal rates, a change which, whilst it would relieve the
Department from much labour which it at present ill discharges at great outlay,
would also relieve the general revenue, and, by creating a claim upon the local


rates, would induce a greater interest in the proper care of the buildings and
in the school generally.
Although it may be deemed that the time has not yet arrived for removing
any great portion of the expense of education from the general revenue to
the localities in which the parents reside, yet the evidence certainly shows
that both economy and efficiency would be effected by throwing the cost of
repairs and control of the building upon the localities in which they are
situate.
Several members of Boards of Advice, who were also members or officers of
municipal councils, stated in their evidence, that they thought that the time
was approaching when municipalities should bear some portion of the cost of
education.
Without in the first instance introducing so great a change as to render it
compulsory upon municipalities to take over school buildings, it might be well
to introduce an amendment into the Act, enabling municipal bodies to take
over school buildings, and also the duties of Boards of Advice upon a vote of
the ratepayers. The municipal council could, in such case, form a represen-
tative school board.
Whilst I have thought it my duty to draw your Excellency’s attention to
the consideration of the possibility of creating an active interest in parents,
and a relief of fhe general revenue, by introducing municipal government
and responsibility into the State school system —which, I believe, would
eventually be the most effective mode of securing economy and efficiency—l
would wish to express my opinion that the proposal for the creation of school
committees, with substantial and defined powers, which is set out in the
Report, would, if adopted, be a decided improvement upon the present
system ; but I would still recommend that the territorial boundaries of the
jurisdiction of the proposed committees and provincial school boards should be
ari’anged upon the principle which I have suggested for the re-adjustment of
the boundaries of Boards of Advice.
The school census might then, in future, be taken by the officers of the
municipality, and if time should show the desirability of substituting municipal
councils for district committees, the change could be made.
Whilst dealing with the subject of the compulsory clause, the Report
proposes an amendment in the present system, which, whilst not interfering
with the principle of compulsory gratuitous education, will be found, if
adopted, to effect not only a material economy, but to have a highly beneficial
effect upon the education of State-school scholars generally. I refer to the
recommendation to Your Excellency made in the Report, that if a child shall
not have attained the compulsory standard of elementary instruction at the
age of thirteen that then the parent shall be compelled to bear the cost of the
school instruction of his child from that age until the child shall have either
obtained its certificate or has, by having attained the age of fifteen years,
become exempt from attendance at school. The evidence before the Com-
mission was very distinct that since education had become gratuitous the
parents had become far more careless in compelling the regular attendance of
their children ; it was also clearly established that the compulsory standard
might, with the most ordinary children, be easily attained at the age of
twelve or thirteen years, although from irregular attendance many children
did not attain the standard till much later. It was shown also that the
irregular attendance tended to retard the progress of the more regular
children.
By the adoption of the suggestion in the Report it may be fairly anticipated
that the attendance will become more regular, and that the children will
therefore become earlier entitled to their certificates, by which not only will a
considerable expense in the otherwise more prolonged indifferent instruction be
saved to the State, but the child will have been early trained in more regular
habits of industry and application, and will be earlier enabled to be trained to
some industrial pursuit. It will also impress upon the parent that, whilst it is
his right to have his child trained gratuitously to a certain standard of educa-
tion, his right is coupled with the condition that he, on his part, shall discharge


his duty to the State by compelling in his child a regular school attendance and
attention to school work.
One great cause of expense is the necessity of numerous small schools in
•sparsely populated districts. The evidence has satisfied me that no full-time
school should be maintained with a less assured average number of scholars in
attendance than thirty ; under this number the school should be made a half-
time or third-time school. I believe, however, that much of the expense and
difficulty of small schools in country places would be avoided, and their
efficiency largely increased, if the system of payment for results in secular
subjects, in a manner analogous to that which I herein have submitted to your
Excellency in reference to the Roman Catholic difficulty, were adopted in
country places upon the request of a few resident heads of families.
Were this course adopted, I believe that in many cases the settlers in
sparsely populated districts would give up a portion of their homesteads (so
there would be no necessity to erect school buildings) for the purpose of
receiving the children of the locality for instruction, and that thus a most
efficient mode of instruction, at small cost, would be established, in the place
of very imperfect and expensive half-time or third-time schools.
All which matters I beg humbly to report and submit to your Excellency.
J. WARRINGTON ROGERS, (1.5.)
Chairman of Royal Commission on Education.
MEMORANDUM OF FREDERICK McCOY, WILLIAM HENRI ARCHER,
EDMOND KEOGH, HENRY NICHOLAS LOUGHNAN, MEMBERS OF
THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON EDUCATION.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
We, Your Excellency’s Commissioners, whose hands and seals are hereunto
set, desire to state to Your Excellency that we cannot approve of the Report
adopted by a majority of Your Commissioners present at a meeting of the
Commission except so far as the same is adopted by our Chairman, Mr,
Warrington Rogers, and we have therefore not signed the said Report.
As the Report of our Chairman expresses our opinions and the conclusions at
which we have arrived after a careful consideration of the evidence given before
the Commission, to avoid prolixity, we have the honour to state that we
entirely concur with the annexed Report of our Chairman, Mr. Warrington
Rogers, and humbly recommend the same to Your Excellency’s consideration.
FREDERICK McCOY. (1.5.)
W. H. ARCHER. ( L .s.)
EDMD. KEOGH. (1.5.)
H. N. LOUGHNAN. (1.5.)
26th June, ISS4.
46




