

REMINISCENCES
of the
"Early Settlement
of the
Maranoa District”
BY
MARY A. McMANUS
Registered at the General Post Office, Brisbane,
for transmission by post as a book.
“Charleville Times” Print—Charleville
1969.


REMINISCENCES
of the
"Early Settlement
of the
Maranoa District”
BY
MARY A. McMANUS
Registered at the General Post Office, Brisbane,
for transmission by post as a book.
“Charleville Times” Print Charleville
1 9 6 9.


MARY A. McMANUS


INTRODUCTION
In compliance with a request made me by a friend
that I should give him a few of my reminiscences of the
early settlement of Mount Abundance and the Maranoa,
I will endeavour in the following pages to comply with
his request as best I can.
As I kept no regular journal or any notes, I write
mostly from memory. Therefore, if any of the few old
residents think that I depart from strict facts I am willing
to be corrected. For "To err is human." Also I beg to be
forgiven if I dwell somewhat at length on personal
matters, because in doing so I am also dwelling on the
recollections of others who were intimately connected
with our life at Mount Abundance at that time, as will
be seen as I proceed. I also hope any appearance of
egotism may be pardoned. Indeed, I think I may justly
lay claim to a little self-knowledge, as I am the oldest
woman now living and the first with my mother who
came to the district.
I shall commence with my father's (Stephen Spen-
cer's) occupation of Mt. Abundance, which he purchased
of Mr. Allen McPherson of Keira Station, near Barraba,
New South Wales. The purchase was effected in Septem-
ber, 1857. In the following March, 1858, my father
started from his station, Iron Bark, near Barraba, New
South Wales. His party consisted of himself, my mother,
myself aged 14, and my brother David, aged 11 years, 13
men, 1000 head of cattle, 60 horses, 4 bullock drays lad-
en with rations, household effects etc, a spring cart in
which my mother and we children travelled. It was a
very cramped affair (no waggonettes or buckboards or
buggies in those days). We journeyed on very slowly, as
we kept pace with the cattle and bullock teams. The dis-
tance was 400 miles, and we were four months on the
road. Our losses in stock during the first 200 miles were
heavy owing to the scarcity of feed and water. There was
no grass till we crossed over from Nindi Gully on the
Moonie River to Boomba on the Balonne. Nindi Gully was
then only a cattle station, managed by a Mr. Webster for


Mr. Ogilvie of the Clarence River. Mr. Webster was ex-
ceedingly kind to us. There was no water between Nindi
Gully and Boomba (a distance of 25 miles), where we
struck the Balonne. The cattle and teams were obliged
to travel night and day to reach it. Boomba was then the
property of Mr. Henry Dangar, of New South Wales,
whose general manager was the late Mr. (afterwards
Sir) Arthur H. Palmer. Boomba was then temporarily in
charge of a stockman. We travelled slowly up the Bal-
onne River to allow our cattle to recover their condition
on the luxuriant grass that grew so plentifully all along
its banks. The next place we reached was the natural
bridge of rocks called by Sir Thomas Mitchell, St.
George's Bridge. Here we stayed a short time. There was
then no habitation of any kind where the township of
St. George now stands. My brother and I were probably
the first white children who ran across that natural
bridge. Then we proceeded up the river and camped
some time at Warroo and Wargoo Stations, formerly
owned by Mr. Ogilvie, but then the property of Mr.
Robert Fitzgerald, a wealthy squatter of New South
Wales, but both were deserted. On one of them was a
large slab hut of several rooms. The walls were pierced
with port holes for the purpose of shooting through
them at any hostile blacks that might molest the occup-
ants. At No. Ten, Mr. Becket's Station, we stayed a while.
He was very kind to us and lent us working bullocks to
draw our teams through the sand. Then we came to
Donga, managed by Mr. Richard McDougall, who had
recently lost his wife under very painful circumstances.
I think Donga was then owned by Messrs Flood and Gor-
don, of Sydney, but I am not certain. Subsequently I
know it was; and managed by a Mr. Solomon Wiseman,
From Donga we had no road but two old dray tracks and
the first track up and down the Balonne of the Mailman
in the boggy soil from Moree to Surat. All along the
banks of the Balonne the Country was most lovely. The
tall grass waving in the wind nearly over our heads like
a field of wheat ready for reaping. The bullocks in the
teams could scarcely be seen for the high grass. Wild
carrots, crows foot, etc., were in abundance. Then we


reached Werribene, then owned by Mr. Thos. Hall, of
Dartbrook, New South Wales, and managed by a man
named George Neal. A few miles further up was Tal-
avera or native name, Yamboogal owned by Mr.
Joseph Flemming, and managed by James Norman.
Both he and Neal were "old hands". At each station
there was only one white man to cook, etc. (or hut keep-
ers as they were called in those days). The other em-
ployees were all black boys. Surat consisted then of only
a post office and commissioner's camp. Mr. Henry Boyle
was Crown Lands Commissioner then. Noorindoo also
was Mr. Hall's of Dartbrook Station. It was afterwards
managed for him by Mr. F. G. McKay, now postmaster
in Roma for many years. This station we did not see, as
it is higher up the River. At Talavera we crossed the Bal-
onne at the back of the house or a little higher up. In
crossing two of our drays capsized into a mud puddle
in the bed of the river. This necessitated a camp of some
days to repair damages, dry wet clothing and other
things damaged by water and mud. Here my father dis-
missed about 200 or 250 of the blacks and their gins and
picaninnies, all of whom had followed us up the Balonne
from Boomba; retaining about 20 in all to assist in getting
bark, etc., on our arrival at Mount Abundance. We now
left the Balonne and continued our journey up the Yale-
bene Creek, leaving also behind us the last inhabited
Station (Talavera). We camped at Occabulla (now Trin-
idad), then a deserted station, recently occupied by Paddy
Mclnroe; who was left in charge of Mount Abundance by
Mr. McPherson; but who had died at Drayton just after
my father bought the station from the effects of a drunk-
en spree. We now went up the Yalebene Creek till we
arrived at Mount Abundance deserted head Station on
the Muckadilla Creek or what remained of it, for a bush
fire had burned the two huts and stock yards. We land-
ed there on the 11th June, 1858, after a trying and
fatiguing journey of four months duration. We camped
under a large tent made of calico and the tarpaulins from
the drays, until a rough slab hut could be built. We im-
mediately commenced to rebuild the hut that was partly
burned, also the stock yards, etc.


My mother was the first squatter's wife who ever
came into the Maranoa district, and my brother and I
were the first children. It was a rough life we had then.
My mother was quite unused to it, and I was too young
to be of much assistance to her. No household servants
would venture out then, no matter what inducement
was held out to them. We were obliged to perform ail
our household duties as best we could. We lived in this
great tent, in which all our cooking utensils and cases of
household effects were stored away. So there was not
much room to spare. Here I made my first damper,which
was by no means a success. The weather too was bitterly
cold. The water in the buckets was almost solid ice. We
turned it out the shape of the buckets.
A few days after our arrival seven of our men left,
and three remained. The news of the murder of the
Frazer family at Hornet Bank on the Dawson frightened
them, or they pretended to be frightened. The real cause
was the rush to the Peak Downs goldfields. Both events
happened about the same time. Be that as it may they all
cleared out one morning leaving only three of their mates
behind. These were William Coverly, Philip Mellows, and
another man Joe, whose surname I forget. We soon built
a rough hut, rebuilt the stockyards, and were tolerably
comfortable for a time.
We had no trouble whatever with the blacks; though
they were troublesome at other Stations, they never
molested either ourselves or our property, although
nearly 300 followed us up from Boomba and St. George's
Bridge to Talavera. The reason of this was that my father
treated them kindly but firmly. To every black man,
woman, and child, he gave a new clay pipe and a fig of
cheap tobacco as a peace offering. He never ill-treated
nor deceived them; nor did he allow any of his men to
do so or to have any intercourse with them whatever. He
dismissed six men on one occasion for not obeying his
rule in this particular. No black of either sex was allowed
near our camp after sundown. The question has often
been asked me, "Were you not afraid of the blacks?" I


answered "Not a bit." "Were they hostile?" "Not at all."
Some of these blacks were real "AAyals," not speaking a
word of English, but none attempted any outrage of any
sort. At the same time we did not ignore the fact that
they were savages; and we had arms always in readiness
in case an occasion should arise requiring their use. The
native police were patrolling the district as well. We were
visited by two companies of native police at this time.
One under the command of the Government officer, Mr.
Robert Walker, with eight troopers (I think) all blacks.
Another under Mr. Fredrick Walker, or as he was famil-
iarly called, "Philibuster Walker," because he went about
the country with a band of six black troopers. He was the
founder of the Native Police, and was raised to the rank
of commandant of the Native Police Force. But alas! he
could not resist the failing of intemperance, consequent-
ly, he was requested to resign. He still patrolled this and
other districts, chiefly in the Dawson. His home, I believe
was at Mr. Andrew Scott's station, Hornet Bank. He was
a fine specimen of a man. He stood 6 feet or over, broad-
chested and square shouldered. He was well educated,
and possessed much practical knowledge on almost
every subject. He continued his patrols till his death, also
his railings against the Government for its ingratitude in
not recognising his services. The first Native Police Force
was recruited by him from the native tribes on the Murr-
ay River, New South Wales. But to return. Though the
Native Police visited us and the neighbouring stations,
they were not needed anywhere except in a few isolated
cases. There was, and always has been, more fuss made
about hostile blacks than there was ever any real occasion
for. And half the hostilities and murders were caused by
carelessness, too great familiarity, or unmerited abuse
and ill-treatment. It being then to the interest of the
workmen to cry out "Wild Blacks". They thinking by so
doing, they could prevent other men from coming out,
which would keep up the high rate of wages that they
were then being given, not seeing in their ignorance that
it also kept squatters from coming out and opening up
the country, and by so doing employing more men and


creating a demand for labour, thus causing new industr-
ies to spring up that would never have been the case if
their absurd cry had been listened to,- nor would Queens-
land be wha + she is today.
II.
We remained at Mount Abundance six or eight
weeks, when my father decided to form the Head Station
where it now stands, on the banks of the Bungeworgorai
Creek. This was desirable for many reasons, though not
so convenient in other respects. One was to be nearer to
Wallumbilla Station, which was 50 miles from us on the
eastern side, and Surat was 50 miles on the southern
(the nearest habitations). Thus, in removing to the Bunge-
worgorai Creek we were only 30 miles from Wallum-
billa. That station at that time was owned by Mr. William
P. Gordon. He called on us after we arrived at Bunge-
worgorai. This was his second visit. The first was when
we were at the old head station near the mountain al-
most as soon as we arrived there. Having selected the
present site for the head station we proceeded to build
ourselves habitations. We lived for six months in two V-
shaped humpies built of bark. These were about twelve
or fourteen feet long and about six or eight feet wide and
six feet high in the centre only. All available space was
filled with loading, boxes and household effects, leaving
a narrow gangway down the centre. No cleaning could
be done owing to the crowded state of the buildings, and
the place was swarming with fleas that had come in out
of the bush. Such a number I never saw before or since.
It was a perfect plaque. It was Christmas time and fear-
fully hot; and it rained almost every day, heavy thunder-
storms. The creek was a banker for a week at a time, and
the ground so boggy that no horse or dray could stand;
The first timber that was ever cut west of Wallumbilla
was cut off the big sand ridge opposite what it now Mt.
Abundance Lodge gate and once known as Gibson's farm
(now Irea) was cut for our house. A rough affair. It was
afterwards a kitchen. It was the first house built on the


creek, excepting Mr. McPherson's hut about a mile below
the present station, which was burnt to the ground be-
fore we came.
In March, 1859, the first wheat ever grown in the
district was grown by my father on that sand ridge. The
first grape vines were grown at the head station, also
the first fig, peach, and apricot trees. And the first rose
tree was planted by my mother and bloomed in her gar-
den in the spring of 1859. The first sheep to cross the
Bungil and Bungeworgorai Creeks were my father's like-
wise the first teams that crossed were his, and laden with
his stores. The first wool was also his that crossed on its
way to Brisbane. I forget the name of the first carrier
who crossed the Creek going West, but I think it was one
Florence O'Sullivan, brother to Pat O'Sullivan, once M.P.
for Ipswich.
This was before the separation of Queensland from
New South Wales. We had rough times then too. My
mother and I did all our own work, assisted by the black
gins. Our sewing was then all done by hand, there being
no sewing machines as now. We were then the most
Westerly residents, Mount Abundance head station being
outside them all.
III.
My father made the first marked tree line from
Mount Abundance to Wallumbilla Station in 1859, be-
fore there was anyone living at Blythsdale or Tingin, as
it was called at that time. Blythsdale was taken up some
time previous to this. But owing to the hostilities of the
natives the owner was deterred from forming a station
there. It afterwards became the property of Mr. W. P.
Gordon, and was a part of Wallumbilla run. It is said that
Mr. Blyth (the original owner) was attacked by the blacks.
Mr. Blyth shot some of them, then he and his man
caught and mounted their horses bareback, forgetting in
their haste to take the hobbles off. The consequence was
they were both thrown, which caused some delay before
they could get safely away. Mr. Gordon built a sheep


station at Tingin, where a very old and eccentric shepherd
lived and tended his flock. It afterwards became an
overseer's station, till it was purchased by Mr. Henry
Cardell, who gave it its original name of Blythsdale,
which it has since retained.
The first gentleman to go out on an exploring ex-
pedition in search of new country in July, 1859, was Mr.
William Hunter. He owned Chinchilla at that time. He
subsequently owned Eurella in the Maranoa district,
afterwards the property of Messrs Menzies, Doughlass &
Co. Mr. Hunter was afterwards Inspector of Brands at St.
George, the duties of which he discharged till his death,
which took place in Brisbane about 12 years ago (if my
memory serves me.) He was familiarly known as
"Daddy" Hunter. He will be remembered as a kindly,
genial man, by many old residents of the district, and by
some of the younger ones also. He explored a great dis-
tance out West beyond the Maranoa River, which was
then a terra incognita.
Then came Mr. William Bassett (cousin of Mr. S. S.
Bassett of Roma). He took up Euthulla, which the cousins
owned for several years. After him came the Hon. James
Labr, who took up, seme say bought, Gubberamunda,
higher up the Bungil Creek than Euthulla, and which is
still owned by him. I may say here that Gubberamunda,
Stewart's Creek (Mr. George Smith's Station), and Mount
Lonsdale (Mr. William McManus's Station) are the only
three stations that have remained in the possession of
their original owners. That is as far as I am aware of. All
others having passed through the hands of more than
one owner or owners, some through several.
About this time, July 1859, we were visited by Mr.
Henry Boyle, Commissioner of Crown Lands at Surat;
also Mr. William Yaldwyn then of Bendemere Station,
Queensland, now Police Magistrate at Brisbane. My
father now made an exploration of the Upper Bunge-
worgorai Creek in the company of Mr. Frederick Walker
before mentioned. They camped on or near a very pretty
hill covered with bottle trees which Mr. Walker named


Mount Spencer, after my father. It was afterwards known
as Bottle Tree Hill. Another hill near by of peculiar shape
Mr. Walker named after himself, but it was subsequently
renamed Bob's Mountain. These latter names still adhere
to them.
On my father's return he tendered for a run near
Mount Beagle, so named by Sir Thomas Mitchell, and it
became the residence of my maternal uncle Mr. William
Smith, for some years. In December, 1859, my uncle
William Smith, his wife and family of 1 1 children with
all their horses, cattle, drays, etc., arrived at Mount Abun-
dance from New South Wales. They lived with us for
about a year, when they removed to Mount Beagle in
January 1861, which station my father had taken up for
them. My uncle was a wonderfully hard working and
persevering man, and he spent a great deal of time and
labour in making Mount Beagle a comfortable home. He
was delighted with the fine waterhole, near which he
built his homestead. It was three-quarters of a mile long,
and its depth was unknown. Now I believe it is quite
filled up with sand drift, which shows the changes that
stocking country has brought about. This lovely water-
hole, when I first saw it, was a magnificent sight. The
natives declared it never went dry. It was beautiful water
too, as clear as crystal. Mr. William Smith was the father
of Messrs George William, and Spencer S. Smith, all well
known in the neighbourhood of Roma; also of Messrs
John and S. Charles Smith, late owners of Tyrconnell
Downs and Ularunda, and Mr. Alfred C. Smith of Arma-
dilla. His five daughters are also well known. The eldest,
the late Mrs. A. Statham, of Tregcning, near Morven,
Warrego district. The third daughter is Mrs. R. Statham,
late of Bonus Downs, near Mitchell. My uncle died a com-
paratively young man in 1867, and is buried at Mount
Abundance Head Station, beside his sister (my mother),
who died at Mount Abundance the previous year. Mount
Beagle, after being my uncle's orooerty for 7 or 8 vea's
became the property of the Scottish Australian Invest-
ment Company. After my uncle's death his widow and


her family settled at Stewart's Creek, where her eldest
son George and her youngest daughter now reside.
IV.
In 1859 Queensland separated from New South
Wales. Then came the rush for taking up new country,
and exploring expeditions became the order and topic of
the day (and night too) for nothing else was thought of
or discussed. Everyone was infatuated with the desire to
possess a run in Queensland. The excitement was ex-
treme, and nearly equal to that of the gold rush seven or
eight years before. As before said. Mount Abundance
was the furthest out station in a westerly direction, con-
sequently it formed a depot for all explorers both going
out and coming in, it being the only store where supplies
could be obtained. The nearest township was Surat, but
we went to the Condamine for our mail, a distance of
one hundred miles. It was a great place in its own way,
and consisted of a store, 2 public houses, blacksmith's
shop, post office, and the usual humpies and shantys that
constituted a bush town at that time of primitive build-
ings. In 1860 at the request of the residents of the neigh-
bourhood, my father became postmaster, and a receiving
office (the first in the district) was opened at our store.
It was a great boon to all residents around, who were
glad to have their mails brought to a reasonable distance
of their stations.
Bindango Station was the next to be taken up about
this time by Mr. W. F. Kennedy of Tieryboo, near Con-
damine. His manager was Mr. James M. Gilmour, who
lived there some years with his brother John M. James
Gilmour was afterwards sub-inspector of Native Police at
Thargomindah. He died some years later at Blackall. His
brother John went home to Scotland, and after several
years stay in the "Old Country" returned to Queensland.
Mr. Kennedy was a very handsome man, and also a high-
ly educated one. I believe he died in Sydney about 30
years ago.


The seasons were very wet at this time, and there
was great scarcity of rations owing to flooded creeks
and boggy roads on which no dray could travel. Supplies
were sometimes months on the road from Ipswich.
Many stations were reduced to pigweed and fathen,
which grew plentifully almost everywhere, and were a
good substitute for cabbages. On one occasion we were
a whole month without any flour at all, and we had only
about 2lbs. of sugar, which we reserved for my aunt's
baby. And, worse by far than all, we had no salt. No one
can imagine what a deprivation that is, and how we
longed for it. I divided all we had amongst ourselves
and the workmen, but some of them were mean enough
to steal ours when their own had been used. Many of us
suffered from dysentery through the want of salt. We
had, however, an abundance of vegetables, especially
Swede turnips, some of which were very large. My father
supplied the neighbouring stations with them gratis.
Carriage was very high too, £6O a ton being frequently
given, and often more. So great was the demand for
supplies of all kinds that our store was literally thonged
with customers, and as much as £IOO being taken in one
day in cash alone. By cash I do not mean coin, for there
was but little of that, but in cheques, and orders on Syd-
ney and Melbourne firms, and the übiquitous "1.0. U.,"
which was issued by almost everyone instead of change
for any sum under £l. So recklessly were these I.O.U's
drawn and circulated that many were quite useless, be-
ing issued by those who could not, and some who would
not meet them. Token pennies and halfpennies too, were
issued by storekeepers, having their advertisement on the
roverse side. I have one by me now, also some of my
father's I.O.U's. Consequently Mount Abundance was a
scene of great activity. I doubt if many country town-
ships could boast as much traffic as it and the main road
did then. The road passed our door going West.
Until now no one had settled beyond the Maranoa
River. Mr. William Hunter being, as aforesaid, the first
squatter to cross it in 1859.
About the end of 1859, or the beginning of 1860,


Mr. William Morehead formed a Native Police barracks
or camp about 20 miles below us on the Bungil Creek.
It was called Elutha by the blacks. After all the buildings
were erected, including a house for his family, he re-
moved them thither. His family consisted of his wife and
four daughters and one son John, who was afterwards
in my father's employment, and of whom I shall make
mention later on.
Mr. William Morehead was a diligent and conscient-
ious officer, as well as a kindly, genial companion in
private life. The arrival of Mr. Morehead and his family
was quite an acquisition to the neighbourhood, hitherto
so sparsely populated with ladies.
Mr. Charles Coxen now took up and formed Deep-
water Station, on the Yalebone Creek. He afterwards
held an appointment in the Lands Office, Brisbane. I am
not sure if his widow still survives him. Deepwater Stat-
ion was formed a few miles above old Occabulla (or Trin-
idad). Mr. Coxen's manager was Mr. Henry Ellis, who
lived there some time with his wife and three little
children (all of them very pretty) until my father pur-
chased the station in 1863. There were now two families
living not more than 20 miles from us, and we were be-
ginning to be quite civilised. But owing to the difficulties
and dangers of travelling and other causes there was
little intercourse with the female portion of the commun-
ity. Mr. and Mrs. Ellis were nice kindly people. Mrs. Ellis
often left quite alone during the adsence of Mr. Ellis at
had a good many hardships to contend with, she being
his duties, sometimes not even a black gin for company.
My father now bought the first sheep that he put
on his run from Mr. W. P. Gordon of Wallumbilla. They
were the first that ever crossed the Bungil and Bunge-
worgorai Creeks. This was in 1861. This same year he
purchased 1,200 sheep from Jondaryan, then the prop-
erty of Messrs Tooth & Co. of Sydney. A Mr. A. A. Reiley
took charge of them and brought them to Mount Abun-
dance. His second in command was Mr. W. Holder, who
resided on Mount Abundance ever since till his death
about two years ago, leaving a widow and several child


ren. Mr. A. A. Reiley and Mr. John Morehead were in
our employ at that time. The great rush for new country
continued unabated from 1861 to 1864, and was at its
height during those years.
V.
In March, 1861, my husband, Mr. J. C. McManus,
arrived at Mount Abundance from Victoria, and, like
others, in search of new country in the far west. He
brought the first waggonette into the district. Immed-
iately on his arrival he went out on an exploration ex-
pedition, with Messrs Moffat and Fullerton, the former a
brother-in-law of the latter, who were, with his brothers,
nephews of the well-known Dr. Fullerton, author of the
"Domestic Medical Guide." and whose brother and these
young men's father was the Rev. Dr. Fullerton of Syd-
ney. The late Dr. Fullerton, M.D., was a kindly, courteous
gentleman. Well do I remember the dapper little man
visiting us during his subsequent residence at Tooloom-
billa. Mr. Moffat was the nephew of Mr. Thomas De Lacy
Moffat, of Brisbane. A French gentleman named A. War-
nod (pronounced Varno), and a Mr. James Stanley were
also of the party. Mr. Warned having some time prev-
iously applied for all the country now called Tooloombilla
and Womblebank. On this occasion he was showing
Messrs Moffat and Fullerton those runs with a view to
selling them. Mr. McManus accompanied these gentle-
men on an experimental trip only, promising at the same
time not to apply for any country that might be discov-
ered by the rest of the party. This being a point of honour
amongst all explorers, and which was faithfully carried
out by Mr. McManus. Before the party returned they
were reduced to great straits for want of rations, which
had been exhausted some days before they reached the
Maranoa River. So famished were they that one of the
party shot a dingo (wild dog), near where Mitchell
Downs head station now stands, and Messrs Warnod and
Stanley partook of it, but none of the other gentlemen


could touch it. They reached Mount Abundance in an
almost famished condition, and my mother and I prepar-
ed as hearty a meal as we could for them.
On his return to Mount Abundance Mr. McManus
and Mr. A. A. Reilly (who until now was in our employ-
ment), and a blackfellow, started out to explore the
country west of the Maranoa River on their own account.
Relying on Sir Thomas Mitchell's account of Mount Lons-
dale, they made straight for that mountain, where they
felt sure of finding good country. They discovered the
Mungallala, the head of which rises near Mount Lons-
dale, all the country around which Mr. McManus applied
for, including Tyrconnel Downs, Mr. Reiley applying for
Mungallala, which, by the way, he never occupied. On
their return to the Maranoa River, Mr. McManus shot a
duck where Mitchell township now is; probably the first
duck ever shot on the Maranoa River. The dingoes, how-
ever, robbed them of their game and anticipated break-
fast, much to their disappointment. They then camped
where Mitchell Downs Head Station now stands. Bin-
dango Station (nine miles west from Mount Abundance)
was being formed about this time. In 1862 Mr. J. C.
Smyth, afterwards the partner of Mr. (and subsequently
the Sir) Thomas Mcllwraith took up a block of country
near Wamallila East, and settled down there. Messrs.
Mcllwraith and Smyth subsequently took up and owned
Merrivale, near the head of the Maranoa River.
These were stirring times. Wages were high, and
employment of all kinds was easily obtained and well
paid for. Horses were very dear, as high as £3O and £4O
being given for good hacks, and draught horses could
command almost any price. Indeed the demand for
draughts was so much that saddle horses were put into
drays, some mere ponies. Immigration too was in full
swing. Many gentlemen coming out with a few hundred
pounds thinking they could get on stations and do no
work, but just look on and learn colonial experience.
Many amusing events occurred through their mistakes,
some of which caused not a little trouble, both to em-
ployers and their men. Some of them were more trouble


than their services were worth; their inability to manage
horses and great desire to do so, being a constant cause
of some mishap, which sometimes ended seriously,
although they as often caused great amusement. We had
a Mr. Payne in our employment in 1861 as storekeeper
He had been accustomed to the sea, and however able
he may have been to steer a ship, he certainly was not
able to steer a horse or ride one either. However, one
morning he essayed to take some rations to a shepherd
four miles distant. He was given to ride a little mare we
had called Miss Nightingale, much given to kicking up if
started quickly. Mr. Payne was duly warned, but he per-
sisted in mounting, declaring he could "sit" her. He
mounted with the rations in a sack across the saddle
under him. As usual Miss Nightingale kicked up, throw-
ing Mr. Payne over her head into the mud, he falling on
his hands and knees, the sack of rations following and
lighting on his back, in the same position it had been on
that of the mare. His astonishment was so great that for a
few seconds he remained in that position. The amuse-
ment of the bystanders and the shouts of laughter that
followed can easily be imagined. However, nothing
daunted, he remounted and rode off; the mare going
quietly. But Mr. Payne's trouble did not end here, for he
missed his way going up a gully on the south side of
Chinchinibilla Creek, which was called Payne's Gully ever
since. He ultimately reached his destination and arrived
safely at home.
The excitement of exploring, discovering, and tak-
ing up new country was now as intense as ever, if not
more so, and much secrecy was practiced by explorers
as to the locality of their discoveries. For as the first ten-
der was the only one accepted, there was much racing
and scheming to get to the Commissioner's office first
and such contriving to get there by roundabout routes
that it was most exciting. The commissioner's camp was
then where the town of St. George now is. The Com-
missioner for Crown Lands being then the late Mr. Pat-
rick McArthur, father of Mrs. A. L. Morrisett, of Brisbane,
and afterwards Police Magistrate of Roma, and, I think,
Ipswich. So great was the crowd at the Lands Office that


many squatters had to wait for days for their turn to
come to lodge in their applications. No one who was not
an eye witness of the excitement that prevailed can have
any idea of it. Our house was crowded with visitors. I
have seen our dining room covered with maps and com-
passes. Many a time I have made as much as 10 beds on
the floor of our dining room. Some sleeping on the table
and some under it. I have seen often as many as twenty
riding and pack saddles and other horse gear and tents
and pack bags lying on our verandah. At that time it was
far from safe to leave anything of the kind out of one's
sight for the demand was so great, and prices so high for
all kinds of saddlery that they were sure to be stolen by
some one. I dare say many an old pioneer squatter still
remembers the many "shake downs" they had in the old
house at Mount Abundance Head Station. There were no
hotels then nearer than the Condamine Township, and
my father was far too hospitable a man to refuse a
night's accommodation to any one, though many abused
it, for there were gentlemen loafers then (I am sorry to
sav), as well as the proverbial "swaggie" or "sundown-
er", as he was then called. But he too had his camp in
the hut and was never refused a "feed", no matter who
he may have been. I must say the gentleman loafer at
that t ; me was a most persistent individual, and in many
cases so thick-skinned that he would not take "no" for
an answer. These gents traded on the rage for new coun-
try, and staved at stations or accompanied exploring
parties for amusement to kill time and get housed and
fed at the expense of any one who, like my father, was
too good natured to say them nay. I must here remark
that these gents were mostly the sons and other relatives
of good families at home, and very often of titled ones.
Mere boys (some), who were sent out here because they
were such ne'er-do-well's, and no good could be got out
of them in the old country, nor I fear in this, or any other,
for many went utterly to the bad. While many others put
their shoulder to the wheel and succeeded. Many becom-
ing useful and prominent members of society, and some
occupy high positions in the colonies.


VI.
In 1862 Mr. McManus returned to Victoria, and
again came to Queensland, this time in company of his
partner, Mr. William Turnbull, bringing with them over-
land from Maitland, New South Wales, sheep, cattle,
drays and rations, ready to stock Tyrconnel Downs (which
he had taken up, and applied for license to occupy some
months before), and to build a station, sheepyards and
shepherds' huts, and other improvements. They journey-
ed from Maitland through Liverpool Plains, Barraba, and
Moree to Mingdi, and followed the same route as my
father, till they came to the junction of the Maranoa with
the Balonne River. They then followed the Maranoa River
as far as Amby Junction. On their arrival there Mr. Me
Manus proceeded on ahead of his party to Tyrconnel, but
he discovered there was but little water there. In conse-
quence of this they were compelled to camp at Amby
Junction. This station was taken up by Mr. Jacob Low,
who sold it to Messrs Thos Mort & Co., of Sydney. Here
Messrs McManus and Turnbull staved for seme months
until rain came. Here they went through their lambing
season and shearing their sheep. They had great diffi-
culties to contend with, chiefly owing to the great scar-
city of labour, shepherds especially beind hard to obtain,
although extravagant wages were given. On one occasion
Mr. McManus was obliged to shepherd bv himself alone
10,000 sheep in one flock on horseback, using two horses
a day and gallooing all the time from sunns® till almost
dark. At night he put them in a large "break", or har-
vard on one side of which was a large waterhole in the
Maranoa River. He continued this ardous work for come
davs, whilst Mr. Turnbull was absent at Mount Abun-
dance to obtain shepherds, which he succeeded in doing.
Mr. McManus was quite exhausted from the fat ; gu® of
such hard riding; for such a large number of sheep
soread over such a large space that the flock would be
two or three miles in circumference,- and as side
had to be constantly watched it necessitated constant
riding at almost racing speed. The reason all these sheeo
were "boxed" in one large flock was in consequence of


all their men leaving through being frightened at some
hostile natives, who had just before killed a shepherd
who lived in a hut by himself at what was then called
the Lagoon Station, and quite near their camp. After hav-
ing shorn their sheep and finished their lambing, and
rain having fallen, they proceeded with their stock and
drays to Tyrconnel Downs. They camped on the Mun-
ga Ila la Creek between what are now Mount Lonsdale and
Tyrconnel Head Stations, at the junction of a small creek
called Toocumbilla, where they built the first sheep yard
ever made on the Mungallala; a few of the stakes of
which are still remaining. A short time previous to this
Mr. McManus, on his going to Tyrconnel to see if there
was sufficient water to warrant their final removal from
their camp at Amby Junction, he was passing the hill
where the Head Station is now built, when he shot an
emu through its neck (a difficult matter by the way) just
at the spot where he afterwards built his house. This emu
was a great acquisition; which he carried on his pack-
horse to an immense number of blacks who were camp-
ed on the Womabilla Creek. This was a peace offering,
and they were greatly delighted. Mr. McManus and his
black boy, Frank, camped near them on the opposite side
of the creek, and though these natives were perfectly
wild (many very likely had never seen a whiteman be-
fore) they never attempted in the least to molest him. I
mav here say that Mr. McManus's experience with the
uncivilised natives is the same as my own, that kind, but
firm treatment was the cause of there being no murders
or any misdemeanour whatever. In fact we always found
them honest and obedient servants, and in those days it
was impossible to get Europeans to work, excepting at
very high wages. Therefore, had we not employed the
blacks we could not have got on at all. Because in some
instances no inducement would cause white men to stay.
At the least word from an employer they were off and
often absconded from no cause or provocation whatever
shepherds sometimes leaving their sheep in the yard.
Work was plentiful, and the demand for labour great and
pressing there being no habitations anywhere, the first


buildings were of necessity built of bark. This was plenti-
ful almost everywhere, and the blacks were very useful
in getting it. Shepherds' huts and sheep yards too, had to
be made on every Station, and as all had to be done at
once there was great demand for bushmen and builders
as well as shepherds and cooks (who were most men at
this time) and every kind of station hands, consequently
the blacks were of the utmost assistance in many ways.
They were very good to run messages. The letter sent by
them was put into a split stick, and carried thus by a
blackfellow or a black gin. These letters were carried by
them many miles in a day and delivered safely. A story
is told of a blackfellow, who was sent for some tobacco
and was tempted to appropriate some of it. On his de-
livering it, it was weighed and the theft discovered. The
boy received a reprimand. Being again sent for tobacco,
he again took some. He was puzzled to know how the
owner became aware of his theft on the first occasion.
He was told it was in the letter that accompanied the
tobacco. So the second time, he exclaimed, "That fellow
letter tell 'em he Baal that bin see 'im me take 'em; me
put him under a log." Of course having been told the
letter contained the weight of the tobacco he thought it
had been spying on him. He could not see how effect-
ually he had condemned himself.
Tyrconnel Downs was the very first Station fenced
on the Mungallala Creek, and Mr. McManus and his
partner were the first squatters who settled on it. The
next Station that was formed on it was Toomoo which
was formed 80 miles lower down a few months after
Tyrconnel by a man named James Smith who managed
it for the owner Mr. Alfred F. Doyle of Killarnev, F o w
South Wales, and who afterwards owned Tyrconnel. Too-
moo was subsequently sold to the late Mr. J. A. Winten,
father of Mr. J. A. Winten and of Mr. R. J. Winten of
Luesvale. From being owned by Mr. Winten or rather
Messrs Bucknell and Winten, it was bought by Messrs
York Walsh and Rennie, then the firm became Messrs
Yorke Rennie and Eliott for some years till it was owned
by the City Bank. For 1 7 years it was managed by Mr.


J. M. Watson, (senior), now of Amby Junction. The pre-
sent manager is Mr. J. G. Dickson. The next Station form-
ed was Mungulla on the same Creek. It once formed a
part of Annadilla run and now is a portion of Bonus
Downs. It was taken up by Mr. J. C. McManus but for-
feited; when Mr. William Henry Barton bought it at auct-
ion. A man named Sandy Johnson had a Station on the
Mungallala between Mungulla and Toomoo (of which it
is now a part). It was managed by the late Mr. Soloman
Wiseman who formerly managed Donga on the Balonne
and (I think) formed Gowrie Station in the Warrego, in
1863. He died at his residence, Cliffedale, New South
Wales.
VII.
About six or eight months after Messrs McManus
and Turnbull had become settled at Tyrconnel, Mr. Me
Manus and a man named Thos. Doyle went out West on
an exploring expedition on his own account. On this trip
he discovered Mt. Maria and Victoria Downs, striking the
Angellala where the Autheringa Head Station is now.
Here he discovered a large water hole quite dry, and a
tall sapling, whose top reached above his head when on
horseback. It was about 4 inches through and quite dead.
It had grown up in the centre of the bed of the creek, and
afterwards died, which shows what terrible droughts
have formally prevailed. This same water hole after be-
ing filled in 1864, has never since been dry. He also
found near that place the remains of a riding and pack
saddle, which probably belonged to some one who had
been lost and killed by the natives, or died for lack of
food and water, or broken loose from some station and
wandered into the bush and died or been killed by the
blacks.
On this trip Mr. McManus and his man were some
days without water, and were obliged to leave their pack
horses, pack saddles, guns, ammunition, behind them,
near Angellala Creek. They hastened home, passing and
discovering Tregonning Creek, Western Creek, and Arm


adilla Creek; striking the Dulbydilla as a small waterhole
where the station's now built. They were almost perished
with thirst, also their horses. This waterhole only con-
tained a little water which was black with gum leaves.
Mr. McManus named it the Blackwater hole, which name
it still retains. This water was most acceptable to them
and their horses, and they thoroughly enjoyed the much
needed refreshments. Here they camped for the night.
Before morning their pack horse, which they had left be-
hind at Angellala, came to their camp, having followed
their tracks all the previous day and night. They steered
for home next day, striking the Mungallala, at what is
known at Banarby, a mile below the present railway
station. Soon after Mr. McManus returned from this trip
he met Mr. Grenfell on Hamburg Creek, near where
Morven is now, who was in search of new country. So he
(Mr. McManus) told him of a plain on Tregonning Creek.
Mr. Grenfell immediately took it up and formed a station
there. Mr. R. M. Finlay who came to Tyrconnel Downs
with Mr. McManus, assisted Mr. Grenfell to form his
station. He (Mr. Grenfell) had cattle on it. They had some
trouble with the blacks too. On one occasion Mr. Grenfell
and Mr. Finlay were both absent. On their return they
found the blacks in possession and the cook scared out
of his wits and offering no resistance. They had a bit of
a skirmish, one blackfellow catching Mr. Grenfell by the
beard. Mr. Finlay fired and missed him. However, he let
go his hold and made off, the rest following him. Mr.
Grenfell subsequently sold this run to Messrs Donald and
Alic Cameron. Poor Grenfell afterwards became de-
ranged, and I believe died in Woogaroo Asylum. He was
a nice, gentlemanly man in his cooler moments, but at
times he was very passionate and violent. Soon after
Messrs Cameron bought Tregonning, Mr. William Barton
and his two sons, Adolphus and Julius, took up (also on
Mr. McManus's recommendation) Armadilla Station and
formed it. They built a large rambling rough house which
their neighbours named the "Great Western". They occup-
ied and owned Armadilla Station till 1872, when it be-
came the property of my father, then my brother David
Spencer, sold it to his cousin, Mr. A. Smith, who is now


(1889) its present owner. Mr. Barton died in Sydney some
years ago. His eldest son, Mr. Adolphus Barton, is now a
prosperous and much-respected man of his business in
Stanthorpe. Mr. Finlay, who was afterwards my father's
manager at Mount Abundance, and afterwards kept a
large store in Mitchell, where he died about fourteen
years ago, having first married a Miss Colly, who is now
Mrs. Barnes, also of Mitchell.
During the time Mr. Cameron owned Tregonning a
shepherd and his son were murdered. Their graves are
still to be seen near the creek in the old horse paddock.
Tregonning was afterwards forfeited. We bought it at
Government auction, and it became a part of Armadilla
run. Mrs. A. Statham and her sons have a selection on the
plain where the old Head Station used to be; the fire-
place of which still remains. Mr. Barton and his two sons,
lived by themselves at Armadilla. As cooks, either male
or female, were difficult to procure, and still more diffi-
cult to be induced to stay, they were often obliged to do
their own cooking. This was by no means an uncommon
occurrence. Genriemen were often obliged to be their
own cooks, housemaids, and laundresses. This reminds
me of a story I once heard, which, if not true was very
likely to have occurred. Two or three gentlemen met to'
gether at the camp of a native police officer. One was a
surveyor from his camp near by. They met to spend
Christmas in the free and easy manner of the life in the
bush at that time, and intended having "a good time".
But, as often happened in those days, their cook "pack-
ed up" and went to the nearest pub to "knock down"
(spend) his cheque. Consequently, our three friends were
thrown on their own resources for the preparation of
their Christmas dinner. All went well as far as game was
concerned, which they procured and managed to pre-
pare with tolerable success. But the great problem was
the plum pudding. Here was a dilemna. None of the
three gents had ever made one, and very likely had
never seen one made. Consequently there was some dis-
cussion as to the modus operand!. However, after a time
and much cogitation they succeeded in mixing a passably


good one. So far so good. But a new difficulty arose as
to how and where to obtain a cloth. Neither of them had
thought of that. So after some discussion one of them
suggested a pocket handkerchief, and straightway pro-
duced one from his "swag". The pudding was put there-
in with much fun over the performance, tied up and
placed in the pot to boil. But alas! they forgot to leave
room for the pudding to swell; and the pocket handker-
chief not being a new one burst, and lo; the pudding be-
came mixed with water to the great consternation and
disappointment of the trio, who had evidently disregard-
ed the Scriptural injunction of not putting new wine into
old bottles. Moral: Never put a pudding into an old
cloth, and always leave room for it to swell.
When Mr. Donald Cameron was at Tregonning, he
had an experience which illustrates the difficulties squatt-
ers had to contend with, and the straits they were reduc-
ed to owing to the scarcity and sometimes absence of
dray carriage in the early days of pioneering. Mr. Cam-
eron sent the tyre of his spring cart to a blacksmith in
Mitchell to be cut and shut, a distance of over 70 miles.
When it was completed a carrier brought it out as far as
what was then a public house at Blackwater Hole (now
Dulbydilla Railway Station). The difficulty was how to
convey it to Tregonning, 21 miles distant, which puzzled
Mr. Cameron not a little, as to how this was to be man-
aged. At last he thought upon a plan which was to strap
the trye on to the pommel of his saddle and hold it in
position with his hands above his head, the reins of
course being fastened there also. The horse (a very quiet
one) kept the road for home. In this manner he carried
the tyre as far as Armadilla (9 miles) thence next day he
proceeded in the same manner to his home at Tregonn-
ing (12 miles further on). This, as will be seen is no small
undertaking. On another occasion Mr. D. Cameron carr-
ied an eight quart billy can of water 7 miles, at arms
length, to a blackfellow and his gin who were travelling
from Tregonning to the Nebine with a flock of his sheep
to find water, the creek at his head station being dry.
This also was no small undertaking on a boiling hot day.
I have also seen hurdles carried on each side of a horse


being strapped to each other across a pack saddle. One
of my cousins was taking two hurdles in this manner
when the horse strongly objected to the proceeding. So
my cousin not to be beaten, let the horse go and carried
them himself, a distance of 7 miles. He was quite ex-
hausted from fatigue on his arrival at the end of his
journey; and was about 5 hours going the distance. There
were several similar feats performed on different occas-
ions, which showed the pluck and "go" of the old pion-
eer squatters. Some of the workmen too did some great
things when occasion demanded. I knew three men to
put up a large "basket" sheep yard in three days, made
of saplings woven basket fashion between upright stakes
driven into the ground with a maul. The timber in this
yard, when cut down, was carted three-quarters of a mile
over rather soft ground. These men also built a bark
humpy in two days at the same place, completing it all in
five days. Shepherds too, had a lonely and monotonous
life. No wonder so many went "cranky". If they were
married they were more comfortable, or those who
could read. Then they had some amusement in a news-
paper or a novel; but there were many who could not
read. In the case of married men it was better, but it was
very lonely for the wife, who was always quite alone
during the day, and often exposed to danger. They (the
shepherds) saw no one but the overseer and ration carr-
ier. The latter bringing him his 8 lbs. of flour, 10 lbs of
beef, 2 lbs. of sugar, and i lb. of tea once a week. If he
required more it was booked to him and the amount de"
ducted from his wages. This custom used to seem to me
to be the meanest of all. A man was placed in charge of
nearly £IOOO worth of property (about 2000 sheep went
to a flock), and if he required a little extra rations or beef
he was asked to pay for it, and often dearly too. This was
not thought anything of in those days. The system was
a remnant of the time when Government rations were
served out to the prisoners, and they got that and no
more the difference being in the time I am writing of and
then, the men got wheat instead of flour, which they
ground in a steel hand mill, several of which were kept
on each station, and one for each out station. I am glad


to say that the custom of serving out rations has been
discontinued for many years past.
VIII.
About midwinter of 1861 Captain T. J. Saddlier and
Mr. Edward Eagle Moore took up Eurella (Maranoa), but
for which Mr. William (Daddy) Hunter produced a price
tender. Therefore the Captain and Mr. Moore were ob-
liged to vacate in Mr. Hunter's favour. They then took up
a run and formed a station in the Warrego district, which
they also named Eurella, and where they resided for
many years. This run now forms part of Armadilla. Here
Captain Saddlier dissolved partnership with Mr. Moore
and took in Mr. Robert Turnbull, who a c terwards died at
Mount Abundance 20 years ago. Eurella subsequently be-
came the property of the Scottish Australian Investment
Company, and Captain Saddlier was appointed clerk of
the Division Board at Hughenden, where he died, and
where Mrs. Saddlier was still residing at an advanced
age, a few years ago. She was a fine looking woman,
and in her youth must have been exceedingly handsome.
She was highly educated and accomplished, and bravely
bore all the roughing and discomforts of the life in the
bush at that time, which was no small matter for one who
had for many years resided in India, where she was ac-
customed to every possible comfort and luxury. But she
was a brave woman without a doubt, and faced all the
hardships with commendable courage and fortitude.
Mr. Henry Coxen (nephew of the late Mr. Charles
Coxen of the Lands Office), and who formerly owned
Alderton, Darling Downs district, took up and formed
Amby Downs. He was without the use of his right hand,
and those who did not like him called him "Scrammy"
Coxen. His manager was a Mr. William Sims, a very
clever man, and a most energetic worker. He lived at
Amby Downs some years. He died at an hotel at a place
called Stony Creek, Upper Mooni River, from the effects
of a fall from his horse in 1867 or 1868. Mr. Henry


Coxen went to England after he sold Amby Downs and
resided there for a number of years, subsequently return-
ing to Queensland. I believe he is now dead, though
some members of his family are now residing in or near
Brisbane.
Amby Downs was (after Mr. Coxen went to England)
sold to Captain Graham Myline, where he and Mrs. My-
line and their children lived for two or three years. In
1865 when my parents, brother and myself, were trav-
elling from Toowoomba to Mount Abundance in a wag-
onette, our horses, which were poor and weak, refused
to draw the vehicle out from the bottom of Channing
Creek. Captain Myline and his family were just passing
in their buggy with several relays of horses, and he kind-
ly hooked on a pair to ours, and they instantly pulled
our buggy out of the creek; an act of courtesy and kind-
ness which we all appreciated.
But to return. Amby Downs is now owned by Messrs
Bright, Chrystal and Co., who also own Eurella (Maran-
oa) and By-Mount, also Cornwalle.
Where Muckadilla Railway Station now stands there
formerly stood an out sheep station belonging to Bin-
dango Station, when it was first formed in 1861.
Forest Vale was next taken up in the same year
(1861) by Messrs Robert Tooth & Co. of Sydney, who at
that time owned Jondaryan, Darling Downs district. Their
manager at the latter station being Mr. J. C. White, who
was well known on the Darling Downs at that time. Their
manager at Forest Vale a Mr. Simpson, a very quiet,
gentlemanly man. It may not be out of place perhaps to
mention here, that when Forest Vale was being formed
and stocked, Messrs Tooth & Co built a new woolshed at
Jondaryan, which was then the largest ever built in
Queensland, or perhaps in all Australia. I remember it
was considered a great building, and was spoken of by
everyone as being a great achievement. When it was
completed a great ball was given, and the Governor, Sir
G. F. Bowen, was invited to open the ball. Invitations
were sent all over the Darling Downs, and as far up as


Mount Abundance and its neighbourhood but none of
us accepted them. I really forget if any other squatters
did. At any rate it was a very swell affair and was the
talk of the whole country at that time. However, the fam-
ous Jondaryan woolshed has been eclipsed over and
over again by the very much larger ones that have since
been built on many larger sheep stations out West, till
it sank into insignificance, and is now scarcely remem-
bered.
Forest Vale was owned by Messrs Tooth and Co. for
some years, when it became the property of its present
owner, Mr. R. C. Lethbridge, brother of Mr. W. B. Leth-
bridge of Mitchell, and father of Mr. John Lethbridge, late
manager of Tyrconnel Downs; also of Mrs. Donald Me
Lean, of Redford, Mrs. F. Manning, and several other sons
and daughters. Redford was also formed about the same
time by Mr. Henry Baillie. It was first taken up for my
father by his overseer, William Coverley, but father not
liking it forfeited it after a short time, and went out fur-
ther West to Nieve Downs. Mr. Henry .Baillie lived at Red-
ford some years with his wife and family. Mrs. Baillie was
the widow of Mr. George Page who owned Mongool, on
the Yulebar, where he died suddenly in 1860 (I think)
Soon after Redford was formed, Mr. James McAndrew
took up and formed Max Vale, which now forms part of
Redford run, and is owned by the estate of the late Jon-
othan McLean of Bendango, and is now managed by his
son, Mr. Donald McLean. Mr. McAndrew was a tall eld-
erly Scotchman. He had two distinct voices, one like a
gruff man's and the other shrill like a woman's, which
had a peculiar effect when speaking, especially when he
became at all excited. He was a very jolly and compan-
ionable man. He left Queensland, having failed in 1866,
and I never heard what became of him. I think, though,
he returned to Victoria.
IX.
Mannandilla was taken up and owned by Mr. Scott
Smith (Mr. J. C. McManus's overseer) in 1862. He after


wards married Miss Carry Flemming, who died, and he
married again, his wife's cousin. Miss Hall. I believe he
has been dead some years. His partner was a Mr. John
Burgoyne, who was such a silent man that many persons
declared he would not speak at all if he could possibly
avoid doing so. Mannandilla subsequently belonged to
Mr. Robert Doughlass, and then to Mr. William Crouch,
who now owns Salamis, and it is again owned by Mr.
Doughlass of Mount Maria (Warrego). There is a wonder-
ful spring on Mannadilla of running water, which issues
constantly from a rock into a basin in a deep gorge or
gully, the water being beautifully clear and cool. This
spring has never known to be dry either by the blacks
or by any Europeans.
A very old blackfellow once told my brother that
when he was young there was a very long drought, and
when all the other creeks and rivers were dried up the
natives all made for the Mannandilla spring, where they
remained till all the game was killed and eaten, when
the poor creatures died in great numbers from starvation.
I believe some of their sun-bleached skeletons, or port-
ions of them are (or were a short time ago) to be seen in
the vicinity of this wonderful spring. And to this day no
blackfellow will go there; they having a superstitious
dread that the place is haunted by the spirits of their de-
parted ancestors. The same old blackfellow also assured
my brother that such a drought will occur again and de-
stroy every living creature. Truly not a very promising
outlook for the present inhabitants of the Maranoa.
Kilmcroy Run was taken up in May, 1861, by the
late Mr. George Deuchar and Mr. A. Lee, who at that
time owned Wallumbilla. In 1863, Mr. Lee took their first
sheep out, and formed the station, erecting huts and
sheepyards, and later in the year he camped there under
a small tent with Mrs. Lee for the shearing. Mr. Lee marr-
ied Miss M. Allan, Mr. G. Deuchar's niece. Mr. G. Deuchar
was brother to Mr. John Deuchar, formerly a partner with
Mr. Marshall of Glengallen, near Warwick. In 1864 Mr.
Deuchar went to reside permanently at Kilmcroy, where
he lived for several years. He died in 1890 at Stanthorpe.


His widow resides at Strathmore House, Brisbane. Mr.
and Mrs. Lee lived for many years at Nanango, of which
town he was Police Magistrate. He is now Police Magis-
trate at St. George. Mr. G. Deuchar is uncle also of Mrs.
Robert Doughlass of Mount Maria (Warrego). 1 may safely
say that no one was more esteemed or respected than
Mr. George Deuchar, during the time he resided in the
district. Kilmcroy was afterwards owned by Mr. A. F. C.
Cox, but is now the property of Messrs Bright, Chrystal
& Coy. There is a very singular waterfall on Kilmcroy
Run, and, I believe, also some curious caves in the ranges.
In some of these caves are rude drawings in red and
yellow earth of the various animals and birds that in-
habit the bush. There are also traces of these being in-
habited ages ago, probably by large numbers of abor-
igines who took shelter in them from rain, and also to
hide themselves from their enemies during tribal wars.
It is just possible and highly probable that many
remains of man and other animals may be discovered in
some of these caves, were a search made, that would be
useful to scientific research.! believe some of these caves
are quite large enough to hold a large number of human
beings, many of whom have died in them, as well as
other animals and reptiles and doubtless birds also. The
drawings, I am told, are the work of natives, and are
fairly well executed in many cases.
Mitchell Downs Station was formed in 1861, and
was built near where the Mitchell Cemetery now is,
quite close to the West bank of the Maranoa River. Mit-
chell Downs was then owned by Messrs. Flood and Gor-
don of Sydney and managed by young Mr. Walter Flood,
who upon leaving, appointed a Mr. Davidson, their man-
ager, who was previously in charge of a cattle station for
Messrs Basset & Skinner, of Euthulla, and which was built
near where Bungeworgorai Railway Station is, on what
was and is still known, as Cattle Creek. Mr. Davidson
was a very fine young man, and very much respected by
everyone who knew him. He was afterwards brutally
murdered at a sheep station belonging to Mitchell Downs
by an old army pensioner and an old Waterloo man (so


he said) named Turley, or "Beardy" as he was generally
called from his long white flowing beard, reaching al-
most to his waist. This Turley was a viciously disposed
man, and went about the country armed to the teeth.
He was a dead shot, and used to declare he would as
soon shoot a squatter as look at him. He usually had two
horses (and an immense pack one one of them, composed
of all kinds of rubbish he could pick up and collect. He
was altogether a disreputable looking fellow and a crank.
He usually followed shepherding, and as there were
many such men going about in those days, all more or
less insane, no notice was taken of him, nor did any one
suspect he really meant to carry out his oft repeated
threat. He never kept a situation very long, but wandered
from station to station.
At the time Mr. Davidson was managing Mitchell
Downs, this man Turley was a shepherd there. One morn-
ing Mr. Davidson went to count his flock. There were
some sheep missing. A dispute arose between them. Tur-
ley rushed into his hut, brought out his gun, and, as and
as Mr. Davidson turned to mount his horse, shot him in
the back before the man who was assisting to count the
sheep could prevent him. The ball penetrated the unfort-
unate man's heart. Turley caught his horse and rode off.
He rode all on the stoney ridges, doubling back on his
tracks several times in order to baffle the black trackers.
Mr. Davidson's man finding the poor fellow quite dead,
galloped into Mitchell Downs Head Station and reported
the sad occurance. Everyone including Mr. J. C. McManus
rode at once to the spot. I believe he was hurried on Mit-
chell Donws. It was only a few days before his death that
he sat up to see the Old Year out and the New Year in,
with some friends, Mr. McManus being one of them. He
was so shocked that he has never spent a night in the
same manner since; now nearly forty years after. As
stated, Turley made off, but was pursued by the Native
Police for several days, where he was taken in an empty
hut on Bendango Run, by Leiutenant Carr of the Native
Police, who with his men covered him with their car-
bines. He was tried and sentenced to imprisonment for
life on the plea of insanity, but doubtless there was


method in his madness. Mr. McManus says no one can
imagine what he, and all who were present felt, when
they saw such a fine young man murdered in so coward-
ly a manner, and lying stark dead before them. Indeed,
the whole district was inexpressibly shocked at the sad
end of such a promising young man in the prime of life.
We all knew him well, and everyone liked and respected
him. This was the first murder that had been committed
in the district, and it came as a great shock to everyone.
X
When Mitchell Downs Head Station was removed
from where it was first built (after being washed away
by the great flood of 1864), to where is now is, remains
of the old Head Station were converted into an hotel by
Mr. Thomas Close, which house (the Maranoa Hotel) was
the beginning of the now rising township of Mitchell.
Afterwards Mr. Benjamin Raynor built the present Post
Office Hotel, which he disposed of to Mr. Samuel Stewart
who kept it and a store for many years, and was a much
respected townsman. He died in Mitchell in August, 1890
a few days after my own father. Both succumbed to the
terrible epidemic of influenza or "La Grippe" as it was
termed, and which was fatal to a great many persons
at that time. His widow, who is also much respected by
everyone, still survives him and has continued to carry
on the store since his death.
These business places and a small butcher's and
blacksmith's shop which were carried on by a then noted
character named Jimmy Larmar, constituted the sole in-
habitants of the then flourishing town of Mitchell which
was named after the Station Mitchell Downs, which was
named after Sir Thomas Mitchell, the most celebrated of
all Australian explorers. So that Mitchell in consequence
should be highly honoured. As aforesaid, the township
was first formed by T. Close in 1864, soon after the mem-
orable floods of that year. The water, when the Maranoa
was in flood at that time, coming into the houses and
other buildings determined the then manager of Mitchell


Downs to remove the Head Station to a safe distance, and
therefore the present site was chosen. I think Mr. Abbot
was managing Mitchell Downs during the forming of
the new Head Station. Mr. Abbot was a native of Amer-
ica, and came to Victoria during the great rush to the gold
fields in that colony.
Near the end of 1 862 or beginning of 1863, Messrs.
Deeds & Foster formed Woroonga Station, and lived
there for some years with Mrs. Foster and their two
children. I do not remember if they took the country up
or purchased it. They owned it for several years, when
it became the property of Mr. Henry Biscoe and was fin-
ally owned by Mr. John McFarlane. Mr. and Mrs. Foster
were nice homely people. Some time after Mr. and Mrs.
Foster were settled there, Mr. James Gilmour, manager
of Bendango, built a shepherds hut and folding yard on
the top of a ridge on Waroonga Run, and which is known
to this day as " Gilmour's Mistake" or otherwise Taboon-
by, where Mr. James Hanlan built an hotel.
During the year 1863 the greatest rush for new
country took place. There was the most furious rushing,
in consequense of a new Land Act being passed, which
required all runs to be stocked by a certain day, Bth April
1863. Therefore the scrambling, the hurrying the driving
of stock surpassed anything ever seen before or since.
Squatters were striving to arrive first on their respective
runs with their stock, for whoever failed to have his stock
on his run by the day appointed by the Act, forfeited,
and it became the property of him who could first get his
stock on. This Act was passed to prevent owners of new
country keeping it unstocked, and by so doing prevent-
ing others from taking it up. Also it was to prevent
land-jobbing by those who were not (or ever intended
becoming bona-fide squatters. Consequently,those who
had no stock, or were unable to purchase them,
were obliged to borrow them to put on their runs in time
Some drove their stock over only, either their own or bor-
rowed. There was great racing as whoever first got his
stock on to any unstocked country, whether he tendered


for it or not, it became his property. Many runs were thus
"jumped" as it was termed. The Act also demanded a
given number of stock should be placed in each block
of country according to its area and capability. I remem-
ber hearing an amusing discussion among some gentle-
men as to what constituted "stock" according to the land
Act. From a serious discussion it became a humerous one.
Some suggested goats, another emus, another pigs, and
another kangaroos. Finally, I think it was Mr. Henry Mis-
sing who, amid roars of laughter suggested ostriches.
My father at this time took up and stocked the Nieve
Downs Run, and participated in the race to arrive at that
run before the dreaded Bth of April. His first manager
was William Coverley, who built the first public house in
Tambo some years after. The late Mr. Joseph Flemming
also stocked Burenda at the same time, his sheep com-
ing just behind my father's both making all speed to ar-
rive at their respective stations. My father's sheep were
hastening on before Mr. Henry Missing, who had taken
uo a great part of the Ward River.
Soon after this my father purchased Deepwater from
Mr. Charles Coxen, afterwards of the Land Office, Bris-
bane and whose manager was Mr. Henry Ellis, before
alluded to. Mr. William Harland, now of Roma, was then
an employee of Mr. Coxen's under Mr. Ellis. Mr. Har-
land afterwards acted as my father's overseer for many
years previous to his residence in Roma, where he has
lived ever since. The part of Mount Abundance known as
the Prairie then formed part of Deepwater run, and was
purchased with it.
Rockybank, next to Deepwater, was then owned by
a family named Ross, who also owned Redbank ,near
Dalby, I do not know who owns Rockybank now.
The wet seasons we were blessed with then caused a
tremendous growth of the most luxuriant grass, which
grew everywhere in abundance. The country did indeed
look lovely then before it became overstocked and hard-
ened by constant tramping. The ground was soft and


springy, like English turf. Many a time as I have galloped
over the downs I have felt the sward spring under my
horses' hoofs like a spronge. Fever and ague was very
prevalent then: nearly all of us had it more or less. I re-
member on one occasion there were five of our men
down with it whilst building a hut and sheep yards at
the lagoons, which is now Hodgson. This tendency to fev-
er and ague soon disappeared with settlement, and is
now never known. I believe it was never known in the
valley of the Maranoa River or the west of it. Mosquitoes
and sand flies were in swarms driving the horses frantic.
Fires were obliged to be made of manure, and kept burn"
ing day and night to allow both ourselves and our horses
rest, which could only in this manner be procured at all.
Flies also were in millions, and simply unbearable. It was
almost impossible to ride a horse with any comfort or get
him to stand still an instant to be saddled or mounted.
Grasshoppers too were in clouds. There were mvraids of
them. So many were there at times that they maddened
the horses by striking them in the faces, causing them to
rear and bolt. The horses too were so well fed on the
luxuriant grass, which was in such abundance that they
were so spirited as to be uncomfortable to ride and
troublesome to manage. No one who now sees the
drought stricken aspect of the country of recent years can
form an idea of how it looked then, and how it has det-
eriorated by over-stocking and dry seasons from its orig-
inal and virgin state. There were no marsupials then;
there were too many blacks. I have seen gins go out for
a whole day and not procure sufficient game for their
evening meal. Many times they must have been nearly
starved, especially when they congregated in large
camps, as they often did near any large water hole, river
or lagoon. Indeed many had that appearance. Emus and
kangaroos being the most plentiful owing to their being
the most difficult to capture, they were always delighted
if anyone shot one of these for them.


XI.
Coogoon Station was formed about the time we ar
rived at Mount ADundance in I Bos, and was owned men
by Mr. Micnael Daisey, wno lived mere, or at least had
formed and stocked it with cattle, and anerwards witn
sheep. I believe he purchased it on me late Sir josnua
Peter Bell, or Jimoour Station, Darling Downs. Sir j. P.
Bell had taken it up 'on paper', that is, ne took it up and
applied tor it from the Government maps without ever
seeing it. A practice quite common in tnose days, and
wmcn was generally deprecated Dy old explorers tor trie
reason tney would apply tor wnat the explorer had hon-
estly discovered; and on going to the Lands Ornce ne
would rind it already taken up by someone wno had
never seen the country or had explored at all. This prac-
tice of taking up country from maps only caused endless
disputes and much disappointment to bona-nde explorers
and squatters. But to return. Coogoon Station subsequent-
ly became tne property or tne Western Queensland
rastoral Company, and is now an ott station or Mitchell
Downs, both stations being under the management of
Mr. f. A. Deshion. The station on the west side or Muck-
adilla Creek to Coogoon, formerly known as Western
Lagoons, was taken up and stocked by the late Mr. J. M.
Coiquhoun about the year 1861 or 1862. he however
was unfortunate, and it became the property of Mr.
Matthew Goggs, who took up and owned Chinchilla in
the early fifties, and which he subsequently sold to Mr.
William ("Daddy") Hunter. Mr. Matthew Goggs was one
of the old style pioneer squatters, who lived years
ago before the gold-digging era, and he managed his
station on the rigidly economical lines then in vogue in
New South Wales. He therefore never adopted the reck-
less expenditure that was all the rage when the Maran-
or was being settled. Consequently he was styled among
the workmen who did not like him as 'Old Goggs the
Nipper". He used to delight in going to travellers' camps
to have a 'yarn' with them; also stopping them on the
road for the same purpose. So 'once upon a time", so the
story goes, when two men were having their supper, Mr.


Goggs, who was unknown to them, passed, but they
invited him to have some supper with them, which he
accordingly did. In the course of their "yarning' they in-
formed him they were bound for Chinchilla to ask "Old
Goggs the Nipper for a "job" of work. Mr. Goggs
seeking for information about himself (as was his wont),
asked the men what they though of this Mr. Goggs, when
one of them replied he did not believe all he heard of
"Old Goggs", but thought he was not a "bad sort if taken
the right way", and a deal more to the same purpose.
The other man was of the contrary opinion. "I'll fake
good care", he said, "Old Goggs doesn't nip me", and so
on. The next day these same men arrived at the station
and asked for Mr. Goggs. What was their surprise and
utter consternation when they saw who the "cove" was.
Mr. Goggs pretended at first to be quite ignorant of the
conversation of the previous evening, and in reply to their
questions "Had he any work?" he gave employment to
the man who had spoken in his favour the night before.
Turning to the other man he said, "My man, you boasted
last night you would take care I did not "nip you". You
will not have the chance of being 'nipped' for 1 order you
off the place as quickly as your legs can carry you'. And
the man made off accordingly with all possible speed.
To return. Hillsborough and Cashmere were taken up by
Mr. W. F. Kennedy, of Bindango, in 1862-3, and they
became the property of the Peel River Company of New
South Wales. The former station is now owned by Mr.
William Marsh, and the latter by Mr. Micking.
Mr. McKinnon took up Waterloo also in 1861, and
it was formed by a Mr. Gilles who acted with a noted
character in New South Wales named Larkey. In order
to stock it Mr. McKinnon bought sheep from Mr. Henry
Coxen, of Alderton, built yards and huts and other stat-
ion improvements. In the meantime Mr. McKinnon paid
a visit to his station. He ordered Mr. Gilles to sell the
sheep and clear out, as the country was not worth own-
ing. This same Mr. Gilles was afterwards managing
Mount Hutton for Mr. L. Fraser, who then owned it. This
Mr. Malcome McKinnon, who was an eccentric old Scotch-
man, and who died some years ago, subsequently took


up and owned Albany Downs. After living on it for some
years he sold it to Mr. Peter Close, when it afterwards
became the property of Mr. Broad, of Mount Hutton,
whose brother died at his other station, Teeswater, a few
years ago. He passed away quite suddenly while lacing
his boots. Albany was managed by the late A. Thomp-
son, now by Mr. Nasmith, in conjunction with Mount
Hutton, which is his headquarters.
Mr. W. F. Kennedy also took up, in addition to all his
other stations, the whole of the Wallen Creek in 1862 or
3. Being a great Greek and Latin scholar, he gave the
classical names to each block by which they are known,
and will be noticed in their places. Not liking it, or from
inability to pay the rent probably, he forfeited the whole
of the country on the creek and it was subsequently sold
at public auction bought by squatters whose names will
appear as the several runs are mentioned in their order.
The extreme head of the Wallen Creek, called Corigous
and Parnassus, but now known as the Brigalows, became
part of Bonus Downs run. The block known as Bonus
Downs was taken up by Mr. D. T. Leadbetter, who for-
feited it. The remaining blocks were taken up and bought
at auction by Messrs. J. C. and W. R. McManus, of Mount
Lonsdale, about 1870, and they disposed of it a few years
after to the present owner, Mr. Richard Statham. Proceed-
ing south down the Wallen, we came next to Salamis,
which was bought by Messrs. Copeley Bros., who are
nephews of His Honour Mr. Justice Real, and sons of the
late Mrs. Copeley, who resided near Roma, and who died
not many years since. Mrs. Copeley was a sister of Mr.
Justice Real, Salmisis was owned by Mr. William Crouch
who resided there for many years. Cytherea, the next
station on the Wallen, was brought by Mr. John Holland
who was subsequently engaged in Mitchell, where he
died leaving a widow and sereval young children, who
are still living there. Mr. Holland was twice married. His
elder daughter by his first wife is Mrs. S. J. Carpenter,
also of Mitchell. Mr. Holland had no family by his second
wife who died in Mitchell. He took an active part in many


matters connected with the welfare of the town during
his residence in it. The next owners of Cytherea were sev-
eral monetary institutions, and finally it became the pro-
perty of myself and my husband. Benzamtum the next
after Cytherea, after being owned by several persons,
now forms part of Tomoo Run.
Luss Vale was after being forfeited, purchased by
the late Mr. J. M. Colquhoun formerly owner of Western
Lagoons. Mr. Colquhoun was one of the earliest pioneer
squatters who came over from Victoria, but he was un-
fortunate in some of his speculations, for which he had
the sympathy and assistance of the squatters in the dis-
trict. He laboured most indefatigably with a few hundred
sheep that were presented to him till at last he succeeded
in purchasing Luss Vale. Reverses however, again came
upon him, and he again failed. However nothing daunted
he made a third effort and succeeded in getting some
more sheep, with which he made a third beginning, and
did fairly well on a selection near Taroom. This could not
have lasted long, for a few years ago he died in Brisbane
Hospital, I fear without a shilling, at the age of 79 years.
He was a most wonderfully persevering man and most
energetic. He was well known all over the district, and
celebrated for his legal disputes with his employees and
other persons. This was his failing.
Abbieglassie, which joins Luss Vale, was the pro-
perty of Messrs Holmes Bros, having purchased it at
auction (as all the other stations were). From Messrs Hol-
mes it became the property of Mr. James Lillyman
(who is now a prosperous businessman in Narribri, New
South Wales), and from whom it was purchased by
Messrs J. A. and R. J. Winten, together with Luss Vale,
which he had joined to the former, merging the two
into one run, and calling the whole Luss Vale. Mr. and
Mrs. R. J. Winten have resided at Luss Vale for the past
twelve years. Homeboin was also bought by Messrs
Holmes Bros., It now belongs to the Commercial Bank of
Sydney, and is managed by Mr. Percy Bowman.


As before stated, Mr. W. F. Kennedy gave classical
names to all the blocks of country he took up on the Wal-
len Creek, such as Delphi, Salamis, Hellispout, Cytherea,
Byzantum, and so on, which suggest the idea of bygone
ages, when Greece was in the zenith of her glory, as well
as giving other less learned folk an insight into that
gentleman's knowledge of classical geography and his-
tory; but to return to more modern times. There are still
to be seen, after all the lapse of years traces of his occup-
ation of the Wallen with sheep stations and yards that
were built on the banks of the creek, the whole distance
down, some 80 or 100 miles. These are situated about 2
or 3 miles apart, and are still visible signs of the
creek having been stocked with sheep, although it has
had only cattle on it for many years. The names usually
given to these sheep stations are the number of miles they
are situated from the Head Station such as One-Mile, Two-
Mile, and so on. The 'term' Head Station is so named to
distinguish the owners residence or headquarters from
the out stations, whether cattle or sheep erected as above
stated at various parts of the run. I often thing how suc-
ceeding generations will be puzzled to know the mean-
ing of such names, for many are still retained, though
there are very few (if any) sheep stations, or shepherds
now in any of the States compared with former times,
and these names will sound strange to those who will
know nothing of the old shepherding days, with all
their attendant loneliness and discomforts, and privations.
I am glad to see the fencing of runs and smaller holdings
has rendered the occupation of the shepherd a thing of
the past, and like many other disagreeable institutions
is for ever done away with excepting in a few isolated
instances. The system of fencing in of all sheep runs has
simplified their management considerably and resulted
in the discontinuance of the lonely and uncomfortable
life of the old-time shepherd; to say nothing of the
troubles of ration carrying and sheep counting the latter
obliging the manager or overseer to rise very early and be
home very late, as the flocks were obliged to be counted
either as they drew out of the yard at daylight or as they
entered into it at sundown, and each flock was supposed


to be counted at least once a month or oftener if possible.
In lambing time they were counted once a week gener-
ally. Then also came the constant trouble of lost sheep and
the tedious work of searching for them; which usually
occured in wet weather, and when they were found
many would be maimed or killed by dingoes. To all these
troubles were often added discontented shepherds, who
were cross and illtempered through being often in busy
times neglected by ration carriers, who forgot to take
them their newspapers, books, or letters, and other nec-
essaries and worse than a 11( in the case of smokers) their
tobacco. Often have I pitied them when I used to hear
their complaints for often they had cause for them, it be-
ing impossible on a large station for overseers and ration
carriers to attend to every little want and requirement, be
they ever so willing to do so. At the same time some of
the shepherds were proverbial 'growlers' and very hard
to please. Crabby old men with a passion for grumbling.
On the other hand managers and overseers, aye and even
owners, were not so patient as they might have been in
many instances. I suppose they were occupied with their
own worries as well as the 'growling' shepherd. It was
a hard life for all concerned, and I am glad to sse it dis-
continued once for all.
XII.
We will now leave the Wallen and next in order
cross over to the Mungallala, below the Railway Station,
and take the runs in the order in which they were
taken up.
Tongy Station, on the Mungallala, was taken up and
stocked by Messrs King and James in 1864, and sold by
them to Mr. David Benjamin, who for several years prev-
ious had been a very successful merchant in Roma, and
who now resides in Brisbane. Mr. Benjamin married Miss
Nutting, whose brother was then Inspector of Police in
Roma. Mr. and Mrs. Benjamin resided on Tongy for sev-
eral years, where I believe several children were born.


He then sold out of Tongy to a company that was formed
by Mr. R. W. Stuart (who formerly owned Mitchell
Downs), in 1880. This company was not a financial suc-
cess, and Tongy, after passing into the possession of one
or more monentary institutions, became the property of
Mr. Badgery of New South Wales. It is now owned by a
Mr. Riery, and is managed by Mr. Murray. During the
heavy floods of 1890, the whole of the Head Station, in-
cluding a large and comfortable house, and a complete
and costly station plant and out-buildings, were washed
away and were never seen after.
Grassmere was taken up and stocked in 1863 or
1864 by Mr. Ellis Harding, of Messrs McDonald and
Harding, who shortly before had taken up, stocked and
formed Wildhorse Plains, also on the Mungallala Creek.
Grassmere was afterwards owned by Messrs. Miller Bros,
who for some years resided there. Then a Mr. J. B. Bergin
owned it in 1890, and resided there some years with his
sisters. But the late droughts of 1898 and 1899 ruined
him, and the Commercial Bank of Sydney have it now,
and it is manager by Mr. P. Bowman in conjunction with
Homeboin Stations. Messrs Harding and McDonald resid-
ed at Wildhorse Plains with Mrs. Elias Harding, senior for
many years. The family consisted of several sons and one
daughter. Mr. and Mrs. E. Harding, senior, are now living
in or near Ipswich, where some of their sons with their
families are located. One son, Mr. Elias Harding being a
lawyer in Brisbane. Their only daughter. Miss E. C. Hard-
ing, married in 1869 or 1870, Captain Henry Browne,
who was then Inspector of Police in Roma. They had one
child (a son) who died while young, Captain Browne died
suddenly at Dalby on his way to Roma. Mrs. Browne,
after living some time in Roma in widowhood, ma r ried
Mr. A. Frew, a surveyor. I believe they are residing some-
where in or near Brisbane. Miss Harding was, during her
residence on the Mungallala for some years, the only un-
married lady on that Creek. Wildhorse Plains was over
200 miles from Roma in a south-westerly direction and


Roma being then the nearest township of any note (Mit-
chell being then in embryo) and the facilities for travel-
ling not being so convenient then as now, it must have
been a very lonely life for a young girl as she was then,
for they were very isolated, no station being near them.
Bindebango North was taken up also in 1863 by Mr.
James M. Gilmour. It then passed through several owners
until it ultimately became the property of Mr. Edward
Baker, who still resides there with Mrs. Baker and their
familv. Mr. Baker has greatly improved this property,
building a large and comfortable house.- cutting down
artesian bores and irrigating a large oaddock and garden
in the front of his homestead, as well as various other im-
orovements "too numerous to mention" as the advert-
isements have it.
Bindebango South was taken uo at about the same
time as Bindebango North by a Mr. Benjamin South, who
lived there for many years quite by himself ( a bachelor).
He is a true type of the old fashioned Hawksbury native.
He is a great age about 80 years. He sold Bindebango a
few years ago to a Mr. Hamilton, its present owner, who
resides there with his family. Mr. B. South was famous
for his breed of splendid draught horses. I believe he is
still living with his relatives on the Hawksbury River,
New South Wales, though he has lost his sight for many
years. When young he was a very hard working and per-
severing man, and managed to tide over all the floods,
droughts, commercial panics, bank failures, and other
of the many troubles that the unfortunate squatters have
to contend against without collapsing utterly, as, alas too
many of the older settlers of the Maranoa did. With all
these troubles to face, he continued to bravely hold his
own through all those many and varied vicissitudes, and
is now taking a well-earned rest which his age and fail-
ing sight entitle him to.


XIII.
THE TOWN OF ROMA
In 1862, Mr. A. C. Gregory, Government Surveyor,
arrived at Mount Abundance with instructions to select
a suitable locality for a township, which was to be the
capital of the (now fast be-coming) famous Maranoa dis-
trict, and he consulted with my father as to where would
be the most suitable place to locate it. They rode about
in several directions (I accompanied them). We rode over
most of Mount Abundance and Bungeworgorai runs, and
for some distance up and down the Bungil Creek, but we
failed to find a place entirely suitable, till Mr. Robert Aus-
tin, then also a Government Surveyor (afterwards Ser-
geant-at-Arms in the Queensland House of Parliament)
and Mr. Gregory decided in favour of the place where
the old bridge crosses the Bungil, and where Thomas
Re ; d had already commenced to erect an hotel, thinking
that residents would build there, but the upper crossing
near Chinatown and where the new bridge now is, seem-
ed a more attractive spot. My father and myself, accom-
panied Messrs Gregory and Austin on this occasion also.
I may here say that our horses used to run all over the
country where Roma now stands, as well as for some dis-
tance around it. My brother, David Spencer, myself and
my cousins (the Messrs Smith), and their sisters used to
ride over all that part of the country between the Bungil
and Bungeworgorai Creeks, long before any thought of a
township being built was entertained or conceived.
About a year before Roma was proclaimed a town,
a Mr. Frederick Donkin and his brother Edwin, two very
young men, camped near the old Bridge with their
sheep for some months. They afterwards formed and
owned Langlo Downs, Warrego. My brother and myself
saw the first post hole dug of the old Bowen Hotel, then
only a one'storey house. This was the first hotel built in
the district. It was afterwards converted into one of two-
stories, and is now known as Bowen House. It was built
by Charles Aherne as soon as ever the town


was proclaimed and called the Bowen Hotel,
after Sir G. F. Bowen, the first Governor of Queensland.
Roma was named after Lady Bowen (Roma Diamantina)
it being the first township formed after the separation
of Queensland from New South Wales. With the opening
of the Bowen Hotel, Roma sprang into existence. The first
timber cut for this house was cut from those sandridges
where Mr. T. A. Spencer and Mr. T. S. Barret have their
residence and vineyards, on the Euthalla Road. These
sandridges were then covered with pine trees. Where
the School of Arts Hotel stands, and up towards the hos-
pital, and as tar south as the cemetery, was then a thick
brigalow scrub full of gillgris which were full of stag-
nant water. In fact most of the area on which the town
of Roma was built was very thickly timbered, and scrub
had to be cut down to clear a place to built the Bowen
Hotel. The Maranoa Hotel was built soon afterwards by
a man named Mazareth, which was afterwards burned
down. Thomas Reid, Charles Aherne's brother-in-law,
now removed his hotel from near the old crossing to
Roma. Thus, there were three public houses standing
almost together and I do not think there was, as yet one
private residence.
Three public houses and not a single private res-
idence I However, a Court of Petty Sessions was soon
afterwards established, together with police quarters
for Roma was a rowdy place then. Shearers and other
men came in from all the newly formed stations (some
being over a hundred or two hundred miles away) with
big cheques to spend, and as there were no other amuse-
ments for them, they had only the public houses to go to
for a little diversion, and they drank and spent their
money riotously. There was some excuse for them too,
especially for the shepherd, whose life was a very lonely
and isolated one. But to return.
The first Clerk of Petty Sessions was Mr. Edward
Ogil Moore, who was previously Captain Saddler's part-
ner in Eurella (Maranoa). The first chief constable was
John Nicholls. His subordinate was the late Patrick Hogan


husband of the late Mrs. Hogan, the well-known hostess
of the School of Arts and other hotels in Roma. Patrick
Hogan after leaving the police force, built and owned
the Garry Owen Hotel at Donnybrook, on the Maranoa
River. He was a very jolly man, and the life and soul of
every party he was in, being full of real Irish wit and
humour. He died suddenly on the race-course at Roma
from over-excitement, caused by excessive joy at his
horse winning a race. His widow survived him many
years, and was well known in Roma and the surrounding
district. She died a few years ago, aged about 70 years.
The Post Office was now removed from my father's
store ( where he kept it for about a year) to Roma. Mr.
William Moorehead, who was then a lieutenant in the nat-
ive police at Eulutha Barracks, was appointed the first
Postmaster and Clerk of Petty Sessions, Mr. E. C. Moore
having resigned. After a time Mr. John Moorehead, his
son, was appointed Clerk of Petty Sessions. Mr. William
Moorehead died in 1865 or 1866. Mr. John Moorehead
married a Miss Innes, who was governess to Mr. Patrick
McArthur's children when he and his family resided in
Roma during the time he was Police Magistrate there,
about the years 1865 or 1866, Mr. John Moorehead died
in 1867, during the time he was Clerk of Petty Sessions.
He left one son. Miss Mary Moorehead married Mr.
Tracy, of Surat. Her sister, Lizzie, married Mr. Edwin Bell-
grove, who was the first town Clerk of Roma, and I
think the first secretary to the Roma School of Arts. Miss
Annie Moorehead married Mr. James Spence.
Mrs. Moorehead and her family of four daughters
were the first ladies who came to Roma. I think the late
Mr. McEwen was the first Major and Mr. R. J. Cottell
(now of Brisbane) was the second. At all events he was
Mayor on one of two occasions in the early days of
Roma's municipality.
The first Commissioner of Crown Lands was Mr.
Archibald McDowall, who is now Surveyor-General. He
was transferred from St. George to Roma. McDowall


S'rreet was named after him. Previous to this the Lands
Office was located at St. George, where Mr. Robert Aus-
tin was stationed for some time to receive applications
for newly taken-up runs. The removal to Roma wa s a
great boon to the public, it being most inconvenient for
persons taking up runs having to go so far to lodge their
applications. Consequently the establishment of the Lands
Office at Roma was hailed with delight by all squatters
and explorers, who previous to this, lost much valuable
time travelling to St. George. Sometimes the whole
length and breadth of the district had to be traversed
some 200 miles and over, and as all these journeys were
of necessity performed on horseback, it was often no
small undertaking.
The first stores were opened by Messrs Zemian and
Co. and Messrs R. Lewin and Co. in 1863. The first chem-
ist was Mr. George Ellis, who was previously my father's
clerk. He established himself in Roma in 1866. The first
saddler was Mr. L. C. Johnson, who is still a resident of
Roma with his family, who are all well known there and
in the district.
Dr. Edward Moran came to Roma in, I thing 1863,.
He was the first medical man who resided there per-
manently. Previous to his arrival there was no doctor
nearer than the Condamine township, where resided Dr.
Swift, an old army surgeon. He was a very clever man,
but unfortunately much addicted to intemperance: so
much so, that he was scarcely ever in a fit condition to
attend a patient. He died suddenly in Roma. He was a
fine-looking man of immense proportions. He left a wid"
ow and one son (Harry) who went north, where he mar-
ried, and I lately heard of his death. I believe the doctor's
widow left Queensland, and went home to Ireland. In
1863 and 1864 my uncle. Dr. Spencer, practiced occas-
ionally in and around Roma, but he was so erratic and
indolent in his habits from residing some years in India
and travelling by sea as a ship's doctor that he failed to
build up the lucrative practice he might have done easily
in those flourishing times. Dr. Moran was a generous


and a kind-hearted man, of a lively and excitable tem-
permanent, and always a great favourite with everyone.
He took great interest in politics and horse-racing. I be-
lieve he rode his own horse (Index) either at the first or
second races ever held in Roma. Many will remember
the bustling little doctor, and also little Mrs. Moran. They
lived some years in Roma, and subsequently removed
north to Springsure, where he died. His brother was a
lieutenant in the native police force, and was stationed
at Donnybrook.
I believe he succeeded Mr. Marlow at Donnybrook,
who had first formed that native police camp on the Mar-
anoa River, where it was removed from Eulutha after
Lientenant Carr was transferred to some northern native
police station, as they were not needed near Roma, now
the natives were becoming friendly and more civilised.
I believe the first grape vines planted in Roma were
grown by Mr. F. G. McKay in his garden at the old Post
Office in McDowall Street. Then Mr. S. S. Bassett planted
a vineyard at Roma Villa, which was the first real vine-
yard in the district, excepting those vines which my
father planted for home consumption only. To Mr. Bas-
sett therefore belongs the honour of planting the first
vineyard from which wine was made and sold. The next
to plant grapes on a large scale was my uncle, the late
Rev. Charles Spencer, M.A. father of Messrs George
Smith, of Stewart Creek, of Messrs James Arthur, and
Thomas A. Spencer, also of Emily (Mrs. Moore) and Annie
(Mrs. Dr. Tillston) all well known in Roma and its neigh-
bourhood. My uncle was the second Anglican clergyman
who ever officiated in Roma, where he died in 1872. His
widow survived him for many years till some years ago,
when she died and is buried with her husband in the
Roma Cemetery. My uncle has a son, who now lives near
Brisbane. My uncle's vineyard is planted at Glen-
haughton, on the opposite side and nearly fronting that of
Mr. Bassett, I believe most of the vines were propagated
from cuttings from my father's garden. At least, I am sure
some if not all of those my uncle planted were; so that I


may say that these two vineyards sprang from my father's
garden at Mount Abundance, and probably most of the
vineyards in and around Roma. Doubtless, too, most of
the fruit trees also came from our garden in the first in-
stance, as well as from my uncle's (Mr. William Smith's)
garden at Mount Beagle. These gardens were the first
and only ones in the district for many years. The ground
being newly tilled everything flourished luxuriently. The
seasons, too, were all that could be desired, for it rained
almost every day. This caused the fruit and vegetables to
grow to a great size. Some of the peaches were except-
ionally fine, and quite free from worms. The melons, too,
were very large and luscious, so also were the rock mel-
ons. We also had an abundance of swede turnips, and
pumpkins. Having so many of these latter vegetables was
a great benefit; when we were often without supplies,
and carriage being then very high, it was a great saving
of flour which was scarce and high in price. I cannot re-
member who first planted the orange tree in Roma. I
think, though, it was Mr. McKay or my uncle. My father
planted two trees, but they never grew to perfection.
My father and uncle (Charles Spencer) were both most
enthusiastic gardeners and farmers. My uncle especially
worked very hard with his own hands planting and prun-
ing his vineyard at Glenhaughton. In fact, neither of the
brothers were so happy as when working in a garden or
vineyard. Therefore the credit belongs to my father and
uncles for planting the first gardens and nearly the first
vineyard in the Maranoa district, and to my mother for
planting the first flowers.
Many changes have taken place since my brother,
cousins and myself galloped about the bush, where is
now a flourishing town,- with all the comforts of civil-
isation and surrounded by gardens and all kinds of cultiv-
ation, which has flourished in the face of dry seasons and
other difficultites. Roma has progressed, I venture to say,
as no other or scarecely another town of its size and pos-
ition has done since the days of the diggings. Its many
improvements, including the artesian bore, were not even
thought of when it first came into existence. Truly, Roma


and the district generally have made enormous strides
since we first camped on the Bungeworgorai Creek over
forty years ago, with no human habitation but the bark
humpies of the natives nearer than thirty miles to the
eastward and fifty miles to the southward. And all this
notwithstanding the cry of 'bad times' and 'depressions"
that croakers are always crying out about. If we contem-
plate Queensland as she is now, and what she was when
she separated from New South Wales, I thing all will ad-
mit we are not such slow going people as many would
have us believe. None but an eye witness of her develop-
ment can form any idea of the strides she has made. One
needs to trace her progress year by year to thoroughly
appreciate it, and to be fully aware of all the difficulties a
young district has had to contend with.
Just fancy there being no silver or notes in the dis-
trict (as I have before mentioned) and cheques, orders,
and I.O.U's were sometimes valueless and were known
as 'calabashes'. This was no little inconvienence when
one took them in change or as payment to find they were
quite valueless, or as much waste paper. In order to avoid
having his cheques refused to his face one squatter, Mr.
W. H. Barton, of Armadilla, bought a quantity of gold and
notes into the bush, wherewith to pay his men, and this
obtained for him the name of "Ready-Money" Barton for
the rest of his days.
Also imagine there being no railways, telegraph
lines, or any other means of transit than the bullock or
horse drays, which conveyed the station supplies and
took the wool to town. On one occasion a telegram was
sent by a bullock draw from the nearest telegraph stat-
ion (probably Toowoomba or Dalby) to Armadilla station
and which was just one month old when it reached its
destination. Now we have railways, telegraphs, banks,
artesian bores, Cobb and Co's, coaches, bicycles and even
motor cars, and many other conveniences and luxuries
of which we neved dreamt of forty years ago.


XIV
Having now given my readers an account of the
early occupation of nearly all those runs (or the principal
ones) that were taken up north and west of Mount Abun-
dance, I will now give a brief account of those in the
Warrego district (as far as I remember them) that were
taken up and occupied simultaneously with those in the
Maranoa. The discoverers and occupiers of most of them
were well known to us at that time. Therefore I consider
they should be included in and form part of these "Rem-
iniscences," especially as many of them are in both dis-
tricts and properly belong to both.
I shall begin with Dulbydilla, which, though being
in the Maranoa, it is so near the border of the Warrego
and the Maranoa that it properly belongs to that dis-
trict, the watershed being but a few miles from the head
station. Dulbydilla (or Black's waterhole, as it is gener-
ally called) was taken up by Mr. J. C. McManus in 1862,
and afterwards forfeited by him. Then a man named
William Burton bought it at Government auction, and
built an hotel there, which he called The Traveller's Rest.
For some years it was the only house of any kind on the
road from Mitchell to Charleville (a distance of 120 miles).
For some reason Burton did not succeed well there, and
he sold the house and run to Messrs Pettiford and An-
derson, who, in their turn, disposed of it to Mr. John Me
Kenzie, who for many years has converted it into a pri-
vate residence. Mr. McKenzie made several additions to
his house, but the original part is, I believe, still standing,
a low, roughly-built building of the old style of house of
many years ago. The Dulbydilla Railway Station is near
by. As above stated, the Traveller's Rest Hotel was the
only house on the western road at that time (1863-4),
and in dry seasons there was no water either, for the
whole of that distance.
During the severe drought of 1866-7-8 there was
no water for the whole distance from Mitchell to Charle-
ville excepting in the Angellala Creek a distance of over


100 miles. Consequently that part of the road was quite
closed to vehicular traffic. However, Her Majesty's mails
could not be delayed, but must be carried by some
means. So the postal authorities wrote to Mr. W. H. Bar-
ton (the then owner of Armadilla) that unless he would
allow water to be taken from his dam, which was quite
near to his head station, for the use of the mail horses,
the mail between Mitchell and Charleville would be ob-
liged to be discontinued till rain came. Mr. Barton gave
the desired permission, and a cask or two of water was
drawn by a horse and dray each week from Armadilla to
Dulbydilla, a distance of nine miles, for the use of the
mail horses. This occurred before the Government dam
was made about half a mile above McKenzie's house in
the Dulbydilla Creek.
Mr. Barton, too, lost heavily at that time through his
sheep dying for want of grass and water. I believe at
the time of which I am writing there were terrible privat-
ions on that road, as well as on the stations on each side
of it, for lack of water, for dams were not made in many
places either by the Government or by private individ-
uals, and artesian bores were then quite unknown. Nor
were there any trains to convey water along the road,
as is the case now. I remember hearing of a shepherd's
wife whose water tank, a large square one, had given
out before rain came to replenish it, and only a litiie
water remained in the bottom. It had no tap, and she
could not bale out any more. Her husband was away at
the Head Station and the poor woman was alone with
only her little boy of three or four years old. She was
puzzled for some time as to how she should obtain the
water; at last she put her little boy inside the tank
through the manhole, and with some difficulty managed
to make him understand that he was to bale out the water
with a pint-pot into a billycan, which he did, and though
the idea was not nice, she boiled the water and was only
too glad to get it and drink it. However, before it v/as
done rain came and replenished the tank. This incident
will serve to show what difficulties some shepherd's
wives had to encounter. This was an extreme case, of


course, and occurred on Cashalton Run; but I can quite
believe such a thing occurring in those days. I have
heard of as much as half'a-crown a bucket of water be-
ing given for a horse, if not even a larger sum.
The next station on the Charleville road that was
taken up at that time, 1862 or 1863, was Eurella by
Captain T. J. Saddler, as I have before stated, near where
the town of Morven now stands. For some years Morven
was known as Saddler's waterhole, it being there that
the captain and Mrs. Saddler were camped for some
time whilst their house was being built four miles below
Morven on the main road to Charleville on the banks of
the Hamburg (or "Humbug") Creek. This run is now in-
cluded in that of Maryvale; that is, on the block called
Alba, on which the captain built his head station. The
other block, Eurella proper, is now a portion of Arma-
dilla run. This block was known as Doctor's Plains from
an eccentric old shepherd who lived at a sheep station
near a cliff. He had, or was -supposed -to -have, -some
knowledge of medicine or of chemistry, which gained
him the nickname of "Doctor". This sheep station stood
near the cliff above mentioned, where two gullies junct-
ion. One is called Corbett's Gully, after Mr. James Cor-
bett, who built the first hotel in Morven. The other, to
the south, is called Spencer's Gully, after my father. Mr.
Meridith has a selection there called Hillgrove.
The township of Morven (which is on Victoria
Downs Run) was formed by Mr. and Mrs. James Corbett,
grandparents of the Messrs Corbett, of Mitchell, and par-
ents of Mrs. John Irwin, whose husband was formerly a
resident of Roma, and once its mayor. He now resides in
Brisbane. Mr. James Corbett built the first public house
and store in Morven. It was called the Victoria Downs
Hotel. Mr. John Bath was the first post and telegraph
master.
Maryvale was taken up and formed by A. F. Sur-
lick, which he called after his wife. He also took up and
formed Mount Maria, calling it also after his wife, whose


name was Mary. Maryvale is now the property of Mr. D.
T. Leadbetter, who has resided on it since 1873. Mount
Maria is now the property of Mr. Robert Doughlass. He is
the son of Mr. Robert Douglas, sen., late Sergeant-at-
Arms in the House of Parliament, and brother-in-law of
Mr. Robert Austin, who now holds the appointment. Mr.
and Mrs. Doughlass and a large family of seven
daughters and three sons still reside there. Mr. F. R.
Doughlass, of Mitchell, is their eldest son. Their eldest
daughter, Miss Bessie Douglas, married Mr. W. M. Hun-
ter, eldest son of Mr. Herbert Hunter, of Brisbane, and
grandson of the late Hon. W. Miles, M.L.A., who was
the second member for the Maranoa district after the
separation of Queensland from New South Wales. He
once owned Dulacca on the Darling Downs.
Mr. Robert Doughlass is one of the old pioneer
squatters, and during the early days he and Mrs. Dough-
lass had their full share of all the hard work and rough-
ing of a squatter and housekeeper on stations at that
time, and anyone who had experienced them as they did
will know they were not by any means light or easy, es-
pecially when rearing a young family. This rough life was
especially severe on one who had been brought up so
quietly as Mrs. Doughlass was, and so unused as she was
in her early girlhood to anything of that kind of life, but
she battled with all these difficulties bravely, her life in
the bush at that time being a sample of that led by many
a squatter's and working man's wife and daughter, and
they, like Mrs. Doughlass overcame them all successfully.
Victoria Downs and Brunell Downs were taken up
by one Archibald Meston, who was well known in this
district, but was not by any means popular. He sold them
to Messrs Jamieson and McLean. Mr. Jamieson was the
son of Sir John Jamieson, a physician and a noted one in
Sydney. Mr. McLean was a nephew of the noted Sir John
Robertson, of Sydney, after whom he was named. Hav-
ing purchased these runs and stocked them with sheep,
these gentlemen sold Brunell Downs to the late Mr.
Adolphus B. Jones, a son of a squatter in New South


Wales who was known by the name of "Gentleman"
Jones from his pompous manner and bearing to every-
one, especially to his inferiors. Mr. A. B. Jones and Mrs.
Jones and family resided on Brunell Downs for many
years. They subsequently removed to Nieve Junction.
Mr. Jones died suddenly a few years ago at Augathella.
I believe Mrs. Jones still lives at or near Nieve Junction.
They have a numerous family. Mrs. Jones is a sister of
Mrs. John McFarlane, Woroonga, and of Mr. G. E. Down-
ing, formerly owner of Tyrconnell Downs and now of
Mitchell.
Messrs Jamieson and McLean sold Victoria Downs
to Mr. John Lukeman. Mr. Herbert Hunter then purchased
it, and Mr. John Nicholls bought Brunell Downs. Event-
ually Mr. Hunter became possessed of both stations.
Messrs Hunter and Nicholls were both sons'in-law of Mr.
William Miles. Mr. William Hunter, who married Miss
Doughlass, resides at Brunei! Downs, and manages it for
his father, who lives in Brisbane.
Angellala Downs was taken up by Mr. Fred Harr-
ison, who passed through Tyrconnell with his sheep to
stock it when Mr. J. C. McManus was camped there in
tents only. Angellala Downs then came into the possess-
ion of Mr. Andrew Gordon, who occupied it several
years, and then I believe sold it to its present owner, Dr.
Dickson of Sydney, and a Mr. Newton was manager for
many years. I am not aware if he is still managing it.
What is now called Alice Downs was, I believe,
taken up, formed and stocked, by Mr. Stanbridge. He
eventually forfeited it after living on it for some years.
It was then purchased by Mr. Joseph Read at Govern-
ment auction, from whom it was bought by its present
owners, Messrs Penhallurick Bros.
In 1863 Orthoringa was taken up by Mr. Harrison,
who stocked it with sheep, occupying it for a few years,
and, I believe, forfeited it. Then Mr. Gordon Sandeman
bought it. It then passed into the hands of the Queens


land Pastoral Coy., who sold it to its present owners,
Messrs O'Brien and Cobbard.
Burenda was taken up in 1862 by Mr. Joseph Flem-
ming, who was then the owner of Talevera Station, near
Surat, as well as an extensive sawmill and boiling down
establishment near Ipswich. When Mr. J. C. McManus
was on his way up from Victoria and on his return, he
met Mr. J. Flemming and his manager, Mr. James Nor-
man, going out searching for new country, at which
time they discovered and took up Burenda, which they
stocked in 1863, at the same time as my father stocked
Nieve Downs. Mr. Flemming was a native of the Hawkes-
bury, near Windsor, New South Wales. He married a
sister of Mrs. Hall, wife of one of the late Messrs Thomas
and Ebenezer Hall of Dartbrook, New South Wales, and
formerly owners of Noorindoo, near Surat. Mr. Flemming
had six or seven daughters and one son. This son was
killed when quite a youth from a fall from his horse. Miss
Carry Flemming married Mr. Scott Smith. I have forgotten
who the other sisters married. They were all fine buxom
young women when they passed Mount Abundance on
their way out to Burenda. After holding Burenda for a
year or two Mr. Flemming sold it to Mrs. Adeline H. Dol-
man, who was well known in Ipswich in those days. She
died about 1868, and is buried at Burenda. She was
noted for her kindness to anyone who was sick or in
trouble. She was a splendid horsewoman and performed
many long journeys from Burenda to Ipswich a distance
of nearly 400 miles on horseback. Burenda then passed
into the hands of a Bank, and afterwards it was purchas-
ed by the Hon. Gordon Sandeman, M.L.A. He resided
there for some years, when he sold it to the Queensland
Pastoral Coy., who still own it. Mr. G. Sandeman was a
well known squatter in the Burnett district as the owner
of Burrandowan, for many years previous to his purchase
of Burenda.
Hoganthulla Run was taken up in the same year as
Burenda, or very shortly afterwards by Mr. John Ash-
burne, who with Mrs. Ashburne and family lived there


for many years. They subsequently removed to Brisbane,
where Mr. Ashburne died. I believe his sons still own the
property.
At the same time as Hoganthulla was occupied,
Messrs Charles and Henry Tom, then of Yulebar, took up
and stocked Chesterton. During the time Mr. J. C.
McManus was camped at Amby Junction, previous to his
final occupation of Tyrconnel Downs in 1862, Messrs C.
and H. Tom stayed at his camp on their way out when
on the expedition from Yuelbar to discover the country
which they took up and called Chesterton and which I
believe they still own.
I have already alluded more than once to my
father's occupation of Nieve Downs, which was discover-
ed for him by his overseer, William Coverley, and father
took it up from his description and gave him the man-
agement of the forming of it in 1863. Therefore I need
say no more about it, only to remark that it passed into
the possession with Mount Abundance, of the Scottish
Australian Investment Company in whose hands it has
ever since remained, under the management of Mr.
Thomas Brodie, who still manages it. It is a magnificent
property and quite equal to Mount Abundance, being
quite as large, if not larger. These two properties are
among the finest in Queensland, if not in all Australia.
Gowrie Station was formed and stocked by Mr.
Soloman Wiseman (who is since dead; he was not very
wise , by the way) for Messrs Flood and Gordon, who (as
I have said) formed and owned Mitchell Downs in 1862
or 1863. Mr. S. Wiseman passed by Mount Abundance in
that year with the whole plant necessary to the forming
of a sheep station. That is sheep, bullock drays, supplies
and men to build houses, men's huts, sheep yards, wool-
sheds and all other necessary buildings and appurten-
ances of a sheep station in the old shepherding days,
when it required almost a small army of men and over-
seers to carry it on and perform all the necessary work.
During the time Mr. Wiseman's drays were standing in


front of our stores, two neighbouring squatters chanced
to meet in the store, and one struck the other across
the shoulders with his riding whip for something he had
said of him to his detriment and a fight ensued and the
first offender got the worst of it. It caused great merri-
ment especially as they were well known and were both
Justices of the Peace. They were however, parted. But
the delight of the bystanders and the shouts of laughter
were deafening. I believe Gowrie Station is still owned
by the widows of the Messrs Flood, the two Mesdames
Flood.
Langlo Downs was next taken up by two young
men named Donkin, of whom I have before mentioned.
This completes the list of all the principal stations in
the Maranoa, and those of the Warrego district of which
I was cognisant. I shall conclude these "reminis-
cences" with an account of the great and memorable
flood of 1864, which was all over Australia; and it will
long be remembered as the largest ever known or wit-
nessed by Europeans. In this year the exciting rush for
new country was practically at an end. All the best and
most available country was by this time occupied. But the
grand climax was reached and the most disastrous event
of all was the severe drought which followed it in 1865
and extended to the year 1868, when all or nearly all,
the original squatters succumbed to its effects and were
ruined en masse.
XV.
After the three years from 1861 to 1863, during
which time the taking up and stocking of new country
and forming of new stations, with the bustle and excit-
ment appertaining thereto, had somewhat subsided, and
squatters began to settle down to the usual routine of
station life, then came the memorable flood of 1864, the
like of which had never been before seen by any settler
in Australia. We had such a lengthy and widely extended
rain as had never been known even by the "very oldest


inhabitant". I am not aware of the fullest extent of the
period that the rain continued without intermission else-
where; but at Mount Abundance and in the neighbour-
hood of Roma it continued for 17 days, with only one
hours intermission on one day, and on another it was
fine for five or six hours. With these two exceptions the
rain poured down in torrents day and night. The Bunge-
worgorai Creek was a banker continually all that time.
Thousands of sheep were drowned, also many horses and
cattle. Their carcasses were seen floating down the stream
hourly. Not only were stock drowned in thousands whole
flocks of sheep being swept away, but in some cases
the shepherds also were drowned, while many barely
escaped with their lives, some taking refuge in trees or
on the roofs of their huts. Among the many carcasses of
all kinds of stock and animals that floated down the Bun-
geworgorai Creek was a horse saddled and bridled. From
whence it came no one ever knows. Probably the rider
was drowned too in attempting to swim some creek or
gully. When the flood was at its height, someone induc-
ed a blackfellow, King Peter (a very stout strongly built
man about 25 or 30 years of age), for a reward to swim
across from the station side of the Bungeworgorai Creek
to the opposite one, which feat he successfully accom-
plished. He entered the creek nearly opposite the house,
adjacent to the outlet of the Ana branch which forms
Cattle Creek, where an overshoot dam has since been
erected. He drifted with the current, landing about 200
yards below the men's hut, about 400 yards from where
he started. It was a great swim, the creek being both
deep and narrow there, and the current very strong.
Moreover trees, logs, and other debris were con-
tinually floating past, which might have struck him at any
moment. He swam gallantly and succeeded in avoiding
them all, never coming in contact with even a small one.
I need not say he was loudly cheered by the crowd ass-
embled on the banks of the creek to see the performance.
I cannot remember if he returned the same day. I think
not. There was a large camp of blacks on the opposite
side of the station. He probably went to them.


Before the rain ceased all the workmen's quarters
were inundated with water. There were several English
and German families among them and they were all re-
moved and provided with lodgings in our kitchen, store
or wherever they could bestow themselves for several
days till the flood abated.
During the time the flood lasted the whole country
on the east side of the Bungeworgorai was as far as the
sand ridges (now called Gibbson's farm or Irea), and as
far out in the direction of Roma as the racecourse or near-
ly so, was a complete sea of water, and in some places
more than a swim for a good horse. There were large
flocks of black swans, native companions and almost
every kind of water fowl disporting themselves on the
water, both during the flood and for many months after
the main body of water had disappeared and only the
larger and deeper swamps were left. They were very
pretty and picturesque in their gambols, and any one
who has seen them in their wild state can verify this
statement, especially the elegant and graceful movements
of the black swan, the male bird being particularly hands-
some with his long graceful neck, and scarlet head. The
native companions (a large blue crane) too, are very
funny in their movements, when they congregate to-
gether and have a dance, bowing to each other as grace-
fully as partners in a quadrille. But to return to the sand
ridge above named. It was to it that all the blacks went
when their camps were surrounded with water. So deep
was the water between the sand ridge and their camo,
that they were obliged to swim most of the way (nearly
half a mile) the women carrying their picanninies on
their heads. One poor old gin was drowned in making
the attempt to reach the dry ground.
My father had just begun shearing, having one flock
shorn, when down came the rain, and we were obliged
to discontinue it. The shearers and woolwashers (no wool-
scourers then) and other hands connected with the shear-
ing were all camped about the station, waiting for the
rain to cease to allow them to resume work or go else


where. There were quite a number of people about then.
The station was like a small township. Our house, too,
was as full as it would hold with weatherbound travell-
ers, no less than 14 or 15 sitting down to table every
meal, among whom was Mrs. A. H. Dolman, who was on
her way from Burenda to Ipswich, escorted by Mr. Flem-
ming, of whom she had recently bought the station, as I
have before mentioned. Mrs. Dolman travelled the whole
distance on horseback, about 500 miles. She stayed with
us during the whole time the flood lasted (21) days. As
soon as ever the creek was crossable she resumed her
journey. She crossed the Bungeworgorai Creek on a big
grey carriage horse called Clarence. Mr. Flemming rode
on one side, and I (at her earnest request), rode on the
other. Some idea of the risk and danger may be imag-
ined, and the difficulty of this undertaking, when the
water was half-way up our saddle flaps, and the creek
banks on each side steep and a quagmire. We struggled
out, or rather our horses did, as best they could, flound-
ering at every step. Mrs. Dolman being stout and her
horse a heavy one, he plunged and floundered about
terribly, till we feared she would have been thrown. But
she sat him bravely and managed him splendidly, being
a good horsewoman. On our arrival at the opposite bank
Mrs. Dolman slightly lost her presence of mind, which
she had maintained so admirably when in the creek, and
became a little unnerved and hysterical. She soon recov-
ered her composure, however and resumed her journey.
I accompanied her as far as Cattle Creek crossing, our
horses ploughing sometimes girth deep in water and
mud. On my return I missed the crossing through the
water sinking in the meantime and obliterating my hor-
ses tracks, and my mare swerving with me into deep
water, she narrowly escaped being lifted off her feet.
However, by prompt application of whip and bridle I suc-
ceeded in causing her to bound through quickly on to
firm ground. I was much startled, but did not lose my
presence of mind and so landed safely on the opposite
bank. So near was it to a swim that the pocket of my
saddle was wet. It was a very unwise and dangerous
thing for me to do, but I was very brave in those days


and young people do not see the danger that older ones
do. So far from seeing danger was I, that I had not the
necessary precaution I ought to have had. But then young
people are more or less foolish, and I suppose I was not
any exception to the rule. I was a good horsewoman then
and saw no fear.
He had at this time great difficulty in conveying the
weekly rations to the shepherds over the black soil plains,
which were almost impassable. It entailed a great deal of
extra work for both men and horses, for then no cart
could traverse, and only pack horses were used a very
primitive and insufficient mode of conveyance. More-
over, the ordinary spring cart that was in general use in
those days seemed quite unsuitable for the work, and
was always 'stuck-up' in the middle of a plain or in some
other way coming to grief through breakages or some
such mishap.
During the flood Mr. W. H. Barton, the then owner of
Armadilla was travelling from Surat to Mount Abun-
dance, and when (I think near Occabulla) the ground be"
came so boggy that his horses could not go through it.
Consequently he was obliged to dismount place his sad-
dle in the branches of a tree, and leave the horses to
struggle along as best they could. He himself proceeded
on foot towards Rocky Bank, which he reached after great
difficulty, being two or three days without food. Arriving
at Rocky Bank, he could not reach the station, it being
on the opposite side of the creek to that on which he
was; and the Yalebone was in high flood and running
so strongly it was impossible for any man or horse to
cross it. The channel being (I believe) a very narrow one,
and the current rapid. The question now was how to sup-
ply Mr. Barton with food no small difficulty under the
circumstances. However, Mrs. Ross boiled some eggs
hard, and Mr. Ross threw them over to him. But out of
a dozen he only caught three, the rest falling into the
water. Then they packed some other food into a bag and
conveyed it across by means of a rope fastened to some


trees, but the bag became so sodden, having slipped in-
to the water, that the food was of little service to him.
However, Mr. Barton secured enough to make a tolerable
supper, although his matches being wet, he was obliged
to pass the night without a fire. By morning the creek
had so far fallen as to allow of a horse being taken over
to him, and he crossed over in safety. He was much ex-
hausted when he reached the house. Being over middle
age the effects of his privation were very severe upon
him. After a few days rest with the Rosses, be borrowed
a horse from them and proceeded to Mount Abundance
Head Station, where he purchased a horse, saddle and
bridle, and proceeded to his home at Armadilla, a dist-
ance of about 100 miles, leaving his own horses and
saddle to be taken home later on. I believe the latter were
never recovered.
XVI.
In October succeeding the great flood of March
1864, my parents and myself took a journey out West to
Nieve Downs. My father and mother drove and I rode on
horseback. We had also a man leading spare horses. The
first days journey was 10 miles beyond Bindango head
station. We lunched there on our way to camp, Mr. A,
James Rea, the then owner being very kind to us. The
next day we journeyed as far as Wooronga, where we
camped, spending the evening with Mr. and Mrs. Foster
and his partner, Mr. Deeds. The next day we were pro-
ceeding on to the Maranoa River. We met Mr. Zeiman,
who at that time had a store in Roma; also a branch store
in Donnybrook, from whence he was returning to Roma
from one of his periodical visits to that township. He
lunched with us at our camp, and then proceeded on his
way. That evening we arrived at the Maranoa River, and
camped near the Native Police Barracks. Mr. John Marlow
being absent on one of his periodical visits to some stat-
ion which it was his duty to visit in turn every three
months. Every Native Police officer and their troopers
regularly patrolled their districts in this manner. From
thence we passed on to Forrest Vale, but found no one at


home but the cook. Then we proceeded on to Redford,
stopping one night with Mr. and Mrs. Henry Baillie. They
had been living there but a short time, and had only re-
cently build a large bark house which, though rather
rough, was comfortable. They also were very kind and
hospitable to us. We had known them some years pre-
vious to their going to reside at Redford. We passed
Max Vale and Hoganthulla without calling, as these stat-
ions were some distance off the road. Indeed, we saw no
other habitations, with the exception of a shepherd's
hut now and then, until we came to Burenda. We did
not call in there either, my father being anxious to pro-
ceed. The weather threatened rain, and we were fearful
of being delayed by boggy roads and swollen creeks.
Just beyond Burenda we mistook a timbergetters
road for the right one, which led to the Warrego River
where there was no crossing. This mistake was easily
made in those days when nearly all the bush roads were
new and not well defined, especially in the vicinity of
sheep stations or lambing yards, where they were com-
petely obliterated in many cases by the flock passing over
them. Having arrived at the Warrego where there was
no crossing but a very long and deep waterhole, we were
in a dilemma. So we camped here till the morrow, the
man being sent to discover the road and the regular
crossing which he found about two miles lower down the
river. We travelled all the next day and far into the night
because we wished to make Nieve Downs that night, for
at that time the natives were not to be wholly trusted.
It also threatened to rain. The road was very sandy all
up Nieve River and we experienced a deal of heavy
pulling. As we neared the Nieve Downs lower crossing
about 8 p.m. I was riding a short distance ip advance of
the party. At a sudden turn the road dipped abruptly
down the bank of the river, in the bed of which camped
and apparently fast asleep were three men. Owing to
the sandy nature of the soil on the bank of the river they
failed to hear either the sound of the conveyance or that
of my horses hoofs. Therefore, they were as much
astonished at seeing me as I was at seeing them. They


were soon on the alert. One grasped a stick, another a
firestick, while a third stood staring dumbly at the sight
of a girl on horseback standing on the river bank above
them at that hour of the night, and apparently alone; an
apparition (if I may use the word) for which they were
not prepared. The wonder was they were not armed.
Had they been, I was in no little danger of being shot
for they evidently expected on attack by wild blacks. But
they were so surprised that they stood still. I was equally
astonished and for once was at a loss for an explanation
or how to account for my presence there. However, my
father and the man soon arrived. As one of the men
knew my father all was explained and all fears of blacks
and other dangers vanished. We learned from these men
that we were only five miles from Nieve Downs Station,
so we decided to camp there for the night. We were out
of flour and beef, but the men very kindly shared their
damper and beef with us. To my dying day I shall never
forget the blank look of surprise on these men's faces as
they gazed up at me; and I daresay I looked quite as
astonished at them. I was very careful ever afterwards
not to ride ahead again. Indeed, this was the only occas-
ion that I did so. We started very early the next day, ar-
riving at Nieve Downs a short time after sunrise: finding
the station folk still in bed and asleep. On being awak-
ened they looked very disconcerted and crestfallen at
being caught in bed by the owner and the sun nearly
an hour high. No doubt they expected to be reprimanded
for their slothfulness. But father did not notice it at the
time; whether he did subsequently I don't remember.
Probably his thoughts then were centred on breakfast; I
am sure mine were; also my mother's. After a five mile
ride in the keen October air our appetites were consider-
ably sharpened, especially as we had but a light meal
the previous night. However, the man cook, who was an
excellent one, soon set before us a nice breakfast of
mutton chops and well made bread.
We stayed at Nieve Downs ten days. The house
was recently built, and was not completed. Consequent-
ly the accommodation was very rough. I fear dear mother


did not enjoy the trip or her stay very much, although
she never murmured, but took it all placidly and calmly
as was her wont. As for myself, I was young and young
people don't consider such trifles as earthen floors to
walk on, tin pannikins to drink out of or tin plates or
dishes to eat off, and various other inconveniences
that were to be expected so far out where there were
only men. No women for very likely 100 miles off. AAy
father spent the time in inspecting the run and sheep
with his manager, and was out all day. The bookkeeper,
AAr. Peter Cadman, drove my mother and I out every
afternoon over the fine plains. They looked lovely and
green, and we enjoyed the drive very much.
On our return home we made slower progress, as
one of our horses went lame at Burenda. At that station
we passed an old man camped by the roadside, whose
mare had a very young foal which insisted on following
our spare horses and all our efforts to induce it to rejoin
its dam for some time proved futile. The old fellow at
last become very excited, and used very unparliamentary
language, declaring we did not wish him to recover his
wayward little foal, or would not try to assist him to do
so. My father wishing to reach a certain place to camp
that night was anxious to proceed, and was impatient
at the delay. Consequently he too used language more
forcible than polite (an unusual thing for him in those
days). So for a time there was an exciting scene. At length
the foal solved the difficulty by leaving the spare horses
and following mine, so I dismounted and the man led
him back to the man's camp the foal following; and the
two men succeeaed in indue.ng it to remain behind. We
then resumed our journey after overcoming the obstin-
ancy of the foal and the profanity of the man.
At Hoganthulla we again lost the road through sheep
tracks crossing and obliterating it, for it was not very
plain in many places. Whilst the man was searching for
it I rode over to a lambing ground a short distance away
to enquire the way of a woman I saw in the distance. She
was driving some sheep with very young or "green"


lambs, as they are called. She was toiling through the
heat and sandy soil covered with dust and tormented
with flies and mosquitoes, to say nothing of the sandflies
and which were in my veil and also in myriads. She car
ried a heavy child in her arms and two more children
were clinging to her skirts, hiding their faces in it at the
sight of a stranger. She was rapidly approaching mother-
hood for the fourth time. It was an intensely hot day, and
I did pity her so much. She looked so hot and tired toiling
through the hot sand and driving stubborn old ewes and
weak newly-born lambs. Persons who have done this will
readily understand what a difficult and patience trying
job this is.
A few miles further on we turned out for our mid-
day meal and to water our horses, on a high sand ridge.
I was sitting on my horse waiting till the other horses
were taken to the creek near by, when the animal with-
out any warning, took it into its head to deliberately lie
down. My father, who was holding the other horses, call-
ed to the man to catch him by the head, but he (the man)
was so frightened that he could do nothing, so I was ob-
liged to struggle from under him as best I could, no easy
matter with one's habit on which were worn much long-
er than at the present day, I however, after a little diffi-
culty succeeded in getting to my feet from my struggling
steed, and with my whip which I applied as hard as I
could I prevented him rolling over and breaking my sad-
dle. I was quite unhurt, save being smothered in sand.
My mother, however, was much alarmed for my safety.
As for me, well I enjoyed the fun as a relief to the mon-
otony of the journey. For does not youth love adventure
all the world over? And has ever done so and I suppose
ever will do. The man's fright amused me more than
anything else, he being such a stupid fellow. I suppose he
could not help it, though father was very angry with him
for not getting to my assistance, and was near dismiss-
ing him on the spot. We did not call at Redford on our
return, but proceeded to Forest Vale, and were caught in
a heavy thunderstorm of rain and hail. My horse objected
and began to buck a little, but after a time he went


quietly. As it was late and we were wet, we did not go
up to the house, but camped in the woolshed. Shearing
was about to commence, and some of the shearers and
other hands and several women were camped about near
the shed in tents and carts awaiting the shearing. Among
them was Mrs. John Power, who prepared a nice supper
for us and dried our wet clothes. Her husdand had form-
erly been employed on Mount Abundance. Mrs. Power
was a hard-working woman. I believe she was the first
white woman to cross the Condamine at the township
going West, or rather where the township is now. I know
she was the first white woman who came to Wallumbilla
before we came to Queensland.
But to return to our journey. The next day we came
as far as Donnybrook. We camped near that township;
and about midnight another storm came on. My mother
and I were sleeping in one tent, my father and the man
in another. The wind was so high and strong that it was
all we could do to hold our tent from being blown away;
whilst father and the man were holding on to their's
with all their might. It was a larger one and was in still
greater danger than ours of being blown adrift, and in
consequence was more difficult to hold. The next day be-
ing showery we stayed all day, and the following night,
at the Native Police barracks aforesaid. Mr. (or rather
Lieutenant) Marlow being absent on this occasion also.
The sergeant who was left in charge was very kind to us,
and made us as comfortable as circumstances would per-
mit. He assisted us to dry our wet clothes, which were
saturated by the rain of the previous night. We started
next day, and in three days reached home, being absent
exactly three weeks. We were delighted to be once more
at home, though on the whole it was rather a pleasant
journey. The weather, however, was now becoming too
warm to make travelling pleasant. Our horses too were
very tired and one was lame. The distance was about 200
miles; 400 miles there and back; and a deal of the road
was heavy loose sand, which made it heavy and diffi-
cult pulling for a great portion of the road, especially on
the banks of the Maronoa River.


XVII.
During our journey up and down the Maranoa River
from Donnybrook to Forest Vale, we were much inter-
ested in observing the tremendous havoc the recent
floods had made in the banks and bed of the river. It was
worth the whole trip, for all the traces of the late floods
were still fresh and the devastation made by them need
only to be seen to be fully comprehended. No one can
imagine the thousands of tons of sand that was washed
from all huge sand ridges on each side of the river banks
and deposited on the tlats and into the river bed, filling
up magnificent water holes, never again, perhaps to re-
appear and for which the Maranoa was famous. Some of
these sand ridges were cut into (probably) many hun-
dreds of feet deep, and still showed banks of sheer sand.
Coal was seen protruding from some of these banks,
but whether any of it was ever taken out I am unable to
say. Some of the seams laid bare by the action of the
water were rather large and would probably have yield-
ed a considerable supply if any one possessed sufficient
enterprise to work them. It had always been a mystery
to me how these immense sand ridges were formed, till I
caw the tremendous dust ctorms of the present year
(1899-1900) driving sand about into hills everywhere.
No doubt but these terrific wind storms and the action
of the water has been the means of their formation. The
size and ages of the trees growing on them and the great
depth reached by their roots all tend to show they must
have been ages and ages in forming. It would be an in"
teresting study for any one having a taste for geology to
make some observations on some of these large deposits
of sand which abound in so many parts of Queensland
and Australia generally. I am strongly of the opinion that
the whole of the interior of our continent was once a sea.
The fineness of the sand on these ridges in many
places is almost beyond description, while in other
places it is quite coarse like the sea shore; the latt-
er being white as snow, while the former is red or yell-
ow resembling sugar of these colours. The white sand


in the glare of the sun dazzled one's eyes like snow. Es-
pecially was this the case near Forest Vale and Donny-
brook, as well as between those places. Here all the flats
were covered for miles with this snow-white sand, in
some places for a distance of half a mile to three-quarters
of a mile back from the river, and in low-lying places
even a greater distance. In some of these high sand ridg-
es there was no subsoil visible, although they were
hundreds of feet deep, showing a perpendicular face,
where the water had cut its way into them, of sheer
sand. The cause of the sand on the flats showing so white
was owing to the grass not having yet grown over it. In
some places the grass was completely covered inches
deep (and probably feet) and it was years before the
grass showed above it. In other places the grass was
washed completely out by the roots and perhaps never
grew properly after.
The water had completely covered the tops of near-
ly all the highest trees, and the carcasses and skeletons of
drowned animals, such as cattle, sheep, horses, kangar-
oos and many other animals were to be seen hanging in
every conceivable position in the topmost branches and
forks of almost every tree, even the tallest of them, that
were growing in the flats and in the river bed or near
its bank. Large trees too were lodged in the forks of
others quite entire with the roots and branches, showing
they had been uprooted entire, and uplifted by the water
without breaking a twig. And thus they floated till caught
by those standing in their path and in floating down the
stream had become fast and so remained. I daresay
many have remained in their positions, and may still be
seen in their original posture as a monument of the
height to which the flood reached. Huge banks and
mounds of debris were thrown up against every ob-
struction, containing every conceivable thing, including
caracasses of drowned animals, portions of dwellings,
hurdles, and many other things used on stations. From
the many remains of dead animals the smell must have
been very offensive. It was a wonder there was not a
pestilence; but I never heard of any ill effects from them;


neither do I remember hearing of any fever and ague be-
ing prevalent at that time, which was singular after so
much wet, although it was very prevalent in Roma not
many years before.
The pressure of so many carcases hanging in the
trees, the large mounds of drift, and the endless num-
ber of heaps of timber lying about which contrasted with
the whiteness of the sand, gave to the scenery a weird
uncanny appearance of desolation. The country back from
the river was most luxuriantly grassed and covered with
flowers. When once we were beyond the margin of the
floods the country looked lovely, the green hue of the
grass, and bright colours of the flowers showed a pleas-
ant contrast to the desolate aspect of the river channel
and the sand covered flats.
With all this havoc it was satisfactory to know that
though the loss of stock was somewhat considerable,
that of human life was small. Indeed, I do not remember
hearing of any in the Maranoa district. Many men, how-
ever, risked their lives and performed daring deeds
worthy of the Victoria Cross, in swimming swollen creeks
and rivers to convey rations to some poor water-bound
shepherd or to succour or rescue him from the roof of his
hut or a tree top to which he may have betaken himself
for safety. Some shepherds at Forest Vale were some days
in a tree without food but they were rescued. One man
too was completely surrounded by water with his flock
on a high sand ridge, but beyond a short supply of food,
he suffered no inconvenience, though he had some dif-
ficulty in feeding his sheep, as they were in a rather con-
fined space. They were soon rescued. I believe this also
occured on Forest Vale, and only about a mile from the
Flead Station. At Forest Vale too, the store and all its con-
tents were washed away, not a post or a vestige of it be-
ing left. There were tins of jam, bottles of pickles, and
many other provisions found many miles down the river
months afterwards.


The great flood of 1864 will long be remembered
while anyone remains alive who (like myself and others)
has any recollection of the enormous bodies of water
that flowed down even small creeks, not to mention large
rivers. Also the vast area of lowlying land such as that
on the Balonne and Moonie Rivers. These rivers were as
one for hundreds of miles after the Maranoa and other
rivers and creeks had joined them. They are 25 miles
apart at the nearest place, and run parallel for about 200
miles. These lands were completely inundated for some
time after the rain had ceased. Still with all, the losses of
stock were but small compared with those caused by the
severe droughts that have prevailed in Australia (and in
the Maranoa district in particular) during recent years.
Indeed all stock owners would gladly welcome the
return of the wet seasons of the five or six years of the
early settlement of this district which culminated in the
memorable (and I may also say continual) floods of 1864.
For I believe they extended over the whole of Australia
(then known), a circumstance that has never as far as they
were aware of, in any previous year since the colonies
have been inhabited by Europeans, and certainly not
since.
XVIII
In concluding these reminiscences of the early settle-
ment of the Maranoa, I will make a few remarks on the
social life in the district during the days of its primitive-
ness lest my lady readers should accuse me of writing
only of the affairs appertaining to squatting pursuits, and
imagine they are left out in the cold; or that I have for-
gotten those little trivialities which ladies love so much to
read about in books no matter of what subject they treat.
Should I neglect this they may probably accuse me of be-
ing a "dry as dust" writer, if not anything equally horrid.
Therefore, to escape such an accusation, I will give them
a few items dear to the feminine heart; and devote a little
time and space to what is sure to interest them. First of
all they will doubtless wonder that in all the searching


for runs, the forming of stations, the purchasing and driv-
ing of stock, and the great efforts and striving to secure
these precious holdings, that the gentlemen never gave
a thought to the ladies, or of taking unto themeselves
wives. The fact is there were so few marriageable girls in
the district that there was no opportunity of indulging in
the tender passion. The little god Cupid has not as yet
"explored" the hearts of the youths and maidens of the
"never never". I hope I may not be considered irreverent
when I compared the district at the beginning of its settle-
ment to that place where we all hope to go, in that there
was " neither marriage nor giving in marriage" though
I fear few resembled angels. For some two or three years
after the settlement began 1 do not think that besides
the Misses Moorehead and myself there were any mar-
riageable girls west of Condamine township in any walk
of life. Even at that place I believe there was only Miss
Foster, the daughter of Mr. Henry Foster, hotel-keeper,
store-keeper, and postmaster and what not all in one.
Therefore the romantic passion was very little, if at all,
indulged in. Squatters and run hunters were too busy to
spare the time to seek sweethearts and wives. Runs were
all they sought after. Perhaps the men thought they
would procure them first and leave wooing till a more
convenient season. At all events love matters remained
for a time in abeyance. Now a word about the fashions
in dress may not be mal apropos. The men all wore great
turbans of white muslin on their hats called puggeries,
some were very large, some were twisted, some were
pleated over the crown of the hat. Some wore plain book
muslin, while the majority wore long muslin scarves
with red or blue ends and long fringes hanging over the
brim of the hat behind. Some hung down 6 or 8 inches,
and some a greater length, in order to protect the nape
of the neck from the sun. The fashion came from India
I believe. When of moderate size they looked very
nice and cool, but when too large they had a heavy and
clumsy appearance, which strongly suggested the slang
name for them , viz, "poultice". In winter heavy rugs
were worn over the shouders with a hole cut in the centre
through which the head was thrust. I suppose they were


very warm and comfortable and were a good protection
from the rain. These were very often gaudily coloured to
resemble the skins of the tiger or leopard or some other
wild animals. They were called ponchos, and were intro-
duced into the colonies by the Spanish gold diggers. Al-
though they were said to be comfortable enough they
looked very clumsy and unwieldy, and when wet
were very heavy and troublesome to dry. Wellington
boots, too, were worn; also the long ugly Napoleon's
that sank down in a heap about the men's ankles looking
most ungraceful and untidy. Some of the gentlemen
when out on their exploring expeditions had splendid
outfits and expensive ones too; both for themselves and
their horses. Saddlers did a "roaring trade" in those days
of reckless expenditure. No expense was spared in the
selection of all kinds of horse gear.
As for the ladies, they wore the crinolines of the
most ample dimensions, and small pork-pie hats. Also
Garibaldi jackets (now called blouses). Brown holland
was seen everywhere, and everything was made of and
covered with it, even to our hats. Hats too, were trimmed
with large streamers of several colours of ribbon, reach-
ing to the feet behind, and we wore velvet neck ribbons
also tied with long streamers down our back. Our hair
was dressed down over our ears, bulged out on each side
with pads made of various materials with a huge bow
behind with long ends of ribbon reaching to our feet, to
say nothing of the heavy chenille hair nets of black and
every other colour, some large enough to hold a large
cabbage. The hair was merely placed in these, almost at
its full length. Some of these nets were made of fine silk
with a small mesh and were the colour of one's hair. They
were called "invisible" nets and were the prettiest of all;
and were merely passed over the pads, and were very
neat and nice. But those long ones that hung almost to
one's waist were horrid things. The state one's dresses
were at the back need only to be imagined. A more un-
tidy fashion could not be thought of. The one more re-
diculous was the hideous chignon of a decade later.
How funny these styles would appear now. For riding


our habits almost swept the ground and were very
heavy. For some years after the death of the Prince Con-
sort; magenta or mauve mingled or combined with black
were the most fashionable colours. Indeed, such was the
rage for these colours that almost every fabric of ladies'
attire, also gentlemen's ties and handkerchiefs, were not
considered fashionable unless they were one or the other
of those colours or the two combined. But of all the hid-
eous, grotesque, and inconvenient styles of dress for
women the crinoline was the most absurd. The incon-
venience and unwieldiness had only to be seen to be
fully realised; that is when they were worn of such enor-
mous dimensions. Some were quite two yards in di-
ameter. They were dangerous too. Many a woman was
burnt to death through wearing such large crinolines, the
steel ribs preventing the use of wraps to envelope one in
case one's dress caught fire. The inconvenience and dis-
comforts they caused in conveyances and railway carriag-
es were the cause of much profanity among the men
when escorting or dancing with the women; but of course
under their breath. I am sure with the provocation it was
pardonable, and let us hope they may not be called on
to answer for it. I fear in this case the answering would
be on the side of the women. If not it ought to have been
for adopting such a hideous ungainly style of dress.
Those who remember the issues of the London "Punch"
of that time will doubtless remember the clever cartoons
in it portraying the oft and many awkward difficulties
and scrapes both men and women got into through the
crinoline. They will also remember the side whiskers the
men wore at that time. This style was called the "Lord
Dundreary shave" after a character in Southern's cele-
brated play of "Our American Cousin".
As for social gatherings such as balls or even visiting
between ladies, or even gentlemen, they were not much
indulged in; there being neither time nor opportunity for
su'h pastimes, As a rule, everyone was too busy and
situated at too great a distance usually to admit of such
amusements being possible. But for all that (as a friend
remarked to me anent these reminiscences) there was a


kind of family sympathy subsisting between the settlers
in the early days, which was nice to see a good amount
of good fellowship, and comradeship, despite the desire
of each to outstrip his neighbour in securing country.
When once it was secured and the neighbours settled
down near each other they were as a rule, very friendly
and obliging to one another. Had it not been thus many
a one would have been in sore straits on many occasions,
and in various ways incidental to such a sparsely popul-
ated district; and the necessity of combining for the pur-
pose of protection was a great incentive to the friendly
and neighbourly feeling that usually prevailed among the
early pioneers. At the same time, owing to the great dis‘
tances there was not that opportunity to display this
neighbourly feeling. Stations were often over 30 and
40 miles apart, and never less than 10 or 20 miles. Close
settlement was not even thought of nor was it desired.
It was a bug-bear and a thorn in the flesh of every squat-
ter in those days. Now the contrary is the opinion. And
they see now that large holdings will not pay so well as
smaller ones do.
Having now given my readers as many of my re-
miniscences as I can recall to mind, I will conclude with
the wish that they may derive as much pleasure in the
pursual of them as I have in the writing.
I must not, however, close them without thanks to
the friend by whose suggestion I conceived the of
giving my friends and all other readers who may be inter-
ested in them, a slight sketch of the old pioneer life in
the bush. I must also thank those gentlemen who have
suoolied many corrections and valuable information of
which I was either not aware or had entirely forgotten.
Many of the above incidents recorded will recall
many others (long forgotten) in the lives of those who
were actors or eye-witnesses of them in the opening up
of the Maranoa and Warrego districts; and in looking
back will not fail to note the great strides that have been
made, and the many comforts and luxuries we are now
enjoying of which our parents never saw or even dream-
ed of forty years ago.


If in the circle of my friends there be,
One, who will take this volume writ by me,
And not on all its imperfections look.
But rather see the pathos and the wit
Which I have tried, yet failed to put in it.
To her or him I dedicate my book.
Author Unknown
THE END.
MARY A. McMANUS
June, 1903.
"Times" Print, Charleville.
