

AGREEMENT BETWEEN ASSOCIATED BANKS
TO AFFORD MUTUAL SUPPORT.
tlbe Hrgus,
MELBOURNE, TUESDAY, 14th MARCH , 1893.
((MONETARY AND COMMERCIAL.)
The Argus Office, Monday Evening.
The communique which is published in another column is highly
re'assuring to the public mind, because, in the first place, we now
have it on the authority of both the Government and the Asso-
ciated Banks that the disquieting rumours which have been
current of late are unfounded. This assurance, especially as it
comes from the Government, vouches for the security of the posi-
tion. In the second place the Associated Banks undertake to act
unitedly in rendering assistance to each other, should assistance
be required, and the obvious meaning of this is that they have
engaged themselves to enter into a material guarantee sufficient
to ward off disaster. Otherwise the undertaking would be
purposeless, and this is a view which, having regard to the
disquieting rumours, cannot of course be entertained. In the
third place, the Government has resolved to afford cordial co-
operation with the Associated Banks, so that the public enjoy a
double guarantee, that of the Government of Victoria backing up
that of the Associated Banks. The popular acceptation of the
communique thus being stated, it will be readily seen that no
further cause of apprehension exists, for the united strength of
the Associated Banks and of the Government of Victoria is quite
sufficient for the occasion. Under any circumstances it will be a
great relief to a public which to a considerable extent has
il ‘


unnecessarily got into a feverish condition, that the Government
has formally, by the Treasurer, with the approval of the
Cabinet, undertaken to prevent further banking disaster.
And it is to be admitted that there are eras in the life of
a nation at which the interposition of a Government for the
unmistakeable well-being of the.community is justifiable. That
the present Government of Victoria is of the opinion that such
an era exists at present is unquestionable, and it is therefore
committed to a definite course of action, that is to the support of
all the Victorian banks. Hereafter no depositor should have any
apprehension on the score of the safety of his money, inasmuch
as he now possesses the moral, and therefore (in this case) the
material obligation of the Government to see him reimbursed in
full. With this provision quite understood, banking business in
Melbourne should no longer be subject to the perturbations
arising from what the Associated Banks and the Government
consider to be unfounded and alarmist rumours.
(leading article.)
The announcement is made in another column that the
Associated Banks, acting on the initiative and with the promised
co-operation of the Government, have joined in a league and
covenant for mutual support. Throughout Victoria, and indeed
throughout Australia, this statement will be received with great
satisfaction, in the hope and belief that it will arrest the decline in
confidence that is unhappily a feature of the times. We need not
dwell here on the causes to which the present feeling of unrest
may be attributed. The man in the street, the merchant in his
office, the shopkeeper, and indeed the whole business community,
know that some occult influence has disturbed the public faith
in two or three of the banks, and put credit, so to speak, on the down
grade. Similarly it has been matter of common remark that the
banks might by entering into a real practical union amongst them-
selves do much to restore confidence. Tlm'public mind has gradually
become possessed of this idea, so that it may be hoped that the
announcement now made that the banks are prepared to stand
or fall together will be all that is necessary to re-establish that
firm sense of security in financial institutions which should


distinguish every healthy and progressive community. It should
now be possible to realise the difference between banks acting
independently, each relying on its individual resources, and a
solid organisation. Such a combination, especially as it is
assured of the cordial co-operation and material support of the
Government, must be one of immense strength, and cannot fail
to have its due effect in diffusing a widely-felt sense of security.
The corporate safety of the banks being assured, confidence
should rapidly recover, and the recovery of confidence will be
marked by the easing of the strain on the institutions that are
suffering at the present time. This is what the Associated
Banks aim at; it is what, in the opinion of the Government,
public policy calls for; and it is what everyone will fervently
hope will be realised.
An important and gratifying feature of the understanding is
the loyal adhesion given to it by what are termed the English
banks. In a sense, it might have seemed prudent of these
institutions had they elected to hold aloof from the agreement.
Throughout the trying ordeal of the past few months their posi-
tions have remained strong, and they might have seen in the
weakness of some of their Australian rivals the prospect
of augmented business for themselves. That under these
circumstances, therefore, it should have appeared to
them to be desirable to concur in a general bond for
mutual protection must be gratifying to every Victorian. That
they have chosen wisely we may rest assured. Mutuality of
interest, which is the spirit of the bond, is really the life of
banking business. Even in piping times of peace the banks,
though competing against each other, are sensible of the neces-
sity for agreement in many matters. In time of trouble we now
see them knit together for a common purpose—to promote
confidence as the first step towards a renewal of prosperity.
Considering what the word “confidence” really signifies, it is
somewhat strange that we should so easily lose our hold of it.
Reliance in our resources has surely not disappeared. The
sharp and severe experiences of the last eighteen months
have not unfitted us for civilised and healthy existence.
We are of the same people who surmounted stupendous


difficulties in colonisation; we have not yet lost the
spirit nor the fibre inherited from our forefathers. To
talk of lack of confidence in each other is unworthy of us,
and we shall deserve the contempt of every country in the
world if the craven feeling which has been so prominent of late
be not speedily and sternly repressed. The curse of the city at
this juncture is the mischievous gossiper who passes from man
to man and spreads cruel and dastardly reports reflecting on the
stability of this bank or that company ; who whispers with bated
breath of Brown, who is supposed to have lost heavily in one trans-
action, or Jones, who is on the verge of bankruptcy ; and so on.
The conditions of the times have unfortunately generated a
nervous, anxious feeling in the minds of men, and this is intensified
by stupid canards which are now and again sent flying through
the town by ill-conditioned gabblers. This is the secret of the
lack of confidence which has taken possession of us, and so long
as people are ready to give heed to the rumours that originate no
one knows where, so long shall we have to endure our present
humiliating condition. It is impossible to lay down a rule of
conduct for an entire people, but it may be at least suggested
that if the citizens as a body would unite to check and discredit
the scandalmonger, and turn a deaf ear to his innuendoes, we
shall make a rapid advance towards emancipation from the
thraldom which most unnaturally has fallen upon us.
(news column.)
The Associated Banks. —A Notable Agreement.—Resolve to
Support Each Other.
For several days past the representatives of the Associated
Banks have been in consultation with the Treasurer on the
question as to whether steps should be taken with a view to
strengthening confidence in banking institutions. After con-
siderable deliberation an agreement was arrived at that all the
members of the Association should act unitedly at the present
juncture and support each other. The institutions concerned
in this compact are the Union Bank of Australia, the
London Chartered Bank of Australia, the English, Scottish


and Australian Chartered Bank, the Bank of Victoria,
the Commercial Bank of Australia, the National Bank of
Australasia, the Colonial Bank of Australasia, and the City
of Melbourne Bank. The Bank of New South Wales does not
belong to the Association, and for reasons given below the Bank
of Australasia has not yet definitely joined in the arrangement.
The formal announcement of the agreement was. communicated
to us yesterday by the chairman of the Associated Banks, Mr.
Guthrie, in the following terms :
“As the maintenance of public confidence in the banking
institutions of Australia is a matter of national importance, the
Treasurer of Victoria, with the approval of the Cabinet, has
placed himself in communication with the Associated Banks
regarding unfounded and alarmist rumours which have caused
disquietude in the minds of the public, and we are authorised to
state that the Associated Banks, having considered the position
of affairs, have agreed to act unitedly in tendering financial
assistance to each other should such be required, and that the
Government of Victoria have resolved to afford their cordial
co-operation.
“The absence of Mr. Sawers, the superintendent, from the
colony has precluded the Bank of Australasia from assenting to
the agreement, pending his consideration of the matter on his
return to-day (Tuesday).'’


Jftfp
fclfrUO
FS7IS
XEbe Hge,
MELBOURNE , TUESDAY, 14th MARCH, 1893.
(finance and trade.)
Monday Evening.
The public will hear with considerable gratification that the
representatives of the Associated Banks held a final meeting to-
day in connection with the financial position. The currency of
absolutely groundless rumours during the past week, it may be
admitted, has tended to induce a feeling of alarm amongst bank
shareholders and depositors, but this doubtless will be wholly
allayed by the action now taken. The following Memorandum
was unanimously affirmed by the whole of the representatives of
the Associated Banks :
“As the maintenance of public confidence in the banking
institutions of Australia is a matter of national importance, the
Treasurer of the colony of Victoria, with the approval of the
Cabinet, has placed himself in communication with the
Associated Banks regarding unfounded and alarmist rumours
which have caused disquietude in the minds of the public; the
Associated Banks, having considered the position of affairs, have
agreed to act unitedly in rendering financial assistance to each
other, should such be required, and the Government of Victoria
have resolved to afford their cordial co-operation. The absence
of Mr. Sawers, superintendent, from the colony has precluded
the Bank of Australasia from assenting to the agreement,
pending his consideration of the matter on his return to-morrow.”
The Treasurer has also promised that the Government will give
its full support in the same direction, and hence it may be trusted
that in self-defence shareholders and others interested in our
banks will be relieved from all apprehensions as to the future,
and allow things to assume their normal condition.


(leading article.)
It cannot be denied that during the past week the currency of
unfounded rumours in connection with some of our financial
institutions has tended to create considerable alarm in the public
mind. In periods of depression it takes very little to cause a
scare, and even the best balanced minds are often influenced by
reports which in quiet times would simply be dismissed as absurd.
The unrest at the present juncture, it may be at once stated, has
been largely increased by the special surroundings of our local
money market; and people have ignored the enormous resources
behind, and seem to have been led away with the idea, to use a
vulgarism, that the colony was “ going to the dogs.” A momen-
tary consideration of its real position should at once show how mis-
taken such a conclusion is. Our pastoral, agricultural, and mineral
resources are being now developed under the most favourable condi-
tions, and although our public as well as private expenditure has for
the last few years been too lavish, it only requires consistent
retrenchment in the former and proper economy in the latter
to place matters again on a sound footing, and ensure a return of
prosperous times. These considerations should show at once
the utter unreasonableness of anything like disquietude, much
less of a panic; yet the idea seems to have got abroad in spite of
them that the Associated Banks not only viewed the situation
with alarm, but were prepared to set aside their mutual obliga-
tions to assist each other in case of need, and to take in-
dependent steps to individually secure their position. There
was not the slightest justification for the assumption; never-
theless, it was so studiously paraded by the busybodies who are
always generated by a crisis of this kind that it was thought
prudent to reassure the public mind by some formal declara-
tion to the contrary. The policy of this action was strongly
approved of by the Government, and accordingly a meeting of
the representatives of the Associated Banks was held to consider
what action they should take under the circumstances. The
unanimous opinion expressed at the meeting was that, although
the rumours were absolutely groundless, nevertheless, as these
were calculated by their very indefiniteness to create alarm
amongst the holders of bank stock, some official statement as to


the position and the relations between the Associated Banks
should be made public without any further delay. After discuss-
ing the form this should take, it was resolved yesterday that the
following memorandum be communicated to the Press : —“ As
“ the maintenance of public confidence in the banking institutions
“ of Australia is a matter of national importance, the Treasurer
“ of Victoria, with the approval of the Cabinet, has placed him-
“ self in communication with the Associated Banks regarding
“ unfounded and alarmist rumours which have caused dis-
“ quietude in the minds of the public; and the Associated
“ Banks, having considered the position of affairs, have agreed
“ to act unitedly in tendering financial assistance to each other
“ should such be required ; and the Government of Victoria have
“ resolved to afford their cordial co-operation. The absence of
“ Mr. Sawers, the superintendent, from the colony has precluded
“ the Bank of Australasia from assenting to the agreement, pending
“his consideration of the matter on his return to-day.” This
declaration is so emphatic and far-reaching that it should tend
immediately to restore public confidence. The banks have shown
confidence in each other, they are the best-informed authorities
of each other’s strength and weakness, and it is this very fact
that tends to add weight to the resolution. The .banks severally
and collectively are joint sponsors for each other, and both share-
holders and depositors may therefore rest content that the whole
confederation must be bankrupt before their interests are im-
perilled. They hold now as it were an interest in the Australian
Associated Banks, with the enormous resources at their com-
mand, This is the view which should be reassuring to the most
timid shareholder or depositor, for it actually means that the
position of the banks is made unassailable. Unity in this in-
stance is strength.
McCarron, Bird and Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street, Melbourne. -
8
