

pa-?
I bit.
A CHAKGE
DELIVERED TO THE
itif ilu 0f
4ts:, 1868,
AT THE
THIRD VISITATION
FREDERIC BARKER, D.D.,
nisiior OF SYD>'EY,
And Metropolitan of Australia,
With an Appendix on the Keal Presence.
.Sglnug :
JOSKI’H COOK & CO., I’KIX rKRS, CKOKCK STRKK'r,
opposite the hank of ne\\ south waives.


■' ' ■
. ■■'■C'X ' .


A CHARGE
DELIVEEED TO THE
0{ to d
AUGUST 4th:, 1808,
AT THE
TRIED VISITATION
FREDERIC BARKER, D.D.,
HISUOP OF SYDNEY,
And Meiropolitan of Australia,
With ah Afpekhix on the Eeae Pbesence.
Sgtneg :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OrrOSITE. THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


TO THE CLEEGST OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
THIS CHAROE
DBLITBRED TWO XEARS AGO AND JTOW PUBLISHED AT THE EARNEST BEQUEST
OF SOME OF THBIE NUMBEK,
IS INSCEIBED WITH SINCEBE AFEECTIOH AND EESI’ECT,
BY THEIB FAITHFUL FRIEND AND BROTHER IN CHRIST,
F. SYDNEY.


A CHARGE.
My Reverend Brethren, — A period of more than
six years has elapsed since I was permitted to address
you at the second visitation of my diocese. In the
meantime, the occasions of our meeting in Conference
and Synod have not been unfrequent, but as I trust
the various questions which arose during the forma-
tion of our Church Constitutions are settled, I now
gladly resume the ancient customary mode of visit-
ing the clergy, so far at least as to address you upon
some topics which do not belong to the ordinary
business of the Synod, and I have arranged to hold
this visitation at a time when it is not inconvenient
to the clergy to attend.
On the last occasion of our meeting, I was on the
point of leaving the colony for England and had
mainly in view the formation of the diocese of Goul-
burn. That work has since by the good hand of our
God upon us, been accomplished, and with most
happy results. The cause of religion and of educa-
tion and the interests of the Church of England have
all received a great impulse by the appointment of
my Right Reverend brother, the Bishop of Goulburn.
By his zeal and ability the number of churches and
of clergymen has been largely increased, the organi-
zation of his Church Society completed, and nothing


required but time, with the Divine blessing, to plant
the ordinances of religion throughout the whole of
the southern diocese.
Difficulties will be found in every colonial diocese.
Disappointments will arise, but for a sphere of useful
labour, for the means of doing extensive good, for the
hearty co-operation of clergy and laity a Bishop is most
favourably placed in this colony of New South Wales.
After an experience of J 3 years I can testify that
where a good work commends itself to the judgment
of the laity, neither the men nor the means are want-
ing to carry the design to a successful issue.
Encouraged by the results which have followed the
formation of the Goulburn Bishopric, and deeply im-
pressed with the conviction that the wide and impor-
tant regions of the western portion of this colony can
only be reached by means of additional episcopal
superintendence, I am at the present time engaged in
providing an endowment for the proposed Bishopric
of Bathurst, and have received conisderable assistance
towards this fund from parts of the Western district.
The amount subscribed is upwards of £7,000, which
will however require to be largely increased before an
appointment can be made. I look forward to this
further division of my diocese with much interest and
hope. The diocese of Sydney will then be brought
within manageable limits, and portions of the colony
which can now rarely if ever be reached by a Bishop,
will enjoy the advantages of the regular and frequent
visits of a chief pastor whose residence will be
amongst the people of his charge. I trust that it may


please Almighty God at no distant period to permit
me to see this arrangement carried to completion.
Tlie future, however, we can only regard with the
feeling that a day may bring forth great changes,
including our own last great change. How sadly
has this conviction been impressed upon us by the
sudden removal of the newly-arrived Bishop of Graf-
ton and Armidale. “ Like as a dream when one
awaketh ”is his coming and his departure. May the
Lord graciously comfort and provide for the father-
less and the widow, and raise up a faithful successor
to him whom God hath taken to Himself. —From our
own body we have lost the two senior clergy, the Rev.
Thomas Hassall and the Rev. H. T. Stiles. Their
names are associated with the early history of the
Church in this colony. • The former, as the son-in-
law of Samuel Marsden, and a chaplain of apostolic
zeal and missionary life, had peculiar claims upon
our interest and affection. Multitudes in tliis colony,
both old and young (to the latter he especially en-
deared himself) revered and loved him. .His life
and ministry have been worthily commemorated in
the sermon preached on the occasion of his death by
the Rev. R. L. King. From him and from Mr.
Stiles I ever received the most friendly support. I
deeply regret their removal, though in the case of
Mr. Stiles life had become a burden from the con-
stant suffering he was called to endure. But from
labour and from suffering they rest. Absent from
the body they are present with the Lord —It remains
that we be not slothful, but followers of them, who.


through faith and patience, inherit the promises.
Whatever of good was wrought by them we shall do
well to follow. Differing from eacli other in per-
sonal and ministerial character, they were alike in
this—they gave themselves to their Master’s work,
and by diligence and devotedness, won for them-
selves that best of reputations—they were highly es-
teemed in love for their work’s sake. Let us then
remember these rulers, and follow tlieir faith con-
sidering the end of their conversation,” knowing that
the grace which dwelt in them is ready for us, since
Jesus Christ, their Lord and oar’s, ‘‘is the same yes-
terday and to-day and for ever.”
Other changes have taken place in our body. Four
of the clergy have returned to England. Though
prepared for some of these Removals, I do not the
less regret them. My much valued Chaplain the
Rev. Edward Synge, who accompanied me to tliis
Colony, and who was more extensively known
throughout it than any other clergyman, and more
extensively useful than any other clergyman had the
opportunity of being, is settled in the midst of a
large population in the North of England where as
in a recent letter to me he says—“ It is just the same
work on both sides of the world, but how soon we
shall all be in the one fold under the one Shepherd,
and then the remembrance of the work will be
pleasant indeed, and the results will be laid at His feet
who has done it all and to whom is all the glory.”
The Rev. W. Hodgson the lato Principal of Moore
Coilege, has also returned to his native ]aml, after


twelve years residence in the Colony. By his
valuable labours he contributed largely to the body
of the clergy in this diocese, there being at tlie
present time 15 clergymen labouring with acceptance
amongst us, besides 25 in other parts of Australia.
The addresses presented to him on his departure did
most truly represent the feelings and opinions of
those who had the best opportunities of forming a
judgment concerning him and his work. I shall
ever have reason to be grateful for that work, and
while I regret the removal of my highly esteemed
friend, I acknowledge with thankfulness the good
Providence by which his place has been so satis-
factorily supplied in the person of his successor the
Rev. R. L. King.
There are at present ten students in the College,
of whom six are for the diocese of Sydney. Some
suggestions have boen offered by the Council of St.
Paul’s College, the object of which is to secure for
candidates for Holy Orders the advantages of an
University education. I gratefully acknowledge the
kind feeling which has dictated this proposal, and
trust that in time we may be in circumstances to
avail ourselves of it. Meanwhile it is a great comfort
that we have hitherto been able to meet and in some
measure to overtake, the wants of the diocese by
ordaining men not only of sincere piety, but many
of them of cultivated and well furnished minds.
On the last occasion of my addressing you, our
Synod had not been called into existence. The
third session of the first Synod is now about to be


held. lam quite satisfied with the Synod both in
its constitution and mode of operation, and I feel
assured we did right in obtaining the sanction of the
Legislature to the method we have adopted in
managing our own affairs.
o o
The subjects which are more especially within the
province of the Synod, I shall speak of in my address
to that body. To you my Reverend brethren I
desire to offer a few words of friendly counsel on
matters connected with our character and position as
ministers of Christ’s Gospel, aud clergymen of the
United Church of England and Ireland.
It appears to me that at the present time we are
specially called upon to consider what is the true
character we bear. I say at the present time because
it is impossible to deny that there are two rival the-
ories on this subject in strong and decided opposition
to each other, and that between these two claimants
there is such a wide and irreconcilable difference,
that it is impossible for the same person to hold them
both as true, or to make them harmonize with each
other.
The one endeavours to restore the CTiurch to the
position it occupied before the Reformation; the
otlier desires to carry out the views and intentions
of the Reformers. I do not enter into any proof of
this assertion. It is a fact assumed by the Bishop of
London in his last charge, and largely dwelt upon
and very ably and earnestly set forth by my Right
Reverend brother and friend the Bishop of Carlisle.


He shows that before the Reformation the Presby-
ter of the apostle’s day had become a sacrificing priest
and a spiritual judge. •
The Church of England in her formularies, in her
homilies and in the teaching of her best divines, as
Jewel and Hooker, knows nothing whatever of a sac-
rificing priest or a spiritual judge. Her clergy are
not priests but presbyters—not lepng sacrificing
priests, but elders, heralds and preachers. We read
of apostles, prophets, teachers, evangelists, never of
of priests. They are sowers, builders, workmen,
never spiritual judges. Fathers, guides, rulers it may
be, but the ground on which allegiance is claimed is
that ‘‘ they have spoken unto you the word of the
Lord.” They are stewards of mysteries, but if
Scripture is to be its own interpreter, the mysteries
are certainly not the sacraments. They are the
truths which God has revealed. the mystery of
the Gospel.”
And if it be said that coupled with the authority
to preach the word of God, there is added in the
Ordination Service that declaration whose sins thou
dost forgive they are forgiven ; and whose sins thou
dost retain they are retained,” we say with Bishop
Jewel on the power of the keys ‘‘that the minister
doth execute'the authority of binding and shutting as
often as he shutteth up the gate of the kingdom of
heaven against unbelieving and stubborn persons,
denouncing unto them God’s vengeance and everlast-
ing punishment, or else when he doth quite shut them
out of the Church by excommunication. Moreover


that Christ’s disciples did receive this authority, not
that they should hear private confessions of the
people, .... but to the end they should go, they
should teach, they should publish abroad the gospel.
. . . . Seeing then the key whereby the way and
entry to the kingdom of God is open to us, is the
word of the Gospel and the expounding of the law
and scriptures, we say plainly where the word is not.
there is not the key.”
Upon another point of like importance the language
of Hooker on the presence of Christ in the Sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper is no less definite and clear. I
quote it though well known, ‘Ghe Real Presence of
Christ’s most blessed Body and Blood is not therefore
to be sought for in the Sacrament, hut in the icorthy
receiver of the Sacrament. I see not which way it
should be gathered by the words of Christ, when and
where the Bread is His Body, or the Cup His Blood,
but only in the very heart and soul of him who
receiveth them.” Hooker E. P. Book v. chap., 67,
sec., 5, 6. (See Appendix )
Next to the Scriptures themselves I know no
authorities which members of the Church of England
are more bound to regard with reverence than tlie
two divines I have quoted. But bring these questions
to the test of Scripture and there can be no room
whatever for doubt. We cannot be sacrificing priests
if the teaching of the Epistle to the Hebrews is
intelligible. Since Christ our Lord was once for all
upon the cross made a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction, for the sin of man


there is no other oblation to be made for sin, and
nothing for us to do with reference to that sacrifice,
but to commemorate it in the Lord’s Supper and set
forth its fulness and its freeness, to preach the
glorious gospel of the blessed God. It is necessary
to dwell on this point inasmuch as the questions
which are at present agitating the Church at home,
turn chiefly upon the character and position of the
presbyter. Is he anything more than a herald
of the cross, who in the Providence, and
by the appointment of God, is specially set
apart and authorized to preach the Gospel ? There
seems no higher or nobler office than this. A
messenger from God! an angel can be no more.
And yet it is certain that there are men who speak of
offering the oblation of the Holy Eucharist, and who
by their dress, their gestures, and all the accessories
of public worship, as well as in express language pro-
claim that they do offer a sacrifice, and in some
instances do not hesitate to speak of it as the mass.
Now we doubt not that such men are sincere, earnest,
and devoted but we may be allowed to doubt whether
they are consistent clergymen of the Church of Eng-
land. In the last charge of the Bishop of London he
says “ there are churches amongst us in which the
ornaments about the Communion table, and the dress,
and attitudes, and whole manner of the officiating
clergy render it difficult for a stranger when he enters
to know whether he is in a Roman Catholic or a Church
of England place of worship. Now it is certain that
these peculiarities are frequently adopted to symbolize


false doctrine on the nature of the Eucharist. When
this is the case the actors in these scenes are no doubt
conscientiously preaching by their worship a doctrine
which is very dear to them, but let them remember
it is not the doctrine of the Church of which they are
ministers.” The moral feeling of the members of
the Church of England was so shocked at the attempt
made in Tract No. 90 to reconcile the articles of the
Church of England with the Council of Trent, that
the design of unprotestantising the Church of England
received a considerable check ; and, partly from the
defection of some of the writers to the Church of
Rome, and partly from the strong feeling evoked by
this audacious attempt, there was an apparent cessa-
tion of the endeavours to take us back to Rome.
Within the last few years that attempt has been re-
newed, and is now carried on with a persistency and
boldness which sets at defiance the admonitions of
Bishops, and the formally expressed opinions of the
Houses of Convocation, and will apparently only be
restrained by the interference of the law. It is a
painful subject, but one which it is impossible to pass
over. I notice it chiefly for the sake of observing
that it is our duty to keep within the limits of that
usage which the general practice of the Church of
England has sanctioned for the last 300 years. Had
this been adhered to we should certainly never have
heard in the Church of England of vestments and of
incense, of elevation and adoration of the elements,
of mixing water with wine, and of that construction
and decoration of the Communion table, which are


intended to convert it into an altar,” a term un-
known in the formularies of the Church of England.
I pray you, my Rev. brethren, to give no coun-
tenance to these novelties, and to make no changes
whatever in the ordinary mode of conducting Divine
Service without the express sanction of your Bishop,
and the consent of the officers of the Church.
I, for my part, am determined to uphold that
grave and decent order, in which, as far as mj' obser-
vation and knowledge extend, the services of the
Church are conducted in this diocese.
Our position is that of ministers of a Reformed
Protestant Church, and in cases of doubt or difficulty,
we are, in my opinion, bound to fall back upon the
views of those martyrs and confessors of the Refor-
mation, to whom we owe a far deeper feeling of
reverence than to any guides which the Church has
had since the Apostles’ days.
While on the subject of the services of the Church,
I would observe that omissions are as unjustifiable as
additions. The Book of Common Prayer is our
manual of public worship, and we have no authority
to alter it, or to depart from it. A more general ob-
servance of the season of Lent beginning with the
public service of Ash Wednesday, the commemoration
of our Lord’s Ascension as well as His Birth and
Death, are obviously duties which we owe to
ourselves and to the members of the Church.
The melancholy condition into which a portion of
the Colonial Church has been thrown, and the scan-
dals which have arisen from the failure of justice in


the case of the ]3ishop of Natal, are matters of notor-
iety, and to us especially of deep interest. The
publication of Bishop Colenso’s heresies in England
will probably enable the authorities to use their
power of proceeding against him. A Committee of
the Upper House of Convocation was appointed to
examine into certain of the Bishop’s writings published
in the Diocese of London, with a view I presume, of
bringing him to trial for heretical teaching. I trust
that this will be done, and a great evil be removed.
It is vain to array against Bishop Colenso the
judgment of his Metropolitan, the opinions of Bishops
or the resolutions of Convocation, if none of these
bodies have legal authority to deal with him. He
may be called upon to resign by men to whose opin-
ion he is bound to defer, and for reasons which ought
to influence any man of right feeling, but unless
moral suasion is accompanied by legal binding force,
the most convincing arguments are occasionally of
little avail.
I regard the proposed consecration of another
Bishop for Natal as unjustifiable in the present state
of the question. It will be well to set aside the
authority of a hetorodox bishop and even to depose
him, but the authority for doing this rests with the
Crown as Supreme Ruler of all estates and degrees,
whether they be ecclesiastical or temporal, and to
whom it belongs “ to restrain with the civil sword
all stubborn and evil doers.” Art. 37.
The prayer for Unity is greatly required, and we
shall do well to use it. We are ‘Mn great dangers


l)y reason of our unhappy divisions,” and should
ask that we may all be of one heart and of one
mind united in one holy bond of truth and peace of
faith and charity.”
We in this Colony shall not be unmindful that we
are members of the United Church of England and
Ireland, and shall I trust remember the Irish portion
of the United Church of England in our prayers.
Evil times have come upon it, and a JChurch
which in these later years has borne a remarkable
and faithful witness to the truth, is in danger of
being sacrificed to gratify personal and political
ambition. The people of Ireland have no just
cause of complaint against the Irish Church. Roman
Catholics did not found it. Roman Catholics do not
maintain it, and while the proposed disendowment
of the Irish Church is unconstitutional and dishonest,
it is also a mistaken and useless surrender of a
Scriptural institution in the vain hope of propitiating
an implacable foe. It is a great national calamity.
Men of high character and of undoubted benevolence,
are allying themselves to the idolatrous system of the
Church of Rome, and are thus making that possible
which without their aid, could never have been ac-
complished. The plea is that Ireland may be paci-
fied. Ireland would be at rest if agitators would
allow her to be so. One would think that history
had never been written. Did the Church of Rome
ever willingly accept any articles of peace but those
which gave her the entire supremacy of
mind, and soul, and body ? Did any policy of


conciliation ever satisfy that Church, or was not that
which was granted made the basis of fresh demands ?
What solemn vows and promises were heard when
the repeal of Romish disabilities was sought! what
confident hopes expressed, as for example by the late
Dr. Chalmers, who is reported to have said, that with
the Bible in one hand, and the Roman Catholic relief
bill in the other, Ireland would speedily be converted
to the Protestant faith.
No doubt the church in Ireland has much to answer
for. It was not exempt from the almost universal
decay and corruption whi(di characterized the state of
religion at the close of the last and beginning of the
present century. Too commonly regarded as a
political engine, a means of maintaining the English
interest, it failed of its great purpose. It did not
bear a clear full testimony to the truth of God, and
the iniquities of earlier days may be receiving a just
recompense of reward. But of late years the Irish
Church has contained a body of men who for zeal,
ability and self denial are unsurpassed by any clergy
in the world, and have been remarkably free from
tliose errors which are at the present time invading
the Church in England. It may be the will of Gou
by this trial to purify His Church. Endowments are
not necessary for the being of a Church, and while
some anomalies may be removed by means of this
threatened spoliation, the spirituality and zeal of the
clergy will not be lessened. And if it is a melancholy
consideration that by- this act the influence of the
Church of Rome will for the time be extended, we


may derive consolation from the further consideration
that the prophetic word is thus in course of fulfilment
and the time of the end is drawing nigh. In that
day the circumstances which now call forth our
interest and excite our feelings, will assume their just
proportions, and will be important or otherwise as
they have affected our position and usefulness as
ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
I turn then from the subject on which I have thus
far spoken, to matters which more immediately affect
our ministerial character. When Archbishop Leigh-
ton was requested by his brethren to preach for the
times he replied suffer one poor brother to preach
for eternity.” I have not invited you my brethren
to meet at this time only that I might address you
upon matters which belong to our external and
temporal position, it is my desire to put you in mind
of some of those things which enter into our work as
good soldiers and servants of Jesus Christ. To you
my brethren is entrusted the commission of carrying
on Christ’s work in the world. You are links in the
great chain which extends from Him to us, from
apostolic times to our own. His work, so far as that
work can be entrusted to man, is yours. You have
to seek the salvation of the souls of men. No other
and no lower aim is to be yours. By all means you
are to endeavour to save some.
The great means to this end is the Gospel, the
glad tidings, salvation by faith in a crucified
Redeemer, a Saviour offered to all, available for all,
effectual in them that believe.


Be not afraid of making this ofFer.
Be not ashamed of repeatins: this offer. Men
speak of the Gospel as an old and worn out system,
once perhaps remedial, but which has now lost its
power. This is untrue. It never loses its power to
the awakened conscience, the enquiring mind, the
heart which is ill at ease with itself and is seeking to
know the true good.
We are never weary of the cold water with which
our great thirst is assuaged. The appetite is never
palled by the wholesome bread with which our
strength is from day to day renewed. The Gospel is
equally suited to the felt wants and desires of the soul.
Nothing but this can give true peace, abiding peace.
It may be and is “ the old, old story,” but ever new,
ever suited to the deep real necessities of man, of
guilty man in need of a forgiving Saviour.
2. I would have you bear in mind that you serve
a personal Christ. You have not to do with mere
doctrines or abstract ideas of sin and salvation.
Your hearers are persons, individuals, men, women,
and children; your Divine Master is a person, a man
with all the sensibilities of our nature and with a
sympathy which reaches to the condition of a child.
He is one who hears you, who observes you, who is
better acquainted with you than you with yourselves,
and who in sorrow is ready to comfort you with His
presence, and in danger to stand by you. Be not
afraid then, be strong and of a good courage. Christ
and you against the world. Only let Him be with
you by a prayerful believing invitation addressed to


Him, by the habitual turning of the heart to Him, and
in solitude and in society He will be with you. As you
kneel by the bed of sickness He will be present with
you to open the hard ground of a worldly heart. He
will speak by you in the pulpit as you endeavour to
set Him forth as the true and living Way, and will
accompany your word by His quickening Spirit.
He will keep you from the evil of the world so
that while you are in it you shall not be of it. You
will never be so little alone as when alone with Him,
lifting up your soul to Him and communing with
Him in His Word. Such is your Beloved, and such
is your Friend !
Now, it is of Him you have to speak. He it is
whose grace and goodness you can magnify. You
can tell of His forgiving love, of His forbearing
mercy, of His great deliverance, of His full and free
salvation.
These things you know and can testify of them by
your own experience, and invite others to share your
blessedness, to come with you and to receive the
good to which you can guide them.
And this is your work. You are witnesses to the
Saviour. John the Baptist was a voice. You, like
him, boar witness, and say, Behold the Lamb of
God which taketh away the sin of the world.”
My Reverend Brethren, liave full confidence in
Him who sends you. Regard Him as the great
Healer of the nations, and as graciously making use
of you to dispense the blessings of life, peace and


eternal glory to a fallen world, in which are men
with a capacity of being saved.
3. Let this thought also be present with you, that
the Saviour has promised a divine Almighty influence
in the gift of His Holy Spirit. Who art thou, O
great mountain ? before Zerubbabel thou shalt be-
come a plain.” And why or how? —Not by might
or by power, but by My spirit saith the Lord of
Hosts.” The enemy cometh on as a flood? The
spirit of the Lord alone can lift up a standard against
him. When we consider how few and feeble
we are, how many and how powerful the evil influ-
ences which are at work against us, we might despair,
were it not that He is mighty who is in the midst of
us, and that in relying upon His aid we shall not be
disappointed in our hopes or of our toil.
Consider how mightily the spirit of the Lord
wrought at the Creation of the World. As He moved
upon the face of the waters, light and life, order and
beauty came forth where all had been chaos, confu-
sion, darkness and death. “God who thus com-
manded the light to shine out of darkness is He who
hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” It is still
the promised spirit which quickeneth. By Him the
Son giveth life to whomsoever He will. “He hath
come and hath given us an understanding.” Every
conversion is due to Him. Every consolation
cometh from Him, and He stands ready, and
able to guide souls out of darkness into light,
and reduce the disordered powers of nature to har-


monious and loving service. Honour Him therefore
my brethren, by looking to Him for aid and depend-
ing upon Him for guidance and grace. Them that
lionour Him He will honour, and will give Himself
to such as ask, and seek and knock; to them the
door of heaven shall be opened and abundant bless-
ings poured forth.
4. Again it is a great advantage and a great com-
fort that we are men of one Book, The Book, the
Bible. We owe it to the character of the age that
we should as far as practicable keep ourselves abreast
if not ahead of the intellectual activity which marks
this period in the history of man, but in the occupa-
tion of our time for study nothing should supersede
the Word of God. To be mighty in tlie Scriptures
is not only to be a good theologian, but to be a wise
counsellor, a discerning friend, “ a man of God
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” When
all things are viewed in the light of the word
and of eternity, true comparisons are made, and just
conclusions are arrived at, we the things
which differ, and choose the more excellent.”
“ Tlie commandment is a lamp, and the law is a light
and reproofs of instruction are the way of life.”
Give then my brethren to this book, its due place in
your affections, in your studies, in your ministry,
honour it before men by enlarging upon its value,
its uses, its divine authority as inspired by God.
Honour it before God by the prayerful and diligent
study of it, and by your careful and conscientious
application of it to your own heart and life.


Under the influence of these principles you will
carry on your work with comfort and satisfaction
to yourselves, and with advantage to the flock com-
mitted to your charge. Ido not, on this occasion,
dwell particularly upon the special duties of your
calling. If you love the Saviour, and live in the
Spirit and walk by the rule of the Word, you will
preach faithfully, will visit diligently and systemati-
cally, and have regard not only to the sick and infirm,
and the poor, hut to all classes and ages, night and
day, from house to house, in the pulpit and in the
school, you will endeavour to warn every man that
you may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
God is my record, my beloved brethren, how
greatly I long for your spiritual well-being and that
you may have many souls given as your crown of
rejoicing at the last day. With the Apostle, I pray
that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all judgment —that you may be
sincere and without offence till the day of Christ,
being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
22


APPENDIX.
—♦—
The subject of the Real Presence referred to in the Charge has assumed a
very important position in the controversies of the present day, and seems to
require more than the passing notice which has been given to it in my Charge.
The false notions on this subject entertained by many persons threaten to
bring the Church of England into such a near conformity to the Romish com-
munion as in the ideas and hopes of Romanists themselves to make that union
which has taken place in the case of individuals, possible in the case of the
whole body of the Church of England.
The views of certain writers in the Church of England are commended in
Romish periodicals as in no way differing from the statements of the Council
of Trent, and the subtle distinctions by which it is endeavoured to dissociate
Tridentine from high Anglican doctrines, are described as slight inaccuracies
of expression which do not essentially detract from teaching which in the main
is that of the Catholic Church.
The term Real Presence is one which the Church of England has not ad-
mitted into her formularies or authorized teaching. Some of her divines,
liave, however, used it, and it is necessary in the outset to observe that there
is a presence of our Divine Lord in the believing reception of the sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper, which is as real in a spiritual sense i.e. by the operation
of the Holy Spirit on the heart of the believer, as the Bread and Wine are
really i.e. locally and substantially present on the table. But as it will be
necessary to observe of other passages the term real presence when used by
some divines has a very different meaning from that whicli others assign to it;
and tlie meaning of an author in whose work the term occurs must be gathered
from the observation and comparison of other portions of his writings. No-
thing is easier and nothing more fallacious than to cite an author as holding a
certain opinion on the Real Presence merely because the expression is found
in his works.
What then is the sense in which these words are used by such writers as
Dr. Pusey, Archdeacon Denison, the late Bishop Hamilton, Mr. McConochie,
Mr. Bennett, and men of that school ? Wliat they mean is this. In the
sacrament of the Lord’s Supper the Bread and Wine are by consecration so
influenced and operated upon that there is a real though spiritual presence of
the body and blood of Christ, so united to the Bread and Wine as to form
with them one compound whole, and hence that the body and blood of Christ
are received by all the communicants whatever their state may be ; so that
what the communicant puts into his mouth consists of two parts, one Bread


and Wine, the other the Body and Blood of Christ present in a supernatural
or superlocal manner with the Bread and Wine. This view of the presence
of Christ in the Eucharist differs in no material respect from that of the
Church of Eome. The Church of Rome believes that while the accidents, as
they are termed, the outward form and substance of Bread and Wine remain*
the elements have given place to a substantial presence of Christ’s real body
and blood, after a supernatural manner; they are there on the altar under
the form of bread and wine.
Christ’s body and blood, says Archdeacon Denison, “ are really present in
the Holy Eucharist under the form of bread and wine,” i. e. “ present things,
though present after a manner ineffable, incomprehensible by man, and not
cognizable by the senses.” This is precisely the language of Rome.
Mr. McConochie addressing his flock says : “ I believe, and therefore have
always taught, that the body and blood of Christ are objectively (i. e. out-
wardly, as “present things”) “given by the priest, objectively taken by every
communicant.” And again, “ supralocally. He is present both in His God-
head and in His manhood —whenever and wherever the Sacramental conditions
which He has laid down are fulfilled. This presence I believe to be conferred
by the word of Christ, as spoken by the priest, through the operation of God
the Holy Ghost, irrespective of faith or any personal qualification either in
the consecrator or receiver.”
Mr. Bennett is stated to hold and teach “ That the Body and Blood of
“ Christ, thus really present, are therein and thereby given to and received by
“ ALL, both in respect of those who eat and drinJc worthily, and in respect of
“ those who eat and drinTc unworthily.”
When such doctrines are taught by high authorities in the Church of
England, the Romish Archbishop Manning may well be credited with having
said, that the controversy about transubstantiation had ceased, because “so largo
a number of the Clergy of the Established Church had taken out of the hands
of the Catholic Clergy the labour of contending about it, they have been left
to the much more happy and peaceable task of reaping the fields. ’
Our first enquiry with reference to this subject would naturally be “what
saith the Scripture ?” But the question may be somewhat narrowed by the
enquiry, what is the interpretation which the Church of England puts upon the
language of Scripture. And this course may with propriety bo taken since
the controversy is between those who have signed the same articles and
assented to the Book of Common Prayer.
The only fair way of judging what is the real meaning of the Church of
England is to take the dogmatic statements in the articles, the teaching of the
Catechism, the language of the Communion service, the rubrics and the
homilies, and compare them with one another. The 28th article says “ The
body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the supper only after an heavenly
and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the body of Christ is received
and eaten in the supper is faith.” The rubric at the end of the Communion


Service states there is not “ any corporal presence of Christ's natural
flesh and blood,” because “ the natural body and blood of our Saviour
Christ are in heaven and not here, it being against the truth of Christ s
natural body to be at one time in more places than one.” Again in the
third rubric after the Communion of the sick it is said, “ that if
a man either by reason of extremity of sickness * * # * do not
receive the Sacrament of Christ’s body and blood * * if he do truly repent
him of his sins, and steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ hath suffered death
upon the cross for him and shed His blood for his redemption, earnestly
remembering the benefits he hath thereby, and giving him thanks therefore, he
doth eat and drinh the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ profitably to his
soul’s health, though he do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth” In the
Catechism it is affirmed that " the body and blood of Christ are verily, and
indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lord’s Supper.”
These statements when combined enable us to judge fairly what is the
doctrine of our Church on this subject. The language of the Catechism
taken alone might be strained into a meaning entirely at variance with the
others. It might be said that our Church teaches that “ the body and blood
of Christ are verily, and indeed taken in the Lord’s Supper,” in some such sense
as the writers before named would put upon the words, or that the body and
blood were necessarily, and in all cases combined with the Sacramental signs;
but the introduction of the word “ faithful ” shows to whom and in what
manner the Sacramental sign conveys the body and blood of Christ. The
mean is faith, the persons are the “ faithful,” i. e,such as “dulyreceive not
all baptized persons, because many baptized persons are “ wicked and eat not
the body of Christ in the Lord’s Supper ” (Article 29), many of the baptized
“ are devoid of a lively faith, and although they do carnally and visibly press
with their teeth (as Saint Augustine saith) the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to
their own condemnation do eat and drink the Sacrament of so great a thing.”
Here, then, let it be observed that the presence of Christ is not in the
consecrated elements. A man may eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
though he do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth. If ho is “ faithful,”
if “he repents and believes and is thankful,” he duly receives the body and
blood of Christ, because the mean whereby the body of Christ is received and
eaten in the Supper is faith. On the other hand, a man may eat the bread
and drink the wine in the use of the Lord’s Supper, and not eat the body of
Christ; he may “ eat the sign or sacrament of so great a thing ” as Christ’s
body, and “ in no wise be a partaker of Christ ” because he is “ wicked,” or
“ destitute of a lively faith,” and because Christ’s body is not in the element
of broad, but is in heaven. It follows then that the reception of the true body
and blood of Christ is not an act of the body, but of the soul, not of the mouth
but of faith. When, therefore, the Catechism says that the body and blood of
Christ are verily and indeed taken and received in the Lord’s Supper—we say


with Cranmer: “ Christ giveth Himself, that same risible and palpable flesh
that was for us crucified, to be eaten, but all is spiritually, with faith not
with mouth.'' “God worketh in Kis faithful, not in the Sacraments''
And again : “ I mean not that Christ and the Holy Spirit are present in the
bread and wine which are only the outward and visible sacraments, but are
truly (verily) and indeed present by their mighty and sanctifying power,
virtue, and grace, in all them that loorthily receive the same." (Cranmer’s
Works, Parker Society’s Edition.) So again with reference to this expression
in the Catechism Bishop Jewell says : “ Tlie thing that is inwardly received in
faith and in spirit is received ‘ verily and indeed.’ ” So that Christ according
to the Church of England is present in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper
only to the faitliful, who, looking beyond the outward sign, do lift up their
hearts to Him in Heaven in faith that He will fulfil tlie promises of His Word.
To such by His Spirit He is present, as really and truly as tlie sacraments or
signs of His body and blood are present, but He is not in the elements, or
under them, or substituted for them, but only in the hearts of His faithful
people.
At the same time the expression in the Catechism teaches that our Church
does not regard the ordinance as a mere commemorative sign, but that to the
“ faithful” the broad and wine do become efiectual signs in the partaking of
which they do verily and indeed obtain communion with the Body and Blood
of Clirist and are partakers of them to their soul’s health. They eat the flesh
and drink the blood of the Son of God so as to derive the full benefit which
that body and blood received by faith can aflbrd to fallen man.
The language of the Homily is not less clear. “It is well known that the
meat we seek for in this Supper is spiritual food; the nourishment of our
soul; a heavenly refection and not earthly ; an invisible meat and not bodily ;
a ghostly substance and not carnal; so that to think without faith we may
enjoy the eating and drinking thereof, or that that is the fruition of it, is but
to dream a gross carnal feeding basely objecting and binding ourselves to the
elements and creatures. Whereas by the Council of the Nicene, we ought to lift
up our minds by faith and leaving these inferior and earthly things, there seek it
where the sun of righteousness ever shineth. “ For the unbelievers and faithless
cannot feed upon that precious Body." Here manifestly the presence of Christ
in the Lord’s Supper is only to the faithful. It is not necessarily bound to
the elements. We can only “ touch it with the mind, receive it with the hand
of the heart, and take it fully with the inward man.”
The Catechism of Dean Nowell is an authoritative exposition of the
Church’s doctrine on this subject, and according to Bishop Randolph may
with Jewell’s apology be relied on as containing the final and decided opinion
of our Reformers, approved of in general by the Church at large. This
Catechism is named in the 79th Canon of 1603 “as by public authority set
forth.” There are no other Catechisms to which these words apply but
Nowell’s, as Archdeacon Churton in his life of Nowell, and Dr. Jacobson


now Bishop of Chester, in his preface to the Catechism maintained. The
words from which our present Catecliism is abridged* afford a very plain
testimony as to the sense in which the eating of the Body of Christ is to be
understood.
“The body and blood of Christ, which in the Lord’s Supper are given to
the faithful, are by them eaten and drunk only in a heavenly and spiritual
manner, yet, nevertheless, verily in truth; so, that is, that like as the bread
nourishes our bodies, thus also the body of Christ nourishes our souls
spiritually througli faith ; and like as the hearts of men are exhilarated by
wine and their strength confirmed, so our souls are refreshed and renewed by
the blood of Christ through faith; in which way the iody and blood of Christ
are received in the Supper. For Christ as certainly makes those who trust in
Him partakers of His body and blood as they certainly know they have
received the bread and wine into their mouth.” “ The mode of receiving the
Lord’s body and blood is by faith.”
And so Bishop Jewell says, “ The body then which we eat is in Heaven
above all angels, principalities, and powers. Our meat is in Heaven on high,
and we are hero below on earth. How may it be that we reach it, or taste it,
or eat it ? By the hand of faith we reach unto Him, and by the mouth of
faith we receive His body." “It is a holy mystery and a heavenly action,
forcing our minds up to heaven, and there teaching us to eat the body of
Christ and drink His blood ; not outwardly by the service of our bodies, but
inwardly and by faith, and that vebily and indeed. The truth here
standeth not in any eeal or coepoeal presence, but as Hilary saith, in a
mystery, which is, in a Sacrament; whereby outwardly and unto our senses we
express that thing in our bodies that must be wrought inwardly in our minds.”
* The following letter from Ilev. E‘. C. Harington, Chancellor of the
Diocese of Exeter, is decisive on this point. It appeared in the Guardian of
Juno 29, 1870;
THE COMPOSERS OP THE CHURCH CATECHISM.
Sir,—l observe that Mr. Borosford-Hope stated,in a speech delivered by him in the House
of Commons on Monday last, tliat “ the first portion of the Church Catechism was com-
posed by Dr. Nowell. Dean of St. Paul’s, and an Elizabethan divine, who was a leader of
what w'ould now be termed the low Church party and that “ the second portion of the
Catechism was written in the reij?n of James I. by Bishop Overall, a Hl(?h Churchman.”
This Is, I believe, a mistake—a very common one, I admit, but still a mistake, and there-
fore requires correction. If your readers will tuni to the 7th section of Churton's Life of
'Sowell (pp. 151—157, edit. 1809) they will find that the second portion of the Catechism was
published as early as 1572 or 1577, or perhaps earlier, and that it was written, probably, by
Dean Nowell himself. “ Certain it is,” says Churton, ” that Bishop Overall, who is universally
said to have written the part upon the Sacraments (sometimes called an ‘ Addition to the
Catechism’), after the Conference at Hampton Court, did nothing more than shorten and
reduce into a more commodious form the excellent matter which Nowell, or some earlier
writer, had provided to his hands” (p. 185). In fact, a scarce little 12m0., in Latin, is now
before me, entitled Catechismus parvus Pueris, primuni Latine qui ediscatur, proponendus
inSekolis, of the date of 1641, being a reprint of the edition of 1572 or 1577, with Nowell’s
Dedication to Parker, Crindal, Sandys,and the other Bishops, andslgned “ A.N.,” And “this
republication of the then authorised Catechism is,” as Churton truly states, “in substance
the Church Catechism exactly as we now have it, including the part upon the Sacraments"
(p. 183). If 1 might hazard an opinion on Overall’s part in the work, I should say that he
rather damaged the original Catechism of Nowell by omitting certain words which would
have thrown light on some disputed passages. (These Italics are mine, P’. S.)
E. C. Hauington.
The Close, Exeter, June 22, 1870.


It is unnecessary to give further testimonies to the true doctrine of the
Church of England on this subject. What we have brought forward is
sufficient to show that the compilers of our Liturgy, the framers of our
Articles, and the defenders of our Faith, were wholly opposed to any such
view of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, as that
maintained by the modern writers to whom we have referred.
Of Cranmer, Eidley, Latimer, and Hooper, it may be said that they laid
down their lives in defence of the doctrines opposed to Romish and Lutheran
views of the Real Presence. The modern notions on this subject had not
then been propounded. Their arguments were principally directed against
the Romish doctrine of transubstantiation, but hold equally good against such
views as wo have been considering. To regard the Reformers as upholding
them is most incorrect, and their words can only be quoted for this purpose by
using them in a sense entirely different from that which the writers intend.
Could they have expressed themselves in the language of Mr. Maconochio,
Archdeacon Denison, Dr. Pusey, Mr. Bennett, and others, they had not needed
to die. Rome would willingly have accepted a statement that Christ’s body
was in the bread, and would not have contended with them as to the mode in
which this was brought about. If they had been content to say that the
bread and wine were changed, and had not added “in the use only and
character, not in essence or condition,” their lives might have been saved.
It was a reproach which his judges cast upon Cranmer, that he who had, in
the early part of his career, defended transubstantiation, ended by being a
Zuinglian. The writers of the Zurich letters mark the change both in him
and in Ridley, as it came under their own observation from time to time. Of
Hooper’s opinions, the correspondent of Bullinger and Bucer, and intimate
friend of Zuingle, there can be no question. Bishop Jewell has been quoted
above.
The “ Reformatio Legum ” drawn up by Cranmer’s authority, the Decades
of Bullinger, which the clergy were directed by the Upper House of Convo-
cation to read and take notes of both speak of the bread and cup as
represeniing that body and blood which the righteous receive by faith, and
which the wicked do not eat.
Bishop Jeremy Taylor wrote a treatise upon “The Real Presence and
Spiritual of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament.” He himself explains the
phrase as used by him, and the following passages will show how little ho
favours the view that there is any other presence of Christ than that spiritual
one which is in the hearts of the faithful. “ Christ is present spiritually, i. e.
by effect and blessing." “In the Sacrament is given to us the true substance
of Christ’s body or flesh, but not carnally, but spiritually ; that is not to our
mouths, but to our hearts i not to be chewed by the teeth, but to be eaten by
faith."
With reference to the statements that Christ’s body is present, but only
spiritually or supernaturally, the following extract from the same author is


very important. It shows how a phrase may be used by a Eomish writer
in a sense entirely different from that which is ordinarily attached to it, and
how, by this substitution of one meaning for another, the Reformers may be
made to appear to speak the language of Rome.
“ Bellarmine says that Christ’s body is there truly, substantially, really, but
not corporally; nay, you may say spiritually. But he intends not with all
those fine words, that Christ’s body is present spiritually, as the word is used
in Scripture and in all common notices of usual spealcing, but spiritually with
him signifies after the manner of spirits, which besides that, it is a cousening
the ioorld in the manner of expression, is also a direct folly and contradiction,
that a body should be substantially present, that is with the nature of a body
naturally, and yet be not as a body but as a spirit, with that manner of being
with which a spirit is distinguished from a body. By spiritually they mean
present after the manner of a spirit. By spiritually we mean present to
CITE SPIEIT3 ONIT. They say that Christ’s body is truly present there as it
was upon the Cross, but not after the manner of all or any body, but after
that manner of being as an angel is in a place. That’s their spiritually. But
we, by the real presence of Christ, do understand Christ to he present as the
Spirit of God is present in the hearts of the faithful hy blessing and grace ;
and this is all u>e mean besides the tropical and flguratioe presence,"
And again ho says in reference to the notion of Christ’s body being in the
Sacrament yet not there locally, i.e., supra-locally. “ I wish the words were
sense and that I could tell the meaning of being in a place locally and not
locally, unless a thing can be in a place and not in a place, that is, so to be in
that it is also out,”
Archbishop Wake, one of the most learned prelates of our Church, has the
following question and answer : *
“Q. Are the body and blood of Christ really distributed to every communi-
cant in this Sacrament ?
“A. No, they are not; for then every communicant whether prepared or
not for it would alike receive Christ’s body and blood there. That which is
given by the priest to the communicant is as to its nature the same after con-
secration that it was before, namely bread and wine, only altered as to its use
and signification. It is bread in substance, the body of Christ by signification,
by representation, and spiritual communication of His body and blood to every
faithful and worthy receiver.” And again, “It is the design of this sacrament
to exhibit and communicate to us the body and blood of Christ, not any way
but in the state of Ilis suffering and as He was given for us and became a
sacrifice for our sins.” “ The real presence is not to be sought in the
elements but in the worthy communicants,”
We may add to these witnesses the testimony of Waterland, whose works
formerly published by Bishop Van Mildert have been again brought before


the world by the present Bishop of This reprint was issued at the
request of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York with a view of placing
within the reach of candidates for Holy Orders a treatise which was once con-
sidered almost as the text-book of the Church of England on the subject of the
Eucharist. This work comes to us with the commendation of the three chief
Pastors of the Church of England at the present time.
The great subject of the treatise is the true nature of the sacrifice said by
some to be ofiered up in the Eucharist. The author shews that there is no
change in the elements of bread and wine, and carefully excludes the idea of
a reiteration of the great sacrifice “ once for all ” offered upon the cross. He
neither believes that the bread is changed into the body of Christ, nor that the
priest offers up that body to God.
In one portion of the work we have the following description of Harchius, a
learned German, which might pass for that of a modern ritualist. “He
asserts a spiritual and miraculous change made in the elements, but not
destroying either their substance or their figure; a change of qualities and a
melioration as it were of the substance itself by the powerful operation of the
Holy Ghost and the supervening of the Logos : on account of which change
he talks frequently of the elements as passing into the virtue of Christ’s body
and blood. Sometimes he calls it passing into the flesh of Christ or substance
of His body ; but then he interprets it to mean not the personal body or sub-
stance, but another very like it, or near akin to it in virtue, which he denomi-
nates a spiritual body to distinguish it from the natural and personal body.”
These Archdeacon Waterland terms the “ rovings of a learned gentleman,’’
leading nevertheless to what he again and again stigmatises as idolatry or
“ bread worship.” > In another passage he quotes and confirms the well-known
saying of Hooker. “ What Mr. Hooker veiy judiciously says of the real
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, appears to be equally applicable to the
presence of the Holy Spirit in the same ; “ It is not to be sought for in the
Sacrament, but in the worthy receiver of the Sacrament.” “The relative
holiness of the elements is intelligible, as to the rest it is all more rationally
accounted for by the presence of the Holy Spirit with the worthy receivers in
the use of the symbols, than by I know not what presence or union with the
symbols themselves.”
These testimonies may suffice. They might easily be multiplied by quota-
tions from expositors of the Catechism and Articles, as for example from
Meyer, a contemporary of the Reformers, who affirms that “ the Lord’s body
is communicated only in a spiritual and sacramental manner, faith making
Him present to the worthy receiver,” down to the present Bishop of Ely who
in his exposition says : “ The doctrine of the early ages was not in favour of a
miraculous change in the consecrated elements, nor in favour of a carnal
•“A Eoviow of the doctrine of the Eucharist: with Eour Charges connected with the
same subject. iJy David Waterland, D.D., with a preface by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln
(now London.) Oxford, 1868.”


presence of the natural body of our Lord, but in farour of a real, effectual,
life-giving presence of Christ’s spiritual body communicated to the faith and
feeding the souls of His disciples.” It is impossible to misunderstand such
language, yet by the omission of a few words it was on one occasion attempted
to shew that this writer supported a view which he was actually engaged in
refuting.*
Of Mede, Andrewes, Hooker, Taylor, Hammond, Cosin, Bramhall, Ussher,
Pearson, Patrick, Bull, Beveridge, Wake, and Waterland, the Bishop of Ely
siys, “ All these have left us writings on the subject, and all have coincided
with but very slight diversity in the substance of their belief.
“ They have agreed, as Hooker says, that ‘ Christ is personally present;
albeit a part of Christ is corporally absent,’ that ‘ the fruit of the Eucharist
is the participation of the body and blood of Christ,’ but that ‘ the real
presence of Christ’s most blessed body and blood, is not to bo sought for in
the Sacrament (i. e. in the elements,) but in the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament.”
One more testimony may be added, that of Dr. Hey, Norrisian Professor of
Divinity at Cambridge, in the latter part of the last century.
“ The body of Christ is in the Lord’s Supper oaten spiritually by faith.”
” The Eomanist’s chief argument lies in the words ‘ This is my body ;’ plain
words, as they contend; Archdeacon Sharp rightly replies, ‘ Yes; they are
plain words, for they are a very plain figure.' Many exceptions may be taken
to their being used in a literal sense. It is idle to use words, and, by limi-
tations, to take away their customary moaning. What signifies talking of a
body not present as to place ? That, which is not present in such a sense as
to occupy a place is not body, in human language.”
On the review of these testimonies as to the doctrine of the Church of Eng-
land on the subject of the presence of Ciirist in the Holy Communion wo ap-
pear to be shut up to this conclusion that our Church does not hold the ob-
jective presence of Christ in the Lord’s Supper—does not believe that the
presence is in the elements at any time, or in any way, denies that the wicked
partake of the Body and Blood of Christ, and on the other hand declares that
the presence is subjective in the sense of being with our spirits, is not
“ supralocal, unspeakable, miraculous or supernatural,” but according to
Christ’s promise spiritual, by the influence of the Holy Spirit upon our
spirits.
Further that as the bread is not the body in any other sense than a
figurative one, there is no sacrifice, no priest, no altar, but “ a remembrance ”
of a sacrifice until the Redeemer’s return, “ the perpetual memory of His
precious death until His coming again.”
• " Archdeacon Denison quotes In defence of his opinions from Brown on the Articles this
passage: “In one sense of the words we may admit tliat every communicant eats Clirist’s
body and drinks Ills blood.” The very next words wliich are not cited are tliese : “ Bkcausk
he eats the symbol which is called Ills body, and drinks the symbol which is called Ilia blood."


It is not only because of the error involved in the unscriptural notion of the
objective (outward) presence of Christ’s body in the Sacrament, that we pro-
test against it, but, because, it is in truth the source and mainspring of
that departure from the faith, which finds its proper expression in the decrees
of the Council of Trent, and in the Church of Eome.
The idolatry of the wafer prepares for and justifies all other idolatry. The
worship of the Virgin is as reasonable as the worship of a piece of bread.
The sacrifice needs a priest ready to hear confession and to grant absolution.
The Mass and Purgatory are intimately allied—the prayers for the dead there
offered up are for the relief or release of souls in misery.
The authority of the Church and of tradition must be called in to support
a notion which has no sanction from the Word of God.
This notion is in truth the keystone of the Eomish system which being once
removed the whole structure falls. Any member of that Church who has
learned first to doubt, and then to dishelieve the doctrine of transubstantiation
is on the path of the Eeformers, and if true to his convictions will inevitably
forsake the Church which holds it. The converse of this statement is also
true. He who being by profession a member of the Eeformed Protestant
Church of England has adopted the unscriptural notion of a real objective
presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, has received a seed of error
which, if unchecked will bring forth the full ripe ear of Eomish doctrine to
be “ reaped ” by Dr. Manning and his fellows.
This is the danger, that a Church, whose Eeformers yielded up their lives
unto death rather than admit as truth, what they know to be false, or practise
as worship what they believed to be idolatry, should be led back into the
Egyptian bondage, from which, by the goodness of God, it had been delivered.
“ Obsta 'principiis" is our sound reason for the resistance we offer to this
destructive error. We deny not, that good men may hold it, for in many men
the heart is better than the head, and a man may in Coleridge’s words be
“ possessed by an idea ” without possessing it, and admit a notion which has
little or no influenee upon his life, hut this we believe, and sad experience
confirms us in it, that he who has taken up the notion against which we con-
tend has set out upon the way to Eome. As we believe this, it is our duty to
say it. A duty we owe to the clergy over whom we are placed, and to the
Church whose spiritual guides we are. It is not denied but rather openly
declared that the object of an active, numerous, and influential party in our
Church is to bring about a union with Eome. Sooner than submit to that yoke,
many would, no doubt, be willing to die, and to avoid such conflict, and
deliver unwary souls from such a snare, and to save our beloved Church from
the judgments which must follow such apostacy, it is necessary that we re-
peat the warning cry of the pious Bishop Hall, recently re-echoed in the
Upper House of Convocation by the learned Bishop of Gloucester and Bris-
tol —“ No Peace with Eome.” In the present divided condition of our
Church at home, there is a disposition in some minds to sacrifice Scriptural


truth to a false peace. We have been in no haste to speak, but it seems to be
necessary to warn the Church of the danger that lies in this error of the real
objective presence. The opinions we have expressed, are founded upon the
Word of God, and maintained by the highest authorities in our Church. We
are not prepared either in our individual belief or in our spiritual character
to modify or surrender them. They are the foundation of our hope as
Christians and they are the Church’s safeguard against a return to that system
of error from which we were delivered at the Reformation.
The following Report of the proceedings in the case of Sheppard r. the
Rev. W. J. E. Bennett, is taken from the Record of June 20th, and appears
in the Guardian of June 22nd. :
COURT OP ARCHES.—June I7th and 18th.
(Before the Right Hon. Sir R. J. Phillimore, Dean of Arches.)
SHEPPABD V. THE BEV. W. J. E. BENNETT.
This case, which was opened on Thursday, and partly reported in Friday’s
Record, was continued throughout that and the following day.
Mr. A. J. Stephens, Q.C., Dr. Tristram, Mr. Archibald, and Mr. B. Shaw,
appeared for the promoter, Mr. Sheppard. The defendent did not attend the
proceedings.
Mr. Stephens continued his address, in which he argued that the con-
trariety and opposition of the doctrines maintained by Mr. Bennett to the
authoritative teaching of the Church of England on the subject of the
Eucharist, which had been proved in detail by reference to her formularies,
would appear more clearly and concisely if he in conclusion proceeded to con-
trast the propositions, which in the first division of his argument had been
deduced from the XXXIX Articles and other formularies of the Church as
embodying her doctrines, with the deductions which had by fair legal con-
struction been drawn from Mr. Bennett’s publications.
The first proposition that had been established as the doctrine of the Church
of England respecting the Lord’s Supper was—“ That the natural body of
Christ, that is, his true actual human body, now in a glorified and spiritual
condition, is in heaven, and not here.”
The teaching of Mr. Bennett had been ascertained to be—“ That there is a
visible presence of our Lord upon the altars of our Churches ; and that, there
is here before God’s altar the presence of the Son of God in human flesh
subsisting.”
“ That the natural body and blood of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ are
not only in heaven but here, to wit, upon or before the altars of our churches
under the form of bread and wine.”
That teaching was contrarient with the doctrine of the church.
33


The second proposition established as the doctrine of the Church of England
was—“ That, consequently, there is no presence of the true body of Christ in
the elements at any time.”
The teaching of Mr. Bennett was—“ That there is an actual presence of the
body and blood of our Lord in the consecrated bread and wine.”
That proposition was contrarient to the doctrine of the Church of England.
The third proposition that had been established as the docrine of the Church
of England was—“ That the body and blood of Christ are not present upon
consecration in the elements on the ‘ altar,’ or in the hand of the minister.
Tix&jourth proposition was—” That the body of Christ is not received by
the hand or by the mouth of the communicant, nor by any corporal mode of
reception, but only in an heavenly and spiritual manner, by the means of
faith alone ; that is to say, the body of Christ is given by God only, and not
by the priest, is taken by faith only, and not by the hand, is eaten by the
soul only, and not by the mouth.”
The teaching of Mr. Bennett was—“ That there is an actual presence, called
by him at one time a visible presence, at another time an objective presence,
of the body and blood of Christ in the consecrated bread and wine, without
or external to the communicant, by virtue of or upon the words of consecration,
irrespective of the faith of the communicant —a presence given to all who
receive the elements, —a presence prior to and separate from the act of
reception.”
Tliat teaching of Mr. Bennett was contrarient to the doctrine of the Church
of England.
The fifth proposition established as the doctrine of the Church of England
waa—“That since the body and blood of Christ are not present in the ele-
ments, on the altar, nor in the hand of the priest, there can be no offering or
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ made by the priest to God.
“ That such supposed sacrifice of Christ by the priest is derogatory to the
one-single and all-sufficient sacrifice of the death of Christ made once for all
upon the cross.”
The teacliing of Mr. Bennett was—“ That the Holy Communion Table is an
altar of sacrifice, and that in the celebration of the Holy Communion there is
a great sacrifice or offering of Jesus Christ by the ministering priest, a living,
real, and spiritual offering of Christ by the priest.
This teaching of Mr. Bennett was contrarient to the doctrine of the Church
of England, and opposed to the judgment of the Judicial Committee in
Westerton and Liddell.
The sixth proposition established as the doctrine of the Church of England
was—“ That since the true substance of bread and wine remains in the con-
secrated elements, and may not be adored without idolatry, and since the true
body and blood of Ciirist are in heaven and not in the elements, and, there-
fore, may not therein be adored; no adoration is due or ought to be done to
or towards the sacramental elements.”


Mr. Bennett’s teaching was—“ That adoration or worship is due to the
consecrated bread and wine in the Holy Communion. That adoration is due
to Christ present upon the altars of our churches, under the form of bread and
wine, on the ground that under their veil is the sacred body and blood of our
Saviour Jesus Christ.”
That teaching was contrarient to the doctrine of the Church of England.
In conclusion, the principles which were the foundation of all human
knowledge of the sacred and mysterious subject of the Lord’s Supper were
these :
“ (1.) The body of Christ when on earth was a human body in a natural
condition until Sis resurrection.
“ (2.) After His resurrection and ascension, the same human body was
glorified, and is now in heaven, and will there abide until the end of the
world.
“ 3.) In the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper grace is imparted to the faith-
ful communicants from the body and blood of Christ, which yet remain in
heaven.
“ (4.) The body and blood of Christ never descend to earth, yet they are
verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in Ihe Lord’s Supper, by
way of spiritual communication.
“ (5.) What this *vay of spiritual communication is, the Church of England
has not defined, beyond declaring in the 28th Article that it is heavenly and
spiritual.”
The whole of the argument, therefore, culminated in one principle, viz.:—
“ That the natural body of our blessed Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, His
“ true, actual, spiritual body —and He has none other — is in heaven and not
“ here. And therefore His body was communicated to the faithful receiver, not
“*» the consecrated elements, but in the rite or ordinance of the Lord’s
“Supper duly received.”
If this test was applied to all the charges against the defendant, it would
be impossible to arrive at any other conclusion than this, viz., that the
doctrines maintained and published by Mr. Bennett contravened the laws
ecclesiastical of the Church of England.
Judgment was given in this case by tbe Dean of Arches July 23rd.
Certain phrazes used by the defendant were severely condemned by the
Judge.'’ As to other matters he held that Mr. Bennett had not exceeded tbe
liberty allowed by law. The case is to be carried by appeal to the Privy
Council.


»(ft q:/fsiow lo rrf;tiMi>f)« JlSti'f
»«f; ii t:o Ja;!T .wtt »>
{;,'iit f'j; :n ! ,fi iHiol i Ht I'lfiiiu "WO lo orfl nfiqa im
IBl) 1:‘ iii ;>it) J><l« JoyiSiia (wil tit iiS'l ;y brWOT
. . ‘'JwiiiO
,lo> lo »nhl : i 'f <4 Saw jjo
trtU!s :\ &\{f ony'' j vjii .At:
bi >v »'lnod "jUt 10-»9|<fi)B fcnu iws'ti" •’!
,ViT«i)?a a;fii fi, - 'fT
~ ,c . ': ’> I. .i.iuNur
fi.W '!j>o<l (Ui":y'rri »ai.|;ft idi ,fToUrtr««l! i)ois- «C iJSxTtllKm »
i»iU i., ;3i:j -J.’Jj; -■ vit 111-ti Of »v'<
■ • . ..V; , .. ' i .i47a#' ■
'rt»-.3l '. ( J ;.->i7i;C(rfw ?i s'lmij,e'f<7<xl lfiJ.riTf;r>.'.' ’' t; J’T
Vi i-; ii'-« ,)»7 if'riw .Jiriiit)'to Itoolci bj!A ftilJ Ji:<nt ■ .iicii’
■y!»; 7 i4l t'iT nl isTrsjrr to (Viol'i t vi;?i .'ui i’ v 4,
v,i ,7-x{<;7'i e’u'nxf 'jiit ja iiildtiat 'xO l 'u'.n A>NHtvvijs:.
■ ■ ..''i.'rii. t; '1 I to
■ T'( ;'-i7iiir''. w!t ,!)t fioiiftorn' .t;<iO’. i.’ii:.' .i ,> V, vj ~;■ .’;.ii//
36




