





DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES.
(With Map, Plate XIII.)
BY K. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read November 18, 1898.)}
In an article on the “ Initiation Ceremonies of Certain Tribes of
Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of this
Society, Vol. xxxvii, No. 157, pp. 54-73, I established the bound-
aries of the different organizations spread over the whole of New
South Wales. In the present article it is intended to show the
limits of the aboriginal nations inhabiting that portion of Queens-
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., YOL. XXXVII, NO. 158.


land lying between the northern boundary of New South Wales
and the nineteenth parallel of south latitude.
Each of these nations is composed of certain communities or
aggregates of tribes who adopt identical section or class divisions,
the particulars of which are explained under each head in the fol-
lowing pages, and the boundaries of the nations are accurately
defined on the accompanying map. Each nation has been named
after one or two of the tribes whose section or class divisions were
first reported in it, and they are numbered on the map to corre-
spond with the numbers given in the letter-press.
On the map referred to there is also represented the dividing
line, AB, between the area in which circumcision is practiced, and
that in which such rite is not in force. From B, this line con-
tinues in the same northerly direction till it meets the shore of the
Gulf of Carpentaria. The continuation of this line southerly from
the point A passes through the northwest corner of New South
Wales, and its position is fixed on the map of that colony accom-
panying my paper read before this Society March 18, 1898.
No. i. The Dippil Nation.
The country occupied by this nation, No. i on the map, extends
from the Upper Clarence in New South Wales to Port Curtis in
Queensland. On the east it is bounded by the sea-coast, and on
the south, west and north by the distinguishing line marked upon
the map, and includes the Brisbane, Mary, Burnett, Dawson, Upper
Condamine and other rivers ; together with Moreton, Stradbroke,
Fraser and other islands on the adjacent coast. The following are
a few of the principal and best known tribes who were formerly
spread over this tract of country: Dippil, Turrubul, Paiamba,
Kitabool, Kaiabara, Kooranga, Goonine, Murrungama.
The people are divided into two primary groups, called Deeajee
and Karpeun ; the former is again divided into two sections, called
Bunda and Derwine, and the latter into two, called Banjoora 1 and
Barrang. The following synopsis shows which sections may inter-
marry, and to what section the children belong:
1 In the Wide Bay district, Balcoin is used instead of Banjoora, with the fem-
inine equivalent Balcoingan.


Section
Offspring,
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
Karpeun
Barrang
Banjoora
Bundagan
Derwine
Bunda
Derwinegan
Bundagan
Derwinegan
Bunda
Deeajee
Barrangan
Banjooran
Banjoora
Barrang
Banjooran
Barrangan
Derwine
Descent is always reckoned on the female side, the children
taking the group and totem name of their mother. Ihey do not,
however, belong to her section, but take the name of the other sec-
tion in their mother’s group, as exemplified in the above table.
The pair of sections, Barrang and Banjoora, forming the group
Karpeun, invariably marry the Bunda and Derwine pair, of the
group Deeajee, but the rules of intermarriage of the individual sec-
tions constituting the groups is different in different parts of the
tribal territory. For example, in some districts, instead of the
rules of marriage following the order laid down in the foregoing
table, a Barrang, male, marries a Derwine, female, and vice versa ;
a Banjoora, male, marries a Bunda, female, and vice versa. The
descent of the children is not, however, affected by this variation
—the offspring of a Derwinegan being always Bunda, no matter
whether she marries a Banjoora or a Barrang husband. 1 his law
applies, mutatis mutandis , to the offspring of the women belonging
to the other three sections.
Although marriages are generally regulated by the rules set out in
the above table, and in the last paragraph, yet there are what I have
called family or sectional regulations, under which a man may, in
certain cases only, marry a woman belonging to his own section,
but of a different totem to that to which he himself belongs. For
instance, a Barrang Opossum might be allowed to marry a Bar-
rangan Porcupine. Marriage between persons of the same totem is
strictly prohibited. 1
The totems belonging to each of the primary groups are common
i « The Kamilaroi Class System of Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust. (Q.)> x > 2 3~ 2 4-


to the two sections of which it is composed. Thus, the totems
attached to Karpeun are common to the sections Barrang and Ban-
joora, and the Deeajee totems are common to the Bunda and Der-
wine sections. I have found that certain totems which belong to
Karpeun in a given district are reported to be attached to Deeajee
in a different part of the tribal territory. It may be stated that I
have observed similar local disagreements among the totems of
other organizations. 1
In the tribes inhabiting the country on the heads of the Clarence
and Condamine rivers, the following are some of the totems
attached to the group Karpeun: kangaroo-rat, parrot, turtle, carpet
snake, eaglehawk, codfish, sea, brown kangaroo, crow, opossum,
scrub turkey and porcupine. Among the totems of the Deeajee
group in the same district may be enumerated the plain turkey, red
kangaroo, bat, common magpie, wallaroo, black snake, native cat,
emu, iguana and platypus.
Mr. A. W. Howitt reports that in the Turrubul tribe,, one of
those included in this Nation, “descent is counted through the
male.” 2 In another place he makes the same assertion in regard to
the Kaiabara, also belonging to this Nation. 3 There is, however,
no question that he is in error in both instances, and has evidently
been misinformed. I have drawn attention to the matter now,
because on a former occasion I was misled by Mr. Howitt’s conclu-
sions respecting the line of descent of the Kaiabara tribe. 4 I have
since, however, from personal inquiry, reported that descent is
through the mother. 5
I have before given the Rev. William Ridley the credit of being
the first to report the Turrubul and Dippil tribes from Moreton Bay
to Wide Bay, whence Mr. E. Palmer traced a similar organization to
Port Curtis. 6 lam the first to publish the existence of identical
divisions on the sources of the Clarence and Dumaresq rivers;
down the Condamine, and across the country to the Dawson,
including that river and its tributaries, as shown upon the map.
I Jourti. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, 170.
2 Trans. Roy. Soc. Victoria (1889), i, 102.
z Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xviii, 50.
*Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.)> x > 2 9-
6 yourn. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 81-82.
*Loc. cit., p. Bx.


The names of the groups Deeajee and Karpeun, and the equiva-
lence of the four sections to those of the Kamilaroi tribes, have
also been first reported by me.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera Nation
The name is adopted from the Kogai of the Maranoa and
Yuipera of Mackay, the two tribes whose divisions were first made
known in this area. The immense extent of country covered by
the tribes and communities constituting this nation can be under-
stood better by a reference to the map than by any description of
it. In a former paper, to which the reader is referred, 1 I detailed
the original work done by the Rev. William Ridley, Mr. R. B.
Smyth, Mr. E. M. Curr, and Mr. E. Palmer, among different tribes
of this organization.
I have traced the same section names among the tribes of the
Warrego, Paroo, Bulloo, Barcoo, Thomson, Diamantina, and other
rivers, thus covering all the country in which the section or class
names had not been particularized by previous writers. The fol-
lowing are a few out of a large number of tribes included in my
inquiries: The Gnoree tribe of the Middle Warrego, the Murgoan
of the Bulloo, the Moothaburra and Birria of the Thomson, the
Koonkerri of the Barcoo, the Kurrawulla of the Diamantina, the
Banthamurra of the Wilson, etc.
In all the tribes of this Nation the people are divided into four
sections, called Woongo, Koobaroo, Bunburri and Koorgilla, or
else mere variations of these names. The people appertaining to
the Woongo and Koobaroo sections together form a group called
Wootaroo, and the Bunburri and Koorgilla sections constitute the
group Yungaroo. In my previous article already referred to, 2 1 gave
a tabular arrangement of the groups and sections of the Yuipera
tribe at Mackay, as reported by Mr. R. B. Smyth, in 1878, but as
the names are slightly different in the interior, it will be better to
supply a new table, as follows :
x yourn. Roy. Soc. N S. Wales, xxxii, 78—80.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 79.


Section,
Offspring.
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
tit , Woongo
Wootaroo 6
Koobaroo
Bunburrian
Koorgillan
Koorgilla
Bunburri
Koorgillan
Bunburrian
Yungaroo Bunburri
or Mallera Koorgilla
Woongoan
Koobarooan
Koobaroo
Woongo
Koobarooan
Woongoan
Mr. E. M. Curr reported that the name Mallera was used on the
Belyando and other rivers instead of Yungaroo, and I have found
the same name on the Warrego, Thomson and elsewhere.
As every man and woman in the community bears the name of
an animal, or some other natural object, it follows that there will
be an aggregate of diverse totems known by the collective title of
Wootaroo, and a corresponding variety of totems will be distributed
under the distinguishing name of Yungaroo or Mallera. The
tribes of this organization are so widespread that I shall not at
present occupy the space to enumerate the lengthy lists of totem
names collected by me in the various districts, but will reserve this
task for a future occasion.
Although the section names are practically the same over the
vast territory shown as No. 2 on the map, yet the dialects and cus-
toms of the people are more or less diverse in different parts of it.
Throughout a wide zone of the western end of this nation, all the
males are circumcised, and other rites are performed, which have
been described by me elsewhere. The line from Atoß on the
map separates those tribes who practice circumcision from those
who do not. Such a boundary would necessarily be varied slightly
at different times by conquest, or by the intermarriage of neighbor-
ing tribes on either side.
The southwest and west boundaries of Queensland, separating
that colony from South Australia, being arbitrary geodetic lines,
cannot be expected to coincide with the boundaries of the aborig-
inal nations. For the sake of simplicity, however, the Queensland
boundary has, for the present, been adopted as the southwest limit
of the Kogai-Yuipera people. I am preparing a map dealing with


some South Australian tribes, on which the actual boundary between
them and the Queensland communities will be shown in its proper
place. The northern boundary of the Barkunjee nation, No. son
the map hereto annexed, will also be more particularly defined in
my forthcoming article.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra Nation.
This nation comprises several small tribes, inhabiting the coastal
district from Port Curtis via Keppel Bay, Port Bowen, Cape Town-
shend and Shoalwater Bay to Broad Sound, together with Long
Island, Curtis Island and some smaller ones off the coast. On the
south they were bounded by the Dippil, and on the west and north
by the Kogai-Yuipera nations, as represented by a distinguishing
line upon the map, PI. XIII. The community is divided into two
intermarrying groups, having the same names as their western
neighbors, but with subdivisions bearing a different nomenclature.
The primary group Wootaroo is divided into two sections, called
Moonal and Karilburra, and the Yungaroo group into two, called
Kooealla and Koorpal.
The names of the groups and sections, showing how they inter-
marry, and the names of the respective divisions to which the chil-
dren belong, will be readily understood by referring to the follow-
ing table:
Section,
i
Offspring,
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
Moonal
Wootaroo
Kooeallan
Koorpalan
Koorpal
Kooealla
Koorpalan
Kooeallan
Karilburra
Y ungaroo
Kooealla
Koorpal
Moonalan
Karilburra
Moonal
Karilburran
Moonalan
Karilburran
Moonal and' Karilburra are equivalent to Murri-Kubbi, and
Kooealla and Koorpal to Kumbo-Ippai, of the Kamilaroi and
Wiradjuri communities in New South Wales
In this community descent is always reckoned on the female side,


the same as in the two adjoining nations, the children of both sexes
taking the totem name of their mother. The undermentioned are
a few of the totems common to Moonal and Karilburra: curlew,
wallaby, rain, russet hawk, bat, yellow-bellied snake. The Koo-
ealla and Koorpal sections have the following totems amongst
others: crow, boomerang, jackass, eaglehawk, salt water perch.
The intermarriage of certain totems belonging to the same sec-
tion, referred to in my explanation of the marriage laws of the
Dippil nation, also prevails in the Kooinmerburra community.
For example, a Moonal might, under certain restrictions, marry a
Moonalan of a totem different to his own.
For the particulars of the social structure of the Kooinmerburra,
and their geographic range, I am much indebted to Mr. William
H. Flowers, one of my most valued correspondents, who took a
deal of trouble in replying to my inquiries. In 1894, in an article
treating of another tribe, 1 I incidentally referred to the Kooinmer-
burra divisions reported by Mr. Flowers. The divisions of this
tribe have also been briefly mentioned by Mr. A. W. Howitt. 2 The
full details given in the present article, and the map defining the
boundaries of the tract of country occupied by all the tribes of
this organization, have never been published until now.
Explanation of Plate XIII.
No. 1. The Dippil nation/at its southern end, extends a little
way within the New South Wales frontier—the whole of the
remainder being situated in Queensland. Moreton and Stradbroke
islands appertain to this organization.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera nation adjoins the northern boundary
of the Barkunjee and Kamilaroi nations of New South Wales, which
encroach some distance within Queensland territory. All the
tribes occupying the country to the west of the line AB practice
the rite of circumcision, but to the east of that line the custom is
not in force.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra nation inhabits a comparatively
small territory fronting the sea-coast for some distance north and
south of the Fitzroy river.
No. 4 is the northern extremity of the country of the Kamilaroi
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x, 27.
‘tjourn. Anthrop . Inst., xiii, 341.




nation, which crosses the boundary between the colonies of Queens-
land and New South Wales.
No. 5 represents a portion of the Barkunjee territory, which also
overlaps the Queensland frontier.
For particulars of the country occupied by the Kamilaroi and
Barkunjee nations, and the eastern limit of the custom of circum-
cision in New South Wales, the reader is referred to my paper on
the “Initiation Ceremonies of Australian Tribes,” published in
the Proceedings of this Society, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 54-73, PI- V-




