

THE
FORGER’S WIFE.
BY
JOHN LANG,
AUTHOR OF “TOO CLEVER BY HALF,” “TOO MUCH ALIKE,"
ETC. ETC.
LONDON:
WARD AND LOCK, 158, FLEET STREET.
MDCCCLV.


LONDON :
FETTER AND GALPIN, PRINTERS, PLAYHOUSE YARD,
ADJOINING THE “TIMES” OFFICE.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE.
The conductors of several German and French papers paid
the author of this story the compliment of selecting it for
translation and insertion in their columns, during its con-
tinuance in the columns of Frazers Magazine ; one of them,
the “ Echo de Bruxelles ” supplied a short tale, by way of
episode, which will be found at the conclusion of this reprint.
It may not be out of place to mention that the story of
« The Forger’s Wife” is not a fiction ; albeit the incidents are
sufficiently disguised to spare the feelings of any surviving
member of the family (called in the following pages “ Orford”).
The letters written by the unfortunate lady, from New South
Wales, came into the possession of the author some sixteen
years ago, and it was from these letters (some of them dated
« Moreton Bay !”) that the idea of her sufferings was gleaned.
Vienna , 22 nd Jan., 1855.




THE FORGER’S WIFE.
CHAPTER I.
In one of the midland counties, some years ago, there lived a gen-
tleman of ancient family and large estate-a Mr. Orford who had
married early in life, a young lady of great personal attractions,
the daughter of a distinguished general officer in the British army.
The issue of this marriage was numerous, but one chi Id only was
reared a girl. Some had died very young, others had lingered on
till they were six or seven years of age, and two had been taken
away—a boy and a girl-when the former was fifteen and the latter
f °" With what anxiety did Mr. and Mrs. Orford watch Emily their
onlv child' Her every look was studied, every whim gratified,
overywant anticipated ; and year by year did then- anxiety become
mor When'Emily had completed her thirteenth year, Mr. Orford
who represented Ills county, resigned his seat m 1 arliament, and
removed his family to the Continent. For four years and upwards
fc Orfords remained abroad, travelling; and when they returned
to England, Emily was seventeen years of age. .
Emily was vei y pretty, and had remarkably pleasing manners
Her form was slight, her figure well-shaped and graceful The
sweetness of her disposition might be seen m her soft hard eye ,
the expression of her delicately-formed mouth, and the intonations
of her and unaffected voice. She was the beau id-al of a
ll of gentle blood, and heiress to all her father possessed-a very
considerable fortune, not less than fifteen thousand a-ye^.
Amongst the many eligible suitors who visited at Ortord Hall
was a hafdsome, manly person-one Charles the second
son of a baronet whose estate joined that of Emily sfa •
For a year Charles Everest continued to pay Miss Orford the
most “ marked ” attention, which she received seemingly with
delight. At length he proposed to her; hut, to the disappointment


of t all who were interested in the matter, she refused to become his
wife, though she acknowledged she liked him extremely. Charles
Everest, dejected and abashed, removed himself from Emily’s vicinity,
and proceeded to London, where his father’s interest soon procured
for him an appointment —that of private secretary to a Cabinet
Minister.
The next person whose attentions seemed far from disagreeable
to Miss Orford, was a Mr. Hastings, a young barrister, in whose
“ circuit ” Mr. Orford’s estate was situated. Mr. Hastings was “ a
very rising man,” and Mr. Orford, who was chairman of the Quarter
Sessions, would frequently invite him to the Hall.
Mr. Orford was about to stand once more for the county, which
he had formerly represented in Parliament, and his friend the
barrister volunteered to canvass for him. The offer was accepted,,
and on this occasion the barrister remained for a fortnight under
the same roof with Emily, with whom he became passionately in
love.
Through the exertions of Mr. Hastings, Mr. Orford was returned
by a very large majority ; and Emily naturally shared her father’s-
joy on this event. Her lover observing this, made a declaration of
his attachment in the most eloquent terms. But it is one thing to
move a jury or a mob by figures of speech and impassioned discourse —
it is another thing to create that strange mysterious feeling, called
“ love,” in a maiden’s breast. Emily owned that she liked Mr,
Hastings, just as she had liked Charles Everest; but then she added,
“ I could never think of marrying him, because I do not love him.”
******
Miss Orford’s third suitor was an officer in the Coldstream
Guards, Captain Deesing. He first saw Emily at a county ball, to-
which he had escorted his sisters. Deesing was a man for whom
half the girls in London were breaking their hearts, contrary to the
wishes of their mothers, for Deesing was in debt, and had no “ ex-
pectations.” Deesing’s address was peculiarly captivating, and he
had always at command a stock of fresh and entertaining pleasantries
wherewith to amuse those with whom he entered into conversation.
He could not only engage the affections of the fair sex with wonder-
ful facility, but even men who had once spoken to him, long after
thirsted for his society. Witty, clever, shrewd, good-tempered,
frank, generous, unaffected, Deesing's smiles were courted by per-
sons of all ranks. He had never thought of marriage ; at least, he
had thought that matrimony was not exactly suited to him, and
therefore he had no idea of contracting it.
Captain Deesing was no sooner introduced to Miss Orford than
lie conceived for her a regard which he had never felt for any other


woman; and the morning after the ball he communicated to his
eldest sister that he was in love with her friend.
******
Although Captain Dcesing saw Emily Orford almost every day
for three weeks,— although he had played in a charade with her,
wherein they were ardent lovers, —although his sisters had been loud
in his praises,—although he had escorted her in her morning naes,
had walked with her alone in the shrubberies, had read poetry to
her had sang to her the tenderest songs; although he had striven
hard, by exercising all his powers of fascination, to win her love
still when he proposed to her, she told him what she had told the
others, she “liked him very much, but she could never think of
marrying him,” . TT , , ,
This was a severe blow to Captain Deesing. He went to town ,
rejoined his regiment in disgust; shortly afterwards mamed a
rich widow, and exchanged into a regiment of the line.
CHAPTER II.
Mrs. Orford was induced to visit a watering-place in Devon-
shire. Mr. Orford’s parliamentary duties required his presence in
to ' U \t this watering-place, Mrs. Orford and Emily met in society a
person of gentlemanlike appearance, called “ Captain Harcourt.”
His manners were prepossessing, his address unaffected and easy. He
was very o'ood-looking, amusing, and clever, though superficial.
He was a great favourite with the little society, and the young
ladies used to speak of him as “ that charming man.”
Captain Harcourt did not pay Miss Orford the attention she had
been accustomed to receive; he seemed to prefer others who had
less pretensions to beauty. He had never once asked Miss Oifoid
to dance though he had been introduced to her, and had met her at
several evening parties. He appeared to hold aloof from Emily,
though he occasionally condescended to converse with her mother.
Mrs. Orford invited Captain Harcourt to dine at her house,


albeit be bad never called upon ber. The Captain accepted the
invitation, and after dinner, over the dessert, culled for Mrs. Orford
that bouquet of compliments for which she had been pining all day
long.
At the request of her mother, Emily played and sang; and Cap-
tain Harcourt bestowed that languid applause which men of fashion
frequently affect. His ears were enchanted by her voice, but he
skilfully kept his raptures under control. Emily’s sketches, too,
were also exhibited for Captain Harcourt’s inspection and criticism,
and he was pleased to speak of them as “ rather good—not at all
bad.”
On taking leave of Mrs. Orford and her daughter, the Captain
shook the former’s hand very graciously, but gave Emily only two
fingers and a very low bow.
On the following day Captain Harcourt met Mrs. Orford and her
daughter on the beach. As he approached, Emily blushed, and
involuntarily trembled. She knew not why, but she felt ill, and
could scarcely refrain from bursting into tears. Captain Harcourt
spoke to Emily in a patronising tone of voice, and with the air of a
man who feels that his words are valuable. Emily was annoyed;
but she could not hate the man. She had now an interest in him.
And why ? He had piqued her, provoked her.
It is hard to say at what age folly is likely to end in women who
have been greatly admired in their youthful days. Mrs. Orford was
actually proud that Captain Harcourt preferred her conversation to
that of her daughter, and had she been a Avidow, she would have
accepted him as a second husband, had he proposed to her.
On taking leave that evening on the beach, Captain Harcourt
bestoAved upon Emily a Avarmer shake of the hand than he had
given her on the previous night, and smiled upon her. Emily
Avas not prepared for this. It took her by surprise ; and the gentle
pressure she experienced thrilled through every vein, and made her
heart beat violently.
Emily could not sleep that night; she lay aAvake thinking of
Captain Harcourt. She could now feel for poor Charles Everest,
for Mr. Hastings, and for Captain Deesing, since she had conceived
a love for a man who regarded her with indifference, or avlio was
only civil to her, out of mere charity. More than once she summoned
all her pride, and tried to laugh at herself for thinking of Captain
Harcourt; but that luscious poison of love had entered into her
blood, and in vain did she attempt to eject it.
It Avas Emily’s Avont to rise early, and walk with her maid by
the sea shore. While she was dressing on the morning Avhich fol-
loAved that most eventful evening of her life, oh! how she longed


that she might -t Captain !-that *.
Ms hat, gave aXal inclination of his head,
Halr rt h td^C e e d cZnin g than any of those gen-
tlemen P wTo had aspired to Emily (Word's affect.ons. He knew
that the shortest and safest way to a womans heart and soul was
the longest way round, and by the most mtncate path. That she
was an heiressf and that her father was a man possessed of great
parliamentary interest, he had already mformed limse -
When Captain Harcourt was convinced that Emily reaiiy ioie
him-a ter hehad observed her keep her eyes upon bm for■ hou s
mm daw uc proceeded with immense tact to met
Emily entertained for him;
L ot afternoon, win she "was walking, alone, on the beach, ho
° a " o M^tlCyon'™st often have thought me
very —“but. alas! you little know what pan , r
I have felt hound to assume has caused me. ‘ •
this place to-morrow, we pai%
klllirelnl\lThavenot been'insensible of your beauty
vou“ talents, your great and varied accomplishments; nor have I
presently she said, “Do not go to-morrow. Stay here
l0Dg “ cln it be that your heart beats a response to mine !” he
inquired, with well-feigned wonder. _
“Yes ” and as;ain she looked into his eyes.
Ev this “mo they had rounded the cliff. Not a soul was near
them y They were loon pledged to each other, and then pledges
witnessed by the wild w -fXthTelhSlslX.er mother
Captain Harcourt, who, to her unspeakable joy, t j
fahh in the light of an impediment to their union- And then
Captain quoted to her those passionate lines of Moore
an accepted lover.


■“On some calm placid shore we’ll dwell,
Where ’tis no crime to love too well;
Where thus to worship tenderly
An erring child of light like thee
Would not be sin ; or if it be,
Where we might weep our faults away,
Together kneeling night and day ;
Thou, for my sake, at Alla’s shrine,
And I at any God’s for thine ! ”
“ I have to fear, dearest,” said Captain Harcourt, “ that at present
it would be premature to mention our attachment to your excellent
mother. For a brief while let it be a secret known only to ourselves.
We can meet every morning early, and every afternoon at about
this hour; and at our leisure we can settle our plans, dearest Emily.
Yes. Since you wish it, I will defer my departure.”
CHAPTER III.
Day after day Emily met Captain Harcourt, on the beach ; and
day after day he tested her regard for him. A woman loses her
pride as soon as she ardently loves a man, (so far at least as between
him and herself,) and Emily put up with and endured more of
Captain Harcourt’s assumed caprice and temper than most people
would be inclined to credit. He would sometimes talk of going
off immediately by a post-chaise ; and the otherwise high spirited
girl would implore him to remain, and not leave her to die of a
broken heart. He would at another time recount the girls then at
theSvateringvplace who were anxious to elope with him, and hint
that he might yet be tempted ; and Emily, who was conscious of
having done nothing to offend him, would endeavour to assuage his
well-acted irritability. Captain Harcourt would at other times
insinuate that Emily loved him not for himself, but for his fortune,
and his claim to a lofty title on the death of his uncle, the Marquis;
and when Emily denied this, he would cry “ Humph !” and curl his
moustache with his finger and thumb.
In the innocence of her soul Emily had divulged to the Captain
the extent of her affection, and he had determined never to relax
that hold which the secret gave him. Her fears that he would leave


Wf cirrus ZSZ£
ZZTfrocUm disposition; on the contrary, the amcmty of Ins
the Captain had created a difference,
and Emily’s kind words had brought about a reconciliation, Captain
"r Wd suddenly, and said, “ Dearest, at the hour o two
I must leave this ifface. I must no longer delay. Dallying
ds aready Wght me into f^v*.
A post-chaise vvill bo ready at the hour X mention ; and at a 'I 1 '- 1 ' I '-;!
A post cl.aue v end of the [ ano> n oar your mother s
house’” We can be married in Scotland, dearest. My relations will
and erelong will be r—ch You
know I love you, Emily-that I worship s<>« 5 <>«- Make up your
““o Dear Ee<dnald,” exclaimed Emily, “ my parents never opposed
my will Mv°mother is kindly disposed towards you; and lam
sure you would be a favourite with my father. J* djj.
« T am a strange fellow,” said Captain Harcourt. child
hood a creature of impulse ; and I shall be the same to the end of
thetC It was impulse that made me decline runnmg off wffh
the Marchioness of Riggethimbley. It was impulse that made me
break off a match with Lady - V orimla Di-ngoruc, after tlje
a ga.nl,'ling house, and
SwX: is time, Emily, for consideration, between
thiS Zdy a d\Tds, P o"pot, that she would elope with Captain
llai Mrs t ’Orford and her daughter were engaged to spend that day
with some friends, but when twelve o’clock came, Emily she
had a headache, and Mrs. Orford left her house accompanied on y
by STts now distracted between her love and her duty At
one moment she decided on abandoning Captain Ha J C( ™*’
=to those who had, from her infancy, shown her nothing
and affection. The next moment she would rush
to «<lc.
AN ACCEPTED LOVER.


It was impossible to pluck her love from out her bosom—and how
could she thus desert her parents ?
Five minutes past two ! She could not run away. She began
to unpack hastily her carpet replace her dresses in the
drawers of her wardrobe-; but before the task was done, dear
Reginald s eyes seemed to gleam upon her, and she repacked the
bags.
Ten minutes past two ! She heard the sound of carriage wheels.
A carriage had passed the door! She seized her bags—rushed
out of the gate, to the end of the lane—met Reginald, who handed
her into the post-chaise, and kissed her. She fainted on his shoulder
as soon as she was seated.
CHAPTER IV.
There were no electric telegraph despatches in the days when
Captain Harcourt carried off Emily Orford—no special trains that
could travel at the rate of fifty miles an hour. The fastest convey-
ance was a post-chaise, and when Mrs. Orford, at four o’clock, was
startled by the intelligence that Emily had eloped, she was unable
to find out what road even the fugitives had taken. Nevertheless
she displayed some show of a pursuit, and made the best of her way
to London, where she informed her husband of wdiat had taken
place,
Mr. Orford was natui’lilly furious. In vain did Mrs. Orford
declare that Captain Harcourt was a most gentlemanlike person;
that he was very rich, highly connected, and much courted in
society.
Emily was advertised and described in the papers, and a
reward of £5OO was offered to any person or persons who would
prevent the solemnisation of matrimony between herself and the
person with whom she had eloped. But these precautions were of
no avail. The old blacksmith at Gretna-green had tied the knot
before the advertisement appeared at any great distance from
London, and Captain Harcourt, in the ecstacy of his joy, presented
the blacksmith with a bank note for £5O.
Captain Harcourt, that child of impulse, had (to use a vulgar
phrase) “ heaps of money and he squandered it with an open


0n pro-
sSSSSS^-SSKfs
wealth but the enjoyment it affords . Reginald
What struck Emily as very strange \vas this. »
- rs s m iSE
honey when they are lovers, n^ ar | t dof the Captain,
hb SSSd ItaSdbtneaA her touch. Emily fancied he was
distm-bed in his dreams by some horrid vision she-warned
him. Reginald started up, glared at his wife and said Kememo ,
dearest Emily, nothing shall ever part ' ,3 ' ° l> ar l| me iit, and
bottom of my heart. You, .fat her . me> jJ-Ung,
has enormous influence at the nonu »
if 6 ThJy S^r e e ”w n on y the°ir y :ay to Matlock from Gretna-green.
KS Emily, at Captain Harcourfs
several letters to her parents Prom her father ds _
reply; hut from her mother she received a note inthese^
« Emily, —We have brought ourselves to think of y
° f °"?»y,””Sd Captain Harcourt, on reading this laconic epistle
“it won?pay for them to shake us off in that fasluou Our
r7o£fL cHhe
having her husband made a baronet, so much™ thedSSg-
strnck with her personal beauty, when she appeared at the drai „
roo^mil^conld n no^tu^^Tstand'eith'er Ith 1 the e tone or the substance of
EegS Observations; but then, Reginald was o ton ~
herently funny, that she did not attempt to unravel h.s sentences
She therefore contented herself with smiling, and saying, be
mind, dearest Reginald ; when you come m for your title, on your
the first days of her married life.


uncle's death, my mother, who is very proud and vain—bless her
dear heart!—will be only too glad to acknowledge and receive us ;
and, if it be possible, we shall be happier then than wo are now, my
own dear Reginald.”
“ What sort of a man is your father, really ? ” inquired Captain
Harcourt. “Ishe a man of warm feelings, generously disposed?”
Emily described her father truly, as “ the kindest and most
liberal-minded man in the world, and very intellectual withal, but
rather obstinate and determined.”
“ That’s all right,” said Captain Harcourt; “ then I know how
to deal with him.” And the Captain, who was rather overcome by
constant refreshment taken during that day, sat down, and, in a
handwriting resembling copper-plate, wrote the following. (The
verses he italicised.)
“ Edmund Orford, Esq., M.P., &c. &c. &c.
“ Sir, —Pardon me ; but I desire to make an explanation : I am
sure you will forgive me.
The faults of love by love are justified,
With unresisted might the monarch reigns,
He levels mountains and he raises plains,
And, not regarding difference of degree,
Abased your daughter and exalted me.
“ Yours obediently,
“ Reginald Harcourt.”
It is needless, perhaps, to say that Mr. Orford never took the
slightest notice of this communication. It confirmed his previously
conceived opinion, that “ Captain Harcourt” w r as some low blackguard
—an impostor and a swindler.


CHAPTER V.
C* apt AIN and Mrs. Harcourt went to Brighton, and there
r en"set a very quiet neighWrooth
Emily svas as happy as a woman ™ nst ‘ 7 d thc u regretted
SMtfS S
his inwoto
since he feared taking her to such rf^helvroteselrS
S tZnZ? SSrfT“» «*“-*. fro “ t t
‘““tf * Joma consequent on smoking and drinking he
mUC Em3y”™' alarmed, and wished to send for a doctor “No
dearest,” the Captain said ■' “ it is only a passmg spasm.
of that day, however the Captain seemed very
n TTo eomnlained of a bad headache, and a pain in the si ,
Un «Lsfd aTar thai the air of Brighton did not agree with him
and proposed seeking a change b,■ gmng.that night o "“th.
’ tsars Sly —: %£***>
packed, o’clock, Captain and Mrs. Harcourt were away
fr °“ H was all the air.” said the
ahont five miles. “ I knew.* ™ 1 t f "orts of fun.” Vd to
prove took off Emily’s honuet, put it upon ins own
T T IF FIRST DATS OF HER MARRIED LIFE.


head, tied her boa closely round his neck, and a scarf over his
mouth, put on his wife’s spare cloak, thrust his hands into a muff,
and said, “ Emmy dear, should I not make a capital woman ? Put
my hair in paper, dearest; three curls on each side. Is it long
enough, darling ?”
“ Oh, quite long enough, Reginald dear,” said Emily; and by
the moon’s light she gratified her husband’s funny humour, and
tightly twisted up his hair, according to his directions, “ three curls
on each side.”
Captain Harcourt did make an excellent woman, for a very
inquisitive and impertinent man, who had been following the post-
chaise on horseback, opened the door, and peered in, when they
stayed to pay the first toll, and, after satisfying his curiosity, said,
“ Two ladies : all right. Beg your pardon.”
The Captain’s funny humour, this whim of his, lasted all night.
He went to sleep (?) in the curl papers and Emily’s bonnet, and
did not divest himself of the female attire till daylight next
morning,
“ What a funny creature you are, Reginald,” said Emily, while
she was combing out the Captain’s curls.
“ Always was,” he replied. “ Child of impulse, Emmy.”
*******
Having arrived in safety at Portsmouth, Captain and Mrs.
Harcourt took a small cottage, and enjoyed the sweets of solitude
for several weeks. But one night, alas ! a coarse man, in top-boots
and corduroy breeches, and a blue double-breasted coat, with brass
buttons upon it, without being announced, broke in upon them, and
said, in the most familiar manner, to the Captain, “Hulloa, my
pippin ! Oh ! Charley !”
Captain Harcourt was naturally very indignant, and asked the
intruder what he meant. The intruder in reply put out his tongue
at the Captain, squinted hideously, and drew from his pocket a piece
of parchment.
Captain Harcourt protested that it was all a mistake; and
Emily’s anger now being aroused, she desired the intruder to leave
the house.
“ I will do that immediately, mam,” said the intruder; “ but
you’ll excuse me for saying that this gentleman, the Captain—
Captain Harcourt—mam—the Captain, mam—the Captain must go
along with me. Particular business demands it, mam.”
“ Emily, dearest,” said Captain Harcourt, in a whisper, “I am
not the first person in the world that has been subjected to incon-
venience by a false identity. It once happened to the great Duke
of Marlborough—ay, royalty itself has not escaped. Compose


vourself dearest. By going at once it will be the sooner over. The
law shall be altered. I will soon be back. Now, don t cry, that s a
darling,”
chapter VI.
Emily fancied that her husband had been arrested for the debt
of some other person. She had no idea of the truth—that he had
been apprehended on a criminal charge. He had been absent ten
days and had never written to her. She did not reproach him,
because she imagined his time was wholly engaged m clearing up
this unfortunate mistake. Her fears were for poor Reginalds
health What pained her most was that she could not write to him,
for she did not know his address ; and this put her to some incon-
venience insomuch as he had only left her a few pounds, which
were now almost exhausted. All their ready money, some two or
three hundred pounds, Reginald had thoughtlessly carried away
Wltl Captain Harcourt, when at Portsmouth, used to receive regularly
the Examiner newspaper, and it was from this journal Emily learnt
that under the name of Charles Roberts, her husband had been
arraigned and tried at the Central Criminal Court for having on a
certain day forged a certain deed, by which the Bank of England
had been defrauded by the said Charles Roberts of a certain sura of
money to wit, the sum of £7,850. And alas! she further learnt
that he had been found guilty, and sentenced to be transported to
New South Wales for the term of his natural life !
Charles Roberts, alias Reginald Harcourt, had retained as his
counsel Mr. Hastings, the “ rising barrister,” who had formerly been
a suitor for Emily’s hand, and most ably did his counsel perform his
painful but bounden duty. Mr. Hastings’ speech—which Emily
entirely agreed with, fancying that it came from the counsel’s
Peart was ingenious and eloquent in the extreme ; but the evidence
was much too clear, and the proof of Roberts’s identity (the great
point in dispute) much too strong to be shaken by an artful cross-
examination, or explained away by rhetorical flourishes.
Emily could not believe that her husband was guilty of the
offence, and, having pawned her watch and dressing-case, at the


of one of her servants, she hasted to town. She did not
dare to visit her father ; she knew his stern, unbending disposition
too well to warrant her harbouring a thought or cherishing a hope that
he would ever forgive her or raise his voice on behalf of her unfortunate
husband. And, harder still, she felt that her mother’s implacability
would not be one whit inferior to that of Mr. Orford himself. She
had many friends in London, yet she knew not which of them to
consult in a matter so difficult and so peculiarly delicate. At length
it occurred to hex* that she could not do better than select the
gentleman who had expressed at the tidal such positive opinions
respecting Reginald’s innocence.
Emily had listened with a cold ear to the outpourings of Ins
warm heart, and she had refused his hand, it not with disdain, with
something which very much resembled it; still, she determined to
plead former husband at the feet of her rejected lover. It was easy
to procure his address. She found it in the Couvt Guide, Gnoige
Hastings, King’s Bench Walk, Temple.”
With trembling hand Emily touched the knocker of the door,
over which this name was painted in large black letters. The door
was opened by a clerk, who informed Emily that Mr. Hastings was
at present engaged at a consultation, but if she pleased to wait
until it was over she could see him. Emily took a chair in the
clerk’s room; she could hear Mr, Hastings’ voice in the next
apartment, not as she had been wont to hear it, soft-toned and
gentle, but loud, and rather imperious and overbearing.
The consultation over, Emily heard the clerk to Mr.
Hastings, “ Please, sir, there’s a lady wishes to see you.”
“ A what ?” said Mr. Hastings, abruptly
“ A lady, please, sir,” replied the clerk, timidly.
«What does she want?” inquired Mr, Hastings.
“ To see you, sir 1”
“Why, you fool, you’ve told me that already. What is her
lyzcsiwcss
“ That I don’t know, sir. I tried to find out. But I couldn t
glean it, sir.”
“ Has she come alone ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Well, admit her.” #
“If you please, ma’am, will you walk this way ? said the clerk
to Emily. . „ , . . . „,,
Who shall describe the emotions of the man when his eyes tell
upon the woman whom he still devotedly loved ; when he beheld
her, pale and agitated, sink into a chair and give vent to a violent
flood of tears; when he heard her, far more eloquent than he had


been at the trial, protesting the innocence of the most artful and
worthless villain whom it had ever been his, Mr. Hastings, lot to
defend? Mr. Hastings could not explain to Emily that his opinions,
which she quoted to him, were intended only for the jury and that
no one more entirely concurred in the justice of the verdict than he,
Mr. Hastings, did. In pity for her sufferings he made no attempt
to dispel the delusion under which she was labouring. Emily
beaded of him to use his influence and cause the sentence to be
reversed, and she piteously extracted from him a promise that he
would befriend her in her serious difficulties. And she asked him
where “poor Reginald” was to be found. Mr. Hastings had not
the courage to tell her this. “Reginald was in the hulks, dressed
in the attire of a convict, and shorn of his moustache and long, sil
dai Emil jellied the next day at the chambers in King’s Bench
Walk, and was informed by the clerk that Mr. Hastings had been
obliged to leave town suddenly, and would not return foi several
Everest was now a clerk in the Home Office. Mr
Hastings, in reply to a question put by Emily, had stated that the
Home Secretary was the only person who had the power of saving-
her husband. Emily sought an interview with Charies
and Charles Everest spoke to the Home Secretary. The Hoi
Secretary could not, of course, listen to his intercession.
On her way from the Home Office to her lodging, Emily met,
near the Horse Guards, a captain in the navy— Captain Bruce an
oldknd intimate friend of 'the (Word
her sorrows to Captain Bruce, but lie was unable to offer her any
assistance or advice, except that which she could not fo


CHAPTER VII
Captain Bruce took Emily to his home in the country, where
himself, his wife, and his daughters, endeavoured to make her
troubles less difficult to bear. Here Emily had a serious illness,
and during its continuance her reason frequently deserted her.
When she recovered, she expressed a wish to follow her convict
husband, in whose innocence she still firmly believed, to New South
Wales, and share his lot, whatever it might be. The folly, the
madness of this proposal were forcibly pointed out by Captain and
Mrs. Bruce, and by other friends. But Emily still remained stead-
fast in her resolve.
Captain Bruce, who was not rich, had a large family to support.
To convey Emily to Australia was more than his means could
compass. He therefore resorted to a subscription among his most
intimate friends, and succeeded in raising the sum of £125.
Captain Bruce saw Emily on board the ship which was to carry
her to New South Wales, and was shocked to think that such a
gentle, graceful being, who had been brought up from her infancy
with so much tenderness and care, should be thus thrown amongst
the mass of people then standing on the vessel’s deck. Some hun-
dreds of trunks and carpet bags were strewed about in all directions.
Scores of voices were raised in contention with the mates and other
persons in authority on board. Men, women, and children, in rags,
were wandering about, inquiring where they were to be stowed.
Some looked as though they had seen better days, and regretted
leaving their native land, now that they were about to sail; others,
as though their days and nights had been spent in debauchery, and
that any change that might come must be for the better. Emily ap-
peared to take little heed of the miserable creatures around her. She
was indifferent about her own comfort, and dead to everything except
the desire of seeing and again living with her husband.
*******
Emily was under the impression that she would have a cabin to
herself, but of this idea her mind was speedily disabused. She had
only “ a berth” in an apartment between decks, in common with
nine other females, steerage passengers. She was rather disappointed
at this; but her joy at the idea of being at last actually on the way to
Sydney, to join dear Reginald, would not suffer the inconvenience
to which she was subjected to give her any serious annoyance.


Four of Emily’s cabin companions were women of respectable
appearance and steady mien; three were persons of doubtful cha-
racter and frivolous manners, while the remaining two, from the
style of their conversation, and the grossness of their discourse,
must have led the most dissolute and abandoned of lives. Emily
often trembled and shuddered at their horrid stories, which she
could not help hearing, for these two women invariably talked m a
loud tone, as though they were rather proud of their opinions, and
thought it a pity that any of them should be lost by the limited
community of which they formed a part. . , f •,
One evening, near the equator, Emily observed that the playtui
banter in which these eloquent damsels were indulging, was about to
lead to a violent encounter, and she ventured, in the kindest and
gentlest manner possible, to address them, in the hope—not of ad-
fustino- their differences—that would have been impossible, for they
invariably quarrelled about nothing— but of averting a disgraceful
outbreak. The consequence of Emily’s interference was, that she
brought upon herself the combined forces of these capricious women,
who,"disturbed in the amusement which quarrelling seemed to afford
them, first asked her—or rather said they should “ like to know
who she was—what she meant—what business she had to put her
finger into other people’s pies ; and before Emily had time to reply
—even had she been able to do so—they called her a variety of
names, of which—fortunately for her own peace of mind—she had
not the most remote idea of the meaning. Emily made no com-
plaint of this treatment, but the captain of the vessel happening to
be informed of it, immediately made arrangements which secured
for her both privacy and comparative comfort during the remainder
of the voyage. ,
When the land was sighted Emily became agitated and nervous.
All sorts of horrible fancies filled her distracted mind. Amongst
other things, she feared her husband mighty have sunk under
the weight of his misfortunes, and died in a distant land without
any friend near him to close his eyes, and administer comfort to his
departing spirit. . . . r\ . ,1
Emily had of late frequently conversed with Captain Dent, the
commander of the Lady Jane Grey, and had received many little
attentions and kindnesses at his hands. Being herself perfectly
ignorant of everything relating to the colony, and as Captain Dent
had been frequently to the port of Sydney, she made bold to ques-
tion him one afternoon, when a good opportunity presented itself,
respecting a few matters on which she needed some definite infoima-
Emily prefaced her questions with a brief sketch of her history,
2


and failed not to dwell particularly upon the innocence of her husband,
whom she declared had been transported entirely by mistake. This
part of her narrative Captain Dent did not implicitly believe; but
he could see that Emily was quite sincere in her protestations.
m Captain Dent was a kind-hearted, fatherly old gentleman, and he
pitied Emdy, felt for her as though she had been a child of his
own. He promised her that she should be comfortably housed on
her anival in Sydney, and pledged himself to spare no pains, as
soon as he could afford time, in ascertaining in what part of the
colony her husband might be located. Emily fancied she might
ascertain this by inquiring at the post-office, but Captain Dent very
delicately gave her to understand that persons in her husband’s
unfortunate predicament had rarely any settled address, and that it
was sometimes rather difficult to find them, although everybody
knew they were somewhere in the colony.
“ F or instance,” said Captain Dent, “he may be in Sydney, or
he may be in Paramatta, or in Windsor, or at Bathurst, or on some
farm in the distant interior.”
“On some farm! ” said Emily. « Ho, I don’t think dear Reginald
would turn farmer ; though I should like him to do so, I confess;
for we could then live on some secluded spot, w'here w r e might never
see a soul from one year’s end to another.”
CHAPTER VIII
The emigrant ship dropped her anchor in the harbour of Port
Jackson. Had Emily’s mind been at ease, how busy would she
have been, sketching the magnificent scenery that now met her
view.
Numbers of persons came on board, and most of the emigrants
were engaged at once ; those who were not so fortunate landed to
search for employ. Amongst the latter were the two young women
who had behaved so badly to Emily, and conducted themselves so
boisterously on the voyage. Captain Dent took Emily to the house
of a very respectable widow, who used to let furnished apartments.
It was at her house, when he lived on shore, that Captain Dent had,
for years past, taken up his abode. He advised Emily, as they


walked up George-street, not to mention to the widow anything
concerning her husband, and remain as quiet as possible.
“ Why ? ” inquired Emily. , A „
« You had better not say anything about your husband, e-
neated Captain Dent. He longed to tell her, but had not the heart
to wound her feelings, that persons who, like the widow, had gone
out “ free ’’ to* Australia would object to reeeive into their houses
under any circumstances, the wife of a person under sentence of
transportation. “ Remain quiet,” urged the old Capta.n, untd I
see you again. It may be to-morrow evening.
When Captain Dent had left her, and returned to the ship,
Emily felt unable to keep her promise. She could not rest, tire as
she was with the exertion of packing up her trunks and prepar g
0 land. Reginald, she thought, might be within a short dis-
tance of her - perhaps in the same street, or even next door -
who could tell 9 Dear Reginald! Oh, what happiness to meet him
SSftl To put his long dark hair off his beautiful white
forehead, and kiss the poor innocent dear who was the victim
base conspiracy! How could she exist in such painful suspense.
So she sent for the landlady, Mrs. A\ lute. ~ , «
"could you oblige me,” said Emily, “ with the s.ght of .
directory? I should be very much obliged to you if you would
Mrs! White. I wish to find out the address of a gentleman whom
1 lm “A directory, mum f” said Mrs. White. “ There’s no directory
published in the colonv ; but we have almanacs. There sno need
'of directories, mum ; everybody knows where everybody else hves.
If you’ll tell me the name of any gentleman, I have no doubt I shall
d y ;Ll’’ttd Emily, overcome by her anixety, and
seizing Mrs. White by the hand. “ His name is Harcourt—Regina d
Harcourt n HarcQurt> mum ?” sa id Mrs. White. ,
a yes, Captain Harcourt!” said Emily. “Do tell me, where is
' IC 'o Captain'llareourt, mum, whom I know very well, is not in
Sydney just now. When in Sydney, he lives in the barracks in his
quarters, but he married only a few days ago, and he has gone into
tUe «Married JrTed Emily--“married! impossible! How could
he whom you mean ” said Mrs
White. “ Captain Harcourt has been very wild, and often does
very funny things, and enjoys a joke, like most ol the officers, but
FRESH DIFFICULTIES.


I don’t think he would commit bigamy. That’s rather too much of
a good thing.”
“Do you know any other Captain Harcourt?” asked Emily in
an agony of impatience. ’
“ No, mum,” said Mrs. White. “ The only Captain Harcourt in
the I believe, is the Captain Harcourt I have spoken of.”
Describe him do describe him,” said Emily; for she really
began to have some misgivings that Reginald had forgotten her and
himself. “ Tell me, Mrs. W lute, is he tall ?—handsome ?—clever ?”
“No, mum; he is short, stout, and plain,” replied Mrs White
As t 0 ‘cleverness,’ I can’t say; of that I am no judge ; but he is
a great favourite with the ladies.”
Though Emily s mind was at once relieved of the horrible idea
that dear Reginald ” might possibly have married some other lady
to keep his house, and look after his comforts, still her anxiety to be
informed of his whereabouts was increased rather than diminished.
“And you know of no other Captain Harcourt or Mr. Harcourt ?”
she again asked Mrs. White.
No, mum; I am quite sure there is no other person of the
name in the colony,” said Mrs. White.
“See here,” said Emily, wildly. “ I will tell you all, Mrs.
White; and then you may be able to assist me. Rray sit down.
Excuse my troubling you in this way ; but if you only knew” (here
she burst into tears) “ what I have suffered, and what I now suffer,
lam sure you would pity me. Pray sit down, Mrs. White.”
. Wrs. White took a chair. Emily sat opposite to her, and
divulged the sad tale. She was several times interrupted by con-
vulsive sobbing, and Mrs. White was a good deal affected by the
narrative. Mrs. White acknowledged that she knew nothing of
Roberts (Emily was obliged to say that his accusers persisted in
calling him Roberts); but if Emily could give her the name of the
ship which brought him to the colony, and the date of his sailing
irom England, she said she could easily ascertain by inquiring at
the office in Hyde-park. Emily said the name of the vessel was the Me-
dora, and that it was exactly a year since her husband had left home.
I lie Medora: said Mrs. \V hite. “ I have an assigned servant
who came out in that ship, and perhaps he may know something
about him. They generally do know all about their shipmates—to
whom they are assigned, or whether they are reserved for govern-
ment s ow r n employ, in the offices, or dock-yards, or barracks.”
“ But a good deal depends on what he was at home,” Mrs. White
added. “If he knows any trade
“Trade!” exclaimed Emily, interrupting her—“ Trade! My
husband was a gentleman—an officer.”


«Oh t indeed !” said Mrs. White, “ I heg your pardon Yes,
von mentioned that his name was Harcourt, and came out here by
Sake for a person called Roberts. In former days gentlemen
were called ‘ specials,’ and were sent to a place called Wellington
Valley ; but there is no distinction made now; all are treated alike,
gentle and simple. All are assigned to take their chance.
“ How do you mean assigned ? inquired Emily.
“ Why when one wants servants, male or female, said. .
White “one applies for them, and government are only too glad to
o-et them off their hands. They do all your work, and you clothe
diem and feed them. This young man who was assigned to me out
was very well to do in Dublin, and Ids father who
is a clergyman, keeps his carriage ; but the y oun S " as tr ‘
ported for some offence or other, and was assigned to me. .
1 « Poor young man ! ” said Emily. “ And perhaps he was just
as innocentas ni } „ returned Mrs. White, waning
what she said, but not in the sense in which Emily received t
And do you think he knows what has become of my Reginald ?”
in^M d osmleiy,’’ said Mrs. White. “He will be home presently,
aIld “ And how do you employ the young man?” said Emily.
“He chops the wood, cleans the boots and shoe.,
kn i V es runs errands, answers the door, and makes himself genera, y
useful ’ and if he doesn’t, I stop his tea and sugar, and put him on
gov’ment allowance-ten pound of flour and seven pound of beet
a-week and make him cook it himself, said Mrs. White.
« Poor thino 1 !” cried Emily, shuddering from head to foot, lest
she should hear that “ Reginald ” was in similar circumstances
1 woman came in. and delivered some message to her unstress.
When she had left the room, Emily inquired
“ Is that woman a convict ? ” . , ,
“Yes” said Mrs. White; “but never use the word convict
unless you are in a passion, and wish to wound their feeling .
< r» onv ict’ is a word they cannot bear. Always speak of tmm <
< a "d servants,’ or ‘Prisoners of the Crown ; ’ these are milder
tGI n Mrs.°White'h*eard the man-servant’s voice in the kitchen, and
said to Emily, “If you will excuse me for a few minutes I will
if Nelson has returned.” , p .
“Nelson,” said Mrs. White, “was there a man named Roberts,
alias Harcourt, on board the Medora ? ”


[Nelson, according to his own account, was the eldest son of a
rector in Ireland, who belonged to the elder branch of the family
rendered so illustrious by our greatest naval hero. This statement,
however, was open to very grave question, for not only had Nelson’s
education been confined to the merest rudiments ; and not only was
his countenance of a cast which was prodigiously plebeian, but he
had been transported for an offence which, to say the least of it,
was not by any means such as a gentleman “born and bred ” would
ever think of committing. It was for picking an old woman’s pocket
at a fair of a silk handkerchief, a bunch of keys, and a brass thimble.
Tut, insomuch as most young men in similar circumstances, and
especially those from Ireland, were prone to indulge in making out
that they were “ very well connected at home,” some excuse may be
made for Nelson’s desire to exalt himself at the expense of his
veracity. Not that it made much difference with Mrs. White.]
“Yes, mum, said Nelson, in reply to Mrs. White’s question.
Roberts, alias Harcourt. He was a flash fellow, who was lagged
for forgery: he used to boast of having great parliamentary influence,
which was to procure him a free pardon and apartments in Govern-
ment House on landing. He was employed in the Auditor-General’s
office, being a clever hand with his pen; but he soon misconducted
himself, and was put into barracks. After that he was drawn by
Mr. Dawson, of Campbell Town, and put to pig-feeding ; but he has
run away, it seems, and is advertised in to-day’s Gazette, with a
reward of £lO offered for his apprehension.”
“ Run over the way, and see if you can borrow the paper,” said
Mrs. White. “Don't be long,”
Nelson went, and in a few minutes returned with the paper.
There could be no mistake about the person. The advertisement ran
as follows :
“ (Sllbtrcas, my assigned servant, Charles Roberts, alias Harcourt,
per ship Medora, under sentence of transportation for life, absconded
from my employ, on the night of the 13th instant, this is to give
notice, that a reward of £lO sterling will be paid to any person or
persons who will give such information as will lead to his apprehen-
sion. Description: name, Charles Roberts, alias Harcourt; ship,
Medora; sentence, life; height, 5 feet Ilf; age, 33; complexion,
fair; eyes, hazel; hair, dark brown; whiskers, black; figure,
slight; trade or calling, lawyer’s clerk ; marks, small scar on upper
lip, scar on the back of left hand, mole on the left breast.
“ N.B.—The absentee has white and very regular teeth, plausible
manners and graceful bearing; at the time he ran away
he was dressed in a striped shirt, duck trowsers, white smock


SSt
•“ • ••- ii'S“£?t" ■-
“ Wlv.f <v villain 1 ” exclaimed Mrs. White, putting down the
papef W “ I Should not be surprised to hear he has turned bush-
chance of that, mum,” said Nelson. ‘‘He “ "
fellows who would talk the hind-leg : o a , », Laziness
to * e
PIP mJs! Whitf tSaS'to gTvt Emily these tidings of her husband,
lest they should cause her a fit <>f illness andthatTt
tSZ prejudicial to hi
whom she knew to be the w.fe a for a
away— perhaps a bushranger w ° h .® e ay tlierefol , e> returned to Emily,
short time, as a lodge . • ’ g j ve n 0 information ot
rlTftS^ h^Ttlt H r:—“d g Emily to take some
“ to get up ln themornmg and
cieTfo a y goveiment office! and who would be sure to know where
i,or "rno? g°o t°„-„tht, if you are not too much fatigued 1' 1
1 ” said Mrs. White. “ The pers.nwh.ml mean
eyesS nToment thf
She saw her husband dancing before her m chams, ° r , S ‘ a car?s tail
flying fromdiis pursuers, he was shot, ounded i \
SZtotd fwlfthTlole ShMili the <£bb£ forwhmh ste
Come in, Mrs. White.
NEWS OF ROBERTS, ALIAS HARCORRT.


The servant entered, and said, “ Please, mum, it’s me. lam
sorry to say missis was taken very dangerously ill in the night, mum.
We had to fetch the doctor, and thought she would have died, mum*
We were going to wake you, mum, at one time, to come down and
see missis; but we did not like to disturb you, mum, as we thought
you were tired.” a
“I wlsl } you had called me—l was awake,” said Emily. “ But
I hope she is better now ? ”
“ 011 y es > mum > thank you, missis is a little better,” replied the
woman ; “but the doctor says, mum, that she must be moved imme-
diately off the ground floor where she now is ; and there is no other
room but this, mum.”
“Dear me, how unfortunate!” exclaimed Emily, abstractedly
gazing out of the window. “ Oh, of course,” added she, recollecting
her sen, “ I will vacate the room at once; put me anywhere you
please. “ J
“ unfortunately, mum, we have nowhere to put you,” said
the woman. “1 he room that missis is now in must be given up to the-
nurse, who has been sent for. She has a little girl that always
comes with her, mum, and she cannot do without a room to herself.”
“Do you know of any other respectable lodgings?” inquired
Emily. 1
No, mum, I do not,” said the servant (for her mistress had told
her exactly what to say). “ But it strikes me, mum, that the best thing
you could do would be to go on board the ship, where you could
have a nice cabin, now that the passengers are all out of her, and
there stay, mum, till missis is better, or till you can get a house.
As missis is now asleep, mum, I can go with you to the wharf, and hire-
a waterman s boat for you, which will take you on board, and Nelson
will wheel your boxes on the barrow, mum.”
Emily instantly adopted the suggestion, and thanked the woman
ibi her kind offer. “At all events,” the unhappy lady reasoned,
I shall see Captain Dent the sooner, and he may have hoard some-
thing by this time about my poor Reginald. ”


CHAPTER IX.
What was Captain Dent’s astonishment on seeing Emily ami
her boxes alongside the Lady Jane Grey. T ie ' < r sse J' aS chair
in the stream, and no companion ladder was yet ngged The chair
was lowered, and Emily once more stood upon the deck, where all
was in the same state of confusion that she beheld on embai an
Gravesend. When she told the Captain what had passed on the i
vious night he could easily comprehend Mrs. White s sudden and
Tness. He was vexed that Emily had been so impruden
as to tell Mrs. White so much of her history, especially as she had
been warned not to do so; but, poor creature, he thought she had
enough agony of mind to bear already, without having her snfieiings
aggravated by any useless reproaches; and he therefore withheld
1116 Emily’s eyelids were red and swollen with weeping ; her cheeks
very pale, and her limbs so feeble, she could scarcely stan .
Captain Dent ordered Emily’s boxes to be placed in on o he
stern cabins, and caused to be removed from his own a couch
table, and an easy chair. The chief mate contributed a lookin -«l
and a toilet-table ; and the second mate gave her red datna*
curtains to keep out the glare of noon-day, and obstruct the view
persons approaching or leaving the ship. . , -p -i - n
1 « You must not tease me now,” said the Captain to Emily m a
srentle tone of voice, and with a cheering smile on his bps. iou
must have some breakfast in your cabin, and then yon must take a
composin'* draught, and lie down. You had no sleep last night.
It C ® clock®*; will dine, and then I will manage to goon
shore with you, and devote myself to your service.
Emily, who was fairly exhausted with fatigue, felt like a child m
the hands of the Captain", and promised to obey,»U his commands.
She took the draught and slept soundly, throug i a
bustle on board the ship. * * * *
Refreshed in mind and body, Emily awoke about one o’clock
and prepared for dinner. The dress she wore on this occasion was
very becoming one—a plain black silk, without any kin 0
except a small topaz brooch, <‘ Reginald's " first present to her The
people on board had never seen her look so well or so cheer .1 She
was still, perhaps, under the influence of the opiate—that is to say,
IN SEARCH OF A HOME.


the happy feeling which the drug often produces had not entirely
departed.
Captain Dent and Emily landed at a place called Dawes’s Bat-
tery, at about a quarter past three in the afternoon. Thence they
proceeded, on foot, through the government domain, towards that
part of the town where they were most likely to find a small fur-
nished cottage to be let on moderate terms. On the way Captain
Dent espied, at a distance, a gang of convicts heavily ironed, and
guarded by some half-dozen soldiers, mending the roads. He
immediately led his charge in another direction, to avoid them, for
he feared it w r as just possible that “ Reginald ” might be one of that
gang, and that Emily might recognise him, when an unpleasant scene
would to a certainty ensue. Before Emily could be prevailed upon
to look for a cottage, she wished the Captain to take her to the
office which Mrs. White had mentioned—the office where she would
learn her husband’s address. The Captain objected to this, insomuch
as he thought it would be more satisfactory for him to go alone to
the office. Emily, however, was so earnest, so eloquent in her
entreaties, indeed she so piteously implored him, that he was com-
pelled to yield to her request. Accordingly, he shaped his course
tor the office of the Superintendent of Police, where the name, de-
scription, and character of every person who had been transported to
Sydney, from the foundation of the colony up to that date, were duly
registered. They arrived at and entered the office, Emily leaning on
Captain Dent’s arm. He wished to leave her below while he went
upstairs, butsheclung to him, and heard all that passed between himself
and one of the clerks, whom he addressed across a counter, whereon
were spread a number of books, like ledgers of colossal proportions.
“ Could you give me any information,” said Captain Dent, “re-
specting a person named Harcourt, or Roberts, who came out last
year in the ship Medora ?”
“ jSTo, sir,” said the clerk, smiling; “ I wish I could.”
“ A tall gentleman, sir, with dark eyes,” said Emily, anxious to
assist the clerk’s memory.
“ Oh, thank you, mum ; I know the gentleman’s description
perfectly,” said the clerk, “ though I have not had the pleasure of
seeing him.”
“ I thought you knew where every person who came to the
colony in an unfortunate position was to be found ? ” said Captain
Dent.
“We know where they ought to be found,” replied the clerk;
“ but they don’t always stop there.”
At this moment a messenger brought into the office, and laid
upon the counter, a huge load of placards, printed in monster type.


The clerk withdrew one of these placards from a
'T^r^he^read
the whole of it, when she clasped her hands, uttered a p.erc, e
shriek, and fell senseless on the floor # * *
In those days there were no vehicles for hire in the colony, and
so 7 77
. u as necessary to heave her down to repair it. an
out, and it was neces J rpTnain anv longer on board, and
the end of a street called Castlereagh-street. # *
Th I Lady Jane Grey had been repaired,
Her obstmacy such as an incorrigible
h"i“s. a But
remembering as I do, how much gratitude J fav ’ oura bly of a
mT’ir i 1 ism:
r/remain inTlfls land”'here also will I remain ;
IN SEARCH OF A HOME.


and whatever may be his sufferings, he shall have that consolation
which a wife s sympathy ought ever to afford. I would rather work
beside him upon the roads, with fetters on my feet—share with him
the coarsest food, and a bed of straw, than return to the home of
my father or my friends, and partake of all the comforts, luxuries
and gaiety that once fell to my lot.”
With tears in his eyes the old ship captain raised Emily’s thin
w ell ” t 0 US 1 * )S ’ hissing it affectionately, bade her" “ fare-
CHAPTER X.
Nelson, Mrs. White’s assigned servant, was out one evening
on an errand. Walking down “Brickfield Hill,” he met Eoberts,
who was disguised in person as well as in dress.
“ Hulloa ! is that you ?” said Nelson,
Eoberts started, and, giving Nelson a look which was meant to
say, Aou have made a mistake,” he moved on. Nelson followed
him, and, walking by his side, said, “ It s of no use your attempting
to deceive me. I know you ; but I am not going to split. Just
come and treat me, and I will tell you something which you’ll be
glad to hear, perhaps.”
After looking round to see that there was no one near, Eoberts,
feeling that he was in Nelson’s power, replied, “ Sam, I’ll make it
all right with you.”
The two convicts proceeded to a public-house, called the
“ Wheat Sheaf,” where Eoberts ordered half a pint of rum, and
pipes and tobacco for two. When they had seated themselves in
the corner of the tap, and had drunk “luck” to each other,
Eoberts commenced the dialogue.
“ What’s this you have to tell me ?” he inquired.
“ Perhaps you know,” said Nelson.
“ Perhaps I do,” said Eoberts: “ but what is it ?”
It won t do beating about the bush,” said Nelson, blowing a
dense cloud of smoke, and watching the festoons vanish as they
neared the ceiling.
“ No,” said Eoberts, knocking the ashes out of his pipe upon the
table; “ no, don’t beat about the bush, Sam.”
“ I say, Charley,” said Nelson, resting his elbows on the table.


and placing Ins chin between the palms of his hands, “ where’s your
M 1 Roberts replied, “ I forget now where her last letter was dated
flon !i Where is she, I say ?” returned Nelson.
“At home in England with her friends,” said Eoberts ; unless
she has taken the office of Maid of Honour to the Queen, perhaps
she will do, just to exert her influence, and procure my free pardon.
« That’s all you know about it,” said Nelson. “I ve seen your
wife, talked to her, received coin from her hand. Believe me, or
believe me not, but it s true, so .
« None of your nonsense,” said Eoberts.
« There you go, again! ” cried Nelson.
« Don’t talk so loud,” said Eoberts ; ‘ I am not deaf._
« Then hear this,” said Nelson,in a whisper: ‘‘she is in Sydney;
and if you can make it worth my while, and will meet me at the
market-place at ten o’clock to-night, you shall see her at a quarter to
are chaffing me,” said Eoberts ; « you want time to give
the office, and have me taken. You think it would make you good
for a ticket-of-leave. I see your dodge, bam. . „
« No, Charley, believe me, on my honour you are mistaken,
said Nelson. “I know I’m a convicted villain, but I have still a
lingering regard for friendship, and all that sort of thing; and what
I have spoken is the truth. Your wife is in Sydney. If you doubt
“ Do,” said Eoberts, eagerly, holding up his ear to catch Aelson s
cvmy worffi , f ghe wag? like you , Charley, a bolter, with a
ten-pounder offered for her apprehension by her missis in the news-
papers,” said Nelson.
« Go on,” said Eoberts, impatiently.
“ Name, Hareourt,” said Nelson ; “ship, Lady Jane Grey, trade
or calling, emigrant, age, twenty-two or twenty-three ; height, ve
feet seven; hair, dark brown; eyes, hazel; nose, slightly curved,
mouth small, with white teeth ; complexion fair, but pale ; long, t un
neck, and very small ears. Walks remarkably erect; wears on little
Aimer of left hand a white cornelian set in gold, and on third fin er
of ditto a pearl ring as a guard to wedding-ring Has a. habit of
saying, ‘ You are very kind,’ to anybody who does anything for
llCr ‘“ Hold !” cried Eoberts, his bosom swelling with the hope that
Emily’s presence in Australia might be of service to him—“ Where
is she to be found?”
AN INTERVIEW BETWEEN TWO CONVICTS.


“ How much can you stand ?” said Nelson, re-filling his pipe.
“ I have only thirty shillings about me,” said Roberts, “ but
she has money, and you shall not complain of my want of liberality,
Sam.”
CHAPTER XI.
George Flower was a great character in the colony of New
South Wales. He had been transported for discharging, in cold
blood, the contents of a double-barrelled gun into the body of
a young squire who had seduced his sister. This misfortune "had
overtaken Flower when he was only nineteen years of age. He was
the son of a gamekeeper ; and a handsomer lad had rarely breathed.
Flower had received a conditional pardon from the Colonial Govern-
ment for capturing, single-handed, three desperate bushrangers, for
whose apprehension a reward of one hundred pounds had been
offered in the Government Gazette. Flower w r as now a “sworn
constable,” and as a thief-taker was without a rival in the colonv.
So many attempts had been made upon his life, that, like Macbeth,
Flower used to boast of having a charmed existence. His sagacity
w r as on a par with his courage and personal prowess ; and in many
points he strikingly resembled the blood-hound. He walked about
the police-office in Sydney with a swagger which spoke a conscious-
ness of his superiority in his profession. He was a hard drinker,
but liquor rarely had any effect upon him—that is to say, it never
interfered with the exercise of his faculties. Although he made a
great deal of money by capturing runaways "and claiming rewards.
Flower was always (to use his own phrase) “ without enough to pay
turnpike for a walking-stick.” Like some other men in much loftier
positions, his “ attachments ” were too numerous and too transitory
to admit of his living within his means. He had no fixed residence;
but was generally “to be found,” about sunset, at a public-house
kept by a Jew, called Pollack, immediately opposite to the police-
office. Flower was just on the point of proceeding to Paramatta,
when Nelson approached him, and said—
“ Mr. Flower, I want to speak to you.”
No great man was ever more easy of access than George Flower,
and no one more popular with informers, for he invariably acted


“on the square.” His word was his bond ; and he never made a
promise, either to do a favour for a friend, or bring about an enemy s
ruin, without completing it to the very letter After hearing what
Nelson had to sav, Flower ordered his horse to be put into the stable,
and invited Nelson to have a little dinner with him. It was a pro-
minent feature in Flower’s character, that he had no petty pride—
none of that vulgar prejudice which most emancipated constables
entertained, against men in an actual state of bondage. It must
also be mentioned that no informer dared to name his price for
putting Flower upon a scent. His terms were well known : halt-a-
crown out of every pound.
«He has only been out a short time, you see, said Flower,
confidentially, “ and at present he’s hardly worth having £lO from
his master, and £5 from the government Are you quite sure he
would never grow into a bushranger, and be worth fifty from the
government, besides a ticket to anybody that wanted it—yourself,
for instance ?”
“ Never,” said Nelson.
« What was he ‘ lagged ’ for ?” said Flower.
“Forgery,” said Nelson.
“Oh ’ ” groaned Flower. “ Then there sno hope of his taking
to powder and shot. Forgery! I never knew a forger that was worth
his salt. Forgery ! perjury ! larceny ! bigamy .—all those crimes
ending in ‘y ’ ought to be made death, and no reprieve. Why they
send such fellows out here, I don’t know. What were you lagge
for?”
“ Stealing,” said Nelson.
“ Stealing ! Under what circumstances ? said Flower. Uon .
speak false. °I can find out, you know, in five minutes.”
Nelson detailed the particulars ot his ofience, and 1 loner
contemplated him with a searching look of scorn and contempt.
“I hate a thief!” exclaimed George Flower, loudly to himself,
but suddenly recollecting that Nelson had just confessed himself one,
he said, in an apologetic tone, “ I beg your pardon. Have another
glass of whisky.” , . .
It was finally arranged that Nelson was to convey Roberts to
Emily’s cottage, and leave him there, at a quarter to eleven o clock.


CHAPTER XII.
It was a bleak night in July—the depth of the Australian winter.
The wind blew keenly from the south, lifting a hard, gritty dust,
which battered the faces of those who attempted to make headway
against it. It was ten o’clock, and the convict Roberts, at the corner
of the market-place, anxiously waited for Nelson, who was to conduct
him to the cottage where his wretched wife had taken up her abode.
Roberts heard footsteps, and trembled lest they should be those of
some constable who might take him into custody. He walked
stealthily to the other side of the street to wait for the subdued
whistle, which it was understood Nelson was to give as the signal of
the coast being clear. Presently Roberts heard that whistle, and
neared his shipmate. Nelson, having taken from Roberts every
farthing that he had about him, led the way. When they arrived at
Emily’s cottage, Roberts leaped over the palings and looked through
the crevices of the shutters. Emily was seated at the table, reading
her bible previous to retiring for the night.
“ All right, Sara, it is her,” said Roberts to Nelson.
“ Am I your friend, or am I not ?” asked Nelson.
“ You are,” said Roberts, u Off - with you !”
Nelson obeyed him, and in another moment was out of sight.
Roberts tapped at the shutter, and Emily, alarmed, inquired,
“ Who is there?”
“ It’s me, Emmy darling I It is your Reginald, dearest!” said
Roberts, in a low voice. “ Open the door, my own dear Emmy !”
Emily recognised the voice; but she could not believe her ears.
Who is there ?” she again demanded, to satisfy herself; and she
placed her ear close to the window.
“ Reginald, my love—your own Reginald I” said the convict,
“ Don’t make a noise, dearest; open the door.”
Emilv’s doubts were at once dispelled. She flew to the door,
unlocked it, and beheld once more her husband! Under other
circumstances, his altered appearance—his costume—his sunburnt
face and hands—his shabby clothes—would have struck her forcibly ;
but just then, when she was in the arms of the man to whom she
had given herself in passionate and confiding love, she was so overcome
with the feeling of joy that they had once more met on the face of
the earth, that she clung to him as fondly as she did on the day when
she became his bride.


n Tell me, dearest Reginald,” said Emily, “ tell me the truth
do not be offended with me for questioning you—but do, with your
own dear lips, assure me that you have not been guilty of the
crime they impute to you ; tell me truly, Reginald.’’
“ I am as innocent, Emily, as your own dear self, said Roberts;
and he called upon the Almighty to witness his assertion.
« And you are not Charles Roberts? You are my own Reginald
Harcourt ? It is false that you are an impostor ?”
« False as hell!” said Roberts, theatrically.
« Thank heaven!” exclaimed Emily, clinging to her husband
and falling on his breast. “ Oh, Reginald, I am so happy. Never
mind, dearest, our present troubles. Truth in _ the end is sure to
prevail. For some wise purpose, Reginald, it is ordained that we
should bear this awful reverse of fortune, and let us bear it as
cheerfully as we best can. Oh ! Reginald——”
At this moment George Flower, who had contrived to secrete
himself in Emily’s bedroom, whence he overheard all that had passed
between the convict and his wife, broke upon the scene—not
abruptly, but in the quietest manner possible. Having gently
opened "the door, he raised a pistol and brought “ the sight to bear
on Roberts’s breast. He remained in that position until he had
cau-ht Roberts’s eye, when he called out, “If you move hand or
foot you are a dead man! Stand as you are !
Roberts stood aghast; and Emily, terrified to the last degree,
sank into an oak arm-chair. Speechless she beheld what followed
With his eyes, which were like those of an eagle, firmly fixed,
and with his forefinger on the trigger of the pistol, Flower slowly
approached Roberts. “Bolter!” said George Flower,‘‘you know
the penalty of even putting your hand into your pocket. Gradu-
ally he came within arm’s length of his victim, who stood pale and
agitated. Suddenly Flower sprang upon Roberts and secured Ins
hands, and in another instant his wrists were in a pair of brightly
your leave, I’ll go through the usual form,” said
Flower “ You need not be alarmed, madam,” he added, turning
to Emily, “ but I really must pick his pockets—first, of his
handkerchief,” he continued, spreading it on the table - “ secondly,
of a oh! ah ! you did happen to have a little pistol about you,
did you ? Is it loaded ?”
“ No!” said Roberts, feebly.
“ Thirdlv, of a pipe, and fourthly, of a small tin-box, containing
—eh f what ? oh, you artful! you owdacious lifer ! a certificate ot
freedom eh ? Who have you robbed of this, I wonder ? Why, it
describes you exactly! How’s that? Holloa! Why, you must


have been up to your old tricks again ? This is uncommon like old
Secretary Macleay’s signature, but hang me if it is his—no, it can’t
be. I say, how comes the water-mark on the paper to be of later
date than the pardon itself? Well, while you wore about it, you
might have seen to that, I think. A small tin box” (Flower passed
back to the inventory), “ containing a forged certificate of freedom.
Why, this alone would hang you,” argued Flower, “ and as I cannot
afford to lose you yet, I’ll put it into the fire, and say nothing about
it*
Roberts involuntarily thanked Flower for this act of o TaC e
Emily knelt down and prayed, but the words she uttered" were
inaudible.
. “ There’s no need of giving this little pistol to the government,”
said Flower. “It’s a pretty little thing.” (He placed the weapon
in lus ivaistcoat pocket, with a complacent smile.) “ Then that
reduces the property found on the prisoner’s person to this handker-
chief and this pipe. Well, that will not hurt you, any how. Have
you got any money ?”
“ Hot a farthing,” said Roberts.
.‘1 l mt a shilling and a few coppers into the handker-
chief, said I lower, “just to make an appearance in the court, and
show that you are not a desperate character. It will look suspicious
(for me) if I find no money upon you.” These preliminaries
arranged, Flower was about to lead Roberts to the nearest cells, and
there lock him up, when Emily fell upon her knees. Flower’s iron
heart was touched by her tears, and gladly would he have relin-
quished the reward, and set the convict at liberty, had he dared to
do so.
He shall be treated with the greatest kindness and considera-
tion, foi youi sake, madam, said I lower. “It shall not g'o hard
with him : that I promise you.”
Oh, thank you, thank you !” cried Emily. (( Ah, sir, if you
only knew how cruelly he has been treated you would have pitv on
him, as well as on me.”
. “ Y° u may depend upon me,” said Flower, in a kind and soothing
voice. “ To-morrow I will come and bring you good news. Make
yourself quite easy, madam. Hood night. Come along, Charley,”
he tinned to Roberts; “ I ve a comfortable bed and a hot supper,
and a bottle of port wine, all ready for you at my house.”
*******
Flower had not walked more than twenty paces with Roberts,
when he pulled up beside a lamp post—one of the very few in that
lonely street—and by the dim light he looked peeringly into the
convict’s hazel eyes.


“ I have a precious good mind,” said Flower, “to take your
handcuffs off, and blow your brutal brains out. I’ll swear I did it
to prevent your escaping. It could be done,” he added, with a
movement of the head which convinced Eoberts, not only of the
practicability of the measure, but of the earnestness of the man who
contemplated it. .
“ Oh, don’t, for God’s sake ! It would break my wife s heart 1
Whv should you shoot me ?” said Eoberts.
“ To rid that beautiful and amiable lady of such a villain as you
—to make her free of the crime, the curse, of belonging to such a
diabolical scoundrel.”
“ Oh, pray don’t! You would not murder me in cold blood,
surely ? ” said Eoberts, growing more and more alarmed, as he
Watched the action of George Flower’s mouth.
“Murder!” cried Elower. “ That would not be murder. It
would be praiseworthy homicide —an act of mercy towards one of
God’s fairest creatures. I could forgive your forgeries, your thefts,
your anvthing else ; but what business had you to marry a lady
like that—to link her to your felonies, and then deceive her by
calling God to witness your innocence ? I heard you, you dog,
tell her those falsehoods. Had she a brother ?”
“ No,” said Eoberts.
“ Then let me take off those handcuffs,” said Flower, “ and
I’ll fancy myself her brother. If you attempt to run away, I’ll
send a bullet through you.”
“ Ob, pray don’t,” said Eoberts, “ Pray, Mr. Flower, don’t
strike me.”
His entreaties were in vain. Flower unscrewed the handcuffs,
and leisurely thrashed Eoberts to the cells, where he locked him up
in the coldest and most uncomfortable apartment he could find.


CHAPTER XIII.
Emily’s wrongs had filled the mind of the lion-hearted thief-
taker. He could not rest. Late as it was, he saddled his horse
(Sheriff), and galloped to the cottage to give Emily some good
advice. He tapped at the window, and said, “ Throw a cloak on,
Mrs. Harcourt, and let me speak to you. I am Flower—George
Flower, who was here a little while ago. Don’t be frightened, Mrs.
Harcourt.”
Emily, who had not retired, opened the door and allowed Flower
to enter the cottage.
“ You must be very careful in this country, Mrs. Harcourt,” said
Flower. “They are a queer set of people. You must not leave your
shutters unbolted, or you’ll be robbed, and murdered, perhaps. I
got in without any sort of difficulty, while you were reading here,
all alone. To-morrow night I’ll send a man down to protect you,
and if you lose anything he shall be answerable for it.”
“ Oh, you are very kind, Mr. Flower,” said Emily; “ very kind.”
“ Don’t mention it, madam,” said George, his eyes filling with
tears. “Fd part with my heart’s blood to serve you; for you
remind me of the days of my boyhood, when my father was Lord
Waldane’s gamekeeper, and the young ladies used to come down to-
the Lodge, and talk to my mother and my sister, and sometimes to
me. Ah, Mrs. Harcourt, we were as happy a family as any in all
England, until a young gentleman—one that I used to go shooting,
with, and was like a brother to—came and talked of love to my
sister Bessy, and robbed her of her honour and her virtue. I
couldn’t stand it, Mrs. Harcourt. I took his life, and they trans-
ported me for it! ”
“ Dear me!” cried Emily ;“ I have often heard the story, and
heard you pitied. It happened near Yewbray Bridge.”
“ It did so,” said Flower, elated at the idea that the deed had
become notorious. “It did, madam ; lam the man. It was not a
crime, or I should have repented of it before now, instead of
glorying in it, as I did and do. Do you know the country about
Yewbray, Mrs. Harcourt?”
“Yes; my father’s estate joins that of Lord Waldane, of whom
you spoke,” said Emily,
“ Indeed ! ” said Flower, looking at her reverentially.


a yj v father was member for the county at that time Mi.
Orford ■ you may have heard of him, said Emily.
Flower rose from the chair on which Emily had politely re-
quested him to sit down. He contemplated her with curiosity,
pity and respect. He could not speak for several minutes, but
tears and they were scalding hot, chased each other so rapidly
down his cheeks, that they dropped from his chin upon the floor.
the daughter of Mr. Word V ” exclaimed Flower, when
his voice was restored to him. “ You the daughter of Mr Orford
—the gentleman who saved my life by going to the Home feec . reta 7
on my behalf. You know I was cast for death. You here, in th
accursed iaill You the wife of a man transported for life . You
in Botanv Bay ! This is a strange world, but I never expected o
witness a scene like this!” The thief-taker went down upon his
knees, and with the fingers which had long been used to roug i y
handle the most desperate criminals, he gently pressed, wit i i
spirit of an idolater, the feet of the wretched woman, who shrank
a t the thought of being alone with, and touched by, a man who had
taken the life of a fellow-creature. , ,
« j will repay the kindness your father showed to me when he
came to see me in the condemned cells, with heavy chains upon me
bov as I then was,” said Flower. “ I can do anything I like m this
country, Mrs. Harcourt. They say I am the greatest man m this
laro-e island, and I believe I am. Members of council, and magis-
trates when they meet me, pull up and say, ‘ Well, George, how
are you ? ’ There’s nothing that I can’t do. I might own thousands
upon thousands of acres of land, and flocks of sheep,_ and herds of
cattle as big as Macarthur’s or Wentworth s, and I might have lots
of ships in "the harbour, like Cooper and Wright; but what use
would they all be to me, when I can’t get rid of that thought,
Xh is always uppermost in my brain ? -why had not that man
that I killed five hundred thousand lives, instead of one, for
t a ke ? I mean the man that seduced my sister Bessy. She was a
dear girl, and very good looking, and gentle, and nice spoken, and
oh ’ so like you, that you might have been sisters. .
«Be kind to my unfortunate husband,” said Emily, in replyito
this impassioned harangue. “Be kind to poor Reginald, Mr.
110 “T will,” returned Flower. “ But don’t say Mister— it feels so
cold and distant. Say George, do this, or do that, and it shall be
« Have my husband restored to me,” said Emily. _ “ I care not
how frugally and humbly we may live, but all I want is to be with
my husband. I want to be alone with my husband.


“It shall he done,” said Flower. “I, who have the power of
I “ e l^ d death constantly in my hands—l, George Flower, say it
shall be done; but you must wait for a fortnight.”
CHAPTER XIV.
Flower did not over-estimate his influence, when he informed
Emily of its extent. Ry fair means or by foul, there was nothing,
seemingly, that George could not do. In the police office he exercised
supreme power, albeit he was in a subordinate position; and
“ amongst the gentry of New South Wales ” there was scarcely
a person who was not under some obligation to him, either for
recovering cattle, horses, or other property, that had been stolen,,
or for apprehending bushrangers who infested the roads between
Sydney and their estates. Mr. Dawson, Roberts’s master, had a
particular regard for George Flower. He had on one occasion
been an eye-witness of Flower’s wonderful coolness and bravery,
when a gang of convicts rebelled, knocked out the brains of sundry
overseers, and set authority at defiance.
When Flower left Emily, he returned to the cells where Roberts
was locked up. With a very bad grace, he gave directions that
Roberts should have a bed to lie upon, a plate to eat his victuals
from, and some tobacco now and then, if he wanted to smoke.
“ Don t speak to me, you villain,” said Flower to Roberts, when
the latter returned thanks for the former’s kindness. “ Don’t look
at me, even, or I’ll spoil your beauty, you white-livered, black-
hearted, pettifogging,* filthy-minded, double-distilled essence of a
cowardly, cringing, woman-deceiving criminal. You are a nice-
fellow to represent yourself as an officer and a gentleman!”
Hereupon he seized Roberts by the left ear, and’ pinched it
savagely.
“Let him be taken into court at ten o’clock this morning,
Johnson, and remanded for a week,” said Flower, to a brother
constable. “ Tell the magistrate I will give my deposition as soon
as I come back from Campbell Town.”
* Eoberts had been an articled clerk to an attorney.


“ All ri<dit ” returned Johnson. “Is he worth anything ?
« No, the beast; only £10,” said Flower; “ and here am I with
a ride of thirty miles there and thirty back before me.
It would be difficult to say which of the two was superior in the
endurance of fatigue, and in abstinence from sleep and
George Flower or his little horse, bherin. , -w,-,
Sheriff was not more than thirteen hands high, and Flower was
not less than twelve stone ; and yet they had frequently beent seen
together at Sydney in the morning, and at Bong Bong at mg
the distance between the two places being one hundred and foui
mUet the road a very bad one, and several rivers and broad streams
t 0 I Shared many of his master’s dangers, and bore the
marks upon his compact bo/y. When the famous Donah.ougb, from
lipliind a huge iron-bark tree, upon the Liver pool-road, discharged
from an old Tower musket a handful of swan shot, at the distance
If Lh v vards at Gcor-c Flower, Sheriff received a goodly number
f left shader, and ok in his left
+llp thereof. On another occasion, a bullet, wtuen orose
Flowers arm, had struck Sheriff on the near quarter, and
left a lar", mark ; but (to use Flower’s own words) he never sai _
a word but stood like a stone, as if ho enjoyed a lark of that sort.
Ind there was a small piece out of Sheriffs r.ght ear. That, too,
Lnrl Lppn lost in an engagement with the enemy.
Onward fogged Flower and Sheriff, as jauntily as though there
was no danger to be met with on the road. The^ e and
Flower’s fustian shooting coat contained each a laige pistol, anc
several pairs of handcuffs; and in each waistcoat pocket there was
a small weapon, besides the one which had be J
In his trowsers’ pockets were sundry rounds of ball cartridge, and a
clasp knife with which Flower had been “ compelled to hamstnn
Gvo of the o-ano-whom he caught in the bush near Prospect-the
one a fifty°pounder, and the" other a twenty-fiver ” besides “ a
sweat at tJsilver swag,” which phey had ,u| taken from^wo
harmless gents, who had come out free from England to buy sneep
'''“wilralUhlf bar-maids Flower was a prodigious
avis always so lively and pleasant in his conversation— so kind and
genUe in y hi mauirs; bm invariably so respectful and modest m
GEORGE FLOWER AXD HIS HORSE.


his demeanour. No being in this world was ever more completely
under the influence of the softer sex than George Flower After
inflicting summary punishment on a prisoner, and using the strong-
est language in the verandah of a public-house, he would approach
a female at the bar, and talk to her in a strain which was frequently
refined and sentmiental With young children he was a perfect
child himself. He would encourage them to pull his hair and
whiskers, beat him with his own whip, which he would put into their
tiny hands—give them a ride on Sheriff, or chase the fowls and
( ucks round the yard for their especial amusement.
CHAPTER XV.
“ What ! Flower!” exclaimed Mr. Dawson, on George ridino- up
and touching,lns straw hat to him. °
“ Good morning, sir,” said Flower; “ I happened to have a
little business in this quarter, and thought I’d just look in and say
how do ye do, as I was passing.”
“ I’m delighted to see you,” said Mr. Dawson. “ Get off; and
send the little horse round to the stables for a feed of corn, and
come in and have a glass of porter and a pipe, and tell me of your
adventures.” J
“Aotmany to tell, sir,” said Flower. “ There is not a really
good placard on the walls—tens, and fifteens, and twenties; but
not a single three-figure gentleman” (he meant £100) “ among ’em.
By the way, Mr. Dawson, there’s a little money of yours in the
market, I see.”
“ Yes, George, and I wish you could finger it,” said Mr. Dawson.
“ He is hardly worth your while, but if you could lay hold of him,
I’d be very much obliged to you, and besides the £io you should
have any colt or filly out of the two-year-old batch. lam very
anxious to have that man apprehended,”
Why, has he been and done anything besides running away ?”
asked Flower.
Done ?” cried Mr, Dawson. “He has spoilt the whole of my
assigned servants. Made them discontented and bad men. Caused


them to complain of me to the nearest bench of magistrates. I have
been represented as a master who limes their flour, and feeds them
on shins of beef instead of wholesome flesh, and as one wlm works
them to death. Before that fellow came here, I had not occasion lor
three years to get a man punished; and since he came, almost every
man has either been flogged or put upon the treadmill.
“I know you are a good master,” said Flower. But tell me,
Mr. Dawson, how did you employ this runaway ?” _
“ Why, I used to set him to shell Indian corn, skim the cream
off the milk bowls, drive the parrots out of the wheat fields, lee
the pigs, and on baking days, attend to the fire in the oven, and all
such light and easy jobs I used to give him, for he had never been
accustomed to hard work, and could not do it; it blistered is
hands.” •
« Why didn’t you break him in to bullock driving ?” said Flower.
“ Because I pitied the blackguard at first. ~
“Ah ! pity’s a dangerous thing in this country, Mr. Dawson,
said Flower; “ a little of it ought to go_ a very long way. Iye
known many a promising young man ruined by pity. Aow, sir,
suppose I was to get a scent of this Roberts and arouse him from
his slumbers by rattling these handcuffs in his ears, what would you
do with him after he was punished ?”
“ Turn him in to Government.”
“ Don’t do that, sir. Look here, Mr. Dawson, said Flower; i
applied to Gov’ment the other day for a servant, who turns out to
be a tailor. He made these clothes I’ve got on, and very well made
they are. But of tailors in Sydney there’s a regular glut, and my
tailor cannot earn more than nine and sixpence a-week, out ot
which I take seven shillings. Now, your lawyer—-I know lie s a
lawyer—would be able to earn at least a pound a-week, copying
papers and all that sort of thing ; and by keeping a tight hand over
him I could turn the fellow to good account. Why not make a
swop ? You have got a lot of men, and you might buy duck and
cloth, and let this tailor be always employed, instead ot buying
ready made slops in the market. To tell you the honest truth, I
have got Roberts in my possession, and have come here to talk
about him; never mind the filly and the £lO, give me the man and
take the tailor, and I’ll be satisfied. The papers can be got ready
in the office, and Gov’ment’s sanction I’ll procure by the time he s
dealt with.” . , .
Mr. Dawson accepted Flower’s proposal, and the business boin 0
concluded, George saddled Sheriff and returned to Sydney. Ho
went at once to Emily’s cottage, where he found her m great gnel.
Her writing-desk had been stolen, and it contained all the money


she had in the world, besides several little trinkets which were very
precious in her sight.
“ Don’t let this distress you,” said Flower, after a few minutes
reflection ; “ you shall have it back to-night.”
“ Pray sit down,” said Emily ; “ you look very tired.”
“No, Mrs. Harcourt, I will not sit down,” said Flower.
“ Will Reginald be restored to me ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ God bless you !” cried Emily; “ you are indeed a kind friend
to me.”
Flower cantered Sheriff down to Mrs. White’s house, and called
out, “Nelson.”
Nelson came.
“ I want to talk to you, my boy, about Roberts,” said Flower.
“ Just come into the Barrack-square with me. Fll leave my horse
at these palings.”
Nelson, who was flattered by this condescension, accompanied
Flower into the Barrack-square.
“ I say, where’s that writing-desk ? ” said Flower, when they were
alone.
“ What writing-desk ?” said Nelson.
“ That writing-desk,” said Flower, striking Nelson on the
bridge of the nose a blow which swelled up both his eyes and felled
him to the earth. “ That writing-desk,” repeated Flower, placing
the thick sole of his boot upon Nelson’s neck. “ Gurgle up the
receiver, or Fll squeeze out your poisonous existence.”
“ Abrahams ! ” gasped Nelson.
“ If ever you steal that writing-desk again,” said Flower, leaving
Nelson on the ground, writhing in pain from the kicks he had re-
ceived, “ I’ll give you such a thrashing as you will not forget in a
hurry.”


CHAPTER XVI.
When Flower left Nelson, he directed his steps towards the
police office, where he provided himself with a “jemmy, ’ an instru-
ment used by burglars for effecting an entrance. Thus armed, he
hastened to the residence of Mr. Isaac Abrahams, an old Jew, who
had been transported to the colony so far back as Governor Bhgh s
administration. , , .
Mr Isaac Abrahams was very rich; he had become so by being
engaged in various occupations—to wit, receiving stolen property,
lending money at usurious rates of interest, crimping, dealing m
second-hand clothes, and keeping for many years a public-house m
that part of the town of Sydney which is frequented by sailors—a
place called “ The Rocks.”
Abrahams and his wife were in bed when Flower arrived at their
dwelling Without any sort of ceremony, Flower inserted the
“jemmy” into a window shutter, which he wrenched from its
hinges. He then broke a pane of glass, put his hand through tie
aperture, drew the bolt, lifted the sash, and vaulted into Abrahams
ThJ Jew heard the noise, got out of bed, and called aloud
“ Who’s there ?”
“It’s only me, Ikey,” cried Flower. “You need not come
down. I am coming up. It’s only me—George Flower, Ikey.'
In another moment Flower was in the Jew’s bedroom.
«By heaven! Mr. Flower, what do you mean ? cried the Jew.
“ Why do you come into my bedroom ? At this hour of night,
tool”
“On business, Ikey.” . . ~ ,
« Then why do you come like a thief, breaking into the house .
Couldn’t you knock at the door ? , ..
“ No, Ikey. Fish up that writing-box you fenced this after-
noon I
“ Are vou mad, Mr. Flower ?
“No, Ikey; but you must be. To think that a man of your
time of life, with all your money, should go putting your neck into
the noose for a paltry thing like that. To think that you shouldn t
be able to leave off your old tricks after you ve made your fortune .
Forbes” (Flower always spoke of the Chief Justice in this familiar


maimer) “ would lag you to Norfolk Island for life for fencing that
box.”
“ What box ?”
“ Now, none of your nonsense. I can’t stop here all night.
And if I have to search for it, and find it, I’ll take both you and"the
box away together.”
“ Take a glass of spirits-and-water, Mr. Flower,” said the Jew,
blandly.
“ Well, I will,” said Flower, “on the lid of that writing-box ;
fish both the box and the grog up at one dive—they are both in this
room.”
The Jew opened an iron chest, in which he kept the title deeds
of lands mortgaged to him, bonds, promissory and bank notes—
jewels, gold, silver, and other valuables ; and" from this chest the
Jew reluctantly brought out the writing-desk that Nelson had that
day stolen from Emily’s bedroom. He then produced a case bottle
and a tumbler, which Flower half filled with liquor.
“ Ikey,"’ said Flower, after he had refreshed himself with the gin,
“ I am awfully hard up. Lend us a flimsy. I don’t want to be hard
with you, Ikey. Make it a fifty, for which I give you my verbal
promissory note, payable with interest.”
“Mr. Flower,’ said the Jew, “I always had a great respect for
you, and I've often felt sorry that you didn’t belong to our per-
suasion.”
“ Don’t flatter me, Ikey,” said Flower, “ or you’ll make me
vain, and vanity is a bad thing; so stump up the money, and let
me go.”
The Jew again visited the iron chest, and produced a bank note
for £SO. Having satisfied himself that it was not a bad one, Flower
returned to Emily's cottage, which was not very far distant from
where the Jew then lived.


CHAPTER XVII.
The next day Roberts was placed-at the bar of the police office.
Flower appeared in court, and made a deposition to the following
effect;—' 4 1, George Flower, police constable, hereby make oath and
say, that this deponent met the prisoner at the bar m a house m
Castlereagh-street, on the night of the 26th instant. That this
deponent took the prisoner into custody, and found upon his person
a pocket-handkerchief and a pipe, here produced; that this depo-
nent, after apprehending the prisoner, who is an assigned servant of
Mr Dawson of Campbell Town, proceeded to his master, and in-
quired whether he had any charge to bring forward against him,
beyond that of absconding from his employ, and this deponent states
that the said Mr. Dawson told this deponent that he had no charge
whatever to bring forward against the prisoner in this court.
“ Did he make any resistance, Flower ? inquired the magis-
“ None whatever, your worship,” said Flower.
“ I suppose fifty lashes would do for him ? said the magis-
trat« I don’t think he could stand fifty,’; said Flower. “ The mill
and the Carter’s Barracks crop would suit his circumstances better,
your worship, I think. As he has never jun away before, seven
days, perhaps, would be a sufficient lesson.
‘ Roberts was accordingly sentenced to seven days on the tread-
mill and was forthwith removed to Carter’s Barracks, where, pre-
paratory to entering upon his punishment, his hair was cut as closely
as possible with a pair of very sharp shears. ,
Flower made an excuse to Emily for her husbands absence by
saying that he had gone up to Campbell Town to get his clothes
from Mr. Dawson s ; and meanwhile Flower negotiated the trans-
-I*ol*
When Roberts came “off the mill,” Flower went down to Carter’s
Barracks to receive him. “ Holloa, Captain! cried he, you are now
my assigned servant, and I’m going to leave you down at that house
in Castlereagh-street, just to look after the premises. Come along.
While they were walking down the road, Flower harangued
Roberts: “Don’t suppose, you miserable thief;’ he thus began,
“ that you are going to lead a life of idleness. Quite the contrary.
I intend to make you work. I shall let you out to an attorney or


three pound a-week, and if ever you absent yourself from office—
and I shall keep a sharp look out upon you—l’ll dust your jacket
with this cane, and you know how it makes you tingle, don’t you?”
And fearing that Roberts’s memory might be treacherous on this head,
lie gave him several smart blows on the calves of his legs, which
made the convict dance in the street and cry for mercy. And if
ever you say one word to your wife of how I serve you,” said Flower,
you 11 be missing some fine morning, and no one will ever hear
an} thing more about you. By the bye, what plausible reason can
you assign to your wife for that blacking brush condition of your
infamous poll, you pettifogging blackguard, you ?”
111 say I had a stroke of the sun,” said Roberts, “ and was
obliged to get my head shaved the other day.”
“ Capital!” cried Flower. “If I’d known you’d have been
so ready as that, I’d have spared you that last stroke of the cane
which I gave you just now. There’s another thing I wish to say,”
continued Flower; “never ask your wife for money, and if she
od’ers you any, don t take it. If I find you disobeying me in this,
111 flog you w ithin an inch of your life. And don’t allow any of
} oui acquaintances ever to come inside the house where your wife
is do you hear ? And see that the garden is weeded with your
own hands, and everything kept in proper order. I shall come
down pretty often, just to see how you’re getting on, you know.
You understand me?”
“ Ch, yes,” said Roberts; “ and I’m very much obliged to you,
Mi. Flower, and you 11 find that my conduct will be most exemplary,
I assure you, and in the end you will discover that I have not been,
and that I am not, anything like so bad as you at present conceive.”
“ I don’t wish to have any of your talk,” returned Flower;
and as for my kindness to you, I give you to understand that
you re under no obligations to me whatsoever. I tell you plainly,
that if I had my will, I'd hang you this very day.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
Flower hired out Roberts, as he threatened, to an attorney, at
a salary of £250 a-year, for Roberts, it was discovered, had a very
o-ood insight into the art of special pleading and the principles of
conveyancing. In short, Roberts was a very clever _ fellow, and
could do an immense deal of work, when he was so disposed, in a
very short time. His salary was drawn every week by Flower, and
duly handed over to Emily, who increased this income by giving
lessons in music and dancing. . , , .
Roberts had provided himself with becoming apparel, and Ins
external appearance once more resembled. that_ of a gentleman.
Although Flower hated him with the same intensity as ever, he had
nevertheless no fault to find with him, and was rejoiced beyond
measure to see Emily so happy and so comfortable in her small
abode.
At the end of three months, Roberts began to grow weary ot
leading a steady and virtuous life. He was sorely afraid of Flower,
while he continued Flower’s assigned servant; and did not dare
to indulge in the slightest irregularity so long as he was owned by
so firm and powerful a master. He therefore begged Emily to re-
quest Flower to transfer him to herself, and thus make him his own
wife’s assigned servant.
* b ** * * *
One evening, when Flower went down to visit Mrs. Hai couit
(although Roberts was called by his proper name, his wife continued
to be called Mrs. Harcourt), she proposed this transfer of her
husband.
“ My dear madam,” said Flower, “it would end in your own
misery. What hold, I should like to know, would you have upon
him?” , ,
“ What hold !” cried Emily. “ What stronger hold can there be
than my affection for him, and his affection for me? Ah! George
Flower, you don’t know dear Reginald! If you only knew what a
kind, good, generous, noble-minded, single-hearted creature he
really is, you would not think so harshly of him as you now seem to
do
« My dear madam,” returned Flower, “ I know that your hus


band is all that you have described him; but in my opinion it
would be as well if matters were allowed to stand as they now are.
See how happy you are ! What more can you desire ? ”
“ Yes, it is very true, George, and I ought to be, and I am,
very grateful indeed, for all your goodness to me, and to my un-
fortunate, innocent Reginald; but oh ! if you would grant me this
request!” said Emily.
“ I tell you it would be the worst thing in the world, Mrs.
Harcourt,” said Flower. “Do you suppose I should refuse, or make
any objection, if I thought it would be to your advantage ? Now,
take my advice; do not press this any further.”
But Emily had promised her husband that she would press it.
“ Ah, you were never so obstinate before,” she began. “Of
late you seem quite changed.”
“ Obstinate 1 ” exclaimed Flower. “ Obstinate ! Ed go through
fire and brimstone to do you a service; but to grant what you now
ask would be downright madness.”
“ Then you mean to tell me that dear Reginald is not to be
trusted?”
“ No, I do not say that.”
“ Then what can be your objection ?”
“ It would be unlucky.”
« Unlucky ! ah ! you are trifling with me.” Emily’s eyes filled
with tears.
Flower’s heart was again touched, and he immediately agreed to
the proposition, expressing his sorrow that he had refused her in
the first instance.
Roberts came home shortly after this, and Flower presently asked
him to look at a horse which he said he was about to buy.
« And so you wish to be transferred to your wife, do you ?
Oh, how I should like to break your bones!” said Flower, when
they were out of Emily’s hearing.
“ It is her own wish, I assure you, on my honour,” said Roberts.
“On your honour!” said Flower, and he kicked Roberts several
times.
“ I assure you it is her own thought, her own wish,” Roberts
repeated.
In his violent anger Flower lost his presence of mind, and
instead of beating Roberts, as was his wont, in such a way as to
leave no visible marks, he struck him a heavy blow in the face,
which laid open Roberts’s upper lip.
Roberts took out his lawn pocket-handkerchief, and applied it to
his mouth, which was now bleeding profusely.
“ Turn upon me, you contemptible forger, you thief! ” cried


■Flower “ Turn upon me—strike me—throw a stone at me, do
do something that will justify me in pounding the breath out of
5 ° U ‘‘ sTrik^my' deliverer, my benefactor?” said Roberts “ No,
Mr. Flower, whatever may be my sms, I am not ungrateful.
“Oh heaven’.” groaned Flower. “ And things like you ar
called men! Now, don’t look at me in that cringing way, or 111
"ou Je both your eyes out, I will. My blood is up, and lam thirst-
fL to avenge the wrongs of that lady, by tearing you to pieces
And with these words Flower gnashed his teeth, and seized Roberts
bv the hair, and shook him with the boisterous ferocity of an excited
fiend. “ I’ll be in at your death yet,” gasped Flower, exhauste y
passion, « I will. I feel it. I will! I will! I will I
CHAPTER XIX.
Flower abstained from visiting Emily foi several da} s.
He intended to keep his promise, but wished to delay doing so
until the last moment. Besides, Flower was not quite satisfiedAhat
Roberts would, on this occasion, conceal from Emily the iou 0 h
handling to which he had been subjected; and this formed an
additional reason for staying away. At length Emily wrote to
Flower, and begged him to come and see her, as she had something
very particular to say to him. It was curious to observe the sudden
changes in the expression of Flower’s countenance when he read
Emily’s note. At first a very pleasing smile-a smile which Mas
called up by affectionate regard and pity—played ovex his fi x
features; then came a scowl and compressed lips, "Me his eyes
seemed to Hash fire; and then, when lie again looked at Emily s
hand-writing, the kind smile returned, speedxly followed by that
awful, ay, diabolical look.
It was just as Flower expected. The “ somethxng very par-
ticular ” was the “ transfer.” Flower went down upon his knees
and implored her to forego her demand, and passionately, but
tenderly, uplifting his hands, assured her that she was asking him o
sign the warrant for Roberts’s ruin and her own eternal wretchedness.
“ Mrs. Harcourt!” he exclaimed, “must I tell you the trut .
flower’s TREATMENT OF ROBERTS.


"Ses, you drive me to do so. Your husband is not what you think
him, not what you have described him to be. His outside is like
that of a gentleman; but within he is low, and tainted with the
ideas and habits that belong only to the very dregs of mankind.”
“ Mr. Flower!” said Emily, indignantly, “do you imagine that
Captain Harcourt would deceive me?”
“ How can you be so blind, so childishly simple, as to be im-
posed upon by that man, when the very proofs of his deceit are ever
before your eyes ?” said Flower. “ Did he not tell you that he was
a captain in a dragoon regiment, and that he had never done any
work in his life until he came to this country?”
“ Nor had he, Mr. Flower.”
“ Then how comes it that he is, suddenly, the best lawyer in
Sydney ? How comes it that, if you will only let him remain as
he now is, he shall earn £SOO a-year, but that if he is freed from my
authority he will not earn a shilling himself, but drain you of
all your little hard-earned savings to gratify his low and inborn
tastes ? ”
“Mr. Flower!” again cried Emily, indignantly.
“ Mrs. Harcourt, hear me!” returned Flower.
“ No, Mr. Flower, this is a mere pretext,” said Emily. “ You
made me a promise, and now you wish to break it.” She wept and
sobbed violently.
“ Don’t cry, Mrs. Harcourt, don’t cry ; I cannot stand that,”
said Flower. “ I did not mean to hurt your feelings.”
“ Then why did you slander poor Reginald ? It is hard enough
to be convicted when innocent, and sent to this horrid country, and
debarred the comforts of his former life, without being vilified in
such a dreadful manner.”
“Yes, but don’t cry any more,” said Flower.
“ As for being suddenly the best lawyer in Sydney,” said Emily,
“ why, of course he is. Reginald is so clever that he could learn
anything quickly. He would be the best doctor in a month, if he
were to study medicine ; or the best anything he gave his mind to
for a little time. You do not know Reginald, Mr, Flower.”
“ I’m afraid I do not,” said Flower.


CHAPTER XX.
On t e day, when Emily was standing in the little garden in front
of her cottage, a gentleman named Brade, one of the police magis-
trates, happened to pass by, and see her face. Mr. Brade, whose
disposition may be described as “very gay,” admired Emily exceed-
ingly, and he passed and re-passed several times, and stared at her.
Emily observed this, and retired to the cottage, of which she very
rarely crossed the threshold. _
Mr. Brade made inquiry, and informed himself who Mrs.
Hareourt was; and further discovered what sort of a person her
husband was. Mr. Brade’s informant also told him of George
Flower’s acquaintance with the lady, and suggested that it would be
advisable to get Flower out of the way, before obtaining an intro-
duction to Mrs. Hareourt. ,
To o- e t Flower out of the way was far from difficult. iliere
happened to be at large, near Bathurst, three men who had baffled
all the efforts of the mounted police. A hundred pounds reward
had been offered for the apprehension of each of them, and Mower
had often sighed to take them “ single handed,” but he could not
make up his mind to leave Emily unprotected, for he was in
constant dread lest some person in power should be struck with her
beauty, and, in his absence, cause her annoyance.
Mr. Brade, while sitting on the bench, took up the newspaper,
the Australian, and read the last daring act of the bushrangers.
“ Svvinton,” said Mr. Brade to the chief magistrate, “ have you
seen this?” pointing to the paragraph. _
“Yes,” replied the chief magistrate; “I have just been talking
to Major Boole about it.” (Major Boole was also a magistrate, then
sitting on the bench.)
“ This ought not to be,” said Mr. Brade. “ These men ought
to be taken. Let us have a meeting in the private room, and send
for George Flower.” ,
“ I have spoken to him already,” said the chief, but he does
not seem disposed to have a venture. I don’t know what has come
over George Flower, lately. He is getting lazy and timi(v 1 la ' K M
“Let us all talk to him, and put him upon his mettle, said Mr.
Brade.
At the breaking up of the court, George Flower was sent tor,


and taken into the private room. The three magistrates vied with
each other in painting the glory which attached to Flower’s past
career, and succeeded in inflaming his vanity; but he declined the
errand they proposed, on the ground that it was not fair to rob the
mounted police of their legitimate profits ; besides, he pleaded, that he
was tired of being made a target, and thought of retiring from the
police, and keeping a public-house.
“Oh! a thousand pities!” cried Mr. Brade. “ Only fancy—
what would the police be without you, George Flower ? You are
the police ! What are we, without you ? What is the Government
without you ? Nothing ! The convicts would take the country
from us, if it were not for you ; for the military could never keep
down the convicts without the police, and I repeat that you are the
police ! And if you are bent on keeping a public-house, why you
would have these three hundred pounds to set you up: one hundred
would buy you a cask of rum, another a cask of gin, and the third,,
a cask of brandy ; and then, after such an exploit, the prettiest girls
in the country would be dying to marry you. What a finish to your
fame it would be ! ”
“As to the money for setting up a public-house,” said Flower,
argumentatively, “I could easily manage that. And as for the
pretty girls,” he added, with a smile playing on his lips, “ there is
no lack of them. But the fact is, I don’t want to go.”
“ Come, come, George,” said the chief magistrate, “ undertake
it as a personal favour to all of us; and I promise you that if you are
successful your conditional shall be changed into a free pardon.”
“ I don’t care about a free pardon now,” said Flower ; “ I don’t
want to visit my native land again—l have now an inducement to
remain in this country, and I wouldn’t go home to-morrow if I
could.”
“ Ah,” cried Mr. Brade, “ I begin to think, George, you suspect
that one of this gang is more than a match for you. They say he
is monstrously clever, cunning, and courageous.”
“ A match for me, sir! ” said Flower. “ I believe there’s only
one person that’s a match for me.” He significantly pointed with
his forefinger—insinuating that the person he alluded to was down
below. “ However, since you are all so determined upon it, I will
go, and bring in this clever fellow you speak of —dead in a cart,
and t’others tied to the cart’s tail—and I’ll do it before this day
six weeks.”
“ Bravo ! ” cried out the three magistrates. Mr. Brade, in his-
ecstacy, held out his hand and shook warmly the small but vigorous
fist of the dauntless thief-taker.
Flower that night left Sydney. But before he wont on his


journey he paid a visit to Emily. He found her in excellent spirits,
which were strangely in contrast with his own melancholy frame of
mind.
CHAPTER XXI.
Flower was no sooner out of Sydney than Mr. Brade wrote
a very polite note to “ Mr. Roberts,” requesting him to call at his
private residence. Mr. Brade received Roberts with extreme
courtesy, pitied his unfortunate position, expressed his implicit belief
in the convict’s innocence, and then informed Roberts that he
desired his opinion upon a point of law on so delicate a subject that
he did not wish to submit it through an attorney to counsel.
Roberts was of course “highly flattered,” and gave Mr. Brade a
very sound opinion on the imaginary case which Mr. Brade verbally
made known to him ; and knowing well where Roberts lived, he
inquired what was his address, in order that he might convey to
him some sense of the obligation under which he said he was labour-
ing. Roberts without hesitation gave Mr. Brade the number of his
house in Castlereagh-street.
On the following morning Mr. Brade called, and presented
Roberts with five sovereigns and five shillings, delicately folded up
in a piece of silver paper. Whilst he was talking to Roberts, his
eye rested upon Emily’s piano, and upon a basket containing some
Berlin wools.
“ You are musical, I perceive,” said Mr. Brade, addressing
Roberts in the tone of an equal.
“I am not,” replied Roberts, “ but Mrs. , that is to say, my
wife, sometimes amuses herself.”
(Roberts just then felt too proud to say that his wife gave lessons.)
“Oh ! you are married ? I was not aware, or ” (he simpered
and smiled) “ I should not have thought of calling in so rugged a
costume.”
“ Oh, pray don’t mention that. In this country one does not
expect those Avho have business to attend to should be always
attired in the garb of morning visitors.” Roberts went to the door
and called out: —


“ Emily, my love, come down stairs! ”
Emily, in obedience to ber linsband s commands, made lier
appearance, but much against her inclination, for she had from the
window recognised in Mr. Brade the gentleman who had stared so
strangely at her on a previous day.
Mr. Brade stayed for several hours, chatting with Eoberts and
his wife, and on taking his departure he invited them to visit him
on the ensuing Sunday, at his villa, a few miles from town upon the-
South Head road.
Eoberts accepted the invitation ; but when Mr. Brade had gone,.
Emily expressed her regret that he had done so.
Eoberts, than whom a more cunning man never breathed, “ saw
through” Mr. Brade as quickly as Emily had “ seen through” him ;
but Eoberts was not a jealous man, and as his wife did not breathe
her suspicions, he was determined to foster, rather than obstruct,
Mr. Brade’s desire to become acquainted with them.
“ My dear love,” said Eoberts, “it is highly desirable we should
be on terms of intimacy with the magistracy. They have the power
of recommending persons in my position for pardons, conditional or
absolute, as the case may be. Who knows but that Mr. Brade, who
is satisfied of my innocence, as you will hear him say yourself on
Sunday next—Mr. Brade, a police magistrate, and lately an officer in
her Majesty’s service, like myself, and on the most intimate terms at
Government-house —who knows whether he may not be the means
of procuring my return to the land of my fathers, and ample com-
pensation from the Home Government for the wrongs they have
inflicted upon me by this unmerited banishment ? Mr. Brade, ray
dear, is not a man like Elower; he is a gentleman, a person of
exquisite sensibility and good taste. You see it in his manner, his
address, and his conversation. It would be madness, my dear Emily,
to spurn the spontaneous advances of a gentleman of his calibre and
character.”
Overcome by these arguments, Emily’s scruples about visiting
Mr. Brade were speedily dissipated. . . , ,
Sunday came, and Roberts drove Emily in his gig to Mr. Brade s
countrv residence, which overlooked a small branch of the har >our
of Port Jackson, called Rose Bay, one of the most lovely spots in
the world. . , ,
The bav is almost semicircular, and margined by a broad patn
of cream-white sand. It is so completely shut in that its waters are
rarely troubled; and upon this Sunday they were as the surface
of an enormous mirror, which reflected the shadows of the trees
and rocks skirting this calm expanse of water.
Butterflies were on the wing, and diamond birds were chasing


each other from bush to bush ; the mocking-birds were singing in
the mangrove trees, and from a distance there came upon the ear
the lowcooings of the bronze-winged pigeon. Heaths of every
description were in full flower, but their perfume was drowned by
the overpowering scent of the mimosa and the wild laburnum.
After luncheon, Mr. Brade proposed a walk round the bay, and
promised to exhibit to Emily, from a certain peak, its transcendent
beauties.
They had not proceeded far when Roberts lagged behind, while
Mr. Brade and Emily walked leisurely on.
Emily looked behind her several times, and at length stopped,
and called to her husband, who was now out of sight,—“ Reginald,
are you not coming? ”
Roberts heard her voice, but gave no reply. He smiled,
and smoked more vigorously the cheroot which ho had secretly
lighted. Roberts was premeditating a return to the villa for the
purpose of draining the decanter of its delicious sherry.
Again Emily stopped, and called out, “ Reginald 1
“ I am afraid my husband will be lost,” said she to Mr. Brade.
“ There is no fear of that,” returned Mr. Brade. “My good
madam, husbands arc not such fools.”
At that moment Roberts was acting on his premeditation.
He had drank nearly a tumblerful of the wine, and was pouring the
like quantity of water into the decanter. He had heard Mr. Brade
say, at luncheon, that this was a trick his servants were addicted to,
and Roberts concluded that they would have to bear the blame,
when this impudent dilution was detected by their master, at dinner.
Emily began to feel alarmed, for Mr. Brade’s attentions, and
the opinions lie ventured to express, were offensive to the last
deoree. She intimated that she had seen sufficient of the beauties of
Rose Bay, and would fancy the rest. She then left Mr. Brade’s arm,
and retraced her st,eps to the villa, Mr. Brade walking by her side,
and paying her the most extravagant compliments.
When they reached the villa, Roberts was walking up and down
the verandah, pretending to read a book. When he beheld his wife,
flushed with anger, approaching the steps, and Mr. Brade a few
paces behind her, he guessed that she had been insulted, but he
suffered no species of resentment to ruffle his soul, which had
seemingly been convicted with his body, and transported in bondage
to a land where both were in subjection to every man in power.
Ror the first time in her life, Emily was in a passion. She
could not suppose that her husband was a party to the insults which
had been offered to her, but she thought it was unpardonably dull
in him not to have perceived that her personal charms (she was


quite aware of their extent) were the mainspring of Mr. Brade’s
civilities.
« What! are you tired, Emmy, dear ?” said Eoberts,
“ Yes,” she replied, curtly, and walked into a room which had
been given up to her. > .
“My wife never was a good walker,” said Eoberts, cnngmgly.
“ So it seems,” replied the magistrate, twirling his moustache.
“ She rarely takes any exercise whatever,” said Eoberts,
“ Ah !” said the magistrate.
“ It is very warm to-day, sir, is it not ?” said Eoberts.
“ Very,” said the magistrate, imperiously, still twirling his
moustache. “ I shall drink some wine,” and he called to a servant,
“ Bring me some sherry, slave !”
The sherry was brought. As soon as Mr. Brade tasted it, ho
placed the glass upon the tray, and looked at the servant.
“ What is this you have brought me ?” he inquired.
“ Wine, sir,” said the servant.
“Wine !” Mr. Brade echoed him in a loud voice, which Emily
heard. “ Wine ! you convicted scoundrel! I’ll teach you to put
water into my wine. Go into my bedroom.”
The convict servant obeyed, and presently Mr. Brade followed
him “ What do you mean, sir,” said Mr. Brade, after he had closed
the door, « by watering the wine, when I have guests in the house ?
It is bad' enough to do it when I am alone.”
“Please, sir, I didn’t do it,” said the man. “It was that
gentleman. I saw him.”
Emily heard all this, and was shocked at the servant s
deP “IIEw l IEw dare you tell me such a falsehood?” said Mr. Brade'.
“I intended to flog you moderately, but now you shall have*it
severely.” And forthwith he lashed him with a hunting whip.
The man howled, cried, and implored him to desist. But Mr.
Brade whose passions were now tempestuous, gave no ear to his
' cries. ’ Emily was afraid that Mr. Brade would flog the man to
death and fain would have interceded on his behalf, sinful as she
thought he had been in attempting to put the blame on « Eeginald;”
but she did not dare to interfere, although she felt, in her own heart,
that the cold reception she had given to Mr. Brade’s attentions was
intimately connected with the awful severity of the chastisement he
was bestowing on his servant. , ,
Exhausted by his labours, Mr. Brade went into the verandah;
and when he had recovered his breath, talked to Eoberts #
\i If they would content themselves,” said Mr. Brade, “ with


stealing a portion, and leaving the rest unspoiled, I could forgive
them ; but watering one’s wine— tis abominable.
“ Horrible,” said Roberts ; ‘ I have often felt as you now feel.
But what can one do with a parcel of low rascals ?”
“ Flog their backs bare !” cried Mr. Brade.
Roberts, unobserved by Mr. Brade, involuntarily shuddered,
and changing the conversation, praised the beauty of the villa
and the grounds.
“Who designed them?” inquired Roberts.
“ I did,” said Mr. Brade.
“ You must have exquisite taste in architecture.”
“ Yes, I have studied the art very attentively for years.”
“ And the result has repaid you. I never beheld anything so
perfect. Even the site on which you have built the villa. Amidst
so much beauty it must have been very difficult where to choose.”
“ Such was the case. But at last I fixed upon this spot, and
have not had reason to regret it.” _
“ I really must show my wife the delicate curve of this verandah,
said Roberts ; and he left Mr. Brade to bring Emily forth.
Roberts found his wife in tears. ?
“My dear Emily, dry your eyes,” said her husband. “ Here s
Brade in an awful rage because that villain watered the wine, but
come out and put hint it* a good humour by praising the verandah,
and everything on the premises.’ _
“And the man did it, Reginald.”
“ What, love ?”
“ Watered the wine!”
“ What a villain !”
“ And that’s the reason Mr. Brade beat him so unmercifully.” _
“Of course, my dear. Brade knows that I m a gentleman, in
every sense of the word—that I’d scorn a low action. He hates a
liar, and so do I. He knows me, Brade does. Water sherry ? No
wonder somebody was found to accuse me of forgery! What
next? Ah, Emmy dearest, Brade’s a man after your husband’s
own heart.”
“Not in some things, Reginald dear. His manners are too
familiar with ladies.”
“ Bless your heart, Emmy dear, thats only a way he has.
Brade’s a gentleman, Emmy, and you may always trust a gentleman
bred and horn, that is to say. Now, come out and talk to Brade,
and make yourself agreeable, while I go and look at his stables.
Remember, my own love, that although Brade is kind to me,
knowing that lam a gentleman and although he treats me like an
equal, or a superior I may say, knowing, as he does, that I am a first


cousin removed ” (Roberts inwardly laughed when he felt the force of
this word) “ to a marchioness, and nephew of the oldest of the Nova
Scotia baronets ; still, bear in mind that it would be dangerous to
both of us if you, by any superciliousness, were to turn his wrath
upon me.”
“ Dear Reginald,” she replied, “ I am too keenly alive to your
welfare to admit of my treating unkindly such a friend to you
as Mr. Brade appears to be ; but I wish George Flower had
returned.”
“ George Flower !—that contemptible constable; that scoundrel
that was transported, not for shooting a man, as he says, but for
arson, setting fire to a poor farmer’s barn. George Flower! My
beloved Emily, Brade could crush him whenever he pleased—have
him put in irons and sent to Norfolk Island for the remainder of his
natural life, the barn-burning convict! George Flower ! If I
could only tell to you, Emmy, the barbarity of that degraded
individual, who, for humanity’s sake, I have tolerated out of sheer
compassion for the creature, you would shudder, dearest! George
Elower ! I beg of you, out of respect for me, and the hospitality of
my friend Brade, never to mention his name again beneath this
aristocratic roof!”
Emily was seldom proof against the eloquence of her husband.
Her ideas invariably floated on the rapid stream of words which
gushed from his lips, spontaneously; she therefore dried her
tears and accompanied Roberts into the verandah, where he left
her with Mr. Brade, while he went to the stables, not to look at
the horses, but to smoke a pipe and crack coarse jokes with the
grooms.
Poor Emily! she was afraid to resent the affront which Mr.
Brade’s loose discourse afforded her ; for he had now given her to
understand how completely her convict husband was in his power,
and he coupled Roberts and the servant who had recently been
thrashed so artfully together that Emily almost fancied she could
hear her “ poor Reginald ” screaming under a similar affliction.
It was not Mr. Brade’s wont to behave unlike a gentleman ; but
his passions had such an ascendancy over him on that Sunday, that
he became reckless as to the means by which his purpose could be
effected. He had tried soft words without success, and he now
adopted other measures.
Mr, Brade knew that Emily was a woman of gentle birth and
refined education. And he graphically depicted the gulf which
yawned between two such beings as herself and her husband. He
ashed Emily how she could have thought of admitting to a place
in her affections a person of Roberts’s stamp ?


Had Mr. Brade been her father, or her brother—and had his-
obiect been to dissuade her from matrimony— nothing could have
been more unexceptionable than was his discourse. But he went on
to propose that she should discard the convict, and seek an asylum
—a home for ever—with him, a man of equal birth, and blood, am
rank in life. He offered to resign his appointment and leave the
colony with her, and go to any part of the world she thought proper
to mention. He told her that an ample fortune would be his on ins
father’s death, and implored her on his knees to listen to his prayers,
Emily hid her face in her hands, and was silent, _
Mr. Brade mistook this for an assent, and rising, kissed her
several times. She struggled from his embrace, and iooked iMeously
into his eves ; she longed to scream and bring Reginald to 1 e
assistance"; but alas! she knew the penalty, and, kneeling to - -
Brade, she prayed to him with clasped hands, and in a subdued
voice :
“ Spare me, oh, spare me!” .
« You are not offended with me?’ he inquired. .
“ Ho,” she replied, falsely ; but her falsehood may be forgiven.
“ May I visit you to-morrow ?” . . , ,
« Yes!” (Emily rose, for she heard the voice of her husband, who
was now approaching.) , , , ,
After dinner Mr. Brade tried to make Roberts drunk with wine
and flattery. Roberts humoured him, pretended to be speechlessly
intoxicated, and snored in an easy chair. ~ , , ,
Emily endeavoured several times to arouse Roberts; but he acted
too well to give her any hope of success. Mr. Brade then bade her
contemplate her convict spouse, and criticised him without reserve.
And he renewed his offers, his insinuations, and his threats an ,
seizing Emily’s hand, hissed it, to her disgust and horror.
It became late-eleven o’clock—and Emily begged that the
horse and gig might be ordered. Mr. Brade assured her that
Roberts was not sober enough to drive, and that the road was very
dangerous in many places ; and he offered to drive her home him-
self. This Emily declined, and again attempted to arouse her hus-
Mr. Brade retired suddenly from the room. Emily heard him
barring the windows and locking the doors at the back part ot the
house. No time was to be lost! she prudently thought and slipping
from the front door, unobserved, she reached the high-road, bare-
headed and unshawled. She did not keep the road, but skirted it
crouching down behind the bushes whenever she fancied she heard
footsteps near her. Fortunately it was moonlight, and sue was
enabled thus to trace her way.


When Mr. Brade had fastened every door and window he returned
to the room where he had left Emily. What was his annoyance to
find she was gone ! He was now alone in the house with Roberts,
who pretended still to sleep. Mr. Brade could not believe that
Emily had left the villa; he searched every room, looked under
every bed, behind every curtain, and into every closet. He then
ordered his horse, and galloped along the road, in the hope of over-
taking the fugitive.
Emily saw him pass by at full speed, and before she had tra-
velled a "mile further, she heard him re-pass, on his return home.
Still she kept within the fence until she was out of danger.
It was three o’clock in the morning when Emily, foot-sore and
heart-broken, arrived at her cottage.
CHAPTER XXII.
Let the reader imagine George Flower, with his hair cut as
closely as was Roberts s when he came off the treadmill , imagine him
unarmed, in the garb of a convict, a dress of coarse yellow and black
livery, and a broad arrow painted, or rather tarred, on the yellow parts,
to show that he belonged to a road-making gang ; a pair of handcuffs
on one of his wrists, as though he had succeeded in pulling the left
hand through, but could not get the fetter from the right wrist.
Flower soon fell in with that illustrious trio—Millighan, Slobey,
and Drohne who were the terror of the district, and who had
recently met the mounted police, and in a fair fight shot two of
them, and driven away two others.
“ Who are you ?” inquired the leader, Millighan.
“ A poor devil!” said Flower. _ _
“ Why have you these darbys on your right wrist ?”
“ Because I can’t get ’em off.”
“ Where have you come from ? ”
“ From a gang about thirty miles from this.
“ Are vou a bolter ? ”
“ Yes/ They were taking me to get seventy-five,* and I hit the
* Seventy-five lashes.


overseer a blow on the head with both hands in the cutis, and did
for him.”
“ Did you kill him outright ?”
«I should just think I did. I put my foot on his throat and
kept it there till he gave over breathing.
“ Then you’re a roper?”*
“ That same, of course.”
« And a lifer originally ? ”
« What else ? I’m the man that the judge cracked the joke
upon.” _ .
“Is transportation for life a joke ? . -
“No, but when I told him that I committed my crime in a Jit oj
absence, he said ‘ that’s a fit that must last for the remainder of your
life!’”
The trio laughed heartily. . ,
« What a jovial judge,” said Millighan, smiling. He must ha
been an Irishman.”
“No; an Englishman,” replied Flower. ... ,
“Now, look here, young man,” said Millighan, “ although we un
three quite enough, still you are so worthy of being one of us, you
shall be added to our number. There is a devilry in your eye. Mid
a taste for fighting about your mouth, that I like amazing y.
all of us sure to be hanged if we’re taken, and therefore you 11
no sort of objection to be shot rather than surrender. We have
been out for more than two years, and if we have any uc v '' e 1
remain the lords of this bush. We are somewhat hard up lor‘flour,
and we have come down here on purpose to lighten one of old U p-
tain Piper’s drays-I mean the old gentleman who keeps a band,
and is fond of dancing. That business concluded, you shall Is ‘
comfortable home, and a Tower musket, and sun roun s o
cartridge; and meanwhile here’s the horse pistol and the pouc i-
which belonged to that unfortunate fellow of the mounted po i
who lost his life in a most glorious manner the other day.
« All right,” said Flower. « You’ll find that I thoroughly un-
derstand my business.”
Captain Piper’s drays now loomed in the distance.
« Here they come !” cried Millighan ; “and you shall have the
honour of speaking first to the drivers.”
The drays, drawn by bullocks, came slowly up the road, and
Flower, in a stentorian voice, which charmed the trio, commando
a “ halt.” j
The men in charge of the drays instantly surrendered; an
* A man who is sure to be hanged when apprehended.


Flower, with his usual activity, proceeded to unload the drays of
such stores as the trio told him they stood in need of. A hag of
English biscuits was found, and the flour therefore remained un-
touched. Three gallons of French brandy, a small keg of American
negrohead tobacco, and a quantity of almonds and raisins were also
selected, and a small box containing millinery, silks, ribbons, tapes,
bobbins, needles, thread, &c., and, what a prize! a pair of new
double-barrelled pistols, two pairs of plated spurs, a new saddle and
bridle, and a small chest filled with various medicines. The drays
were then suffered to proceed, and the bushrangers took the shortest
road to their habitation.
It was a house made by nature, in a limestone rock, in that
region of the world where gold in such quantities is now found. It
overlooked a beautiful valley several miles in extent. Cattle were
grazing in the valley, and hobbled horses were fattening on theluxur iant
pasturage. Pigeons and fowls were feeding about the den, and se\ ci al
large kangaroo dogs barked a welcome to the trio on their return.
There was an old woman in the den, wnom the bushrangers
•called “ Mother,” and a girl of about thirteen or fourteen years of
age, but prematurely very old-looking ; this girl they all called
46 Sister Sail/* but it is doubtful whether she stood in that relationship
to any one of them.
On seeing the keg containing the brandy, the old woman was
greatly joyed. She speedily produced a large gimlet, pierced the
wood, inserted a quill into the aperture, and drew r oft about a
which she fairly distributed amongst the party, including herselt an
■“ Sister Sail.” ..
Guns, cutlasses, pistols, and powder-flasks decorated the was
of the den; and in a corner were several bayonets mounted upon
broomsticks, and upon three pegs there were three saddles and
bridles, all in excellent condition. Such a collection of miscellaneous
articles Flower, even with all his police experience, had never
beheld. ~ „ . . .
The furniture of the den consisted of a table formed of a large
piece of limestone, with a flat surface. It had been rolled into the
centre of the apartment. The stools were smaller pieces ot lime-
stone. On the floor was a Turkey carpet, and upon this the inmates,
male and female, used to sleep, covering themselves with blankets,
kangaroo skins, and horse rugs, of which there w'as a superabun-
dance. Millighan, the leader, invariably made a pillow of his saddle.
There was no door to the den ; and the fire, around which the
dogs congregated by night, was a few paces from the entrance.
The den was so dark, even by day, that it was necessary to burn a
lamp, but at night it was lighted up with wax or tallow candles.


The old woman made some soup out ot the tail of a large
kangaroo, and served up an excellent dish composed of boiled
maecaroni and Westphalia ham. Unexceptionable port wine (law-
fully the property of the commandant of Bathurst) was in due
course produced. Smoking and drinking then commenced, and in
these occupations the old woman and the young girl participated.
George Flower still wore his handcuffs on his wrist, ihe old
woman had steeped his hand in emu oil, and had attempted, but
ineffectually, to draw the fetter over the greasy flesh. She now
brought a file, and began to cut through the hand-cuff, and when
she grew tired, Sister Sail took up the work. Meanwhile the trio
were engaged in playing “ all-fours ” with a new pack of cards
which had lately come into their possession.
While the old woman was filing his handcuffs, Flower recollected
her features. She was a convict who had absconded trom tle
factory at Paramatta, some six years previously, and it was sup-
posed she had perished in the bush. Her name was Elizabeth
Norris, but she was more familiarly known to the police authorities
as “ Tambourine Bet.” Playing upon the tambourine at fairs was
the profession she followed in England before she nnbibed a taste
for felony, which ended in her being transported for life, ihe lace
of the girl was also familiar to Flower, and ho racked his brains,
but without effect, to bring to recollection whose child she was, and
where he had seen her.
“ I think that will do,” said Flower, when the process ot filing
had continued for about two hours ; and striking the fetter shaip y
upon the limestone stool on which he sat, it snapped asunder, and
his wrist was once more free.
The trio had finished their game, and were re-filbng their pipes
and replenishing their tin pannikins with Captain Piper s brandy,
when Millighan called out to Flower—
“l say, what’s your name, give us a song.”
“ My name is Teddy Monk,” said Flower.
“ Well, then, chant, Monk; and if you can do it as well as you
can stop a dray, I make no sort of doubt you’ll give universal satis-
faction.” ... , . , i i
Flower, who was rather proud of his singing, at once indu gee
the company with a song admirably suited to their tastes. The air
of this ditty was that of an Irish jig. It _ inspirited the old
woman, and seizing the instrument from which she derived her
cognomen, she cried out, “Encore,” and accompanied Flower with
a vigorous beat.
When the song was a second time ended, the old woman got up
and danced round the den, as though she were once more on a


platform at Greenwich Fair, while Sister Sail, who was by this time
intoxicated, clapped her hands, and laughed hysterically. The
conviviality was prolonged, until the day began to dawn. The
inmates of the den then coiled themselves up upon the Turkish
carpet which was spread upon the floor, and, one by one, dropped
off to sleep.
The only dog which was allowed to come into the den was a
small pug-nosed terrier, the property of Millighan. This animal
used to sleep at his master’s head, his nose resting on the saddle
■which Millighan used as a pillow.
Flower did not go to sleep. Weary as he was, he lay awake,
encompassing the destruction or capture of all the human beings
by whom he was surrounded. He raised, his head and recon-
noitred the den, which -was now as still as the grave, while the cocks
were crowing, the pigeons cooing, the calves bleating in their pens.
He was on the point of getting up stealthily for the purpose of
putting his intent into execution, when the terrier growled, and
Millighan, awakened, inquired, of the dog, “ What’s the matter ? ”
The terrier barked; and. Flower rejoiced, that the dog had no
tongue wherewith to answer fully the question that was put to
him.
“ Hold your noise, you little fool,” said Millighan; but the
terrier disobeyed him, and approaching the spot where Flower lay,
re-commenced an angry bark, varied occasionally by a surly growl.
“ What’s the row ? ” cried Flower, pretending to be awakened.
‘‘Oh! it’s only my dog,” replied Millighan; “he knows you
are a stranger, and he can’t understand it. Give him a kick, and
turn him out of the house.” <
“ Oh no ! he’s a good dog,” said Flower ; “ what is his name ?"’
“ Nettles,” said Millighan.
“ Come here, Nettles; good dog, Nettles,” said Flower,
coaxingly.
The dog was not susceptible of flattery. He declined the
invitation, and again took up his position near his master’s head,
where he remained awake, watching, until Flower had fallen asleep.


CHAPTER XXIII.
“My dear Reginald,” said Emily to her husband when he
returned from Mr. Brade’s, “ why did you take so much wine last
night, and compel me to walk home ? I could not arouse you, and
I could not remain there all night.”
“My beloved,” said Roberts, “it was very wrong but
remember, it is seldom that one meets a man of ones own cloth
You don’t know Brade—you don’t know what an actor he is. He
has the most intense regard and respect for me, and Re-
times, lam told, pretends to run me down behind my back. He
does it just to hear what other people say of me. He is a man who
is full of fun.” _
“Yes’my “love, pure fun, I assure you. Don’t oft end Brade,
whatever you do. He has pledged me his word that I shall have a
free pardon immediately, and for my sake do not make an enemy of
a man who can be, if he likes, such a valuable friend He is coming
to dine here to-morrow quietly, and hear you sing and play. 1 told
him we should make no preparation for him; but you mus, see
that there is a particularly nice dinner put upon the table, and i
will order in some excellent wine and a very recherche^ dessert.^
«I am not equal to entertaining Mr. Brade, Reginald, replied
Emilv “ The dinner shall be provided, but I wall not appear.
“ Emily, my love, you really must make an effort on this occa-
sion,” said Roberts. “Remember, dearest, for my sake, for the
sake of my emancipation from this loathsome place of bondage, i
is your duty to conciliate Brade, and not repulse him.
J Emily, who had not the faintest idea of the real_ character of
the man to whom she was linked, was afraid to mention to him all
that had passed on the previous day. She therefore ga\ eas a reason
for her disinclination to appear at the dinner, that she was po y
and out of spirits. -p
“ But you will be better by to-morrow, my own dearest Emmy.
My life, mv soul, you know what sacrifices your Reginald is pre-
pared to make for you, and he knows she will not disappoint him
in this, will she, my own dear pet?” and Roberts, placing his arm
around Emily’s neck, gently patted her cheek, and looked tendeily
into her soft hazel eyes, which were filling with tears.
o


With an aching heart, Emily promised that she would appear at
the dinner-table on the following day, and that she would do her
utmost to delight with music and her voice the gentleman who
seemed to take advantage of her husband’s position, and who, under
the impunity which that position afforded him, was resolved to-
persist in his infamous pursuit.
*******
Roberts had of late frequently absented himself from the office
in which he was employed, and spent his stolen leisure at a cottage
where resided a young lady who had recently attracted his attention.
This was no other than one of Emily’s fellow passengers, whose
conduct on the voyage has been already described. It amused
Roberts vastly to hear of Emily’s “ greenness ” from the lips of this
person, who used to accompany her details with mimicry. Thus
entertained, Roberts would lie on the sofa, smoke his cigar, and
drink Madeira, on those days when he felt indisposed for work.
Mr. Brade knew of this, and, a few days after he had dined at
the cottage, called one morning and delicately conveyed to Mrs.
Harcourt “ what a pity, what a shame it was, that a man who was so
blest with a beautiful and accomplished woman for his wife, should
be so lost to every sense of propriety as to indulge in such dis-
reputable company.”
Mr. Brade’s motive was obvious, and Emily saw that he wished
to estrange her affections from her husband. She therefore con-
cluded that Mr. Brade’s story was an invention.
“ The idea of Reginald being unfaithful! It was absurd.”
Had she been in other circumstances, Emily would have said
this aloud, and ordered Mr. Brade to leave her house, and never
more enter it; but as it was, she w r as compelled to remain silent,
and listen to offers which Mr. Brade never failed to repeat whenever
he had an opportunity.
Although Mr. Brade’s story was not credited by Emily, never-
theless it added to her miseries. The bare thought of “ Reginald ”
taking a delight in the society of any other woman distracted
her.
“Reginald,” said Emily, one night, “ I have such awful dreams,
lam afraid to go to bed. I dream that you love some one else.”
“My darling!” exclaimed Roberts, “is it not proverbial that
ridiculous fancies, the most improbable things, present themselves
to our imagination when we are asleep? You dream that I could
be so wicked? May you continue so to dream, dearest. Oh,
Emmy ! why do you torture me ? No, never, my love ! ”


CHAPTER XXIV.
T,ifbe were to be races at Paramatta, fifteen miles from Sydney .
XL, “his gig, drawn by his fine-actioned, fast-stepping. trottmg
and the. took upthe
"T lace
“poMa Ifte straw bonnet, and carried a beautiful parasol, frmged
' Vit Votert* S turn 'out was the neatest of its kind on the crowded
you“ lady’s company, and he determined tce
raC6 I S i ™ : a S e rC M E“e"n the colony appeared to have
hts Magnificent trotter, his light gig
and ster plated harness, to the admiring spectators; had lost
CftMdiscuss the
I to fteM o erylrt e ot'Mrvi„g the ham, having given his
companion of one of the fowls, the constable ap-
proached Roberts and said—
“ Please may I ask who you are, sir.
“ what X wish to know is, are you free
° r b ° Why, free ; free as air, or a bird on e ocean wave.”
“ Now, I don’t want to take any undue advantage of you, sa.d
the constable, “ and I therefore repeat the question, are you a free
man, or are you a Prisoner of the Crown /
the races at paramatta.


“ Have some ham and fowl, and a glass of champagne ? ”
“ Put dow n that knife and fork, and answer my questions. Are
you a free man
“ Not exactly.”
“Are you an assigned servant? Or are you in the service of
Government ?”
“ Assigned.”
“ To whom ?”
“To my wife.”
“ Is this lady your wife ?”
“No ; she’s a friend of my wife.”
“ Is your wife on the race-course ?”
“No ; she’s in Sydney.”
“ Will you oblige me with a sight of your pass ?”
“ Pass ! my good sir ! Do you suppose it necessary for me to
carry a pass ?”
“You haven’t a pass?”
“No.”
“ Then I am sorry to say I am compelled to take you into
custody for being an assigned servant ‘at large,’ without a pass from
his mistress; and as a convict cannot possess property, I am bound to
believe that everything about you belongs to your mistress ; so, pack
up and come along with me. And you, madam, must go too, for
how do I know that all that finery you’ve got on isn’t the property
of the lady to whom this man belongs ?”
Roberts’s companion instantly discharged a volley of abuse
at the constable, but this had the effect of making him even more
disagreeable.
Roberts took out his purse and offered it to the constable. The
constable put it into his pocket, then searched Roberts, and took from
his person a penknife, a pencil-case, and a toll-bar ticket. He also
took Roberts’s gold watch and chain, and the ruby pin which
fastened his blue satin scarf. This operation was performed amidst
the laughter and jeers of the multitude, who had now formed a ring
round Roberts’s horse and gig.
Roberts was then handcuffed, and a small rope tied to the
handcuffs, and fastened to one of the springs of his vehicle. The
constable then got into the gig, and, sitting beside the Enchantress,
triumphantly drove off the course, with Roberts in tow, cheered by
the mob, who seemingly enjoyed the joke—for Roberts had attracted
considerable notice upon the road.
Proceeding, as this interesting cortege did, at an easy pace, it was
passed by all those who were returning from the races; and the
majority of the company now labouring under the excitement


•which is caused by frequent drams, the quantity of personal
pleasantry which was scattered upon Roberts and the Enchantress
WaS When they were within about five miles of Sydney, there came
on one of those violent storms of wind called, in the colony of New
South Wales, “ a brick-fielder.” This covered every one with red
dust, and the wind being followed almost immediatelyA>y a-heavy
fall of rain, anything more grotesque than became the plight ot the
party it would be difficult to conceive. Roberts, who was greatly
fatigued, was continually imploring the constable not to let the
horse walk so fast, a request which was commonly responded to rn
the words, “ Hold your tongue, and don t disturb us, for t
woman had now made herself more agreeable to the constable than,
under the circumstances, he had any right to expect.
They were now at the door of Emily’s cottage. Mr. Brade
was in the cottage at the time. He had been there for at least
two hours, apologising in the most abject tone for any leuty of
demeanour of which in previous interviews he had been guilty.
« Dear me' what’s this ?” cried Mr. Brade, looking out of the
window. “ Dear me !No ! it can’t be. Yes, it is. Let me conceal
myself. If the constable sees me here, I’m ruined. What crime
can he have committed ? He may be brought up before me! Pray,
Mrs. Harcourt, let me conceal myself. Look out of the window. Mr.
Brade rushed into the next room, and almost fainted with the con-
vulsive laughter into which that magnificent spectacle had thrown
lUm Emily immediately recognised the creature who had so often
chilled her blood on the passage to New South Wales. _ She d
not at first see Reginald. What a constable and this hornd woman
could be doing in Reginald’s gig at her door was more than Eir y
C ° U Th^constable came in and detailed all that had taken place,
leaving Reginald and his companion still outside the iatter seated i
the gig holding the reins, and the former in handcuffs tied to the
tail of the vehicle. ~ . ,
Emily was stupefied, but believing Reginald to have been a
victim of 'conspiracy in the matter which originally brought urn t
the colony, she was not prepared to condemn him until she had
heard what he had to say in his defence. She therefore told the
constable that Roberts was at the races with her consent, and
desired that he might be immediately set at liberty.
“ And what about the lady, mam ?” said the constable. _ May
I take her home in the gig, mam? Poor thing, she is very
wet.”


“ You must use your own discretion in that matter; speak to
my husband,” said Emily.
The constable did use his own discretion, and very humanely
drove the Enchantress to her abode, where he received at her hands
a bottle of brandy for his trouble.
Roberts threw himself upon the couch in his dining-room, and
stretched himself at full length. He was too tired to pull off’ his
wet clothes and boots.
“ Dearest,” he gasped, “ a spoonful—a spoonful, Emmy, dearest,
of brandy—l’m regu-larly dead-beat 1”
Mr. Brade was looking through the key-hole, and was longing
to laugh at Roberts’s miserable but well merited condition ; but when
he beheld Emily administering to his w T ants, and holding up his head,
while he drank the liquor from her hand, his soul was consumed by
a variety of passions which were never before perhaps blended
simultaneously in the same bosom. Love, pity, envy, hate, jealousy,
anger, joy, and sorrow were all at work together, and Mr. Brade
said within his heart, “ That man or I must leave this colony, if not
this world,”
“ Flower ! that villain Flower ! Oh, the scoundrel!” groaned
Roberts. “He promised that he would show me that the transfer
of myself to you would not better my condition. Who but Flower
would have thus insulted me ? I could have borne all but being
mixed up with that horrible woman. Oh, Emmy, judge of what
my feelings have been !”
Roberts was sincere in his belief that George Flower was the
author of his misfortune, and the conjecture did credit to his saga-
city, for it was just the trick Flower would have played him, only
that he would not have allowed Emily to see the young lady.
A light was now breaking in upon Emily. She began to see
through it all (she thought). “ Poor Reggye I let me take off these
wet boots and change your clothes, dear ; and then tell mo all that
has happened,” In a whisper she added, “Mr. Brade is in the
next room. He ran in there to escape being seen by the constable.”
“ Oh, Mr. Brade is here ! I am glad of that,” said Roberts, “ for
he will see how I have been treated, and will have justice done to
me. Oh, Emmy ! I have not a leg to stand on.”
When Roberts had attired himself in dry clothes, Mr, Brade
made his appearance, and heard the complaint preferred against the
constable. A more plausible story was never uttered. Roberts
had hatched it on the road, and in point of “ circumstantiality” it
was perfect.
He had left his gig, (he said) and had gone into the race-stand.
When he returned he found that abominable female seated in the


vehicle—polluting the very harness upon the back of the horse. He
requested her in the most polite manner to leave his gig immediately.
She abused him, and called him all sorts of names,
Emily here said she could believe it. She had heard the creature
in a passion. „ _ ~
« Well,” continued Roberts, “ what could I do ? I was obliged to
call a constable to take her in charge. The constable came. He
happened to be a friend of the woman. ‘ Give me in charge I said
the woman. ‘ Who are you ? What are you ? You are a convict.
Give me in charge ? I give you in charge for assaulting me . ihe
constable took her part, and then took me into custody. And, to
show the animus of the man, he drove her to town in the gig, and
tied mo, handcuffed, behind, as you saw with your own eyes, Emmy,
dearest.” ~
Emily had seen it, of course ; and what was more, the constable
had had the audacity to speak kindly of the woman, and pity her,
and then take her away in Reginald's gig; and she saw the man
laughing when he left the house ! Emily was, therefore perfectly
satisfied" that Reginald had been most grossly ill-treated; but she
did not as yet perceive how George Elower was a party to tins
infamous proceeding. . , ~ ,
Roberts explained. Elower was a friend of this constable, who
acknowledged that he had promised Elower to keep an eye on him.
Mr. Brade, who felt that Roberts’s cunning had completely
baffled his project, pretended to be very angry with the constable.
« I cannot advise you,” said Mr. Brade, “ to press the charge in
public ; but I will see that both that man and George Elower are
dismissed from the police.”


CHAPTER XXV.
Millighan and his gang never left the precincts of the den except
they were in want of supplies ; and being now provided with all they
required for the present, they engaged in the many pastimes within
their reach. Shooting and kangarooing during the day—cards, to-
bacco, and grog at night. Flower rather enjoyed the life, and had
grown to like the captain of the gang. In addition to bein a very
plucky fellow, Millighan rode well and swam -well was, a good
shot both with gun and pistol; could tell a pleasant story, sing
sentimental songs ; and was an ardent admirer of the fair sex. In
short, he Avas very like George Flower in disposition and accom-
plishments—as good looking, and as active.
Millighan, in turn, had conceived a great regard for Flower, and
had said to George, one day, when they were out kangarooing on
horseback —“ If I should get knocked over in the next battle we
have with the mounted police, you are the man to stand in my shoes.”
Ay, and Millighan had endeared himself to Flower by other means.
He had, unconsciously, aroused George’s pride and tickled his vanity :
and to this he was indebted for his life; for Flower’s opportunities of
destroying him w r ere now frequent. Millighan had one night
(little conscious in Avhose presence he was speaking) held forth on
the nobleness of Flower’s character.
“He is not one of your chicken-hearted dogs that fire at a man
from behind a tree,” said Millighan. “He never employs those
black beasts to track up his prey. He goes out into the open, like
a man, and challenges his adversary. If I had been in that gang,
Avhen Flower was shot in the back on the Liverpool Road, I’d have
killed the cowardly villain Avho did such a thing. It’s a great pity
that Flo Aver did not take to the bush instead of the police. Ho
Avould have gone down to posterity in the annals of this blessed
country, in the absence of patriots, as one of her greatest men.”
* * * * # #
It was now time for another visit to the roads. The tea and
sugar were exhausted, and there Avas but very little tobacco
remaining.
Slobey was left at home to assist the old Avoman in the den.
Millighan, Drohne, and Flower, each armed Avith a carbine and
a pair of horse pistols, descended the hill on Avhich their limestone


house was situated. They were on this occasion on horseback, and
were, moreover, dressed in the uniform and appointments of the men
of the mounted police, and they wore their regulation broadswords,
and the horses they rode were the property of Government.
After winding five miles, over crags and creeks, and throu h
valleys and forests, the bushrangers reached the high road, of whic
for the past two years they had been the terror. .
“Monk,” said MiUighan to Flower, “have you a mind for a
larL “ Yes,” responded George. “I’m up to anything. What is it
to 1)6 ? y>
“ Why, look here. Let us pay a visit to old Grimes, and taste
of his hospitality. He is very fond of entertaining the mounted
police, and lending them stores when they run short. And he may
a-ive us a newspaper or two.” v .
“ But docs he not know the men of the mounted police .
qUll “Notalurf ’em. How should he ?” returned Millighan. “Thanks
to the accuracy of my eye, they are changed pretty often in these
Part Maior Grimes had been a major in the Royal Artillery. He
was now a settler, possessed of large flocks of sheep near Bathurst.
His store houses were usually well filled with supplies of all kinds
and it was quite true that he had been very accommodating to the
men of the mounted corps, whom he was always glad to see upon
his premises.hran g ers rode on? and at length arrived at Major
Grimes’s estate, where they were welcomed warmly, °
alight, and take some refreshment in the kitchen. Had the 0
an? news ? Yes, the body, or rather, the remains of a body, had
been found in the Hawkesbury river, and had been identified as
those of the famous thief-taker, George Flower! It was supposed
he had been murdered; though one paper hinted, that,.as he wa
drunk when last seen upon the road, it was not improbable that he
met his death by attempting to swim across.
All expressed their great regret at this; and Flower had a a
the satisfaction of hearing his own praises sounded by Millighan.
He joined in those praises, and was very eloquent on his own
bravery though he expressed a decided opinion that George
Flower was a great vagabond, and too grasping after rewards or
the apprehension of desperate characters. _
“ Talking of desperate characters, said Millighan to the Major,
“ what third? you of that unfortunate in which some of our
fellows were engaged, and two killed ?


“Yes, it was a sad business,” replied the Major; “ but what
could you do—four against nine ? Such awful odds.”
“ Awful I” said Millighan. “And all nine brave men, too.”
“ And daring,” added the Major.
“Yes, and daring,” conceded Millighan. “But -we shall have
better luck soon, I hope.”
“I hope so, too,” said the Major ; “for I have several drays on
the road, about which lam beginning to be very nervous. They
took everything from Captain Piper’s drays a short time ago.”
“ So I hear,” said Millighan ; “but I don’t believe a word of
it. If these drivers are stopped at all, and robbed of only a few
articles, they sell the rest, and go home empty. At least, that’s my
opinion, Major. Of course, I may be wrong.”
“ Here’s a nice slander upon your cloth, Corporal, in the last
Australian ,” said the Major,
“ What’s that, sir ?”
“ Why, they say that the mounted police sometimes doff their
clothes, hide their horses, put on smock frocks and hairy caps—and
help themselves to people’s property.”
Millighan and his companions laughed the idea to scorn, and
appealed to each other as to the possibility of such a thing.
“ If the mounted police want anything, they have only to ask
for it,” said Millighan. “At this present we are out of tea,
sugar, tobacco, and spirits, and if you could supply us with
some, for the price of which I will give you an order on Lieutenant
Mole, our commanding officer, in Bathurst Town, we shall be very
much obliged to you.”
“ Oh, certainly ! how much do you require ? ” asked the
Major.
“ Why, sir, about five pounds of tea, fifteen pounds of sugar,
three pounds of tobacco, and about a gallon of rum, gin, or brandy,”
said Millighan.
While these stores were being weighed out, Millighan wrote an
order for payment on Lieutenant Mole, and signed it—“ Walker,
lance-corporal.”
“ Corporal, will you allow me to speak a few w r ords to you in
private ?” said Major Grimes.
“By all means, sir,” said Millighan, following the Major into
the verandah, where he walked up and down —his heavy sabre in
its steel scabbard dangling at his side.
“Corporal,” said Major Grimes, confidentially, “a shepherd of
mine this morning told me that he knows the very spot which those
desperate dogs make their head-quarters.”
“ Indeed !” said Millighan ; “and where may the spot be ?”


“ That’s the point,” said the Major. “ The fellow knows the
secret is worth something, and he won’t tell; but he says he 11 point it
out if we will go with him and take a large force, and promise to obtain
for him a pardon, and give him a portion of the reward that is ottered:
three of their number are worth £3oo,—a hundred each, you know.
“ The man’s terms are very moderate,” said Millighan very
moderate. Of his free pardon he would be quite sure; but il he
wants a good share of the money, the fewer that have to do with
the capture the better. Let me and my men have some conversa-
tion with him, and who knows that by this time to-morrow we may
not have the whole gang, dead or alive ?” ...
Flower was now summoned to the council. He heard with
well-acted delight what the Major communicated, entirely agreed
with Millighan that the fewer who had a hand in the capture the
better, and proposed that the shepherd should be at once sent tor
and questioned. , , , ~ , .
The shepherd repeated his story—that he had seen the den at a
distance, and could point it out, for he had marked with a tomahawk
several leading trees as landmarks; but he said he could not describe
the way to the den, it was so intricate and round about, from bis
description of the den, there could be no doubt that he was
possessed of the secret, which, as Major Grimes had truly observed,
was well worth knowing.
At first the shepherd declined to go, unless accompanied by a
large force ; but after a while he yielded to the persuasive arguments
of Millighan, which Flower was compelled to support.
“ How did you happen to stumble across it, my man ? inquired
Millighan, when they were about two miles distant from the roan,
and in the heart of a forest peopled only by kangaroos, opossums,
and wild cats. . , , . -
« Why, one day,” the shepherd replied, “ I was out looking lor a
working bullock in this direction, and 1 lost my way, and had to sleep
in the "bush all night. Next morning, when daylight appeared, i
wandered about, almost starved to death, when suddenly I came upon
the print of a horse’s foot. This I followed, and at last came upon a
path, where I came upon the print of a dog’s foot, which was quite
fresh. £ Hulloa,’ says I, £ I can’t be far off some cattle-station;
and I followed the track for about three mile, when I came to a
creek, where I saw a horse drinking. Now that horse belonged to
a gentleman who had it stole. It belonged to one of Lilly Went-
worth’s overseers, and there was the W. C. W. branded on the
shoulder, plain enough. £ Oh, oh,’ thought I, £ the sooner Igo back
the better,’ for, mind you, these fellows make pretty short work ot
anybody who happens to get a scent of where they are: they think


nothing of tying a fellow to a tree and leaving him there till his
skeleton is discovered.”
“ Nonsense!” cried Drohne, who had twice performed this
cruel operation, when the gang was short of powder, and could not
afford to throw away a single charge in destroying an enemy; for
every man who knew of the den’s whereabout could be regarded in
no other light.
“ Well, go on,” said Millighan.
“ Well, while I was looking at the horse, and thinking that I’d
make the best of my way back, I saw smoke about a hundred yards
off, and heard the barking of dogs—”
Drohne cocked his carbine, took it from the socket, and looked
fiercely at the shepherd; but Millighan frowned at his comrade, and
checked his impetuosity.
“ Just as I was going away I saw three men coming along. I
was in an awful fright, and crouched down behind a big piece of
stone, and they passed without seeing me.”
“ Should you know them again ?” asked Drohne, once more
placing his hand on his carbine.
“ Oh, yes,” said the shepherd. “ They were drest in jackets
and caps made out of the skins of flying squirrels, and were talking
about a robbery they had committed only a few days before. But
we had better talk quietly now, for we are not far from the creek,
where I saw the horse. As I live, there he is, lame as a cat in the
fore shoulder.”
“ Who’s to do it ?” shouted Drohne to Millighan,
“ Hold your tongue!” said Millighan, in reply.
“ What are you about ? ” screamed Mower to Drohne, who was
now taking aim at the shepherd’s head. “ Hold hard I If you
pull that trigger I’ll send a ball into you.”
The shepherd was rather bewildered. He fancied that Drohne
wanted to shoot him, in order to prevent his receiving any share of
the reward ; and he addressed himself to the whole party touching
the unfairness of such a deed.
“ Answer me one question,” said Millighan. “Is there any one
else who knows the road to this den ?”
“ Not a soul,” was the reply.
“ Did you mention it to no one ?”
“No ; I was not such a fool. I told master that I knew where
the den was, but I would not tell him even the direction it was in.
But let us not make a noise, for look, there’s the smoke! And
don’t you hear the dogs bark? You go on, and Ml wait here.
Give me something or other to defend myself with, for they'll be
sure to show fight.”


Drohne was still disposed to shoot the shepherd, and could not
understand on what principle Millighan and Flower objected.
“ Come along/’ said Millighan to the man. “ You’ll find there
will be no fighting.”
What was the shepherd’s astonishment to find that the dogs re-
cognised this curious branch of the police, and frisked around their
horses in an agony of delight at their approach. The shepherd’s
want of comprehension on this head, however, was soon supplied,
when he found himself in irons.
CHAPTER XXVI.
In consequence of the scene which had taken place upon the
race-course, Roberts lost his employ in the attorney’s office, and
Emily’s pupils were all withdrawn from her. Parents were unwilling
that their children should come into contact with a person who had
such a husband. In order, therefore, to earn daily bread, Emily
was compelled to do needle-work, and knit socks and comfoiters.
The Lady Jane Grey paid another visit to Sydney, and old
Captain Dent lost no time in finding Emily, who was still living in
the cottage he had taken for her. Emily was delighted to see the
old man, the more especially as he had come at the very moment
when she most needed a protector, for Mr. Brade had thrown out a
dark hint that he intended to have Roberts taken away from her,
and assigned to himself.
Captain Dent used to visit Emily very often, and his presence
bored Mr. Brade beyond measure. To Mr. Brade’s horror the old
man used to invite Emily to return to England with him, offering
her a stern cabin and a free passage.
One day Mr. Brade sent for Roberts, and said to him, ‘ Do
you know, that vulgar old ship captain is far too intimate with } our
wife ?” .
Roberts, quite unmoved, notwithstanding the grave character
of the suspicion, replied that it might be so, and a legal idea
suddenly flashed across his mind. The idea was this, whether a
convict assigned to his wife could bring an action for criminal
conversation ? —whether being attainted by felony destroyed certain


rights or not ? Of his wife’s innocence he had no sort of doubt,
but that was not his “point.” His point was to get money out of
Captain Dent’s pocket, and Captain Dent out of Mr. Brade’s way.
This was what Roberts called “ a very comprehensive move.”
Emilv had shown to her husband all the letters the Captain had
recently written to her. They were conceived and expressed in a
tone of the most affectionate regard.
Captain Dent had frequently been shut up in the same room
alone with Emily for hours, and half a dozen little circumstances
might be brought forward, which, if put together, would be ample
to satisfy the law. “ But then, again,” (it was thus Roberts argued,)
“ this would be cutting up the goose for the golden egg, for Emmy
would leave me and go home, and I might fall into the hands of
some master»who would make me work, and bring me perhaps
before Brade for idleness, and Brade would order me fifty lashes as
soon as look at me, if Emmy was once out of the colony.” So
Roberts abandoned the project which at first had appeared to him
so flittering. But, insomuch as he would not be safe if he were
indifferent to Mr. Brade’s wishes, he spoke to his wife on the subject,
and requested her in future not to be at home when Captain Dent
called.
It was a great sacrifice to Emily to forego the pleasure of
receiving the old man who had treated her with such uniform
kindness ; hut slave as she was to the wishes of her husband, she
consented without a murmur, albeit she laughed at the very idea
that “ Reginald ” could think of being jealous of an old gentleman
whose age was more than double that of herself, while he did not
appear at all jealous of Mr. Brade, whose visits were quite as
frequent as those of Captain Dent, and whose attentions 'were
much more marked, even in “ Reginald’s ” presence.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Flower was far from weary of the wild marauding life that
he was leading, hut he had a curious dream on the night which
introduced Major Grimes’s shepherd to the den, and he made up his
mind to bring matters to a speedy conclusion, so far as related to
the capture of the gang. He asked Millighan to walk with him
to the top of a mountain, which overlooked the den, and there he
discoursed with Millighan for some time on the grandeur ot the
scene, and the sweets of liberty. It was a beautiful warm day, and
not a cloud to be seen in the sky. The foot of man had never
before trod the ground on which Flower and Millighan were then
standing. The stillness amidst the huge rocks of limestone con-
veyed an idea of something awful. The place was uninhabited,
even by the birds of the air or the beasts of the field.
« Millighan,” said Flower, resting his arms across the muzzle
of his carbine, and peering into Millighan’s eyes, “ could you commit
murder ?” . i
“Not in cold blood,” said Millighan. “Why do you ask me
that question ?” . .
“Because I wish to know your sentiments on that head, said
Flower. “ I could shoot a man, or be shot at, Millighan, without a
flinch, but I could not kill a brave fellow from behind a tree, or
take a dirty advantage of a living creature worthy of the name ot
man.”
« Well, that’s what I feel,” said Millighan.
« Now, look here,” said Flower. « Suppose a mounted police-
man, or a thief-taker—a fellow of real pluck—was to come upon
you when you were alone, and challenge you to surrender, what
would you do ? Would you draw your trigger at once, and not
give him a chance ?” , ,
« No!” cried Millighan; “ I’d tell him to stand off and have a
fight for it.” , . .
“ Millighan,” said Flower, still keeping his eagle eye firmly
fired on Millighan’s, “are you speaking the truth?”
« Yes, so help me heaven!” „ ™
« Now let us suppose, that such a man as that fellow George Flower
the fellow who was drowned the other day—was to be in the
same position with you as I am now ?”


“ I’d tell him,” said Millighan, “ that one of us must die,
challenge him to fight fair !”
“ How fight fair ?”
« Why, I’d ask him to measure off fifty yards —to walk back-
wards five and twenty paces, and let me do the like.”
“ And do you think he would agree ?”
« y eSj I do; for he was a man. I have often longed to meet
that fellow in the field, for what I most love in this life is its excite-
ment, and to be killed by the hand of a man like Flower, or to
escape by killing him, in fair fight —either way, it would be some-
thing to suit me.”
“ Millighan,” said Flower, “ I believe every word that you have
uttered. Now, listen to what lam going to tell you. lam George
Flower /”
Millighan started, and stared at Flower, whose eyes were now
riveted on those of his adversary.
Millighan’s carbine dropped from his hand, but he did not
change colour, or betray any alarm.
“ Pick up your piece,” said Flower, pointing to the carbine, and
assuming a proud but careless attitude. “I am all that you have
said of me, Millighan. I might have shot you like a dog before I
spoke to you just now ; but I could not do that, for you are a man,
as well as myself, and you are as brave and as generous. Pick up
your piece, and walk backwards five and twenty paces. But let us
shake hands first.”
Millighan took Flower’s hand, and sighed heavily.
« Don’t surrender,” suggested Flower, half fearing that Millighan
would do so, and break the very charm that bound him to the
man.
“ Surrender !” cried Millighan, with a smile and a sneer. “ No,
I’ll never do that. And knowing you to be a brave foe, I have still
a chance. But tell me, are you in earnest ? Are you really George
Flower ? Yes, you must be. And hear this ” (his blood began to
warm), ** if you are not , we must fight this day, for we cannot after
this live together.”
Millighan took up his carbine, satisfied himself that there was
powder in the pan, and with his left thumb pushed the corner
of the flint round, so as to insure ignition when he drew the
trigger.
Flower placed his carbine against a huge stone, put his hands
into his pockets, and looked firmly at Millighan :
“I am George Flower !” said he. “ Who but George Flower
would deal with you as I do ? Don’t let us talk much, or I may
forget my mission, and become a bushranger myself.”


Flower then took up his carbine, examined the powder in the
pan, and touched the flint, as Millighan had done.
a Slower! for Flower you must be,” said Milhghan, graut me,
if you shoot me, one desire that I have had from boyhood—a desire
that has haunted mo. Ido not dread death, but I have a horror of
burial. If I fall, suffer me to lie on the very spot. Let the eagle
come and feast upon my carcase, pluck these eyes from their sockets,
and the skin from this brow. Let me lie here in this lonely region,
and let my bones bleach in the sun, and the ram fall, and the moon
and the stars shine upon them.” > .
“My God!” exclaimed Flower, seizing Milhghan by the arm,
“ the same dread of being buried has ever haunted me. If I fall by
your hand, let me rest here, with my head pillowed upon this gun.
Let no man living be shown the spot where I fell. w
“ Take your ground,” said Millighan. “I am ready.
“ There is my hand,” said Flower, “ and we meet in
another world we shall not be ashamed of one another.”
Tears were starting in the eyes of both Flower and Milhghan.
Each stepped backward pace for pace, Milhghan followed by the
little terrier, Nettles. When they were about fifty yards apart they
halted and looked at each other for several moments. Loth simul-
taneously levelled their carbines, but each was indisposed to be the
first to fire. Millighan discharged his piece. He had aimed at
Flower’s heart. His bullet whizzed past Flower’s head, and carried
away a part of the left whisker. . . i n i i
Flower fired—and Millighan fell flat on his face ! , 'The ball had
entered his left breast. Flower ran to the spot, to catch any last
word Millighan might desire to breathe—but—
Millighan was dead ! .
The dog Nettles became frantic. He flew at Flower, bit him
in the legs, and stood over his late master, barking defiantly.
Flower could not drive the dog away without violence, which he
would not resort to, and he could not, therefore, even touch the
bushranger’s corpse, now weltering in its blood.
Millighan’s gun was still grasped in his lifeless hand, and tnere
Flower suffered it to remain.
“ That head,” muttered Flower to himself, while the tears
streamed down his cheeks, “is worth a hundred pounds; but i could
not cut it off for a hundred thousand, and fifty tree pardons.
“ Nettles, come 1” said Flower to the dog. “1U take care ot
you Nettles.” But the terrier only growled in reply, and took up
a position near his late master’s head, and there remained.
1 * * * * * * *
The capture of the other two bushrangers was as easy as^possible


to a man of Flower’s strength of mind and body. On returning
to the den, he found only the shepherd, who was still in irons,
and the two women. Drohne and Slobey had gone out kanga-
rooing.
Flower released the shepherd, gave him a double-barrelled
gun, and told him to use it, if he were ordered to do so.
Bet and Sal were handcuffed together, and placed in an aperture
of the den; Flower and the shepherd then awaited the return
of Drohne and Slobey.
Flower had been remarkably abstemious of late. His sagacity
had pointed out to him that if he drank too much he might talk too
much, and be led into boasting, which would be dangerous. But
now that Millighan was no more, and the arrangements for his com-
rades’ capture quite complete, he went into “ the spirit-room,” and
drank four drams. “ Here’s to the memory of that brave man!”
said Flower; drinking the first dram at a gulp. “And here’s
to my noble self!” “And here’s to that dear woman, Mr.
Orford’s daughter!” “And here’s to the girls that love George
Flower!”
Flower’s tongue, too, had been tied up of late. He had not
been able to “ hold forth” in the strain he was accustomed to indulge
in : and such a volume of words and phrases pent up for so many
weeks was almost the death of him. He was dying to abuse some-
body, and lacked the provocation until Drohne and Slobey appeared;
for Flower could not address any unkind discourse to the women ;
on the contrary, when he was handcuffing them and putting them
away, he said, in the most gentle and earnest manner imaginable,
“ My sweet dears, it’s only a matter of form, which must be gone
through, for safety’s sake.”
Of handcuffs there was an abundance in the den, and Flower
began to manipulate the assortment, and select such as w'ould best
fit Drohne and Slobey.
“ How, then, shepherd,” said Flower, “ when these two gentle-
men arrive, you will be so good as to put these things round their
wrists. So ;do you see ? I’ll cover them with this double-barrelled
gun; do you see ? This is the way to handcuff two men together
—so ; do you see ? hands across, down the middle,”
These instructions had scarcely been given, when Flower heard
voices outside the den.
“ Here they come !” said Flower. “ Now for it!”
Drohne and Slobey were unarmed.
“Don’t get off your horses !” cried Flower, levelling his gun at
Drohne.
“Why not?” said Drohne and Slobey.


“ Because you are my prisoners ; and if you don t do as I toll you,
I’ll drop you right and left, just as I would quad.
“ What lark are you up to?” asked Drohne. .
«You will see that presently,” said Flower. ‘ Bide close
together; do you hear? There! that’ll do. Now, then, my
gentle shepherd, receive their wrists prettily. In ot that way,
stupid Hands across, didn’t I tell you? There. Thank you,
shepherd; that will do. Now, then, bring out another pair or two
of handcuffs.”
(The handcuffs were brought.) „ A
« Hold this gun, shepherd, and shoot the first man who moves
his hand against me,” said Flower.
« What is all this, Teddy ? Where s Mdhghan ? Have you
been drinking, and gone mad ?” inquired Drohne. <
«What an impatient fellow you are exclaimed Flower.
“ Wait a bit, and you will see through it all. _
Here Flower handcuffed together a stirrup-iron of either saddle,
so that the horses were coupled. The reins of the bud es
were then drawn over the heads of the horses and given to the
Shel S r e d w^men d were now released, and ordered to bring up four
of the other horses (government cattle), then grazing in
valley. While they were absent, Flower, unseen, possessed hll £ se
of all the gold and jewellery in the den, and packed it carefully
• n tvo new saddle-bags. “This is for Govment, he remarked
to a w 4 which denied the truth of his statemen
in this particular. “Why, this bus’ness, one
be worth about eight hundred pound to me he added filling
his pipe, and looking round the den. IMlg&
bountv monev on all these horses, and saddles, and guns, and
such like; and then these two are worth » ho ?^
Bet ouoht to be worth something, as she has been a boite
at large°for upwards of four years.
must say, in some things, though stingy m others Pool Milh 0 .
He very nearly did it for me. How that ball "hutted! Here
Flower scratched that part of his jaw
bullet had shorn of its whisker He then went and used
some very arrogant language to his prisoners, > V
understand him thoroughly. ... ,
The women had now returned with the horses.
.. Saddle ’em, my gals,” said Flower. “Saddle ’em, and to-night
we’ll drink with old Grimes, and perhaps kiss that pretty <>
kitchen. Oh dear! it’s a fairy world after all. Saddle the nags,
my gals. Help’em, shepherd. I’ll hold these gentlemen s horses.


Flower took the reins, and stroked the noses of the steeds on which
his prisoners sat.
The horses were saddled.
“ Now, then, shepherd, take the reins of these gentlemen’s horses
once more, while I go inside with Bet and Sal.”
These orders were obeyed, and Flower and the females retired
to the den,
“ Dress yourselves in the gorgeous array of the mounted police,”
said Flower.
Bet urged that it would be impossible for her to do this; but
Flower insisted on the difficulty being overcome.
“ Of course, put on the boots and spurs, and pouch-belt, and ail the
rest of it,” said Flower, in reply to a question from the woman.
“ And now you, Sally, come you here, and let Bet dress you up in
proper character. What a noble face you have for a private! Come
along! ”
The girl appeared to enter into the joke, and obeyed the mandate
with alacrity.
“Now then,Bet, bring something to drink upon the road,” said
Flower, “ for it’s a precious long ride, and we shall all be dry before
we reach old Grimes’s.”
Bet provided herself with a bottle of brandy, and Sal put a tin-
pannikin into the bosom of the uniform jacket, which was much too
large for her.
The only armed person of the party was George Flower. He
carried a carbine, a pair of loaded pistols, and a sword.
“ Shepherd, mount your horse, and lead the way! ” cried Flower.
“ And you, gentlemen, ride behind him, as you now are. You get-
up, Bet, and ride on my right; and you, Sal, come to the left.
Now, then, look alive ! ”
“What about the dogs ?” inquired the woman.
“ Oh, they may come with us,” said Flower; “ the whole lot of
’em. Call to them.”
The dogs, some seven in number, were called; they came, and
the party, or rather the procession, moved on.
Bet complained of being tired when she had ridden about nine
miles; but Flower drank with her, and cheered for awhile her
flagging spirits. He then recommended her to have a race with
Sal for a quarter of a mile; but she had no ambition to shine in
equestrian performances, and began’to abuse Flower with match-
less volubility, without producing, however, any effect, beyond that
of making him laugh immoderately.
*******
Suddenly Drohne pulled up his horse, and Slobey was obliged
to do the like.


“ What’s the row ? ” Flower inquired.
« The row is this,” said Drohne; « I’ll go no further with you,
5 ° U “ Nowf don’t talk in that way to me,” returned Flower; “ I don’t
like it. Grimes’s is not above three miles off now.”
“ Not so much,” said the shepherd, “two miles and a halt will
bring us to the house.” . Tni „
“ I know what the distance is,” said Drohne. But 111 go no
further. I have made up my mind.”
“ To what ? ” inquired Flower.
“ To die ! ” said Drohne.
« Oh, that you are sure to do,” said Flower. “ But why not
wait till you are sentenced? Now, come on ;it is getting cai •
“ And if we don’t reach the road before sundown, we shall be
in the bush all night,” said the shepherd.
“ You hear that ? ” said Flower.
“ I do,” said Drohne.
« Well, and why kick up a row ? ” said Flower.
“ Because lam ready to die,” replied Drohne. “ I may as well
give up my life to you as to the Ketch.” T *
3 “ Well, but I don’t want your life,” said Flower. All I want
is £lOO for you from Gov’ment. I never saw such an unreasonable
brute as you are in the whole course of my life.
“ Take me dead ! ” cried Drohne. „ , T
« You would be so ‘high’ in this weather, said Flower; and I
can’t get the reward unless I produce your body._ Now, don tbe
a fool. Come along. I hate being out all night in the bush. Go
on, you! ” Flower called to Slobey.
Drohne prevented the advance. T .
« Now, look here,” said Flower. “ Look here, Drohnm It tg,
as far as your life is concerned, a matter of time, and if time is o no
object to you, it is to me, remember-and if you won tgo on, 111 do
it at once.”
“ Do it! ” cried Drohne.
Flower levelled his carbine, and looked at Drohne.
« For God’s sake! ” screamed Bet and Sal.
“Have you made up your mind?” asked Flower, heedless of
the screams of the women.
« I have!” said Drohne, firmly.
“ That you will not go on? That you are to die by my hand,
instead of the hangman’s?”
“Yes!” said Drohne,
The women screamed again.
“ Fire ! ” cried Drohne.


Slobey tried to urge Drohne forward. Flower did all lie could
to move his prisoner by persuasion, and then by force. But Dhrone
was a strong man, and he was successful in checking the march.
“ Once more, I beg of you,’' said Flower.
“ Fire ! ” cried Drohne. “ Fire! ”
Flower shot him through the heart.
The corpse, still handcuffed to Slobey, was carried on the horse.
Flower holding it on the saddle from the near side.
The wailing of the women became deafening, and the faces of
the shepherd and of Slobey were as pale as the lifeless visage of
Drohne, whose head was now bent forward on the neck of his horse.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Emily had once more the misfortune to be robbed of the
■writing-ease, in which she kept the few trinkets that then belonged
to her. The thief she fancied was a charwoman, whom she used to
employ every Saturday to clean the windows and the furniture.
Roberts affected to think so too, and gave Emily great credit
for her acumen in guessing so correctly. “ But then,” he said, “it
would be madness to proceed against her without direct proof.”
Now, the truth was, that Roberts had given the contents of that
writing-case to the woman in whose company he had been disgraced
and degraded on the Paramatta race-course. The brooch, which
was his first present to his wife, was amongst the things the
writing-case contained, and a little gold pencil-case, a present from
her father on her twelfth birthday; a smelling bottle, the last
gift from her mother; and a small seal which had belonged to her
great grandfather. In the absence of money, of which he was now
very much in want, Roberts had bestowed these trifles upon “ the
Enchantress.” And she used to wear the brooch ; and the gold
pencil-case she appended to her watch-chain, likewise the little seal,
with which she used to seal numerous notes written for her by a
young female, who was both her companion and amanuensis.
When Emily spoke to Mr. Brade of this distressing robbery he
told her at once, but in confidence, his well-grounded suspicions—
that her husband was the thief, and that he had given them to the


woman who lived in the cottage at the top of Church-hill. Nay,
Tirade went further. He stated that he had seen the woman wearing
tooch and the pencil-case in her possession. But Emily, who
was very clever in reasoning (all confiding and really virtuous women
are! began to ask herself a variety of questions -.—First. Had not
Mr Brade an object in continually attempting to disparage dear
Reginald ? Secondly. Had not Reginald gone a dozen times to
the° police office and talked to the constables about the theft ?
Had he not come home and told her all that the constables had
said v Thirdly. Had not dear Reginald cried with _ vexation when
the theft was discovered ? Was he not frantic to think that his first
present should have been stolen from her ? Fourthly. Had not dear
Reginald gone into a violent passion with the charwoman, and
ordered her never again to darken his doors ? Fifthly. How could
Mr. Brade have seen these things in the possession of the woman .
Did he know her ? How absurd of Mr. Brade to think she was such
a perfect child ! There was something so foolish, so simple, in men
resorting to such trumpery artifices! Poor Reginald ! when would
the world see him in his proper light-as she did ? But no wonder
all the world seemed against him. It was nothing more than
human nature. He was the handsomest man in the world, therefore
all the handsome men hated him. He was the cleverest man m the
world, therefore all the clever men detested him. He was the most
open-hearted man in the world, therefore the open-hearted would
not praise him. He was the most witty man in the world, and
therefore ah! she could see through it all! Dear Reginald. And
to think that he should still swear by Mr. Brade, and fancy him
such a great friend. Just like Reginald. He was so honest himself,
he could not fancy any one otherwise until he had found them out.
Poor dear boy! brought up, as he had been, to every comfort and
luxury a scion of the aristocracy—the heir to a title—the idea
that he should be in such a horrid country, surrounded by such
people, and compelled to bear insult and contumely, and not be in
a position to show his real spirit! But the day would yet come.
It could not be far off; for the Almighty, though he often visited us
with affliction for a time, was always just and merciful in the end .
It was thus Emily was in the habit of discoursing with herselt
whenever her husband was caluminated by Mr. Brade, or by any-
body else.


CHAPTER XXIX.
Egberts might have earned at least five pounds a week by en-
grossing deeds and other legal documents, but he could not bring
his mind to work, and Emily did not press him to do so ; for, “ poor
fellow,” she thought he had quite enough to distract him. Her own
earnings, from needlework, were all they had to subsist upon, and
these rarely amounted to more than thirty shillings per week. It
was difficult to live upon this sum; but, somehow or other, Emily
contrived to do so, for there are no economists in this world to be
compared with women of lofty condition who have been brought
up luxuriously, and have fallen into poverty by reason of their love.
Their pride is aroused, and they can debar themselves, with a good
grace, of comforts with which even the poorest can but ill dispense.
Emily now kept no servant. She did everything herself, even
to washing her husband’s linen, and scouring the floors and the
passage of the cottage; and at night, when no one could see her, she
■would come out and whiten with a large sandstone, the steps in front
of the door.
One night, u the Enchantress,” with whom Eoberts had been
spending the day, flew into a violent passion, and stabbed him with
a carving-knife. The wound, which was in the left breast, bled
profusely. It was not deep enough to be fatal, but, nevertheless, it
was sufficient to arouse Eoberts’s fears. Pale and faint from the
loss of blood he staggered to the arms of Emily, who screamed on
beholding him in the condition in which he presented himself.
A man in a slouched hat, and muffled up in a cloak, he said, had
aimed that blow at his life. When-—he inquired of his wife—was
this persecution to end ?
Emily at once suspected Mr. Brade. Nay, she was convinced
that this cruel attack had been made upon Eeginald at Mr. Erade’s
instance, if he had not with his own hand inflicted that gaping
wound.
A doctor was immediately sent for, and came at about one o’clock
in the morning. He admitted that Eoberts had had a very narrow
escape, but expressed an opinion that he Avas in no sort of danger.
Emily Avatched by the convict's bedside during the night, and
prayed fervently that the sufferer might be spared to her, and that
his enemies might cease to pursue him. More satisfied than ever Avas


she that all Mr. Brade had told her, and all that Flower had repre-
sented, were wicked and malignant falsehoods.
Mr. Brade called. When he heard the story from Emily’s lips,
of the assassin in the slouched hat and the cloak, he smiled in her
face, and caused her to shudder at his want of feeling both for her-
self and her husband.
As soon as he could venture out alone, the convict, under pre-
tence of “ going for a walk in the domain,” wended his way to the
cottage of the Enchantress. Roberts was too faithful to vice to be
turned aside by a wound inflicted by a woman with a carving knife.
The Enchantress received Roberts with loving kindness, and
pleaded drunkenness as an excuse for her violent cruelty. Roberts
accepted the excuse and was satisfied with it; and, it possible, liked
the Enchantress all the better, since she had left a mark upon him.
It was inconsiderate—perhaps indelicate —under the circum-
stances, on the part of the Enchantress, to ask Roberts for money at
this meeting ; but her wants compelled her to overcome her feelings.
She wished for a new bonnet and some kid gloves.
How was Roberts to procure money ? What was easier than to
forge ? With whose name could he take the liberty ? Should it be
a bill or a cheque ? A cheque. And for how much ? Twenty
pounds. At first he thought of Mr. Brade’s name ; but he doubted
if Mr. Brade had any balance in the bank. Then it struck him he
would use the name of the attorney in whose office he had been
employed. At length he decided on Eieutenant-Colonel Wim-
bleton.
“ He’ll not dare to say a word about it when the forgery is dis-
covered,” said Roberts to himself. “ I’ll manage that.”
And forthwith Roberts drew a cheque for £2O in favour of a
e< Miss Burnes, or bearer,” and signed it, “ Edward Wimbleton,
Roberts could imitate any signature so exactly, that it was hard
to say which was the original and vvhich the counterfeit.
The reader is requested to understand that Miss Burnes was
under Colonel Wimbleton’s protection ; and Roberts w T as quite right
when he calculated that the Colonel would hardly like to be cross-
examined in a witness-box, touching his relations with this lady, in
the event of a trial in the Supreme Court.
Colonel Wimbleton’s cheque for £2O was cashed immediately on
presentation at the bank. And the Enchantress had her bonnet and
gloves, and several other presents. And she and Roberts were very
happy—as long as the £2O lasted.


CHAPTER XXX.
“Is Major Grimes at home?” Flower inquired of a servant on
arriving at the Major’s door.
“ Yes,” was the reply.
“ Then just ask him to come out, will you?” said Flower.
The Major made his appearance, and Flower alighted from i';
horse.
“ Good evening, sir,” said Flower,
“ Good evening,” said Major Grimes.
“You don’t recollect me, sir?” said Flower.
“ No,” said Major Grimes.
“ I had the honour of partaking of your hospitality a short time
ago, sir,” said Flower. “ And I’ve brought back your shepherd, sir,
and a queer lot along with him.”
“ Indeed! ” replied the Major, who was alarmed on recognising
the features of the man who spoke to him; for on presenting the
order for payment drawn by Millighan on the Lieutenant command-
ing the police, the Major had been made cognisant of the fact, that
he had been entertaining the notorious bushrangers, and not the
military.*
“I’m Flower, sir,” said George—“commonly called Mister Flower,
—the person as the papers made drunk, and drowned in the Hawks-
bury river. But the papers were in error, sir.”
“ Oh! I see,” said the Major,
“ No, you don’t, sir. Excuse me,” said George. “ Don’t be
frightened, Major. It is all right, as I will soon explain to you. I
have brought ’em in—the whole nest. One of ’em is a stiff’ ’un.
That man there on horseback, held up by that individual, Tambourine
Bet, is as dead as a door nail, Major. He compelled me to shoot him
about an hour ago. He’s dead, sir; but hardly cold, I take it.
There’s no mistake about my visit this time, Major. lam Flower—
George Flower, —frequently called Mr. George Flower-—the king of
traps. I’m as well known as the Governor, or the Chief Justice, or
the Colonial Secretary, There’s no mistake about me, Major.”
“ Oh, I see!” said Major Grimes, whose alarm was now on the
increase, for he did not believe a word Flower said ; but fancied the
* The mounted police were private soldiers, selected from her Majesty’s
Regiment of foot, then quartered in the colony.


gang had come again, to rob his house, and perhaps murder himself
and his family. _ T
« I wish you could see, Major,” said Flower. “It is all right, 1
assure you. X am George Flower, and have taken all that gang.
Them two men as came here w r ith me, and got tea and sugai and
grog, are now dead. Send for a light, Major, and I’ll show you one
of ’em, and then you’ll be convinced. And, then, here’s your shep-
herd. He helped me to capture ’em. It is all right, I assure you.
Major.”
The Major knew not what to think; but he ordered a light to
be brought, and surveyed the whole party.
Drohne, whose looks were now horrible and ghastly, linked to
his living comrade, was a striking proof that Flower s statements
were true. But the sight turned Major Grimes sick at And
when he saw Flower (out of curiosity, apparently) plunge his fore-
finger into the hole the ball had made—when he heard him exclaim,
“ Can’t fathom it,”—the Major almost fainted.
“ Where can I put ’em, sir ? ” inquired Flower; “ for I must ask
you to let me stay here to-night.”
“ I will see,” said Major Grimes. And he sent for his overseer,
who was a good deal surprised when he heard Flower’s story, and
saw the party he had brought in.
t£ Could you give us a barn,” inquired Flower, “ that would hold
the men, the horses, and the ladies ? These are ladies, you know,
overseer, and capital police they make, too. And a few feeds of
corn would not be a bad thing for the horses, overseer. Most of
’em belong to Gov’ment.”
It was decided that a stable should be devoted to the accorn-
modation of the party. Flower then superintended the extri-
cating of Drohne from Slobey—the latter, in reply to a question from
Flower, having said that he should not like to sleep all night in such
close contact with Drohne. Flower handcuffed Slobey’s hands
behind his back, and chained him, with a bullock-chain, to a ring
attached to the manger in one of the stalls. And then with the
assistance of the woman and the girl—the latter holding the lantern
over her head—Flower laid out the dead body of Drohne in the
next stall, upon a broad sheet of bark, and borrowed an old
white tablecloth from the overseer, and spread it beneath the corpse.
A third stall was set apart for the females. They were fastened
with dog-chains to a ring-bolt. This was done lest they might
release Slobey during the night. ,
Flower, having made “all snug,” betook himself to Major Grimes s
kitchen, where he found mutton chops, fried cakes, and tea, all
ready for him; and the pretty servant-girl in attendance.


“ A ou little dreamt, did you, Susey, when I was here last, talk-
ing to you so quietly, that I’d be back so soon ? You had no idea
then of the lay I was on, had you ? ” said Flower.
“ No, sir.”
“ Don’t call me ‘ sir,’ Susey,” said Flower. “ Call me your love,
or your darling; but never say sir, or mister,”
The girl laughed, and presently remarked—
“ And do you mean to say you shot that man ?”
“ Why not ?” demanded Flower. « Wouldn’t he have cut your
throat just as soon as look at you ? Wouldn’t he have taken hold of
you so—and gone so ?” He seized her round the waist, and rubbed
his hand across her delicately formed neck. “ I say, what heavenly
eyes you’ve got, Susan ! Have you ever been in love?”
“ Ho,” she replied. “ Have you ?”
“ Hever till I saw you,” said Flower. “ And I have been in
love ever since, and I’m now in love. Come, what do you say,
Susan ? There’ll be a public-house—fine trade—lots of money,
pleasant company, gig and horse, and all that sort of thing. Be Mrs.
Flower. Say the word at once.”
“ You are joking,” said the girl, with a blush.
“ Marriage is not a joke,” said George. “ And without being
engaged to you, Susan, I could not think of asking you to give mo
a kiss, and lam dying to have one. Some folks are not particular
in these matters; but I am, very. Upon my word, I never loved a
girl till I saw you. Won’t you, Susey ? Won’t you be mine ?”
Susan sighed, and looked consent. The truth is, that she was
vastly pleased with Flower’s fun the first day she saw him in the
guise of a mounted policeman. His frank manner and his laughing-
face had won her heart, and she had often thought of him, and
smiled at the recollection of many of his speeches to her.
“ I shall be up all night, Susey,” whispered Flower; “ and when
everybody is in bed and asleep, you come in here with a light; let
it be at about two o’clock in the morning, and we’ll settle matters
and arrange about our marriage. Don’t let us say anything more
just now, for old Grimes will be coming presently; but don’t you
go away, Susey. lam very anxious for you to hear all I have been
doing since we parted. Mind, at two o’clock you are to meet me
here. Give us a kiss; nobody will see us. Thanks, dearest!”
Major Grimes came into the kitchen, and Flower gave him a
succinct account of all that had transpired. Major Grimes was loud
in his praises of Flower’s bravery and skill, and no wonder Susan
was already infatuated with her hero.
“ Sir,” said Flower, when, with the permission of the Major, ho
had lighted his pipe, “ I have a great favour to ask of you.”


“ What is it, Flower ?”
« Why, sir, you see Gov’ment is very particular, and Gov’ment’s-
quite right to be so, for frauds in dead bodies have been done by
constables, and about eighteen months ago I lost five and forty
pound by taking in a dead ranger to Hyde-park barracks, who was-
so far gone that nobody could swear that it was the man for whom
the reward was offered. I shot that man in fair fight at Bong Bong,
and took him in a cart to Sydney; was thirteen days on the road,
and after all lost the five and forty, and was laughed at by all the
police office. Superintendent Heely said that I ought to have got
a certificate from the nearest magistrate while the body was fresh
and not putrefied. Don’t you see, sir ? Now by the time I get
this body down to Sydney—and it will take me twelve days good—
he must be gone ; nobody could swear it was Drohne, you see, sir ?
So, what I want from you, Major, is the certificate. I want you, if
you would be so kind, to go over the marks on the body, and com-
pare them with the description in the Gazette. If you would be so
kind, sir, I’d take it as a favour, for I should not like to lose £IOO.
I’m a poor man, Major.”
Major Grimes did not relish the idea of this post mortem exami-
nation, but it was a part of his duty to undertake it, and he therefore
made no objection to Flower’s request.
« Couldn’t we make it a moral lesson, sir?” said Flower.
“ How do you mean ? ”
« Why, sir, have up all your assigned servants, and let ’em see
the dead, and hear me talk about him. I’m an awful public speaker,
Major, whenever I have a good subject, and this is one, and no
mistake. I could talk Wentworth or Warded stone blind on it, I
only want your people to look on—to see the corpse. I shall not
say a word to them. I shall only address my observations to you,
and they’ll get ’em by a side wind, as it were.”
Major Grimes agreed with Flower, and ordered all his convict
servants to be summoned. While he was absent, Flower filled his
pipe again, and again made love to Susan.
Flower truly was a great orator by nature, and required not
time to give his speeches the gloss of art, by thinking over what he
should say.
The convict servants—thirty-nine in number —were assembled
in the stable; and Flower, carrying the lantern and smoking his
pipe—followed by Major Grimes with the Gazette in his hand—
jostled through the crowd, and approached the dead body of Drohne.
lie paused for about two minutes, and then began :
“ That man, Major Grimes, weighs about fourteen stone, and
the reward for him is £IOO sterling, so that his carcass is worth
about ten shillings a-pound. Fine young man; broad chest; well


limbed, and ribbed up. When that young man came to this country,
transported for life, he had before him noble prospects, Major. He
was assigned to a good master. If he had been steady for about
five years he would have got his ‘ticket/* But he was lazy, and that
made him discontented and restless. Laziness is at the bottom of
all mischief, Major. So he took to the bush, and a pretty business
he has made of it. He forgot that if the devil puts it into the
heads of convicts to turn bushrangers, Providence checkmates the
devil, by creating traps like George Flower, Major, and prompting
Gov’ment to offer high rewards for ’em. Gov’ment’s a glorious
thing, Major. I respect Gov’ment. This young man has come to
an ignominious end, as all must come to that doesn’t know when
they are well off. That man in the next box will be hung, and I
can’t pity him. Are lifers to bolt, laws to be broken, drays to
be robbed, and gentlemen and ladies to be put in bodily fear ?
Civilisation is not such a jackass as to stand any of that sort of
nonsense. It can’t be done for the money. What’s Bourke paid
for ?” [General Bourke was the Governor.] “ What’s old Frank
Forbes paid for ? ” [Francis Forbes, Esq., was the chief justice.]
“ What’s Thomson paid for ? ” [Thomson was the colonial secretary.]
“What am I paid for? Why, we are all paid for preserving the
glorious majesty of resistless justice, and for nothing else, Major
Grimes, and let them deny it who dare. But let us look at this
man, sir. You observe, Major, ‘ wen on neck/ That wen would
have been an awful eye-sore to the Ketch, for look here, it would
have bothered him. It would have been in the way of the rope.
That makes good the saying, ‘ that a man who’s born to be shot
will never be hanged.’ Having observed that wen, sir, let me direct
your attention to a mermaid on his breast. There she is, you see,
with her curls, and likewise her fish’s tail, and a looking-glass in
her hand. I don’t believe in mermaids, for my part. Having
docketed the mermaid, sir, will you be so good as to cast your eyes
on his Anchor and Hope, and then these bull dogs, barking at a
Bow-street officer? And now, with your permission, sir, we will
turn him over, and look at the man hanging on his back. He must
have had some idea of his fate before him, or rather behind him, as
it happens. What a fool a man must be to have himself disfigured
in that fashion! What does the Gazette say is the colour of his
hair, sir ? ”
“ Pteddish brown,” replied Major Grimes.
“ There it is, sir, reddish brown enough. And his eyes, Major?”
“ Light blue.”
“ There they are—light blue, look, sir,” said Flower, lifting the
lids. “ And what else, Major?”
* Ticket of Leave.


“ Lost a front tooth.”
« There it is, or rather there it isn’t,” continued Flower, pulling
the clammy lips asunder. “ Have you any doubt, Major Grimes,
that this is the body of Edward Drohne ?”
“ None whatever,” said the Major.
« Then that’s all I require,” said Flower, and he rose from his
knees, washed his hands in a bucket of water, and (without per-
mission) wiped them on the corner of a smock frock worn by one of
the audience.
“Now then, Major Grimes, the business being over, these parties
may retire to their huts,” said Flower. “ I shall be to and fro
all night, and there’s no occasion for anybody else to watch this
stable.”
*******
«That’s a nice girl, sir, that servant of yours,” said Flower,
when himself and Major Grimes were returning to the house.
“ Yes, she is, indeed,” replied the Major; “ and she’s a very
respectable girl, too. She’s the daughter of a farmer who died near
Bathurst a few months ago, very badly off* and left a large family
behind him.”
“ Indeed, sir ? She’s a currency lass, of course? said blower.
«Yes,” said Major Grimes ; “ but she reads and writes very
nicely.”
“ That’s a great gift,” said Flower. “ I have always felt the
want of a good education. By heaven, Major Grimes, if I’d had a
good education, I’d have been a sort of a Boney-Party. Now, look
here, sir,” he continued, “ moral effect is a very fine thing, and does
a great deal of good; but what s the use of moral eftect it you don t
carry it properly out ? Gov’ment’s very liberal. I don t complain,
of Gov’ment. But when a man like me, sir, rids a district like this,
sir, of a gang of men like these, sir, ought not the district to mark
its sense,' sir, by coming forward and putting their names down for
something handsome, sir ? What would five hundred pound be to
a large and wealthy district like this, compared with the moral effect
that act would produce ? ” _ .-in
“ I agree with you,” said Major Grimes; “and the district shall
do it.”
“ Thank you, sir,” said George; “ and if you ever have a dray
robbed, you have only to drop a line to Mr. Flower, care ot 1 ollack s
public-house, opposite the police office, and I will make it all light
for you. You’ll lend me a cart, sir, or sell me one for Gov ment,
and let that shepherd go with me to-morrow ?”
“ Oh, yes, by all means.”
“Then I’ll bid you good night, sir. There’s a bed all ready for
me, I see, sir—here on the dresser. Good night, Major.”


Major Grimes bade Flower “ Good night.” Proud man as he
was, he involuntarily gave the thief-taker his hand when they
parted,
* * * * * * »
At two o’clock—exactly at two—Susan, on tip-toe, stepped into
the kitchen. “ Hush ! ” she said to Flower, who clasped her in his
arms—“ hush! the Major’s room is not far off.”
* * * *• # * *
The next morning Drohne’s body was placed in a rudely formed
coffin and put into a cart. Every precaution had been previously
taken to make it as little offensive as possible. The shepherd was
to drive the cart. Slobey and Sal were to sit upon Dhrone’s coffin,
and Tambourine Bet, still dressed as a mounted policeman, was to
ride beside Flower on horseback. All was ready, and it was now
time to make a move.
“ God bless you, my dear girl,” said Flower to Susan, who was
weeping; “ I’ll come back and marry you, you may take your oath.
Good bye!”
The Major came into the verandah to see the procession off, and
say “Farewell” to Flower, who beg’ged the Major not to forget
the subscription, for the sake of a really good and wholesome moral
effect.
The party set out for Sydney— the shepherd in high spirits at
the prospect of getting a ticket of leave.
The cart had to be taken a round-about way before it could
reach the road. Just as they were ascending a hill Flower’s keen
eye discovered a female form coming towards them. It was Susan,
who had taken a short cut across the fields, on purpose to join George
Flower’s party. She had a small bundle in her hand.
“Halloa, Susan !” exclaimed Flower. “ Where are you off to?”
“ I am going with you .”
“Impossible! what would old Grimes say ?”
“1 don’t care. You have stolen my heart.” (Susan began to
cry.)
“ Don’t cry, my dear girl,” said Flower, “ Don’t cry. Stolen
your heart, Susan ? Well, why can’t you love me rationally, and
have patience ? ”
“ I must go with you, George.”
# “Well, if you must—you must; but it is a very pretty business.
Grimes will never get up the subscription; but he’ll try and have
me cashiered out of the police, instead. Don’t cry, Susan.”
Flower got off his horse, slipped the rein over his wrist, held
riusan round the waist in his right arm, looked affectionately into
her face, and kissed the tears from her cheeks.


“ Don’t cry, my girl. It is all up with mo. I ha\ c shirked toe
knot for a long time past, but lam caught at last. You have done
it, Sue, and lam not sorry for it. Only fancy me married! Well,
never mind, it can’t be helped. Here, you—shepherd ! Get down
off that cart and get on this horse, and gallop up to old Grimes’s,
and tell old Grimes that Susan has bolted of her own accord and
joined me, and that lam going to marry her. Tell him it is all
right. Make haste. We will go slowly along the road, and you
will soon overtake us. Give my respects to the Major. Off with
you! Come along, Sue. Get into the cart, my treasure, and sit
beside your George, in the flower of youth and beauty s pride. 111
make you a trump of a husband, you 11 see, you beautiful darling.
There now, don’t cry any more. We’ll be married in Sydney, and
if that won’t be another moral effect of this trip, why the devil’s in
it.” , . . .
About half an hour had elapsed, when the shepherd came
galloping back with a note in his hand.
« Halloa !” said George. “ Here’s an order for us to go back,
I’m afraid. The old boy is in a rage.”
“ But I’ll not go back,” said Susan.
The note did not contain the order Flower expected. It in-
formed him that Major and Mrs. Grimes trusted to his honour, and
hoped he would lead a happy life with the excellent girl whose
affections he had engaged. And there was a message for Susan.
“ Tell her we forgive her, and hope to hear from her as often as she
has time to write to us.”
« Hooray ! I’m in for it at last!” cried Flower, when Susan
threw her arms round his neck and clung to him, and kissed him,
regardless of the presence of Bet, Sal, and Slobey, who were look-
ing on.
" A smile passed over the face of the manacled prisoner, who
was now lying at full length beside the box which contained
the body of Drohne, when he heard Flower’s ejaculation, and
remembered how Flower used to talk to Millighan about that
pretty girl at old Grimes’s 5 ” and suggested to Millighan that he
should not mind carrying her oft’ to the den some fine moonlight
night.
Flower’s meeting with Sheriff; at Penrith, was a very amusing
scene. The little horse knew his master’s voice, and seemed mad
with delight on again beholding him. And Flower hung about
Sheriff’s neck, kissed his nose, patted him all over, talked to him, and
asked him a hundred questions.
“ The cart is getting very unpleasant,” said Flower to Susan,
“ and the shepherd shall drive the rest of the journey. You shall
7


ride on Sheriff. I’ll borrow a side saddle. He’ll carry you as-
quiet as a dog, and X will ride beside you on this bia- horse of
Gov’ment’s,”
CHAPTER XXXI.
“ Dearest Beloved !— I am going to dine tins evening with
my friend, Brade. lam going there now. Brade’s cabriolet will
be at your door at half-past five, and the groom will lead the horse,
and bring you in the cabriolet to Brade’s villa. Make yourself
look very smart, Emmy, dearest. We dine at seven; but be ready
to leave home at half-past five. Ever your affectionate,
“ Reginald.”
Emily was very wretched when she read this note ; but, fearful
of offending her husband, she made preparations accordingly. She
washed and ironed a lace collar, and, ill as she could afford it,
bought a new neck-ribbon, and a pair of pale kid gloves; and she
re-trimmed her straw-bonnet, and mended her worn-out parasol.
At half-past five precisely, Mr. Brade’s cabriolet was at Emily’s
door. Emily was barring the shutters and the back door, when
George Flower, who had left his party in the “ cells” of the police-
office, made his appearance on horseback, accompanied by Susan, on
little Sheriff.
“ Get off, Susan,” said George; “ and let me take you to Mrs.
Harcourt, and hear what she thinks about you. Stop a moment.
I’ll help you off.” Flower lifted his bride elect from the side saddle,
and placed her on the ground.
“ What! George Flower!” exclaimed Emily. “ Why, they
said you were drowned !”
“ Oh, no, not yet, Mrs. Harcourt,” said George. “Em still
living, and I’m going to be married. This lassie has managed to
hook me.”
“ Indeed, I’m very glad to hear it. Bray, sit down,” said
Emily.
“Her name’s Susan,” said Flower. “She’s a currency lass.
Pretty girl, isn’t she ? And she’s as good as old gold. Arn’t you,


Sue ?” He placed his hand affectionately on the girl’s shoulder, and
looked into her lovely, honest face.
“ How dreadfully sunburnt you are, George,” said Mrs. Harcourt.
“ And you look quite haggard and weary.’’
“ Yes; I have had a good deal of anxiety of late,” said Flower.
“Eut it will be all over soon. Won’t it, Sue? I shall now have
some rest, I hope, in the snug little home I mean to make for my-
self. Where’s the Captain ? How is he getting on ?”
« He is at Mr. Brade’s, and I am going there to dine, and fear
I shall be late; but you’ll come and see me to-morrow,” said Emily;
and she began to pull on her gloves, and express her sorrow to
Susan that she was compelled to go away.
Flower rose from his chair, and surveyed Emily from head to
foot.
“ That’s Brade’s cab at the door,” said he. “ I thought I knew
it.”
“ Yes,” said Emily. “He has sent it to take me to the villa.”
“ Has he ? How good of him ! How came you to be acquainted
with Brade ?” Flower asked.
Emily explained; and informed Flower, that Reginald and
herself had dined at the villa one Sunday ; and that Mr. Brade had
since been in the habit of calling.
“ Does he come here with your sanction ? Is it your wish that
he should come here ?” inquired Flower.
“ Why, to tell you the truth, George, I would rather that he
stayed away : and I am grieved at the thought of now going there ;
but then, you know how poor Reginald is situated , and Mr. Blade
being a magistrate, we dare not give him offence.”
«Oh ! that’s it, is it ? Go into your room, Mrs. Harcourt, and
take off your bonnet immediately.”
Flower drew himself up, and spoke in an imperious tone of voice
to the lady. The expression of his face ajf that moment reminded
her forcibly of her own father’s, when he was in a passion. Flower’s
lips were quivering, and the veins in his neck swelling to an unusual
size, while his eyes seemed to dart fire. Even Susan was alarmed
when she beheld that fiendish look.
“Go to Brade’s villa ? By heaven you shall not! ”he continued.
“ I know Brade, and liked him; but as to allowing him to come near
any woman for whom I’d a regard, I’d cut his throat first, I now
see Avhy he wanted to get me out of the way, the villain. But,
thank God, I have come in the very nick of time to disappoint him,
and thwart his diabolical purpose. Take off your bonnet Go you
shall not! I will go instead of you, and give Brade a section of my
mind.”


“But remember, George, Mr. Brade is a magistrate,” said
Emily.
« What do I care for that ? lam not in Brade’s power.”
“ But Reginald is,” said Emily.
“ No, he is not,” said Flower. “ I can smash Brade. He is in
my power.” Rushing into the street, Flower ordered Mr. Brade’s
groom to take the cabriolet away, and tell his master it was not
wanted,
“Let nobody say there’s nothing in dreams,” said Flower, when
he returned to Emily’s presence, “ I dreamt in the bushranger’s
den, that I saw with my own eyes what my coming here has pre-
vented happening. Let Susan remain with you, please, till I come
back. I’ll not be very long away.”
Flower’s looks, voice, and manner now carried Emily back to
the days when she was the joy and the pride of Orford Hall. His
face was now the image of her father’s. Agitated beyond descrip-
tion, the unhappy woman burst into tears. She was glad that
Flower had returned, and yet she feared that his violence with Mr,
Brade would entail some disaster on her husband.
Susan was full of the glorious achievements of George; but Emily
listened to them with a tame ear ; for her thoughts were engrossed
in compassing the question—
“ How will this matter affect poor Reginald ?”
On arriving at Mr. Brade’s villa, Flower was struck with the
stillness of the place. Although the magistrate kept a number of
servants, not a soul was to be seen. On hearing the sound of a
horse’s hoofs, Mr. Brade came out into the verandah. When he
beheld Flower, he stood aghast. He believed him to be dead: for
Flower had enjoined Major Grimes not to mention the capture ; and
he contrived to bring his party into Sydney without being re-
cognised upon the road.
“ Is that you, Flower ? ” said Mr, Brade.
«It is,” said George. “Is there nobody to take my horse to the
stable ? ”
“ I’m afraid there is not,” replied Mr. Brade. “My rascally
servants have all gone away.”
“ Then I will tie the nag to the fence,” said Flower. He did
so ; and placing his hands in his pockets, and walking boldly up to
the magistrate, looking him full in the face, and becoming rod
with rage, Flower said, in a measured tone of voice—
“ Are you not a cowardly villain ? ”
“ What do you mean, sir?” said Mr. Brade, pale with fear.
“ Why do you turn white and cower under my eye ? Why do
your hands shake ? You are all alone ! No one to come to you


if you scream for help! None to save you if you implore for mercy
from a strong ruffian! You expected an innocent lamb, you wily wolf,
and you find yourself face to face with a roaring lion. And seizing
Mr. Brade by the arms, Flower pinioned him with his back to the wall,
glared hideously at him, grinding his teeth while he foamed at the
mouth, and the saliva ran down either side of his finely chiselled
chin.
“ Release me, Flower!” gasped Mr. Brade.
“You knew she was a lady. You knew she was an object of
pity, such as the world never saw before. You knew that the end
of her visit here to-day would have been her death—that she would
have killed herself. And yet you
“ Release me, Flower!”
“ Don’t speak, or I’ll take your life here, and spare you the dis-
grace and misery lam going to bring upon you. I will see you,
before three months have passed away, walking about the streets of
Sydney in ragged clothes, and your toes peeping through your boots.
You shall be starving, and compelled to pick up the half-crown I
will throw to you, just as I would throw a bone to a hungry dog.
You shall be turned out of your office, and forbade to come near
Government House. Your friends will not dare to countenance you
mark my words —you cowardly villain ! And in your po\ ei ty
and wretchedness, your vanity shall not be consoled by the reflection
that your name has been coupled with that of the lady you expected
here this evening. No you shall not have that satisfaction. Good
evening to you, Mr. Brade.”


CHAPTER XXXII.
When Flower left Mr. Brade he went forth in quest of Roberts.
He knew all Roberts’s old haunts, but he could not find him at any
of them. From a woman, however, Flower learnt of Roberts’s
disaster on the race-course, and of his being stabbed by “ the En-
chantress.” To her cottage he therefore repaired, and placed his
ear to the shutter. He heard Roberts’s voice. He was teaching
the woman how to play double dummy.
Flower knocked at the door, and as soon as it was opened he
forced his way into the room.
The Enchantress had never had the pleasure of Mr. Flower’s
acquaintance, and she stared first at him and then at Roberts, who
appeared, on observing his late master, extremely uncomfortable.
“ How do you do, Captain ?” said Flower, holding out his hand.
“ Quite well, thank you, Mr. Flower,” said Roberts, giving his
hand to George, But when Roberts wished to withdraw his hand
he felt it detained, and presently he roared with the intense pain
which the iron grasp of George Flower’s fist occasioned him. It
seemed as though his hand were a vice ; the knuckles and the bones
of the fingers were cracking under that awful pressure; his rings
entered his flesh, and one of them was broken.
“ Don’t make such a noise,” said the Enchantress, “ you will have
all the police here.”
“ My dear madam, I am all the police,” said Flower, “ and a
pretty scrape you will get into for harbouring a convict, contrary to
an act passed by the Governor in council. lam sorry to deprive
you of this gentleman’s company, but he must go with me, unless
you will permit me to punish him with this whip in your house.
Yes, you really must give me leave,” and thereupon Flower seized
Roberts and began to belabour him soundly.
“ On second thoughts, I wall not take him with me, madam,” said
Flower. “ I could not trust myself alone with him to-night. He
may remain with you till two o’clock in the morning, and at that
hour he may go home to his wdfe, and tell her that he has been at
Mr. Brade’s villa, on the South Head road.”
“ And are you really Mr. George Flower ? ” said the Enchantress.
“ Well, I have often longed to see you. I heard you were such a
handsome man.”


“ And so I was before I became so sunburnt,” said Flower. “ I
bear that you went to the races with my friend the Captain. While
the Captain scrapes the mud off my boots, oblige me, madam, with
the whole story, and I’ll say nothing about finding a convict in your
house at this hour of the night.” , „
Eoberts did not require to be told twice to remove the mud from
Flower’s boots ; and the Enchantress, seeing him so employed, and
knowiim- full well the extent of Flower’s power, related the story,
while Flower smoked a pipe, and drank a bottle of pale ale which
the Enchantress produced.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
Flower married Susan Briarly, and resigned his appointment in
the police office. He took a public-house; and Emily painted his
sign-board in oils—a portrait of his famous horse. Ihe house was
called “ The Sheriff’s Arms.” Flower also became the proprietor
of a livery stable, and engaged in boat-building; and in all these
ventures he was remarkably successful. Abrahams, the Jew used
to advance him any sums of money he required at a moderate rate
of interest, for Abrahams was under very peculiar obligations to
Flower, and would not have offended him on any account, in short,
George Flower was now one of the most prosperous men in the
Colony of New South Wales.
Mr. Brade was dismissed from the magistracy for improper con-
duct, which Flower brought to light, and was walking about t ie
streets of Sydney, almost bare-footed, and without a shilling in his
pocket; and sure enough, Mr. Brade did receive money from George
Flower’s hand —not half-a-croAvn, but a five pound note. And
Flower paid his passage to England, after reluctantly forgiving him
the offence of which he had been guilty. , A
There was a constable who owed much to Mr. Brade, and
he fancied that Eoberts was the cause of his patron s ruin. He
therefore brought to the notice of the Bench, that ‘‘this convict,
assigned to his wife, was seldom at home with his mistress,


and that ho was “in the habit of staying out all night.” The Bench
regarded this as extremely improper, and the constable was ordered
to apprehend Roberts on the next occasion that he found him in the
streets, or in a public-house at a late hour. Soon after this, Roberts
and the Enchantress were drinking together, and playing cards, at
about two o’clock in the morning ; and on the constable breaking
in upon them, the Enchantress assaulted the constable; and he,
therefore, not only took Roberts into custody, but the woman also,
and both were locked up in the cells.
The next day, Emily was summoned to appear. She came, in
fear and trembling, and beheld her husband in the dock—and beside
him the Enchantress, who nodded familiarly to Emily, and then
told “ Reginald ”to “ cheer up.” When Emily heard the deposition
sworn to by the constable, and observed that her husband was silent
when the magistrate asked him what he had to say in his defence
when she found that he could not, or would not look at her—when
she heard the Enchantress abuse the magistrate, and tell him that
“ Charley” was a much finer gentleman than him (the magistrate),
she w'as deprived, not only of power of speech, but of reason.
“ Have you anything to say, madam ? ” inquired the magistrate.
Emily stared at him, and sank into a chair. At this moment
Elower came into the office, and took the unhappy woman away.
The Bench were of opinion that the prisoner’s services should
be withdrawn from his wife and resumed by Government. Judgment
was delivered accordingly, and Roberts taken from the dock, and
led to Hyde-park barracks, where he was divested of his blue frock
coat and tasteful neck-tie, his fancy waistcoat, drab pantaloons,
Wellington-boots, black beaver hat, and lemon-coloured kid-gloves ;
and clothed in a suit of coarse canvass apparel, consisting of a smock
frock and trowsers, with the letters H.P.B. (Hyde-park barracks)
and two broad arrows painted on various parts of either gar-
ment. In lieu of his white linen shirt, a coarse blue cotton garment
■was given to him, and he was fitted with a pair of “slop ” boots,
with huge hobnails in the soles and heels. The cap he was required
to wear was made of black cloth, and shaped like an old fashioned
nightcap with a large button on the top. He was made a messenger,
and his duties were to carry letters from the superintendent of
police to the various public offices.
Emily was now perfectly satisfied of the truth of all that she had
previously disbelieved ; but still, she could not banish “ the unhappy
wretch” (she so spoke of him) from her gentle mind. She no longer
desired to see him, or to speak to him; but since he was her
husband, and she had loved him, she could not utterly abandon her
interest in him. She was now living under the roof and under the


care of George Flower and his wife, who frequently to
her the advisability of returning to England, and claiming the for-
giveness of her parents. But Emily’s invariable reply was, “ Not so
long as that man lives.'’
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Flower bought two vessels —a ship and a brig. The ship \\ as
sent on a whaling expedition; and the brig, with a gang of men,
was sent “ sealing ” to Macquarie Island. In six months, both
vessels returned —the ship laden with sperm oil, and the brig w ith
7,000 skins. The value of the two cargoes was £37,000. Such
luck had never been heard of; and Flower, like a prudent man,
sold all his property, and invested the proceeds in the Bank of New
South Wales, and lived upon his dividends, which were rather more
than five thousand pounds a-year.
Roberts’s first forgery in New South Wales had been so successml,
that he w r as tempted to take a loftier flight. He conceived a
noble project. He was to obtain a very large sum of mono} -
purchase a vessel in the name of some “ free man” —have her fitted
out as a whaler —and in her get to America or the Cape of Goo
Hope.
There was a convict in Carter’s barracks, called Sly—a shipmate
of Roberts—who was an engraver—a very clever man in his trade ;
a man who had successfully copied the plate of a provincial banx,
and had paid, or rather was paying, the penalty for so doing.
Roberts had a conference with Sly, and Sly said that “ the plate of
the Bank of New South Wales would be mere child s play to him.
Roberts and Sly forthwith “ collaborated,” and between them pi in-
duced a work of astounding merit, so far as success was concerned.
Sly did the engraving, and Roberts the signatures of the directois
and the secretary. They made five hundred twenty-pound notes,
and gradually cashed them. Amongst other signatures of Bank
Directors, Roberts, with a laugh upon his lips, used those of G eorge
Flower and Robert Wardell. _
A convict, who had been formerly a commander in the Royal


Xavy, was now consulted about the vessel, and the means of escape.
He suggested a fast-sailing schooner, then for sale, and “ lying off
the Queen’s wharf.” The boat was purchased, well stored with
provisions, and all were ready for embarkation.
Three casks with false tops, covered with biscuits, were con-
structed to hold Roberts, Sly, and the naval gentleman, until the
vessel was “safe outside the Heads”—the harbour of Port Jackson.
There was now nothing whatever to stand in the way of their escape
from the colony, except Roberts’s evil propensity. He must needs
invite the Enchantress to share his wild fortunes in—what he was
pleased to call America—“ the mother penal country.” The En-
chantress said she would, and Roberts then laid bare the whole of
lus heart, and informed her of what the reader is already in posses-
sion, touching his design to escape. But the woman did not keep
her word, She gave notice to the police, went on board the
schooner, and pointed out the three casks of biscuits in which the
convicts were sitting, and peeping, respective!v, through the bung-
holes.
_ The moment they were detected, each wanted to turn “ king’s
evidence,” and convict the other two. But the Custom-house
officer who was on board, and who had some voice in the matter,
very properly observed, “ Well, but you can’t all three be king’s
evidence—draw lots for it.” This was done. A pipe-stem was
broken into three unequal pieces, and the ex-naval hero was the
lucky man—he drew the longest piece.
The forgery part of the business had not yet transpired, and
Roberts had in his pocket a quantity of the £2O notes, and with
these he purchased his release from the constable who had him in
charge, and who permitted Roberts to knock him down and run
away, while Sly was being conveyed to the jail by another constable
whom he had not the means of bribing.
Sly was hanged, and Roberts made the best of his way towards
Bathurst, where he joined two other runaway convicts of desperate
character—men who (to use the colonial trope) had ropes around
their necks; and, ere long, Roberts was the captain of the gang, which
his fears induced him to increase until it numbered seven. At the
3lead of this gang, or rather in the rear of it, Roberts committed
several highway robberies, and in more than one instance wilful and
wanton murder. Large rewards and conditional pardons, as usual,
were offered for the apprehension of these bushrangers, but still they
contrived to remain at large, and carry on their depredations with
vigour and daring.


CHAPTER XXXV.
One morning, Flower read in the Australian newspaper the
following paragraph “ The notorious Eoherts, the confederate of
SK wL warfanged for the forgery on the Bank of New South
Wales, is one of the gang bXk-
driverln charge'of°« dray belonging to Captain Eaine, of Bathurst,
which dray was robbed of sundry stores about a fortagh ago^
Flower had given up business of every sort and kind, and wa
now lWne quietly in a villa which he had built on a lovely spot of
tod rerioddngthe ocean. It was near a place called Bundye
Biv and not very far distant from the famous bay (Botany) whence
the colony of New South Wales has derived its disagreeable (from
association) cognomen. Emily was still under the protection of Mr
and Mrs. Flower. Indeed, it was owing to her detcmination
to nuit the colony so long as her husband was ah\e, that Mower re
maiued in tbeSoutb, for' he now panted to put foot again on the
soil where he was reared, and stand on Yewbray Bridge, once more
and say “ I would do it again to-morrow. He robbed my sister of
her virtue, and he broke the old woman’s heart, as well as the dec
Sirl ifwas in a strange frame of mind that George Flower stroUed
down to the beach which bounded his domain, and faced the strong
wind, which blew in his face and tossed about his long thin hair, and
sent the monster waves hissing and creaming to his leet.
“ Roberts a bushranger !” said Flower, contemptuously looking
over the breakers at the troubled mam beyond them. Bober .
bushranger! Defying the police! What has
the police come to, at last ? What would Donahough 01 Milh han
say to this? or Webber, or Alfred Jackson ?—brave men who have
died by this hand ! I would take Eoherts armed to the» teeth, as
he would he, with no other weapon than a horsewhip, 01 a sole
cane' You tell me that I could not,” said Flower, talking to the
winds and the waves, and knitting his brows, and compressing his
lips. '« I could not ? I will. I swear to you I swear, Iml .
1 Flower turned round, walked hastily home, went into tlie ’
kissed Sheriff, and smiled at the scars which decorated the gallant
little animal.
ROBERTS A BUSHRANGER.


“ I owe all my fortune to you, Sheriff, my little dear,” said
Flower, embracing his horse. “If it had not been for you,' Sheriff,
I should have been killed many a time. Come along, my darling,
let us have another brush. We’ll go out together on a spree, as It
were, and tell Susan we are going to see a flock of sheep that’s to be
sold at Bathurst. Eiches have not made either of us fat, Sheriff-
have they ? But, my honour, you are getting as gray as a badger,
and I’m getting one or two in my whiskers. Can’t you kick, old
boy, as hard as ever?”
Flower touched Sheriff in the ribs, and the panel of the stall, on
which the horse instantly left the imprint of his hoof, very loudly
responded to the question.
That night Flower told his wife and Emily that he was going up
to Bathurst to look at a farm which he thought of buying, and next
morning after breakfast he took an affectionate farewell of them, and
rode Sheriff quietly along the road to Paramatta, calling, as was his
wont in former days, at every public-house to have a few words
with the landlord, the landlady, or the barmaid. And Flower took
the opportunity of paying, with interest at twelve per cent., a num-
ber of scores which had been standing against him, and had escaped
his memory for several years past. From Paramatta Flower rode to
Penrith, and from Penrith, in one day, he went to Bathurst—a dis-
tance of ninety miles. It was to the house of Major Grimes that
Flower guided Sheriff. The Major was delighted to see him again,
and so was Mrs, Grimes. But his host and hostess could not
]}revail upon him to go into their sitting-room.
“ No, Major; no, Mrs, Grimes,” said Flower. “ Eiches doesn’t
alter rank ; give me something in the kitchen, and come there and
let me talk to you. The first time I came here I carried off some of
your tea and sugar, Major, and the second time I carried off dear
Sue. So you see I have been to you a regular robber.”
When Flower made known the reason of his visiting the
Bathurst district again, Major Grimes was astounded, and so
expressed himself.
“Ah, but you see, Major, it is not a matter of money with me
now,” said Flower ; “it is a matter of passion and feeling. I cannot
tell you all that is in my breast. But it must be ; I must take this
fellow and his gang, and you must help me.”
“ How ?” inquired Major Grimes.
“ Why, you must give me a man and a horse, and you must
make Captain Piper do the same, and all the other settlers who
have had drays stopped and robbed. I want about six plucky men,
all well mounted. Gov’ment’s a fool for going to the expense of
mounted police. You ought to learn the value of combination, and


how to protect yourselves. You can club up to get rid of the
blacks when they spear your cattle or steal your sheep. Why ca
you capture your own bushrangers? Why, hang it, the rewards
would more than pay for the loss of time, and look at the induce-
ment that a ticket-of-leave would be to your servants engaged in the
“I see,” said Major Grimes ; “ but had we not better speak to
the officer commanding the mounted police ? ”
“ No, no,” said Flower ; “ I wish to teach you settlers, and the
Gov’ment, and bushrangers, a great moral lesson I want to make
you more independent and secure—bushrangers less numerous and
daring— and Gov’ment more economical and sensible.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
Flower carried his point. Every settler whose drays had been
recently robbed was called upon, and each contributed a man.
Some volunteered to take the field themselves; but to this Flower,
for good reasons, no doubt, objected.
It was amusing to see Flower, mounted on Sheriff, puttm
small force through its various evolutions, in a paddock front g
Major Grimes’s parlour windows. The great difficulty that he me
to overcome was making the stock horses stand fire.
All this was at last accomplished, and one fine frosty morning
the force, with its leader at its head, moved out for action. In or-
mation had been gleaned by Flower of the enemy— located some
eleven miles from Major Grimes s, and not very far distant from t
den which has been already described in this narrative. No general
officer ever knew better than George Flower the value of accurate
intelligence—touching not only the enemy s position, but his streng t ,
weakness, and resources. On all these points Flower was thoroughly
informed. From long experience he could guess the» very homr a
o-ang would be on the move—what direction it would take and
what would probably be its sport, or object of plunder ; and upo
this occasion his calculations were marvellously _ correct.
After riding eight miles there were seen, in the distance, six o
seven men on horseback. “ These are they I cried Flower. Now,


my lads, be steady. When I tell you to charge, out swords and at ’em.
Never mind your pistols, and don’t mind theirs; it is not easy to
shoot a man from the back of a horse in motion, but it is the easiest
thing in the world to cut one down from the saddle. Be steady!—
Here they come! ”
The forces were within a hundred and fifty yards of each other.
Roberts became alarmed at seeing so strong a party, and suddenly
recognising Sheriff and his rider, he called aloud—“ It is all over
with us! ” —then turned his horse and galloped away, followed by his
gang, in great confusion.
“ Charge ! ” cried Flower. “ Charge! ” This order was obeyed,
and a hard contest, in speed, immediately ensued, for Roberts and
his party were excellently mounted. Ere long they came to some
very bad ground, which slackened the speed of the horses, and in a
few moments the pursued and pursuers mingled and fought, hand to
hand.
Three out of the seven bushrangers were killed. Amongst them
was Roberts. Flower lost two men and received a rather severe
blow on his head from the butt end of an adversary’s pistol. Never-
theless, the victory was complete, and what Flower so eagerly desired,
“ Charles Roberts, alias Reginald Harcourt,” ceased to live.
“ Yes,” said Flower, gazing on the corpse of Roberts, while his
companions were digging a hole wherein to bury their own dead, and
that of the enemy—“ Yes, it is so. It was to be. Something always
told me it would be so. I knew it. I felt it.” Then turning to
another of the slain he contemplated for several minutes the features
so recently sealed in death. What was Flower’s surprise, his horror,
on recognising the face of a woman whom he knew in former days—a
woman named Ellen Leger. She had been transported for poisoning
her father, and on arriving in the colony had been “ drawn ” as a
servant, by a gentleman in power and in authority, and with that
gentleman she had remained for several years. She afterwards ran
away, committed some offence, was apprehended, shorn of her
long black hair in the Paramatta factory, and from that hour became
a very desperate person. She had been good-looking, nay, hand-,
some, and the traces of beauty were still upon her face.
“ Well, thank Heaven,” cried Flower, “ that it was not I who
cut you down, my poor girl. I was very near doing it once, to-
day ! ”
The bodies were binned, and the captured prisoners and their
horses taken to Major Grimes’s. Flower did not accom-
pany the cavalcade. He was overcome by a curiosity to revisit the
spot where he fought Millighan a few years previously, and Flower
wended his way to the old den.


Not a soul had been there since the day he left it.
On the limestone table was a pipe which had belonged to
Millighan, and a clasp knife which was once the property of Drolme.
Of the fowls not one remained; but the pigeons still clung to
the abode ; albeit they were now very wild, instead of so tame that
they would settle on the heads and shoulders of those who formerly
fGCI There was property still in that den,—guns, pistols, swords, hand-
cuffs, plated ware, saddles, &c. &c.; but Flower was not disposed to
carry anything away, except the broken handcuffs, which the reader
may remember had been filed from his wrist on the night of his first
appearance in that locality. , . „,,
From the den, Flower proceeded on foot to the top of the moun-
tain, leaving Sheriff in an enclosure, eating some rich grass which
grG a is the rock,” said Flower to himself, pointing to a
huge mass of limestone. “ Yes, that is it—this is the way.”
The awful stillness of the place had struck Flower when he was
there talking to Millighan, but now it was even more striking, more
awful. Had Flower’s heart been susceptible of fear, at that moment,
and in that spot, would the passion have stolen over him. As it was,
he could not help muttering, « What is the matter with me ? I feel
very curious-what is it?” he asked of himself, grounding Ins
double-barreled fowling-piece, “ What is it ? There s nobody here,
and if there was, what do I care ?
“I care,” the echo answered him.
Flower started, and then smiled at himself for so doing, feusey,
dearest!” cried Flower, at the top of his voice, and echo responded
the last word.
“ All safe ?” cried Flower.
“ Safe,” was the reply.
(The echo amongst these limestone rocks is something won-
de1 ’At } a slow pace, and with a reverential feeling George Flower
directed his steps to the spot where lay the bones of Millighan. He
placed his gun beside a rock, and, unarmed, went to gaze on the ic ics
of mortality which had thither attracted him. .
There was the skeleton of the man, quite perfect. Corruption
had rotted the flesh, and with the flesh the clothes had been consumed.
The eagle had not visited the dead body, nor had the wild t og
There lav all that remained of the man, as he fell, —the rusted mus vet
by his side. But mingled with the bones of the man were the bones
and the skull of the dog—the little terrier, who had died of starva-
tion and grief, near the master whom he loved so well, i resh from a


scene of slaughter—with human blood recently shed upon his hands
and clothes, Flower sat beside the skeletons of Millighan and his
dog, and relieved the heart of its heaving by shedding scalding tears.
“ You were a man,” said Flower, staring wildly into the sockets
which once contained Millighan’s bright eyes—“ and you, poor doo-
you were as clever and as brave as he was. Better to die with one
you loved than live without him. Dear Nettles.”
Flower put his hand gently on the little dog’s skull; but did not
disturb the position which, in the last moment, the dog had taken up
on the breast of his master,
“ What is this?” cried Flower. “ Here is the ball—the ball
which flew from that carbine, and stopped the current of his life!”
and inserting carefully his fingers between the ribs of Millighan’s
skeleton, he took up, and held between his forefinger and thumb,
the fatal and slightly battered piece of lead.
Flower was in the very act of putting the bullet into his pocket;
but something checked his hand; some mysterious power seemed
to whisper, “ No”—and Flower replaced the bullet with the same
care, lest he should disturb the bones, that he used when he re-
moved it.
Millighan, when he fell, had in his pocket a small silver flask,
which contained spirits. On this the worms could not banquet, and
there it was—blackened, but still perfect. “ Into this I will put his
epitaph,” said Flower, “ and some day or other, when these remains
may be stumbled across, those who find them shall not suppose he
was some black fellow.” So Flower wrote on a piece of paper with a
pencil, the following words: “ This man’s name was Millighan; he
was killed in a fair fight with one George Flower. The dog’s name
was ‘Nettles.’ George Flower wrote this himself. My handwriting
is well known.”
Grief, as well as ardent spirits, has its intoxicating properties;
and Flower lost sight of the fact that the day was drawing to a
close. For full three hours he remained beside the skeleton—
speculating as more educated philosophers have done before him,
upon matters which we have no inclination to discuss.
When Flower left the skeletons of Millighan and the dog, it
was almost dark, and quite dark before he arrived at the den. °To
find his way to Major Grimes’s was utterly impossible. In the
broad daylight it would be far from an easy matter, for the trees
which had been marked had, in the course of nature, shed their bark
several times since Flower was an inhabitant of the den. Flower,
therefore, was compelled to stay in the den all night; into the den
he took Sheriff, and, in the absence of any other companion, talked
to the horse incessantly, and asked the little animal, several times,


whether he would not rather die with him (Flower), as Nettles had
done with Millighan, than live with any other master ?
At about twelve o’clock Flower became very hungry. He had
not tasted food for eighteen hours. He next became faint, then
ravenous, and would have given any sum of money for even a
biscuit and a glass of wine. He made a fire (as the aborigines do,
by rubbing two pieces of dry stick together till they ignite), and
was sitting over it, thinking how he could satisfy the cravings of
hunger, when suddenly he got up, lighted a wax candle (there were
several pounds of wax candles in the den), and searched about in
the desperate hope that “ something to eat” might be discovered.
There was a box of macaroni, which with his own hands Flower had
taken from the dray of Captain Piper; but it was rotten, and full
of weavels, and when handled, it became like “ seconds flour. He
mixed this with water, kneaded, and was frying it, when he heard
the pigeons cooing in their cote. ,
That horrible impulse of our nature which always steals over us
under similar circumstances, now stole over Flower, and he was
bent on taking the life of one of those creatures which have been
“ sanctified to our uses.” He put down the frying pan, ejaculat-
ing, “By Jove! a grilled pigeon 1” .
Flower went out stealthily from the den, put his hand into the
cote,- and withdrew a plump bird. He brought it into the den with
the intention of wringing its neck, but lo and behold. he recognised
“ poor, old Moses,” a pigeon so christened by the women; and
around the bird’s leg there was a gold eai-iing.
“ I would not hurt you, or any of your numerous family, for the
whole world,” said Flower, releasing the patriarch pigeon, which,
strange to say, seemed not afraid of George Flower ; for, instead
of flyino- away in terror, he partook of the macaroni pancake, dipped
his beak into the water, and pouted about the table, in apparently
an ecstacy of satisfaction. c . „ ,
The next morning, at daybreak, Flower saddled bhenft, and
rode to Major Grimes’s. His absence had caused great alarm, and
people had been despatched in all directions to search for him, for
the Major was fearful that Flower had been “ lost in the bush.” _
The bushrangers were “given up ” to the men who had assisted
in their capture, and Flower took leave of Major and Mrs. Grimes,
after thanking them over and over again for not being angry with
him for taking away from them “ the best hearted and prettiest
girl that ever breathed.”
8


CHAPTER XXVII.
The death of Eoberts and the two others who fell by his side,
and the capture of the remainder, were published in all the papers
(the Sydney Gazette, the Monitor, and the Australian). But Mrs.
Flower and Emily knew nothing of this; for Flower, previous to
setting out upon his expedition, had “ stopped his subscription,” and
had given orders to his servants that no newspaper was to be allowed
in the house during his absence. It would be difficult to say which
of the two welcomed Flower back the more heartily, Susan or
Emily.
*******
“ Why are you out of sorts, George ?” said Susan, when Flower,
after dinner, was sitting silently over the fire, smoking his pipe;
“ you have been away for more than a month, and, now that you
have come back, you won’t speak a word.”
“ Go to bed, Susey, dear,” said George, with a kind look, which
Susan understood. “ I want to have some conversation with Mrs.
Harcourt.”
Susan lighted her candle —bade Emily good night—and left
the room.
“ Now look here,” said Flower, “ there’s no use in hesitating. I
am going home to England, and mean to take Sue. Will you go
with us, or not ?”
“ Not so long as that man lives.”
“ He does not live : he is dead !”
Emily stood up. Her face became very pale; she trembled, and
said, “ Dead ! Is Eeginald dead ?”
Flower, observing her emotion, dropped his pipe, caught her in
his arms, and cursed himself for breaking, so abruptly, intelligence
of a nature which he ought to have known would shock the feelings
of a sensitive woman.
A scene ensued—Susan w r as called—and Emily conveyed to her
room, in a state of insensibility.
The shock over, Emily’s mind experienced a relief, when she
reflected on Eoberts’s death. Her chief anxiety, of late, had been
lest he should perish by the hands of the public executioner.
Emily now no longer objected to accompanying Flower and his


wife to England, though she feared that her parents would never
forgive her, or listen to any of her entreaties.
Flower sold his bank stock and houses, and the proceeds were
£51,000. With bills upon England for this amount, he embarked
on board the old Lady Jane Grey. The stern cabins were engaged,
and Emily had one of them—and a good-sized cabin, in the fore
part of the vessel, was secured for Sheriff, whom Flower could not
leave behind him.
OIF Cape Horn the Lady Jane encountered very boisterous
weather, and Susan, who was in delicate health, became seriously ill.
Emily, who had of late gained strength and spirits, watched her
with much care and tenderness, and thus repaid a portion of the
obligations she was under to Susan’s husband.
But, alas! neither the skill of the surgeon, nor the attentions of
Emilv and of George, could hold in its mansion the fleeting breath
of Susan Flower. She died in the arms of her manly husband, and
was committed to the troubled deep on the following afternoon.
For several days after the death of his wife, Flower never uttered
a single word, or shed a single tear—nor could he be prevailed upon
to take food. His cheek-bones began to protrude, beneath his
eyes came dark lines, and his face was as pale as that of a corpse.
He sat down upon a chest, in his cabin, and there remained, in a
perfect lethargy of woe.
Emily became alarmed, and did all in her power to rouse her
protector, and console him. She who had recently been as helpless
as an infant, was now as active and intelligent as an experienced
nurse ; while he who had lately been as strong as a young lion, was
nerveless and childish, in his overwhelming affliction.
Old Captain Dent, this voyage, had his wife on board. She
was a motherly lady, who had seen much sorrow in her day, arising
from domestic bereavement, and she hinted to Emily that if Flower
could be moved to tears, his present mood would speedily dis-
appear. Emily acted on this hint—took Mrs. Dent into Flower’s cabin
—and began to tell Mrs. Dent, in Flower’s presence, of all Susan’s
good qualities : how kind and gentle was Susan, and how beautiful
and good-natured.
At first, Flower did not heed Emily’s discourse. There he sat,
gazing on the floor, and wearing that peculiar vacant look which
had overspread his countenance since Susan’s death. But, at length,
his ear drank in a few of Emily’s words, and he regarded her
intently.
Emily pursued the strain, and, ere long, “ the flood gushed
forth ” from that overcharged brain, and Flower was aroused to
consciousness.


CHAPTER XXXVIII
After a passage of four months, the Lady Jane Grey sighted
the Lizard Light, and next morning the land was clearly visible,
Elow r er and Emily were gazing on it from the poop, and experiencing
those emotions common to all who have been for any length of time
absent from their country.
“ Where do you intend going when we land, George ?” Emily
inquired.
“ To Orford Hall,” was the reply.
Emily shuddered, and remained silent for a few minutes.
“ But I cannot go there,” said she, “ until I have written to my
father and mother.”
“Ho,” said Flower; “but you can go -with me to a road-side
inn that stands near Yewbray Bridge—or that used to stand there
in my day—and there you can remain until I have seen your father,
and heard what he has got to say.”
“ And will you see him ?” she inquired.
“Of course, I will,” said Flower. “ I -wonder if he will remem-
ber me. He used to be very fond of me when I was a little fellow,
and always took a great interest in my welfare. What awful
changes we shall find in the neighbourhood! Prepare your mind
for that, Mrs. .” (Flower, since Eoberts’s death, never breathed
any name when addressing Emily.)
“I am prepared for all,” said the unhappy lady. “I am even
prepared for the refusal of my father and mother to receive me
under their roof. lam prepared to lead a life in England quite as
unhappy and as cheerless as was that in Hew South Wales.”


CHAPTER XXXIX.
At Gravesend Flower and Emily disembarked—and Sheriff, the
first Australian horse that ever rounded Cape Horn. Sheriff was
verv stiff on landing, though in excellent condition : and he created
no small amount of curiosity with those present; for blower had
brou<dit home the identical saddle that Sheriff always wore on great
expeditions, and it was now upon the little horses back It was
not a pig’s skin, but made out of the hide of a calf. Its flaps were
not padded, but flush. The stirrup-leathers were as black as ink,
and very thin, though strong ; the irons that were attached to them
were so small, that the toe only of a man’s boot could get inside
them. There was a sheep’s skin spread behind the saddle, and
fastened under the crupper. On this reposed sundry pairs of anc -
cuffs, and a small chain. The bridle, too, was rather quaint; the
head-piece was that of a gig horse, with the blinkers cut off, and
the bit, a racing snaffle, as light (to use Flower s words) as a feather.
But if the horse and his trappings attracted attention, so did
also his master. . , , ..
Riches had not worked any change in either Flower s sentiments
or dress. He still wore the uniform fustian shooting-coat and fus-
tian trowsers (washed white), and the blue cloth waistcoat; boots,
laced up the front, and a cabbage-tree hat, with a black ribbon;
while around his neck was a blue silk handkerchief, tied in a sailor s
Flower had become not only very “ colonial ” in outward ap-
pearance ; but in parlance he was peculiarly so. He had mixed a
good deal with the blacks during his stay abroad ; and in the colony
(where the aboriginal language, if it be not thoroughly understood
by the European, nevertheless contributes sundry words and phrases
which became current) it was all very well to use occasionally a little
of it; but in England it was otherwise; and therefore, when blower
told a groom to give Sheriff some “ patter,” he was driven to exp am
that “patter” did not mean a thrashing, but “grub. ®°» als ®»
when he used the word “ narang” (small) but “ bidgee (good), t e
groom did not quite comprehend the gentleman’s praise of Ins noise ,
which induced Flower to say— ■
“ You stare at me as if I had just come from some outlandish
country! ”
FLOWER IN ENGLAND.


A large carriage and post-horses were hired, and Emily and her
boxes put inside. Flower took his seat in the rumble. They had
only a journey of twenty miles before them.
When they neared the spot where they had been born, hoAv
strangely did the heart of each palpitate.
And now, every house, every tree, every lane, became familiar
to Flower’s eye.' And—yes, there was the bridge! Yewbray
bridge!
There was the spot where the young Squire fell—and there was
the little road-side inn, whither George Flower, on that morning,
now twenty years ago, ran, and boasted of having done the deed!
“Stop!” cried Flower. “ Pull up here!”
Flower descended, and took Emily from the carriage into the
inn. She was greatly agitated, and very pale ; but Flower bade her
take heart, make herself comfortable, and not talk to any of the
people of the house.
The landlady did not recognise Flower, but he recognised her.
She was a young unmarried girl when he left that part of the world.
She was now the mother of eight or nine children. He longed to
make himself known to the landlady; but contrived to master
his inclination, and left the inn on foot. He went to the lodge
where his family used to live. All were gone !
Flower paused for a few minutes.
“ Ah! that’s where I shall get the most information in the
shortest space of time! ” said Flower to himself; and he bent his
steps to the church-yard, wherein he had often played as a boy,
and where he had first learned to read.
Yes; there was told the tale. His mother was sleeping beside
that sister whom he so dearly loved. But of his father, who always
treated him and his sister with so much severity, there was no record.
He knelt beside the grave, and placed his head on the stone which
marked the spot where lay the dear ashes of his kindred; and he
plucked some daisies, and placed them on the stone. He then
strolled about the yard, and saw the graves of many whom he had
left in the bloom of life—many a brave lad, and many a bonnie
girl, with whom he was acquainted. Inside the church he then
moved, to see what inroads death had made amongst the gentry.
Yes; the gentry had suffered as much as the peasantry. Lord
Waldanc’s monumental slab was there, and those of many other
great folks whom he remembered. And there was cut upon a piece
of white marble these words : “In memory of Emily, wife of Edward
Orford, Esq., of Orford Hall.”
“ Then he is not dead,” said Flower, —“ he is still living. lam
sorry for Mrs. Orford; but, why I know not, she never liked us”


It was now evening, and Flower walked to Orford Hall, wine i
stood about three quarters of a mile distant from the church. e
inquired at the lodge if Mr. Orford was at home, and was
answered “ Yes.” He entered the house, and expressed to t
footman a wish to see the master.
“ What name?” „ . , -j
“Well I don’t see the necessity of giving my name, sa
Flower. “ Tell Mr. Orford that a person has come to give him
some information. Mr. Orford is a magistrate, I believe .
“ Yes.”
“ Then eo, and tell him what I have told you.”
The footman called to another footman, and saying, loud
for Flower to hear—“ Keep this gentleman company until 1 come
back ”_he went into the library to deliver the message.
aTabsenceof a few "minutes, the footman
said—“ Walk this way,” and he conducted Flower to Mr. Oilor
Mr. Orford had grown very old, infirm, and irritable. When
Flower was announced he was reading the Bible.
“ Well, sir, and what may be your business i he asked.
“ It is private business, sir.”
« Shut the door, and go,” said Mr. Orford to the footma .
“ You do not remember me, sir,” said Flower, when they were
alone.
“ No, sir; who are you ?” . „
«It is more than twenty years ago since we met, sir. ?
“ Well, that may be. But who are you ? What do you a .
What is your business ?”
“ Sir, you knew not only me, but everybody belonging to me.
Mr. Orford put on his spectacles and surveyed the intruder, lie
rose from his chair, with the assistance of his hands, approached
Flower, who was still standing, hat in hand, and peered into his eyes.
“ Good Heaven !” ejaculated the old man, placing his hands upon
Flower’s shoulders. “My boy ! Is it you, George f and he clung
to Flower, and clutched him by the elbows.
“You remember me now, sir ?”
“ Remember you ? Forgive me for speaking harshly to you, y
poor boy. How often have I thought of you, of late-longed for
you to be here with me, to talk to me-and read to me. Why d,d
"you not write to me?” and the old man shed tears which fell upon
the cuffs of Flower’s shooting coat; and Flower, too, wept and
loved the old man for his warm greeting.
“ You will stay with me?” said Mr. Orford. “You will never
leave me, George? lam all alone here, will, no one but these
FLOWER AND MR. ORFORD.


servants about me. Sit down, and tell me all that has happened to
you.”
Flower obeyed Mr. Orford. He told him of his career in the
colony, and of his circumstances—that he had returned with £50,000,
and more, and how he made it. But Flower did not yet touch upon
Emily.
“ I wish I could tell you something,” said the old man.
“ Do so, sir.”
“ Not now; to-night; when every one is in bed, fast asleep.”
“ And I wish, sir, I could tell you something.”
“ Perhaps you suspect it—know it ?”
“ What, sir ?”
“ My secret.”
“ No, sir ; I fancy not.”
“ Then tell me, what is it you wish to say ?”
Flower fell upon his knees, and said, “For God’s sake, Mr.
Orford, forgive your only child !”
“ I do,” cried the old man, raising him—“ I do—l did long ago,
for it was a crime which will be pardoned in heaven.”
“ Then may I bring her to you ? She is not far from you, at
this moment. I have protected her as though she had been my own
sister, or my own child.”
“ Her ? Who ?” inquired Mr. Orford, eagerly.
“ Your only child, Emily, a wretched widow, who repents of her
folly.”
“ Are you mad ?” said Mr, Orford, “ or is this a dream ? Emily
lives ? No—she is dead, poor dear. She died, without a friend to
compose her limbs, and her mother—” The old man faltered, and
wept afresh.
“ I have been the protector of your daughter for several years
past —up to this very hour.”
“ How—her protector ? W T here ?”
“In New South Wales. I have been to her a brother, though
she is of gentle blood, and I am not.”
“ Emily lives ? Where is she ? Conduct me to my child. Order
the carriage.”
“ Let me bring her here, sir.”
“ Then haste —haste !” said the old man. “ What a strange
world is this ! This night, George, you shall know the truth ! ”


CHAPTER XL.
Flower hasted in the carriage to the roadside inn, where he
found Emily in sore distress. She had gleaned that her mother
was numbered with the dead, and so great was her grief, that the
o-l a d tidings of her father’s forgiveness did not stay her tears.
° As soon as Flower left Orford Hall, Mr. Orford ordered the
servants not to come near him until they were cal led, so that when
Flower returned with Emily, there was not a soul to be seen.
The poor penitent was conducted to the library, and there the
meeting with her father took place. . , . , ~ .
She° knelt to the old man, and with upraised hands craved his
naMon; and he forgave her from his heart, and placed his aged
alms upon her aching head, and blessed her, and sanctified the
blessing with pious tears. And Emily was once more under her
own roof, and was installed the mistress of that ancient abode. An
that night she slept in, or rather wandered about, the room which
from childhood up to the unhappy date of her error had been her s.
And Emily heard from her father s lips that her mother had, in
her dying moments, forgiven her, and prayed for her salvation in
tllG And that night Mr. Orford divulged to George the secret to
which, in the morning, the old man had so mysteriously alluded.
He told George that when he, Mr. Orford was a very young man
he was wicked enough to engage the affections of a y ?f
whom his parents would not permit him to marry-that had he
married her he would have been disinherited that the fimt of Aim
connection were two children, a boy and a girl—that Loi d\V alda
gamekeeper, Edward Flower, had married the mother of these two
children, receiving with his wife a marriage portion of several hundred
pounds —that he, George Flower, was the son, and Bessy, whose
wrongs he had avenged, the daughter ; and hence that remarkable
likeness which not only “ Bessy” but George Flower himself bore to
Emil y% *
A few months passed away, and Flower began to feel lonely
and miserable. He no longer cared for shooting and fishing*
These sports had lost their charm with him. _He fancied that he
was looked upon with suspicion by persons with whom he made
acquaintance; and it became tedious to him to explain to eveiybody
who heard that he was “an expiree,” that he was not transported
for thieving, or anything mean or low, but for justifiable mur er.
THE MEETING OF EMILY AND HER FATHER.


Flower engaged a passage for himself and Sheriff, and re-sought
those shores whereon he had achieved so much renown, and where
he was “as well known as the Governor or the Chief Justice, and
quite as much respected by honest men and feared by rogues.” He
kept up a regular correspondence with Emily and her father, and
frequently sent them Australian curiosities, such as kangaroos, emus,
flying squirrels, parrots, and cockatoos; in return he received sad-
dlery, cutlery, and other matters precious in his sight.
Mr. Orford died, and Emily succeeded to his estate.
Some time afterwards, Emily was sitting in the drawing-room,
all alone, when a card was put into her hand.
“ Sir Charles Everest!”
How Emily blushed. What scenes, painful and other, did the
sight of that name recall!
Sir Charles took Emily’s hand, and said to her, “ I will not re-
lease this till you promise to be mine. I have never ceased to love
you, Emily, dearest, and I never shall cease to do so.”
Emily held down her head, and gave no reply—but she suffered
him to retain her hand in his, and play with its small fingers.
Presently, he raised it to his lips, and kissed it fervently, She ac-
cepted his proposal on the condition that he would never remind
her or allude to the dark past. After a few months Emily became
.Lady Everest. And the evening of her life was tranquil and happy.


APPENDIX.
nr a la rnfere de Mrs. Stanlcy-Krasinska, avait petdii depuis pen
avait besom d acquenr un talent et ,’ t ' Ti n des fq s (ji s etaient deux)
venu a Londres en permission pour s’y ir B |Snski. Get
m X pLS soovent le tl«=, amus.it ~s Mtes pat PHstoire *■«“£££«s
introduiLit adrqitement cell. d. ses anctos, auec /“S
avait de rentrer dans leurs domames, quand la paix remettra
place sur, d’ailleurs, de la protection de son general et memede> cede du roi
Freddric-Guillaume, dont il avait prefdrd le service au drapeau de Napoldon.
II montrait alors une carte topographique des terres paternelles, b® f qu qi
logique, des lettres de Blucher et autres pieces en polonais ou qu
Sduisiit aux dames Stanley II dt.it gudn depms «tt mom et 1 m
„„„„ Ip voir nartir lorsqu’il declara son intention de se fixer en Angiemric
Miss Stanley consentait a devenir sa femme declaration accueillie
la mere de la fille et du frere, tous enchantds du charmant Polonais.
. 7 ’ ~:i 1014 ce f u t, l u i nui arriva triumphant aupres de sa future et annoi 9<
I’occupation de^Pan^par^leTallies. “L’Europe*” ajouta-t-il “ganger
et ma fortune aussi; mais il faut que je parte sans delai; d^n^par S;
jours je sois aupres demon ancien general.” Eliza paht 'a J une sOparauon,
‘klrs Stanlev versa des lannes: mais Krasmski s empressa de rassurer ses alarme ,
“Je serais dljlleif possession de mes Mens,” dit-U, “que je me eromus le plus l.che
des homines si i’etais ingrat envers la tendre hospitalite que je retjus a Londres......
si je ne tenais ks sermefts qui me lient a cette famille dont j ai. voulu
_ou plutot si j’oubliais cette affection sincere que appele de tonsmes
vceux ne saurait e'touffer dans mon cceur. La seule condition qua J® t f’
mettre au maxiage qui est encore ma plus chore ambition, cest qu d ™“ edl^ e
—Eliza lui tendit la main en sounant; mais Mrs. Stanley ]Kwer wSfiHe
vous comprcnds,” dit Krasinski, “ vous pensez que je veux vous enlever
Tsion • io ore tends on elk conserve sa mere et que nous vmons tons ies trois flans
me sera restitue., Jesu/s orphelin *
mbre en meme temps nu’une femme....” Bref, on admira le chevaieresque caractere
de I’officier polonais :on fut reconnaissant de sa generosite, le manage u me,
an bout de quinze jours Krasinski conduis.it a Paris sa
voila dans un des hotels oil descendent les plus riches Grangers, et 1 ans a 1 aurore
de la paix en avait tout d’abord vu accourir un certain nombre. . ,
Depuis cinq iours, Krasinski allait and venait de I’etat-major prussien a 1 hote
apportant les nouvelles et disant combien son general avait dte heureux de le reyoir.
BlUcher voulait aussi que M™ Krasinska et sa mere Ini fus:pr&e le viei *
vainqueur etait si paternel qu’il exigeait que son aide-de-camp les amenat «a» 1*
moindre edremonie, sans aucune parure, avec leurs robes les plus simples. Ams ,


leur dit Krasinski, “ vous etes bien comme vous voila, attendez-moi toute la soiree
jpt je viendrai vous prendre des que j’aurai accompli un message dont je suis charge
par mon general.” C’etait en dinant, an dessert, que Krasinski parlait ainsi, et il
laissa sa femme avec Mrs. Stanley, languissant dans I’attente de son retour jusqu’a
dix heures, impatientees de ne pas le voir revenir, tressaillant au bruit de cliaque
voiture qui s’arretait devant la porte de I’hotel. Onze heures sonnerent: Krasinski
n’ctait pas revenu. Minuit, la plupart des etrangers de I’hotel qui avaient ete a des
soirees ou au spectacle rentrent successivement. Tout a coup une clameur s’elfeve
dans les escaliers et les corridors Presque en meme temps chacun s’apercevait
d’un vol. Tousles appartements avaient ete envahis, tousles tiroirs fouilles : les
bijoux et I : argent n’y etaient plus. Bleu de rapide comme les soup9ons quaud un
voleur a fait son butin.
De I’un b I’autre on se rdpdta que le voleur ne pouvait etre que le comte polonais.
Au milieu de I’inquietude qui les agitait depuis deux heures, Mrs. Stanley et sa
lille se voient accusees d’etre les complices d’un malfaiteur Ce qu’elles com-
prennent de la langue de ceux qui leur demandent ce qu’est devenu I’homme attendu
par elles soffit pour les troubler et les accabler.
Bientot un agent de la police survient, appele par les plaignants. Elles voient
fouiller leur chambre et reconnaissent alors qu’elles sont depouillees comme les
autres habitants de I’hotel. Elles se rdjouissent presque de cette decouverte qui
semble ala fois absoudre I’absent et attester surtout leur innocence: mais, tout au
contraire, cette circonstance tourne contre elles; on s’eerie que la chose a dte ainsi
arrangee pour detourner le et le s’acharne contre les deux dames
anglaises. Ou les arrete, on les met en prison. Pendant deux jours elles esperent
en vain que Krasinski, dont la disparition leur semble une enigme, viendra en donner
le mot
Quand elles ont comparu devant le commissaire de police et sont acquittees,
e’est pour se trouver isolees, etranghres, inconnues et suspectes encore, allant en vain
a I’etat-major prussien demander une audience du general Bliicher et invoquant un
nom qui devait etre pour elles un talisman protecteur. Elles apprirent la que le
general n’avait jamais connu Casimir Krasinski ni entendu parler de lui.
Elles s’adress&rent alors a I’ambassade anglaise et se virent reduites a accepter
I’espece d’aumone que I’ambassadeur leur accorda pour les mettre en etat de re-
tourner a Londres aupres du jeune Stanley, reste I’unique soutien de sa mere et de
sa soeur. Pendant quinze ans, a travers toutes sortes de vicissitudes, longtemps
pauvres, puis arrivant au gain de leur proebs, Mrs. Stanley et sa fille avaient tou-
jours devant les yeux I’image de cet etranger qui etait venu s’associer a leur
destinee sous les dehors les plus romanesques pour disparaitre tout a coup comme le
demon d’un cauchemar.
Mrs. Stanley mourut: Eliza demeura seule avec son frere, et jeune encore avait
etc plus d’une fois recherchee en mariage sans pouvoir dire si elle etait veuve, et
obligee de raconter sa penible histoire.
FETTER AND GAI.PIN, PEATHOUSE YARD, ADJOINING THE “ TIMES ” OFFICE.


