

THE ABORIGINES
OF AUSTRALIA;
THEIR ETHNIC POSITION
AND RELATIONS,
JOHN FRASER, 8.A., LL.D., F.R.S. (N.S.W.)
New South Wales.
LONDON:
THE VICTORIA (PHILOSOPHICAL) INSTITUTE.
INDIA : W. THACKER & Co. UNITED STATES : G.T. PUTNAM’S SON, N.T.
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND : G. ROBERTSON & Co., Lim.
CANADA : DAWSON BROS., Montreal.
S. AFRICA; JUTA & Co., Cape Town. P. DAVIS & SON, Natal.
PARIS: GALIGNANI.




THE ABORIGINES
OF AUSTRALIA:
THEIR ETHNIC POSITION
AND RELATIONS,
JOHN FRASER, 8.A., LL.D., F.R.S. (N.S.W.)
New South Wales.
LONDON:
THE VICTORIA (PHILOSOPHICAL) INSTITUTE.
INDIA : W. THACKER & Co. UNITED STATES : G. T. PUTNAM’S SON, N.Y.
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND : G. ROBERTSON & Co., Lim.
CANADA: DAWSON BROS., Montreal.
S. AFRICA : JUTA & Co., Cape Town. P. DAVIS & SON, Natal.
PARIS: GALIGNANI.
f 973#




THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA : TEEIR ETHNIC
POSITION AND RELATIONS. By John Fraser,
8.A., LL.D., F.B.S. of New South Wales.
aborigines of Australia present a wide and inter-
JL esting field for ethnographical study. The field is as
yet to a large extent unexamined and unexplored; for, although
there are some books specially written about our aborigines,
their customs and language, and although many of our older
colonists can tell much about their habits, yet the subject
has scarcely attained to the dignity of a scientific study. I
purpose to-night to confine myself to a single department of
this subject,—the position and relation which our aborigines
hold to the rest of mankind; and to take my arguments
only from what I may be permitted to call the common
religiousness of nations. And as I am a colonist on a
visit to this country, and have not here opportunities and
facilities for a complete treatment of my theme, I shall ask
your permission to refer to and quote a portion of my past
labours in this field, as published in vol. xvi. of the Jourhal of
the Transactions of the Royal Society of New South Wajes^


I have said that I mean to build my argument on the
religious ideas and ceremonies which exist among our
Australian aborigines, and the resemblance of these to similar
institutions found among nations and tribes elsewhere. Now,
of all the definitions which have been thought of as distin-
guishing man from the rest of creation, the one that describes
him as the ‘'“'religious animal ”is perhaps the best. Some will
say that man is the mechanical, the social, the omnivorous,
and so on. The philologist will tell us that etymology declares
him to be the “ thinker.” I grant that the power of consecu-
tive thought is a noble gift to man, but I am ready to
deny that it is his noblest possession. The religious
instinct, however debasing the forms which it now
assumes, seems to me a diviner gift; for, while it stimulates, it
also chastens and regulates the force and direction of thought,
and lays hold of and moulds man’s inner nature in a way which
mere intellect can never approach. lam further, prepared to
deny that religiousness is a thing of man’s own invention,
that mere thinking will ever lead a man to acts of worship, or
that the progress and development of thought alone will bring
him to more enlightened forms of worship. The tendency, as
registered by history and observation, is all in the other
direction, —towards degradation, not towards elevation; and
if man were solely mental and emotional, his attitude in
viewing the vastness, the energy and the multitude of the
objects of nature around and above him would be one of
awe and fear, not of worship. I therefore believe the
manifestations of the religious sentiment among uncivilised
nations such as the Australian aborigines, to be like ruins of
an edifice, which neither they nor their ancestors ever built,
but yet its very stones may tell something of its origin. Now,
since man does not invent religious beliefs and practices for
himself, we may justly argue that the presence of the same
or similar ceremonies in nations at present widely separated
in place indicates a common origin. The traditions of a
great deluge, so similar everywhere, the folk-lore stories
among so many nations, all tell the same tale, —a common
origin. And, further, it is not an unreasonable thing to say
that, as the human race was long ago split up into four great
divisions, which we now call the Aryan, the Shemite, the
Turanian, and the Hamite or Ethiopian, and which became
antagonistic and locally distinct, so the primitive religion, with
; Z-V. its beliefs and practices, would tend in four diverging direc-
tions, each portion, however, being homogeneous in itself,
although retaining some features of resemblance to its
([■ brethren. Now, in speaking to you about our aborigines, I


have to do with the Ethiopian or black race, and if I can
show you that the Australian beliefs are closely like those of
the black race in other parts of the world, and yet in some
respects similar to those of all mankind, I think I can then,
without presumption, ask you to agree with me in saying that
Lenormant and others must be wrong when they cut off the
Australians from the record in the tenth chapter of Genesis,
and thus from all connection with the sons of Noah.
My present task, therefore, is to show that the black tribes
of Australia are connected with the rest of mankind, and espe-
cially with the black race in Africa. But, before I attempt to
do so, you may consider it my duty to establish an antecedent
probability, or, at least, possibility, that the blacks of Africa
and the blacks of Australia are akin; this will carry me back
to some of the earliest periods of human history.
The Chaldgean tablets recently deciphered speak of a dark
race as existing in the plains of Babylonia from the earliest
times, and along with it a light-coloured race.* This dark
race I take to be the Kushites; they seem to have been the
first occupiers of these regions, and had become so powerful
that their empire reached from the Mediterranean to the
Ganges, and from the Indian Ocean northwards to the plateau
of Ararat. Other races, however, came down upon them
from Central Asia, and, like a wedge, split them in two.
Hence the position of this race is, in Genesis x., indicated
ethnically by the names of Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and
Canaan, which, geographically, are the countries we call
Ethiopia, and Egypt, and Nubia, and Palestine. Their dominion
had thus been thrown much to the west of their original
seats, and had lodged itself in Africa, now their stronghold;
but the other half of their old empire existed still, although
much broken, for the later Greek tradition, in the Odyssey i.,
23, 24, speaks of an eastern as well as a western nation of
Ethiopians. Leaving the western Kushites to increase and
multiply, and spread themselves into Central Africa, let us
follow the fortunes of their eastern brethren. They are the
pure Hamites of the dispersion, and long occupied the
northern shores of the Persian Gulf and the plains of India.
Meanwhile, a composite empire, called on the inscriptions the
Kiprat Arhat, “ the four had formed itself in
Lower Babylonia. This Chaldaean monarchy—the first of the
five great monarchies of ancient history—was overthrown by
* Even Cyrus, the conqueror of Babylon, found them there, for, on a
cylinder, he speaks of “ the black-headed race ” as conquered and governed
by him.
A 2


an irruption of Arab (Shemite) tribes about 1500 jb.c. And
now, as I think, a second wave of population began to move
towards the shores of Australia, for these Arabs were pure
monotheists, and in their religious zeal must have dashed to
pieces the polytheistic and sensual fabric which the Babylonian
conquests had upreared. Those portions of the Chaldaeo-
Babylonian people that -were unable to escape from the
dominion of the Arabs, were absorbed in the new empire.
But the rupture of the Babylonian state and the pro-
scription of its worship must have been so complete as
to drive forth from their native seats many thousands of
the people of the “ four quarters or zones and force them
westwards into Africa or eastwards through the mountain
passes into the table land of the Punjab and thence into the
Gangetic plains. Here, I imagine, were already located the
earlier and purer Hamites, but finding them to be guilty of a
skin not exactly coloured like their own, and not understand-
ing their language, these later Kushites of mixed extraction
regarded them as enemies and drove them forth into the
mountains of the Deccan, where to this hour the Dravidians,
and Kolarians, ’whom I consider their representatives, are
black-skinned and savage races. Ere long these Babylonian
Kushites were themselves displaced and ejected from the
Ganges valley by a fair-skinned race, the Aryans, another and
the last ethnic stream of invaders from the north-west. These
Aryans, in religion and habits irreconcileably opposed to
the earlier races of India, waged on them a relentless war.
Hemmed up in the triangle or Southern India, the Hamites
could escape only by sea ; the later Kushites, on the other
hand, could not seek safety in the mountains of the Deccan,
as these were already occupied; they must, therefore, have
been pushed down the Ganges into Further India and the
Malayan peninsula; thence to pass at a later time into Borneo
and the Sunda Islands and Papua, and afterwards across
the sea of Timor into Australia, or eastwards into Melanesia,
driven onwards now by the Turanian tribes which had come
down from Central Asia into China and the peninsula and
the islands of the East Indies.
Many known facts favour the view which I have thus taken
of the successive waves of population which flowed over Indian
soil towards Australia. I will mention two or three of these :
(1) Ethnologists recognise two pre-Aryan races in India.
The earlier had not attained to the use of metals, and had
only polished flint axes and implements of stone ; the later
had no written records, and made grave-mounds over their
dead. The Vedas caill them “ noseless/’ ff gross feeders on


flesh/’ “raw eaters/’ “not sacrificing'/’ “without gods/’
“ without rites.” All this suits our aboriginals ; for they use
stone axes; in several districts they make grave-mounds;
the typical natives are “ noseless/” for they have very flat and
depressed noses as contrasted with the straight and promi-
nent noses of the Vedic Aryans ; they have no gods and no
religious rites such as the Vedas demand. (2) The Kolarian
and Dravidian languages have inclusive and exclusive forms
for the plural of the first person. So also have many of the
languages of Melanesia and Polynesia. (3) The aborigines
in the south and west of Australia use the same words for
I, thou, we, you, as the natives of the Madras coasts of India.
Having thus shown from history and from the migration of
nations that the aborigines of Australia, as to their remote
descent, may be the brothers of the negroes in Africa, I now
proceed to my proper theme, a comparison of the religious
ceremonies and beliefs on both continents. We cannot expect
to find set modes of worship or a formulated creed such as
the possession of sacred books might secure, but we shall
rather seek for analogies in the experiences and practices of
their social and tribal life, for it is there that ancestral beliefs
often stamp themselves permanently; a custom is there main-
tained from age to age, while those who practise it know not
what it means or whence it came.
At present I confine myself to one tribal custom ; our black
fellows have a ceremony called the Bora, through which the
young men pass when admitted into the tribe. This Bora exists
everywhere throughout Australia, and is carried out everywhere
much in the same fashion. I therefore conclude that it belongs
to the whole race, and is an essential attribute of its existence.
Now, if I may trust the accuracy of Hurd’s Rites and Ceremonies ,
the negroes of Upper Guinea had, seventy years ago —long
before ethnography became a science—certain religious mys-
teries singularly like those of the Bora, and I suppose they
have them still.* These, like the Bora, are ceremonies of
* From W. Winwood Eeade’s book on Savage Africa (London : Smith,
Elder, & Co.) I learn that similar ceremonies still exist in Equatorial Africa.
He says : “ Before they are permitted to wear clothes, marry, and rank in
society as men and women, the young have to be initiated into certain
mysteries. I received some information on this head from Moongilomba,
after he had made me promise that I would not put it in my book. He told me
that he was taken into a Fetich-house, stripped, severely flogged, and plas-
tered with goat-dung, this ceremony, like those of Masonry, being conducted
to the sound of music. Afterwards there came from behind a kind of
screen or shrine uncouth and terrible sounds, such as he had never heard
before. These, he was told, emanated from a spirit called Ukuk. He after-
wards brought to me the instrument with which the fetich-man makes this


initiation, and not only bring a youth to a knowledge of his
country’s gods, but qualify him to commune with spirits and
to hold civil power and authority in the state; all the un-
initiated are to him a “profanum vulgus,” who, on the least
transgression of orders, are hurried away into the woods,
there to be destroyed by the evil spirits which the magical
power of the initiated can command and control. As an
assembly of this kind is convened but four or five times in a
century, and occupies a period of five years, only a small por-
tion of the male population can acquire the qualification
necessary for power in the state. The king issues, when he
pleases, an order for the holding of this assembly. The pre-
parations are committed to the care of those old men that are
known to be best acquainted with the mysteries. These
choose suitable places in the woods, and make ready there
every appliance which can produce surprise, awe, and chilling-
fear on the minds of the novices. All women, children, and
strangers are warned from the spot during the ceremonies,
and the novice believes that, if he reveals any of the secrets of
the grove, the spirits, knowing his faithlessness and profanity,
will in some way or other bring destruction upon him. The
country for some three or four miles around is sacred and
inviolable, and the evil spirits will carry off those who
intrude.
■ The essential idea prominent in the negro ceremony of
initiation is that of death and a new birth, a regeneration.
Hence the catechumen before he proceeds to the groves gives
away all his property and effects, as if about to die to the
noise. It is a whistle made of hollowed mangrove-wood, about two inches
in length, and covered at one end with a scrap of bat’s wing. For a period
of five days after initiation the novice wears an apron of dried palm-leaves,
which I have frequently seen. The initiation of the girls is performed by
elderly females, who call themselves Ngembi. They go into the forest,
clear a space, sweep the ground carefully, come back to the town, and build
a sacred hut, which no male may enter. They return to the clearing in the
forest, taking with them the Igonji, or novice. It is necessary that she
should have never been to that place before, and that she fast during the
whole of the ceremony, which lasts three days. All this time a fire is kept
burning in the wood. From morning to night, and from night to morning,
a Ngembi sits beside it and feeds it, singing, with a cracked voice, ‘ The
fire will never die out.’ The third night is passed in the sacred hut; the
Igonji is rubbed with black, red, and white paints, and, as the men beat
drums outside, she cries, ‘ Okanda, yo, yo, yo,’ which reminds one of the
Evohe of the ancient Bacchantes. The ceremonies performed in the hut
and in the wood are kept secret from the men, and I can say but little
about them During the novitiate which succeeds initiation the girls
are taught religious dances ; the men are instructed in the science of fetich.
It is then that they are told that there are certain kinds of food which are
forbidden to their clan. One clan may not eat crocodile, nor another
hippopotamus, nor a third buffalo.”


world, and on the completion of his novitiate, when he returns
to his kindred, he pretends to forget all his past life and to
know neither father nor mother, nor relations nor former
friends, —his is a new life ; his whole aspect is that of a
new man, for he now carries on his head a cap made of the
bark of a tree, he is adorned with feathers, and as a badge of
his new rank he wears a collar of leopards’ teeth round his
neck. During the five years of his training the probationer
is attended by some old and experienced devotees who act as
his instructors; they teach him the ritual of their religion,
various songs and pieces of -poetry, mostly in praise of their
chief god, and, in particular, he learns from them a dance of
a frenzied kind. While this course of education is proceeding,
the king frequently visits the groves and examines the can-
didates. When their training is sufficiently advanced, they
receive each a new name, and, as a token of their regeneration,
several long wounds, which afterwards become permanent
scars, are made on their neck and shoulders. They are now
conducted to some retired place at a distance where women
may attend them. Here, their religious education being
already complete, they are instructed in those principles of
morals and politics which will make them useful as ‘members
of the state, and fit to act as judges in civil and criminal
causes. This done, they leave the groves and their tutors,
and, with their new badges of perfection upon them, they
exhibit their magical powers in public by means of a stick
driven into the ground, with a bundle of reeds at its top, or
they repair to the public assembly, and join in the solemn
dances of the wise men or in the duties of civic rulers.
The aboriginal races of India also have observances similar
to those of the African negroes; for I learn from a lecture
delivered last year in this hall that, among some of the
Dravidian tribes of Central India, “ persons desiring to enter
the priesthood are required to retire for some days to the
jungle and commune in solitude with the deity. Before they
are confirmed in their office, they are expected to perform
some marvellous act as evidence of their having acquired
superhuman power.” In another tribe, the novice “ retires
“to the jungle, and there remains alone and without clothing
for eight days, during which time he performs certain puri-
ficatory rites. On the eighth day he returns and enters upon
the discharge of his duties.”*
So far the negroes of Upper Guinea. I now turn to
Australia; and there, when a boy approaches the age of
puberty, a feeling of restless anticipation spreads over his
Transactions Victoria Institute, vol. xix., pp. 103, 104.


mind, for lie knows that his opening manhood has brought
him to the threshold of ceremonies of mysterious import,
through which he is to be formally received into the tribe
and thereby to acquire the dignity of a man. The rites of
initiation are important, numerous, and prolonged: and, as
his admission does not concern himself or his family merely,
but the whole tribe, these observances call together large
assemblages, and are the occasion of general rejoicing.
This assembly,—the most solemn and unique in the tribal
life, —is called the Bora. The whole proceedings are essen-
tially the same everywhere in' their general features and
teachings, but the details vary among the different tribes.
Therefore, instead of a separate narrative for each tribe, I will
endeavour to pi’esent to you a full view of the Bora, taking
one tribal mode as the basis of my description, but intro-
ducing from the other tribes such features as appear to me
needed to complete the significance of the ceremonies.
The chiefs of the tribes know that some boys are ready for
initiation ; they accordingly summon their “ raarbull," or
public messenger, and bid him inform the sections of the
tribe that a Bora will be held at a certain time and place, the
time being near full moon, and the place being usually a well-
known Bora ground; they also send him away to invite the
neighbouring tribes to attend; this invitation is readily
accepted, for, although the tribes may be at variance with
each other, universal brotherhood prevails among the blacks
at such a time as this. The day appointed for the gathering
is, perhaps, a week or two distant, and the intervening time is
filled with busy preparations by the leading men of the
novice's tribe. They select a suitable piece of ground, near
water, if possible, and level for convenience in sitting or lying
on; they then form and clear of all timber, and in most cases
even of every blade of grass, two circular enclosures, a larger
and a smaller, about a quarter of a mile from each other, with a
straight track connecting them *; the trees that grow around
the smaller circle they carve at about the height of a man,
often much higher, with curious emblematical devices and
figures; the circuit of each ring is defined by a slight mound
of earth laid around, and in the centre of the larger one
they fix a short pole with a bunch of emu feathers on the top
of it. Everything is now ready for the rites of initiation, and
there is a large concourse; the men stand by with their bodies
painted in stripes of colour, chiefly red and white; the women,
* In the Bora grounds which I have examined this path leads due east
and west by the compass.


who are permitted to be present at the opening ceremony only,
are lying on the ground all round the larger ring with their
faces covered. The boy, painted red all over (I speak of only
one, but there are several boys initiated at once), is brought
forward and made to lie down in the middle of it, and covered
with an opossum rug. Such of the old men as have been
appointed masters of the ceremonies now begin to throw him
into a state of fear and awe by sounding an instrument called
tirricoty, similar to what an English boy calls a “ bull roarer.”
This same “ bull roarer ” is found in Central Africa, and is
there also used as a sacred instrument. In Australia the men
use it on all occasions when they wish to frighten the women
and boys, who cower with fear whenever they hear it. It
is made of a piece of thin wood or bark ; it is about nine
inches long, and is sometimes shaped and marked like a fish.
The roaring sound is supposed to be the voice of a dreaded
evil spirit who prowls about the black fellows’ camp, especially
at night, and carries off, tears and devours those he can seize.
When the'performers think that the “ boombat ” (so they call
the novice) has been sufficiently impressed, tirricoty ceases to
speak ; they then raise the boy from the ground and set him
in the ring, so that his face is turned towards the cleared track
which leads to the circle of imagery; then an old man comes
forward, breathes strongly in his face, and makes him cast his
eyes upon the ground, for in this humble attitude he must
continue for some days.
Two other old men next take the boy by the arms and lead
him along the track, and set him in the middle of the other
enclosure. As soon as this is done, the women rise from
their prostrate position and begin to dance and sing. The
Murring tribe, on our S.E. coast, place along this track or
path figures moulded in earth of various animals (the totems ),
and one of Dararaulum, a spirit god whom they fear. Before
each of these figures the devotees have a dance, and a
“Koradjie” (that is, doctor or medicine man) brings up out
of his inside by his mouth, the “jo-e-a” or magic of the
totem before which he stands; for the porcupine he shows
stuff like chalk, for the kangaroo stuff like glass, and so on.
Meanwhile the boy has been sitting in the smaller circle with
downcast eyes ; he is told to rise, and is led in succession to
each of the carved trees around it, and is made to look up for
a moment at the carvings on them, and while he does so the
old men raise a shout.* When he has come to know all the
* A fire is kept constantly burning in the centre of this ring ; with this
compare the Vestal fire at Rome. The boy is made to lie within the ring prone


carvings sufficiently, the men give him a new name, which
must not be revealed to the uninitiated, and they hand to him
a little bag containing one or more small stones of crystal
quartz ; this bag he will always carry about his person, and
the stones must not be shown to the uninitiated on pain of
death. This concludes the first part of the performance.
The “ boombat ” is next conveyed, blindfolded, to a large
camp at a distance of several miles, no woman being near, and
food is given to him, which he eats still with his eyes cast
down ; here they keep him for eight or ten days, and teach
him their tribal lore by showing him their dances and their
songs ; these he learns, especially one song of which I can
tell nothing further than that it is important for the boy to
know it. These songs, they say, were given them by Baiamai,
the great Creator. At night, during this period, the “ boom-
bat ” is set by himself in secluded and darksome places, and
all around the men make hideous noises, at which he must
not betray the least sign of fear. At some part of Abe cere-
mony a sacred wand is shown him ; of this Ridley says :
“ This old man, Billy, told me, as a great favour, what other
blacks had withheld as a mystery too sacred to be disclosed to
a white man, that dhurumbulum,” a stick or wand, is exhi-
bited at the Bora, and that the sight of it inspires the initiated
with manhood. This sacred wand was the gift of Baiamai.
The ground on which the Bora is celebrated is Baiamai’s
ground. Billy believes the Bora will be kept up always all
over the country; such was the command of Baiamai.”
Another conspicuous part of the inner Bora customs is the
knocking out of one of the upper front teeth of the “ boom-
bat.” The tooth is then conveyed from one sub-tribe to
another until it has made the circuit of the whole tribe; on its
return it is given to the owner or kept by the head man. It
is said that an ancient shield [cf. the sacred Ancilia of Rome,)
handed down from past ages, and regarded as almost equal
to Daranmlum himself, accompanied the tooth. This tooth-
breaking, however, is not practised by some of the larger
tribes ; but instead of it there is circumcision, cutting of the
hair, &c.
on the ground for weeks, it may be, getting only a very little food and water
now and then. When he wishes to go outside, the old men carry him over
the circle-mound. With this compare the sacredness of the pomocrium cir-
cuit of ancient Rome. One black boy told me that when he was initiated,
he joined the Bora in the month of August, and did not get away till about
Christmas. When the blacks in charge of the sacred circle at last bade
him rise from his recumbent position, he said he was so weak that he
staggered and fell.


All these formalities being now completed, the boombat's
probation is at an end. They now proceed, all of them
together, to some large water-hole, and jumping in, men and
boys, they wash off the colouring matter from their bodies,
amid much glee, and noise, and merriment, and, when they
have come out of the water, they paint themselves
white.
Meanwhile, the women, who have been called to resume their
attendance, have kindled a large fire not far off, and are lying
around it, with their faces covered as at thefirst; the two old men,
who were the original initiators, bring the boy at a run towards
the fire, followed by all the others, with voices indeed silent,
but making a noise by beating their boomerangs together;
the men join hands and form a ring round the fire, undone old
man runs round the inside of the ring beating a heelaman or
shield. A woman, usually the own mother, then steps
within the ring, and, catching him under the arms, lifts him
from the ground once, sets him down, and then retires;
everybody, the boy included, now jumps upon the decaying
red embers, until the fire is extinguished.
Thus ends the Bora; the youth is now a man, for his initia-
tion and his instruction are over. But, although these are
formalities observed in admitting a youth into the tribe, yet
in the Bora, as in freemasonry, the novice does not become
a full member all at once, but must pass through several grades,
and these are obtained by attending a certain number of
Boras ; here also, as in Africa, restrictions as to food are
imposed, which are relaxed from time to time, until at last
the youth is permitted to eat anything he may find; thus
the process of qualifying for full membership may extend
over two or three years. Then he becomes an acknowledged
member of the tribe, undertakes all the duties of membership.
and has a right to all its privileges.
I have thus finished my description of the Bora ceremonies,
and, as a sort of introduction to that description, I gave at the
outset a condensed account of similar observances both in
Africa and in India.
Now, when I cast my eye over the Bora and its regulated
forms, I feel myself constrained to ask, “ What does all this
mean ? ” I, for one, cannot believe that the Bora, with all its
solemnities (for the rites were sacred, and the initiated were
bound not to divulge what they had seen and done), is a
meaningless, self-developed thing; still less that the same
thing can have developed spontaneously in Australia and
in farthest Africa; I prefer to see in it a symbolism covering
ancestral beliefs—a symbolism intelligible enough to the


Kushite race at first, but now little understood, but yet
superstitiously observed, by their Australian descendants.
Accordingly I now proceed to what I regard as the most
important part of this inquiry, for I shall attempt to show
that in many respects the Bora corresponds with the reli-
gious beliefs and practices of the ancient world. If we
can prove that the germ ideas which underlie the Australian
Bora as it has always been celebrated among the aborigines
are the same as those in many religions of antiquity, and that
these same ideas present themselves in ceremonies of similar
import among nations now widely separated in place, I think
we have established a strong presumption that there is a
common source from which all these things have sprung,
and that there is a community of origin on which this com-
munity of belief is founded.
And here I wish to enlist the sympathy and assistance of
this intelligent audience. There are among you many who
have a full and accurate knowledge of the religious systems of
Africa and India, and who can thereffme give valuable aid in
tracing analogies sufficient to build up my argument to the
dimensions of substantial proof. I ask these gentlemen to
assist me, either now by oral remarks, or afterwards in any
form which they may prefer. My present theme is a small
contribution to an argument for the unity of the human race
as to its origin, and while I work in the Australian field,
which is as yet little known, I shall gratefully receive any
help which may come from fields that have been long
explored.
I now offer to you such analogies as my limited knowledge
permits me to refer to ;
(A.) In the Bora there are two circles, the one is less
sacred, for the women may be present there, although only on
the outskirts; in it certain preparatory things are done in
order to bring the “boombaPs” mind into a fit state of
reverential awe for the reception of the teaching in the other
circle, —the adytum, the penetralia, —where the images of the
gods are to be seen; the women and the uninitiated must not
approach this inner circle, for it is thrice holy; “ Procul este.
profani.”
(a.) In the earliest religions, the circle is the invariable
symbol of the sun—the bright and pure one, from whose
presence darkness and every evil thing must flee away. Thus
we have the disc as the symbol of the sun-god in Egypt,
Chaldeea, Assyria, Persia, India, China. This fact is so well
known that it is needless to multiply examples. Those who
are within the circle are safe from the powers of evil. The


sacredness of the circle in those early ages is seen from the
Chaldaean name (Genesis xxxi. 47), “ the circle of witness ”
a name given to a solemn compact of friendship witnessed by
that celestial orb which looks down on and observes all the
deeds of men. In Persia, to this day, in the southern parts of
it, which were originally inhabited by a Hamite race of an
almost purely negroid type, there are to be seen on the road-
sides large circles of stones which the tradition of the country
regards as set there by the Caous, a race of giants, that is, of
aboriginals. Their name closely resembles the name Kush,
as does also Cutch at the north of the Indus, and other
geographical names along the Arabian seas. Then in the
classic nations, both in Greece and Italy, some of the most
famous temples were circular in form, especially the Pantheon
at Athens ; and, at Rome, the temple of Vesta, the goddess of
the sun-given, eternal fire. At Rome also, for 100 years from
the foundation of the city, the worship of the gods was cele-
brated in the open air {cf. the Bora), often in sacred groves ;
and there also the temple of Janus, the oldest and most vene-
rated of the Roman gods, was merely a sacred enclosure upon
which no building stood till the time of the First Punic War.
The pomcerium, or circuit of the walls of Rome, was a sacred
ring, and the Circus was consecrated to the sun, and was open
to the sky. In Britain, too, the fire worship of the Uruids led
them to construct ring temples in various places, and especially
at Stonehenge, where there are two rings as in the Bora, but
concentric. Even the rude Laplanders, who are sprung from
the same Turanian race which was one of the earliest elements
in the population of Babylonia, make two circles when they
sacrifice to the sun, and surround them with willows; they
also draw a white thread through the ear of the animal to be
sacrificed, and white, as we shall presently see, is the sun’s
livery.
(B.) In the Bora, the two rings, both of them sacred,
communicate with each other by means of a narrow passage,
in which are earthen representations of certain objects of
worship; the inner contains the images or symbols of the gods
carved on trees, and the novice is so placed in the outer ring
that he faces the passage and the shrine of the gods; he is
turned to the east (see note, the eighth page of this paper).
(b.) The inner shrine is an arrangement common to all
religions. At Babylon in the temple of Belus, which was
built in stages, the worshipper had to pass through these
seven stages of Sabteism before he reached the shrine; this
was the topmost of all, and contained a golden image of the
god; each of these stages was devoted to the worship of one


of the Babylonian gods. So also, in the Bora, the worshipper
advances by stages along the passage leading from the one
circle to the other, and pays his devotions to each of the
images in succession. In Greece and in 'Rome the roofed
temples were commonly arranged in two parts, an inner and
an outer, and the statue of the god was so placed that a
worshipper, entering by the external door, saw it right before
him. At the very ancient temple of Dodonscan Zeus, in
Greece, the god was supposed to reside in an oak tree, and
it is quite possible that the Xoanon, or wooden image of the
god, was here, as in other grove worship, merely a carved piece
of oak as in the Bora. In this sense Festus gives Fustis
decorticatus as an equivalent for delubrum. The student of
Biblical archeeology will also remember the Asherah of the
Israelite idolaters, the consort of the sun-god Baal; this was a
wooden pillar or statue of the goddess which could be cut
down and burned. Such a pillar our black fellows also have
been known to erect; for on one occasion several men of a tribe
which is well known to me were seen to cut down a soft cedar
tree; they dressed it with their hatchets, and cut the end of it
into the rude figure of a head and face; they then carried it some
distance down the river to a sandy spot, and, setting it up there
like a pillar, they danced in a circle around it. This was
certainly an act of worship, the same as many other acts of
worship in the heathen world. Was it merely a happy thought
on the part of these black fellows, or undesigned coincidence,
which led them to do so; or was it a portion of an ancestral
form of worship brought from other lands ?
(0.) In the Bora, the novice in the outer circle has his body
all painted over with red, but at the close of his novitiate he
washes in a pool, is thereby cleansed, and then paints himself
all white. The other members of the tribe paint themselves
red and white for the ceremony; they, too, at the close, wash
in the pool and retire white like the “ boombat.-” This trans-
formation is to them a source of much rejoicing.
(c.) Among the black races the colour red was the symbol
of evil; and so Plutarch tells us that the Egyptians sacrificed
only red bullocks to Typhon, and that the animal was reckoned
unfit for this sacrifice if a single white or black hair could be
found on it; in certain of their festivals the Egyptians
assailed with insults and revilings any among them who
happened to have red hair, and the people of Coptos had a
custom of throwing an ass down a precipice because of its
red colour. The god Typhon was to the Egyptians the
embodied cause of everything evil, malignant, destructive,
man-hating in the economy of nature, just as Osiris, the bright


and beneficent sun, was an emblem of all that was good. In
the Levitical economy, the red heifer was a sin-offering for
the Israelites, probably with some reference to the Egyptian
ideas about this colour. In India, Ganesa, the lord of all
mischievous and malignant spirits, is symbolised by red stones,
and the Cingalese, when they are sick, offer a red cock to the
evil spirit that has caused the sickness. The blacks of Congo
wash and anoint a corpse and then paint it red, and their
black brethren of Madagascar, when they are celebrating the
rite of circumcision, never wear anything red about them lest
the child should bleed to death. The negroes of Upper
Guinea, far enough removed from Australian Boras to prevent
even a suspicion of borrowing, make a similar use of the colours
red and white; for in Benin, when a woman is first initiated
into the rites which the Babylonians sanctioned in honour of
their goddess Mulitta, she seats herself on a mat in a public
place, and covers her head, shoulders, and arms with the blood
of a fowl; she then retires for her devotions, and, these
being finished, she washes herself, returns, and is rubbed
all over with white chalk where the blood had been. The
young ladies of Congo, also a black country, have a similar
custom, but they besmear their faces and necks with red
paint.
In Australia, those who pass through the Bora paint them-
selves white at its close. Everywhere in Australia there is
the belief that the black man when he is dead and buried
still lives, but he is then white; the aborigines say Cf black
fellow jumps up a white fellow ; 33 hence their name for white
man is “ wunda,” a word which originally described only the
black man in his spirit state after death. The father of a
friend of mine was the first white man to enter, some fifty
years ago, the territory of a black tribe near to where I lived;
it so happened that the tribe had just lost their chief by death,
and, as the white man whom they saw coming over the crest
of the hill towards their camp bore some physical resemblance
to the deceased, they soon got to hail him as their chief in the
“ wunda 33 state, and to this hour they claim that white man’s
son as one of themselves, a brother !
Now, in the ancient rituals, white was the colour sacred to
the sun, the benign god, before whom darkness flies away.
In India, white agates represent Siva, the eternal cause of
all blessings; in Persia, white horses were sacred to the sun;
in Celtic Britain, some of the Welsh people even now whiten
their houses to keep away devils; and so with many other
examples.
In these senses the “ boombat 33 enters the Bora with the


brand of Typhon upon him, exposed to all evil influences,
to disease and death fronfianimals, men, and spirits; but after
he has made the acquaintance of his fathers' gods, and has
learned the sacred songs and dances of his tribe, he comes
forth another man; he washes away the badge of darkness
and evil, and assumes the livery of the children of light.
The other men, whose mottled colour is a confession of
mingled good and evil in their lives, also emerge new men
once more, purified and devoted anew to the service of the
good, and freed from the power of the evil.
This felt subjection to unseen evil and aspiration for deli-
verance from it in the minds of our native races, is not only
natural to man everywhere, but was a marked feature in the
whole system of Akkadian magic; for these old Chaldaeans
believed that innumerable spirits, each with a personality,
were distributed throughout nature, sometimes in union with
animate objects, sometimes separately. Existing everywhere,
they had each both an evil and a good aspect, at one time
favourable, at another unfavourable, controlling both life and
death, regulating all the phenomena, beneficial or destruc-
tive, of air, earth, fire, or water, A dual spirit, bad and good,
was attached to each of the celestial bodies, and each living
being; a constant warfare existed and was keenly maintained
between the bad and the good, and, according as the one
principle or the other held sway, so did blessings or disasters
descend upon nature and upon man. Hence the value of
religious rites, such as the Bora; for the due observance of
these, repeated from time to time, gave for a while, at least,
the victory to the good spirits, and brought blessings to the
faithful. Thus, then, I explain the red colour of the novice at
the Bora; the red and white of the celebrants, and the white
colour of the whole when the service was completed.
(D.) Ridley says that the Bora is Baiamai's ground. He
adds: “ Baiamai sees all; he knows all, if not directly, yet
through Turramulan, a subordinate deitv. Turramulan is
O ' t t */
mediator for all the operations of Baiamai to man, and from man
to Baiamai." “ Women must not see Turramulan on pain of
death. And even when mention is made of Turramulan, or of
the Bora at which he presides, the women slink away, know-
ing that it is unlawful for them so much as to hear anything
about such matters."
(d.) We have seen that in some places an image of
Daramulun is set up at the Bora. In another place, the
bull-roaring instrument, w r hose voice begins the ceremony of
the Bora and warns the women not to look, is called tirricoty,
and is sometimes made in the shape of a fish; the magic


wand that Ridley mentions is called dhurumhulmn; and tlie
great ancestral Bora ground of the Kamilaroi tribe in New
{South Wales is at Tirri-hai-hai. In Victoria this same
roaring instrument is called turndnn, which I think should
be written dhurrum-dun. All these names are identical, and
only modifications of dara-mulun; thus, with a slight alteration
of the spelling, we have turra-mn\-nn durru-m-dim, durru-m-
-bnlun, tirri-coty, tirri- hai-hai. The root of all these forms
I take to be dava, dar, Sanskrit dri, meaning to protect, a root
found in all the great branches of human speech, and furnish-
ing derivatives which mean “ a prince/' “ a governor/’
“ a lord,” “ a supreme ruler.” I therefore take Daramulun
to mean something like “ Lord of the mysteries,” for it is
evident that he presides at the Bora, and is the source of
the blessings therein communicated. The use of a fish-
shaped roarer to indicate his presence leads me to com-
pare him with the Chaldeean god, Hoa, Hea, half man,
half fish, who, in the Chaldaso-Babylonian religion, was
reverenced as the revealer of all religious and social
knowledge. His abode was the sea, the Persian Gulf, where he
passed the night, but by day he remained among men to instruct
them; thus he became a legislator and protector, Hea, as a god,
“seesthat all is inorder/’and,beingacquaintcdwithallscieuces,
he can baffle the powers of evil by his magic arts. With this
I compare the “ magic” shown by the Koradjie in the Bora
in the presence of Daramulun’s image. The Akkadians, and
from them the Babylonians, invoked the aid of Hea, when
spells and enchantments were found unavailing against the
power of demons. So in the Bora passage, when Daramulun
had been duly honoured and magic influence conjured up for
the driving away of all adverse spirits, the lad is taken into
the inner circle and sees the gods of his fathers, and learns to
know them and their attributes, just as in the greater Eleusinia
of Greece the duly qualified were, after a course of previous
preparation, led into the inner sanctuary in the darkness of
night, and there, by a dim light, allowed to see and know the
holy things.
(E.) The next step in the process of initiation is interest-
ing: (1) a sacred wand is shown to the “boombat:” (2) ho
gets a new name; and (3) certain white stones are given to
him.
(e.) (1) The wand. In this there is the notion of consecra-
tion and sacredness; for, on the Egyptian monuments, the
deities are constantly represented as holding in one hand a
long rod or wand, with a crook on the upper end of it. The
king also, and some of the higher officers of state, carry this


“ crook:” In India we find tkat Yama, the regent of the South,
has a name from a sacred staff or rod, and some religious
impostors wear as badges of sanctity a “ staff” and a deer’s
skin. The Magi of Persia carried the Baregma or harsom, a
divining wand as one of the badges of their ministry and the
magicians of Egypt similarly had rods in their hands when
they stood in the presence of Pharaoh. The traditions of
Peru speak of a sacred golden wand borne by the son and
daughter of the Sun. These are analogies; but the nearest
approach to the use of the wand in the Bora is, I think, to be
found in the Finnish Kalevala, where there is a reference to
a “ celebrated wand ” (evidently as in Peru a sun wand) which
protects its possessor from all spells and enchantments; eveu the
gods are glad to use it against the powers of evil, (2) A new
name. Having now acquired a knowledge of sacred things,
the initiated is henceforth a new man, he is “ twice born,”
and like his kinsman in Upper Guinea, already described, he
will come out to the world in a new character, renouncing his
former state. In India, a youth becomes one of the “ twice
born,” by investiture with the sacred cord, receiving thus
a spiritual birth ; thereafter, like our “boornbat,” he passes
into the hands of religious preceptors, who teach him the sacred
prayers, mystic words, and devotional ceremonies. In more
modern times, when a monastic house or a nunnery receives,
from the world without, one more recluse, a new name is
given by which he or she may thenceforward be known in
religion. The underlying idea in all these instances is that a
religious profession gives one a new character and a new
relation to the rest of the world. And who will deny that this
is true, whether the professor be black or white ? (3) The
white stones. I am inclined to think that the “ boombat ”
receives only one of these at a time, and that the number of
them increases according to the number of Boras he attends
until he becomes a full and accepted master of the craft. In
any case they are used as talismans, and are carried in the belt
during the whole of the man’s life. They are merely small
pieces of quartz crystals, but are so sacred that they must not
be shown to the women,* The negroes of Guinea use small
stones as fetishes, which they carry about their necks or under
their armpits. These the priests sell after a formal con-
secration. The white colour is a sun colour. It is beneficent
Mood is the name for the white crystals. A Koradjie, in the presence
of a friend of mine, swallowed three or four small ones, saying, “ That fellow
stick there.” He believed that the crystals would give him more power as
a medicine-man.


and preservative against evil, as already shown ; hence the
Hindoos dedicate white stones to Siva, the eternally blessed
one.
Under this head I venture to refer to the promise given to
the Church in Pergamos (Revelation ii. 17) in these words :
“ I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.”
On this passage commentators have given the most diverse
opinions in explanation of the white stone and the new name.
The very diversity of their opinions leads me to think that in
this passage there is a reference to some heathen and idolatrous
rites well known to the Pergamenes, part, it may be, of the
religion of their ancestors, as in the Bora ceremonies; for in the
Bora there is the white stone and the new name which must
not be divulged. I cannot stay to examine this curious
analogy, but I think that some light might be got to illustrate
the passage if one were to explore the source of the early
population of Pergamos and its forms of worship. It will
probably be found that both were in some way Chaldsean, and
that the worship was very sensual and degrading, such as was
the worship of Mulitta in Babylon. This would explain how
it is that in the message to the Church in Pergamos the expres-
sion occurs, “ I know where thou dwellest, even where Satan’s
throne is”; and again, “ Among you where Satan dwelleth,”
the city being thus twice in one short message described as a
stronghold of Satan; it would also explain the reference to
“ fornication,” and “ things sacrificed to idols,” and “ the
teaching of Balaam.” If I Avere for a moment to assume the
garb of a commentator, I Avould paraphrase the promise to
the Pergamene Church somewhat in this manner : —■“ To him
that overcometh, that is, to him that rises above the abound-
ing evil and remains faithful in his new profession, will I
give .... a Avhito stone, a pledge of purity and a safeguard
against the tvicked practices so common among yon Avhere
Satan dAvelleth, and a new name to shoAV that he has put off
his former state of slavery to sin, and has become a new man
in the service of a neAV master, avlio is pure, and holy, and
undefiled.”
(F.) The initiated lad is next led to a camp at a distance;
he is kept there for eight or ten days receiving instruction,
specially in songs and dances; he also eats here, and his
confidence in divine protection is tested by hideous noises
during the darkness of the night.
(/.) It is rather singular, as a coincidence, that Festus
speaks of Roman ceremonies as lasting ten days, and that
the Hionysia and the greater Eleusinia of Greece also lasted
B 2


nine or ten days, and that part of them was a solemn meal
and a solemn bathing; or purification by water; thereafter
instruction was given. So; also; a young Brahman must
reside with his preceptor for some time; until he has gained
a thorough knowledge of the holy books; he must pass
through certain purificatory rites, which remove the taint of
former sin; one of these is the cutting off of the hair, and
with this seems to correspond the knocking out of a front
tooth practised by some of our tribes in Australia.* The
singing and the dancing are everywhere essential parts of
the heathen worship, and the dance is in its origin religious.
(Gr.) Then come the washing and the purification which
I have just spoken of, but after that they join hands
all round, dance round the fire, and then jump into it and
through it.
(y.) Analogies to this purification and protection by fire
are abundant. In Bretagne, at this hour, the farmers protect
their horses from evil influences by the service of fire. They
kindle fires at nightfall; then, at dawn of day, the horses are
led thrice round the fires, and a particular prayer, known only
to a few, is said before the dying flame; as the last words are
pronounced, they all leap on the embers with their feet joined.
The ancient British Kelts, to which stock the modern Bretons
belong, did much the same thing. On May Day the Druids
used to light large fires on the summits of the highest hills,
into which they drove their four-footed beasts, using certain
ceremonies to expiate the sins of the people. Until very
lately, in different parts of Ireland, it was the common
practice to kindle fires in milking yards on the first day of
May, and then many women and children leaped through
them, and the cattle were driven through in order to avert
evil influences. In ancient Rome, on the feast of Pales, in
April, the same forms of purification and dedication were
observed. The Hottentots of the present day retain the old
customs, for they make their cattle pass through the fire as a
preservative against the attacks of wild dogs. In India, the
youth, when about to be invested with the sacred thread,
stands opposite the sun and walks thrice round the fire, and
in the marriage ceremony the bride is led thrice round the
sacred fire. An incantation used by the oldest Chaldaean
sourcerers has these words : “ May the god Fire, the hero,
dispel their enchantments or spells for the injury of others.”
An Australian gin , going to the river to fetch water after
nightfall, carries for protection a burning stick; and the men
* In some parts of Australia the hair is cut off or singed off in the Bora.


in the camp, when they think an evil spirit is near, throw
firebrands at him to drive him away. We may not wonder,
then, that our Australian black fellows, if, as 1 believe, their
ancestors came from Babylonian lands, have not forgotten
the fire observances, and still trust in the protection of the
fire-god.
So far the Bora and its analogies. I have thus considered
at some length the institution of the Bora, both because it is
the most important of all the social regulations of our
aboriginal tribes, and because its universal distribution among
them, although with slight local differences in the manner of
its celebration, seems to me a strong proof that our black
tribes are all brethren of the same race, and that they are of
the same common origin as the rest of mankind, their nearest
kin being the blacks of Africa. Is it possible that so many
tribes, differing in language and confined by their laws and
habits each to its own hunting ground, should have evolved
from their own consciousness ceremonies so similar, and
which, when examined, correspond in so many points with the
religiousness of the ancient world ? How is it that the blacks
O t ,
of Australia and the blacks of Guinea have similar ceremonies
of initiation ? Is it not because they have come from the
same ethnic source and have a common ancestry and common
traditions ?
And now to complete the task which I proposed to myself,
I would add a few words of aboriginal mythology, as another
point in the argument for the unity of the human family.
Our native races are attentive observers of the stars 3 as
they sit or lie around the camp fire after nightfall, their gaze
naturally turns to the starry vault above, and there they see
the likenesses of many things with which they are conversant
in their daily life 3 young men dancing a corroboree (Orion)
and a group of damsels looking at them (the Pleiades) making
music to their dance 3 the opossum, the emu, the crow, and
so on. But the old men say that the regions “ above the
sky ” are the home of the spirits of the dead, and that there
are fig-trees there, and many other pleasant things, and that
the head of them is a great man Miuny ; he is not visible, but
they all agree that he is in the sky. A greater than he is
the great Garabooung, who, while in earth, was always
attended by a small man, but now the two shine as comrades
in the sky—the “ Heavenly Twins.” Both Garabooung and
Minny are “ skeletons.” In his mortal state, Garabooung was
a man of great rank and power 3 he was so tall that his feet
could touch the bottom of the deepest rivers 3 his only food
was snakes and eels. One day, not being hungry, he buried


a snake and an eel; when he came back to eat them he saw
tire issuing from the ground where they were; he was warned
by his companion, the little man, not to approach, but he
declared he did not fear, and boldly came near; then a
whirlwind seized them and carried them up “ above the sky/’
where he and his companion still are, and “ can be seen any
starlit night.”
These two legends are interesting. Minny is to them the
father and king of the black races, whom he now rules and
will rule in spirit-land; he was once a mortal, but now he is
a “ skeleton ” —a spiritualised being without flesh and blood;
and so our black fellows retain the simple primitive beliefs of
mankind ; they have heard nothing of annihilation or absorp-
tion into the infinite. I observe also that the name of their
great father is the same as that given on the hieroglyphic
inscriptions to the first king of Egypt, Menee—by Herodotus
called Menes—the head of the First Dynasty of mortals. He
was a public benefactor, for he executed several important
works, and taught his people the worship of Phtah, the great
artificer-god of Egypt. He must have some mythical relation
to the human race, for in Greece he is Minos, king of Crete,
“ Minoia regna,” author of many useful laws, and afterwards
a judge of the shades of the dead ; in another part of Greece
he is Minyas, the founder of a race of heroes ; in India he is
Menu, and in Old Germany Mannus ; for I take all these to
be the same name.
The story of Garabooung seems to correspond with that of
the Dioscouroi—Castor and Pollux —who were also mighty
heroes and benefactors of mankind. The ancient Germans
worshipped them in a sacred grove, and called them Alois.
How have our black fellows got hold of the name Minny, and
such a myth about him? Were the name and the myth in-
vented by them ? Are they not rather a survival—derived
from a common origin—of traditions which belong to the
once undivided human family ?
In conclusion, let any one ask me how it is that our
aborigines, if they are of such an origin as I assign to them,
have sunk so low in the scale of humanity as to be regarded
among the most degraded of the races of men. I deny that
this estimate of them is well founded; on the contrary, I
assert that it was formed long ago by those who imperfectly
understood the habits and social organisation of our native
tribes, and has been ignorantly passed from mouth to mouth
ever since; that, when they are thoroughly understood, our
black fellows are not the despicable savages that they are too
often represented to be. They have, or had, virtues which


we might profitably imitate; for they are faithful and affec-
tionate to those who treat them kindly; they have rules of
family morality which are enforced by severe penalties;
they show the greatest respect to age; they carefully tend
and never desert the sick and infirm; their boys are compelled
to content themselves with meagre fare, and to bring the best
of the food which they have found and present it to the aged
members of the tribe and to those who have large families.
I am assured by one who has had much intercourse with them
for thirty years that he never knew them to tell a lie, and
that his property was always safe in their hands ; another
who has been familiar with them since he was a child says :
“ Naturally they are an affectionate, peaceful people, and,
considering that they have never been taught to know right
from wrong, their behaviour is wonderful; I leave my house
open, the camp close bv, and feel the greatest confidence in
them.”
Then, again, although the material civilisation of the world
was commenced by the race of Ham, yet the task soon fell
from their hands, for morally they were unfit for it; for the
conservation and first dissemination of a pure and ennobling
religion we are indebted to the race of Shem ; while the sons
of Japheth have gone forth to rule the earth and the sea
—“audax lapeti genus ” —and to spread abroad the blessings
of good government and the arts and inventions of an
enlightened age to the remotest lands. The Hamites, on the
other hand, have continued to sink in the social scale, have
been persecuted and oppressed by the other races and thus
debased ; and whenever, as in Australia, the sky above and
the earth beneath have conspired to render the means of life
to them meagre and precarious, there the process of decay
has been accelerated, and physically their condition has been
very low; but still, among their social institutions, we have
this evening, I trust, seen traces of their having once enjoyed
a better state of things. Would that we had a full record of
what they really are before they pass entirely away from
among us !
The Chairman (D. Howard, Esq-, E.C.S-, &c-). —I am sure that
all present would have been glad 11 the author of the paper could
have been here to receive our thanks for the very interesting and
valuable information lie has been the means of placing before us on


a subject of so much importance. Such records as these of what
is to be learned of the far distant races of the world are indeed
of great value. It is true that the idea has gained ground,
in not few quarters, that the aborigines of Australia are so
utterly degraded and so devoid of the ordinary distinguishing
marks of humanity that they can hardly be said to be men at all,
or, at any rate, men of the same species as ourselves. But the
testimony we have had to-night from one who has long lived
among them, and who, therefore, speaks of his own knowledge, is
extremely valuable, inasmuch as it presents a very different view,
and makes it clear that those who take the trouble to become
acquainted with these races, and by treating them with kindness
come to know them intimately, are able to tell a very different stoi’y
from that which is told by those who have only come in contact
with them to tyrannise over and ill-treat them. It has been
frequently and boldly stated that the aborigines of Australia have
no religious customs. lam afraid that a great many ignorant
people are too apt to be shy of making their religion public, so
that others may conclude they have none at all; why, there-
fore, should we suppose that the habit of reticence which
induces so many to keep their religious feelings in the back-
ground is not to be met with in other races than our own ? Is it
not a rule that, what men care most about, they talk least about,
especially before strangers ? And, if this be so, ought we not, when
Ave find it stated that such and such a race is entirely devoid of any
religious feeling or sentiment, to assume that the assertion is
made from want of knowledge, and that in all probability the
contrary is the fact. We know it is being brought out more
and more clearly that the negro race, whose fetish worship we
have heard so much about, know nothing about fetish worship,
such as is frequently described; and, therefore, if most of the
statements that have been made about them are unreliable,
so also may be those that have been put forward with regard
to the Australian aborigines, whose very remarkable religious
customs have been traced out by the author of this paper, as well
as the extraordinary connexion that exists between their religious
customs and those practised by the black race in Africa. It is,
consequently, for those who say that these natives of Australia are
not of the same race or nature as our own, to explain how the
religious ideas, of which w r c have now heard, can have sprung up
independently, especially the idea of that dim, shadowy kind of


regeneration, or second life, which would seem to be a part of their
religious system. It is very interesting to trace the customs that
arc so strongly developed in this, —ethnologically,—out-of-the-way
corner of the earth, and to find expressed, in the manner related
by the author of the paper, the idea of the mysteries of
initiation, as well as other ideas that have been rendered familiar
to us through the classical literature which describes the Eleusinian
and other mysteries, derived no doubt from Egypt, which were
from a Hamite source; and these we find, in almost every feature
of the familiar type, developed in the far-away portion of the earth
with which we have been dealing. I hope that those present who
may have something to say on this subject will now give ns the
benefit of their views.
Rev. E. A. Walker, D.D., F.L.S.—On page 13 it is stated that “ the
pomcerium , or circuit of the walls of Rome, was a sacred ring, and
the circus was consecrated to the sun and was open to the sky.”
I should like to say that there is much in the nature of a counter-
part of this, on a small scale, still extant in the ruins of Ephesus.
There is a circular platform evidently, at one time, part of the shrine
of the sun, and having a circular base ; in the middle there is the
corolla of a flower and around it the remains of what would exactly
have resembled the petals of the sunflower. It is not part of the
circus, and it may be as well to mention that it is very near the
stadium or racecourse which still exists there.
A Visitor. — I have lived for a while in Australia, and as regards
the native belief in a God I may state that I have, in the course
of my travels, come across a great many cases in which men of the
very lowest type have shown that they all had some idea of religious
worship, and my conclusion is that the reason for this is to bo found
in the fact that God has put into their minds faculties which compel
them, as a matter of necessity,—of absolute necessity, —to worship
Him, and the more we analyse the minds of men the more, I think,
shall we be inclined to come to this conclusion.
Rev. H. Walker-Taylor. —As an Australian clergyman I
venture to say just a few words on what the writer of the
paper has brought before us. I am sure we are all very
much indebted to the author for having dealt so ably with
a subject which, in many of its aspects, is comparatively
unknown. I certainly do object to the idea that has been
getting abroad for many years that the aborigines of Australia are a
degraded people. Any one coming in contact with them, and


knowing their religious traditions, must see that those traditions
are based on something more ancient and something which shows
that they hold the idea of a spiritual being, and that they look on
the carious life of this world as a life of work and thought, having
relation towards a life of action and thought to come. One
who knows a great deal of Australia and the Australians, says that
the ordinary idea of omnipotence, goodness, and eternity is distinctly
characterised in the religious ideas of the Australian natives. As
to the proposition which has been advanced that these people came
from India, there would appear to be good grounds for that supposi-
tion, as shown by certain similarities of phrases and the resem-
blances which point to a migration through New Guinea, the people
who established themselves in the northern part of Australia
having evidently penetrated that country from the southern
part of New Guinea, going afterwards south-west, and thus
overspreading the continent of Australia. This, at any rate,
is the idea of those who have looked into the question.
Tradition certainly seems to point to the Australian aborigines
coming from the north. Ridley (perhaps the chief authority
amongst the many devoted missionaries and laymen who have
lived amongst them and investigated the history and customs
of the race) speaks of a tradition about the first landing of
man on the north-west coast of Australia from Java. He says,
moreover, “ it has been shown out of their own mouths, from their
songs and their cherished traditions, that they are by no means
destitute of some qualities in which civilised men glory; such as
the power ;of inventing tragic and sarcastic fiction, the thirst for
religious mystery, stoical contempt of pain, and reverence for
departed friends and ancestors. It may be affirmed, with some
reason, that they have handed down with reverential care through
many generations, a fragment of primeval revelation. The manner
in which they have displayed these characteristics present to us
such a strange mixture of wisdom and folly, of elevating and
degrading thoughts, of interesting and repulsive traditions, of
pathetic and grotesque observances, that in order to account for the
apparent contradictions, we must have recourse to the supposition
of an ancient civilisation from which this race has fallen , but of
which it has retained some memorials l need not now say more
than to express my sincere pleasure at the full and careful treatment
of this most important subject exhibited in the paper of Dr. Fraser.
The poor aborigines have been for well-nigh a century hardly the better


for English civilisation. They have been despoiled, degraded, and
neglected by the Anglo-Saxon race who occupy their lands. It is
well that this paper has been introduced to the notice of the
members of this Institute, if only to give new impetus and a new
motive to the movement at the antipodes for more righteous and
brotherly attention to the material and spiritual wants of our fellow-
subjects, the aborigines of Australia.
The meeting was then adjourned.
REMARKS OK THE FOREGOING PAPER.
BY THE REV. MYRON EELLS
(Of Paciiic University, United States).
I have been very much interested in this paper, because it bears
strongly on a subject on which I prepared a paper, which was read in
1885 (see Transactions, vol, xix.), —the bearing of the religious ideas
of the natives on the unity of the race, and other principles of the Bible,
—my paper having had reference to the natives of America, while this
one refers to those of Australia. It seems evident from their geo-
graphical position, that, next to America, the islands of the Pacific
Ocean are the most difficult of access by immigrants from that part
of Asia where it is believed that Adam was created, and hence the
most likely to be the centres of other human creations, if there were
such. Hence, everything which tends to show that the inhabitants
of these islands were formerly connected with that part of the
human race which inhabits the Eastern continent is specially valu-
able. Realising this, and my interest in the subject having grown
since I wrote that paper, I have, as opportunity offered, examined
some works on several of those islands, in order to see how much their
religion agrees with that of the Bible. Mr. A. W. Howitt, F.L.S.,
F.G.S., in a paper in the Smithsonian Report for 1883, on the Aus-
tralian group relations, speaks of their belief in a Supreme Being,
and their very great reverence for Him, even in pronouncing His
name, and he gives this name in the languages of several of the
tribes. W. B. Wildy, in a work on Australasia and the Oceanic
region (p. 116), says that the Larrakeyahs and Woolnahs do not
practise circumcision, but all the other tribes do; and that the
custom is purely traditional. He adds that they are afraid of an
evil spirit called Browl; and that under the trees, up which they
bury their dead, they will smooth down the grass in order to detect


any visitation of Browl; also that before retiring at night, they take
a light and hunt around, calling out “ Browl! Browl! ” as if to
bring him from his hiding-place. These are the Northern Austra-
lians, very low in the scale of civilisation, wearing almost no clothes,
eating roots, grubs, worms, the larva? of ants, lizards and snakes, and
practising cannibalism to some extent. Sir John Lubbock, in the
Smithsonian Report for 1869, in a paper on the social and religions
condition of the lower races of man, also speaks of the belief of the
inhabitants of Australia in spirits and a kind of devil, who is spiteful
and malevolent, but weak, and dangerous only in the dark. But the
paper just read is a most valuable one, and I hope the author will
follow up his studies on the subject much farther. There are
some things spoken of in this paper which remind me
of practices among some of the natives of America. In
regard to the ideas of the natives of America about a mediator,
and dancing as a mode of worship, I would refer to my paper
( Transactions , vol. xix., pp. 313, 319). There are among the
Indians in Washington Territory, in the north-western part of the
United States, two sacred styles of worship practised, called respect-
ively the Red Ta-mah-no-us and Black Ta-mah-no-us, or religious
ceremonies. The former derives its name from the red paint with
which they paint themselves during its ceremonies. It is by far the
most common of the two kinds, is open to the public, and is the usual
way which many of them have of occupying the stormy winter days
and long evenings. It is often practised by a few persons, and at any
time and place, though sometimes considerable preparation is made
for it. Any person may engage in its ceremonies, who has obtained
his ta-mah-no-us, or guardian spirit. In order to get this, a young-
man (or woman) goes into the woods alone, where he remains eight, ten,
or twelve days, with little or nothing to eat, but during which time he
washes himself constantly. While there his ta-mah-no-us is revealed
to him in the shape of some animal, which ever after is sacred to
him : that is, his guardian spirit dwells in this animal. The latter,
or black ta-mah-no-us, takes its name from the black paint which is
used, especially on the face, during its ceremonies. This is a secret
society, with certain ceremonies, which are public, but the meaning
of which they do not tell. The ceremonies of initiation and observ-
ance afterwards are only practised at some of the large gatherings,
I have seen them but once, when they occupied six or eight days, but
I have heard of their lasting two months. Their faces were painted
black in various ways, in stripes or spots, or with a part or the whole


of it completely black. About the close of it, the candidates
were washed for a long time. In fact, washing and purification
constitute an important part of the initiatory ceremonies of
both of these modes of worship, and also when a person
becomes a medicine man. In both of these we see the
period of eight or ten days mentioned in the paper just read,
but more especially in the red ta-mah-no-us, whose object is
to enable the candidate “to commune with the spirits,” as the
paper says (p. 5). In the latter, the secret society is plain, and
the ceremonies are performed in great state, as in the Bora. Tradi-
tion says that this latter originated in British Columbia, in a mytho-
logical way. In the practice of the ceremonies of the red ta-mah-no-
us, I have seen persons dance around a large fire, clothed with a red
blanket, holding a stick in the hand, with face and eyes askance, so
that I was forcibly reminded of an old witch with a wand in her
hand. This stick was sacred, and the object of the performance was to
purify the persons from sin. Singularly enough, however, the red paint
is not considered as the symbol of evil, but of good. The tradition
of the Skokomish Indians is that, long ago, when a previous race,
the progenitors of the present one, dwelt here, the Klik-i-tat Indians
of Central Washington came to Skokomish and engaged with
those of Skokomish in a great game of gambling. The Klikitats
who were painted red, won the game. In process of time, Dokibat,
a kind of deity, incarnate, came and changed the people into
earth, the Skokomish Indians being changed into the hills on the
west side of Hood’s canal, which are of common clay colour, and
the Klikitats being changed into hills on the east side, where is
a bank of red clay, the remains of the red paint, which was on
the Klikitats. To that place the Skokomish Indians go for the
red paint, which they use in gambling and religious ceremonies,
as they believe it to be an omen of good. The circle and sun
mentioned in this paper also have their counterpart in America.
The ancient civilised nations of Mexico and Peru, and also less
civilised tribes, as the Katchez Indians of Louisiana, the Dakotas,
whose sun dance is one of the most savage of their religious
ceremonies, the Blackfeet, Clallams and Makahs of the northern
part of the United States, and the Pueblos of Hew Mexico and
Arizona, all worshipped the sun. Many of these people built
temples to it, and there are remains of sacred places in the south-
western part of the United States in circles, which are believed to
bo the ruins of ancient temples, and which have reminded me of


the circles mentioned in this paper. There is evidence also to
believe that the Ancient Mound builders worshipped the snn.
BY ME. HASTINGS C. DENT, C.E., F L.S.
There are many points in this important paper upon which I
should like to write, but my stay in Australia was so short that
though I ascertained a good deal, I must not do more than say
that all I heard there is confirmed by the author. To study the
links between distant nations or people as proved by any similar
religious traditions as practices which they respectively hold, is
a most valuable sphere of work. May I mention one point upon
which the author seems to contradict himself, viz., the two passages
on the second page of the paper where he denies “ that religiousness
is a thing of man’s own invention,” &c., and the allusion to tho
“ red heifer ” of the Israelites, offered “ probably with some reference
to the Egyptian ideas about this colour.” There appears to be in
this a tendency to state that the Hebrew records which we hold to
be the inspired Word of God, adopted heathen customs. Is it not a
much more reasonable—as well as a more lofty —view, to
hold that the oral inspiration given to the primeval nations was the
true origin of the degraded mythologies which avc meet with in the
most ancient religions P And that this oral inspiration was the
preparation for the elaborate system of type and ritual revealed
eventually to Moses, and by him reduced to writing. I would
have liked the author, as he was dealing with the “ religious-
ness of nations,” to say something as to the capability of the
Australian aborigines to understand and accept the Christian
religion, and their receptivity as to civilisation, Ac. I venture to
suggest that had the author, with his wide experience, given us
some information on this subject, the practical value of the paper
would have been very considerably enhanced. I heard and have
read much as to the great success of mission work among the
natives, both by Roman Catholic and Anglican Missionaries, but
had no opportunity of seeing it. But as regards capacity for
civilisation, I met some black boys from Western Australia and the
Northern Territory, ages from ten to thirteen years; they were
travelling on board my steamer from Port Darwin to Brisbane and
other parts of Queensland, so I had an opportunity of gauging their
powers, &c. They were returning as servants to some miners
who were going home after an unsuccessful hunt for gold,


The boys had been taken from the wild tribes, had had no more
than a few months’ intercourse with white men, yet could talk
English well, were very intelligent, and sang English songs very
prettily. From all I gathered in Australia (and I visited every part
between Port Darwin, along Queensland, down to Adelaide) these
aborigines,—reputed to be one of the lowest races of mankind, —
appear to have in them all the powers with which man is endowed,
and the rising generation is capable of being formed into respectable
civilised and religious communities. Of course, from Port Darwin
to Brisbane was the most available field for inquiry, as the natives
there have not been so entirely “ wiped out,” or, at least, are more
easily reached than in New South Wales, Victoria, or South
Australia. In fact, from all I gathered, this appears to offer the
greatest opportunities for success of all the foreign fields of mission
work that I have seen.
Analogy ( d ), “ the fish-shaped roarer,” which the author com-
pares with the ChahUean god, half man half fish, requires notice,
as to the wide-spread relics of fish-worship. The god Vishnu
(of India) is described as “ incarnate, in the form of a fish,
to recover the sacred books lost in the Deluge.” The fish was
worshipped by the Cuthites or Phoenicians, and relics thereof
appear abundantly in Ireland (in which country the round towers
are perhaps the best known remains of this very early race). On
one of the ancient and beautiful pre-Christian crosses at Kells,
county Meath, 1 have lately seen a carving of six men on their
knees worshipping a huge fish as big as themselves. When I was
at Fuchau, on the Min river, in China, in October, 1886, I visited
the Kushan (Buddhist) monastery, situated aloft in the seclusion of
a mountain dell; there is here a huge tank or pond full of sacred
fish, mostly perch, some of which are an enormous size. The wor-
shippers at these shrines can, for a few “ cash ” (a cash is about l-25th
of a penny), buy a lot of biscuits, which they throw into the pond, and
immediately the holy fish rise in hundreds to the surface and devour
the offerings of the devotees.
The mention of fire worship in Analogy (g) is rather too
brief. The author might at least have said that this is none
other than the worship of Baal. Abundant traces thereof are
preserved to this day in Ireland, in names of places or dedications
of ancient temples to Cuthite demigods transformed into Christian
saints, all of whom are now represented as having lived about the
time of St. Patrick, but there yet remains a tradition at Glenda-


lough, co. Wicklow, that in ancient times the heathen priest used to
ascend the fine round tower (which has been lately restored) and at
sunrise called aloud the name of Baal four times, once from each of
the four openings or windows at the summit of the tower, which
face the cardinal points of the compass. (Cf. 1 Kings xviii. 26, &c.,
as to Baal among the Israelites.) Apart from the religious links of
affinity between nations, and quite outside the limits of discussion
of Mr. Fraser’s paper, is the last word I would like to add, but it
may perhaps be ruled “ out of order.” It is, however, an instance
of how a link may be traced which has never been thought of.
The case in point is the affinity of the Indians of Alaska with the
Botocudos of Eastern Brazil. I had the opportunity of attending
a recent meeting of the Royal Geographical Society, when a paper
was read by Mr. Steam on his explorations of the Rio Doce in
Brazil, and his sojourn among the Botocudos for a month. In the
discussion, Mr. Colin Mackenzie (whom I met in Brazil in 1884)
stated that he had traced the custom of the monstrous lip-disc worn
by the Botocudos, from the eastern coast of Central Brazil, through
the interior, by Central America, to the West Coast in California
and thence up to Alaska, where the custom is also found to-day.


REPLY BY THE AUTHOR.
I have to thank the Chairman and those who have taken part in
the discussion for their kind approbation of ray paper. I may be
allowed to state that it was written to combat the theory held by
some ethnologists that onr Australian blacks are a race distinct
from the rest of mankind. Against this theory my argument is
briefly this :—The blacks of Western Africa have certain rites and
ceremonies, evidently of a religious and sacred character, through
which young men have to pass at their opening manhood. The
blacks of Australia have similar ceremonies, of a similar import,
and in some particulars, identical with those of Africa ; therefore
these two races must have drawn their rites of initiation from a
common origin and a common source, for it is impossible to
believe that two races of mankind, now located so far from each
other, and with no opportunities of contact for thousands of years
bygone, should have, apart and of themselves, worked out the same
beliefs by mere thinking. My introductory remarks, to which Mr.
Stephenson refers, were meant to say that man is found to have
everywhere a share in the common religious instinct planted in him
by God, and, it may be, in a common primitive revelation given by
God. All mankind are therefore in this respect homogeneous, but
if men were found anywhere who were void of this instinct, the
mere use of the thinking faculty would not lead them to religious
beliefs and acts of worship.
As to the “ red heifer,” I should have expressed my meaning more
accurately if I had said the red colour of the heifer in the Mosaic
ordinance had probably some reference to the notions about that
colour which we find among the Hamite races, of which the early
Egyptians were a part. I did not intend to say that any portion of
the Mosaic ritual was borrowed from the Egyptians. To the white
race black is the evil colour; to the black race white is the spirit-
colour, and red is evil.


As to the analogies which may he drawn from Baal worship, I
spoke of them as briefly as possible, because they are so well known
in Britain.
1 may here be asked how I came to possess a full account of the
Bora ceremonies, when the blacks hold them as sacred, and will not
divulge them. So silent are they on this point that, so far as I know ?
no one had previously obtained, or at least published, full informa-
tion about these ceremonies. Well, about sixty years ago it was the
custom in this colony for the Government to give grants of Crown
land of considerable extent to immigrant gentlemen who were in
a position to occupy and improve the land. The father of a friend
of mine got a grant in this way, and went to take possession. As
I have explained in the paper itself, he was coming down the hill
towards the spot where he intended to build his house, when a tribe of
blacks camped there rushed off in alarm, taking him to be “ Wunda,”
a spirit; but, reassured by his gestures, they came near, and finding
him to resemble a chief of theirs, who had just died, they claimed
him as one of themselves ! His son, as might be expected, grew up
on terms of intimacy with the blacks on the estate, and has always
treated them with kindness ; they will tell him anything. At my
request he got a young black, who had just been initiated, to tell him
all about the Bora. I have in various ways tested information thus
given, and I am convinced that it is full and accurate.
In the month of September, 1888, there was some correspondence
in the Times on the subject of Australian arithmetic. A dis-
tinguished authority there says, “ One of the clearest indications of
the low mental power of savages is that afforded by arithmetic.”
It seems to me that this statement is too general; for even,
although the power of counting up to high numbers were wanting
in a savage, it does not follow that his mental powers in general
are low. Perception, cognition, and memory are mental powers ;
but if Sir John Lubbock’s memory were weak and yet the cognitive
and perceptive faculties remained strong and vigorous, it would be
unjust to say that he is a man “of low mental power.” Colonists
who have been long familiar with the blacks of Australia, with one
voice cry out against the assertion that they are of low mental
power, and could give hundreds of instances to the contrary. A
friend of mine who, in his boyhood, fifty years ago, was much in
contact with the tribe in the midst of which his father had settled,
has told me that two black boys, his companions, were “ out and


out good chess-players, taking plenty of time to study the moves,
and showing great patience and calmness; these boys never went
to school, and yet they could count up to a thousand.” It is very
clear that mental power was there, in these boys, but unseen and
dormant, like seed in the ground, until circumstances led to its
being developed.
Sir John Lubbock also says, “ In no Australian language is there
any word for ‘ five.’ ” This is not quits correct, for I know at least
two large tribes (and there may be others that I do not know of),
the one in Queensland and the other in the south-east of New South
Wales, which have single words for “five,” and in each case the
word “ five ” is formed from the native word meaning “ hand.”
As to the general question—-the counting of numbers—l believe that
a careful analysis of the numerals used by the Aryan family of lan
guages will show that the base of them is one , two , three , and no
more, three being in many religions a sacred and complete number;
and that the other digits are expressed by words equivalent to one-
three, hand, hand-and-one, hand-and-two, two-four, one-wanting
two hands. If it should be proved that the Aryans, now the
most civilized of races, originally said one-three for four, why
should our Australians be considered “of low mental power ”
because they say two-two for four ? Indeed, lam inclined to think
that our Australians count in the more natural way, for they see
nothing in or around them arranged in threes ; the birds and beasts
go in pairs ; they themselves have two feet, two hands, two eyes,
and so they count by twos. If the Australian blacks separated
from the parent stock of mankind at a time when the common
numeral system was still limited to one, two , or one , two, three ,
then their case is merely one of arrested development, their en-
vironment being unfavourable after separation ; or if they ever had a
developed system of composite numbers, these have fallen into
disuse through the operation of a law of nature, for their wants are
few and they live so much from hand to mouth that they had no
need for high numbers. Their neighbours in Polynesia, who have
plenty of fish to count, and bunches of bananas, and yams, and taro
and cocoa-nuts, have developed many peculiar expressions to in-
dicate the number of these, but our black fellow, who is well
pleased when he is able to sing of the capture of “ wakula, boolara
bundarra ” (one, two kangaroos), and whose only property is two
or three spears, clubs, and boomerangs, does not require to use high


numbers in his daily speech. Nevertheless, when it is necessary,
he counts 10, 20, 30, 40 by closing and opening his hands, and
then for higher numbers he contents himself with saying “Many,
many.”
For these and other reasons it is desirable that men of science in
Britain should be careful in building theories upon what is said
about our Australian aborigines; much of the information they
have about them is unreliable, for it has not been gathered by
competent observers or tested on scientific principles.
NOTE.
Professor Max-Miiller, in his “ Selected Essays ” (volume ii., p. 27),
makes the following interesting remarks
“ Looking at a report sent home lately by the indefatigable
Governor of New South Wales, Sir Hercules Robinson, I find the
following description of the religious ideas of the Kamilarois, one
of the most degraded tribes in the North-Western district of the
colony:—
“ ‘ Bhaiami is regarded by them as the maker of all things. The
name signifies ‘ maker,’ or ‘ cutter-out,’ from the verb bhai, baialli,
baia. He is regarded as the re warder and punisher of men accord-
ing to their conduct. He sees all, and knows all, if not directly,
through the subordinate deity Turramulan, who presides at the
Bora. Bhaiami is said to have been once on the earth. Turramulan
is mediator in all operations of Bhaiami upon man, and in all man’s
transactions with Bhaiami. Turramulan means ‘ leg on one side
only,’ ‘ one-legged.’
“ This description is given by the Rev. C. Greenway, and if there
is any theological bias in it, let us make allowance for it. But there
remains the fact that Bhaiami, their name for deity, comes from a
root ‘ bhai,’ to ‘ make,’ to ‘ cut out,’ and if we remember that hardly
any of the names for deity, either among the Aryan or Semitic
nations, comes from a root with so abstract a meaning, we shall
admit, I think, that such reports as these should not be allowed to
lie forgotten in the pigeon-holes of the Colonial Office or in the
pages of a monthly journal.” —Ed.


Cjjc Victoria Institute,
Socutii of (Ureal
ADELFHI TERRACE, STRAND, LONDON, W.C,
Correspondence (including communications from intending Members
or Associates, &c.) to be addressed to “ The Secretary.”
THE PRIMARY OBJECTS.
rpHIS SOCIETY has been founded for the purpose of promoting the following
I Objects, which will be admitted by all to be of high importance both to
Religion and Science :
First.—To investigate fully and impartially the most important questions of
Philosophy and Science, but more especially those that bear upon the great
truths revealed in Holy Scripture.
Second.—To associate Men of Science and Authors* who have already
been engaged in such investigations, and all others who may be interested
in them, in order to strengthen their efforts by association ; and by bringing
together the results of such labours, after full discussion, in the printed
Transactions of an Institution, to give greater force and influence to proofs
and arguments which might be little known, or even disregarded, if put
forward merely by individuals.
Third.—To consider the mutual bearings of the various scientific conclusions
arrived at in the several distinct branches into which Science is now
divided, in order to get rid of contradictions and conflicting hypotheses, and
thus promote the real advancement of true Science; and to examine and
discuss all supposed scientific results with reference to final causes, and the
more comprehensive and fundamental principles of Philosophy proper, base<f
upon faith in the existence of one Eternal God, who in His wisdom created
.all things very good.
Special advantages are secured to Country and Colonial Members and
Associates in the Journal of Transactions.
The Journal of Transactions
Contains the Papers read at the Meetings and the Discussions thereon.
Before these are published in the Journal, both are finally submitted to
their Authors for any revision, and MS. comments and supplementary remarks
are added, which have been sent in by such British, American, and other
Members to whom, as being specially qualified to contribute information
upon the respective subjects, proof copies of the Papers had been submitted
for consideration—the authors of Papers adding their final comments. These
arrangements, which are found to add greatly to the value of the Journal, are
corned out with a view to securing the special usefulness of the Journal to*
all, whether home or Non-resident Members or Associates ; these thus
find in the Journal much valuable matter, and often much (contributed by men
of learning in all parts of the world) in addition to that which had come before
those actually present at the Meetings. (The Journal is sent post-free.)
* The Society now consists of 1,200 Subscribers (about one third f whom
are Foreign Members); including Literary and Scientific Men and others
favourable to the Objects. (The present average annual increase is upwards
of a hundred.)


President.
Professor G. G. Stokes, M.A., D.C.L., President of the Royal Society
Vice- Presidents.
The Right Hon. The Lord Chancellor.
Sir H. Barkly, K.G.8., G.C.M.G., F.R.S. W. Forsyth, Esq., Q.C., LL.D.
Sir J. Risdon Bennett, M.D., F.R.S. Rev. Robinson Thornton, D.D.
Sir Joseph Fayrer, K.C.5.1., M.D., F.R.S. A. McArthur, Esq., M.P.
Correspondent Members.
Professor L. Pasteur, F.R.S., Paris. | Sir J. W. Dawson, K.C.M.G., F.B.S.
Professor Maspero, Cairo. | Hormuzd Rassam, Esq. | Professor Naville.
The Council (24 Members).—Professor Adlbtne-Nicholson, F.R.S.F. Revs. W. Akthuk and
Dr. Angus. The Bishop op Wakbbibud. J. Bateman, Esq., F.R.S. J. P. La-Teobb
Batbman, F.R.S., F.R.S.E. Captain Cbbak, F.R.S. Dr. Gunning, F.R.S.E., F.R.C.S.E.
Surg.-Gen. Gordon, C.B. Dr. F. B. Hawkins, F.R.S. D. Howard, Esq., V. Pres. Chem. Soc.,
Pres. 8.C.1., &c.&c.
Trustees. —Sir Robert N. Fowler, Bart., M.P. ; R. Baxter, Esq.
Hon. Auditors.— G. Crawfurd Harrison, Esq. ; J. Allen, Esq.
Honorary Treasurer.— William Nowell West, Esq.
Hon. Sec. and Editor of Journal. —Captain F. W. H. Petrie, F.G.S.,&c.
MEMBERSHIP AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.
Intending Members and Associates are requested to address “The Secretary.”
The Annual Subscription for Members is Two Guineas , with One Guinea
Entrance Fee (see privileges). The Annual Subscription for Associates is One
Guinea , without Entrance Fee. ( All receive the Journal post free.)
In lieu of Annual Subscription, the payment of Twenty Guineas (without
Entrance Fee) will constitute a Life Member , or Ten Guineas a Life Associate.
The payment of a Donation of not less than Sixty Guineas qualifies for the office
of Vice-Patron , with all the privileges of a Life Member or Life Associate.
[lt is to be understood, that only such as are professedly Christians are entitled
to become Members,\
*** Subscriptions are payable to the “Victoria Institute’s” credit at
“ Ransom’s Bank,” 1, Pall Mall East, S.W., or may be remitted to the Secretary,
at the Office. Cheques or Post Office Orders (on General Post Office) should be
made payable to “ Victoria Institute or order,” and crossed “ Ransom & Co.”
PRIVILEGES.
Members —on election, are presented with any Volume of the First or Second
Series of the Journal of the Transactions, mad are entitled —to a Copy of the Journal,
either in the Quarterly Parts, or the Annual (bound) Volume, for the years during
which they may subscribe, and to a copy of any other documents or books which may be
published under the auspices of the Society, and, on application, to a copy of every paper
re-published in the “People’s Edition” ; to the use of the Library (Books can be sent to the
country), Reading and Writing Rooms (affording many of the conveniences of a Club) ; and
to introduce two Visitors at each Meeting. The Council are chosen from among the
Members, who alone are eligible to vote by ballot in determining any question at
a General Meeting. Members are farther privileged to obtain any Volumes, other
than that chosen, of the Transactions issued prior to their joining the Institute at half-price
(half-a-guinea each), or any Quarteriy Parts for past years at half-a-crown each.
The Library, Reading and Writing Rooms are open, for the use of the
Members only, from ten till five (Saturdays till two). The Institute
exchanges Transactions with the Royal Society and many other
leading English and Foreign Scientific bodies, whose Transaction-
are therefore added to the Library.
Associates —ABE entitled, to the Journal, in Quarterly Parts or in the Annual Volume,
for the years during which they may subscribe; to obtain the earlier Volumes or Parts
at a reduced price ; and to introduce one Visitor at each Meeting.
Members and Associates have the right to be present at all Meetings of the Socieiy
The Meetings, of which due notice is given, are held at 7, Adelphi Terrace, ai f ight
o’clock on the evenings of the First and Third Mondays of the Winter, Spring, and Summer
Months. Proof Copies of the Papers to he read can be had by those desirous of placing their
opinions thereon before the Members (when unable to attend, they can do this in writing).
Members and Associates on Ist January, 1871, 203. —Joined since.—ln 1871,
911872, 109 1873, 110 1874, 1111875, 115 ;~1876, 107 1877,
100;—1878, 101;—1879, 105 1880, 104;—1881, 122 ;—lBB2, 122 1883,
126 ;—1884,109 1885, 110 -.—1886,101;—1887, Foreign, 47 ; Home, 62
109.


oc
r*
8
<
P 3
O
6 ©
„ M
« 00 t> ®
oo ” ta
fc ~ “
o 80 £
op. c f*
H g . <2
oe g s
Sin «
02 QO 03 S
« i
H t. S I
03 T~'- 1 **3 < M
§ r s st
g § g ® *
ft ’S 2 ft S
” .2 s, O Xi
Oh s* * >H S
03 p «= _ r ®
0 = 2-5 » a
g « S * sT
” .2 S, o ja
P s* * s* 3
03 p 8 ns r ®
o a 2 -S 8 « a
(V P N- J '*' s l '® o
tp 3 , ® o o
J *» S S
« -< o' O M -g
cc J ft
Q P <3 0)
fc «® t| 2 "
<1 ® « G p-
_ _q n
CH 55 P SU «
SC® a O S
g G sc -2 to *.
° pi as 0 2
t. <3 x! ® p tS
t_ r-\ ’ J» I—l ■»
P ~ , "r? P
O P s« r s
r o ® Pi Z
H Pt
ca P 03
<| S»» O g
o -o •§
P* S' W
&- P W £
O H
p to
ISU H
S 3 £ *
° z
Cp u 5
sT
S
•N
« I .4*
8 X 5 2»
&V JS O
•■>> W «5 .S
» P 2
?: •«» o
I* S -I
•is s' sT
| -| p
S’ C oc <©
® s; =c
•'qj =S ®
•» 5> v.
J 'S Rs o x
Gs r «
r® i^)
§= i 3
O
H
H
P
H .
H Q
1/3
"< rT
o P «
H « O
O r;3
H g P
2 o
<3 | a|f
<o x O $3
-b
2 ° M
° a p* <o
CO s O
s rO 5 +J si
S Pop
e §* P p S
o o o
**B 2 P=H
-5 J u 00 . M
C O 0
o§p p o
:S S 3
8 % gg^
i ;^-
1 a ®
-3
K> H
JOURNAL OF TRANSACTIONS.
YOL. XYIIL
69. On Misrepresentations of Christianity. By Lord O’Neill (the late).
Science not Opposed to Revelation. By J. L. Porter, D.D., LL.D., Pres. Queen’s Coll.
70. Recent Egyptological Research in its Biblical Relation. By the Rev. H. G. Tomkins.
Cuneiform Inscriptions as illustrative of the times of the Jewish Captivity. By W. St.
Chad Boscawen, F.R. Hist. Soc.
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon—On Recently Discovered Inscriptions of this King. By
E. A. Budge, M.A., M.R.A.S.
Buddhism. By Rev. R. Collins. Remarks by Dr. Leitner (Lahore), Professor Rhys
Davids, Mr. Rassam, Rev. S. Coles (Ceylon), &c. Also a Full Note on Krishna.
71. Pessimism. By (the late) W. P. James, Esq.
On the Prehistoric Factory of Flints at Spiennes. By Rev. J. Mauens Mello, F.G.S.
The Evolution of the Pearly Nautilus. By S. R. Pattison, Esq., F.G.S.
72. On “ Prehistoric Man in Egypt and the Lebanon.” By Sir J. W. Dawson, K.C.M.G.,
F. McGill University, Montreal. Remarks by Professors W. Warington Smyth,
F.R.S., W. Boyd Dawkins, F.R.S., T. Rupert Jones, F.R.S., T. Wiltshire, F.G.S.,
Colonel Herschel, F.R.S., Dr. Rae, F.R.S.
VOL. XIX.
73. /On the Inductive Logic. By Prof. R. L. Dabney, D.D., LL.D. Speeches by Sir H.
/ Barkly, K.C.8., G.C.M.G , F.R.S., Sir J. Lefroy, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., &c.
lOn Evolution by Natural Selection. J. Hassell, Esq.
j Remarks on Evolution by Professor Virchow.
74. On the Recency of the Close of the Glacial Epoch. By D. Mackintosh, Esq., F.G.S.
I Communications from Prof. T. Rupert Jones, F.R.S., and others.
\on the recession of Niagara (with the United States Government Survey Diagrams!.


THE VICTORIA INSTITUTE.
/On the Religion of the Aboriginal Tribes of India. By Professor J. Avery. Remarks by
General Haig, Mr. H. Rassam, and others.
On the Evolution of Savages by Degradation. Rev. F. A. Allen, M. A.
Some Thoughts on the Evolution of Religions. By Rev. W. R. Blackett, M.A.
On the Relation of Fossil Botany to Theories of Evolution. By lafe W. P. James, F. L.S.
Remarks by Sir R. Owen, F.R.S., Prof. W. Carruthers, F.R.S., Dr. J. Braxton
/ Hicks, F. R. S., &c.
Was Primeval Man a Savage ? By J. Hassell, Esq.
Remarks on Evolution and Development. By Rev. J. W HITE, M. A.
On Some Characteristics of Primitive Religions. By Rev. R. Collins, M.A.
Human Responsibility. By Rev. G. Blbncowe,
On the Worship and Traditions of the Aborigines of America. By Rev. M. Eells, M.A.
\ Remarks by Professor J. 0. Dorsey, U.S. Survey.
\Note on Comparative Religions.
YOL. XX.
77. Special Address by the Institute’s President, Professor G. G. STOKES, M.A., D.C.L.,
President of the Royal Society.
Egypt; Physical, Historical, Literary, and Social. By J. Leslie Porter, D.D.,D.C.L.,
President of Queen’s College, Belfast. Remarks by the Earl of Belmore, Right Hon.
A. S. Ayrton (the late), &c.
On the Theory of Natural Selection and the Theory of Design, By Professor Duns, D. D.,
F.R.S.E. Remarks by Right Hon. Lord Grimthorpe, &c.
78. On Agnosticism. By J. Hassell, Esq..
On the Structure of the Gorilla. By E. Charlesworth, Esq., F.G.S. ; with illustration.
Notes on the Antiquity of Man. By the Editor. The Chronology of Animal Life on the
Earth prior to the Advent of Man. By Sir J. William Dawson, K.C.M.G., F.R.S.,
President of the British Association.
Historical Evidences of the Migration of Abram. By W. St. C. Boscawen, F.R.Hist.Soc.,
with drawings. Notes By Professor Sayce, F.R.S., E. A. W. Budge, Esq., &c.
A Samoan Tradition of Creation. By Rev. T. Powell, F.L.S. ; Notes on the Islands.
79. The Fundamental Assumptions of Agnosticism. By Rev. H. J. Clarke.
On Miracles. By Rev. H. C. M. Watson. Remarks by Lord Grimthorpe, &c.
On Accounts of the Creation. By W. P. Jambs, Esq., F.L.S. (the late).
80. On Final Cause. By Professor R. L. Dabney, D.D., LL.D.
On Structure and Structureless. By Prof. Lionel S. Beale, M. 8., F.R.S.
On the Meteorology of Syria and Palestine. By Professor G. E. Post, F.L.S. (with chart).
Remarks by Sir Joseph Fayrbr, K.C.5.1., F.R.S., &c.
On the Geographical Names on the List of Thothmes 111. By Professor G. Maspero
(with map). Remarks by Sir Charles Wilson, K.C.8., K.C.M.G., F.R.S., Captain
C. R. Conder, R.E., Dr. Wright, &c. Note on Excavations round the Sphinx. By
Prof. Maspero.
YOL. XXI.—IBB7-8.
81. Results of an Expedition to Arabia Petrsea and Palestine (with chart). By Professor E.
Hull, F.R.S., Director of the Geological Survey of Ireland.
Jewish, Phoenician, and Early Greek Art. By Rev. Dr. Porter, President, Queen’s Col-
lege, Belfast.
82. The Discoveries at Sidon.
The Empire of the Hittites. By Rev. W. Wright, D.D. Note on the Hittites.
Canaan, Ancien' and Modem. By Professor Tristram, F.R.S.
On Caves. By Professor T. McK. Hughes, F.G.S. (Cambridge), with comments by Sir
J. W. Dawson, K.C.M.G., F.R.S.. Sir Warington W. Smyth, F.R.S., and others.
Oriemal Entomology. By Rev. F. A. Walker, L.D., F.L.S. Notes by S. T. Klein, Esq.,
F.L.S., and others.
Petra. By Professor E. Hull, F.R. S. (with chart).
83. On Krishna. By Rev. R. Collins, M.A. Notes by Sir M. Monier-Willtams, K.C.1.E.,
Professors Max Muller, E. B. Cowell, Douglas, de Lacouperie, Dr. Leitn er, and
Dr. Edersheim.
The Pedigree of the Coral Reefs of England. By S'. R. Pattison, F.G.S. Remarks by
Professor G. G. STOKES, P. R.S.
Practical Optimism. B} r Canon Saumarez Smith, B.D.
84. Traditions of the Aborigines of North America. By Rev. S. D. Peet (with illustrations!.
On the Reautv of Nature. By Lrd Grimthorpe, with special paper by Rev. W.
Ahthur, M.A.
Evolution. By Rev H. J. Clarke, M. A. Remarks by Sir J. W. Dawson, K.C.M.G.,F.R.S.
Appendices ; The Jewish Nation and Diseases. Egyptian Discoveries in 1888. (Library
List, &c.) The Sacred Books of the East. By Sir M. Monier-Williams, K.C.I.E.




