

EMIGRANT TRACTS.— No. XVI.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. II.
Preparations for the Voyage
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OF “ HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
Published under the Direction of
The Committee of General Literature and Education ,
Appointed by the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge .
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN
KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
AND 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.
Price Fourpence.








EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XVI.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. II.
Preparation for the Voyage
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.
AUTHOR OF “HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION, APPOINTED BY
THE SOCIETY TOE PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


LONDON:
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square.


PREPARATIONS
FOR
THE VOYAGE.
I do not write for the purpose of advising
you to emigrate. I would rather say, if you
can provide lodging, food, and clothing for
your family, if you can enable them to obtain
a good Christian education, and to hold the
same position in life that you do, be content
with your lot, and remain in the land in
which you were born; but if, on the con-
trary, after persevering industry you find that
you cannot obtain these first necessaries of
existence, then, by all means, endeavour to
reach one of our British colonies, for I am
well assured that you will there find to the
full, all that you can reasonably require.
I will suppose, then, that you have made
yourself well acquainted with the different
a 3


British colonies, their positions, climates, con-
dition, and requirements, and that you have
selected one as your future home, where your
trade or calling is in demand, or where you
have good reason to expect to establish your-
self happily. Do not leap in the dark. Do
not go to any country, unless you have a
favourable account of it from those in whom
you can justly place confidence, and on no
account, go to a country which is not truly
British. But I will suppose, I repeat, that
you have already selected the colony to which
you wish to emigrate, after due enquiry and
consideration, and that you wish to know the
best means of getting there, and the pre-
parations necessary for your voyage, and on
these subjects, I will endeavour to give you
the best information in my power. However,
it must be understood that my remarks apply
more particularly to the South African co-
lonies, and to Australia and New Zealand,
though they may also be found useful to those
persons going to Canada, to any other of
our North American colonies, or to the Falk-
land Islands. You must bear in mind, that
you are going to make a very great change,


that it is a very important matter you are
about, and therefore take no step precipitately
or carelessly. Go about your work with a
serious mind, and forget not to entreat God’s
blessing that your undertaking may have a
happy issue. In the first place, if you are
at enmity with any of your neighbours, be
reconciled to them, and pay all your debts—
if you have not the means, and your creditors
will allow you to depart, make arrangements
to send home money to pay them after you
have been settled in the colony. This can be
done easily through the Colonial Bank, which
will remit the amount to a London bank, which
will forward it to the bank in your country
town; but of that matter I will treat here-
after. There is one piece of advice which I
must not omit to give to any young man who
thinks of emigrating. Let him look out for
an active industrious girl to become his wife.
He will not perhaps be so rich a man at the
end of six months as if he were a bachelor,
(and that even I doubt) but he will be far
richer at the end of two years, and most cer-
tainly far happier from the first. There are
no hardships in a bush life which a woman


will not gladly endure with a man she loves;
and many ladies who have been delicately
brought up at home, have gone out with their
husbands, and are living contentedly and
gladly, far away up the country. How many
a young couple are pining away, because pru-
dence forbids them to marry! How much
better would it be for them to emigrate, and
they would then have little cause to fear for
the future.
Remember, whatever has been your trade
at home, you must be prepared if necessary
to follow some other in the colony. Weavers
make excellent shepherds; London shopmen
turn into daring cattle drivers; hair-cutters
into sheep-shearers. Every man must try to
do his best, and to turn his hand to whatever
he sees is wanted, or his master wishes.
Many a lord’s son has built his own hut, and
sheared his own sheep, dug up his garden,
and followed his plough. A jack of all trades
is the man to succeed in a new colony—in a
new colony, nothing is degrading but idleness
and dishonesty. If you have any employ-
ment, do not give it up, and so live idly till
you go on board your ship.


The first consideration is, by what means
can you obtain a passage. £l2. for each
grown person, and £6. for each child, is the
very moderate sum asked for the passage to
any of our more distant colonies. This in-
cludes provisions for the voyage, plain, but
good, and generally permission to remain on
board the ship for a fortnight after in harbour.
Do not trust to persons professing to be emi-
gration agents, or those with whom you are
not acquainted, but go first to the clergyman
of your parish and consult with him. We
will suppose that you have a wife and child,
your passage money will be £3O. If you
can raise this sum, all you have to do is to
write to a respectable ship broker, and request
him to furnish you with an account of ships
sailing, and you can fix your time accordingly.
I should, however, always advise those who
determine to emigrate, to get the clergyman
of their parish, or some influential gentleman,
to make arrangements for them with the
shipping agent or broker.*
* I believe that I may safely recommend Mr. Capper,
at the Colonial Reading Rooms, 6, Charing Cross, as a
most respectable Agent, who will secure passages and


A person of some influence, who may have
to secure passages for many emigrants, is
much more likely to be well treated by a
broker, than is the emigrant who is never
likely to take a second voyage. If there is
an Emigration Society, and I wish there was
one in every district in England, apply through
the Secretary. An agricultural labourer may
have a chance of a partially free passage to
one of the Australian colonies, by applying to
Stephen Walcott, Esq., Secretary to Her
Majesty’sEmigrationCommissioners, 9, Park
Street,Westminster. If he is under forty years
of age, he will have to pay £4. for himself and
wife, and £l. for each child under fourteen ;
but he must not have more than two, or at
the utmost three children ; though mechanics
' c 5
have to pay nearly half the passage money,
about £5. each. By all means let them
outfits at a very moderate cost, and will afford full informa-
tion regarding all colonial subjects. I have constantly
found the want of such an agent to whom to refer persons
in the country for information, and consequently was very
glad to find him thus established: at the same time, I
cannot be farther answerable for him than I am by ex-
pressing my own belief in his respectability.


a Pply through some gentleman they know, or
society, or one of the Emigration Commis-
sioners’ Agents, a few of whom are stationed
about the country. The process is as follows :
The emigrant sends up his name, age, and
calling, number of children, and their ages,
through some clergyman, agent, or society,
to the Secretary of Her Majesty’s Emigration
Commissioners, 9, Park Street, Westminster,
stating the colony to which he wishes to go,
and about the time he can be ready to sail.
If the applicant appears eligible to the Board,
a paper, with a regular form of application,
will be sent down for him to fill up and get
signed by several persons, to certify as to the
correctness of his statement. He will be
obliged also to procure his marriage certi-
ficate, as also that of his own and his wife’s
baptism, and that of their children.
The form and the certificates must be sent
forthwith to the Secretary, and should the
applicant be approved of, he will receive in
due course an embarkation order. Some-
times this order is received a week or even
less, and at other times a fortnight before the
time for embarking. On the day staled in


the order he must present himself at the
depot at Deptford, or Plymouth, where all
his statements will be more strictly examined,
as will the condition as to the health of his
family, by the medical officer who is to pro-
ceed in the ship. Should his statements be
found incorrect, he will not be allowed to
proceed in the ship, but will have to return to
his former home, at his own expense. It is
seldom that families with more than three
children are accepted. The only colonies to
which the Commissioners have funds to grant
passages are, New South Wales, capital
Sydney ; Victoria, capital Melbourne; South
Australia, capital Adelaide; Swan River,
capital Perth; Cape Colony, and Natal, and
a few at times to some of the ports in New
Zealand. Emigrants wishing to go to Can-
terbury, New Zealand, must apply to the
Canterbury Association, Adelphi Terrace,
Strand, and those to Otago, to the Otago
Association, Edinburgh.
The mode of proceeding adopted by the
Canterbury Association is very similar to that
of Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners }
only the Canterbury Association do not grant


any free passages. There is also a legally
constituted society, who send out emigrants
to Western Australia, called the Colonization
Assurance Corporation.* The office is in 73,
King William Street, City, London, Any
agricultural labourer, or craftsman, who has
made up his mind to go to Western Aus-
tralia, will do well to apply to them, much in
the same form that he would to the Govern-
ment Emigration Commissioners.
There are, I believe, other associations pro-
fessing to assist persons to emigrate, but they
are either not of a permanent character, or such
as cannot be recommended in a work of this
nature. I must except the Society for Pro-
moting Female Emigration, of the managing
committee of which the Hon. Sidney Herbert
is Chairman. The office is in 4, St. Martin’s
Place, Trafalgar Square, London. Young
women of the class of needlewomen, or house-
hold servants, wishing to go to one of the
Australian colonies, may apply to the Secre-
tary, and further directions will be sent to
B
* There is a society of a very similar name, which is in
reality a mere United States Land Company. Unless
people wish to abandon the name of Englishmen, they
will not be tempted by their offers.


her. The female emigrants stay at a house
of probation for a short time before em-
barking, that their characters may be fully
inquired into, and that they may be in-
structed in various pieces of knowledge which
may be useful to them in the colony.
By a clause in an Act lately passed, 12 &13
Viet. c. 103, facilities have been given to
parishes to advance funds for the emigration
of their poor. 20. “ And be it enacted, that
the Guardians of any Union or of any separate
Parish for which a Board of Guardians is or
shall be established, may expend, with the
order, and subject to the rules and regula-
tions of the Poor Law Board, but not other-
wise, any sum of money not exceeding ten
pounds for each person, in and about the
emigration of poor persons having settlements
in such parish, or in any parish in such Union
respectively, without the necessity of the rate
payers and owners of property therein meet-
ing, and giving their consent (as required by
the said Act of the fifth year of King William
the Fourth) to such expenditure, and such
Guardians shall charge the same to the parish
of the settlement, in every case where such


poor person reside therein, or was removeable
thereto at the time of the emigration: Pro-
vided always, that the Guardians, or (if more
than one) a majority of the Guardians of such
last mentioned parish shall express his or
their concurrence in writing in the resolution
of the Board of Guardians for such expendi-
ture, and such written concurrence shall be
transmitted to the Clerk of the Union, in com-
municating that resolution to the Poor Law
Board: Provided also, that the aggregate
amount of the moneys expended in the course
of any one year in and about the emigration
of such poor persons shall not exceed one
half of the yearly poor rate raised in the said
parish for the three preceding years.” I must
very strongly urge Parish Officers, and all
concerned, to take advantage of this Act. Let
them not, however, induce their poor to go to
the United States of America because the
passage is cheaper, as also from thence they
are very likely to return, but for the more
patriotic reasons I have given in a former
tract, let them go to the Australian colonies,
or the Cape, where they will at once afford em-
ployment to many at home, and from whence
b 2


they will soon be able to send home funds to
assist in the emigration of their friends and re-
lations. Let them remember, that a pauper in
England is a heavy expense, and may become
the parent of paupers, but that the same person
removed to Australia, is not only no expense,
but will certainly employ many at home, and
will become probably the parent of a healthy
progeny, who will add to the wealth and
prosperity of the mother country. What is
also very much required to assist the poor to
emigrate in a comfortable manner, are Socie-
ties, composed of some of the most respectable
men in every town and district in Great
Britain, who by raising funds, collecting
clothing, and gaining all current information,
may be able to communicate with the au-
thorities and agents in London, and to afford
all information required. If some gentleman
of zeal and intelligence will undertake the
office of secretary, such societies may easily
be formed, and when once a regular routine
is established, will afford but little trouble to
those engaged in them. The business of the
secretary will be to communicate with London,
pass the forms of application, and spread


information, while a treasurer collects sub-
scriptions, and another gentleman takes care
of the clothing branch, for which he should
collect old clothes from all directions. An
indispensable branch of such a society is a
Ladies Committee, who will also collect
clothing for the women, and give them advice
and encouragement Let all those who read
this, endeavour to establish such societies in
their neighbourhood. Where such societies
are not established, the clergyman, or some
other gentleman of the parish, should take
charge of a subscription list, and forward the
required sum to the proper quarter in London,
but the intending emigrant should on no ac-
count be entrusted with the money. Another
gentleman should collect clothing for the men,
and the ladies of the neighbourhood should
contribute that for the females of the family.
The first step towards emigrating is to
select a colony.
The second, to arrange for a passage, either
in a Government emigration ship, that of
some Society, or in a private ship, at the
entire cost of the emigrant and his friends.
The third, is to collect the required funds
b 3


to pay for the passage and outfit, the amount
depending on the assistance the emigrant can
obtain.
The fourth, is to settle his affairs at home.
The fifth is to arrange the outfit, to make
the chests for packing it.
The sixth to wash clothes and person, and
to pack up.
The seventh, to arrange and perform the
journey to the port of embarkation.
By means of the first named, the colony
may have been selected, and the three fol-
lowing steps I have already described. We
now come to the arrangement of the outfit.
A considerable amount of useful clothing
may be supplied with the cast-off garments
of the gentlemen and ladies of a neighbour-
hood. A gentleman’s old shooting jacket,
though well patched, and a cast off pair of
trowsers, are far more valuable to an emigrant
than the flimsy articles he is likely to find in
a cheap shop in London. For women also,
where, as at sea, a quantity of garments are
required, and where there is not much hard
wear, old petticoats and similar articles,
though thin and much patched, are very valu


able, and should by all means be preserved
for emigrants. Let it be remembered, that
all clothes of every description, before being
packed, should be thoroughly cleaned, washed
and dried. I would wash everything woollen
as well as cotton.
The following are lists of things which are
almost essential for people taking a long
voyage; and a larger quantity of under gar-
ments will be useful, old and patched though
they may be.
Men’s outfit: —2 jackets, 2 waistcoats,
2 pair of trowsers, 1 duck frock, 12 shirts,
12 pairs of stockings or socks, 8 handker-
chiefs, 6 towels, 2 pair of braces, 2 sheets,
counterpane, 2 blankets, and bed. In Go-
vernment ships the blankets and bed are
supplied. 1 cap and bad weather hat, 2 pair
of shoes, and 1 pair of hob-nailed half boots,
1 hair brush and comb, 1 razor, strop, box,
and glass; (1 knife, fork, plate, mug, table
and tea spoon,) these in Government ships
are supplied; 6 lbs. of soap, and needles and
thread, 1 Bible and Prayer Book, and 1 chest.
The cost of the above articles is estimated
at from £4. to £4. 10s. Many of the above


clothes might be supplied by the gentlemen
of the neighbourhood, so as to leave little
more than shoes, socks, sheets, and handker-
chiefs to be purchased for the emigrant.
For women:
2 sleeping jackets, 1 flannel petticoat, 2 cot-
ton ditto, 1 pair of stays, 6 pair of stockings,
1 cloak, 1 bonnet, 1 shawl, 6 handkerchiefs,
6 caps, 6 towels, 2 sheets, 1 counterpane,
blanket and bed—in Government ships these
are supplied; 2 pair of shoes, 1 knife, fork,
plate, mug, table and tea spoon, 6 lbs. of soap,
needles and thread, 1 hair brush and comb,
1 Bible, Prayer Book, and 1 chest; cost about
£4. Women should take as much work as
they can procure to employ themselves on
the voyage, and also books, for they will find
otherwise the time hang heavy on their hands;
besides it is a great pity to be idle, and to
lose so good an opportunity for improving
themselves. Men should take books, any
materials to afford themselves employment,
and also the tools of their trade. All heavy
cumbersome things should be disposed of
before leaving home, where a tolerable price
may be got for them. On board Government


ships they cannot be carried, and the freight
in private ships costs more usually than the
things are worth, added to which, there is the
carriage in England, and also in the colony, to
be taken into consideration. Emigrants fre-
quently suffer a considerable loss by having
to dispose of their property at the port of
embarcation. It is much better to take no-
thing more than the things I have mentioned,
with a few others I will enumerate.
An emigrant’s kettle, the cost of which is
from 155. to 215. It may be very useful, and
serve a family instead of any other cooking
apparatus. It is made of iron, tinned over, and
contains saucepan, gridiron, 2 plates, 2 cups,
teapot, knives and forks. The outside serves
as a cauldron for soup, or for boiling a joint,
and the top for a large dish or saucepan,
while a strap secures it to the saddle. It is
more especially intended for travellers, or
persons going to reside in the bush, and is
valuable on account of its portability. A
bundle of old linen may be very useful to
bind up a wound, or to make lint, or for many
purposes.
A very important item, for women espe


cially, is a stout bag (if water-proof so much
the better), large enough to contain a month’s
supply of clean clothing, and any working
materials with which the emigrant may wish
to employ herself during the voyage. Men,
also, should have bags for the same'purpose.
For want of this simple arrangement, a great
many emigrants are put to very much incon-
venience and trouble. They are told at the
depot, that they cannot get at their chests for
a month after sailing, so they have to tumble
all their clothes out in a hurry to get at what
they think they may want. Their property
is damaged or lost, some of the things they
require are not to be found, and what they do
collect they have to put up in an old hand-
kerchief; their clean linen gets wet, and their
work tumbles out through the holes. I dwell
on the subject, because it is one of the small
points which, if neglected, cause great annoy-
ance, but is easily prevented. I would advise
every married man who is likely to have a
cottage of his own, to take a good hammer,
saw, gimlets, two or three chisels, and an
assortment of nails, that he may be able to do
any little work for himself. Every emigrant


ought to be able to build his own hut or
cottage. Scraps of leather and cobblers’ tools
will be useful for mending shoes, and bits of
cloth and needles for mending clothes. A
clean and dirty clothes bag is very necessary.
I also advise every female emigrant, and every
bachelor, to carry a bag with needles, thread,
tape,buttons, &c. Old clothes well patched are
respectable, but ragged clothes ought never
to be seen. I need not say, that all good and
instructive books will be most valuable in
the bush, and I should advise as many to be
taken as the emigrant can collect ; however,
avoid trash of every description. There is a
small useful and entertaining library put on
board all Government ships, and the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge also
give a collection of valuable books when
there is an authorized instructor on board the
ship to receive them. No description of
furniture can be taken; favourite chests of
drawers and bedsteads must be left behind.
In the Government ships, no bedding even
may be taken except sheets. It is considered,
and with justice, that fever may lurk in a bed,
or, at all events, that dirt may, which is very


likely in the confined space on shipboard to
breed a fever.
It must be remembered, that all rules and
regulations are made for the benefit of emi-
grants, and that when such and such things
may not be taken or done, it is not because
the authorities wish to play the part of tyrants,
but because they feel the well-being of the
whole body of emigrants is entrusted to them,
and that they know, from long experience,
that such ordinances will tend to secure such
well-being. Therefore, without regret, part
with property which, however prized at home,
will only be an incumbrance and trouble from
the day you begin to move it.
We now come to packing. The chests
should be very stout and strong, with good
locks, and hasps in addition; avoid trumpery
padlocks, which are constantly breaking.
There should be stout battens at the bottom
to keep them as much as possible from the
wet. The chests should be about 2 feet 7 in.
long, 16 inches wide, and 17 inches deep, with
flat tops, a tray inside for small articles will
be found useful. Line them with stout brown
paper, just tacked in, not pasted. Tools, or


any iron-work, should be well cleaned and
greased, and packed up in dry thick brown
paper; take care that no rough edges are left
uncovered to cut the clothes about.
With any woollen clothes sprinkle small
bits of camphor to keep away the moth, which
is otherwise sure to attack them. A good
supply of soap, and especially of marine soap,
which will form a lather in salt water, will be
found very useful.
I must repeat, wash thoroughly all clothes
and dry them, and then at once pack them in
tightly; put the things you will not require
on the voyage in at the bottom. If there are
two chests, manage that only one may be
required on the voyage, and mark it on the
outside in large letters “ For the Voyage/’
Paint, also, your name in full, and the colony
to which you are going. A card with the
name of the ship will be useful. You will
have to unlash your chests at the depot, so
the cords should be long enough to do them
easily up again. Of equal importance to
having clean clothes is to have a clean person;
and therefore, I insist strongly on advising a
plentiful use of soap and hot water; nothing
c


less than a complete hot bath for all the
family, old and young. It is worth any
trouble or expense. Borrow tubs and light a
good fire, and let one part of the family leave
the house, if there is not room for all, while
the rest are going through the process; let
all the clothes you have on be thoroughly
washed also. You are now ready to start;
wish your friends good bye with a firm heart,
depend on it before long some of them will
be following you, and you in a short time
will have saved up money to pay for the pas-
sage of some of your poorer relations. The
mode of sending home the funds to assist
your relatives to emigrate I will describe in a
future tract.
Emigrants embarking from Liverpool,
should be very careful to avoid the sharpers
on the look out to deceive and fleece them in
a variety of ways. In the first place, they
try to take them to lodging-houses where
they are charged very highly; then they in-
duce them to purchase goods and provisions
which are not required; the worst try to make
them change their British coin for paper, or
foreign coin of no value; others offer to pur


chase or exchange the emigrant’s property,
and all endeavour to induce him to take his
passage in some ship which is frequently in a
very inferior condition. These men are known
by the name of runners; have nothing to do
with them, but learn as best you can the
most respectable shipping agents, and go
direct to one of them. The emigrant’s Chap-
lain at Liverpool, the Rev. J W. Welsh, will
give every information and aid in his power.
On no account trust to the puffing placards
of the passenger agents, and fancy that be-
cause a ship is described in the advertisement
as of first-rate qualities she is so in reality.
Before you pay your passage-money, go on
board, and see that you can stand upright
between decks, that she has good water-
closets, and conveniences for cooking on deck.
Learn if you can the age of the ship, and if
she is not more than five or six years old,
and stands in Lloyd’s lists in A 1, you will be
certain of getting a tolerably good ship. If
possible learn the character of the master;
that is to say, the captain and his mates.
Of course you will have some difficulty in
doing this, but if you hear a bad character of
„ o


the officers, avoid if you can going by their
ship. It is impossible to lay down rules to
enable an emigrant to avoid being imposed
on, unless he possesses a good amount of
sagacity and clear-sightedness. The above
remarks apply especially to emigrants going
to America, but may also be useful to those
bound for more distant colonies.
It is a good plan when a party of emigrants
are going together, for the gentleman who
takes an interest in them to write to the
agent at the port of embarcation, that he may
send some trustworthy person to meet them
at the rail-road station, or on board the
steamer, and conduct them at once to re-
spectable lodgings, and arrange any further
outfit they may require.
The best course an emigrant, on arriving at
Liverpool, can pursue, is to go at once to the
vestry in the parish church of St. Nicholas,
where the Rev. J. W. Welsh attends at certain
hours daily. It is advantageously situated,
being in the centre of the line of docks, past
which omnibuses ply every five minutes. He
will at once recommend the most respectable
lodging-houses to which emigrants may resort.


There is a Sunday morning service at the
church of St. Nicholas, and an evening one
at St. Peter’s, where emigrants generally
attend. Mr. Welsh is fully recognized as
emigrant Chaplain by the ship owners and
ship agents, who afford him every facility for
visiting emigrants. He states, that the books
put on board emigrant ships presented by
the Society for Promoting Christian Know-
ledge are eagerly welcomed by the passengers,
as also by the officers, from the aid they
afford in amusing them, and keeping them in
good spirits. The duties of the Chaplain are
numerous. He meets the emigrants at the
vestry of St. Nicholas, where he converses
with them, and gives them advice; he accom-
panies them to their lodgings, and converses
with their families; he also reads to them,
and prays with them: he visits strangers
who have not heard of him, and invites them
to church; he visits the ships in dock, in
order to improve, if possible, the disposition
of the berths. The bad arrangement of the
berths, where men and women are placed
close together, and the crowded state of many
of the American ships is very objectionable,
c 3


He boards ships lying in the river, and after
distributing tracts among the emigrants he
O O O
holds Divine service in a convenient part of
the between decks, and delivers a short lec-
ture. When the ship is towed out to sea, he
remains on board till the tug returns. There
have been several emigrant marriages and
christenings ; much good has, therefore, been
effected by the exertions of Mr. Welsh.
The parliamentary trains will convey you
to the port of embarcation at a cheap rate.
Be brisk about every thing you do. Do not
on any account loiter on the way, and take
care to be at the place appointed at the exact
time, for if you are not you may lose your
passage altogether. Above all things avoid
going into a public house to take a last glass
with a friend ; I have known instances where,
by such incaution, the intending emigrant has
lost his passage, and been completely ruined.
At most of the rail-road stations there are lists
of respectable lodging houses, to which emi-
grants arriving late in town may go; but if no
lists are to be seen, apply to one of the police
officers, and request to be told which are the
best to go to : however, as a rule, it is better


to start from home as early as possible, so as
to get on board the ship or to the depot on
the same day. Emigrants by private ships
will generally have to spend a night or more
near the place from which ships sail, but
those who are so fortunate as to obtain pas-
sages by the Government Commissioners’ ships
go to a depot, where they lodge till they go
on board free of any charge.
The depot at Deptford is a large old-
fashioned building, standing in the centre of
an open space of ground near the river. On
the ground floor is a hall, with tables and
benches in it, at which the emigrants dine ; a
kitchen, and the rooms of the family who
have charge of it. On the upper floor are
four or five sleeping apartments, fitted up
with two tier of standing bed places, one
above another, with partitions between them
of rough deal, like those on board the ships ;
one is for the married people, another for the
single women, and another for the single men.
In front of the building is a large court yard,
where the emigrants may take the air, and in
it is a shed for their luggage. The whole
establishment is kept as clean as it possibly


can be, but it is neither as commodious nor as
large as it should be, nor are there baths or
wash-houses attached to it. I should par-
ticularly advise all emigrants who come from
London, or who remain there a few days, to
make use of those admirable institutions, the
baths and wash-houses, lately established in
most districts. All the emigrants’ chests are
examined by a proper officer at the depot, to
see that they have the regulated supply of
clothing, towels, and soap, and also that no
gunpowder, or any other improper thing, is
packed up ; chests should, therefore, not be
crammed full, and the things should be done
up in bundles, so as easily to be re-packed.
Care should be taken during this necessary,
though vexatious operation, not to allow the
things to get damp. A man with a large
family should have a list of all his chests, and
of what each contains. The surgeon-super-
intendent of the ship will be found at the
depot; he will examine all the emigrants
separately as to the state of their health, and
one of the embarcation officers will be there
to see that they answer the description given
of them in the Form of Application, On


several occasions whole families have not been
allowed to proceed on account of irregu-
larities, the state of the health of some
member, or want of sufficient clothing. The
food supplied at the depot appears to me very
good.
There is a Branch Committee of the British
Ladies’ Female Emigrant Society, and a
visiting matron, Mrs. Dickie, at Deptford,
who pay the greatest attention to the female
emigrants. As soon as the emigrants arrive,
she makes such inquiries as will enable her
to give them the best advice in her power;
she then, to each of the single women, dis-
tributes work-bags and work, and a few
tracts and other small books. The visiting
Ladies speak to them, and distribute books,
and various useful articles; and, what is very
important, teach them to sing together. It
is most interesting to hear the emigrants, met
together for the first time, stand up and sing
a Grace in chorus before dinner. The Ladies
also teach them many other appropriate
hymns and songs.
Emigrants, on entering the depot, will of
course understand that they must, for their


own and the common good, be subject to all
the rules and regulations of the establishment.
They remain there from one to three days,
but they will find themselves as comfortable
as circumstances will admit. After all the
examinations have been gone through, the
officer whose duty it is to berth them, or
arrange their places in the ship, comes to the
depot; he has a plan of the between decks,
with the berths properly numbered. With
this before him he takes a list of the emi-
grants, and inserts the names and ages of the
emigrants individually in the berths they are
to occupy; their names are also written on a
card, with the number of the berth on it, and
they are also told their numbers, so that the
moment they go on board they can find their
proper berths without confusion. All the
single women and girls above fourteen are
placed in the after berths, and divided by a
bulk-head from the married people. Next
to them are placed the oldest and most re-
spectable married people; the married people
are placed in the upper tiers of berths, and
their children are placed under them. Great
care is taken that families and friends should


be near each other. The single men and
boys are berthed in the fore part of the ship,
and separated from the rest by a bulk-head.
This arrangement being made, a dozen or
more of the strongest men are selected to go
board and help stow the luggage, which is
then sent otf to the ship in a lighter; and
when it is all arranged, the emigrants march
down to the river side, and go on board in
boats without the slightest trouble or dis-
turbance. In private ships, where there is of
necessity less discipline, there is less order
and regularity; but emigrants must remember
to bear and to forbear, and where regulations
do not exist, to form such as seem most
suitable for their own government.
The Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel have an employment branch, with a
superintendent, who lives in a house close to
the depot.. He has a variety of models of
brushes, mats, &c. &c. and he selects four or
five of the most intelligent emigrants, whom
he instructs in the method of making these
various useful things. He puts on board
every ship, to which a religious instructor is
appointed, a model of each article, and ma


terials to make a considerable number during
the voyage. It is much to be wished, that
sufficient encouragement were given to the
plan, so that every ship which leaves the
Thames, or Plymouth, might be amply sup-
plied with materials to employ the emigrants
during the whole voyage. I should earnestly
advise the emigrants selected, to do their
utmost to learn, that they may teach the rest
of their feUow passengers on the voyage.
Every man and boy should supply himself
with a knife, with a hole in the handle, and
secured by a lanyard round his neck. On
numberless occasions he will find it useful,
and it may even be the means of saving
his life.
Should there be any female emigrants re-
quiring especial care, the lady taking an
interest in them should write to Miss Layton,
the Secretary of the Matron’s Committee,
25, Red Lion Square, stating the case, and
she will forward it to Mrs. Dickie.
I most especially appeal for support for
the Matron’s Fund of that excellent Society,
and also urge all those interested in emigra-
tion, to find persons of superior qualifications


fitted to undertake the office of matron on
board ship.
There is also a fund entitled the Emigrants’
Spiritual Aid and Employment Fund, ad-
ministered by the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, 79, Pall Mall, and this should
be especially supported.
Clergymen, and gentlemen of education,
of whatever profession, are much required to
act as instructors on board ship, and such
proceeding to the colonies should apply to
the Society, and they will receive a free pas-
sage, and a grant in addition. As there is
little demand for mere schoolmasters in the
colonies, they have small chance of being-
approved of by the Government Commis-
sioners, with whom the appointment rests—
and often farmers, lawyers, naval and military
officers, architects, &c. are far more fitted for
the office.
Emigrants in Government ships need not
take provisions of any description, unless they
have infants; and then arrow-root, tapioca,
sago, and flour will be found beneficial. Hard
biscuits are very injurious to young children,
however softened by boiling, as there are
D


flinty particles in them which irritate the
coatings of the stomach. Many infants have
been destroyed by being fed improperly. I
was assured of this by a surgeon, who took
out an emigrant ship to Port Philip, and
who examined into the cause of the death of so
many infants during the voyage. Adults are
apt to suffer from eating too much meat, and
taking too little air and exercise during the
voyage. A sort of rusk can be made cheaply in
the following way out of bread, and preserved
in tin cases. u Cut the bread into thin slices,
toast it till it is perfectly dry on both sides,
and then pack it in a perfectly dry box, letting
it stand edgeways in the box. It must be
soaked in tea, coffee, or water before being
used.” Gingerbread nuts baked very dry
and hard, and kept in a tin canister, will
remain good for many months.
In ships bound to America, water and
bread are alone in most cases provided; so
that the emigrant must provide himseil
with a keg to hold water, cooking utensils,
mess utensils, tea-pot, coffee-pot, preserved
beef, ham, peas, potatoes, butter, tea,
coffee, sugar, onions, oatmeal, molasses,


sugar, salt, pepper, mustard, bread, &c. He
should have a box filled with compartments
to contain his stores, and various other
utensils. Let all be strong and well tinned.
A ticking filled with straw makes a cheap
and good bed; or if with strips of cork, it
may serve as a life buoy. A box of aperient
pills may be found useful.
Emigrants before leaving home should
apply to the Clergyman of their parish for a
recommendatory letter to the Bishop of the
colony to which they are going.
The following is a copy of the Form, which
may be procured gratis, at the office of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
79, Pall Mall.
“ To the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop, and
the Rev. the Clergy of the Church of Eng-
land, in the Diocese of
“ I desire herewith to commend to your
pastoral care and brotherly good offices
of the Parish of
, in the Diocese of ,
who with his family is about to settle in
and I certify that he is a member of the
Church of England, and that his children,
d 2


severally named , have been bap-
tized.
“ Minister of
“ Diocese of
“ Dated this
Thus, by proper arrangement, the emigrant
is never without spiritual advice and con-
solation. His minister bids him farewell,
and speeds him on his way with a blessing.
In many instances on board ship he finds a
minister of the gospel to perform the services
of religion on the voyage, and on his arrival
in the colony he is met at once by another,
who will advise him on all subjects, and for-
ward him on his way into the interior.
Much the same system which I have de-
scribed at Deptford is pursued at Plymouth.
There, that indefatigable minister, the Rev.
T. C. Childs, and his assistants, with a Ladies
Committee, not only visit the emigrants at
this depot, but go on board the ships in the
Sound, whether Government or private, and
give advice and encouragement, and dis-
tribute Bibles and other books, and materials
for employment.


A very blessed change in the system of
emigration has taken place during the last
few years, but there is still room for improve-
ment: more regularity and joint co-operation
among the workers in the cause is required,
and a wider diffusion of information. I have,
[ believe, described all the necessary steps to
be taken before emigrating, and in another
Tract I will describe the voyage, and some
methods for employing the time during that
interesting period of an emigrant’s life.
D 3




APPENDIX.
Take a few bottles of lemon juice and
raspberry vinegar, both are strong antidotes
to scurvy.
Carry your money in sovereigns, or bank
bills on the Banks of Australia, or Union
Bank of Australia. Do not boast of having
money, or shew it more than you can help,
and beware that you are not deprived of it by
any cunning rogue on the voyage, or on
arrival; but as I am writing for those who
are not likely to have money, and not the
worse will they be for the want, the advice is
superfluous.
Be very careful that you buy marine soap
for the voyage. It is the only sort with
which you can wash your clothes in salt
water. Each person requires about 2 lbs.
besides common soap for the use of the
person.


Have a set of strong clothes to stand the
hard wear in the bush. Good cord, or mole-
skin trowsers, and some blue serge shirts,
made very large, to stand shrinking. Also,
take care to have two pair of well made
shoes. What I wish you to understand is,
that you should buy only the very strongest
and best things for use in the colony, but
that you will find useful any quantity of old
things, however thin or patched, to wear on
the voyage. If you go in a private ship, and
have money to spare, you will find a little
tea, coffee, sugar, arrow-root, and mixed
spice increase the comforts of the females of
the family.
A box of American soda biscuits or crackers
will assist in preserving the health of the
children.
Take thin shoes or slippers to wear on the
voyage, as you cannot keep your feet on
the deck in thick hob-nailed boots, if the ship
is rolling. Leather is certain to rot when
exposed to the sea water or air. The fol-
lowing composition is recommended for pre-
serving shoes; —
Linseed oil 1 gill; spirit of turpentine 1 oz.


bees wax 1 oz., Burgundy pitch | an oz., to be
well melted together, and kept covered in a
gallipot; lay it on boots or shoes, rubbing it
in well, and set them in a hot sun, or before
the fire.
Let the tools you take be of the very best
description; no common tools will stand a
day’s use on the hard woods of the south.
The most useful agricultural implements
are the spade, mattock, bill-hook, and axe,
in anew country; but unless an emigrant has
the means of working for himself, he may as
well use his employer’s tools; again, however,
he may require the above for his own garden,
as he will common carpenter’s tools for doing
any job about his own cottage. Generally
speaking, the iron only should be taken, as
from the bulk of the wood handles a con-
siderable freight may be charged on board.
Whatever you buy, I repeat, avoid a cheap
shop.
I must warn the Clergymen, Magistrates,
and other Gentlemen who sign the papers of
intending emigrants, to be very careful that
the statements are correct; for from the nu-
merous impositions practised, the Government
officers are very strict, and it will be but


mistaken kindness to send a poor person all
the way to the port of embarcation to have
him returned in a worse condition than he
went. I feel, as I trust will my readers, that
in planting the ground the seeds should be
of the best quality, and that a flemishing
tree may grow up; so would I plant a new
colony with some of the best of the people in
the land.
Of vast importance to the prosperity and
moral well-being of a colony is the influence
which virtuous and well educated women may
exert over the newly assembled population;
and, therefore, would I urge on the Ladies of
England, who have no ties to keep them at
home, bravely to lay aside their fears of the
difficulties to be encountered on the voyage,
and on their first arrival, and to go forth in
charge of the numbers of our young country-
women who are emigrating to the Australian
colonies, without any one in any way qualified
to improve their minds or correct their faults.
Woman has a mission in Australia which she
only can fulfil to civilize and reform the com-
munity, and in which the more educated and
refined must also take their part.


London:
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square,






