

SEVENTH EDITION
RECOLLECTIONS
GALLIPOLI
FRANCE
AND
FLANDERS
By A RETURNED SOLDIER
Price : One Shilling
SYDNEY:
G. A. JONES, Printer, 127 Phillip St.


INTRODUCTION
Dear Reader.—The following sketches of
life in the trenches are a faithful ac-
count of a soldier’s life as it really is,
stripped of all gloss and glamor; the
realities of war are truthfully portrayed;
i also the brighter and more human side
of the soldier’s life—the joking, the com-
radeship, the arguments, and, running
through all, the golden thread of love
for our native land. The writer hopes
that in these few pages you will find
something to interest and amuse you,
and he will not have written in vain.
Yours faithfully,
302, L. WLLLS
2nd Pioneer Batt., A.I.F




In the Trenches
A scorching day on the Peninsula, seven or eight Aus-
tralians are sitting together in a sap. The Turks’ trench is
a bare fifty yards away. Every six or eight yards, in our
trench an observer stands, watching through his periscope for
the slightest movement on the other side. The heat is in-
tense, the trench is like an oven, and the perspiration runs
off the men in streams. ‘ ‘ Could you stop a long one now
Bill?” said the man on his right. Bill does not answer.
Suddenly he stiffens, his trigger finger crooks, and he fires.
“Got him, by hell!” he shouts. “Good boy, Bill!” said
the man on the left, “I’ve missed the cow twenty times.”
“Yes, said one of the crowd in the sap, “Missed him! —
and we’ll miss the bally Derby and Cup and every other
darn thing if we don’t soon get a move on. ” “ What do
you fancy for the Cup, Jim?” one man asks. “Why, old
Seldom, every time,” Jim replies. “Spare me days,” said
another man, “he hasn’t a hope. Why, I’ll give you five
to one that he don’t get a place.” “It’s a wager,” says Jim;
“five to one in quids.” “Right oh!” says the layer of odds,
‘ ‘ and I ’ll get a bit back of what I dropped on the cow at Caul-
field. Anyone else wants to back him?” “Look here, you
blokes!” said a long fellow from outback, “you can have
all your Derbys and Cups! What I want is a piece of
roast beef and baked potatoes and cauliflower, and plum
pudding—and a big pint of ” “ Gor’s-truth! what’s
the matter with a pair of roast ducks and green peas, and a
drop of lager,” chips in another. “Yer can’t beat a nice
roast leg of mutton and apple tart,” from a little chap.
“Tarts!” says Jim, “wait till we blooming well get to Con-
stantinople and the harem, and you ’ll see me bowling down
the street with one on each arm.” “Well, I’d sooner be
bowling down Big Bourke with my best girl than any of
them Turkey tarts with their trousers on. What do you
say, Jack?” “My oath,” says Jack, “every time. Aus-
tralia will do me; I’m not fussy.”
AUSTRALIA! A momentary silence falls on the group,
as each one's thoughts flash back to the land of their birth
and the loved ones at home, in that fragment of time. Crash!
A 9-inch armour-piercing shell has come through 6 feet of
solid earth and exploded amongst them. The vagaries of for-
tune —the only ones uninjured are two brothers; all the rest
are shattered, broken, and torn; and poor Jim will never see
either Derby or Cup again, for he sleeps his last long sleep
on the wind-swept hills of Gallipoli.


A Night Alarm
THE BEACH AT GALLIPOLI.
It is 4 a.m. and a misty morning. The remnant of bat-
talion had arrived the night before from Cape Helles, where
we had lost half our strength. The men are sleeping as only
soldiers can sleep, in spite of the increasing war of artilleiy
and the incessant rifle fire. The inlying pickets, in full fight-
ing order, are lying in all sorts of different attitudes, bliss-
fully indifferent to the turmoil in the hills above them.
Suddenly an order comes, quick and sharp: “Stand to!”
Recalled to the realities of existence, we stagger to our feet
rubbing our eyes. “What’s up?” is the question on each
man’s lips; but again comes the hoarse voice of command:
“Fall in!” —“Quick march! —“At the double!” And away
we go, up rock-strewn gully, that bears an unenviable re-
putation. Shrapnel is falling all around us, and occasionally
a man goes down. "We do not slacken our pace, but stumble
and struggle on up the steep incline, eager to be in before
the finish; for the Turks have made a determined attack
on our line, and supports have been called for. As we
draw nearer, louder grows the din of rapid rifle fire, the
ping of the passing bullets mixed with showers of shrapnel.
The thunder of our artillery gives us a feeling of security,
and we dive into the communication trenches. In a few mo-
ments we are in amongst our own men, who have had a hot
time. The enemy were retiring, having had enough of it for
one night. A few Turks managed to reach our trenches,
but they never returned.
When the sun came out and the mist cleared away, the
Turkish dead could be seen thickly strewn all over No Man’s
Land. It was estimated that our lads had accounted for
fully three thousand of them that night. Abdul was taught a
lesson that he never forgot.
(Cairo street boy to Australian soldier): “Paper? Buy
a paper?” Good news, Mr. McKenzie. Thirty thousand
Australians killed!”
Two Tommies were heard criticising the Australian sol-
dier. This is how one described them: —“I, Chum, they be
big chaps, with wristlet watches and gold in their teeth, and
they call their best friends ”
German sniper, caught in No Man’s Land: “Mercy, kam-
erad, mercy. ’ ’
Australian: “I’ll give yer mercy, yer —-
s’pose it was you who busted me pipe this morning.


A View of France
We landed at Marseilles on a fine morning in the early
Spring. The Harbour was crowded with shipping of all nr.
tionalities. The French people gave we Australians a hearty
welcome, and provided us with coffee, cigarettes, etc., at every
stopping place. For four long and weary days we' passed
through smiling fields and well-kept roads, through large towns
and small villages. The contrast between Egypt and this fair
land was remarked by all. “It’s a beautiful country, and well
worth fighting for,” was the general opinion. Armentieres was
our last stopping place, and wo settled down to life on French
soil —or, rather, sometimes on it, and sometimes under it. We
took over the trenches that we were to occupy from the Tom-
mies, and set to work to make ourselves at home. The German
trenches w’ere not far away, and the first morning after our
arrival Fritz put up a board with the following words written
on it: “Welcome, Australians! Advance if you can.” Sub-
sequent events proved that Fritz was a bit too premature with
his challenge, for it was not many days after that some of
our boys went over and bombed him out of his trenches, and
brought a couple of his machine guns back with them. We
have met many times since then, but never again has Fritz
displayed any placards inviting us to come over. He knows
the slouch hats a bit better now than he did at that time.
Champagne was two shillings a bottle when we arrived at
Armentieres, but after the first pay (when we were all million-
aires) the demand for it was so great that it very soon rose
to ten shillings. The boys soon got on good terms with the
French population; their free and easy way, and open-handed-
ness and fondness of children made them great favorites.
Winter on the Somme
Rain, mud, ice and snow—all churned up together! In
places it is three feet deep, and never less than over our boot
tops. We struggle wearily along through the rain, which has
never ceased since we started our march, twenty-six hours ago.
We are only ten miles from our last camp, and have taken all
that time to cover the distance. The road is crowded with
traffic of all descriptions, and a wait of two hours is not un-
common when a block occurs. Over-turned waggons, dead
horses, motor bikes and cars line the road, and amongst these
obstacles we drearily pick our way (when we can move at all).
At last we leave the 1 ‘ road * ’ and turn off, down a gully, for a
mile or so; then we come to a halt and proceed to camp. It
is raining harder than ever; everything is wet —pack wet,
ovej-coat wet, and no blanket; and the wood is wet. It is
about 4 a.m., and there is nothing for it but to walk about un-
til morning. An issue of rum was served out, and it warmed us
up a bit, but we were very glad to see daylight appearing. All
the old trenches and dugouts were full of mud and water, and
the boys started to bale them out and dig fresh ones. They
soon got things “ship-shape,” and made themselves as com-


fortable as possible. Timber was scarce, but the Australians
had such a “taking way” with them that they soon got all
they wanted. The Tommies, who were in charge of the tim-
ber dumps had a good deal to put up with from our chaps.
Some of the hard cases would put a couple of stripes on their
sleeve, write an order out for so many duck boards for “Colo-
nel Jones,” or any name that came handy, and march six
men up to the dump. “Here, Sergeant! Here’s an order from
Colonenl , and they are wanted immediately. “While the
Sergeant was arguing with the Australian the duck boards
would be half-way to our camp—never to return. We stopped
at this place for three months and had several brushes with
Fritz during that time. We left there for Bapaume, and took
that place, and then proceeded on to Bullecourt.
The Australian
BY W.H.O.
“THE BRAVEST THAT GOD EVER MADE.”
A DISTINGUISHED BRITISH OFFICER’S OPINION.
The skies that arched his land were blue;
His bush-born winds were warm and swest;
And yet from earliest hours he knew
The tides of victory and defeat.
From fierce floods thundering at his birth—
From red droughts ravening while he ploughed—
He learned to fear no foes on earth —
‘ ‘ The bravest thing God ever made. ’ ’
The bugles of the Motherland
Rang ceaselessly across the sea,
To call him and his lean brown band
To shape Imperial destiny.
He went by—youth’s grave purpose willed,
The goal unknown, the cost unweighed;
The promise of his blood fulfilled —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
We know —it is our deathless pride—
The splendor of his first fierce blows:
How reckless, glorious, undenied,
He stormed those steel-lined cliffs we know:
And none who saw him scale the height,
Behind his reeking bayonet blade,
Would rob him of his title right—
“ The bravest thing God ever made.”
gravest, where half a world of men
Are brave beyond all earth’s reward^


So stoutly none shall charge again
Till the last breaking of the swords.
Wounded or hale, won home from war,
Or yonder by the Lone Pine laid,
Give him his due for evermore —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
The Real Anzac
There are plenty of slouch-hatted soldiers in town,
Doughty and debonair, stalwart and brown;
Some are from Weymouth or Salisbury Plain,
Others have “pushed” in the Western Campaign;
Call them “Overseas soldiers,” or down under men,
Declare that each one is as daring as ten;
Call them Cornstalks or Fernleaves, all out for a fight—
But don’t call them Anzacs, for that isn’t right.
The Anzacs! —their ranks are but scanty, all told —
Have a separate record illumined in gold.
Their blood on Gallipoli’s ridges they poured,
Their souls with the scars of that struggle are scored;
Not many are left, and not many are sound,
And thousands lie buried in Turkish ground.
These are the Anzacs! The others may claim
Their zeal and their spirit —but never their name.
When We Return
I call to mind the crowd upon the quay,
A surging crowd that cheered us off to war,
A girl who waved a farewell hand to me —
And then the dim receding shore.
It seems a thousand years of nebulous intent.
They called across the seas for martial men,
And, knowing their sore needs, we went.
We flinched not on those fields of riven red,
Nor called a halt when duty urged us on;
Content, we did our share. Our honoured dead
Define the fields we have fought and won;
And now returning—broken, bruised and bent —
We know we have done our best. We’ve fought our round,
And deep yithin our breast lies that content
Which comes to men when homeward bound.
But, while we’ve left behind that seething hell,
Where men grow mad for lust of alien blood,
We know not whether all at home is well,
Nor if love’s tide remains at flood.
That trusted heart we thought possessed no flaw
May well revolt at sight of you or me,
When crippled, maimed, we step upon the shore
And seek her eyes upon the quay.
PESSIMIST.


Anzacs
The children unborn shall acclaim
The standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.
Some of you got the V.C.,
Some, the Gallipoli trot;
Some got a grave by the sea,
And all of you got it damned hot.
And I see you go strolling through town,
In the faded old hospital blue,
And driving abroad “lying down,”
And, my God!—but I wish I were you.
I envy you beggars I met,
From the dirty old hats on your head
To the rusty old boots on your feet,
I envy you, living or dead.
A Knighthood is fine in its way,
A Peerage brings Splendour and fame;
But I would rather have tacked any day
That word to the end of my name.
I count it the greatest reward
That ever a man could attain.
I’d rather be Anzac than lord —
I’d rather be —Anzac than Thane.
There’s a bar to the medal you’ll wear,
There’s a word that will glitter and glow,
And an honour a KING cannot share,
When you are back in the Cities, you know.
The children unborn shall acclaim
The Standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.


Four Australians
“Johnnie, Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie!”
The speaker is a tall, bronzed Australian soldier, fully six
foot high—a typical remnant of an original battalion.
He is dressed much the same as any Australian soldier
was in the early days of the Gallipoli campaign.- His feet
are encased in a pair of heavy military boots, looking none
the better for wear; the nether part of his body in what was
once a reasonably stylish pair of riding breeches, that, by all
appearances, have seen as much wear as his boots. His left
knee protrudes through a ragged tear, and gives him the ap-
pearance of an overgrown schoolboy who is dressed ready
for a run with his mates. The upper part of his body is
covered with something that by close scrutiny suggests to
us as being a tunic —or closely resembling one. His head
is adorned with the famous slouch hat of the Australian sol-
dier; the sort of hat that the enemy hates to see; a hat that
amongst a London crowd attracts more attention than the
wearer does. It is jammed on his head at a rakish angle
and seems to say to all the world, “I am a hat —a good hat;
I have got a master.” The big soldier takes another gulp
of air, drawing it as far back into his lungs to emit it again
in the form of “Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie, come here!”
Down the hill a little way, a small wiry Indian soldier
suddenly stops short and looks around. Then, as if
not quite catching the meaning of the English words, saun-
ters slowly down hill. “Hi, Johnnie! Come here, will you?”
The little soldier stops again, and, looking up, sees the issuer
of the half entreaty, half command who by this time is beck-
oning with both head and hands. His manner has become
almost imperious with his excitement. The solution of the
problem, “Hi, Johnnie,” slowly forming in the Indian’s brain,
he solemnly starts to cross himself, putting a special, distinct
emphasis as his fingers touch his head, left shoulder, right
shoulder, then chest. This finished, he starts to wend his way
up hill; his whole appearance smartened up; in his face the
look of an humble, adoring spirit.
As he comes closer to us we see a small, liard-visaged
face; a face that at times betrays a conflict of emotions.
Sometimes it is as if a dark shadow was hiding the finer
points of features, giving it a dog-like, inscrutable expression
that could never be fathomed. His eyes seem to say, “I have
got heavy burdens that I will never rid myself of.” His
mouth twists into a curious grimace as he briskly salutes.
The Australian soldier, whom we call “Digger” (because
“Digger - ” happens to be any Australian soldier) returns the
salute, and greets the Indian with, “Salaam, Johnnie!” “Sal-
aam, Johnnie!” The Indian mumbles in naughty boy fashion.
This conventional greeting over, the two soldiers, vastly dif-
ferent in aspect and build, stand and survey each other.
The two standing together give an impression of strength
and endurance beyond description. The Australian, big-boned
with unknown strength lurking behind his bronzed, healthy
skin, and eyes that speak of hate and love, and the mouth
that seems to work in conjunction with the mind; the mouth


and jaw that give a sudden, sharp click when the brain
speaks and says, “Do it!” The Indian, small, almost un-
dersized, but not at all badly built, with small, wiry limbs,
that, when moved, show a sea of muscle, working in perfect
unison. His every action betray a certain determination of
character. The precise movement of the head seems to say,
“I will try to do the best of my ability.”
The Australian breaking the silence, asks abruptly, “John-
nie! —you got curry?” The Indian slowly raises his eyes
to Digger’s face, and wags his head as if not quite certain
of his question. To make his meaning more clear, Digger goes
through the action of passing food to the mouth, ejaculating
now and then, “Curry; you know, curry, Johnnie! Jerry?”
Digger’s actions and his earnest appeals have conveyed to
the Indian the thought of something important. His face
wrinkles and break into a smile —an honest smile —one goad
to see. He mumbles “Johnnie, Johnnie!” this being the full
extent of his English.
Digger, taking it for granted that “Johnnie, Johnnie!”
means “yes,” and not being far wrong, leads the way down
the hill. They pick their way carefully, slowly, down the
hill, wending and stepping reverently over a little patch of
brown earth that is slightly higher than the surrounding earth.
Some of the mounds are adorned with rough wooden crosses.
Just simple little things, branches off some shrub, tied in the
form of a cross with pieces of boot laces or string. A simple
little token to the dead. Digger’s dead; Johnnie’s dead. Just
comrades who have passed out. Ii»-British “Tommy” langu-
age, “Gone West.” As the Indian passes these little mounds
he makes the sign of the cross on his body. To him they are
dead men —something to be regarded with superstition. To
Digger they are mates still; mates although dead; mates that
are more sacred and honoured in death than ever in life.
They half walk, half slide, down the last step incline.
Straight before them a dark, forbidding hill hides from their
view the Indian encampment. Before ascending the hill Dig-
ger motions to the Indians to stop. He points to the crest of
the hill, and, speaking in a veranacular that life in a foreign
country has helped to cultivate, soliloquised, “Well, e’ll
and jest to think old ‘Aller’ was there waitin’; he’s a shrewd
ole cow, though.” He utters the last few words with a
finality that does not need questioning. The soliloquy is not
lost on the Indian. He mumbles, “Johnnie, Johnnie!” Dig-
ger smiles; he knows Johnnie wants to say, “Quite right!
Quite right; he is shrewd.” They start to ascend the hill; the
very same hill that made the Australian soldier famous; the
hill that children yet to come will try and picture in their
minds. When within fifty yards of the crest they start to crawl
on hands and knees for fear of being spied by some wary-
eyed sniper, snugly ensconced in his lair on some adjoining
hill. Once over the hill they are safe and they will straighten
up to the normal state of walking. It does not take them long
to traverse the slope, and they are soon on the beach where
the Indian encampment is situated. It is not the sort of
military encampment that the reader will conjure up. In fact
there is no sign of human habitation whatever.
Johnnie now takes the lead, and makes for a sheltered
pottion of the hilL After walking for five minutes or so


Johnnio turns to Digger and exclaims, “Johnnie!” breaking
off into his own dialect. He points with his hand, as much
as to say, “That is where I live.” Digger unconsciously
brushes pieces of dried furze and earth from off his tunic
showing plainly his nervous excitement at the thought of
the meal of curry that will soon be his. Johnnie claps his
hands and calls out something that Digger does not un-
derstand. A strip of sacking tha,t is painted green and brown
to correspond with the surrounding landscape is moved aside
by an invisible hand. From the darkness of the dug-out another
Indian appears and regards his comrade’s visitor with dis-
pleasure. His eyes rest for a moment on Digger’s hat, then
his face lights up with a smile of delight. He has recognised
the Australian hat, and is not this their dream of the “White
Gurkha?” Digger, knowing he has been judged and not
found wanting, gives the greeting, “Salaam, Johnnie!” “Sa-
laam, Johnnie!” The Indian murmurs with every evidence of
pleasure. “Got curry, Johnnie?” Digger jerks out. For an-
swer the Indian beckons him inside and procures an empty
bully beef box for him to sit on. This is the seat of honour.
When a “White Gurkha” is not sitting on it, it is used for
keeping foodstuffs in.
The interior of the dug-out is snug and homely, more
for comfort than style. Arranged on each side of the walls
are sets of four bunks, with odds and ends of equipment, bags
and blankets strewn pell mell on them. Digger . sits down
contentedly to wait and gloat on the meal that will soon be
ready. A meal that, to a man who has had nothing but salty
bully beef and biscuits for weeks, takes the form of a ban-
quet. The two Indians, working in conjunction, soon get the
stew ready. Rice, a little goat’s flesh, and curry powder is
what they use. While it is stewing the Indians arrange them-
selves one on each side of Digger.
The three gabble away at each other as if they under-
stood what the other was saying. The first word is always
Johnnie! It is a little distinction conferred by the Aus-
tralian soldier on their dark-skinned comrades. It is a word
specially reserved for speech amongst the two sets of brothers.
Johnnie, as the Indian says it, can mean anything. The Aus-
tralian version is ‘ ‘ cobber laddie, mate. ’ ’ Digger talks, his
words interspersed with sundry nods and grimaces. One of
the Indians start to tell a story. By the woe-begone expres-
sion, and the dull glow far back in his eyes, it is some-
thing that affects him very much. From what can be glean-
ed by his actions a comrade has been killed lately. He points
to the trenches, and goes through the motion of loading a rifle;
then he hits himself sharply on the forehead with his finger.
His actions are ludicrous as he tries to imitate how the last
breath was drawn. Digger understands, and remains silent.
They have all lost good comrades. It does not need words to
explain; it needs action to revenge. The silence is broken
by the sizzling sound from the direction of the curry pot.
Digger grants his approval at the looked-for sound; it’s
suspiciously like “Oh, hell!” The pot is brought over and
placed at Digger’s feet, and a spoon is produced and handed
to him. The two Indians arm themselves with flat pieces ot
wood, roughly cut into the shape of a spoon. The three of


them start to eat out of one pot, having dip for dip. O mores!
All class and convention is dropped over that steaming pot.
The black Johnnie is on a level with the white Johnnie. This
is why the Indian claims the Australian for his friend. The
Indian is not made to feel that he is the under dog; he is met
on level terms with a hail fellow, well met, and appreciates it
accordingly, treating the Australian soldier with an almost
childish adoration. It is embarrassing to a certain extent,
but nevertheless they cannot be made to act differently towards
us.
The meal over, Digger produces some cigarettes and hands
them around. The three comrades then sit back and smoke.
Digger’s eyes are half closed; what with a full stomach and
the mellowing influences of the fragrant weed, he does not feel
disposed to talk. Talk is needless, as it happens. The friend-
ship between the three is unexplainable; neither understands a
word the other in saying; yet they are friends. The smell of the
strong curry and tobacco gradually fills the close interior of
the dug-out and filters outside. The smell has evidently dis-
turbed the occupants of an adjoining dug-out. A big, bony
figure makes its way into the dug-out, and then, as if surprised
to see his friends have a visitor, turns to go. He is stopped
by Digger’s “Salaam, Johnnie! Come in!”
The big Indian turns around and murmurs in laboured but
very good English, “Yass, alright; how are you?” as he grasps
Digger’s hand. “Oh, pretty good,” Digger gasps in sur-
prised tones. Not being too sure that the Indian can
speak English well, he starts to question him, speaking simply
and omitting words likely to make his meaning less clear.
“You speak English talk, Johnnie?” “Yass; a little.”
“Where you learn, Johnnie?” “Me, I learn India.' I work
one year, two year, three year, English officer. He good man;
very good man.” “Oh, you work for English officer, and he
learn you to talk English? Where you live in India, Johnnie?”
“I live Rampur. R-A-M-P-U-R, ” the Indian spells for Dig-
ger’s benefit. Digger, not being well versed in the geography
of India, and not having ever heard anything about it to single
it out in his mind, goes on with his questioning. “You mar-
ried man, Johnnie.” The Indian looks at Digger as if not
comprehending. Digger’s large vocabulary of words remains
silent. “You know, Johnnie, got a ‘tabby’—er—l mean a
girl. You know, missus, Johnnie, jerry?” Johnnie still not
understanding Digger’s large vocabulary of words, remains
silent. “You know, Johnnie, woman?” Digger goes through
a series of action that are supposed to convey to the Indian
the lovable actions of a wife towards her husband. “You
know,” Digger goes on, and goes through the action of putting
his arms around an imaginary waist, and pursing his lips as if
about to receive a kiss.
Digger’s actions have been so ludicrous that the three
Indians by this time are enjoying a hearty laugh at Digger’s
expense. His actions have seemingly put his words to shame.
The big Indian seems suddenly to understand what Digger
means. His face gradually becomes serious, as if making pre-
paration for the words yet to come. “Yass, I got woman.
What you call woman?” “Ah —er, tabbie, girl, tart.” The
three break off into another fit of laughing. Between the


gusts of laughter the big Indian asks if there are different
sorts of women in Australia. Digger tries to explain that
they are all the same sort, only they are given different names.
“Why, you call some ‘fatt,’ some ‘tuppie, ’ ?” splutters the
Indian, trying to hold his laugh. “Oh, I don’t know; some
are young and some er—er old,” Digger explains, groping
around in the hope of turning the subject into safer channels.
“What you call old women?—old tarts?” came thoughtlessly
from Digger.
Something has evidently ticked the Indians again. They
jab each other and the tears literally roll down their cheeks.
Digger, still groping around for some means of escape, asks,
“Johnnie, you got any kids?” The Indian sobers down again,
und their interpreter speaks. “Yass, I got ten, twenty kids.
My uncle what you call farmer; he got nearly hundred kids
this year; before war no good, no kids.” Digger’s eyes open
wide in astonishment. He voices the answer to his question,
“He got nearly hundred kids!” Then, as an after-thought, he
asks, “Gawd, Johnnie, he go broke; er—got any money?”
“Yass; plenty. He seel ar—ar fifty goats this year. Plenty
money.” Digger, not quite realising for the moment that the
Indian had been speaking of the offspring of the goat, re-
mains silent. At last, after pondering it over in his mind
for a moment, he chuckles himself purple in the face at the un-
conscious joke. Digger, recovering himself, expostulates, “No,
no, Johnnie; you don’t jerry; I mean kids —er —er children;
you know, nippers, picaninnies?” The word picaninnies and
Digger’s description of “so high,” conjures up in the Indian’s
mind little children. “Ah, yass, yass; one, two leetle wan.
Beetle wan, so big,” raising his hand about two feet from the
ground. “Big wan, he clean boots, Meerat, he sends what
you call my ar—ar old ‘tatt’ plenty money. He big gentle-
man. You got any leetle wan?” “Yes, a couple—er—two
er—youngsters.” “What you call youngsters?” Digger sud-
denly remembering that if he uses anything but strict English,
answers “Children.”
The next thing to attract Digger’s attention is a potato
lying near the fire. Thinking this a good opportunity of
taking their minds off the subject of women and children, he
asks Johnnie “What you call this?” picking up the potato.
Johnnie answers something that sounds like “Mallella.”
“What English call it?” Digger questions. “Pertater,” is
the answer. “What you call it?” Johnnie queries. “Oh—
er—a—spud.” “Why English give two names?” Digger’s
answer is, “Or, I dunno.”
The conversation slackens now. Outside they hear the
roar of a bursting shell warning them of night. Bigger gets
up and stretches his limbs luxuriously. “Well, I’ll have to
go,” he remarks, regretfully. “Be down again some day.
Salaam, ‘Johnnie’!” “Salaam, ‘Johnnie’!”
Digger strides out so as to be in his accustomed place in
the trenches before darkness falls. Digger had an enjoyable
afternoon, but it was his last. That night the first stages
of the Lone Pine battle were fought, and Digger is peacefully
resting underneath a dark mould of earth now.


The Great Game
Mud, dusk, and a somewhat limited panorama of Flanders!
Flanders and mud we have come to look upon as one, and look
on them as an essential to the life of a soldier. Dusk we wel-
come: it giving us respite and rest for a few brief houis.
Out in front, and behind us, a foggy mist rises from the ground,
rising in weird, fantastic shapes as it strikes the upper air.
A slight breeze rustles the scanty foliage of a shattered
tree to our left. It makes, to our ears, a hideous soul-search-
in or cry for vengeance. AVhen tlie star shells flare in mid-
air it throws the tree out into weird relief,. making it cast
lon'*, ragged shadows on the ground. We think of the story
that tree could tell if it could only speak. How it has seen
the ebb and flow of battle; how nobly men fought; how they
died; how they still die —defiant, to the end. Pointing with
shattered arms to their goal, ever onward, up, Excelsior
as the old tree still points with the remains of its shattered
trunk. Then it could tell yet another story; how the little
children played beneath its sheltering branches; how they en-
joyed the cool, refreshing shade cast by its branches and
thick foliage. Instead of deep scars on the ground, poppies
and daisies and hundreds of other spring _ flowers adorned
the surrounding landscape. How the nightingale made the
night sweet with his hopeful melody. The nightingale still
gives voice to his song; but it is more broken than before,
and the trills, instead of a light-hearted hopefulness, take on
a haunting mournful sadness, with a touch of infinite longing
for his old domain.
Far up in the sky a silver sheen shows for a moment and
disappears. Suddenly the dark clouds are riven asunder and
the old moon shines out in all her glory, casting a mellow,
tender light over the torn and tortured ground around the
trenches. It heartens us. We see, by this sign, something
bright and good, after that which is before us. Taking advan-
tage of the light of the moon, we peer towards our enemy.
Big things are afoot to-night, and one slight slip may mean
that some of our comrades will not answer the next roll call.
But all is well. Intense silence; except, at times, the spiteful,
moaning hiss of a sniper’s bullet; sometimes a scream of agony.
“Everything ready?” the Corporal questions. “Got the
bombs ready, Tommy?” Tommy, a big, hefty giant, answers
“Yes'” Then, as an afterthought, he adds, Corp., guess
we’ll’give ’em the king hit to-night.” Hardly are words
out mouth than the answer is given by a swishing roar
above our heads. Bang! And what we have been waiting for
has come.
The second shell comes from half right, rear. It is an
isolated gun “feeling” for the rest of the battery. Another


few moments of silence, then guns all along the line take
up the cannonade. The air is filled with a hurtling, swish-
ing sound as the first salvo of shells speed on to their destina-
tion. We duck our heads with the shock of the first ex-
plosion. In and out of the lesser bursting of the small shells
we recognise the demoralising roar of the big sixty-pounders.
These big shells plough up tons of earth, spreading death and
destruction everywhere.
The roar of our shells give us a feeling of security. We
well know, by past experience, that “Fritz” will be keeping
low. Perhaps he is even down in his dug-outs, some of them
a considerable distance underground. Some of the men, taking
a chance, risk a glance over the parapet to enjoy to the full,
the sight of “Fritz’s” discomfort. Those men who have
not looked over get a fair inkling of how things go by the
talk of the boys at the parapet. As the shells strike the
earth sundry ejaculations are heard. “By hell, they are get-
ting it hot now!” “Strike me pink, that was a beaut!”
Tommy, catching the spirit of the moment, fixes a grenade
to this rifle, sardonically salutes it, and releases the trigger.
He mounts the fire step in time to see where his bomb lands.
“About five yards out,” he mutters discontentedly; but, never-
theless, he seems to be highly pleased. As he is getting the
next grenade ready, his face creases up into a thousand wrinkles.
He breaks into a broad, good-humoured grin. He sets his
rifle at a more acute angle, kisses the grenade in grim sar-
casm, and fires.
Our artillery is working itself into a pitch of fury before
undreamed of, but we are used to the shriek and hiss of the
shells by this, being more at home in action than silence
and inaction. We glory in the red, raw, hiss of the big
shells as they hurtle on their way to destroy human life.
“Out in front’’ “Fritz’’ has suddenly thought of some-
thing happening. Being too preoccupied gloating on “Fritz’s”
destruction we forget that he can retaliate. A sudden whiz,
bang, thirty yards in front of us, makes us think more of
safety and less of gloating.
The Corporal slides down from the fire-step and yells
imperiously, “Keep in the parapet, boys; they will get the
range next shot. ’ ’ And with a final injunction to our bomb-
er, Tommy, ‘ ‘ Tommy, you overgrown cow, cover- yourself up,
will you?’’ Tommy expands his broad chest, his lovably, wick-
ed face lights up with a wicked, scornful smile, but never-
theless he crouches into the parapet; not for his protection,
but, as he says, “Lookin’ safer; and being orders, I must.’’
We all crouch close together. Somehow we feel safe at
the thought, and the feel of warm, pulsating, human comrade-
ship beside us, a comradeship before unheard of till the cry
of the “War God’’ brought us together. “Brothers they
were who found their brotherhood that night, and found it
good.’’
A swift, sharp hiss, like the letting loose of a giant’s
pent-up fury, a dull thud, and we know the shell we have
been waiting for has arrived. The second intervening be-
tween the thud and the burst cannot be explained. A second


« bndv dead- vet every nerve and every thought
ri“Sb and become vfvid and real; a second when the mind
twitch an , • every thought into a confused chaos
r r tren?daS It" ”1 secoVThai helps the body to with-
stand the shock that will follow. A second specially made
for those in great danger. To be brief, the second between
life and death.
Our small world of parapet, paradox and dug-out suddenly
ii mo o blister Then crash! A stomach-sickening
ZT and extension J'broken. . Mind reMsertßita.il over,
the body, and we are suddenly whisked back to the rca .
“Who is hurt?” is the silent question asked in every -
mind “Did you get it?” one man questions of a comrade,
Xis feeing 7 hinfself all over. “Dunno,” he answers, worn
dering if his answer is true or not. “Give us a look. After
looking and seeing no sign of a sound he again asks. Whe
do vou feel it?” “Here an’ here, an’ here an . . “°"f
on 7 laddie don’t be silly; that was some lumps of dirt it
ver ” '“’Hell' I forgot; thort I was knocked a treat.
“Well I dunno what you’ll think when a lump does yer
and knocks yer rotten. Guess you ’ll think all Krupp s iron
foundry suddenly ’it yer under the chin, . G
aritan mumbles cheerfully, as he moves off to help some
fortunate comrade.
The Corporal, missing Tommy, asks quickly, re s
that silly cow gone to now?” His words do not speak his
innermost thoughts; his face betrays a look J rol sJ^® on a
eerii He does not mean anything when he calls lo ™ ni y
“siliv cow ” If anybody had been listening he would have
said 7 “Where’s that dear old comrade of mine.
ase ’such as “dear” and “comrade” do not sound well in
our primeval surroundings, a veneer of slang is generally
used. The worse the name the better the man.
Tommy is soon found underneath some fallen sand bags,
ia no n e the worse for his imprisonment, and, after a
drink of water, curses the Germans for fully mutates.
‘‘What are you swearing at, Tommy. Anyone would think
that you had been half killed ” “That’s what’s makm
mo swear to think that I should get such a ell of a, fright
and not got a wound, so’s I could get a trip to ’capital for
awhile. Ain’t it rotten,” he asks of anybody in particular. We
agree with him. It certainly is a bit hard.
This little excitement over, we start to build up our
shattered parapets, preparing for the shrapnel that will f -
low the high explosives. We know , the high explosive shells
•ire meant to dislodge us, and once dislodged, then the shrapnel
SeT a heavy toll of victims. We build our parapets up,
Pa „ for bag, hand over head, and then settle down to waiting.
The hardest of the lot. The order: “Fix bayonets: First
whistle mount fire step; second whistle, charge! is passed
along to us from the commanding officer further up the line.
“Make no noise!” is the final order.
“Mnke no noise!” No noise in this fearful din. Un-
consciously we speak in whispers. Although the order .is funny
?o an extreme, H has to be obeyed. The order incessantly


flits through the brain, “Make no noise!’’ You feel as if
you want to tell it to everybody, with the result, if a shell
makes a sound a little bit out of the ordinary you jump un-
knowingly.
A sudden whiping and crackling in the air above us and
we know the shrapnel shells are coming over. The Corporal
gives the very unnecessary command. “Down!’’ But'we are
down long before the order formed on his lips, for we well
know the result of standing up while shrapnel is whizzing
through the air. One chap went back to hospital with a
piece in his head yesterday.
At last we hear the report, sharp bark of our trench mor-
tars, followed by a rumbling snarl as they strike the wind.
Men clutch their rifles closer to them. It is a little com-
fort to feel the sleek, smooth wood-work of the rifle. It is
a true friend! The shells are coming over in hundreds, and
we know that every field-piece from the smallest to the larg-
est is working overtime.
Again we get the order, “Eix bayonets!’’ This order is
the height of a soldier’s ambition. What we have all been
trained up to is to take this order. “Fix bayonets!’’ calmly
and as a matter of course. This is the moment men have
waited for since first enlisting. How many men have tried
to picture this moment when training on the sands of Egypt.
It could be fittingly described as the climax of a soldier’s life.
What will follow in the next half-hour is what the soldier has
been trained up to; and that, in a nutshell, is to kill, as
quickly as possible and, at the same time, to be careful of his
own life. Is it any wonder men’s hands tremble and shake
as they fix the bayonets to their rifles? Soldiers have been
described in the doing of that act as bloodthirsty; but it is
hardly so. Is a prospector, who, after searching for gold for
twelve months, finds his heart’s desire, greedy? Is a soldier to
be described as bloodthirsty when he cries for vengeance for
helpless women and babes, who have been foully murdered?
No! So we fix bayonets and get slightly hot in the head in
the doing of it. The heat in the head gradually develops in-
to an all-consuming flame, scorching and searing refinement,
until we emerge different men. Supermen! with the lust to
kill; the lust to kill those who have killed without cause; they
who have murdered women, outraged children, and slaughter-
ed old men, for lust only—not for any military achievement.
. The crashing and banging of the shells make us half
delirious and incapable of thinking properly. ■Someone tries
to raise a laugh, but fails miserably. Every man is listen-
ing to the hissing, moaning wail of the shells, interspersed
with demoralising crashes. It pulsates and throbs through the
brain till it takes on an unearthly scream that seems to say,
“Kill or be killed! Kill or be killed! ! Kill or ’’
A cry of “Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men, stret-
cher-bearers!’’ helps us to gain control over our wandering
thoughts. Still the cry goes on—“ Ten men, stretcher-bear-
ers! Ten men, stretcher ’’ A sharp hiss, a crash, and we
find ourselves repeating the sentence that will never be fin-
ished in this world—“ Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men,
stretcher-bearers! ”


A shell whizzes just over our heads and fails to ex-
plode. “A dud,” the Corporal jerks out, his voice sounding
odd and out of place. We laugh—a shrill, mirthless laugh
that in ordinary times could never come from men; a laugh
full of ironical satire, sounding unearthly and unreal.
Again the order conies, “Five minutes; no noise! Section
commanders, keep the men in proper alignment!
The roar and the din of the shells abates.
From far behind our lines we hear the sweet music of the
church bells, calling the very old and the very young to
early morning mass. What memories those bells bring back!
The time when we went to church; when we were classed as
“wood” by the people of the town; how we used to say our
prayers. But all is well; we are still all right. Instead of
prayer we fight—fight for religion! Prayers are useless when
not backed up by a firm resolve. Two strong arms and spirit
are worth a thousand prayers when the War God is stalking
through the land feeding on men’s blood. Thousands of such
thoughts flit and pass through our minds like so many shadows.
At the consoling sound of the bells Tommy begins to hum
a sarcastic ditty
“Take me over the sea, where the Germans can’t snipe
at me; ~
Oh, my! I don’t want to die, I want to go home
The Corporal is putting the final words to a mucli-be-
grimed letter of farewell to his loved ones. It has been in
his pocket for months awaiting this moment. Good-bye,
sood luck, don’t worry!” he unconsciously murmurs as he
writes. “Good-bye, good luck, don’t worry!” It keeps re-
peating in our minds. The Corporal looks strangely wan and
worried as he replaces the letter in his pocket. ,
Tommy asks of a comrade, “’Ave you said ‘Good-bye,
good luck,’ laddie?” The answer comes brief and to the
point. “N’ope; ain’t goin’ to be ‘sloughed’ ter-day.” How
der yer know?” “Dunno; something seems ter tell me my
luck’s in.” Then, as if not quite certain, “Hope so, any-
way. ” “ That’s right, crack hardy. Why, • yer might git
flowers on yer grave if yer luck’s in. Yer might! Luck s a
fortune!” “Yes; luck’s a fortune all right,” answers the
man, his face twisting.up into a devil-may-care grin.
From a little to our left a signal is given. “Pheet!”—
the signal for use to mount the fire-step. Another minute and
we will be 'out in that strip of land which has been falsely
named “No Man’s Land!” Another minute before we know
our fate! What a long time it seems —hours, days, years.
“Pheet!” We crawl and slide over the parapet, the Cor-
poral taking the lead and giving us our pace. “Keep back!”
he hisses, through wire.
We advance stealthily, silently, truly; grim men with a
grim duty. Every man keeps in line as though on parade.
For a mile each side of us our comrades are doing the same.
Men stumble into old shell holes, recover themselves and press
steadily on, with never a sound. Much depends on our silence.
If we are heard approaching, before we get anywhere near
them—well, the game is up! The Germans, knowing full well


our trenches will be packed to overflowing, waiting for the
moment when we will need reinforcements, will deal with us,
and then turn their field pieces on to the trenches we have
just vacated. We have to be careful!
Hardly are we on to his barb wire, than we are seen. A
sudden, sharp signal from the enemy’s trench, and then “Swish,
swish, swish!” Two men go down with the first stream of
lead. Lucky they are firing high! The next man to go
down is our Corporal. He slaps his hand to his head, half
turns in his stride, and drops. We know he is mortally
wounded, but cannot stop to help him.
Tommy darts ahead into the Corporal’s place, yelling as
he does. “By hell, boys, we want the first dozen we come
across for that!” As if for answer bayonets are lowered,
gleaming wicked and sinister in the early morning light. All
caution is thrown to the winds now we know we are seen.
“Right!” Tommy yells, as he breaks into a run. A long
line of evil-looking men, with bodies crouched as if for a
spring and with bayonets lowered sweeps after him.
What follows is Hidden by a red mist before the eyes.
All you know is that you are amongst the Germans—amongst
the enemy; to kill him; if not to kill him, to be killed yourself.
Ten minutes, maybe an hour, before you regain your normal
senses. No enmity is felt for the dead Germans in the trench.
They fought well; we fought better. A badly wounded Ger-
man asks for a drink of water, or something to that effect. He
is given a drink, and then disarmed.
High up in the heavens we hear the droning buzz of an
aeroplane. We look up to see if it is one of ours or “Fritz’s.”
At last we catch a glimpse of it outlined against the morning
sun. Away up there it looks a mere speck. It is behind our
lines, making towards us, so we surmise it is ours. It is nearly
overhead before we see the red, white and blue emblem on
the under part of its wings.
It is cheering to see it sail along so calmly, sedately. It
may also give our artillery some targets to fire at. We hope
so. It will give us a little respite. The enemy are sure to
answer our guns if they begin to “feel’-’- for his batteries.
It will relieve the strain on the trenches and may even develop
into an artillery duel.
The 'plane is barely half way over “No Man’s Land”
before the enemy’s “Archies” are flinging shells at it. The
light anti-aircraft shells make a musical sound soaring to-
wards the heavens—like a deep bass and a shrill treble inter-
mingled into a musical one.
The ’plane dives, rises, slides over, and rights itself. We
marvel how it escapes, but steady eyes and steady nerves are
guiding it on its way. We are not the only ones in danger, and
that fact, somehow, seems to give us a feeling of security.
At last we see one, two, three smoke balls drop from the aero-
plane. The men up there watching have discovered an enemy
battery and'are giving its positions away to our gunners.
Tommy hands around his water bottle. We drink sparingly
by wetting our lips and tongues, and passing it on. We have


not got too much water, and if the enemy keeps up the barrage
much longer somebody will have to attempt to get back to
our second line and get some, and that will mean almost cer-
tain death. After replacing his water bottle, Tommy begins
to feel through his pockets. After a lot of hunting and turn-
ing out of pockets, he reveals the object of his search—a cigar-
ette butt and some matches. He lights the precious portion
of cigarette. Every man, as if obeying an order, puts down his
rifle and watches the owner of the “butt.” We watch him
greedily, our mouths moist with anticipation. He takes a long
draw, gulping the soothing smoke well back into his lungs,
holding it there as if loth to part with it.
One of the hungry ones begins to ransack his tunic poc-
kets. He knows full well there are no cigarettes there, but
it is some consolation to search for one. He goes through
his pockets slowly, methodically; his hands trembling. He may
find a butt; one never knows. His face suddenly lights up
like a man who has made a startling discovery. We hold our
breath as he disengages his hand from his pocket. At last
we see what he has found —a ten shilling note. He looks at
it in his hand, this note; this sign of wealth.
Our faces drop. What can money buy here? What is
the use of money when duty, expectant comrades, expects
you to produce something better, even if it be a cigarette?
What can money buy? Fame? with the loss of honour. Is
money to be a substitute for a cigarette? Is it any wonder
one man sneers with scorn, and yet cannot tell why it has
affected him so?
Up on the fire step, Tommy lounges his feet, moving
lazily to and fro, his eyes half closed. We could kill him
for his idle content. “Here, Tommy, I’ll give you this half
quid for a draw.” Tommy closes his eyes and leans back, open-
ing his eyes again to expel a cloud of smoke from his lungs.
This is a worse torture than shell fire. We smell the
faint, haunting fragrance of the precious weed; it bites deep
into our vitals. “Tommy, I’ll give yer this half quid for a
draw,” in piteous tones from the “moneyed man.”
Tommy takes another draw, then taking the cigarette
lovingly from between his teeth, straightens up and asks quietly,
“Do yer think I’m after blood money, boy? stick that half
quid in yer kick, and have a go at this. Give ’em all a go
at it, it’s theirs as much as mine.” And Tommy —big,
wicked-looking, white-hearted Tommy—begins to oil his rifle
in preparation for his next “stunt.”
The artillery have suddenly got tired of what they have
been doing—destroying human life. We sit back for awhile.
Some are drowsing. After the strenuous work of the last
few days everybody is more or less a little fanciful. One
man mentions Australia! Several men get up and move
about aimlessly. We do not want to awake the old longing
for our native land. But we have lost our Corporal, and we
feel a little bit sentimental, so we gather together and talk.
One man takes us back to Australia by his talk of the
last walk he had with his sweetheart. Nobody laughs. We
have all been through the same, if not with a sweetheart,


a mother. Someone asks, “Is she a dinkum tart?” The an-
swer comes, dreary and far away, “Yes, dinkum.” We let
it got at that. We talk of our homes, our hopes, our am-
bitions.
A young farmer begins to tell us his story. A story of a
greater, silent battle than one we are now in. A story of
hardships, work and privation. He carries our minds vividly
back to Australia by his talk of the great Australian bush. He
takes our minds away from the blood-soaked trenches and
transplants them on a hill overlooking his homestead.
He musters his sheep for our inspection; shows us liis
cattle, his ploughed land. He points out where the great bush
fire swept through his land. The next year a drought. He
shows us the skeletons of his animals. Now, when it is
too late, as if in mockery, long sprouts of grass grow around
them. “Even the rabbits died that year,” he tells us. We
see old Dobbin, the horse who is getting lazy fat for want
of work.
We go to the gully at the back of the house. The sun
is sinking. As it sinks still lower it turns the green of the
trees to darker green, from darker green to a thousand and one
shades of amber. The highest peaks of this, Nature’s own
castle, stand out in vivid relief as the sun dips behind them.
A little way up the gully a little brown rabbit peeps timidly
out of its burrow. The silence, giving it courage, it comes
out to feed on the fresh, young undergrowth. From away up
on the hill comes the voice of the lyre bird as he parades
himself, full of vanity and love-making.
As we have had enough of sight-seeing for the time being
we move back to the homestead of tea. As if in reality, we
partake of the good things—brown bread, cream, cakes and
butter. After tea we sit around the fire. Two little children
come to kiss their father good night. “Good night! Nanny;
Jack.” “Good night, dad, and ‘Dawd’ bless you!”
The clock on the mantlepiece strikes the hour of eleven.
Everything is at rest outside. In the big gum by the side of
the house, a native bear cries out. A human, pathetic cry
full of sympathy and sorrow. A mopoke’s call rings out,
dull and monotonous. A moth batters its wings against the
lamp glass. The attractive things are always dangerous. Soon
the place is in darkness. A mischievous ’possum scampers over
the stable roof; the horses stop their contented munching for
a moment and then continue.
Away out here on the hills lies rest. ... A cock crows
from the hen roost; the fowls preen their wings. . . . Morning
is breaking, a calm, peaceful morn, heralded in by the musi-
cal lay of the magpie.


DISCIPLINE.
Sergeant-Major to a Private who has missed eleven shots
out of twelve.
“What, eleven misses; good heavens, man, go around the
corner and shoot yourself.”
Hearing a shot around the corner, the Sergeant-Major
rushes around, to be confronted by the bad shot—
“ Sorry, sir, another miss,” the Private murmurs.
An Australian, Scotchman, and an Irishman were walking
along a street in Bolougne.
A pretty French girl passed them.
“Oh,” said the Scotchman, “I wish ’t was wee Mary.”
“I wish it was Bridget,” said the Irishman.
“ITm,” said the Australian, “I wish it was dark.”
Frenchman, to British soldiers, as they are parting:
Tommy: “Au Reservoir! Au Reservoir! Mon cher.”
Frenchman: ‘’Tanks! Tanks! Frendt.”
Old lady, on her first visit to a military hospital: “Well,
my good man, and where did you get wounded.”
Australian: “In Gallipoli, mum.”
Old lady: “But, my good man, how did you get wounded?”
Exasperated Australian: “ ’Ar stung in the foot be a
camel. ’ ’
Sergeant (instructing squad of Tommies):
“Now, boys, there is one thing I wish to impress on you.
Be very careful not to get into any arguments with civilians.
For instance, if you are in a public house and a civilian gets
quarrelsome and starts arguing, each man should finish his
beer and walk out and leave him. Now, Brown, what would
you do if a civilian came in and insulted you?”
Brown: ‘ ‘ Why, I’d drink up his beer and hook it. ’ ’
Officer, inspecting first line of resistance: “What soldiers
are in this trench, my man?”
“First Sussex Regiment, sir.”
After going along a little further, he questions again:
“What soldiers are in this trench, my man?”
“What the
’as it got to do with
you?”
“Oh, is this the Australian trench” the officer said, quite
surprised.


SUNDRY VERSE.
WAR.
Shrieking, swirling, stricken grandeur;
Big shells hurtle overhead;
Moaning wails of funereal sadness,
Crying vengeance for the dead.
Sneaking, crawling, creeping gasses,
Nauseating God’s good air;
Like Satan’s ghouls at midnight
Creeping—leaping out their lair.
Whizzing hiss of half-spent bullets:
Bombs explode with hellish crash.
All around the wounded lying
Wrecks of manhood . . glorified.
Weird sights and strange enchantments;
Stately trees sigh overhead;
Weeping wails of mournful sadness—
Wailing, for heroic dead.
Clinging, sodden, mud-soaked trenches;
Poppies, daisies, growing there;
Cursing, shrieking, maddened manhood;
Yes, my God! they all were there.
Silent, now the battle over;
Silent also are the dead;
Silent breaks the dawn of morrow,
Hark! ... a thrush sings overhead.
GRIM SARCASM.
Bill: “Give us a ‘fag.’ ”
Horace: “Gam, yer bot, yer’ll want flowers on yer grave,
yer will.”


tommy (to Australian): “I'hat was a rare plucky thing
you did this morning, to bring your mate in under that
heavy fire.”
Australian: “Yairs, the blarsted cow, he had all me b
tobacco with him.”
RAILWAY STATION IN FRANCE.
(Battalion of Australians going from one front to another.
Australian alighting, to French civilian, on platform):
“Hey! Mushshoor! Where would a bloke get a bottle of
whiskey?”
“Non-compreney! ” (shrugging his shoulders).
“Whiskey! YOU know!” (making motions as if drink-
ing).
Ah! Whiskey no bon! no bon, Messieur!”
“Get out, yer cow! I know where there a is pond full
of big green frogs, and I won’t tell you where it is.”
An Australian, in a bar, somewhere in France. Enter
three or four Americans. They order beer all round. After
a while, “Say, Kid, this beer is considerably flat, ain’t it?”
“I suppose it is,’’ said Australia. “It has been waiting
here three years for you to come and drink it.’’
Billjim, in a Tommy Hospital in Blighty.
Doctor, adjusting eye-glass: “Haw, my man. Lost your
eye, I see.’’
“Oh no! I’ve left it in France, to watch my kit till 1
get back. ’ ’
Billjim, with a couple of German prisoners, to Corporal.
“Hey! These silly cows are dopy. This one says he
conies from Brunswick, and he don’t know where the Sydney
road is; and this coot says he comes from Heidelberg, and never
heard of the Yarra.”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
G. A. Jones, 127 Phillip Street, Sydney
