

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE.
The information contained in this handbook is compiled from
reports, &c., dated 1909. It is probable that more recent data will
be available later, more especially with regard to uniform and
insignia.
The information given is not to be communicated, either directly or
indirectly to the Press, or to any person not holding an official
position in His Majesty’s Service.
NOTES
ON THE
AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN
ARMY.
By Authority:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C. 6944.


THE AUSTROHUNGARIAR ARMY.
CONSTITUTION OF THE DUAL MONARCHY AND GENERAL
ORGANIZATION OF THE FORCES.
Constitution of Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.
Austria-Hungary is a dual monarchy, consisting of the Austrian
Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary. The supreme government
is vested in the Emperor and King (Francis Joseph I.), who is
assisted in matters common to both halves of the monarchy by
“ common ” Ministers of War, Finance, and Foreign Affairs ; and
by the “ Delegations ” —representative bodies elected from among
the members of the Austrian and Hungarian Parliaments.
Austria, or Cisleithania, is a confederation of States, the inhabi-
tants of which differ widely in nationality and language. Vienna
is the seat of the central government, but each of the seventeen
States has its own Legislature for the transaction of local affairs
(see page 53.)
The kingdom of Hungary, or Txansleithania, consists of Hungary
proper (in which has been incorporated the Principality of Tran-
sylvania), the town and territory of Fiume, and the kingdom of
Croatia and Slavonia, the last mentioned having a local Parliament,
which sits at Agram for the transaction of local affairs.
In 1878, the Turkish provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina were,
with the sanction of the Great Powers, “ occupied ” by Austrian
Troops. The “ occupation ” ceased in the latter part of 1908,
when the provinces were annexed to the Monarchy. A provincial
Government will be established at Serajevo, controlled in regard
to finance matters by the “ common ” authorities.
General Organization of the Military Forces.
The military system, in view of the peculiar political organization
of the monarchy, is somewhat complicated.
The armed forces are divided into three groups
(а) Forces common to, and recruited from, both parts of the
Monarchy. These are administered through the “ com-
mon ” Ministry of War (Reichskriegsministerium).
(б) Forces recruited from the Austrian portion of the Monarchy
alone; these are administered through the Austrian
Ministry of Defence, (kiiniglicheskaiserliches, or k.k.
Miniaterium fur Landesverteidigung).
A 2


(c) Forces recruited from the Hungarian portion of the Monarchy
alone, administered through the Hungarian { Honved)
Ministry of Defence. (koniglichcs ungarisches , or k.u. f
Landesverieidigungs ministerium).
Separate budgets are prepared for each of the above and up to
the present an additional budget has also been prepared for the
troops stationed in Bosnia-Herzegovina.*
The forces comprised under (a) form the “ common ” imperial
and royal Army ( k . und k.—Jcaiserliches und koniglichcs — Heer)>
with its reserves and supplementary ( Ersatz) reserves.
Those under (h) form the Austrian {k.k.) Landwehr, with its
reserves and supplementary { Ersatz) reserves, and the Austrian
Landsturm.
Those under (c) are forces similar to the last named, but Hun-
garian ( k.u .).
The “ common ” army and the two Landwehrs, with their reserves,
constitute the first line troops, and all three forces receive the usual
training common tc regular soldiers.
The bulk of the artillery and the whole of the auxiliary (pioneer
train, &c.) services are found by the “ common ” army.
The Ersatz reserve receives but a modified training and in war
goes to form supplementary units, affiliated to the regular organiza-
tions, for which cadres exist in peace time.
The Landsturm as such receive no training in peace, but a large
proportion of them consist of men who have completed their time
in one of the above organizations. In war the Landsturm would
be organized into units of their own, for which detailed arrangements
exist in peace time.
Body Guard Troops.
In Austria-Hungary there is no Guard Corps as in Germany and
Russia, but only the following body-guard troops, corresponding some-
what to the corps of Gentlemen-at-Arms and Yeomen of the Guard
in Great Britain, viz. :
The Archers of the Body Guard { Arcierenleibgarde ).
The Hungarian Body Guard {k.u. Leihgarde ).
The Austrian Trahanten Body Guard ( k.u.k. Trdbantenleib-
garde).
The Hungarian Trahanten Body Guard (k.u.k. Trahantenleib •
garde).
The Body Guard Squadron.
The Infantry Company of the Body Guard.
The Kronwache (Crown Guard) at Budapest is a small body of
men, commanded by a captain, kept up for the purpose of guarding
the crown of St. Stephen.
• The troops actually recruited from these provinces are affiliated to those
alluded to In the first group above.


Germans
p.c.
29
Slav tribes: —
Czechs ..
15
Poles
9
Ruthenes
8
Slovenes
3
Slovaks
6
Serbo-Croatians ..
7
Magyars
18
Rumanians
5
Italians
1
Gendarmerie.
Three bodies of Gendarmerie are maintained in Austria-Hungary,
viz., the Austrian Gendarmerie, the Hungarian Gendarmerie, and the
Gendarmerie of Bosnia-Herzegovina. These bodies are employed
in civil duties during peace time, but on mobilization they are utilized
for police and orderly work in the field. They are administered in
the case of the first two by the Austrian and Hungarian Ministers
of Defence respectively, and in the case of the last by the “ common ”
Minister of War.
RECRUITING AND MILITARY SERVICE.
Population.
Austria-Hungary, including the occupied provinces of Bosnia and
the Herzegovina, has a population of about 48,000,000. The popu-
lation is of the most diverse description, nearly one half consisting
of various Slav tribes, such as Czechs, Poles, Ruthenes, &c. Hungary,
although larger in area than Austria, has not quite so large a popu-
lation.
The proportion of the different nationalities in the army is :
STo army, except the Russian, is composed of such a number of
different nationalities, and in no army are so many languages
spoken.
The “official ” language of the “ common ” army, Austrian
Landwehr and Austrian Landsturm, is German, that of the Hungarian
Landwehr and Landsturm, Hungarian.
Teems and Conditions of Military Service.
Every able-bodied citizen is liable to military service, and any
individual who for any reason cannot serve has to pay a tax in lieu.
The procedure is broadly as follows : —A certain yearly “ Recruit
Contingent ” is fixed by law and allowed for in the Budget.
Young men between the ages of 21 and 24, and who fulfil the neces-
sary medical and height conditions, are drawn by lot for this con-
tingent, and are then posted to the “ common ” army or to the


Landwehr. The numbers excess to the contingent required, as
well as men less fit, theological students, school-masters, the
breadwinners of families, and certain land-owners, whose presence
is required on their property, pass to the Ersatz reserve of the
“ common ” army or to the Landwehr.
Periods of Service (Colour and Reserve). “ Common ” Army
and Landwehr.
“ Common ” Army. —*Three years with the colours —seven years
in the reserve—two years in the Landwehr reserve. Then Land-
sturm, Ist Ban. to age of 3S; and Landsturm, 2nd Ban. to age of 42.
Landwehr. —Two years in the colours—ten years in the reserve,
then Landsturm as above.
Ersatz Reserve. —Training two months, then Landsturm as above.
Variations in above. —(a) Men may “ volunteer ” fcr entry at an
earlier age than 21, and youths from certain Government military
schools are also taken at an earlier age. (6) Extension of service,
up to a percentage of fifteen or twenty to strength of a unit, is
allowed in the case of N.C.O.’s and, in exceptional circumstances,
rank and file, (c) Retention beyond the recognized term of service
is enforced as a punishment for misconduct, (d) Service for one
year—“ one-year volunteers ” — see pp. 7 and 8. (c) In the Austrian
Landwehr, a certain number of men may be retained for three years
with the colours, the term of reserve service in this case being
reduced to eight years. (/) Men, residing abroad, may defer their
entry into the Army or Landwehr till their' 24th year.
Periods of training for the reserve : these are : —-
“ Common ” Army. —Liability to three trainings, each of which
must not exceed four weeks. In practice, each training generally
lasts thirteen days.
Austrian Landwehr, 20 weeks in all ( No single training
•< should exceed four
Hungarian Landwehr, 25 weeks in all (.weeks in these cases.
In some instances, i.e., in the case of (a) “ common ” army soldiers
who are performing their two years in the Landwehr Reserve, and
{ b ) those men alluded to in (e) above, the terms of reserve trainings
are modified.
Periods of Service. Ersatz Reserve.
“ Common ” Army : Ten years. Landwehr : Twelve years.
Training. —As for the reserve of the “ common ” army and Land-
wehr, with eight weeks’ initial training. Theological students,
however, receive no training, and exceptional treatment is accorded
in the case of some of the other classes mentioned, as entitled to join
the Ersatz reserve.
Landsturm.
The Landsturm is composed of every man between the ages of
19 and 42, who is not totally unfit, and who is not actually serving
in the “ common ” army, Landwehr, or Ersatz reserve of these
• In Bosnia-Herzegovina the period of service is three years with the colours
and nine years in the reserve (no Landwehr).


forces, it is divided into Levies :
(а) From the 19th to the 37th year inclusive.
(б) From the 38th to the 42nd year inclusive.
Young men who enrol themselves before completing their nineteenth
year are liable to Landsturm service for a period of only ten years
after completing twelve years’ colour and reserve service.
The first Levy may be used for the Ersatz reserve if this is not
sufficient, and to replace casualties in the “ common ” army or
Landwehr.
No training is required from the Landsturm in peace time {set
p. 4), except in the Tyrol and Vorarlberg, where some musketry
practice is performed.
Officers.
The officers, both of the “ common ” army and the Landwehr,
are recruited from the cadet schools, military academies, and from
one-year volunteers, bat the majority come from the cadet schools.
Cadets on leaving the cadet schools join the army as cadet ensigns
fiihnrich, obtaining commissions after about two years’ service,
while from the military academies, with their more advanced course,
students enter the army with the rank of sub-lieutenant ( Leuinani ).*
The officers of the reserve of the “ common ” army are recruited
from former duly qualified one-year volunteers and “ retired ”
officers; officers of the Landwehr reserve are, in addition recruited
from the ranks and from civilians who are suited from an educa-
tional and social point of view for the rank of officer.
Reserve (other than “ retired ”) officers are borne on the strength
of the various units, being appointed up to the rank of captain.
There would be some hundred such reserve officers and cadets to an
average infantry regiment of 4 battalions, and 25 to 30 to a cavalry
regiment. They are called up for four weeks’ training periodically,
and have to pass tests for promotion, captain being as a rule the
highest rank. No officers exist in peace for the Landsturm.
“ Retired ” officers in Austro-Hungary are of two classes, namely,
Armeestand and Itnhestand.
Officers of the Armeestand are officers retired from the army
who are employed permanently in certain appointments for which
they are specially suited, but who, on account of age or some physical
defect, are unsuitable for active service. They form a separate list
for promotion, and wear a special uniform.
Officers in Buhestand correspond to our meaning of “ retired ”
officers.
One-year Volunteers.
Young men who reach a certain standard of education, and who
undertake to clothe, feed, and equip themselves, and, in the mounted
branches, provide their own horse and saddlery, are passed into the
reserve at the end of one year’s service, and are called “ one-year
volunteers.” A money allowance is, how T ever, granted to those who
can prove themselves devoid of means. These volunteers may
* In the Corps of Quartermasters, commissions ere given from the ranks.


War Strength.
War Strength of :—
“ Common ” Army and Landwehr (with
serves)
tlieir re-
1,200,000
Ersatz reserve (partially trained men)
500,000
Landsturm (former soldiers or former
servists)
Ersatz re-
800,000
2,500,000*
select their year of service provided they finish their term by their
24th year. The object is not to damage a man’s study for profession
by a term of three years, and to provide a reserve of officers, doctors,
and officials.
One-year volunteers are generally taken for the arm, or depart-
ment, for which they are professionally suited, but they may select
the branch of the service in which they are desirous of completing
their year’s service, as far as military exigencies permit of this being
done.
Non-commissioned Officees.
Non-commissioned officers are obtained by promotion in the
ranks. Courses are held during the winter months in the various
units for the training and promotion of non-commissioned officers.
A private must have six months’ service before being promoted to
the rank of corporal, and 1 year’s service is necessary before pro-
motion to higher rank.
Non-commissioned officers who have served twelve years have
prior claim to State employment, their cases being considered before
all others with less service.
The number of the untrained Landsturm, i.e., men below the age
of 21, those unfit for “ common ” army, Landwehr or Ersatz
Reserve, &c., cannot be estimated with anything approaching to
accuracy, but it is stated that the actual number of men available
for military service, trained and untrained, amounts to 3,700,000
in all.
Statistical Details.
Proportion of recruit contingent to male popu-
lation .. .. • • • • .. • 6 per cent.
Proportion of peace strength to male population .. 1-8 „
Total military budget (for 1909) .. .. £20,000,000
Proportion of military to the full budget for the
Country .. .. .. .. .. 12-27 per cent.
Proportion of military payment per male per
annum .. .. .. .. ..17 shillings
* See General Table.


[The
war strength must be taken as approximate only, as mobilization returns are kept secret.
General Table.
Artillery
Horse, Field, and
Mountain.
Other
Other
Trained
Infantry.
Cavalry.
Officers
and Men.
Field
Guns.
Arms and
Depots.
Men
Available.
Total.
War .. .. .. .. .. 916,000
The following is an analysis of the above :—
89,000
98,000
2,064
134,000
1,300,000
2,537,000
15 Army Corps ..'
48 Infantry Dlvns.
“ Common ’* Army
605,000
65.000
96,000
2,000
131,000
897,000
25 Cavalry Brigs.
Austrian Landwehr
17] ,000
9,000
2,000
64
1,000
183.000
679 Battalions ..
353 Squadrons ..
300 Batteries
Hungarian Landwehr
140,000
15,000
2,000
157,000
Ersatz reserve and Landsturm
1,300,000*
1,300,000
Total
916,000
89,000
98,000
2,064
134,000
1,300,000
2,537,000
• Approximate only.
WAR STRENGTH.


WAR ORGANIZATION.*
The following are the main units into which the military forces
in one field are divided :
Infantry Brigades ( Infanterie-Brigaden).
Cavalry Brigades ( Kavallerie-Brigaden ).
Infantry Divisions ( Infanterie-Truppen-Divisionen ).
Cavalry Divisions ( Kavallerie-Truppen-Divisionen).
Army Corps ( Korps), and
Armies ( Arnieen ).
There are also for mountain warfare :—•
Mountain Brigades ( Gebirgs-Brigaden) and
Mountain Divisions ( Gebirgs-Truppen-Divisionen ).
Infantry Brigade.
An infantry brigade consists of a staff and six to nine battalions
of infantry. The commander is usually a major-general.
The brigade staff consists of—
-1 brigadier.
1 staff officer.! -
1 orderly officer.
15 non-commissioned officers and men.
16 horses.
3 wagons.
Cavalry Brigade.
A cavalry brigade consists usually of a brigade staff and two
cavalry regiments (twelve squadrons and 2 pioneer troops), and Is
commanded by a major-general.
The brigade staff consists of—
-1 brigadier.
1 staff officer. J
2 orderly officers.
15 non-commissioned officers and men.
20 horses.
2 wagons.
Infantry Division.
An infantry division in the field consists of—
Divisional staff and head-quarters with—■
A company of staff infantry. h
A troop of staff cavalry.
A dismounted telegraph section. '
2 brigade staffs.
14 to 16 battalions of infantry and rifles.
, * Aa mobilization statistics and war strengths are kept secret in Austria, all
tables in connection therewith appearing cn subsequent pages must be taken as
approximate only,
t Attached to the General Staff [zugeiheili).
* Attached to the General Staff.


3 squadrons of cavalry.
An artillery field gun regiment (staff and 4 batteries).
A “ division ” (staff and 2 batteries) of field howitzers.
Technical troops (allotted as required by the army corps
commander).
A train squadron (staff and 7 sections).
A divisional ammunition park, consisting of 4 infantry and
6 artillery ammunition columns.
A divisional medical establishment.
A divisional supply column.
A bakery column.
May be also added —
J of a supply magazine.
1 “ live stock ” section.
1 field hospital


The war strength of
in the following table
a normal infantry division of 15 battalions, exclusive of the teoh
War Strength of a Normal Infantry Division.
lical troops is given
—
Bat-
ta-
lions.
Squad-
rons.
Bat-
teries.
Officers.
N.C.O.’s
and Men
(including
Civilians).
Horses.
[Draught
Riding! and
| Pack.
Vehicles.
Regi-
mental
1st
Line.
2nd
Line
Train.
Guns.
Divisional Head-Quarters
23
268
74 52
19
(a) Machine guns
1st Brigade :—
i
(b) Very approx.; as
Brigade staff
3
15
12 j 4
3
latest establishments
No. 1 Infantry Regiment
3
66
3,294
42 1 86
14
23
2(a)
of these units uncer-
No. 2 Infantry Regiment
4
85
4,356
52 : 109
18
29
2(a)
tain.
2nd Brigade: —
i
Staff. 2 regiments
Notes.
(7 battalions)
7
154
7,665
106 ! 199
32
55
4(a)
1. A proportion of the
1 battalion rifles
1
23
3,094
9 i 37
j
8
2(a)
horse-drawn vehicles
Cavalry (with regimen-
■
will probably be re-
tal staff and pioneer
1
placed by mechani-
3
24
575
536 i 43
20
cal transport.
Artillery: —
2. Ammunition Supplies
1 field gun regiment ..
4
40
700
600
53
23
24
carried : 11 days.
1 field howitzer “ divi-
Per rifle —
sion ”
2
18
320
290
39
16
12
320 rounds.
Divisional ammunition
Per gun —
park (6) ..
16
1,200
1.300
280
500 rounds.
Divisional Medical Es-
3. Fighting strength of
tablishment ..
8
170
14 106
32
the Division rougidy
Infantry Supply
is :—
Column (&) ..
22
650
54 1,007
496
16,000 rifles.
Divisional Bakery Column
7
250
. . 200
80
500 sabres.
36 field, and
15
3
6
499
20,550
4,932
161
1,084
36
guns.
(field)


Cavalry Division.
The composition of a Cavalry Division in the field is as follows :
Divisional Staff and Head-Quarters with :
1 company staff infantry. 1
1 troop staff cavalry. J
2 cavalry brigade staffs.
4 regiments of cavalry (24 squadrons and 4 pioneer troops).
A “ division ” of horse artillery (staff and 3 batteries).
1 machine gun section of 4 guns.
A mounted telegraph detachment.
A train squadron (staff and 6 sections).
A divisional ammunition column.
A divisional medical establishment.
A divisional supply column.
The Division is commanded by a Lieutenant-General and the
staff is very similar to that of an infantry division.


The war strength of a normal cavalry division is given in the following table
War Strength of a Normal Cavalry Division.
—
Squad-
rons.
Bat-
teries.
Officers.
N.C.O.’s
and Men
(Including
Civilian
Officials).
H
Riding
jrses.
Draught
and
Pack.
Vehk
Regi-
mental
1st Line.
lea.
Train
2nd
Line
Guns.
—
Divisional Head-Quarters
35
290
120
60
24
(a) Machine guns.
X Machine gun Section
3
5S
51
30
4
8
4(a)
1st Brigade: —
(6) Very approx., as
Brigade Staff
4
16
16
4
2
latest establishments
No. 1 Cavalry Regiment ,.
6
41
1,095
1,038
73
35
of these units uncer-
No. 2 Cavalry Regiment ..
6
41
1,095
1,038
73
35
tain.
4nd Brigade: —
Brigade Staff and 2 regts...
12
85
2,205
2,092
150
72
Notes.
‘Division" of horse artil-
1. Ammunition Supplies
lery ( b)
3
21
420
iOO
28
14
12
carried: 11 days.
Mounted telegraph detachment
4
100
10
40
6
Per carbine —
Cavalrv Divisional Ammunition
110 rounds.
Column
6
200
2
>0
62
Per gun —
Cavalry Divisional Medical Es-
500 rounds.
tablishment
1
40
2
22
6
2. Fighting strength of
Cavalry Supply Column (6) ..
22
750
55
1,100
540
the Division roughly —
4,000 sabres.
Totals
24
3
263
6,268
6,734
32
804
12
12 field, and
(field)
4 machine guns.


Army Corps.
An army corps in the field consists of:—An army corps staff and
head-quarters with :
A company of staff infantry. /
A troop of staff cavalry. I
3 infantry divisions (including 1 Landwehr infantry division).
1 to 4 pioneer companies.
A pontoon train.
A corps telegraph detachment.
An entrenching tool column.
A corps ammunition park.
A corps train park.
A corps supply column.
A corps bakery column.
The following units are added to an army corps as required
Pontoon trains.
Field hospitals.
Depots for sick horses.
2nd line of supply columns.
Field bakeries.
Live stock depots.
An army corps is commanded by a full General (Feldzengmeister
or General der I Kavallerie ( or by a Lieutenant-General.
(Infanterie I ,
The establishment of the head-quarters staff of an army corps,
including staff troops, is ;
50 officers and officials ) 400 all ranks.
*350 non-commissioned officers and men )
3 horses.
29 vehicles.
The establishment of an army corps of 3 divisions is approxi-
mately
63.000 all ranks.
15.000 horses.
3,800 vehicles.
Combatant strength :
45.000 rifles.
1,500 sabres.
108 guns.
Armies.
An army consists of :
An army head-quarters.
A number of army corps (three to six), with one or more cavalry
divisions.
Heavy howitzer “ divisions,” technical troops, balloon detach-
ments and pontoon trains, as detailed.
A number of reserve establishments, depdts, also line of com-
munioation troops.
• Includes civilians.


The commander of an army is a full General.
The establishment of a headquarters staff ( Armee-Haupi-guartier ),
including the army commander and his personal staff, and with
train and staff troops, is;—
50 officers and officials. \450 all ranks.
*4OO non-commissioned officers and men J
300 horses.
40 vehicles.
The establishment of an Armee-General Kommando, including
train and staff troops is
60 officers and officials. \4BO all ranks.
*420 non-commissioned officers and men/
250 horses.
50 horses.
INFANTRY.
INFANTRY OF THE “COMMON” ARMY.
The infantry of the “ common ” army consists of :
Regiments of infantry of the line and of rifles, independent
rifle battalions, and the Bosnian-Herzegovinian infantry
regiments and rifle battalion.
Organization.
Infantry of the Line.
The infantry of the line consists of 102 regiments numbered 1
to 102.
Regiments also bear permanent titles, or the name of their
honorary colonels, for example :■ —■
“ Infantry Regiment Alexander 1., Emperor of Russia, No. 2”
Each regiment consists of regimental staff, 4 battalions (Nos. 1
to 4) of 4 companies (Nos. 1 to 10) each, a machine gun section of
two guns and an Ersatz (depot) battalion cadre, which on mobiliza-
tion forms a battalion of 4 companies.
Regiments are commanded by colonels; battalions by colonels,
lieutenant-colonels, or majors ; companies by captains.
Some regiments mobilize from the depot battalion a staff company
of two sections, commanded by a lieutenant. Staff companies are
attached to the head-quarters of the higher tactical units for orderly
sentry and escort duties (see pp. 10-11), and are called by the numbers
of the regiments by which they are furnished, for example :
“ Staff Company No. 27/47,”
means the 27th Staff Company mobilized from the 47th Infantry
Regiment.
• Includes civilians.


War Strength.—Infantry Units.
Total.
—
Officers.*
Men.
Horses.
Vehicles.
Combat-
ants.
Infantry company
4
260
3
2
250
„ • battalion
20
1.044
31
10
1,000
„ regiment (four
battalions)
86
4,356
161
47
4,100
Independent battalion ..
23
1.004
52
14
1,000
Stall company
120
Rifle Regiments and Rifle Battalions,
The rifle units of the army consist of 4 Tyrolese rifle regiments
(Tiroler Kalser-J ; ger), numbered 1 to 4, and 26 independent rifle
battalions ( Feld-Jdger ).
Each of the 4 rifle regiments consist of :
Regimental staff.
4 battalions of 4 companies (numbered 1 to 16).
1 machine gun section.
1 Ersatz battalion cadre.
On mobilization, in addition to the foregoing, the Ersatz battalions
furnish between them two staff companies, numbered respectively
No. 1 tind 2.
The independent rifle battalions are numbered 1 to 32, but Nos. 3
14, 15, 18, 26, and 27 do not exist, these having been incorporated
in the Tyrolese rifle regiments.
Each independent rifle battalion consists of :
Battalion staff.
4 field companies (Nos. 1 to 4).
1 machine gun section.
1 Ersatz company cadre.
Bosnian-Jlerzegovinian Infantry and Rifles.
The troops raised in the provinces of Bosnia and the Herzegovina
consist of 4 infantry regiments (Nos. 1 to 4) each of 4 battalions
machine gun section and Ersatz cadre and 1 independent rifle bat*
talion ( Bosnisch-Herzegovinisches Feld jag er-Bataillon).
Uniform.
A light-grey service uniform is gradually being introduced.
* Including medical officers and paymasters.
('.6944. -B


LANDWEHR AND LANDSTURM INFANTRY.
Austrian Landwehr Infantry.
Organization and Strength.
There are in all 37 Austrian Landwehr infantry regiments, and
3 rifle {LandcsschiUzen) regiments, making a total of 40 regiments.
Each regiment (except the 4th, 23rd, and Landessckiitzen regiments),
consists of regimental staff, 3 battalions, and an Ersatz battalion
cadre which on mobilization expands into an Ersatz battalion.
Each battalion consists of 4 field companies and a machine gun
section of 2 guns.*
The Ersatz battalion cadre (including recruiting staff of district)
consists of 3 officers and 14 men.
The war strengths are almost the same as for the infantry of the
line, some Landwehr regiments mobilizing staff companies.
Hungarian Landwehr Infantry.
Organization and Strength.
There are in all 28 regiments of Hungarian Landwehr and an
independent company belonging to Eiume which is attached to the
20th regiment.
Ten regiments have 4 battalions, 18 have 3 battalions, the battalions
of each regiment being numbered 1 to 3 or 4, the companies 1 to 12
or 16, and the regiments 1 to 28.
War strength is practically the same as for the infantry of the
line.
Landsturm Infantry of the Tyrol and Vorarlberg.
The organization of the Landsturm of the Tyrol and Vorarlberg
is more national in character, and therefore a little different from that
of the remainder of the Austrian Landsturm.
It is administered by a Committee of Defence at Innsbruck,
consisting of municipal and military officers, with the Governor
of the provinces as This Landsturm infantry is for local
defence, and can only be exceptionally employed outside its area.
Each Landsturm district is subdivided into several Landsturm
territorial battalion districts, each mobilizing a Landsturm territorial
battalion, consisting of battalion staff, 3 to 6 companies each of
3to 6 sections, and an Ersatz company. To each company, and even
to each section, a certain recruiting area is allotted.
If the whole levy of Landsturm territorial battalions is not required,
mobile companies are formed consisting of the younger and better
trained men. If a general levy subsequently takes place, these
mobile onxpanies return to their territorial battalions, in order to
increase their military efficiency.
* Only a portion of these are formed at present.


Three to six mobile companies are formed into one mobile battalion
and an Ersatz company.
The establishment of a normal mobile company of 4 sections is a
officers and 239 men (214 rifles) : that of a normal mobile battalion of
4 companies is 27 officers and 976 men (857 rifles).
Armament, transport, &c., is similar to that of the remainder of
the Austrian Landsturm.
Hungarian Landsturm Infantry.
Each Landsturm district, of which there are 94, finds 1 or 2
battalions of the first levy, each of 4 companies and an Ersatz company
only trained men being taken for these battalions. Some of the
districts also find 1 battalion of the second levy, which has no Ersatz
company.
The battalions of the first levy are formed into regiments of
3 or 4 battalions and 1 Ersatz battalion, numbered consecutively
from 1 onwards.
The strength of field and Ersatz companies, battalion, and regi-
mental staffs is practically as in the Hungarian Landwehr. Each
battalion cadre consists of 16 officers, 136 men (per company 4
officers, 34 men), the battalion cadre being formed in the same way
as in the Austrian Landsturm.
The armament is similar to that of the Austrian Landsturm.
CAVALRY.
Cavalry of the Army,
Organization.
The cavalry of the “ common ” army consists of 42 regiments
(252 squadrons), divided as follows :
15 regiments of Dragoons.
16 regiments of Hussars.
11 regiments of Ulans.
Dragoon regiments are numbered consecutively 1 to 15, hussar
regiments 1 to 10, and Ulan regiments 1 to 8 and II to 13. In
addition to its number every regiment bears the name of its honorary
colonel or some permanent title. For example :
“ The Ist Kaiser Franz Regiment of Dragoons.”
The 13th Hussar Regiment has a special title, and is known as—.
“ The 13th Jazygier and Kumanier Regiment of Hussars.”
B 2


War Strength. — Cavalry.
—
Officers.
Men.
Horses.
Total
Combatant
Stiength-
Ucgiment, including regimental
and divisional staffs, pioneer
troop, tdogiaph section, and 6
squadrons in the field
Division (stuff and 3 squadrons)..
Squadron
41
17
5
3,095
519
171
1.111*
'524
372
930
450
150
The dragoon regiments are all recruited in the Austrian half of
the monarchy, whilst the Hussars are exclusively Hungarian ; eight
of the Ulan regiments belong to Galicia, one to Bohemia, the remaining
two to Croatia and Slavonia.
Each regiment consists of—■.
Regimental staff.
2 divisions, each of 3 field squadrons.
A telegraph section.
1 pioneer troop.
1 depot { Ersatz ) cadre.
It is very distinctly laid down that the field squadrons are to be
exclusively employed on those duties which appertain to the cavalry
as a fighting arm. and that detachments are not to be detailed from
them for the performance of minor duties, such as escorts and staff
duties.
The divisions of a cavalry regiment are numbered 1 and 2 ; the
field squadrons consecutively 1 to G.
Squadrons are commanded by captains, divisions by majors or
lieutenant-colonels, regiments by colonels, pioneer troops and troops
of staff cavalry by subaltern officers.
Each squadron is divided in to 4 troops ( Ziige ), and each troop
into 3 sections ( Patrouillen ).
The telegraph section consists of 4 sergeants trained as telegraph
operators and 4 privates as orderlies.
On mobilization the Ersatz cadre expands into an Ersatz squadron,
a reserve squadron, and a troop of staff cavalry.
The troops of staff cavalry are intended for duty as mounted
orderlies and grooms at the head-quarters of the higher tactical
units (divisions, army corps, &c.), and for escort duty to supply
columns. The pioneer troop is, as a rule, with regimental head-
quarters, the Ersatz cadre is always in the regimental recruiting
districts, where the mobilization stores are kept.
* Including 1 pack animal for pioneer troop.


LANDWEHR AND LANDSTURM MOUNTED TROOPS.
Mounted Troops of the Austrian Landwehr.
The mounted troops of the Austrian Landwehr consist of—
Six Landwehr cavalry regiments ( Dlans), each organized similarly
to a cavalry regiment of the “ common ” army, but
with a pioneer troop cadre instead of a pioneer troop.
A “ division ” (3 squadrons) of mounted rillos ( Berittene Tyroler
Landesschiitzen ) recruited in the Tyrol and Yorarlberg,
w ith an Ersatz cadre and a telegraph section.
A “ division ” of 2 squadrons of Dalmatian mounted rifles
(Berittene Dalmatiner Landesschiitzen), with an Ersatz
cadre.
These troops have permanent peace stations.
The regiments of Landwehr Ulans are numbered 1 to 6 ; the field
squadrons of each regiment, 1 to 6.
The title of a regiment is as follows ; —“ k.k. Landwehr XJlan Regi-
ment, No. 3.
A squadron of a Landwehr Ulan regiment has 9 men trained as
pioneers.
War Strength.
Similar to the cavalry of the “ common ” army.
Hungarian Landwehr Cavalry.
The Hungarian Landwehr Cavalry consists of 10 regiments of
hussars, numbered consecutively 1 to 10, and in addition bearing the
names of their head-quarters station, e.g., “ k. u. Budapester Land-
wehr-Husaren Regiment No. I.”
The regiments are organized similarly to those of the cavalry of
the Austrian Landwehr, but pioneer and telegraph cadres are only
formed at manoeuvres. Some of the regiments mobilize a troop of
staff cavalry.*
Regiments Nos. 1 to 0 are recruited from men talking Hungarian,
regiment No. 10 from men talking Croatian only.
In each regiment 1 captain, 1 staff sergeant-major, 1 quartermaster-
sergeant, and 4 privates are noted as an Hungarian Landsturm
hussar cadre.
Landsturm Cavalry.
Austria. —No cadres are maintained, but in Landsturm districts,
in which it is possible, mounted units may be raised on mobilization
by special order.
Hungary. —The Hungarian Landsturm in war time can furnish 30
squadrons of hussars, the men being drawn from old cavalry soldiers.
Three squadrons form a Landsturm hussar division. These divisions
are numbered consecutively from 1 onwards, the squadrons in each
being numbered 1 to 3.
• Machine gun sections are being added for each Hungarian Landwehr cavalry
regiment.


Before the squadrons are mobilized, a cadre is formed tor each,
the personnel being supplied by the Hungarian Landwehr cavalry.
The divisions mobilize at the stations of the Landwehr hussar
regiments, where their clothing, equipment, and arms are kept in
store.
To every three squadrons there is an Ersatz half squadron.
HORSE, FIELD, AND MOUNTAIN ARTILLERY.
Horse and Field Artillery.
Organization .
The general term “ Field Artillery ” in the Austrian Army includes
batteries of horse artillery, field gun and field howitzer batteries of
field artillery, and batteries of heavy howitzers.
Of horse artillery there are 8 “ divisions,” of field gun batteries 42
regiments, of field howitzer batteries 14 regiments, of heavy howitzers
5 “ divisions ” (and 4 cadre “ divisions ”), and of Austrian Landwchr
8 field howitzer “divisions.”
A horse artillery “ division ” consists of “ divisional ” staff, 3 four-
gun batteries, ammunition park and Ersatz (depot) cadres.
A field gun or field howitzer regiment consists of regimental staff,
2 “ divisions” ammunition park and depot cadres.
A “ division ” of field guns or field howitzers consists of 11 divi-
sional ” staff, and 2 six-gun (or howitzer) batteries.
A “ division ” of heavy howitzers consists of divisional staff, 2
batteries of 4 howitzers each, with ammunition park and depot
cadres.
The horse artillery “ divisions ” are numbered 1,2, 4-7, 10, and 11.
They are allotted to cavalry divisions or cavalry brigades in war,
but in peace are attached to field artillery brigade commands {see
below) for administrative purposes.
The field-gun regiments are numbered Ito 42. There are 3 such
regiments to each of the first fourteen army corps except the 2nd
and the 14th Corps. This therefore gives 1 regiment to each infantry
division, it being recollected that in w r ar an army corps has 3 infantry
divisions (2 of the “ common ” army and 1 o! the Landwchr). The
2nd Army Corps has in peace 3 infantry divisions of the Army and
has 4 field gun regiments allotted to it. The 14th Army Corps has
only 2 regiments, as it possesses a Mountain Artillery regiment in
addition.
The field howitzer regiments arc numbered 1 to 44, one being
allotted to each of the first 14 Army Corps. This gives a “ division ”
(2 batteries) of field how'itzers to each “ common ” army infantry


War Strengths.
—
KOfficers.
Men.
Horses.
Guns.
Ammunition
■Wagons (6-horse)
Field gun or howit-
zer battery
Horse artillery bat-
6
150
140
6
6 (gun battery)
12 (howitzers)
tery
Heavv howitzer bat-
5
138
160
4
4
tery
Establishment
uncertain.
4
16
Each battery and head
wagon.
-quarters of a regiment
has a telephone
division, the 8 Landwehr held howitzer “ divisions " (numbered
1-3, 8-11, and 14) being in existence for the Austrian Landwehr
infantry divisions.*
The field gun and field howitzer regiments allotted to the various
corps of the Army are grouped into an artillery “ Brigade ” command
for administrative purposes, corresponding to the number of the
Corps.
The heavy howitzer “ divisions ” are numbered 1-5. They would
be allotted in war to army corps or armies ; in peace they stand
under the field artillery brigade commands for administrative
purposes.
Artillery brigadiers are usually major-generals or colonels ; com-
manders of artillery regiments, colonels ; “ divisions ” are commanded
by lieutenant-colonels or majors. Batteries are commanded by
captains.
Besides its number each field howitzer regimentf bears a per-
manent title, or name of its honorary colonel, e.g. :
“ The sth Archduke Albrecht Field Howitzer Regiment.”
Batteries are denoted in abbreviated nomenclature thus :
Batt: No. : 1/5 F.K.R. —lst batterv of the 6th.
F.H.R. (
Field gun \ Artillery Regiment.
Field howitzer I
Batt. : No. : 2/5 fr. A.D. \ —2nd battery of the 6th.
)Sehw. H.H. /
Horse artillery \ “ division.”
Heavy howitzer /
• The Hungarian (Honved) Landwehr have not as yet commenced forming
Artillery.
t These regiments are the former Corps Artillery regiments.


War Strength of Mountain Artillery Units.
Horses
Guns
Ainmuni-
—
Officers.
Men.
and pack
animals.
or
Howitzers.
tion
wagons.
Mountain gun battery ,.
70
4
20 pack
Uncertain
animals
Mountain howitzer bat-
tery (narrow-track
draught)
42
4
4 carts
Mountain Artillery.
Organization.
The mountain artillery consists of —Six regiments, numbered 1 to
6, stationed in the Tyrol, and Bornia-Herzegovina, and allotted to
the 111., XIV., and XV. Army Corps.
Each regiments consists of regimental staff, 2 “ divisions,” ammuni-
tion park cadre and, in the case of the first three regiments, Ersatz
(depot) cadre.
Each “ division” consists of divisional staff, and 2 four-gun bat-
teries, except in the case of the 2nd regiment, which has one
“division” of three-gun batteries, and the other of 2 howitzer
batteries.t
There are two mountain artillery brigade commands for adminis-
trative purposes—at Brixen and Sarajevo.
Batteries of mountain artillery are designated as follows:
No. 1/14 G.A.R.—-No. 1 battery of the 4th Regiment of Mountain
(Gebirgs) Artillery.
t Additional mountain howitzer batteries are now being formed.
ENGINEER DUTIES, TECHNICAL STAFF, AND TROOPS.
General Allotment of Engineer Duties .
Engineer duties in the sense understood in our army are in the
Austro-Hungarian Army specialized, and divided into four distinct
branches. The work is allotted and organized as follows :—•
(1) The Engineer Staff ( Genie Stab) undertakes purely military
scientific duties, such as construction, attack and defence
of fortresses, (fee.
(2) The Military Works Engineer Department {Ban Ingeneure)
undertakes all work of a non-military nature, such as
barrack construction, repair, &c.


(3) The Pioneer Troops perform military engineer duties in the
field, such as bridging, demolitions, communications,
camp duties, &c.
(4) The Railway and Telegraph Regiment undertakes the
construction and management of railways and telegraphs.
Engineer Staff.
This is a specially trained staff of officers under the Inspector-
General of the Engineers, and is organized on the same principles
as the General Staff. It consists of—■
(а) Officers of the engineer staff proper.
(б) Attached officers who have completed a three years’ engineei
course.
The strength in 1909 was—
-2 General Officers.
120 Field Officers and Captains.
33 Attached Officers (Lieutenants).
War Duties.
In war the general duties of the Engineer Staff are to assist in the
attack, defence, or construction of fortified places or positions.
Officers of the Engineer Staff are in war time employed, with higher
tactical units, on the lines of communication, at sieges, or in special
duties. A general officer or colonel of the Engineer Staff is attached
to army head-quarters, and to siege head-quarters, when formed.
Two field officers are attached to army corps head-quarters, and
one field officer to line of communication head-quarters.
The Military Works Department {Ban Ingeneure).
This is a non-combatant department for the construction and
maintenance of such buildings and works as do not form part of
actual fortifications. The personnel consists of officers and non-
commissioned officers who are transferred to the department after
undergoing a course in military building and construction.
The Technical Troops.
These are represented in the “ common ” army only, and carry
out such technical engineer duties, other than fortress construction,
as may be required in war. These duties correspond practically
with those which would be performed in the field by our Royal
Engineers.
Composition.
The technical troops consist of—
(1) The pioneer troops.
(2) The railway and telegraph troops.
There are also certain pioneer reserve establishments which are
formed on mobilization, some by the pioneer troops, and others by
the pioneer store depot ( Pionierzeugsdepot ) at Klosterneuburg.


War Establishment of Pioneer Units.
Officers.
Hank
and
Horses.
Vehicles.
Battalion Staff
.. 4 ..
File.
11 ..
6 .
1
Company
.. 5 ..
233 ..
33 .
. 8
Reserve Pioneer store vnit
.. 1 ..
27 ..
22
. 6-10
Bridging Troop
.. 1 ..
88 ..
110
. 14
Entrenching Tool Column
.. 1 ..
32 ..
39
. 9
Ersatz Company
.. 6 ..
225-345
Allotment to higher Units.
This is apparently to be made dependent on the actual conditions
of any particular -war. Consequently no hard and fast scale is laid
down in peace, and no technical troops are definitely allotted to
infantry brigades or divisions. Nor is the allotment to army corps
and armies on fixed scale.
Pioneer Troops and Reserve Establishments.
Peace Organization of Pioneer Troops .
The Pioneer troops ( Pioniertruppen ) consist of 15 independent
battalions, numbered from 1 to 15. These battalions are, as a
rule, quartered at permanent stations within their respective military
territorial districts. They are attached to infantry brigades for
purposes of command, but in all matters of technical administration
are under the Inspector-General of Pioneers.
Each battalion consists in peace of the battalion staff, 5 companies
numbered from 1 to 5, a reserve pioneer store unit, and an Ersatz
company cadre- The sth company of each battalion is specially
allotted to fortress duties. A reserve store pioneer unit is commanded
by a captain, who is responsible for the bridging and pioneer
equipment, transport material, instructional stores, and explosives
on charge of the battalion. The Ersatz company cadre is charged
with the registration and yearly instruction of reservists called up
for training.
MACHINE GUNS.
• General Distribution .
The armament of the military forces of the dual monarchy with
Schwarzlose machine guns is now (1909) in progress. The scale
of armament is to be as follows :
(fl) In the “ common ” army, with every cavalry division
or independent cavalry brigade, a section of 4 machine
guns.


(6) In the “ common army ” with every regiment, of infantry,
of Tyrolese rifles, of Bosnian-Herzegovinian infantry,
arid with every independent battalion of rifles, a section
of 2 machine guns.*
(c) In the Austrian Landwehr, with every battalion of infantry
a section of 2 machine guns.f
( d ) In the Hungarian (Honved) Landwehr, with every battalion
of infantry and with every regiment of cavalry, a section
of 2 machine guns.
The armament on the above scale of the “ common ” army with
machine guns, is believed (2nd April, 1909) to have been completed ;
that of the Austrian and Hungarian Landwehrs has been partially
carried out, and is still in progress.
Details of the Sohwarzlose machine gun and equipment are given
at the end of the chapter.
Cavalry Machine Gan Sections {“Common ” Army).
Machine gun sections, of four guns each, form part of each cavalry
division, or independent cavalry brigade ; they are incorporated for
peace purposes in certain selected cavalry regiments.
Cavalry machine gun sections are organized as follows:
There are four pack horses to each gun ; with loads thus dis-
tributed :
No. 1 pack horse carries gun, mounting, and 500 car-
tridges.
Nos. 2,3, 4 pack horses carry 1,500 cartridges each.
A sub-section consists of two guns and an ammunition wagon
which carries 20,000 rounds. Thus 15,000 rounds per gun are carried
on pack and in the subsection wagon.
A cavalry machine-gun section consists of 2 subsections.
The peace establishment is as follows : —1 captain, 2 subaltern
officers, 1 sergeant-major, 2 sergeants, 7 corporals and lance cor
porals, 1 armourer, 1 pay non-commissioned officer, 1 saddler, 1
shoeing smith, 1 trumpeter, 25 mounted men, 17 dismounted men,
45 saddle and draught horses, 12 pack horses.
Total 3 officers, 57 other ranks, 57 horses.
Officers and men are armed with cavalry swords and repeating
pistols.
In war the whole of the detachment is mounted, and consists
of about 3 officers, 58 other ranks, 51 saddle and draught horses,
30 pack horses.
• The 22nd Infantry regiment has 2 machine gun detachments,
t In those battalions designated for mountain warfare, 4 guns.


Infantry Machine Gun Sections (“ Common ” Army).
There are in all 138 of these sections, each of two guns.
Infantry machine gun sections are organized as follows :
There are 8 pack mules per gun ; the distribution of the load
is : —■
No. I mule ; gun, mounting, and 500 cartridges.
No. 2 mule ; 1,500 cartridges.
No. 3 mule : gun shield.
Nos. 4,5, 6,7, 8 mules : 1,600 cartridges each.
Thus 10,000 cartridges per gun are carried.
The full detachment with drivers, consists of 14 men, viz., gun
captain, gun detachment of 3 men, 2 ammunition numbers, 8 mule
drivers.
Two guns form an infantry machine gun section.
The peace establishment of a section consists of : —1 subaltern
officer, 1 sergeant, 2 corporals, 1 armourer, 8 men, 1 saddle horse,
4 mules.
Officers carry infantry swords and repeating pistols ; other ranks
bayonet, magazine carbine, and repeating pistol.
In war the section would consist of about 1 officer, 1 sergeant-
major, 33* other ranks, 1 saddle horse, 16 mules.
The abbreviated nomenclature of “ common ” army infantry
machine gun sections is as follows :
M.G. M.G. M.G. . .
UIT Jg 11 BH3 respectively
Machine gun detachment of No. 19 regiment of infantry.
Machine gun detachment of No. 11 rifle battalion.
Machine gun detachment of No. 3 Bosnian-Herzegovinian
regiment of infantry.
Austrian Landwe.hr Machine Gun Sections.
These sections, one per battalion, are similarly organized to the
“ common ” army infantry machine gun detachments.
The peace establishment of a section is : —1 lieutenant, 1 sergeant,
2 corporals, 1 armourer, 10 men, 1 saddle horse, 5 mules.
This peace establishment per battalion in Nos. 23 and 27 regiments
of Landwehr is larger by 12 men and 7 mules.
Abbreviated nomenclature for Landwehr machine gun sections is
used as follows — M.G. This signifies “ the machine gun detach-
ment of No. 1 battalion of No. 5 Landwehr infantry regiment.”
In war the detachment would consist of about :—1 officer, 34*
other ranks, 1 horse, 16 mules.
Armament is the same as in the “ common ” army infantry
machine gun sections, with the exception that the gun numbers do
not carry carbines.
* Including 2 range finders.


Hungarian Landwehr Machine Oun Sections.
Details as to these are not available. The machine gun sections
are organized on similar lines to those already described.
The Schwarzlose Machine Gun and, Mountings.
The equipment consists of ;
(1) Gun and water jacket.
(2) Steel tripod carriage.
(3) Shield (carried by infantry sections only).
(4) Ammunition boxes, belts, &c.
The gun has a recoiling barrel ; the recoil is utilized for automatic
loading. There is a water jacket lor cooling purposes. The gun
is sighted up to 2,650 yards. It is claimed that the mechanism,
which contains only one spring, is as efficient as the Maxim gun, and
less complicated. A rate of lire of 400 rounds a minute is claimed.
Weight of gun and tilled water jacket is about 40 lbs.
The mounting consists of a tripod with telescopic legs, which
allows two firing positions for the gun ; one at very nearly ground
level, the other some 2 feet above the ground. The weight of the
mounting is about 40 lbs.
The shield is of steel, '27 inches (7 mm.) thick. Its weight
is about 90 lbs. Shields are not carried in cavalry machine gun
sections.
The ammunition is of the M 95 pattern which is used for the
magazine carbine, and is carried in belts containing 250 rounds.
Each belt of 250 rounds is contained in a case. A pack animal
carries 6 to 8 such oases, i.e., 1,500 or 2,000 rounds.
The two ammunition wagons of a cavalry section are distinguished
by a red stripe on the limber boxes, and carry 20,000 rounds each.
The whole gun, mounting, shield, and 500 rounds, can be carried
by 5 men.
TACTICAL NOTES.
Infantry.*
Paces.
The quick-march ( Schritl) of 115 paces (94 yards) to the minute
is the usual pace of the infantry. Each pace is | metre (29' 53 inches)
or very nearly the same as that of British troops.
At the double ( Laufschriit) the length of the pace is 90 cm. (35 '4,
inches), and the rate 160 paces (157 yards) per minute.
In “step short” {kurzer Schritl) the length of the pace is only
| metro (14'77 inches).
* From the Infantry manuals (latest edition, 1903)


Close Formations.
Troops in line are drawn up in two ranks, the distance between
the ranks being 120 cm. (47 inches). At close order the men keep
an interval of a hand’s breadth.
A company is, as a rule, divided into 4 sections ( Z ge), and the
latter into groups ( Schwnrme ), usually 4, each of 4 to 6 files {Rotten).
For tactical purposes a battalion consists usually of 4 companies,
occasionally of 3 only, and a regiment of 2 to 4 battalions.
The composition of a brigade is not laid down in the drill book,
but it would usually be 2 regiments.
Companies are formed up in line ( entivickelie Linie ) or company
column ( Kolonne ), with 2J yards interval between companies.
In line the first section is on the right, the second on its left, and
so on. There is no interval between sections.
In company column the sections are one behind the other, and are
numbered from front to rear. The distance between the front
rank of a section and that of the one next in front or rear of it is
5 yards.
The battalion formations are—mass of company columns (Masse),
line of company columns ( Kolonnen linie), line (entivickelie Linie),
and column (Kolonne).
A battalion at war strength has a frontage in line of about
370 yards.
In mass the company columns arc drawn up side by side with
intervals of yards between companies.
In line of company columns, the columns are at deploying interval
plus 21 yards. In line there is an interval of 2J yards between
companies.
A battalion column consists of company columns one behind the
other, the distance between the rear section of one company and the
leading section of the next being 74 yards.
In confined spaces a regiment may be drawn up in close order
(konzenirierte Aufstellung). In this formation the regiment may be
in one or more lines ( Treffen ), and the battalions in mass or column.
Battalions of the same line are drawn up at intervals of 8J yards,
while the distance between the lines is 33 yards. Intervals and
distances may, however, be altered if necessary.
A regiment in column ( Kolonne) consists of battalion columns one
behind the other at distances of 8J yards plus the breadth of the
leading section.
Changes in front and from one formation to another, are usually
made by fours. Only general rules are laid down for their execution,
great latitude being allowed to commanders of companies and
battalions.
Attack Formation .
When a regiment is ordered to attack, the commander of the
regiment details the battalion or battalions which are to form the
first line (Treffen). The remainder constitute the “ regimental
reserve.” No fixed rules are given regarding the extent of front
covered by a regiment in attack formation.


Once troops have formed for attack changes of front are onty
effected by forming a new front out of bodies of troops which have
been held in reserve. It is laid down that troops in the fighting line
can only advance or retire.
Commanders of the battalions in the front line tell off the companies
for the lighting lino (• Kompagnim zum Feuergefecht) and the extent
of front each company is to occupy. The company or companies
not in the lighting lino form the battalion reserve. This may be
posted either in rear of the centre or, if possible, in echelon on one
or both flanks of the fighting line ; in the case of a flank battalion
of a long line it would be in rear of the exposed flank.
The fighting front of a battalion in the main attack would not, as
a rule, exceed its front when deployed in line.
Commanders of companies in their turn tell off one or more
sections (Zuge) to form the firing line ( Schwarm linie ), and the
remainder to form the company reserve. No fixed frontage is given
to a company in the attack, but the front covered by a company
in the main attack may be taken as 110 to 120 yards. No rules
are given as to the distribution of the men in the firing line. As a
rule, however, and especially when little cover is available, a loose
formation is adopted. In exceptional cases it may be possible to
keep the men of each group in the firing line in a more concentrated
formation, which greatly assists the group commanders in their
duties, as appreciable intervals can in that case be left between
groups. The extent of front covered by a man in the firing line, if
no special instructions have been issued, may be taken as 14- yards.
The firing lino advances by rushes, which should be as long as
possible, every advantage being taken of cover. Sections of the
firing line alternately push fonvard and cover by their fire the advance
of the adjoining sections.
The company reserve follows the movement of its firing line in
the formation most suitable to the ground and state of the fight.
The firing line is reinforced by bringing up one or more sections
from the company reserve, and either prolonging the line on one or
both flanks, or extending the reinforcements in the intervals between
sections or groups. The groups both of the firing line and reinforce-
ments are kept intact as long as possible.
The depth of the attack formation varies according to circum-
stances, but in ordinary fairly open ground the following would be
about the distances at the commencement of the development of
the attack :
Firing line to company reserves .. 160 yards.
Company reserves to battalion reserves .. 250-350 ~
Battalion reserves to regimental reserve ~ 400 ~
This makes the depth from the firing line to regimental reserve
800 to 900 yards. The brigade reserve, If any, would be 400 yards
in rear of the regimental reserve ; the divisional reserve 400 yards
still further to the rear.


Conduct of the Attack.
The main principle to be observed in moving forward to the
attack is to strain every nerve to get as close as possible up to the
enemy’s position, and break down his resistance by superiority of
fire. Even before entering the zone of hostile fire (artillery fire about
3,300 yards, rifle tire about 1,600 yards) the troops must be disposed
with this object in view.
Regiments, battalions, and companies must be disposed in such a
way as to facilitate the troops adapting themselves to the ground
during the forward movement.
The formations to be adopted by small bodies of troops are loft
to the discretion of their commanders, who are also responsible for
sending out patrols where necessary.
When the zone of hostile fire is entered, the companies which have
been detailed for the fighting line are formed into firing line and
company reserves, or into firing line only, as soon as a close formation
begins to present too large a target.
The sections forming the firing line may sometimes remain at first
in close order.
The reserves must choose the formations best suited to the
moment, and take every advantage of cover without maintaining
distances too literally.
The object of the advance being to got within the range of effective
rifle fhe as rapidly as possible, fire should not be opened sooner,
unless a particularly favourable target presents itself, or unless the
advance of other troops is assisted thereby.
Great stress is laid upon moving forward continuously, until the
range of individual effective fire is reached.
When the attacking troops have arrived near enough to the enemy’s
position to permit of decisive rifle fire being opened, every effort
must be made to overwhelm the enemy’s fire.
The distance at which this phase commences will vary according
to circumstances ; the nearer the enemy the better, but the nature
of the ground and other considerations will affect the situation.
The commander of the whole force will, whenever possible, detail
part of his force to outflank the enemy, and may, in certain circum-
stances, also detail troops to fire from positions on the flank of the
advancing troops, so as to facilitate the forward movement.
The artillery supports the infantry by directing its fire on the
portions of the enemy’s position upon which it is intended to drive
the attack home.
It will seldom occur that the position from which decisive fire is
first opened can be chosen so near to the enemy that no more forward
position need be taken up. As a r ulc, it will be necessary to carry
the line forward as soon as fire superiority begins to make itself felt,
and a fresh impulse must be given to the fighting line by pouring in
reserves. When the eneraj ’s fire shows signs of weakening, the last
phase of the attack begins, and all reserves still available join the
fighting line previous to the final assault.


The order for the assault is, as a rule, given by the commander
o£ the whole force, or of that portion of the force which is to carry
it out, but it may frequently happen that the order must be given
by commanders of the foremost troops, as they can best seize a
favourable opportunity. In that case they act on their own initiative,
and the other commanders conform to their action and support it.
Bayonets are fixed during the final advance.
The fire of the firing line may be by volleys or individual fire.
Volley firing is only used by troops in close formation, during the
early stages of the attack, or against a target exposed for a short time
only. Individual fire is the fire usually employed. It is laid down
that the greatest rapidity of fire is to be employed in the following
circumstances :—■
In the attach : just before the assault, and immediately alter
the position has been carried.
In the defence : at the moment the enemy delivers the assault,
and immediately after the assault has been repulsed.
At all times : when surprised by the enemy.
The Defence.
On the defensive the position to bo held is divided into sections
(Abschnitte). to each of which special bodies of troops are told off.
Each section has its own commander and reserve (Abschnitts reserve)
In addition to this there is the main reserve ( Haupt-reserve ), which
is usually posted in rear of one of the wings in the position most
suitable for delivering a counter-stroke or for frustrating any-
enveloping movement on the part of the enemy-.
It is laid down that for a defence to have any- positive results it
must invariably be combined with a properly-timed counter-attack,
for which good generalship is required ; and that the object of
waiting for the enemy in a selected position, instead of attacking, is
merely to engage him under more favourable conditions.
The cavalry of a defending force is pushed forward to watch the
enemy-. As the enemy approaches it retires behind that wing from
which it is likely to be able to deliver the most effective charges.
The artillery may all be posted in the main line of defence, or part
of it may- bo held in reserve till the direction of the attack is clearly-
defined.
The conduct of the defence may bo generally described as follows :
Until the object of the enemy is clearly- ascertained the troops
merely remain in readiness to take up their positions, protecting
themselves from surprise by means of patrols and reconnaissances.
This time must be utilized in artificially strengthening the position.
Companies in the front line generally remain in close formation ;
the reserves are posted near the first line, under cover as far as
possible.
As soon as the direction of the attack has been ascertained the
troops take post in the firing line.


Long range infantry fire may be used against columns of the
enemy, and against the enemy’s artillery.
In the zone of medium range infantry fire the defenders’ fire is,
as a rule, concentrated on those portions of the enemy’s fo?*ce which,
seem the most dangerous.
When the enemy reaches the zone of short range infantry fire
the tiring line of the defence is reinforced by all available troops
after making proper provision for the defence of the flanks and rear.
Counter-strokes are delivered on the flanks of the assailants while
they are pressing forward within the zone of aimed infantry lire.
For the purposes of the counter-stroke the main reserve must be
preserved intact.
Local counter-attacks are to be avoided ; the enemy should bo
overcome by rifle fire only. When it is not intended to deliver a
counter-stroke, the main reserve is employed to reinforce the front
line, or to engage any portion of the enemy that may endeavour
to envelop the flanks of the position.
The “ Encounter Battle .”
Apart from offensive or defensive engagements clearly defined as
such, the case of a collision between two advancing armies, which
results in an “ encounter battle,” is also considered.
In the event of such an encounter, every effort must be made to
anticipate the enemy, and to seize the initiative. Columns, groups
of units, or units, must press steadily forward. The advanced
guard, or guards, must seek to prevent the deployment of the enemy.
They should try by vigorous action to force him to conform to their
movements. By such action the main body will bo best enabled
to carry out promptly the intentions of the commander.
It will generally be necessary to throw a portion of the main body
into the preliminary combat which will result from the action above
recommended. A rapid decision as to the employment of the
remainder of the main body must be formed by the officer in chief
command. Under cover of the preliminary combat, the necessary
dispositions will then bo carried out as quickly as possible, and the
troops still disposable brought into action.
Premature deployment is to be deprecated. Deployment apart
from attack is only permissible when it is dear that the enemy,
by his success in the preliminary combat and superior speed of
deployment, has gained an obvious initial advantage.
Sometimes, in cases where topographical conditions favour the
enemy, it may be necessary for the advanced guard or guards to
assume a defensive attitude, until the main body can bo brought into
action. In all cases it is to be remembered by those in command
of units, or of bodies of troops, that the primary object in the pre-
liminary combat is to gain ground and space from the enemy, and
when this ceases to be possible every effort must be made to hold
ground already gained and to prevent the enemy from advancing.


Infantry against Cavalry.
Cool and unbroken infantry have nothing to fear from a cavalry
attack.
Movements and changes of formation should only be ordered
when plenty of timo is available, and then only in order to allow
of a greater number of rifles being brought up into the firing line
or to obtain better cover. In case of a sudden attack by cavalry,
it is considered better to retain a close formation, and deliver the
fire calmly, than to deploy too hurriedly.
As hostile cavalry frequently attacks merely to delay the infantry’s
advance, or to induce it to adopt a close formation, all troops not
actually threatened by the attack must continue the forward move-
ment, or maintain their formations.
If a body of infantry has to cover a long distance open to cavalry
attack, battalions, companies, &c., must be in such formations
as will enable them to meet a sudden attack by cavalry from any
direction.
Infantry against Artillery.
The instructions for the action of infantry against artillery occupy
very few lines in the drill book.
It is laid down that infantry should do their utmost to approach
as near as possible to the artillery, and open fire, if possible by surprise,
against the gun teams and detachments. If fire is to be op ned
against artillery at long range, strong detachments with plenty of
ammunition must be employed for this purpose.
When the object is to harass or push back artillery, the best
formation to employ is an extended loose line without reserves.
Night Operations.
It may be necessary to change the disposition of troops, and to
Jiiake movements of various kinds under cover of darkness. Such
movements will be more particularly necessary in order to deploy
within effective range of a strong hostile position with a view to
an attack at dawn. Infantry must also be able to deliver or to
repulse a night attack. The difficulties of night operations are very
great; trivial incidents produce important results, the simultaneous
and connected action of separate bodies cannot be counted on, owing
to the difficulties of communication. It is very hard to keep direc-
tion ; a fight breaks up into a scries of small disconnected combats.
Hence a plan of attack must be of the very simplest nature and
capable of being clearly and shortly explained to all subordinates.
On the initiative, energy, and independence of subordinates, success
is dependent. Accurate knowledge of the ground and good intel-
ligence of the enemy’s dispositions are an essential condition of
success. The most careful reconnaissance must be carried out on
the day preceding the attack, and reliable guides must be appointed.
Every effort must be made to surprise the enemy. Perfect silence
must be maintained. A distinguishing badge or mark should b©
issued to the troops. Deployment into the attack formation should


take place as close to the enemy as possible. Close formations are
best. Small patrols of volunteers should be sent out a short distance
to the front and flanks for purposes of security. A long tire fight is
to be avoided, the enemy should be charged with the bayonet as
soon after opening fire as possible. During the charge drums beat
and bugles blow. If the position is captured the troops must be
rallied as soon as possible, attempts at pursuit are rarely worth the
risk involved.
In the defence of a position by night extreme watchfulness is the
first condition of success. Attempts should bo made to surprise the
enemy. A short interval of firing followed by a bayonet charge is
the best method of repulsing an enemy when discovered. Obstacles,
even of the simplest kind, especially if unknown to the enemy, are of
great value.
Supply of ammunition to infantry in action.
Before the commencement of an action, 20 rounds of reserve
ammunition (making, with what the man carries, altogether 140
rounds per man) are served out to each man from the company
ammunition wagons, and the number of rounds carried by each
non-commissioned officer is made up to 120.*
When the engagement commences, the ammunition wagons
follow the regimental or battalion reserve as long as the configuration
of the ground makes this possible, or until they come under effective
infantry fire.
The position of the ammunition wagons is shown by day by a
red flag, and by night by a green lamp. Care must bo taken that
these distinguishing marks cannot bo seen by the enemy.
The ammunition wagons must take up a position, if possible under
cover, from which they can easily move forward. When under
artillery fire, intervals of I6J yards are kept between wagons.
In the attack the supply of ammunition to the firing line is carried
out as follows :
(а) Advantage is taken of every pause in the fight to equalize
the number of rounds carried by each man in the firing
line, and by distributing fresh ammunition from any
full wagon which may be at hand. If an immediate
replenishment is required by the firing line some of the
ammunition carried by the reserves may be utilized.
(б) Whenever possible ammunition should be sent up by the
reserves who are pushed forward to reinforce the firing
line.
(c) In exceptional cases, detachments may bo sent up from the
reserves into the firing line for the special jmrpose of
taking up ammunition. Such detachments would then
remain with the firing lino.
( d ) Ammunition should, whenever practicable, be taken from
the dead and wounded, and distributed among those
remaining unhurt.
* The ammunition {Krierjstasrhi>nmuintioi'.) carried by a private in marching
order is 120 rounds, that carried by a N’d’-.0,, 40 rounds,


On the defensive, and especially in the case of fortified
positions, a plentiful supply of ammunition is laid down in
the firing line, and any ammunition wagons that are at hand,
or may come up during the engagement, are kept in readiness under
cover near the firing line.
The empty ammunition wagons re-fill from the divisional ammuni-
tion park, and after obtaining a fresh supply return to the troops.
Sometimes it may be expedient to send up the wagons of the
ammunition park and issue the ammunition direct to the troops.
Great latitude is left to officers in charge of ammunition reserves
as to the position they should take up, and how close to the troops
engaged they should move. They are required to act entirely on
their own initiative.
Cavalry.*
Paces.
The paces of the cavalry are the walk ( Schritt ), the trot ( Trab ),
the gallop ( Galopp ), and full speed (Karriere).
At the walk the rate is 114 yards per minute; at the trot, 246
yards per minute ; and at the gallop, 410 yards.
The gallop is employed when necessary for distances up to 2,500
or 3,300 yards. Full speed is only used for short distances, and
for special purposes, such as the charge and pursuit.
Formations.
Cavalry is formed in two ranks, with a distance of 1£ yards from
nose to croup ; the men are placed with their stirrups nearly but
not quite touching, and the individual rider then occupies a frontage
of 1 yard. The front of a squadron at full war strength deployed
in line is 79 yards.
A regiment consists of 6 squadrons, three of which form a wing
(Division) under a field officer. A squadron is divided into 4 troops
(Ziige), each under the charge of a subaltern officer or cadet ensign.
A troop consists of not less than 12 files, and is divided into three
sections (Patrouillen), right, centre, and left.
A squadron may be formed in line, with the troops side by side
without any interval (frontage about 65 yards) : or in squadron
column, with the troops one behind the other at wheeling distance
(frontage about 16 yards). When a squadron column is traversing
rough ground or passing a defile it may bo ordered to adopt tire
so-called Rudel (herd) formation. Each troop then follows its
leader without regard to line or intervals, making full use of such
space as may be available. Column of sections (four abreast) and
columns of half-sections (two abreast) are march formations, the
• Latest Cavalry Manuals, 1899.


latter only being used in passing defiles. The clear distance in
column between successive sections or half-sections, and between
front and rear rank, is only 30 inches.
The formations of a regiment for purposes of manoeuvre are as
follows :
Line ( entwickdte Linie ).
Line of squadron columns ( Kolonnerilinie ).
Mass (Masse).
Column of troops ( Kolonne ).
Double column of troops ( Doppelkolonne ).
When in line the interval between squadrons ( Eshadronsmterva.il)
is 8 yards. Line is the normal formation for the attack, and for
manoeuvre when cavalry is exposed within range of the enemy’s
artillery fire, or has to work over open ground.
In line of squadron columns the squadron columns are aligned
at deploying interval, i.e., the interval from the right of the Ist
troop of one squadron to the right of the Ist troop of the next is
equal to the front of a deployed squadron plus the squadron interval
of 8 yards. It is the preparatory formation for deployment previous
to delivering a frontal attack.
In mass {Masse) the formation is similar to line of squadron
columns at deploying intervals, except that the interval between
the squadron column is only the squadron interval (8 yards).
This formation is employed when it is required to form up several
squadrons under cover on a narrow front, or for manoeuvre beyond
the effective range of the enemy.
In column of troops the squadrons are formed in squadron
column, and follow one behind the other. The distance
between two squadrons is the front of a troop plus the
squadron interval (8 yards). The narrow front of this formation
facilitates manoeuvring over a broken country, and thus renders it
applicable for moving over long distances in the vicinity of the
enemy. It is a handy formation from which to effect a deployment
to the front, and is specially suitable for forming line quickly to a
flank.
In double column of troops, the two wings of a regiment (3 squad-
rons each), each in column of troops, are side by side at squadron
interval. This formation is employed with large bodies of cavalry,
as its small depth facilitates a rapid deployment and allows great
freedom in manoeuvring.
The interval between regiments in line or column (Eegimentsin-
tervall) is 16 yards.
Attack.
. Cavalry attacks, as a rule, in line, the attack being delivered
either directly parallel to the enemy’s front or obliquely against
his flank. In open ground the order to attack is given when about


800 yards distant, the line advancing at a trot. It subsequently
breaks into a canter, and when from 70 to 80 yards from the enemy
the charge is sounded.
One or more troops ( Ziige ) are always detached to protect each
flank of the line, and are termed defensive flanks (Defensiv-fianken).
They follow in echelon, on the flanks, 40 to 70 yards in rear of the
line. Besides the defensive flanks, a regiment or half-regiment
manoeuvring independently has a reserve, which usually follows
from 150 to 300 yards from the attacking line. In an attack
parallel to the enemy’s front, the reserve is in echelon in rear of one
of the flanks. If the attack is made obliquely to the enemy’s front,
the reserve is always on the flank which is exposed to counter-attack.
Squadron column is the formation of the reserve. Its strength
in the case of a regiment is usually a squadron ; in the case of a
wing it is usually half a squadron.
Bodies of cavalry of a brigade and upwards always attack in three
lines. The Ist line varies from a third to a half of the whole force,
and the 3rd is never loss than a quarter of the whole force. The
usual sub-division for a cavalry division of four regiments is two
regiments for the Ist lino, and one regiment for each of the others.
Each regiment of the Ist line detaches a squadron to protect the
flanks. The 2nd line supports the Ist, and advances on its flank,
about 250 yards in rear of it. The 3rd line forms the reserve, and
protects the flanks and rear. It is usually from 300 to 400 yards
in rear of the front line, and 250 yards to the flank. The 2nd and
3rd lines retain the column formation as long as possible.
Action against Infantry.
An attack on infantry is usually made in several lines, from 160
to 250 yards apart, the first line being generally in extended order.
When large bodies of cavalry attack infantry, the procedure is
somewhat as follows :—The Ist line, on a broad front in extended
order, rides though the enemy and draws the fire on itself : the
following lines, formed in line of deployed squadrons at great inter-
vals, attack the enemy’s supports and reserves.
Action against Artillery.
In an attack on artillery, only a part of the cavalry in extended
order charge the guns, while the main attack is directed against
the escort.
Action on Foot.
Until quite recently, but little attention was given to the question
of the employment of cavalry on foot. Fire action is now however
extensively practised, bodies as large as brigades and divisions being
exercised in dismounted orperations, including the attack and
defence of prepared positions.


ARTILLERY.
Paces.
The paces of field artillery are as follows ;
Walk : —O4 to 98 m. {lO3 to 107 yards) a minute.
Trot : —22om. (246 yards) a minute.
Gallop : —375 in. (410 yards) a minute.
The trot is the pace of manoeuvre. In special circum-
stances batteries may move at a gallop, but only for short
distances and on favourable ground. When marching alone batteries
trot and walk alternately ; when marching with other troops they
conform to the pace of the column.
Formations.
Movements in the held are directed principally by signals with
the sword, followed by word of command. Whistles are employed
In action.
A field battery consists, as in our army, of 3 sections ; a horse
artillery battery of 2 sections. The senior subaltern is the second-in-
command (Battery Couimander’a StcUuertreler) and leads the battery
commander’s staff. Another subaltern fulfils the functions of the
captain in a British battery {Frotzen Offizler). Two subalterns and
the ensign are section commanders. Serjeants load sub-sections.
There is 1 corporal to every 2 wagons, and lead drivers are bombar-
diers.
There are 3 general formations for the battery
(a) Line at close interval ( Geschlossene linie).
(b) Lino at full interval ( Feuerlinie ).
(c) Column of march (Marschkolonne).
{a) This is the formation for rendezvous and parades. Interval
between guns 54 yard*.
(6) This is employed for manoeuvre within a possible hostile fire-
zone ( Feuerbereich ) and for coming into action. Interval between
guns 104 yards.
(c) Tho column of march corresponds to our column of route or
column of sub-sections, with the guns or wagons, as the case may be,
following one another at 24 yards’ distance.
In action, the wagons are unlinibored and on the left of the guns.
In the case of horse artillery, the guns may move separately from
the wagons.
Formations for a “ division ” (2 batteries) :
[а) Mass.—Batteries in lino close interval—9 yards between
batteries.
(б) March column.—22 yards’ distance between batteries.
• Latest Artillery Manuals, 1908-1909.


(c) Line of column*. —110 yards between the battery march
columns.
( d ) Lino at full interval. —28 yards* interval between batteries.
Formations for a regiment (I batteries) —similar to preceding.
Guiding Principles for Artillery Action.
Artillery and infantry co-operate by their tiro and have for their
general object the physical and moral destruction of the enemy.
No detailed rules can be laid down to meet the varying eventualities
and phases of a combat ; what is essentially necessary on the part
of Artillery Commanders is the power of rapid tactical appreciation
combined with a knowledge of the action of other arms, more
especially that of the infantry—upon this their initiative must
depend.
Success may perhaps be attained, not so much by the number of
guns in action as by leadership, choice and occupation of positions,
accurate shooting, and clever concentration of tire, coupled with a
sufficient supply of ammunition.
Use is to be made of the power of long range possessed by artillery ;
at decisive moments, however, saddlery must not shirk the heaviest
infantry fire. Fire should bo directed from several directions,
he., frontal tiro should be combined with flanking fire, Gun batteries
can operate against all targets within range and which are not pro-
tected by strong works. Where the latter is the case the field
howitzer comes into play.
Horse artillery, apart from their employment with cavalry, can
reinforce with rapidity ft threatened point and operate quickly
against the enemy’s flanks.
The use of heavy artillery may bo considered not only against
fortified positions, but also in conjunction with the field batteries
in an open battlefield.
Choice and Occupation of Positions .
The following considerations should govern the selection of a
position:—l. The object in view. 2, Nature of the ground. Quick
opening of fire should not be delayed in order to search carefully
for a very favourable position.
Positions are classed as (a) Open ; (b) Half-covered ; (c) Covered.
Both (a) and (6) are occupied by the direct method. Covered
positions should be occupied at the beginning of an engagement,
against artillery, entrenchments, and against targets at rest. Open
or half-covered positions are suitable for the later stages of a battle,
against moving targets or those that are likely to move.
It is usually desirable to freely combine all three methods during
any large combat, but support of the infantry must never bo
endangered by any indirect occupation.


The advantages of a direct occupation consist in a quick opening
of fire and power to engage moving targets or switch on to alternative
targets. Covered positions deceive the enemy and hinder his rang
ing—much careful preliminary preparation, however, has to be
gone through.
In any direct occupation, quick and covered approach thereto is
to be striven for.
Batteries should not be placed in groups—rather should they
be separated if possible, their fire being concentrated from separate
positions. They may, if in large numbers, bo used one behind
another. Cover, if not naturally procurable, should be artificially
provided, if this can be done without delaying the shooting.
Change of position. —No change of position should ensue so long
as the position occupied corresponds with the progress of the fight.
Commanders are not obliged to wait for orders to advance or
change position, and change of position is not to be neglected
because good cover has thereby to be quitted. Want of ammuni-
tion does not permit retirement.
Choice of targets. —This again corresponds with the progress of
the fight and tactical necessities. Such targets must be selected
as are most necessary at the moment. The choice of a suitable
target is one of the most difficult problems. Diversion of fire must
always be practicable with speed.
Attack.
The task of artillery in the attack is to pave the way for the
infantry and to enable the latter to gain superiority in the infantry
combat.
Aitillery with an advanced guard must be prepared for quick
occupation and rapid movement. In a “ rencontre ” engagement,
the batteries of an advanced guard should occupy positions on a
broad front and endeavour to surprise the enemy in deployment.
If the enemy is more advanced in his dispositions, then indirect
occupation should be sought in order to hold the position against
superior numbers until reinforcements arrive.
Attack of an enemy in position. —-Usually the hostile artillery
must bo engaged first, especially that portion of it which may be
hindering the infantry advance. Superiority must be gained over
the opposing artillery as quickly as possible, so that the infantry
may be directly supported. Infantry must be engaged as well as
the artillery, if this is necessary from the point of view of one’s own
infantry.
If the enemy’s artillery is beaten down or when the infantry
commences to engage in the decisive fire-fight, then a large pro-
portion of the batteries must direct their fire on to the points of
attack, also dealing with troops in rear.
In order to support the attack more closely and deal with local
situations, single batteries are recommended to actually advance
with the infantry.


If the attack fails, the artillery must not mind losses and must
sacrifice itself to enable the troops to re-assemble and fresh measures
to be undertaken.
Defence.
The general object in defence is to command all the terrain likely
to be crossed by the attackers, thus co-operating with the infantry
xn breaking up the attack and facilitating counter-attack.
Some of the batteiies will occupy the position ; others will
remain at convenient supporting points. Exceptionally, single guns
can be posted at important positions in the infantry line. Artillery
in the defence, in order to solve all the tasks necessary, must be
prepared to change position frequently, and in especial to occupy
flanking positions. Fire judiciously concentrated against important
points in the advance will ensure success even against a superior
number of guns. Fire must only be opened by order of the com-
mander. Directly the infantry advance, fire will be directed chiefly
against them. Counter-attack must be powerfully supported by
artillery.
Fire Discipline.
The instructions for fire discipline are framed with a view t
obtaining the greatest possible simplicity combined with the necessary
elasticity. Due stress is laid upon the importance of as far as
possible completing under cover all the operations preparatory to
opening fire, so that when fire is once opened it may be maintained
without any check.
The various natures of fire are laid down in the Gunnery Instruc-
tions for the new quick-firing gun as follows :
1. “ Lage! ” The guns, of the battery or section as the case
may be, fire one round each in succession, commencing usually from
the left flank. The order or signal for each gun to fire is given by
the battery leader, the interval between the rounds being the
shortest which will allow of the individual shell being observed.
2. “ Lage ! Langsam ! ” The guns are fired as above, but with
longer intervals between the rounds to allow of more deliberate
observation.
3. “ Streuenl" Each gun fires four rounds of shrapnel inde-
pendently. For each successive round the range is increased by
100 m., under the orders of the Nos. 1, so as to effect distribution
for depth over a zone of 400 m.
4. “Streuen I Ins Jcurzef ” As above, except that the range is
reduced by 100 m. for each successive round.
5. “ Einzelfeuer ! ” The guns are fired independently and con-
tinuously under the orders of the Nos. 1. If desired this order may
be prefaced by the number of rounds which each gun is to fire, e.g.,
“ 2 Schuss-Einzelfeuer 1 ”
6. “ Ausfuern! ” All the loaded guns are fired off under the
orders of the Nos. 1.


8. “ Batteriefeuer! ” The battery keeps up a continuous tire
the guns firing in rotation at regular intervals on the order or signal
of the battery leader.
9. “ GeschUtzf <hrerfeuer ! ” The guns fire independenth 7 ' under
the orders of the Nos. I, who observe their own shell, and make any
necessary corrections.
Ranging is usually carried out with percussion shrapnel, but
time shrapnel ranging may also be employed. The bracket
system is generally made use of, a pair of rounds being fired at each
elevation, or in exceptional cases a round from the whole battery.
Against stationary targets such as shielded batteries exact ranging
is considered necessary, but in the case of other targets, fire for
effect may be begun when the range has been only approximately
found, such corrections as may appear necessary being made sub-
sequently during the course of the fire. Even a moderately effective
fire if brought to bear upon the enemy with superior rapidity will,
it is considered, secure for a commander the initiative in the fire
combat, and this once obtained he should correct bis range and fuze
with the utmost rapidity. The battery commander should usually
keep the control of the fire of his battery in his own hands.
Ammunition is carried in boxes containing three rounds each.
The fuze of one shell in each box is always carried set so that the
shell will burst about 10 yards from the muzzle. This shell is
marked with a band of white paint. The fuzes of the two other
shells in each box are carried set so as to burst at about 300 yards
from the muzzle. It is thus ensured that a supply of shell for use as
case shot or as very short range shrapnel shall always be imme-
diately available.
In principle, laying is by clinometer, but direct laying is preferred
when possible, in the case of moving or fleeting targets.
Supply of Ammunition.
A battery carries with it in the fighting line only 90 rounds of
shrapnel and 30 H.E. shell. Those are distributed as follows :
In the gun limber—24 shrapnel and nine H.E. shell; total, 33
rounds. In the wagon limber—24 shrapnel and nine H.E. shell ;
total, 33 rounds. In the wagon body—42 shrapnel and eighteen
H.E. shell; total, 00 rounds.
Each artillery regiment has behind it four ammunition columns,
each carrying about 93 rounds per gun for the batteries which they
supply, thus bringing up the total supply of ammunition carried on
wheels in the field to about 500 rounds per gun.
The several ammunition columns in an infantry or cavalry division
together form the divisional ammi nition park.
In action the ammunition columns are pushed up in succession
to a position as close as possible to the batteries which they are
intended to supply.
Batteries utilize first the ammunition in the wagon bodies. When
these are empty they are replaced by full wagon bodies which are
sent up to the firing line from the nearest ammunition column.


The ammunition in tho Umbers of the wagons thus sent up from
the ammunition column is utilized to replace any which may have
been expended from tho gun or wagon limbers of the battery, and as
soon as the ammunition column limbers are empty they return,
with tho empty wagon bodies belonging to the battery, to the ammu-
nition column whence they came. The ammunition column first
pushed forward is in duo course replaced by a second, and so on,
the empty ammunition columns returning in rotation to the rear
to refill.
If it is impracticable to change the wagon bodies in the firing lino
as above, the ammunition may be transferred box by box from the
ammunition column wagons to the battery wagons. If necessary
the ammunition column limbers may change places with the battery
limbers, the latter being sent back empty to tho ammunition column.
MARCHES, BIVOUACS, AND OUTPOSTS.
Marches.
Rates of marching.
Largo bodies of troops. —lt is reckoned that under favourable
conditions, an infantry division with its trains can march 14 miles
in 7 or 8 hours, and 18} miles in 10 to 12 hours.
Infantry and train are supposed to bo able to make a forced march
of 28 miles, cavalry of 37 to 42 miles in one day.
An average daily march for large forces advancing in parallel
columns is 9J miles per diem.
Breadth of front.
Infantry usually march in fours : under special circumstances in
sixes, eights, or columns of sections ; on narrow roads, in file.
The ordinary marching formation of cavalry is in sections ; on
narrow roads in half-sections. Artillery and train march in
“column of route.” Upon exceptionally broad roads wagons
sometimes march two or more abreast.
Trails.
Regimental transport.
The first lino of regimental transport, such as guns and
their ammunition wagons, company ammunition wagons, and
machine guns in the infantry, technical equipment wagons
of pioneers, telegraph and telephone equipment wagons
and the harnessed reserve draught horses which march immediately
with tho troops—troop column ( Truppen-Kolonne ) — is not classed as
train.


Yards
Between companies
7J-
Between battalions
16J
Between squadrons
8
Between regiments of cavalry
16J
Between batteries
25
Between brigades of infantry
205
The road space occupied is—
Infantry in fours—•
1 company with company S.A.A. wagon
100
I battalion (troops only)
410
1 battalion, including ammunition wagons
460
1 battalion with lighting train
560
1 battalion with complete train
610
Infantry regiment of 4 battalions—
Troops with ammunition wagons { Truppen■
Kolonne) and machine gun section
2,000
Troops with fighting train
2,400
Troops with fighting and baggage trains
2,650
Cavalry in sections —
Squadron
115
Division (half regiment) of 3 squadrons
395
Regiment of 6 squadrons (troop column)
820
Regiment of 6 squadrons with fighting train
1,476
Regiment of 6 squadrons with fighting and baggage
train
1,580
Machine gun section (4 guns) ..
120
All other regimental transport forms the troop train ( Trnppen -
Train), which is divided into—
(а) The fighting train ( Gefechts-Train ), and
(б) The baggage train ( Bagage-Train ).
The fighting train consists of all transport, &c., which is required
either in action or immediately after an action, such as sutlers’
wagons, supply, tool, and store wagons, and reserve horses.
The baggage train consists of all other regimental transport, such
as baggage, and reserve wagons with personnel and horses, to which
troops should have access at least every few days.
Army train .
The army train includes all the various columns and units required
to complete an army in the field, such as ammunition columns and
parks, divisional medical establishments, field hospitals, supply
columns, field bakeries, pontoon trains, entrenching tool columns,
transport for headquarters staffs, &c. The army train is horsed
by the train troops, except ammunition columns and ammunition
parks, which are horsed by the artillery.
Distances and Road Spaces.
The normal distances between units in column of route are as
follows :


Yards.
Artillery in column of route —
Field battery
330
Field battery with train
420
Field howitzer battery
335
Field howitzer battery with train
600
Heavy howitzer battery with 2nd line wagon??
370
Heavy howitzer battery with 2nd line with train ..
460
Divisional ammunition park of 4 artillery and 4
infantry sections (GOO each) ..
4,800
Pioneer units —
Pioneer company
330
Pioneer company with train
425
Pontoon train
425
Entrenching tool column
235
In mountain warfare —
A battalion
1,000
A battalion with train
1,170
A squadron
540
A squadron with train
634
Mountain battery, 1st line only
200
Mountain battery, 1st and 2nd lines
270
Mountain battery, 1st and 2nd lines, with train
360
Mountain howitzer battery
620
Mountain howitzer battery with train
750
Mountain medical unit
850
Infantry division —in normal order of march*—
Yards.
Troop column only .. .. 12,000, about 7 miles
Troop column only, with medical
unit and 3 ammunition columnst 14,500, about 8 miles
Troop column, with fighting train
also .. .. .. .. 16,500, about 9J miles
Complete with ammunition, baggage,
and supply, &o. .. .. 29,000, about 17J miles
Advanced and rear guards.
The advanced guard of a column of troops not exceeding a
battalion of infantry is merely an advanced party ( Vorpatrouille);
that of a regiment or brigade consists of an advanced party and a
vanguard (Vorlrab), while in the case of a division of infantry or
cavalry there is also a main body of the advanced guard ( Vorhut -
Reserve.
In the event of more than 1 division advancing along the same
road, the leading division only has an advanced guard.
* With no advance or rearguard out.
t i.e. 1 “redmental” artillery ammunition column and 2 infantry ammunition
column*


When the rear of a column is not threatened, the rear guard
(Xachhut) consists merely of a small detachment, which marches
about 80 yards in rear of the trains accompanying the troops.
The normal strength and order of march of advanced and rear
guards is laid down a? follows : —-
Battalion of infantry—
Advanced party, 1 to 2 sections ( Zi/ye ).
Interval of 350 to 800 yards.
Main body.
Interval of 80 yards.
Rear guard, small patrol ( XacJqxitrouille ), 1 group (Sc hwann)
Regiment of cavalry—
Advanced party, 1 troop ( Zug) or 1 section.
Interval of 350 to 800 yards.
Vanguard, -J squadron, or 1-J troops.
Interval of 800 to 1,000 yards.
Main body.
Interval of 80 yards.
Rear guard, 1 section (Patrouille),
Brigade of infantry—
Advanced party, 4 company.
Interval of 350 to 800 yards.
Vanguard, 3|- companies.
Interval of 800 to 1,600 yards.
Main body.
Interval of 80 yards.
Rear guard, I section {Zug).
Infantry division—
Advanced party, \ company.
Interval of 350 to 800 yards.
Vanguard, 3J companies.
Interval of 800 to 1,600 yards.
Main body of advanced guard, 1 or 2 battalions, artillery and
cavalry according to circumstances.
Interval of 2,050 yards.
Main body.
Interval of 80 yards.
Rear guard, £ company.
In a cavalry division the advanced guard consists altogether of
3 squadrons, and the interval between the mam body of the advanced
guard and the main body of the column is increased to 2,500 or even
4,000 yards.
Rear guards in case of retreat arc similar to the advanced guards
of advancing columns, except that they would usually bo stronger
m artillery. The divisions of the rear guard are—rear party
{ Nachpatrouille ), rear guard {Nachtnib), and the main body of the
rear guard [Nachhui-Reserve),


frontage
depth
yards.
A
Infantry company
20
160
Infantry battalion
140
200
Infantry regiment (4 battalions)
.. 660
200
Infantry brigade (7 battalions) ..
.. 1,250
220
Cavalry.
The following are the dimensions of cavalry bivouacs :—■
frontage
depth
yards.
Squadron
80
160
Division (3 squadrons) ..
.. 280
200
Regiment
.. 570
200
The flanks of an advancing or retreating column are protected by
flanking detachments ( Seitenhuten) consisting, whenever practicable,
of cavalry.
Bivouacs.
Infantry.
Infantry usually bivouac in line of company columns at intervals
of 20J yards between companies.
The interval between half battalions, or battalions, is 20J yards,
and between regiments, 80 yards. When tents are not used the
interval between the companies of each half battalion is reduced
to 2J yards.
The men of each section pile arms and bivouac immediately
behind their piles.
Between battalions bivouacked a clear distance of 40 yards is
left, and between regiments a distance of 80 yards.
The brigade is the largest unit that is usually allowed to bivouac
in one place.
The following are the dimensions of infantry camps and
bivouacs :
Cavalry.
The normal bivouac of cavalry is in line of squadron columns, with
intervals of 80 yards between regiments, and 16| yards between
squadrons. A squadron is given a frontage of 80 yards, a clear
space of 8 yards being left in the centre of the horse lines. The
horses are in four lines, at distances of 124 yards. The men bivouac
immediately in rear of their horses.
Artillery.
Field batteries bivouac usually in line of batteries, 80 yards being
allowed for the front of each battery, and 16J yards interval between
batteries.


frontage
depth
yards,
Field battery ..
80
ITO
Artillery field gun regiment (4 catteries) ..
370
240
Horse battery
80
200
Mountain battery
50
140
The guns are placed in Ist line, the ammunition wagons in 2nd
line, and the remaining battery wagons in 3rd line. Behind these
come the horses, usually in four lines, the men bivouacking between
the lines immediately in rear of their horses. There is a clear central
space of 8 yards in the horse lines of each battery.
If batteries bivouac one behind the other a distance of 40 yards
is left between the rear line of the front battery and the line of guns
of the battery in rear of it.
The following are the dimensions of artillery bivouacs* :
Train.
Independent train units bivouac in much the same manner as
artillery. The wagons in front in two or more lines at 25 yards
interval, and the horses and personnel in rear. The wagons are
parked with intervals of 5 yards from centre to centre of each wagon,
and with 12 clear yards between every twelve waggons.
If there is danger of an attack the wagons are “ laagered.”
Bivouac Guards,
The quarter-guard, called Lager Hauptwache in infantry and
cavalry bivouacs, Lager Parkwache in those of artillery and train
is usually composed as follows :
Infantry. —Regiment—half company. Independent battalions,
—1 section (Zug).
Cavalry. —Regiment—half squadron. Half regiment of
3 squadrons—l troop.
Artillery and Train. —Strength according to requirements.
The quarter-guard furnishes a train guard (Trainwache) of 5 to 8
non-commissioned officers and men, and as many camp guards
(Lagerwachen) as may be necessary for the safety of the camp. The
camp guards are usually stationed 40 to 80 yards from the camp,
and each of them throws out a sentry.
The distance of the quarter-guard in front of the bivouac is—
in the infantry 40 yards in front of the Ist line of piled arms ; in the
cavalry 58 yards in front of the Ist horse line; in the artillery
25 yards in front of the guns.
* These figures are approximate only. Dimensions under the new artillery
u rganization have not yet been officially published. (April, 1909.)


Outposts.
The outposts of bodies of troops not exceeding a battalion of
infantry or 4 squadrons of cavalry, consist of piquets {Feldwachen)
only. Larger bodies up to and including brigades, have piquets
and supports ( Hauptposten ), and in the case of divisions and army
corps there is also an outpost reserve ( Vorposten-Eeserve).
When there are no supports or outpost reserves, their duties
are performed by a portion of the main body held in readiness for
action (Bereitschaft). This portion is under the orders of the
commander of the outposts.
The strength of the outpost troops should not exceed a fourth,
and should be, if possible, a sixth or less of the whole force.
The regulations lay down that piquets should be posted in places
where they can watch the enemy, and be themselves screened
from view; that the supports should be on, or close to, the most
important lines of approach, and as far as possible at points which
command these lines of approach, and lend themselves easily to
defence; and that the best position for the outpost reserve is at the
junction of several lines of approach.
Outpost troops may be either infantry or cavalry. Artillery
and technical troops are attached to the outpost reserve
according to circumstances, and in exceptional cases a battery
section (2 guns) may be attached to a support. No guns should,
however, be left with supports at night time.
A small number of cavalry and a few cyclists are also usually
attached to infantry outposts for orderly duties.
The normal distances of the lines of outposts from one another
and from the main body, are as follows:
Outpost reserve, 2,500 —3,500 yards in advance of the main
body; supports, 1,500 —2,500 yards beyond the outpost
reserve—or main body when there is no reserve ; and piquets,
800 yards in advance of the supports.
The strength of the outpost reserve is usually not less than half
that of the whole of the outpost troops. An eighth to a quarter
of the outpost reserve are kept constantly under arms and in
readiness. They are called the “ Bereitschaft ,” and throw out
sentries.
Supports consist usually of a company or squadron, but vary
according to circumstances from J to 2 companies or squadrons.
The supports are numbered from the right flank to the left along
the whole front, and, in addition to their numbers, are designated
by the names of the places at which they are posted.
The piquets are furnished by the supports. Each piquet consists
of an officer or non-commissioned officer, and not less than 8 men.
By day, in the neighbourhood of the enemy, piquets are placed
from 400 to 800 yards apart. At night, and in foggy weather,
the distance is reduced by increasing the number of piquets or
drawing them closer to the support. Each piquet throws out a
double sentry, and sends out patrols (Patrouille-Oiinge), consisting


of X or 2 men, at least every hour to examine the ground in the
vicinity, and to keep up communication with the neighbouring
piquets. Besides the piquet commander and the double sentry,
2 men should always be with each piquet.
A support and its piquets form an outpost unit (Vorposten
Gruppe), and usually cover about 2,000 yards of front. This
would give, as a rule, by day, 3—5 piquets for each support. The
piquets belonging to each support are numbered consecutively
from the right flank to the left.
A portion of the support ( Bereitschaft ), J by day, I by night,
is kept constantly under arms, and at night, and by day if necessary,
throws out sentries in the direction of the piquets.
Connecting and visiting patrols (Verbindungs und Sicherungs-
Patrouillen) are sent out by the supports ; and when there is no
covering cavalry beyond the outposts, they also ‘send out recon-
noitring patrols ( Nachrichten-Patrouillen).
Sentries are usually relieved every hour; in extremely hot,
cold, or stormy weather, every half-hour. Piquets are relieved
every 4 hours; the “ Bereitschaft ”of supports and outpost reserve,
every 4 to 6 hours; the supports themselves once a day, usually
in the early morning; and the outpost reserve, and with it the
whole of the outpost troops, every 2 or 3 days.
The divisional cavalry remains in touch with the enemy until
nightfall, when it retires within the line of outposts, leaving
patrols and scouts out, or if the distance is too great it remains out
all night.
Passwords.
A parole (Parole), countersign (Losung), and password ( Feldruf)
are used.
The password is some simple word which can easily be remem-
bered by every soldier; the countersign is always the name of a
town, and the parole a Christian name. The countersign and
parole used on the same day commence with the same letter.
Sentries challenge individuals or parties approaching their posts
with the words Halt! werda? After this, when the party challenged
is a patrol, the sentry calls on the commander to approach (Kom-
mandant vor !), and then asks him the password (Feldruf). If
this is satisfactorily given, the patrol is allowed to pass (Passirll).
Patrols or visiting rounds approaching a piquet are required
to give the countersign (Losung) and receive the password (Feldruf)
in return.
When patrols or visiting rounds meet each other, the one that
is challenged is required to give the countersign, after which the
one that challenges gives the password.
The parole is given out in sealed envelopes, and only to those
officers or other trusty persons to whom it is considered necessary
to communicate it. It is used by persons arriving with orders
from superior authority, as a guarantee of the genuineness of the
orders.


I. Austria (Oesterreich), or Cis-Leithania.
Seat of Central Government —-Vienna (Wien).
Language Spoken by
Provinces.
Chief Towns.
the IVlajority of the
Population.
Duchy of Lower Austria (Oesterreich
Vienna
German
unter der Enns)
Duchy of Upper Austria (Oesterreich ob
Linz
German
der Enns)
Duchv of Salzburg ..
Salzburg
German
Duchy of Styria (Steiermark)..
Graz
German or Slovenian
Duchy of Carinthia (Karnten)
Klagenfurt ..
German or Slovenian
Duchy of Carniola (Krain)
Laibach
Slovenian
Statthalterei of Gdrz and Gradiska ..
Gorz
Slovenian or Italian
the Littoral ! Istria
Parenzo
Serbo-Croatian Italian
(Kiistenland) >
or Slovenian
chief town, ( Trieste and territory ..
Trieste
Italian or Slovenian
Trieste 1
Princely Graf- \
schaft of the ' Tyrol
Innsbruck ..
German or Italian
Tyrol and j V orarlberg ..
Vorarlberg >
Kingdom of Bohemia (Bohmen)
Bregenz
German
Prague(Prag)
Czech or German
Markgrafschaft of Moravia (Mahren) ..
Briinn
Moravian or German
Duchy of Silesia (Schlesien) ..
Troppau
German, Slovak, Czech
or Polish
Kingdom of Galicia (Galizien)
Lamberg
Polish or Ruthenian
Duchy of the Bukovina
Czernowitz ..
Ruthenian, Wallachian
or German
Kingdom of Dalmatia
Zara
Serbo-Croatian or
Italian
II. Hungary (Ungarri), or Trans-Leithania.
Seat of Central Government—Budapest.
Provinces.
Chief Towns.
Languages Spoken by tho
Majority of the Population.
Kingdom of Hungary
(Hungary Proper and
Transylvania, “ Sieben-
biirgen ”)
Budapest ..
Hungarian is the official language
throughout the country, but in
parts the following are spoken by
a large proportion of the popu-
lation : —German (along the Da-
nube), Slovak (North-western
Hungary), Ruthenian (North-east
of Upper Hungary),Serbo-Croatian
(South Hungary), and Wallachian,
Rumanian and Low German(Tran-
sylvania)
Kingdom of Croatia and
Slavonia
Agram
Serbo-Croatian
Town and Territory of
Fiume
Fiume
Serbo-Croatian or Italian.
PROVINCES, THEIR CHIEF TOWNS, AND LANGUAGES
PRINCIPALLY SPOKEN.


III. Bosnia-Heezbgovina.
Seat of Central Government—
Sarajevo.
Provinces.
Chief Towns.
Language Chiefly Spoken.
Bosnia .. .. ..
Sarajevo
Serbo-Croatian
Herzegovina ..
Mostar
Serbo-Croatian
VOCABULARY OF MILITARY TITLES AND TERMS.
Military Titles.
Artillerieingenieur .. .. Officer of technical artillery.
Artilleriezeugsbeamte .. Personnel of technical artillery.
Assistenzarzt .. .. Surgeon sub-lieutenant.
Auditor .. .. .. Judge advocate.
Auditorial .. .. Judge advocate’s department.
Bandagentrager .. .. Medical bearer (carries surgical sack).
Bataillonshornist .. .. Battalion bugle-major (rifles).
Bataillonstambour .. Battalion drum-major.
Batterietrompeter .. .. Battery trumpeter.
Bezirksfeldwebel .. .. Sergeant-major of infantry, attached
to depot.
Blessiertentrager .. .. Stretcher-bearer.
Biiohsenmaoher .. .. Armourer.
Divisionstrainkommandant .. C.O. of divisional train unit, who is
attached to divisional head-
quarters staff.
Dragoner .. .. Dragoon.
Erganzungsbezirksoffizier .. Recruiting officer attached to depdt.
Eskadronsriemer .. .. Squadron saddler.
Eskadronstrompeter .. Squadron trumpeter.
Fahnrich .. .. .. Cadet-ensign.
Pahrsoldat .. .. Private (regimental transport).
Fahrvorraoister .. .. Bombardier (driver).
Peldmarschall .. .. Field-marshal.
Feldmarsohalleutnant .. Lieutenant-general.
Feldtelegraphist .. .. Telegraphist, ranking as sergeant-
major.
Feldwebel .. .. Sergeant-major (infantry).
Feldzeugmeister, or General General.
der Kavallerie (Infanterie)
Feuerwerker .. .. Sergeant-major (artillery).
Fleischhauer ~ .. Butcher.
Fuhrer ~ ~ ~ Sergeant (technical artillery).


Military Titles —continued.
Gefreite .. .. .. Lance-corporal (infantry).
Generalmajor .. .. Major-general.
Generalstabsarzt . . .. Surgeon-general.
Generalstabsoffizier .. An officer of the General Staff (Staff
of the Army).
Hauptmann .. .. Captain (infantry).
Hauptmannauditor .. Judge advocate, graded as captain.
Hauptmannrechnungsfiihrer Paymaster, graded as captain.
Husar .. .. .. Hussar.
Infanterist .. .. Private (infantry).
Jager .. .. •. Rifleman.
Kassendirector .. ■. 'j Grades of officers of military cash
Kassenoffizial .. ... and pay offices.
Kassenakzessist .. .. '
Kompagniehornist .. Bugler.
Kompagnietambour .. Drummer.
Kompagnietrompeter .. Trumpeter.
Korporal .. .. • • Corporal (except in rifle units).
Korpschefarzt .. .. P.M.O. of an army corps in the field.
Kurschmied .. .. Farrier.
Landessohiitze .. .. Private (Austrian Landwch rifles).
Leutnant .. .. Sub-lieutenant.
Magazinsoffizier .. .. Officer in charge of mobilization
stores and equipment (a retired
officer).
Major .. .. • • Major.
Medikamentendirector ..
Medikamentenoberverwalter Grades of officers of the pharmacy
MedikarUentenverwalter. .. [. department.
Medikamentenoffizial .. j
Medikamentenakzessit .. )
Militarbauingenieur .. Offices of the military works branch.
Militarintendantur .. Intendanee.
Generalintendant .. .. i
Militaroberintendant .. I Grades of Intendance officers.
Militarintendant .. .. I
Militarunterintendant ..)
Apostolisoher Feldvikar .. J
Feldsuperior .. .. . (Roman Catholic) Ranks of
Feldkurat .. .. ) military
Felderzpriester .. .. \ (Greek Church) I, chaplains
Feldkurat .. .. / of the
Feldsenior .. .. 1 (Protestant) various
Feldkurat .. .. / persuasion*.
Feldrabbiner .. .. (Hebrew)
Imam .. .. .. (Muhammadan)
Oberarzt .. .. Surgeon-lieutenant.
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Terms— continued.


Military Titles —continued.
0 berfahrkanonier .. .. Acting bombardier (driver).
Oberjager .. .. Sergeant-major (rifles).
Oberkanonior .. .. Acting bombardier (gunner).
Oborleutnant .. .. Lieutenant.
Oberpionier .. .. Pioneer (pioneer troops and railway
and telegraph regiment).
Oberreehnungsrat .. .. Audit officer graded as a lieutenant -
colonel.
Oberst .. .. .. Colonel.
Oberstabsarzt .. .. Surgeon-colonel.
Oberstleutnant .. .. Lieutenant-colonel.
Oberverpflegsverwalter .. Officer or supply corps, graded as a
colonel.
Offiziersdiener .. .. Officer’s servant.
Patrouillefiihrer .. .. Lance-corporal (rifles and cavalry).
Pferdewiirter .. .. Groom.
Pionier .. .. .. Pioneer (infantry and rifles).
Professionist .. .. Artificer or specialist.
Proviantoffizier .. .. Quartermaster (regimental) (com-
missioned from the ranks)
Radfahrer .. .. Bicyclist.
Rechnungshilfsarbeiter .. Pay clerk.
Rechnungskontrollbeamte .. Personnel of the audit department.
Rechnungsunteroffizior .. Pay N.C.O.
Regimentsarzt .. .. Surgeon-captain.
Regimentstambour .. Regimental dram-major (infantry).
Regimentstrompeter .. Regimental trumpet-major (cavalry).
Rittmeister .. .. Captain (cavalry).
Sanitatsunterolfizier .. Regimental N.C.O. trained in medi-
cal duties.
Sanitiitssoldat .. .. Private of medical troops.
Stabsarzt .. .. Surgeon-major
Stabsfuhrer .. .. Staff-sergeant.
Stabskavallerist .. .. N.C.O. or private of cavalry staff
troop with divisional or army
corps headquarters.
Stabsoffizior .. .. A field officer, or officer of the regi-
mental staff of a unit.
Tierarzt .. .. Veterinary surgeon.
Trainunteroffizier .. .. Transport N.C.O.
Trainsoldat .. .. Private (transport troops).
Truppenreohnungsfuhrer .. Paymaster.
Unterfahrkanonier .. Driver (ar illerv).
Unterjager .. .. Corporal (rifles).
Unterkanonier .. .. Gunner.
Unterpionier .. .. Pioneer (pioneer troops and railway
and telegraph regiment).
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Terms — continued.


Military Titles —continued.
Verpflegsoffizier .. .. Office of supply corps.
Vormeister .. .. Bombardier (gunner).
Wachtmeister .. .. Sergeant-major (cavalry and train).
Waffenmeister .. .. Armourer.
Wagner .. .. .. Wheeler.
Zeugskanonier .. .. Private (technical artillery).
Zugsfuhrer .. .. Section commander (sergeant).
Miscellaneous Military Teems.
Abteilung . . .. May be, as regards the Austro-Hun-
garian service, generally rendered
by “ detachment ”
Adjustierung .. .. Dress.
Aorarialplatz .. A scholarship at an educational
establishment, supported from
public funds.
Aerarische Pferde .. .. Horses supplied for the public ser-
vice.
Anstalt .. .. .. Institute or establishment.
Armeekorper .. .. A higher unit, as a brigade division,
army corps, or army.
Armeestand .. .. An officer of the Armeestand is a
retired officer, who, although not
fit for active service on account
of age or physical unfitness, is still
employed in a suitable appoint-
ment (officer-clerk at depots, &c.)
Arrendierung .. .. The method of obtaining
supplies of all natures by
contract.
Assentiert .. .. Passed for military service
(man or horse).
Aufgebot .. .. .. Levy.
Aufsohlagziinder .. .. Percussion fuze.
Aufstellung .. .. Formation.
Auf Wartegebiihr .. .. Corresponds to our half-pay.
Augmentationsvorrat .. Mobilization stores.
Ausriistung .. ... Equipment.
Beilpicke .. .. .. Entrenching pick, provided with
an axe-head for use as hand axe.
Belagerungshaubitze .. Siege howitzer
Bettenmagazin .. .. Barrack bedding store.
Bewaflnung .. .. Armament.
Blessiertentransportkolonne.. Transport column for wounded.
Brotsack .. .. .. Haversack.
Briickentrain .. .. Pontoon train.
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Terms— continued.


Miscellaneous Military Terms— continued.
Chargen (Chargengrad) .. Includes all officers, officials and
N.C.O.s. on the strength of a
unit.
Disoiplinarstrafrecht .. Military law.
Division .. .. .. Half a cavalry regiment (3
squadrons). 2 batteries of field
artillery, 3 batteries of horse
artillery.
Divisionsbackerei .. .. Divisional field bakery column.
Divisionssanitatsanstalt .. Divisional field medical estab-
lishment.
Doppelziinder ~ .. Time and percussion fuze.
Eisenbahnkompagnie .. Railway company.
Entwiokelte Linie .. .. Battalion, &0., deployed in line.
Esschale .. .. .. Canteen (utensil).
Evidenz, Evidenthaltung .. Registration.
Etappenlinie .. .. Line of communication.
Etappenverpflegstrain .. Line Of communication supply
column.
Fahrende batterie .. .. Field battery.
Fachbildungsanstalt .. School for advanced military or
technical instruction, as staff col-
lege, intendance school, veterinary
college, &c.
Fassen .. .. To take over supplies indented for.
Feldeisenbahntransportleitung Field railway headquarters.
Feldflasche .. .. Watterbottle.
Feldgerate . . .. Field utensils and necessaries.
Feldhaubitze .. .. Field howitzer.
Feldpostleitung .. . . Field post headquarters.
Feldsignalstation .. .. Field signalling station.
Feldverpflegsmagazin .. 2nd line of supply column.
Feldwache .. .. Piquet.
Fleisohkonserven .. .. Preserved moat.
Fliichtige Feldeisenbahn .. Light field railway.
Friedenstand .. .. Peace establishment.
Fussfesseln .. .. Foot shackles.
Futterwagen .. .. Forage wagon.
Frequentant .. .. Officer student
Gagisten .. .. .. Officers and officials, viz., those who
draw a “ salary ” in distinction to
the Mannschaften, who do not
draw a salary, but are paid at daily'
rates.
Gebirgsausriistung .. .. Mountain equipment.
Gebirgsbatterie .. . . Mountain battery.
Oebtthre .. ~ .. Emoluments.
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Terms — continued.


Miscellaneous Military Terms —continued.
Gestutsbranohe .. . . The personnel, found by the army,
employed at a Government stud
farm.
Gewaltmarsoh .. .. Forced march.
Hauptposten .. .. Supports (outposts).
Hilfsplatz .. .. First aid station.
Hufbeschlagkurs .. .. Farrier’s course of instruction.
Kartatsche .. .. Case shot.
Kasse-Kommission .. Regimental board, consisting of 2
members with the C.O. as presi-
dent, for administration of cash
and funds.
Kavallerietruppendivision .. Cavalry division.
Kommandirt (offizier) .. “ Retired ” officer attached to Gene-
ral Staff.
Konserven .. .. Preserved supplies of all kinds.
Krankenhaltstation .. Resting station for sick and wounded
on line of communication.
Kriegsfutterportion .. Full service forage ration.
Kriegsbriickenequipago .. Pontoon train.
Kriegsrecht .. .. Court martial.
Kriegsstand .. .. War strength.
Kriegstaschenmunition .. Small arm ammunition carried by
soldier.
Kriegsverpflegsportion .. Pull service ration.
Kummet .. .. .. Horse collar.
Legitimationsblatt .. Identification card (carried in small
metal cylinder in knapsack).
Magazinsverpflegsstaffel .. A section of a 2nd line of supply
column.
Mannschaften .. .. See Gagisten.
Marketender .. .. Sutler.
Marodenhaus .. .. Military hospital (established in
garrisons of at least 300, and not
exceeding 500 men).
Marode Pferde .. .. Sick horses.
Massenaufgebot .. .. General levy.
Mehlkolonne .. .. Flour column.
Meldereiter .. .. Mounted orderly.
Militarbauabteilung .. Military works (barracks) branch of
an army corps headquarters.
Militarbildungsanstalt .. Military educational estab-
lishment.
Militarfachkurs .. .. Special course of instruction.
Militarseelsorge .. .. Military chaplains’ department.
Militartierarzneiinstitut .. Military veterinary college.
Monturfelddepdt .. .. Clothing and equipment field depot.
Vocabulary os Military Titles and Teems— continued.


Miscellaneous Military Terms —continued.
Monturverwaltungsbranohe .. The branch (store corps) having
charge of clothing, equipment,
and necessaries.
Munitionskolonne .. .. Ammunition column.
Munitionspark .. .. Ammunition park.
Munitionswagen .. .. Ammunition wagon.
Musikmannachaft .. .. Military band personnel.
Nachschubsfutterportion .. The ordinary service forage ration.
Nahschubsverpflegsportion .. The ordinary service ration.
Nahrichtenpatrouille .. Reconnoitring patrol.
Naturalien .. .. Supplies of all natures in kind.
Operations-Kasse .. .. Treasury chest with unit in the
field.
Packpferd .. .. Park-horse.
Patrone .. .. .. Cartridge.
Patronentasche .. .. Cartridge pouch.
Patronentornister .. .. The separate lower part of the
knapsack carried by dismounted
• troops containing reserve small
arm ammunition, &c.
Pausohal .. .. .. An allowance in money, as
office allowance, ration allow-
ance, &o.
Pionierzeugreserve.. .. Reserve column of pioneer
material.
Proviantwagen .. .. Supply wagon.
Qualifikationsliste .. .. Confidential report.
Rehabilitierung .. .. Re-instatement of officers into
army.
Reitende batterie .. .. Horse artilllery battery.
Remonten-Assent-Kommis- Military board for the purchase of
sion remounts.
R' petirstutzen .. .. Short rifle.
Requisitenwagen .. .. Store wagon.
Reservefutterportion .. Reserve service forage ration.
Reserveverpflegsportion .. Reserve service ration.
Relutum .. .. .. The value of an article of food,
fuel, &c., when a money
allowance is given instead of
an issue in kind.
Rotte .. .. .. File.
Ruhestand .. .. Retired list.
Salonhose .. '.. Trousers or overalls (other than
those worn on parade).
Sanitatsmaterialreserve .. Reserve column of medical
material.
Soheide .. .. .. Scabbard.
VoOABULABY Of MILITARY TITLES AND TkßMS— Continued.


Miscellaneous Military Terms —continued.
Sehanzzeugkolonne .. Entrenching tool column.
Schlachtviehdepot .. ~ Live stock dep6t.
Sohmalspurige Batterie .. Narrow-track battery ; a wheeled
battery of field-guns or howitzers
on special carriages for mountain
warfare.
Spaten .. .. .. Entrenching spade.
Sprengbiiohse .. .. Cylinder containing dynamite
cartridge for demolition pur-
poses, carried by cavalry.
Stiefelhose .. .. Pantaloons.
Stiftungsplatz .. .. Scholarship created by a legacy at a
military educational establishment.
Superarbitrierungs-Kommis- A military invaliding board,
sion
Surrogat .. .. .. The equivalent for issue of one
article of food for another:
e,g. biscuit and bread, beef and
pork or mutton, &c.
Sobwarm .. .. .. Squad.
Technische kompagnie .. Pioneer company.
Tornistor .. .. .. The separate upper part of the
double knapsack carried by dis-
mounted troops.
Trainbegleiteskadron .. Train personnel of a 2nd line of
supply column.
Traineskadron .. .. Train squadron.
Trainkolonne .. .. Transport column.
Trankeimer .. .. Canvas water bucket.
Truppenkorper .. .. An administrative unit such as a
regiment of infantry or cavalry,
artillery regiment, fortress artil-
lery regiment, independent rifle or
fortress artillery battalion, pioneer
battalion, &e.
Überkomplett .. .. Supernumerary.
Überzahlig .. . . Excess numbers in a unit.
Verbandpackchen .. .. Field dressing.
Verbandplatz .. .. Dressing station.
Verpflegskolonne .. .. Supply column.
Versorgter Sabel .. .. Sword in scabbard.
Verwaltungs-Kommission ~ Regimental board consisting of 2
members with the second-in-com-
mand as president, which has
charge of clothing, equipment, and
regimental stores.
Vorposten .. .. Outposts.
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Teems — continued.


Miscellaneous Military Terms —continued.
Vorspannpferd .. .. Requisitioned horse.
Vorspannwagen .. .. Requisitioned wagon.
Wagenstaflel .. .. Line of wagons.
Wehrpflicht .. .. Compulsory service.
Werkzeugwagen .. .. Tool wagon.
Zeitziinder .. .. Time fuze.
Zeugdepot .. .. Field depot for artillery or pioneer
material.
Zogling .. .. .. Student at cadet or military school.
Zugeteilt .. .. .. A “ qualified ” officer attached to the
General Staff.
By Authority : Albert .1. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne
Vocabulary of Military Titles and Terms— continued.
