

oocie% of ||j|ales.
Memorandum of Articles of Association
B Y - Hj .A. ”W S
(REVISED DECEMBER, 1894).
&Übneu 1
McCAREON, STEWART and CO., Pkxntebs, 44 and 86 Pitt Stebet.




(2 G)
(*j <»J
Memorandum of Articles of Association
—B Y - L .A. W S
(REVISED DECEMBER, 1894. )
& (D
McCARRON, STEWART & Co., 44 and 86 Pitt Street.




y 5 yrc. * /
||tcniQr;mLmm of Association
OF THE
ART SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
i. The name of the iYssociation is “ The Art Society of
New South Wales.”
2. The registered office of the Society will be situated in
Sydney.
3. The objects for which the Society is established
are —
(a) To encourage and promote the cultivation of the
Fine Arts in the Colony of New South Wales.
(b) To provide means for the study by the Members of
the Fine Arts in all parts of the world.
(c) To institute and maintain Exhibitions and Galleries
of Painting, Sculpture, Ceramics, and Objects of
Art.
(d) To form and maintain classes for the benefit and
instruction of the Members of the Society.
(e) To acquire form and maintain an Art Library and
Reading Room.
(/) To acquire any rights or privileges which the
Society may regard necessary or convenient for the
purposes thereof or for promoting the interests of
Art.
{g) To purchase take on lease or in exchange hire or
otherwise acquire any real and personal property
and to erect any buildings required for the purposes
of the Society.


( h ) To invest the moneys of the Society not immediately
required upon such securities as may from time to
time be determined.
(i) To raise money in such manner as the Society shall
think fit and in particular by the issue of debentures
charged upon all or any of the property of the
Society both present and future.
(J) To sell improve lease mortgage dispose of or
otherwise deal with all or any part of the property
of the Society.
( k ) To do all such other things as are incidental or
conducive to the attainment of the above objects.
4. The income and property of the Society whence-
soever derived shall be applied solely towards the promotion
of the objects of the Society as set forth in this Memorandum
of Association and no portion thereof shall be paid or
transferred directly or indirectly by way of dividend bonus or
otherwise howsoever by way of profit to the persons who at
any time are or have been members of the Society or to any
of them or to any person claiming through any of them
except as provided herein Provided that nothing herein
contained shall prevent the payment in good faith of
remuneration to any officers or servants of the Society or to
any Member thereof or other person in return for any
services actually rendered to the Society.
5. Every Member of the Society undertakes to con-
tribute to the Assets of the Society in the event of the same
being wound up during the time he is a Member or within
one year afterwards for payment of the debts and liabilities
of the Society contracted before the time at which he ceases
to be a Member and of the costs charges and expenses of
winding up the same and for the adjustment of the rights of
the contributories among themselves such amount as may be
required not exceeding ten shillings.
6. If upon winding up or dissolution of the Society there
remains after the satisfaction of all its debts and liabilities
any property whatsoever the same shall not be paid to or
distributed among the Members of the Society but shall be
given or transferred to some other institution or institutions
having objects similar to the objects of the Society to be
determined by the Members of the Society at or before the
time of dissolution and in default thereof by the Governor of
the Colony.


We the several persons whose names and addresses are
subscribed are desirous of being formed into a Company in
pursuance of this Memorandum of Association,
Names addresses and descriptions of subscribers :
Julian Rossi Ashton, Bondi, Artist.
Frank Prout Mahony, Newtown, Artist.
Sydney Sedgfield, 247 George Street, Litho-Artist.
William Edward Kemp, Stanmore, Architect.
Arthur Levett Jackson, Darlinghurst, Civil Servant.
Arturo Steffani, 100 Hunter Street, Musician.
Frederick B, Schell, Darlinghurst, Artist.
Livingston Hopkins, North Shore, Artist.
Arthur Collingridge, Norwich Chambers, Hunter Street,
Artist.
Charles H. Hunt, 55 Norwich Chambers, Artist.
Albert Henry Fullwood, Forest Lodge, Artist.
Geo. Collingridge, North Shore, Artist.
Edwd. Wm. Minchin, Woolwich, Artist.
Willm. Chas. Piguenit, Hunter’s Hill, Artist.
James Whitley Sayer, George Street, Bank Clerk.
Dated the 20th day of September, 1887.
Witness to all the above signatures,
George Read, Clerk, Sydney.


Articles fff Association
OF THE
ART SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
CONSTITUTION.
i. For the purpose of registration the number of
Members of the Society is declared not to exceed five
hundred.
2. The Council may whenever they think fit register an
increase of Members.
3. The Society is established for the purposes expressed
in the Memorandum of Association and all matters incidental
thereto.
MEMBERSHIP.
4. The Members of the Society shall consist of the
persons signing the Memorandum of Association together
with the persons whose names and addresses appear in the
annexed schedule marked A being persons who have agreed
to become Members and whose names are intended to be
entered on the register of Members and all other persons who
may from time to time be elected and entered on the register
of Members in accordance with these Articles and all such
other persons if any as may from time to time be elected
honorary members and shall have accepted such membership.
5. Each candidate for membership shall sign and forward
to the Secretary an application in the form or to the effect
following :
“To the Council of the Art Society of New South
Wales.
“ I desire to become a Member of the ‘ Art Society
of New South Wales’ and in the event of my being
elected I hereby authorise the entry of my name in
the register of Members.
“ Dated the day of 188 .
“ Name
“ Address
“ Signature.”


6. At the next monthly meeting of the Council or at any
special meeting of the Council convened specially for the
election of Members the name of the Candidate shall be
submitted for election and the Council may either then
proceed to consider and determine upon the said application
or postpone the consideration and determination thereof for a
period not exceeding three months. The admission for
membership shall be determined by ballot if required by one
Member of the Council.
7. Upon the payment by an elected candidate of the
annual subscription payable by him his name shall be entered
upon the register of Members and an elected candidate shall
not be entitled to exercise any of the privileges of a Member
until the same shall have been done.
8. Members shall pay an annual subscription of such
amount as may from time to time be determined upon in
General Meeting and unless otherwise determined an annual
subscription of one guinea payable in advance.
g. The name of every person becoming a member shall
be forthwith entered in the register of Members together with
the date of his admission and his address and no name shall
be erased from such register except by order of the Council
duly entered on the minutes.
10. Any Member who shall at any time change his
address shall immediately give notice thereof in writing to
the Secretary.
11. Any person who shall by any means cease to be a
Member shall nevertheless remain liable for and shall pay to
the Society all moneys which at the time of his ceasing to be
a Member may be due from him to the Society.
12. If it shall appear to the Council or shall be
represented to the Council by requisition in writing signed by
three or more Members of the Society that any Member has
been guilty of conduct which in the absence of satisfactory
explanation would render him unfit to remain a Member of
the Society the Council shall send to such Member a
statement in writing of the conduct imputed to him and shall
appoint a special meeting of the Council for the consideration
thereof. At least twenty-one days’ notice in writing of such
meeting shall be given to such Member in order that he may
be present and be heard if he shall think fit. If at such
meeting or any adjournment thereof the Council shall pass a
resolution for the suspension or expulsion of such Member
he shall be liable by the resolution of such meeting to be
suspended or excluded from the Society and immediately on
such resolution for expulsion being passed he shall cease to


be a Member thereof. Subject however to such Member’s
right to apply for reinstatement to a General Meeting
hereinafter provided. Any person in respect of whom a
resolution for expulsion shall have been passed in accordance
with the first part of this clause shall be entitled to apply to
a General Meeting of the Society to be convened in
accordance with Clause 36 for reinstatement as a Member of
the Society. And upon the passing of a resolution by such
Meeting that such person be reinstated he shall from the time
of the passing thereof be readmitted a Member of the Society
and be entitled to all the benefits and privileges thereof.
COUNCIL.
13. The Council shall consist of a President, a Vice-
President, a Treasurer, and twelve ordinary Members. The
aforesaid officers shall act without remuneration.
14. The first Council of the Society to hold office until
the Ordinary Meeting of Members to be held in the month of
July 1888 shall consist of the following persons : —President
J. R. Ashton Vice-President W. C. Piguenit Treasurer
W. E. Kemp. Ordinary Members :- A. Collingridge
G. Collingridge A. H. Fullwood L. Hopkins C. H. Hunt
Phil May F. Mahony F. B. Schell S. Sedgfield J. W. Sayer
A, Steffani and J. Smedley.
15. An alphabetical roll of all the Members eligible for
election (distinguishing those in office) shall be prepared and
be available for perusal by Members of the Society at its
rooms at least fourteen days prior to the Annual Meeting.
16. No Member shall be eligible for election to the office
of President Vice-President Treasurer or an ordinary Member
of the Council unless at least seven days before the Annual
Meeting there shall be sent to the Secretary or left at the
office for the time being of the Society a memorandum signed
by a Member proposing such Member for election. The
same may be in the following form or to the following effect—
“ The Art Society of New South Wales.
I hereby propose Mr. for
election as ‘ an ordinary Member of the Council ’ or as
‘ President and also as an ordinary Member of the
Council ’or as ‘ President and also as Vice-President
and also as Treasurer and also as an ordinary Member
of the Council ’ (as the case may be) at the ordinary
General Meeting to be held in the month of
next.
Signed ”
Such memorandum to be accompanied by the written consent
of the Member so nominated for election.


ly. At the ordinary General Meeting of the Society to
be held in the month of July 1888 and at each subsequent
ordinary Annual General Meeting all the Members of the
Council shall retire from office.
18. A list setting forth the names of candidates and their
proposers together with the offices for which they are
nominated shall be prepared and such list when complete
shall be advertised on the day of the ballot in two Sydney
newspapers. The ballot shall take place on the day of the
Annual Meeting under the direction of the Council.
ig. A Member or Members of the Council retiring from
office at any General Meeting shall be eligible for re-election
at the same or any future meeting.
20. If the candidates duly nominated under Clause 16
are not more in number than are required for election to the
offices of President Vice-President Treasurer or ordinary
Members of the Council as the case may be the persons so
nominated shall be deemed and declared to be elected at any
ordinary or Special General Meeting at which the election is
to take place. If a greater number of candidates are
nominated than there are vacancies to be filled up the election
shall be conducted by ballot as provided in Clause 21 at the
Meeting or at any adjournment thereof.
21. Voting papers shall be prepared containing a
statement of the vacancy or vacancies to be filled up and the
names of candidates. A ballot shall be taken for the election
of President Vice-President Treasurer and ordinary Members
of the Council. A voting paper initialed by the Secretary or
Chairman or such other person as may be appointed by the
Council for that purpose shall be delivered to each Member
present at the Meeting desirous of voting and entitled to vote.
The names of the candidates for whom the Member voting
does not intend to vote shall be struck out by him and the
voting paper placed in a box provided for the purpose within
a reasonable time to be fixed by the Chairman if regarded
necessary. Scrutineers not being candidates for election shall
be appointed by the meeting who shall examine the voting
papers and ascertain the result of the election and report
thereon to the meeting. The report of the Scrutineers shall
be signed by them and contain the following particulars
(1) the total number of voting papers received ; (2) the
number if any rejected and the grounds of rejection ; (3) the
total number of votes in favour of each candidate; (4) the
names of those who are duly elected. Such report to be
preserved amongst the records of the Society until the next
Annual Meeting.


22. In the event of there not being sufficient nominations
in accordance with Rule 16 the Council shall prior to the
Annual Meeting supply the omissions.
23. In the event of any vacancy occurring during the
year in the offices of President Vice-President or Treasurer
the same may be filled up by the Council from amongst their
number until the next Annual Meeting.
24. In the event of vacancies occurring in the Council
during the year the same shall be filled up by the Council
from the Scrutineers’ report of the immediately preceding
election in the order of majority of votes recorded provided
always that the member or members so appointed shall have
obtained at least 75 per cent, of the number of votes recorded
for the lowest successful candidate and in the event of none
of the remaining names on the Scrutineers’ report fulfilling
this condition then the Council shall have power to fill the
vacancy or vacancies until the next Annual Meeting by the
election of any Member or Members of the Society who may
be eligible.
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.
25. The management of the business and the control of
the Society shall be vested in the Council who in addition to
the powers and authorities by these Articles expressly
conferred upon them may exercise all such powers and do all
such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the
Society and are not hereby or by statute expressly directed
or required to be exercised or done by the Society in General
Meeting.
26. Without prejudice to the general powers conferred
by Clause 25 and other clauses of these Articles the Council
shall have power—
1. To take on lease any buildings for the purposes of
the Society.
2. To purchase hire or otherwise acquire any Statuary
Pictures Cartoons Drawings Casts Ceramics Art
Objects Books Newspapers Documents and other
property (except land) necessary for the purposes
of the Society.
3. To determine from time to time the terms or
conditions on which Members or others may
attend classes visit or use the galleries exhibitions
and library and as to whether articles or books
may be removed and by whom and on what
conditions.


4. To appoint and from time to time suspend or
remove any paid Lecturer Instructor Secretary
or other officer and to fix the remuneration to be
paid for their services.
5. To delegate subject to such conditions as they may
think fit any of their powers except the election
of Members to Committees consisting of any
Member or Members of the Council and to make
such regulations if any as to the proceedings of
such Committees as may seem expedient.
6. To petition Parliament to make any application to
the Governor and Executive Council or any officer
of the Government of New South Wales or to
convene any Public Meeting in the city of Sydney
or any town or district in the colony in the name
of the Society.
7. To receive expend and manage the funds of the
Society.
8. To bring prosecute abandon defend or compromise
any action or suit on behalf of the Society.
9. To suspend or expel any Member subject to such
Member’s right to appeal to a General Meeting as
hereinbefore provided.
10. To give receipts releases and other discharges for
moneys payable to the Society and for all claims
and demands of the Society not receivable by
the Treasurer in the ordinary course of the
business thereof.
11. To invest any moneys of the Society not
immediately required for the purposes thereof on
such securities and in such manner as they may
think fit and from time to time to vary or realise
such investments.
12. From time to time to make vary and repeal any
by-laws for the regulation of the affairs of the
Society its officers and servants or for observance
by the Members of the Society provided that it
shall be lawful for any General Meeting to vary
repeal or disallow any such by-laws.
13. To purchase land if and when authorised by the
resolution of the Society in General Meeting.
14. To enter into all such negotiations and contracts
and rescind and vary all such contracts and
execute and do all such acts deeds and things in
the name and on behalf of the Society as they
may consider expedient for or in relation to any
of the purposes of the Society.


27. It shall be competent for the President and Vice-
President or for any three Members of the Council to call a
Special Meeting of the Council provided twenty-four hours’
previous notice of such Meeting be given to every Member
of the Council.
28, A meeting of the Council for the time being at which
a quorum is present shall be competent to exercise all or any
of the authorities powers and discretions for the time being
vested in or exercisable by the Council.
29. The Council shall meet monthly and at such other
times as may be found expedient.
30, Five Members of the Council shall form a quorum.
31. The President or in his absence the Vice-President
shall take the chair at such meetings and should neither be
present the Council may elect one of their number as chair-
man.
32. The Council shall prior to each Annual Meeting
prepare a report for the preceding year which report shall be
available for perusal of Members at least seven days prior to
such Annual General Meeting. The report shall amongst
other particulars contain : —-
Ist. The number of Members on the roll for the year
as compared with the previous year.
2nd. A statement of the funds of the Society with the
items of receipt and expenditure.
3rd. A record of the number of Council Meetings
attended by each Member of the Council during
the year.
33. Subject to the provisions of these Articles the
Council may make such regulations as they think proper as
to the summoning and holding of meetings and for the trans-
action of business thereat and they may adjourn any meeting.
34. Any deed or document debenture or security which
the Council shall by any resolution determine on executing
may be under the Common Seal of the Society signed by two
Members of the Council and countersigned by the Secretary.
GENERAL MEETINGS.
35. One ordinary General Meeting in each year (in
addition to any Special General Meetings) shall be held at
such time as may be prescribed by the Society in General
Meeting and if no other time be prescribed the ordinary
meeting shall be held in the month of July in every year on
such day as may be determined by the Council.


36. The Council may whenever they think fit and shall
upon a requisition made in writing by not less than twenty-
five Members convene a special meeting for any purpose
contemplated by the objects or purposes of the Society or in
connection with its affairs and notice of such meeting stating
its objects shall be published in two daily newspapers in
Sydney at least ten days prior to the day of meeting.
37. The President or in his absence the Vice-President
of the Society shall preside as chairman at every General
Meeting of the Society and if neither of these be present
the Members present shall choose some Member of the
Council or failing him one of their number to be chairman.
38. All business shall be deemed special that is trans-
acted at a special meeting and also all that is transacted at
an ordinary meeting with the exception of the consideration
of the accounts balance sheets and the ordinary report of the
Council and the election of officers in the place of those
retiring pursuant to these Articles.
39. No motion for winding up the Society or for altering
adding to or amending any of its rules or articles or for any
other purpose except motions of course shall be proposed at
any General Meeting unless seven days’ previous notice in
writing be given.
40. No special business shall be transacted at any
meeting unless stated in the notice convening the meeting
And no resolution shall be passed or other business trans-
acted at any meeting which is not included in the objects and
purposes for which the meeting is convened And no amend-
ment shall be allowed on any resolution contained in the
notice convening any meeting not directly pertinent thereto.
41. At any General Meeting the voting except as other-
wise provided in these articles shall be by show of hands in
the first instance but it shall be competent for the chairman
or any six Members to require a division.
COMMON SEAL.
42. The Council shall have power to provide a Common
Seal for the purposes of the Society and from time to time
to destroy the same and substitute a new seal in lieu thereof
and the seal for the time being of the Society shall be kept
under such custody and control as the Council or Members
in General Meeting shall from time to time prescribe and in
the absence of any prescription in that behalf shall be kept
in the custody of the Secretary and unless otherwise
determined by the resolution of a General Meeting the said
Common Seal shall not be used except under and by virtue
of a minute of the Council or any Committee thereof.


CUSTODY OF MONEYS.
43. The banking account of the Society shall be kept
at such bank as may from time to time be approved of by
the Council.
44. All cheques drawn upon the bankers of the Institution
shall be signed by the President Vice-President and Secretary
or any one or more of them in conjunction with the Treasurer.
45. All moneys payable to the Society shall be received
by the Treasurer or some person authorised by the Council
and shall be paid into the banking account of the Society.
46. No payment shall be made on behalf of the Society
until authorised by the Council.
ACCOUNTS.
47. The Council shall cause true accounts to be kept
of the moneys received and expended by the Society and the
matters in respect of which such receipts and expenditure take
place and of the assets credits and liabilities of the Society.
48. The accounts shall be closed and balanced annually
on such date as may be prescribed by the Society in General
Meeting and if no other time be fixed on the 30th June in
each year and a statement of the funds of the Society with
the items of receipts and expenditure shall be made out by
the Treasurer and submitted at the next ordinary General
Meeting.
49. The Books of the Treasurer shall be produced with
all entries duly made at every monthly meeting of the
Council and all books and records shall be open at all times
for inspection by any two Members of the Society who shall
give twenty-four hours’ notice in writing stating their wish for
such inspection.
AUDIT.
50. Once at least in every year the accounts of the
Society shall be examined and the correctness of the state-
ment and balance sheet ascertained by three Auditors to be
elected at the Annual Meeting under the same conditions as
those prescribed in these Articles for the election of officers
of the Society.
51. An Auditor retiring from office shall be eligible for
re-election.
52. The Auditors may or may not be Members of the
Society but no person shall be eligible as an Auditor who
is interested otherwise than as a member in any transaction
of the Society and no Member of the Council or other officer
of the Society shall be eligible during his continuance in office.


53. Any casual vacancy occurring in the office of Auditor
subsequent to any Annual General Meeting of the Society
shall be filled up by the Council.
54. The Auditors shall at all reasonable times have
access to the account books of the Society and may at the
expense of the Society employ accountants and other persons
to assist them in examining and investigating such books of
account and they may in relation to such accounts at any
time require any explanation or information they may deem
requisite from any officer of the Society.
55. The Auditors shall be supplied with copies of the
statement of accounts and balance sheet intended to be laid
before the Society in General Meeting fifteen days at least
before the meeting to which the same are to be submitted
and it shall be their duty to examine the same with the
accounts and vouchers relating thereto and to report to the
Society in General Meeting thereon.
INDEMNITY OF OFFICERS.
56. All officers of the Society shall be indemnified by
the Society from all losses and expenses incurred by them
in or about the discharge of their respective duties except
such as happen through their own wilful act or default.
57. No Officer of the Society shall be liable for any
other officer or for joining in any receipt or other act for the
sake of conformity or for any loss or expense happening to
the Society unless the same happen through his own wilful
act or default.
ARBITRATION.
58. Whenever any difference arises between the Society
on the one hand and any Member on the other hand touching
the true intent of and construction or the incidents or
consequences of these presents or of the statutes for the time
being affecting the Society or as to any of the affairs of the
Society every such difference shall be referred to the decision
of an arbitrator to be appointed by the parties in difference or
if they cannot agree upon a single arbitrator to the decision of
two arbitrators of whom one shall be appointed by each of the
parties in difference or an umpire to be appointed by the
two arbitrators.
59. The costs of and incident to any such reference and
award shall be in the discretion of the arbitrator arbitrators or
umpire respectively who may determine the amount thereof or
direct the same to be taxed as between solicitor and client or
otherwise and may award by whom to whom and in what
manner the same shall be borne and paid.


60. The submission to arbitration shall be subject to the
provisions of the Act of the Colony of New South Wales 31
Victoria No. 15 intituled “An Act to make arbitrations more
effectual or any other statutory modification thereof.”
INTERPRETATION CLAUSE.
61. In the construction of the Memorandum of Associa-
tion and of these Articles unless the contrary be expressed or
is to be inferred from the context.
Words signifying the singular number only shall
include the plural and vice versa.
Words signifying persons shall apply to Corporations.
“ In writing” shall mean written or printed or partly
written and partly printed.
These Articles shall otherwise be construed with
reference to the provisions of the Companies’ Act and terms
used in these Articles shall be taken as having the same
respective meanings as they have when used in such Act.
Names addresses and .descriptions of subscribers :
Julian Rossi Ashton, Bondi, Artist.
Frank Prout Mahony, Newtown, Artist.
Sydney Sedgfield, 247 George Street, Litho-Artist.
William Edward Kemp, Stanmore, Architect.
Arthur Levett Jackson, Darlinghurst, Civil Servant.
Arturo Steffani, ioo Hunter Street, Musician.
Witness to the above signatures,
George Read, Clerk, Sydney.
Frederic B. Schell, Darlinghurst, Artist.
Livingston Hopkins, North Shore, Artist.
Arthur Collingridge, Norwich Chambers, Hunter Street,
Artist.
Charles H. Hunt, 55 Norwich Chambers, Artist.
Albert Henry Fullwood, Forest Lodge, Artist.
Geo. Collingridge, North Shore, Artist.
Edwd. Wm. Minchin, Woolwich, Artist.
Willm. Chas. Piguenit, Hunter’s Hill, Artist.
James Whitley Sayer, George Street, Bank Clerk.
Dated the 20th day of September, 1887.
Witness to all the above signatures,
George Read, Clerk, Sydney.


BY-LAWS.
REVISED DECEMBER, 1894.
1. The annual subscription of each Member of the Art
Society of New South Wales (as provided for in the Articles
of Association) shall be payable yearly, in advance, from the
date of such Member’s election.
2. If any Member shall neglect to pay any subscription
due from him to the Society, the Council may, by notice in
writing, request him to make such payment. The notice
shall request payment, and if the requisition of such notice
be not complied with for a period of three months after such
notice, he shall, upon expiration of such period, ipso facto,
cease to be a Member, and shall be thereupon disqualified
from membership for a period of two years. Provided
always that the Council shall be at liberty to annul such
forfeiture of membership and disqualification upon sufficient
cause being shown.
3. Every Member upon paying his subscription shall
receive a card of membership, which shall not be transferable.
Any officer of the Society may require the production of such
card, and any person failing to comply with such request
may be excluded from the Society.
4. In addition to the Ordinary Members, whose election
is provided for in the Articles of Association, the Council
shall have power to elect Student Members, who shall be
admitted solely for the purpose of availing of the Society’s
appliances and opportunities for study, and who shall have
no power to vote at the Society’s meetings, or right to send
works to the Society’s public exhibitions. The annual fee
payable by such Student Members to be half a guinea,
payable in advance from the date of election.
5. All Members of the Society shall be eligible as
Members of the Council, or as Auditors.
6. Only those Members whose names appear on the
Alphabetical Roll of Members (provided for in the Articles
of Association) shall be entitled to vote at any election of
office-bearers.
7. New Members nominated at any Meeting of Council
shall not be eligible for election until the next Meeting.


8. Any Member of the Society shall have the privilege
of introducing a friend to the rooms or library of the Society
who may be on a visit from any other place, and no other
person shall have access to the rooms or library, except upon
a written order signed by a Member of the Council, and
countersigned by the President or Secretary.
g. The Chairman of the Council shall be entitled to a
casting as well as a deliberative vote.
10. If any Member of the Council shall resign or absent
himself from the meetings thereof, for three consecutive
months, without sufficient cause, or become otherwise dis-
qualified, his seat shall be declared vacant at the next
meeting of the Council.
11 ‘ Council shall endeavour to arrange for Art Unions
for the distribution of such works of art as the Members may
desire to dispose of.
12. Members and Student Members will be entitled to
admission to any lectures or discussions upon artistic
subjects that may take place in connection with the Society.
13, The Council shall have power to confer on donors of
paintings, prints, casts, and other works of art privileges
similar to those enjoyed by Members, and such donors will
be classed as Honorary Members.
H-.lf any injury shall be done by any member to any
of the pictures, statuary, art objects, books, periodicals, or
furniture belonging to, or temporarily in the custody of the
Society, the person causing such injury shall forthwith, at
the option of the Council, supply the Society with a new copy,
replica, or facsimile of the article injured or destroyed, or pay
the value thereof, or, if the object injured be capable of repair
the cost of such repair.
15. Only Student Members having paid their fees in
advance will be allowed in the Art Society’s rooms during
the classes.


REGULATIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
1. All works intended for Exhibition must be sent to the Society’s
Exhibition Room, Sydney, free of expense, between the hours of 10 a.m.
and 5 p.m., on days appointed, after which no work will be received.
2. In order to ensure accuracy in the Catalogue, and correctness in
other respects, it is essential that the Artist carefully write the following
particulars on the back of each picture he sends in, viz.; —
Subject of Picture
Name of Artist
Address of Artist
Price at which Artist is willing to dispose of the Picture, £
If not for sale, state lowest price for Insurance, £
It is also necessary that a duplicate of this information, in the enclosed
form, under cover to the Secretary, be handed to the Caretaker at the
same time. If more than one picture be sent, a separate piece of paper,
of the same size and in the same form, should be used to contain the
information in regard to each picture, as this method greatly facilitates
the compilation of the Catalogue.
3. There shall be a Hanging Committee of not less than three
Members, whose duty it shall be to arrange for exhibition the works that
have been accepted. Paintings in Oil and Water Colour, Architectural and
Ceramic Drawings and works of Sculpture, the bond fide work of the
Members, are admissable, provided the same shall not have been previously
exhibited by the Society. The admission of such works of Art, however,
will depend entirely upon the approval of the Hanging Committee. No
copies of any kind will be admitted except in Ceramic painting, and draw-
ings in black and white are not admissable on this occasion. The number
of pictures admissable, the work of any one artist, is limited to twelve.
4. In the event of their being a greater number of pictures received
than can be properly hung, the Hanging Committee shall exercise the
power of limiting the space allowed to each exhibitor, in proportion to the
whole space available.
5. Only the President, Vice-President, Secretary, and Honorary
Treasurer shall be entitled to enter the Exhibition Room whilst the
Hanging Committee are arranging for the Exhibition.
6. No work, after it has been placed, shall be removed until the
Exhibition is closed, and then only on the production of an order from the
Exhibitor.
7. Artists may communicate the prices of their works, which prices
will be printed in the Catalogue for the information of intending purchasers.
Members will be charged a commission of five per cent, on the price of
works sold during the continuance of the Exhibition. Such works will be
marked by a special ticket, and no picture will be so marked unless sold in
conformity with this regulation.
8. No work will be received unless it be the bond fide production of
the Member exhibiting it.
g. Exhibitors will be permitted to varnish and re-touch their pictures
on the day previous to that appointed for the private view.
10. All works must be promptly removed on the closing of the
Exhibition, or they will be stored at the owner’s risk and expense.
11. Every possible care will be taken of Exhibits, but the Society
will not hold itself accountable in case of injury or loss, nor will it pay the
carriage of any package which may be presented by carriers, unpack or
re-pack any works.
12. Members who submit works for Exhibition must be residents in
the Australasian Colonies, and in the event of any residing temporally in
any other country, he must obtain special permission of the Council for
Exhibition of his works.


New South Wales'!
to Wit J
In the matter of
The Art Society of
New South Wales
and
in the matter of The
Companies Act.
I certify that the Company styled The Art
Society of New South Wales is incorporated
and that the said Society is Registered under
Clause 54 of the Companies Act.
Dated at Sydney this Twenty-sixth day
of September in the year of our Lord
One Thousand Eight Hundred and
Eighty-seven.
E. G. WARD
Registrar-General
Acting as Registrar of Joint Stock Companies.


This is the Schedule marked
Articles of Association of the Art !
LIST OF
A’Beckett, M. E., Wentworth court,
Elizabeth street
Ashton, J. E., Beaumont Chambers, 88
King street
Abbott, J. H. M., “Tarella,” Amhurst
street, North Sydney
Allen, Miss, Botany street, Waverley
Armstrong, Miss, Auburn
Abbottt, Sir J. P., 14 Castlereagh street
Bennett, J. A., Wahroongah
Bevan, E., “ Dunholme,” Vernon street,
Strathfield
Blacklock, W., Box 921, G.P.O.
Boessar, F., “Wendouree,” Cooper street,
Paddington
Bowry, W., Engineer-in-Chief’s Office
Brown, J. G., Water Conservation,
Works Department
Brown, Miss, Lyndhurst Chambers,
Elizabeth street
Burdekin, S., Macquarie street North
Burne, Dr., 1 Lyons’ Terrace, Liverpool
street
Butler, W. T., Survey Office
Byrne, J. F., 5 Gresham street
Batchen, D. H., “Tyagong,” Shepherd
street, Ashfield
Burgess, J. 0., Grafton
Butterworth, Mrs., “ Cadaxton,” Double
Bay
Birkenhead, W., “ Tulloona,” Park road,
Burwood
Bloxsome, Ri, “ Merone,” Elizabeth Bay
Bell, Miss Ada, Sydney
Bannister, Mrs., “Canagroo,” Russell
street, Bathurst
Bennett, Mrs. J. A., Wahroonga
Barratt, W., French’s road, Willoughby
Boyce, Mrs., St. Paul’s Parsonage,
Redfern
Barnett, H. W., 496 George street
Brownlow, Miss O. M., “ Eaglescourt,”
Bairnsdale, Victoria
Brownlow, Miss A., “ Eaglescourt, ”
Bairnsdale, Victoria
Brewster, J. J., 20 Suffolk street, Pad-
dington
I “A” referred to in the annexed
Society of New South Wales.
MEMBERS
Benjamin, Miss, Waverley road, Wool
lahra
Butterworth, A. R., “ Cadaxton,” Double
Bay
Bloxsome, Mrs., “ Merone,'’ Elizabeth
Bay
Brady, Dr., Lyons’ Terrace, Hyde Park
Board, G., “ Glenbank,” Norton street,
Ashfield
Barlow, A., “ Airmount,” Carrington
road, Waverley
Blashki, M., Falk’s Studios, George street
Brunton, J., Her Majesty’s Theatre,
Pitt street
Benton, J. 8., 90 Pitt street
Blashki, David, 169 Clarence street
Callan, H. W., 318 George street
Chambers, 8., Maryvale, Barraba
Chambers, W. E., Bank Chambers,
Market and Pitt streets
Chappie, A. W., “Invernay,” New
Canterbury road, Petersham
Chipman, H. S., 54 Margaret street
Coffey, A. R., “ Winchcombe,” Ocean
street, Woollahra
Collingridge, A., Norwich Chambers,
Hunter street
Collingridge, G., Hornsby Junction
Combes, Hon. E., Glanmire
Combes, Miss, Glanmire
Commons, D. G. G., Pymble
Collins, E. C., Reuter’s Telegram Co.,
no Pitt street
Carter, Miss L., “Montrose,” Nelson
Bay road, Waverley
Carter, N. A. “ Elsinore,” Marian street,
Enmore
Cameron, A., Athenaeum Club
Creed, Miss, 55 Surry Street, Darling-
hurst
Carter, R. T., Jamieson street
Creagh, Miss H. G., “ Staverton,”
Strathfield
Cusack, Miss A. M., Norwich Chambers,
Hunter street
Clarke, Miss, “Abbotsleigh,” Parramatta
21


Curtis, Miss, 5 Castle Terrace, Point
Piper road, Woollahra
Creagh, Miss A. C., “ Staverton,” Strath-
field
Cotton, H. W., Survey Office, Albury
Cooper, Miss, “Ramsgate,’ Chandos
street, Ashfield
Cocks, R. S., Manning street, Kiama
Cusack, Miss E., Norwich Chambers,
Hunter street
Creed, Miss M., Wallis street, Woollahra
Coldham, Mrs., Ocean street, Woollahra
Christmas, E. W., School of Arts, St.
Leonards
Coutts, Gordon, Grosvenor Chambers,
9 Collins street, Melbourne
Coggan, T., “ Wymer Cottage,” Ridge
street, North Sydney
Daplyn, A. J., 187 Castlereagh street
Dean, T., Railway Parade, Kogarah
Dunnicliffe, Miss, 58 Palace street,
Petersham
Day, W. E., “Ealing,” Edgecliffe road,
Woollahra
Deane, Miss, “ Waimea,” Woollahra
Draper, Mrs. J., “ Redclyffe,” Black-
heath
Dalgarno, J., General Post Office
Daniel, G. A., Old Canterbury road,
Summer Hill
Deane, Miss M. E., “Blanerne,”
Hunter’s Hill
Drewe, Miss, 24 Reynolds street,
Balmain
Diston, J. S., Norwich Chambers,
Hunter street
Dodds, Leonard, Pitt Street
Edwards, Mrs., “ Eora,” Oxford street,
Paddington
Fairfax, J. R., Herald Office
Faur, E. Du, Box 690, G.P.O.
Felton, Miss, Goodhope street, Pad-
dington
Fischer, A. J., 90 William street
Fullwood, A. H., Beaumont Chambers,
88 King street
Fitzgerald, Miss, “ Adraville,” Hunter’s
Hill
Fitzgerald, G.,“Adraville,”Hunter’sHill
Fuller, Miss, c/o F. W. Parsons,
Strathfield
Fleming, Miss, Sydney
Flockton, Miss, No. 3 Victoria Arcade,
Castlereagh street
Fitzgerald, J.D., Charles street, Enmore
Fullwood, F., Union Chambers, 70 Pitt
street
Greaves, W. A. 8., “ Braylesford,"
Bondi
Griffiths, E. W., 187 Clarence street
Grosse, E. M., Electric Photo Engraving
Co., Pitt street
Garlick, H. G., Anson street, Orange
Gordon, J. C., Lyceum Theatre
Goodridge, Miss, Hunter’s Hill
Halligan, Mrs. G. H., “ Riversleigh,”
Hunter’s Hill
Hanson, A. J., “ Creewood,” Concord
road
Harris, J., Ultimo
Heron, W., 80 Clarence street
Hills, H. G., c/o J. W. Gibson, 85 Pitt
street
Hunt, C. H., 14 Wynyard Buildings,
Wynyard Square
Hughes, W., 231 William street
Heunert, W., New South Head road,
Double Bay
Hardy, N., Sydney Mail Office-
Hamilton, Miss, “ Latonia,” Queen
street, Woollahra
Hodgson, Miss, “Ernest Leigh,” Avoca
street, Eandwick
Haight, Miss L., “ Undine,” Vernon
street, Strathfield
Haughton, G., Stewart street, Bathurst
Hall, Miss V., St. George’s Hill, Hobart
Hale, A., Pitt Street
Hill, Mrs., “ Rancliffe,” Ocean street,
Woollahra
Humphries, E., “Beulah,” Watson’s
Bay
Hawley, Mrs., St. James’ Chambers,
King street
Henry, T. S., 38 Elizabeth street
Holdsworth, Miss L., “Eaton,” Bays-
water road, Darlinghurst
Henderson, Miss, “ Ochtertyre,” Alt
street, Ashfield
Hopkins, L., Bulletin Office
Hume, Mrs., c/o Mrs. Nisbet, Inverell
Harris, Captain, Bank of Australasia,
City >
Harvey, J., Chandos street, Ashfield
Hughes, T., “ Brantwood,” Darling
Point
Hughes, Mrs., “Brantwood,” Darling
Point
Houston, Miss, Flood street, Bondi
Hunt, Miss, Auburn street, Goulburn
Hall, Mrs., 42 Alberto Terrace,
Darlinghurst
Hadfield, G. W., Savings Bank, Barrack
street
22


Inglis, J., “Craigo,” Strathfield
Irwin, H., 74 Castlereagh street
lendrzejowski, Miss, 246 Elswick street,
Leichhardt
Inman, W. A., “ Eringah,” Elizabeth
Bay
Joseland, H., 10 Union Bank Chambers,
Pitt street
Johnston, A., 388 George street
James, S. H., O’Connell street, North
Adelaide
Jones, Trevor, “ Tremayne,” North
Sydney
Kemp, W. E., Architects’ Branch, Dept.
Public Instruction, Lands Office
Kent, H. C., Bell’s Chambers, Pitt street
Kenway, A. G., Glebe Island
Kilby, H. F„ Hunter’s Hill
Knox, E. W., “ Rona,” Bellevue Hill
Knight, J. A., Thirroul, Illawarra
Kennedy, Miss, Gunning, N. S. W.
Ker, W. A., 482 George street
Lister, W. Lister, Paling’s Buildings,
off George street
Loudon, Miss, “ Essexville,” Parnell
street, Strathfield
Lyon, J. L., 179 Liverpool street
Lachaume, J. J., 54 Wynyard square
Long, S., 320 Abercrombie street, Red-
fern
Lomer, Miss, Lucas road, Burwood
Leipner, Mrs., “ Fairlea,” Long Nose
Point, Snails’ Bay
Leysalle, E., “ Richmond,” Edgecliffe
road, Woollahra
Ludowici, Miss, “ Northwood,” North
Willoughby
Lambert, G. W. T.. London street,
Enmore
Leist, F., Ebley street, Waverley
Lovegrove, Miss, “ Macleay Flouse,”
Elizabeth Bay
Levey, B, A., c/o. Messrs Baker & Rouse,
George street
Leslie, A. G., 221 Glenmore road,
Paddington
Lennard, Mr., Canley Vale
Macllwaine, Mrs., Pymble
Mahony, F. P., Bank Chambers, Market
and Pitt streets
Mann, G. V. F., Art Society’s Rooms,
Union Chambers, 70 Pitt street
Manson, Donald, 16 Wynyard Square
Mason, J. S., Waltham Buildings, Bond
street
Mather, J., Studio, Austral Buildings,
Collins street, East Melbourne
Minns, B. E., Otis Chambers, King
street
Marony, W., Orange
Mullens, J., Shaftesbury road, Burwood
Muskett, Miss J., 143 Elizabeth street
Maitland, D. M., Lands Office
Mighell, Miss, “ Lindfield,” Watkin
street, Newtown
Mullen, Miss E., “ Avoca,” Palace street,
Petersham
Meston, Miss E., Paling’s Buildings, off
George street
Mulligan, Miss M., “ Arrawatta,”
Waverley
Morton, P. H., Macquarie street
Macintosh, G., Technical College, Ultimo
Marshall, Mrs., Victoria street, Waver -
ley
Moir, W. A., Government Savings’ Bank
Munro, Dr., “ Dalston,” 112 Gleberoad-
Glebe
Munro, Mrs., “Dalston,” 112 Glebe
road, Glebe
Moffatt, Mrs. T. H., “ Marley,” Blue
street, North Sydney
Millar, Miss E., 40 Darlinghurst road
Macready, H. W., Norton street,
Leichhardt
McGregor, A. S., “ Studio,” Planet
Chambers, 285 Collins street, Melb.
McEwen, W., Elizabeth street
McCarthy, Dr., Elizabeth street
McMaster, W., 10 Bridge street
Maclean, Miss, Yarrandally road, Darl-
ing Point
McCarthy, Miss M., Commercial Hotel,
George street, North
Macintosh, W. P., 186 Hereford street,
Forest Lodge
Nicholas, W., Waterworks, Prospect
Norton, Hon. Dr., Australian Club
Norton, Miss, “ Ecclesbourne,” Double
Bay
Neave, MissN., Box 450, G.P.O.
Newman, Miss Clyda, “ Glen Rhoda,”
Lower Forth Street, Woollahra
Neame, J. A., King’s School, Parramatta
Oliver, A., Land Court, Darlinghurst
Overman, Miss, French’s Road,
Willoughby
Odling, H. C., Queen’s Place
Odling, W. A., “ Norwood,” Hornsby
O’Brien, Miss, “Kinkora,” Cooma
Palmer, Miss C. J., 28 Bayswater road.
Phillips, Mrs., “ Argyle,” 2 Prince’s road
Darlinghurst.
Piguenit, W. C., Hunter’s Hill.
23


Peddle, J., Box 1221, G.P.O.
Paul, Mrs., “ Glendorgal,” Church street,
Waver ley.
Poole, Miss, 55 Surrey street, Darling-
hurst.
Payten, Miss Key, Kinmore, Goulburn.
Palmer, Miss J. 1., “ Daltonville,” Junc-
tion street, Woollahra.
Potter, Miss, Kennedy street, Glebe
Point.
Pitt, C., Pastoral Chambers, George
street.
Peter, Miss, “ Falkirk House,” Curtis
road, near Mort street, Balmain.
Pratten, Mrs., “ Planthurst,” Holden
street, Ashfield.
Peplow, F., 34 Denison street, Newtown.
Quaife, Dr. W. F., 195 Elizabeth street.
Rae, J., Liverpool street, Darlinghurst.
Eeid, D. G., 8 Bishopsgate street, Cam-
perdown.
-Rochfort, J. A. T., “ Meringlo,” Stan-
more road, Petersham.
Russell, Miss U. S., “ Keston,” Kirri-
billi Point, North Sydney. •
Roberts, Tom, Eiley Bros’. Buildings,
George and Bathurst streets.
Ruse, Byron, Elizabeth street, Ashfield.
Robinson, Miss, “ Erina,” Five Dock.
Rutherford, Miss, Bathurst.
Richardson, E., 7 Darlinghurst road.
Eeid, A. G., Cary street, Marrickville.
Riches, E., Mosman.
Salwey, Mrs., “The Meads,” Enfield.
Seymour, W. F., 92 Grafton street,
Woollahra.
Shiels, Nicholas, 178 Queen street,
Woollahra.
Shorter, Mrs., Box 469 G.P.O.
Shorter, J., Box 469 G.P.O.
Smith, Miss, “ Shrublands,” Marrick-
Spencer, E. V., Moore street, Bondi.
Souter, D. H., “ Halkirk,” Woodstock
street, Waverley.
Spain, A, Vickery’s Chambers, Pitt st.
Spence, P. F. S., Paling’s Buildings, off
George street.
Spong, W. 8., 148 Phillip street
Starkey, A., “Smithfield Grange,’’Coogee
Stephens, Miss, gga Pitt street
Stocks, E. D., Drouin West, Victoria
Stoddard, Mrs., Paling’s Buildings, off
George Street
Stoddard, F. W., Col. Secy’s. Office
Streeton, A., c/o. W. H. Read, 18
Barrack street
Styles, G. M., Commercial Bank
Syer, W. S., Alfred street, St. Leonards
Stone, J. W., 133 Macquarie street,
North
Stone, Mrs., 133 Macquarie street, North
Scarvell, Miss, 49 Eoslyn Gardens,
Elizabeth Bay
Smyth, Miss, “ Gloucester,” Market
street, Wollongong
Sparke, Miss E. M., “ Maramanah,”
Macleay street
Simmonetti, Signor, Eose street, Snails’
Bay, Balmain
Simmons, Mrs., 62 Alberto Terrace,
Darlinghurst
Stuart, Mrs. J., Canargroo School,
Brewongle
Scott, M., 74 Castlereagh street
Sproule, Miss, Hurstville
Sani, Signor, Trafalgar and Booth
streets, Annandale
Spark, Miss, “ Meaford,” Gower street,
Summer Hill
Smith, Miss Shepherd, Parramatta
Spence, Mrs., Prospect road, Summer
Hill
Spence, V. A., A. M. P. Society
Sheriff, D. J. P., Trafalgar street,
Annandale
Stoddard, Miss, Paling’s Buildings, off
George street
Steffanoni, Miss, “Brighton House,”
Church Hill
Sutherland, J., 44 Cromwell road, South
Yarra, Melbourne
Thomas, G. A., Bray street, off Alfred
street, St. Leonards
Tindall, C. E. S., Sutton’s Chambers,
268 George street
Trickett, Hon. W. J., 28 Castlereagh
street
Tidswell, T., Bell’s Chambers, Pitt street
Taylor, Miss A., Superior Public School,
Pyrmont
Taylor, W. J., Dudley street, Coogee
Thorpe, J., Engraving Department,
Sydney Mail Office
Tristram, J. W., Lands Office
Tillock, Miss, Addison road, Petersham
Taverner, W. E., Wentworth road,
Burwood
Tarrant, 0., Sutton’s Chambers, 268
Georrge street
Vernon, W. L., Government Architects’
Department
Van de Velde, C., Wynyard Buildings,
Wynyard Square
2 4


Watkins, A. J., Bridge street, Gladesville
Watkins, J. L., Gladesville
Wells, E. M. S., Architects’ Branch,
Department Public Instruction
White, Hon. E. H. D., Union Club
Williams, P., “ Lugano,” Hunter’s Hill
Willis, Miss, “The Parsonage,” Sutton
Forest, via Moss Vale
Wilson, Mrs., “Dalston,” Point Piper
road
Wilson, H. S., St. James’ Chambers,
King street
Woodhouse, F. W., “Brierley Cottage,”
Hayes street, Neutral Bay.
White, J., 36 Cambridge street,
Paddington.
Watkins, J. S.
Wallis, Mrs., 22 Lower Fort street,
Dawes’ Point
Webb, Miss M., “ Ashgrove,” Elizabeth
street, Ashfield
Wright, Miss, 153 Brougham street,
Darlinghurst
Wolinski, J., The Synagogue
Wright, G., Arthur street, Ashfield
Winckler, A. E., Box 1222, G.P.O.
West, Miss, Moncur street, Woollahra
Welding, H. J., “ Oakleigh,” Hereford
street, Forest Lodge
Wright, J. P., Brunswick Parade,
Ashfield
Wilson, W. J., 151 Dowling street, East
Sydney
Walsh, F., Parliamentary Library
Williams, Miss G., “ Holmwood,”
Strathfield
Wilson, Walter, Chief Secretary’s Office
White, J. Murray, Athenaeum Club
Warden, A. W., Herbert street, Dulwich
Wright, Mrs., “ Eivelyn,” Gerard street,
Neutral Bay
2 5


UsTIDIEJIK.
Accounts of Society
Actions, Council may take or defend
Alphabetical Roll of Members
Alteration of Rules
Annual Meeting
Annual Meeting when held
Annual Report
Annual Subscription
Annual Subscription when payable
Applications for Membership
Arbitration
Art Union
Association, Name of
Auditors, Duties and Election of ..
Ballot, how directed
Banking Account of Society
Buildings may be erected by the Society
Buildings may be leased by Council
By-Laws
Candidates for Membership . ..
Ceasing Membership, Liability of ..
Chairman of Special Meetings
Chairman of Council voting
Change of Address of Members
Cheques, how signed
Common Seal of Society on documents
Common Seal, how used ..
Conduct of Members
Constitution
Council Act without Fees..
Council of Society
Council, how elected
Council may call General Meetings
Council may hire or purchase Property
Council may lease Buildings
Council may take or defend Actions
Council may vary or repeat By-Laws
Council, Members absent from
Council, Members disqualified from
Council, Nominations for..
Council, Quorum of
Council, Powers and Duties of
Council Retiring may be Re-elected
Council, Special Meetings of
Council, when to meet
Councils, Vacancies in ~
Council, Vacancies in
Council, when retire
Custody of Moneys
Debentures, Issue of
Disposal of Property at Dissolution
Dissolution, Property how disposed of
Clause Page
47 14
26 II
i 5 8
39 13
i 7 9
35 i 2
32 12
8 7
1 17
5 6
58 15
11 1
1 3
50 14
21 g
43 14
3 3
26 10
o 17
5 6
ii 7
37 13
g 18
io 7
44 14
34 12
42 13
12 7
o 6
13 8
13 8
14 8
33 12
26 io
26 IO
26 II
26 II
io 18
io 18
i 6 8
30 12
25 IO
ig g
27 12
29 12
23 IO
24 IO
i 7 9
43 14
3 4
6 4
6 4
26


Documents may bear Seal of Society
Donations to Society
Duties and Powers of Council
Election of Council
Election of Members
Election of Scrutineers ..
Erasure of Members
Exhibition Regulations
Fining of Members, Council power
General Meetings, Council may call
Hire of Property, Council may
Honorary Members
Income of Society, how applied
Income of Society not to be transferred
Indemnity of Officers
Injury to Property
Insufficient Nominations ..
Interpretation Clause
Investment of Money, may be
Issue of Debentures
Lectures, Admission to
Legal Proceedings, Power of Council
Liability of Members ceasing
Losses, Members contribute to
Meeting, Annual
Meeting, Annual, when held
Meetings, Council may call General
Meetings, Council may call Public
Meetings, General
Meetings, Special, how convened ..
Members eligible for office
Members entitled to vote ..
Members contribute to losses
Members, Address of
Members, Election of
Members eligible for Election to Council ..
Members, P'ining or Suspending of
Members in Arrear with Subscriptions
Members Liability, when ceasing ..
Members resigning
Members, Suspension of ..
Members may introduce Friends to Rooms..
Members struck off Register
Membership, Candidates for
Memorandum of Association
Moneys may be invested ..
Mortgage, Property may be
Name of the Association ..
New Members nominated
Nominations for Council •.
Nominations for Council insufficient
Nominations for Membership
Nomination of New Members
Non-Members visiting Rooms
Object of the Society
Officers may be remunerated
Clause Page
34 12
13 18
25 10
15 8
6 7
21 g
9 7
O IQ
26 II
33 12
26 10
13 18
4 4
4 4
56 15
i 4 i 8
22 IO
6i 16
3 4
3 4
12 18
26 11
11 7
5 4
17 12
35 9
33 12
26 11
35 12
36 13
5 17
6 17
5 4
10 7
5 6
15 8
26 II
2 I 7
ii 7
ii 7
12 7
8 i 8
9 7
5 6
o 3
3 4
3 4
1 3
7 17
16 8
22 10
5 6
7 17
8 18
3 3
4 4
27


Officers, Removal of
Power and Duties of Council
Property disposed of at dissolution
Property of Society, Real and Personal
Property, Injury to
Property may be hired or leased by Counci
Property may be Mortgaged
Public Meetings, Council may call..
Purchase of Property, Power of Council
Quorum of Council
Real and Personal Property of Society
Re-election of Retiring Council
Resignation of Members ..
Registered Office of Society
Registration, Number of Members for
Regulations for Exhibition
Remuneration to Officers and Servants
Report, Annual
Retiring Council may be Re-elected
Rules, Alteration of
Scrutineers, Election of ..
Society may erect Buildings
Society, Object of
Society, Real and Personal Property of
Society, Registered Office of
Special Meetings of Council
Special Meetings, how convened ..
Special Meetings, Business of
Striking Members off Register
Student Members
Sub-Committee, Appointment of ..
Subscription, Annual
Subscription. Annual, when due
Subscription, Arrears of ..
Suspension of Members ..
Suspension of Members ..
Vacancies in Council
Vote, Members entitled to
Voting at General Meetings
Winding up, Members liable for ..
Winding up, Property how disposed
Winding up, Motion for same
Clause Page
26 II
25 10
6 4
3 3
14 18
26 10
3 4
26 11
26 10
3° 12
3 3
19 9
11 7
2 3
1 6
o 19
4 4
3 2 12
19 9
39 I 3
21 9
3 3
3 4
3 3
2 3
27 12
36 13
40 13
MoCarron, Stewart & Co., Printers,
Sydney.
28




