

CHRISTIANITY
AND DOGMA
PROFESSOR ANGUS TO HIS CRITICS
ADDRESS DELIVERED BEFORE THE N.S.W. GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, SYDNEY, 18th MAY, 1933
THIRD EDITION




CHRISTIANITY AND DOGMA




CHRISTIANITY
AND DOGMA
PROFESSOR ANGUS TO HIS CRITICS
ADDRESS DELIVERED BEFORE THE N.S.W. GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, SYDNEY, 18th MAY, 1933
THIRD EDITION
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
« 89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
1933


1
SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
1933
First Edition - -- -- -- - 19 May 1933
Second Edition - -- -- -- 23 May 1933
Third Edition - -- -- -- - 2 July 1933


Quod homo est, esse Christus voluit, ut et homo possit
esse, quod Christus est. . . . Hunc igitur comitamur, hunc
sequimur, hunc habemus itineris Ducem, lucis Principem,
salutis Auctorem, coelum pariter et patrem quaerentibus et
credentibus pollicentem. Quod est Christus, erimus Chris-
tiani, si Christum fuerimus imitati. (Cyprian.)




CHRISTIANITY AND DOGMA
After a prolonged disciplina silentii, during which I have
learned much from the eloquence of others in newspapers
and pulpit attacks, I should like to make a few statements.
As I listened to the attacks made upon me during the last
Assembly, one dominant impression was made upon my
mind. This impression has been deepened as I have read
the newspaper controversy and the pulpit attacks, and especi-
ally as I listened to the three speeches made at a recent
Presbytery meeting, and this impression is that a certain
small section of the Church or a few of its spokesmen have
lost the sense of spiritual proportion.
When the world is yearning for a vital and practical
religion, at once satisfying the highest aspirations of the
heart and consonant with the scientific and philosophical
thought of the day, it has been offered “the lost radiance
of the Christian religion,” a radiance lost in the mists of
controversy and tarnished by a spirit of devastating bitter-
ness. We have acted as if Christians were not the light
of the world, but merely members of a sectarian debating
society. Is our historic Church to become an exclusive
dogmatic sect? Or is it to be at least as catholic as the
Anglican Church whose Modernists, Anglo-Catholics, and
Evangelicals live under the same ecclesiastical roof? Or
less catholic than the Roman Communion with its Benedic-
tine scholars (to whom I owe a debt) and its Passionist
Fathers; and with its seemingly incompatible opposites of
legalists and mystics? We owe it to the public to speak
plainly on these alternatives of exclusiveness or catholicity.
The world has struck its tents and is on the march, but
we professed leaders are showing ourselves more expert
in transmitting correct traditions than in discerning the signs
of the times. We are making theories of Jesus’s person


more important than the personal loyalty and spirit of sacri-
fice which Jesus considered distinctive of His followers. We
seem to act on the assumption that the Church must be
pushed back into 1901 or 1647 and kept there by legislation
and votes. Is it not possible that the Church has made some
advances in thought since 1647 and perhaps seen more of
the love of God and the purposes of God since the West-
minster Divines codified their religious opinions between
1643 and 1649? Is religious life, which creates theologies,
not also the great iconoclast of theologies?
The situation has reminded me of the two sons of thunder
in the company of Jesus, who, when the Samaritans
declined their message, showed the nature of their loyalty
to their Lord by requesting Him to call down fire from
heaven to destroy their opponents; but the Master, Who had
suffered the insult and had been offered such dubious
loyalty, replied, “Ye know not of what spirit ye are.” The
sons of thunder are not an extinct religious species; they
have now come to invoke their ecclesiastical fulminations on
my devoted head, not because they have proved my teaching
to be disloyal to or inconsistent with the teaching and spirit
of Jesus, but because of its alleged inconsistency with sub-
ordinate standards which were approved in 1647, or with
their interpretations of those standards. And surely Jesus is
a surer guide than our subordinate standards. Has Christ,
once after stern conflict proclaimed as “the end of the
Law,” abdicated His unassailable spiritual supremacy to
condescend to exercise a legislative sway under the charter
of our subordinate standard? Are we really “under law to
Christ ?” Or are we “under law” to our own standards ?
It was only a worldly ecclesiastic that once trembled for
the Ark of the Lord. Those who know God as the home
of man’s soul, those who are gripped by the inward cer-
tainties, and those who know something of the restless
upward strivings and aspirations of the human spirit, will
never tremble for the Ark of the Lord, especially when
the issue and conflict are only over matters of interpretation.
The sense of disproportion will be more forcibly realized
if we ask what the world demands in the way of an


adequate religion, or if we try to discover the conception of
religion that the world outside has acquired from this bitter
controversy and these repeated attacks upon my teaching.
The world wishes to see Jesus, and we have offered it
Christology or our disputes on Christology. The world
recognizes the spirit of Jesus, especially when incarnate in
His followers; but this controversy has offered the world
disputations about the Person of Christ. The world in its
perplexity turns to us for “some sure word of God, or
raft” which it can trust; but the world has been informed
that our primary concern is to deal with religious theories
of the past, and to make these normative for the present
and for all time.
The world realizes that character is the supreme posses-
sion of man and believes that religion should steady man
in his purposes and guide him in the arduous task of
character-building; whereas this controversy has given the
impression that the Church exists not primarily to promote
Christian character but to produce and conserve dogmas.
The world recognizes the fruits of Christian life under the
most diverse theological systems, but we seem to have
asserted the principle of uniformity of doctrine which makes
all inquiry impossible. The interests which were of supreme
moment to Jesus were righteousness, truth, kindliness, love,
service and imitation of God; Jesus had nothing to say of
virgin births and trinities, unitarianism and propitiation;
the authority even of the supreme standard, and the fallen
nature of man, and His own Deity; and yet these are the
things which this controversy has offered as surrogates for
the eternal values of Jesus and His captivating simplicities.
The more we contemplate heresy hunting, the more we
realize the failure of perspective. It seems to me like a
tithing of mint and cumin and anise, while the weightier
matters of service for the Kingdom and the moral certainties
are secondary. It seems like trying to satisfy a hungry
company by reading a cookery-book or expatiating on the
excellent details of the menu and then wondering why the
hungry do not come to us again for refreshment. We


cannot make a quarrel over shibboleths a source of moral
guidance. The shallow verbiage of theological strife is a
poor gospel to offer where the eternal issues of life are at
stake; the tormenting perplexity and anguish of the world’s
soul cannot be healed by words of strife. The trivialities
of ancient scholasticism do not supply reservoirs of spiritual
power.
The Church might learn a lesson from past controversies.
The Greek Church historians, who preserve for us the ac-
counts of the rancorous Christological controversies of the
fourth and fifth centuries, are painful reading except to
veteran controversialists. The Church was never less Christ-
like than when engaged in disputes over the Person of
Christ, in which the Spirit of Christ had little influence
over wrestling ecclesiasts. Gibbon caustically but truthfully
remarked that the Church had lost the spirit of the Gospel,
and that the world had learned the spirit of the Church.
Which things are a parable in moral proportion.
The grandeur of spiritual ideals should not be tarnished
by our Lilliputian dogmatic interests and animosities. The
world appreciates the glory of the Christian enterprise, but
this controversy amuses and disgusts the world by our
pettiness. The faith that works through love means more
to the world than all creedal zeal.
We are making the fatal error of identifying religion
with theology, and faith with beliefs or subscription to
articles. We cannot make any dogmatics of the past the
lodestar for our future. We dare not treat truth as some-
thing we can imprison in formularies to which we sign our
names and insist on others doing likewise. Truth is rather
something that holds us, that comes possessingly upon us
with its imperativeness. Our life consists not in the futile
controversies of buried yesterdays, but rather in vitalizing
faith and courage in the present and hope for the future.
This religious warfare tends to give a distorted view of
Christianity. Our faith did not take its rise in a graveyard
outside Jerusalem, but in the divine personality of the
Prince of Life. Christianity consists not of creeds but of


deeds and thinking the thoughts of God. It is vision and
courage, rather than doctrinal sediment. Christianity has
God and God only as its centre. The true task of Christi-
anity is to make men God-like and centres of creative
goodness. Christianity is fellowship with the Father and the
Son, rather than a consensus of opinions. Christian truth is
ever pregnant of fuller truth, else it becomes lifeless dogma.
Christianity does not put twentieth-century men into a
twentieth-century world to live with first-century minds and
a first-century apocalyptic outlook. “True Christianity,”
says Edward Caird, “is not something which was published
in Palestine and which has been handed down by a dead
tradition ever since; it is a living and growing spirit, that
learns the lessons of history, and is ever manifesting new
powers and leading on to new truths.” Yes, leading on to
new truths and to new application of truth.
Christianity, because in one aspect it is a search for truth,
leads to diversity of belief rather than to uniformity. Where
the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty.
Facts of time and within time may have a sub specie
aeternitatis aspect but not legislative authority. Faith is not
linked chiefly or only with verifiable facts of history, still
less with shifting opinions. It is the pursuit of ideals, it is
enduring as seeing the invisible. A particular age or council
cannot be given authority over all other ages. While history
is still in the making no one chapter can prevent the next
from being written. Christian men may also be thinking
men. If they will, they may present to God their whole
personality in its wealth and fullness. The maturity of our
faith may be more glorious even than its nativity. The
charter of our race is the privilege of striving; and in all
our strivings the truth of God has its authority in its self-
evidencing character. The mind is of God as much as the
spirit or soul, and as participator in the Eternal Mind, must
be granted its right to seek and test and accept truth.
This theological strife also seems to me to give an awry
view of Jesus and His service. The eminently sane admoni-


tion of a veteran historian of early Christianity, Professor
Gwatkin, should not fall unheeded on our ears:
The Gospel is neither a Protestant idea nor a Catholic organiza-
tion, neither a Greek philosophy nor a Latin law, but a living
Person, on Whom faith can feed continually, and only faith,
for it is plain absurdity to fancy that anything else can have
touch of spiritual things. The witness of history confirms the
witness of every spiritual man, that the questions of government,
of discipline, of ritual, of dogma, which occupy the noisy world
are very minor matters, however needful it be to get some of
them settled. History points us back with solemn emphasis to
Christ Himself. All Christian doctrine is summed up in Christ’s
Person, all Christian morality in Christ’s example.
Jesus is not a subject for debate, but the Master to be
followed in our endeavours to assert and maintain the
essential spirituality of human life. As an ancient Church
father asserts, “Christ is Truth, not convention; Truth not
tradition.” His message is not exhausted but becomes diviner
as we explore and apply it. In his honour we may point
to the borrowed or adventitious titles of ancient Messianism,
or we may point to the inherent splendour of Jesus’s life,
which cannot be lessened. The main question concerning
Jesus is, “Lovest thou Me?” “What think ye of Christ?” is
an ancient question, the answer to which must be moral
and committal. What does Jesus do but reveal the nature
and love of God and call man to his Divine Sonship? “As
He is so are we in this world” is more important than all
theological subtleties. His words have been sent forth and
shall never return void; His spiritual idealism has rooted
itself securely in the highest nature of man. His name
has come to stand, and shall stand more challengingly, for
all the highest that man can know or dream of; His Spirit
will cause renaissance after renaissance in the religious
history of our Western world. His faith won victory for
Himself and for His followers so that our faith in the same
Eternal Father should continue His victory. We should,
therefore, seek Him not among the tombs of the past but
in the needs and aspirations of the present.
Does this controversy not endanger a true understanding
of the programme of Jesus? Should we not depart from
controversy in order to regain a truer perspective? For


example, we hear much about the ancient idea of
“propitiation.” Have the following five questions raised by
propitiation been investigated and answered:
(1) Who propitiated?
(2) Who or what was propitiated?
(3) What exactly was the propitiation?
(4) What is its soteriological modus operandi?
(5) What conception of God does it involve?
While these questions are being answered by our contro-
versialists and theologians, may we not occupy ourselves
with Jesus’s simple and luminous way of life? May we
not meanwhile go on proclaiming that Christ died for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow in His steps
Who did no sin, and thus continue His redemptive work for
our fellow men? May we not find a challenge in the death of
Christ more important than all theories, that as He laid down
His life for us, so ought we to lay down our lives for our
brothers? While theologians are discussing the place of
sacrifice in religion, we may remind ourselves that the only
kind of sacrifice required by Jesus was self-sacrifice, and
that self-sacrifice is the only sacrifice required by Christi-
anity or of any service to the world.
“What,” asks the Christian philosopher Pringle-Pattison,
“was the secret of Christianity, the new interpretation of
life by which it conquered the world? The answer is in a
sense a commonplace. It was the lesson of self-sacrifice, of
life for others, precisely through which, nevertheless, the
truest and intensest realization of the self was to be attained
—in the Pauline phrase, dying to live, in the words of Jesus,
losing one’s life to find it. This is the heavenly wisdom
. . . This conception of the meaning of life, embodied
in the figure of One Who spoke of Himself as being among
men as one that serveth, this was the victory which over-
came the world. It is the final abandonment of the hedonistic
ideal, through the recognition of the inherent emptiness of
the self-centred life. The whole standard of judgment upon
life and the purpose of the world is accordingly changed.
For if this is the deepest insight into human life, must we
not also recognize it as the open secret of the universe?”


This is a conception of sacrifice which should satisfy the
theologian. It is a conception of religion that the world
can understand.
While controversialists are discussing the intricate ques-
tions of resurrection and of re-animation of a body from a
tomb and the subsequent fate of a resuscitated body, we
may proclaim without fear of contradiction that Jesus lives in
the lives of His followers and that such a life matters more
to the world than all theories about resurrection and re-
animation. He is the ever-living Lord, and we have been
raised in and with Him to sit in the heavenly places of life.
He is a Presence to be felt and known in darkness and in
light. Truly, God has given unto us Eternal Life and this
Life is in His Son. Death for us has no terrors. It is
overcome in the higher obediences of daily life and in our
attitude to the things that are unseen and eternal.
Immortality is not only a promise or a hope, it is an
experience of the enlarged life here and now. It is our
ability, in the words of the philosopher Hoffding, “to live
eternal life in the midst of time.” And not only shall we
live with Him, we live now with Him in the love of God;
in a life which daily increases this conviction “that nothing
can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.”
While controversialists are discussing the nature of grace
and of sin and the miraculous or supernatural effects of
grace upon sin, those who find in Jesus the way of life
are surely justified in going on to invite men to arise, in the
farthest country and from the most, devastating experiences
of selfishness, and come to the Father. We may still believe
that there is only one way in which evil is overcome, that
is by good, and that each man in his inner life may strive
for and in his measure—the measure of his personality and
his obedience—attain unto that God-likeness proclaimed by
Christ and even that unspeakably high ideal that “ye shall
be perfect even as your Heavenly Father is perfect.” Pos-
sibly we shall have to agree with Jesus in appealing to men
through all that is best and God-like in them, rather than,
with His greatest apostle, in regarding them as “by nature
children of wrath” or with the greatest follower of that
same apostle, Augustine, as “a mass of perdition.”


In regard to the newspaper controversy and the virulent
attacks in pulpit and Presbytery made against me, I feel
that a gross injustice has been done me which cannot now
be undone. The public mind has been poisoned by misrepre-
sentations of my teaching, and bitterness has entered into
the controversy to deflect men’s minds from an unbiased
judgment. Justice must be dumb amid the strife of tongues
and during the effusion of the gall of pens.
A certain Sydney organ, in its sustained campaign against
me, cast its net far and wide, but could not secure anyone
of standing in the educational or religious world to attack
me, and in the absence of such, had to end a well-planned
campaign. That organ discovered that thinking people do
not think religion as its editor thinks his. After such
biased propaganda, how can a dispassionate verdict be
given ?
Men with the courts of the Church open to them and
cognizant of the laws of the Church appealed to this organ
and called for trial by newspaper; and then those same men
come like innocents to the Church courts to ask these courts
to accept the verdict. Further, these men have actually
done this without finding out what my teachings are.
Is there a new system of justice establishing itself in our
Church which enables any man with a suspicion of another,
or of his opinions, to make assertions and throw upon the
accused the responsibility of disproving them? Such a
method is more consonant with Soviet conceptions of justice
than with those of ordinary British courts of justice.
Am I to congratulate my opponents for having chosen
the Christmas season of goodwill for the virulence of their
attack? Are we to give the impression to the public that
the spirit of rancour evidenced in certain pulpits and con-
spicuous in other attacks, is consonant with our conception
of Christianity? It would be interesting for the history of
religion in the future to have preserved a full account of
the Christmas sermon and services in Ashfield, when a
partisan God was called upon to stay a certain plague. This
ancient conception of Deity has for thinking people passed
into the limbo of forgotten things. Is there to be no
protection for the individual from such bitter attacks as


those made upon me in certain pulpits, in the press and in
the Presbytery, especially when those attacks are based on
misrepresentations ?
If I had desired the limelight of newspapers I could
easily have surpassed the efforts of my opponents. All the
reputable newspapers of this Commonwealth, with the excep-
tion of a certain Sydney organ, were freely and generously
open to me. I must speak a word of sincere thanks to
the reporters and representatives of these newspapers in
this and other capitals, whom I was obliged repeatedly to
send away empty.
Moreover, two radio stations (not 2CH) were generously
placed at my disposal for such statements to the public as
I deemed it necessary to make. I kept silent, believing
that the Kingdom of God comes as little by newspaper con-
troversy as by observation, and because the spirit of the
controversy did not remind me or the world of the spirit of
Jesus. If the spirit manifested in the controversy is the
spirit of Christianity, we are not to be surprised that people
turn away from religion in disgust.
I have been accused of disturbing the peace of the Church.
But who are really the disturbers of the peace? Those who
deliver their own message in all sincerity without seeking
to inflict their opinions on others? Or those who cannot
permit the expression of any opinions but their own? Those
who seek the limelight of newspapers? Or those who
shrink from such publicity which inflicts schism on the
Church? Those who refuse to acknowledge or work with
any who cannot repeat their shibboleths? Or those who
would make the Church a catholic institution in which
Fundamentalists and Modernists, Monotheists and Trini-
tarians, Legalists and Mystics, work side by side with mutual
respect for each other’s convictions? Those who insist on
arraying Christians under the banners respectively of
traditionalism and inquiry? Or those who would unite all
Christians with diversity of doctrines, under the one banner
of Jesus, for the purpose of the Kingdom? I am convinced
that those who make religion a fixed system of intellectual
beliefs are more destructive of the Church’s unity and peace


than those who make religion the tocsin to action and an
attitude to eternal values.
The bond of unity is not uniformity of theological
opinions but common ideals of service. Augustine main-
tains, though he often forgot it himself, that there is only
one method of unity among men—banding them together
in one desire for the same purpose. The service of Christ,
and not Christology, is both the basis of the Church and the
one bond of union.
It is asserted that some people are distressed by my teach-
ings. Who caused this distress? It was those whose
intolerance initiated the personal attacks. This distress is
caused largely by the misrepresentations of my opponents.
I do not blame honest men for opposition due to the mis-
representations of the controversialists. I blame those who
would make Christianity a dogmatic system rather than a
spiritual enterprise. I blame those who have begun the
contest over theologies instead of staking everything upon
the moral and spiritual content of the religious message.
I blame those who have allowed themselves to be indoc-
trinated into a hard and intransigent intolerance which hurls
anathema upon all who do not promulgate their views of
religion. I blame those who fail in estimating the relative
values of theological doctrines and Christian conduct.
Strange to say, the congregations where I have preached
have experienced no such distress, but have in many cases
publicly and officially expressed their confidence in my
message.
Certain people who know not my message distress their
own souls and consider it their duty to distress other souls.
On my part, I have a genuine concern for those who are
perplexed by the dislocation of old beliefs. I feel a deep
sympathy with those who honestly say that no man having
drunk old wine asks for new, on the plea that the old is
better; but I am compelled to go on because I believe in a
progressive revelation of truth by the Spirit of truth. I
go on because I believe that it is more important to impart
a living and intelligent faith to our young people than even
to keep our old people. The only danger of losing our
elderly people is due entirely to those who have made religion


a matter of dogmas rather than the life of God in the soul
of every man. Igo on because I seek in my own humble
way to bridge the gulf between the traditionalism of the
Church and the thinking men of the present day.
All new truth, unfortunately, is fraught with pain to some.
With those, therefore, who are sincerely distressed by my
teachings, I would express my profoundest sympathy, but
I would also assure them that the foundation of God stands
sure; that criticism is but a means to an end; that the things
which can be shaken may be shaken, that the things which
cannot be shaken may remain. I would quote the assurance
of the great Rationalist, John Stuart Mill, that “whatever
else may be taken away from us by rational criticism Christ
is still left; a unique figure, not more unlike his precursors
than all His followers, even those who had the direct benefit
of His personal teaching.”
I would also remind them that the ever-living God, in
Whom they and I alike believe, must ever be the revealing
God and that His Spirit is as truly present even in this
Assembly as it was in the Westminster Assembly of 1643-9,
or at the Council of Nicaea in 325. Indeed I would even
venture to hope that that Spirit is even more truly present
to-day, because Jesus is better known and therefore better
loved. Something has been learned of the mind of Christ
since that orthodox Catholic King of the Franks, Chlodwig,
was so moved by the Passion Story of Jesus that he evi-
denced the sincerity of his conversion and the depth of
his piety by declaring, “Had I been there with my Franks I
should have avenged the insults to Him”—an attitude which
commended itself to some good churchmen.
I would agree with Dean Inge when he says, “I do
not want you to think that the whole truth of Christianity
was given once for all in the Gospels. That would be a
fatal view to take in our day when the idea of evolution
has coloured all our thought and when we are conscious
that two thousand years of human experience have certainly
not gone for nothing.”
Revelation is not a fixed quantum, it is a continuous pro-
cess in which every generation writes its Bible of testimony.
It should be sufficient for any “fearful saints” as it is for


me, to know that all who love the Lord Jesus form a
fellowship held together in the unity of the Spirit, that
In Him shall true hearts everywhere
Their high communion find;
His service is the golden cord
Close binding all mankind.
I would also remind them that the forms in which the
intellect presents moral and spiritual truth are necessarily
shaped and affected by the contemporary thought, and that
these forms change and cease to be adequate vehicles of
truth for a later age. A century ago Thomas Carlyle re-
minded his readers who dreaded signs of change that “the
body of all Truth dies; and yet in all, I say, there is a soul
which never dies—which in new and ever nobler embodiment
lives immortal as man himself.”
Emerson reminded his readers in an age of bitter theo-
logical controversy that “looking at God instantly reduces
our disposition to dissent from our brother.” In this higher
perspective the lesser diversities of the letter vanish.
I must refer to the charge of dishonesty which has been
brought against me in pulpit and press and stated in several
vulgar forms. The implication is that I make a living by a
process of lying, or by posing as fully orthodox when really
heretical. Those without sin, in their own orthodoxies, have
hastened to cast the first heap of stones at me; their con-
sciences are so much at ease from their native functions
that they can take a holiday to judge and condemn me.
Unfortunately I cannot look forward to taking such a holiday
to judge that I may not be judged. Evidently the consciences
of a few others condemn me on a matter in which my own
conscience gives the sign of approval. It should be noted
that none of these accusers has ever taken the trouble to
interview me or to assure himself that what he hawks
around is my teaching—steps which are laid down by our
code of procedure in the interests of ordinary equity. If
ever I am tempted similarly to attack another, I hope that I
shall first make sure that my accusations and insinuations are
not misrepresentations.


In 1924, when Rev. R. J. H. McGowan opposed the
appointment of a certain person to carry on my classes
during my absence, Dr Burgess used these words:
The Fundamentalists were doing more harm than the Liberals
in the Church. Insinuation was one of the most abominable
things on earth. Why did they not come straight out. If it was
not a heresy case, then let the accusers be silent, and not say
that a man was taking money from the Church and not preaching
and teaching its doctrines.
Further, how can I be accused of dishonesty when all my
teachings have been candid, unambiguous and public? My
convictions have never been derived from votes but based
on investigation and reflection, and they can never be shat-
tered by votes. Never have I misled the Church or the
public by stating truth in such an ambiguous fashion as to
mean one thing to me and another to my audience.
How can a man be accused of dishonesty who has pub-
lished a creed which has been allowed to stand unchallenged
by ecclesiastical authority for thirteen years? This creed,
written at the request of University students, was made
public for Australia. It was also brought against me by
Mr McGowan when thirteen years ago he raised the question
of heresy before the Presbytery. It was also in the hands of
the late Dr Burgess when at that same Presbytery meeting
he opposed Mr McGowan and moved the previous question.
Thus it cannot even be said that the attention of the Church
was not drawn to this creed. Surely it may reasonably be
inferred that after such action of the Presbytery and such
inaction on the part of the Assembly, I was at liberty to
hold or to teach such a conception of Christianity. If that
creed is heretical now it was heretical then and the Church
should have denounced it at the beginning. Moreover, in
last Assembly, I made an extempore but rather full statement
of my conception of Christianity and of what I was teaching
within the Church and without the Church, which appar-
ently called for no condemnation. If such a conception of
Christianity is false or heretical in 1933 it was false and
inadequate in May 1932.
The charge of dishonesty levelled against me can arise
only on the conception of Presbyterianism as being a


semper eadcm system of dogma, which is not a religion
of the Spirit but of the letter. If Presbyterianism or Chris-
tianity is a crystallized system, let us honestly tell the public
so. If a static form of religion is the desire of legalists,
let us point our people to that Church in our midst which
best supplies authoritarian and legislative religion. But
evidently the Presbyterian Church has not committed itself
to that position. For example, eleven years ago our As-
sembly declared that the time was ripe for the re-statement
of our Christian faith. Moreover, several years ago the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in this Com-
monwealth appointed a Committee to consider a re-statement
of the Church’s faith. What can this mean except that our
Church is conscious that religion is moving on and out-
stripping generally accepted theological definitions? What
can the very existence of such a Committee imply save the
need for further questioning? What can it mean except
that our Church repudiates the very idea of static dogmas
and believes with Rev. Dr G. Steven of Edinburgh that
“there is no heresy but finality?”
I appeal to the very standard which these people in their
naivete call “supreme,” and I base my teaching on the teach-
ing and Spirit of Jesus. Let them disprove that before
hurling charges of dishonesty publicly against me.
How could any re-statement of religion ever take place
without questioning and inquiry? Someone therefore must
ask questions and raise inquiries. What is a teacher’s
function? Is it to assert the right of way of the past over
the present ? Is he an investigator in a laboratory of experi-
ment or is he merely the keeper of a museum and a
cataloguer of dead specimens? Must a teacher look upon
truth with spectacles instead of eyes? If repetition, without
variation, of certain formularies discovered in the fourth
century is a teacher’s highest service, that service would be
more unerringly performed by a gramophone record. Surely
a scholar s duty is like that of the scribe made wise unto
the Kingdom who from his treasures brings forth things
new and old. If we believe in the Spirit of the ever-
revealing God, why should we treat what is new as neces-


sarily false, and what is old as unalterably true? The truth
of a proposition depends on its being neither old nor new,
but on its inherent consistency, and on its conforming to
the principle of interpretation by the highest we know.
There is no authority whatever except the authority of
Truth. Authority does not create Truth: Truth creates
authority. Jesus did not arrest the development of the
human spirit by binding it to its own past or by pledging
it even to sheer imitation of Himself. In fact, true religion
transports us into regions where external authority avails
naught.
Is ancestor-worship the highest form of our Presbyter-
ianism? The divines of 1647 must have believed in a
re-statement of truth, which implies the inadequacy of
previous statements, to produce the Confession of Faith;
and somewhere between 1647 and 1901 some men in the
Presbyterian Church must have exercised their minds and
discovered the inadequacy of that Confession as a step to
securing the Declaratory Act of thirty years ago. Are we
to suppose that the year 1901 closed revelation for us? Or
are we to follow Jesus and believe that the Spirit of Truth
has yet much to reveal to obedient and willing hearts?
In regard to the many misrepresentations and half-truths
concerning my teaching, I must say something. Most of
these are so gross that they require no refutation to those
who know anything of my teachings. A few examples may
suffice.
It was only recently that I realized that a lying report to
the effect that I held that Jesus was the bastard son of Mary
by a soldier named Pantheras was given any credence. Such
a statement is an out-and-out falsehood, which surely does
more harm to its originator and propagandist than to me.
Those who know my critical-historical method will easily
recognize that I could not possibly make such a statement
or hold such a belief. Who exercised his mythopoeic imagi-
nation in inventing such a story I know not; but I hope that
he will at least have the ordinary honesty to come forth and
make a public apology for fathering such a falsehood which
has gone to the ends of Australia.


Another myth concerning my teaching that came to my
knowledge only three weeks ago is equally alarming, namely
that I actually boasted that I have “stripped Jesus.” What
can such a statement mean? If it is true, I should be ac-
cused of something more serious than heresy. Again I label
this an absolute falsehood. I have never made either such
a boast or such a statement; those who know my attitude to
Jesus will know that such a thing is an utter impossibility on
my part. I have used the word “stripped” in reference to
Jesus in one address, and the words will show to what
desperate lengths my opponents go in distorting my state-
ments. The statement made by them signifies, and is
intended to signify, that I have stripped Jesus of His
divinity or lordship or splendour. Let fair-minded men
judge from my own words:
Jesus has nothing to fear from the application of the most candid
and thoroughgoing criticism. How could we be satisfied with a
Lord Whose cause must be protected from all criticism? In
effect, criticism brings not loss but gain to the cause of Jesus;
it enthrones Him on an unshakable lordship. It is only when
the Person of Jesus has been stripped of the later accretions
and mythological speculations that the real grandeur of His
divine personality stands out challengingly. We are then con-
fronted with a personality Who comes near to us and wins
and holds our deepest loyalty.
The historical method of the study of religion may cast aside
much of the mythical drapery and cosmological speculation which
have for centuries past clothed an idealized figure, but only to
disclose a diviner, more real and inescapable historic figure,
Who will for ever attract those who love truth and seek to live
with God. In this process of antiquating long established
Christologies the truth of Jesus and in Jesus will appear greater
and more convincing than the loveliest fiction.
“In loveliness of perfect deeds,
More strong than all poetic thought.”
A man may live the Christ life without believing cos-
mological Christologies or even after discarding traditional
dogmas, but no man can live the Christ life in indifference
or hostility to Jesus or without a growing devotion to Him
through the verification and re-verification of Jesus’s values.
Men may rid their thought of the Christ of the Christologies,
but they shall never free their imaginations from the majestically
sublime personality Whose greatness gave birth to those very
Christologies which His enduring spirit and living influence leave
sooner or later as derelicts on the sands of time.
The inexhaustible riches and moral winsomeness of the his-
torical figure of Jesus are borne in upon us only when the


gorgeous draperies of ecclesiastical formulas are removed.
Mythology treated as history is one thing; mythology put under
tribute to bring out the lasting significance of the Divine humanity
is another matter. “Is fiction which makes facts alive fact
too?” That historical life, because that life was wholly true,
asserts its dominion over the lives of grateful followers. Jesus
shall reign until a higher motive than love appears in human
conduct and aspiration. Jesus shall reign until a more excellent
way to true self-hood, which is neither selflessness nor selfish-
ness, than self-sacrifice, comes within our moral ken.
Again it is reported that I have said that it does not
matter what we believe about Christ. This is not a falsehood.
It is worse, in that it is a dangerous half-truth. I have
said this. But I have never said it without saying more;
and what I have said is this:
It matters little what we believe about Christ, but it matters
supremely for ourselves and for the world how much of Christ
is lived in us, or to what extent we are Christ-like.
Let fair-minded men again judge.
Again it is maintained that I would do away with theology.
There is a half-truth in this. I object to the identification
of theology with religion; and I object to the subtleties of
metaphysics being made a basis for teaching or preaching.
I object also to theology being merely a systematization of
past thinking, Biblical or traditional. But I hold that theology
or, better still, a philosophy of religion, has its necessary
and useful place. We must endeavour to give intellectual
formulation to the spiritual truths by which we live, but
no formulation should ever be accepted as final. Theology
is a product of religion, and religion arises from and is
based on experience. I would, therefore, bring theology
down from heaven to earth to deal principally with those
things which interested Jesus and with those things which
can be verified by experience. Jesus rescued religion from
the hands of the theologian and the scribe; for, as Professor
Wernle has shown, “the Christianity founded by Jesus was
a layman’s religion, because in accordance with His teaching
all that really matters in God’s sight are the fruits of
righteousness, of purity of heart, of brotherly love, and trust
in God.” Are we to betray religion again into the hands


of dogmatizing theologians with the unchallengeable power
of the keys?
The order is, faith, dogma, truth: faith the beginning and
truth the ever attained and yet ever receding goal, while
true dogma is faith in reflection for the time being upon
itself. Faith may be weak and imperfect, dogma may be
an imperfect and inadequate expression of Christian faith
and as such must give right-of-way to dogmas which more
adequately satisfy the heart and mind of man. Truth, in
so far as it is true, that is in its essence, is timeless, but in
all its manifestations and apprehensions conditioned by time
and place and circumstance.
Professor Sabatier rightly says:
The error of that form of religious knowledge called orthodoxy
is that of forgetting the historically and psychologically con-
ditioned character of all doctrines and of desiring to raise into
the absolute that which is born of time, and which must
necessarily modify itself in order to live in time. Impotent to
arrest the current of ideas and the movements of minds, it can
only establish itself by political measures . . . decisions of popes,
bishops and synods. ... Its misfortune and its failing is to be
anti-historical.
I hold that theology, which is religion in reflection upon
itself, should have as its ideal no other than to attain to
the measure of the stature of Christ, rather than to that of
Apostolic preachers and Patristic creed formulators. It is
well to remind ourselves, in the words of the orthodox
Professor William Sanday, of Oxford, that all doctrine is
“relative in the first instance to the age in which it was
drawn up, and relative at all times to the limitations of our
human faculties.”
Another accusation which has been hurled against me is
that of being guilty of Unitarianism, whatever that means.
Such an accusation taken seriously to-day is of the same
order in the theological world as would be the charge of
witchcraft or of alchemy in the world of science. This
apparently vigorous rumour, promulgated without either
basis or reflection, against my teaching, reminds me of the
Christian legend of the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus. These
good people went to sleep during a persecution (quite a


prudent thing- to do during a persecution) to awake nearly
two centuries later. There are three points of interest about
those famous sleepers: first, they were not aware what a
prolonged slumber they had enjoyed, being under the delu-
sion that they had had only the normal number of hours
of sleep instead of many decades; secondly, under this
delusion when they awoke they tendered a coin which had
been out of currency for several generations; and thirdly,
on awaking after their miraculous sleep they proceeded
without much delay to die, and so leave us wondering what
they missed by not having died two centuries earlier and
what the world gained by their prolonged slumber.
My opponents have waked up without, I trust, the same
unsatisfactory results to themselves as to their analogues
in the parable I have just related. They proceed to hurl
this charge against me which has long since become mean-
ingless; they insist that I answer a question that cannot
properly or intelligently be put, and they also clamour that
it be answered with a simple yes or no. It would just be
as easy for me to answer with a simple yes or no the
question: “Are you an alchemist or are you a wizard.”
Those who are familiar with the history of theological
thought and of the evolution of philosophic inquiry realize
that an allegation of being a Unitarian is as meaningless
to-day as an allegation of being a Patripassian, a Donatist,
an Apollinarian or a Dyothelist. The dualistic philosophy
which raised this question and compelled men to make
Jesus either God or man, either human or divine, has long
since passed into oblivion and is remembered only by those
controversialists who are interested in the fruitless disputa-
tions of predecessors rather than in their positive achieve-
ments. The philosophy of transcendence has been found
lacking, both because of its unsatisfying conception of God
and its inadequate conception of man. The yawning gulf
which once separated the Divine and the human is dis-
covered to have been an hallucination; the philosophy of
the Divine Immanence has made the fellowship of our spirits
with the Father of our spirits a very practicable and a very
potentializing reality. To-day, when, in our knowledge of
God through Jesus Christ, we cannot assert that the Divine


Father differs from us His sons in kind, we cannot be asked
to say that Jesus our Lord differs from us in kind. Not
only does the best Christian philosophy protest against the
false distinction on which a charge of Unitarianism rests,
but an appeal to Jesus Himself likewise removes all basis
of such allegations. He Who made us His brothers and
sisters by doing the will of the same heavenly Father can-
not be interpreted as excluding men from the most real
intimacies with God or from entering into the secret place
of the Most High, despite all that controversialists may
say. He in Whose Divine humanity we have recognized the
incarnation of the Father Himself, is not ashamed to
call us brothers. The same Divine Spirit which indwelt
Him indwells us according to the measure of our person-
ality. The charge of Unitarianism, even if possible, has no
relation to the practical work of the Kingdom of God in the
present.
Let us attempt to recover a sane outlook in religion and a
true perspective of the things by which men live the highest
life. Let us receive every man but not to doubtful dispu-
tations. It is easier to bring as our offering gold, frankin-
cense and myrrh than to offer loving hearts. It is easier to
rend our garments than our hearts. Let us revere our
fathers’ memories but not remain inert by their graves. There
is to-day a more catholic and surer oracle than that of
1647 —the very Spirit of God Himself witnessing in and
with our spirits that we are God’s sons and Christ’s co-heirs.
Let us seek earnestly the truth that gives meaning to life;
truth that can be lived out in our lives; truth that brings
love and light to our hearts. Surely the fellowship of
Christian minds can be better expressed than in arguments,
though I should be far from decrying the proper use of
dialectics. I owe too much to the Greek tradition to despise
the mind of man and his attempts to rationalize his
experiences.
Christianity is not a system of neo-legalism, as some of
its early interpreters attempted to make it by putting Jesus
in the place of Moses. Its divine Founder laid down one
criterion for the life of His followers: “by their fruits ye


shall know them”—a severe test indeed. For the apostolic
office he demanded not creed or assent to an intellectual
system but the more strenuous qualification, “if any man
wishes to come after Me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross and follow Me.” The Christian Church does not
exist to produce, defend, and maintain doctrine, though doc-
trine it necessarily has; but to produce character, to assert
the essential spirituality of life, to fortify men in their
conflicts and encourage them in their restless aspirations.
Christianity, if interpreted as the religion of the Spirit, does
not fear criticism. Thomas Carlyle comforted nervous people
a century ago by reminding them that a thinking man is
the greatest enemy of the Prince of Darkness. True Christi-
anity invites thinking men. Christianity believes in God;
but Christianity must ever re-think its conception of its God,
remembering how many dead Gods have fallen by the way
on man’s march towards his ideal. Some believe in a God
Who can forgive sin only through and because of a blood
offering. We believe in a God Who cares for naught save
the repentance, love and faith of the worst sinner. Some
believe in a God to Whom the way is firmly barred by our
sin; we believe in a God to Whose very heart and throne not
all the sin of all the sinners can bar the way. We believe in
a God Who will not let men go, in the lowest hell to which
they can sink or in the highest heaven to which they can
attain. And to-day God cannot be kept alive by tradition,
correct formularies, creeds and legislative theologies, but
only in sincere hearts. God cannot cease to be God to those
who love Him not. He cannot make all things work together
for good only to those who love Him.
Paul reminded his pagan converts that we Christians have
one god, the Father, of Whom are all things and we
unto Him; and one lord, Jesus Christ, through Whom
are all things and we through Him. Christians accept
to-day even more enthusiastically than in Paul’s day the
supremacy of this Lord Whose only service is “Follow Me.”
The true method of honouring Him is not by elaboration
of titles and the determination of functions or by official
status. The true method of honouring Him is far simpler
but far more strenuous, with no possibility of mis-


understanding. The ancient mythological accretions and
cosmological settings may add a certain deceptive grandeur
to the Christ of the ancient Christologies and may even
qualify Christianity to be a popular religion by demanding
less than its Founder demanded of men. But what the
mature religious conscience requires is, not a semi-God or
a supernatural Being of another order and from another
world, but a veritable Son of God and Leader Who elicits
our faith by His own achievements on the open battlefield
of human life, and also wins our love and loyalty by believ-
ing in us. He makes God a workaday reality to quicken our
spiritual intuitions so that we may, in our vision splendid,
perceive that God hath prepared for us more than eye
hath seen or heart However men may theologize
concerning Him, lovers of God will gratefully confess that
Jesus releases power and quickens faith. For such the
Christian Church is as catholic as the love of God, as catholic
as the outlook of St Ignatius’s declaration that “wherever
Jesus Christ is, there is the Universal (or Catholic) Church.”
Such followers too will enthusiastically re-echo the striking
testimony of the late Poet-laureate in his “Testament of
Beauty” that
His humanity is God’s personality,
And communion with Him is the life of the soul.
Finally, the late Dr Lyman Abbott divided the teachers of
the modern Church into three classes: those who endeavour
to defend the faith of the fathers and also the forms in
which that faith was expressed; those who repudiate both
the ancient faith and the antique forms ; and those who hold
fast the faith, while discarding or modifying the forms, and
labour to restate the faith in forms more rational and
consistent with modern habits of thought. Which kind of
teacher does this Assembly desire ? One who repeats vener-
able traditions? Or one who also seeks, without any claim
to infallibility, to teach living truth? I cannot teach other
than I have been teaching. I have nothing to recant or
deny. Dogmas are long-lived, but God appoints their term.
With Galileo I maintain that from the Divine Word both


Scripture and Nature alike proceed, and I would add, all
truth.
We may continue with “doubtful disputations” to make
our Church ridiculous, or we may “follow after things which
make for peace, and things whereby we may edify one
another.” We cannot, by any decision of the Church, turn
back the hands of time, or make the sun of inquiring faith
stand still.
Seeking the Golden Age of our faith in some idealized
classic past rather than by working and hoping for it in the
future can only blind us to the true glory of the Christian
enterprise. Our attitude should be that of the intensest
activity with the living problems of the present as our con-
tribution to a new world. All history is a Bible, and we are
surely writing our portion, and writing it surely under the
same inspiration by which the previous portions have been
written.
Are we then to deify the past and rest in ancestor-
worship? Do our eternal values depend entirely on happen-
ings in past history or are they timeless and above time?
And are past interpretations of certain past happenings final
and infallible? Over a generation ago Benjamin Jowett
wrote:
Religion is not dependent on historical events, the report of which
we cannot altogether trust. Holiness has its sources elsewhere
than in history.
Vexilla Regis prodeunt, and we must follow. “History
itself,” writes that noted historian of early Christianity,
President McGiffert of New York, “justifies us in saying
that no backward-facing movement or institution can
permanently serve this constantly changing world of to-day
and to-morrow. The watchword of the modern Christian,
if he believes in the permanent leadership of Christ, should
be, not ‘Back to Christ’ but ‘Forward with Christ.’ ”
And I believe in the permanent leadership of Christ, but
not in the permanent validity of dogmas about His Person.
The Spirit of Him Who loved us and gave Himself for
us is of more value to ourselves and of more immediate
relevancy to the world than the most correct and infallible
theories concerning His Passion or Person.


Let us not forget that “doctrine is deposited like crystals
when the seething flow of inspiration begins to grow cold,”
but inspiration is more vital and potential than the institution
which was built historically as a response to a mighty
intuition of a Revealer of God. The most venerable creeds
of the Church should be regarded as milestones of the
Church’s march toward its ideal rather than as immovable
dwelling-places of the Church’s thought. Their propositions
and definitions, bearing a more intimate relation to the
thought and problems of their age, should be to us rather
symbols of truth and suggestive parables than legal enact-
ments.
Our little systems have their day;
They have their day and cease to be.
They are but broken lights of Thee,
And Thou, O Lord, art more than they.


Halstead Printing Company Limited,
Arnold Place, Sydney




THE FIRST PRESS OPINIONS OF
“CHRISTIANITY AND DOGMA”
Church Standard (Sydney) says:—“Professor Angus makes a strong
plea for the true glory of Christian enterprise. His main argument is
of vital importance to any Christian, whatever may be the branch of
the faith to which he is attached. It is as well to remind ourselves now
and then of our common allegiance to our one Lord! Too easy it is
for supporters of the Christian Church to take refuge in the security
of ancient tradition and dogma; ‘The Christian Church,’ he says, ‘does
not exist to produce, defend, and maintain doctrine, though doctrine it
necessarily has; but to produce character, to assert the essential spiri-
tuality of life, to fortify men in their conflicts and encourage them in
their restless aspirations. Christianity, interpreted as the religion of
the Spirit, does not fear criticism.’
“So he asks that theology (‘which is religion in reflection upon
itself’) shall not usurp the place of a progressive dynamic Christian
life which seeks to interpret even better in the future than in the past
or present the meaning of Christ’s own teaching. He asks us to believe
that, as new times and conditions bring us new aspects of life, so may
we see revealed afresh some new glimpses of the ever-living God.
“ ‘True Christianity,’ he says, ‘invites thinking men.’ It is the creed
of a man of fine intellect and heartfelt sincerity. ... Here is the
challenge, and can we say that it is not to the whole Christian Church?
It is a call to preach Christianity as if it were ever fresh and ever new.”
Brisbane Courier: —“The address is a particularly brilliant piece
of reasoning. ... It is a book of only thirty pages, but it presents the
modern conception of Christianity with a cogency that is of especial
value. Throughout, the reader cannot avoid feeling that he is in touch
on this greatest of all subjects with a devout mind and the first-rate
intellect of a scholar and thinker.”
The Mail (Adelaide): —“Dr Angus showed commendable Christian
restraint in not replying to his swarm of critics in continuous broad-
sides, but in awaiting the right opportunity and presenting his case in a
constructive and highly logical and courteous manner. ... It is a
vigorous speech, comparable with Milton’s defence of liberty, and of
great historic interest in Australia’s religious life.”
The Witness (The Organ of the Presbyterian Fellowship Union of
N.S.W.): —“It is partly a personal defence and answer to his critics and
partly a vigorous plea for a more spiritual and less dogmatic attitude
in religion.”
