

THE QUESTION
OF
UNRECIPROCATED
FOREIGN COPYRIGHT
IN GREAT BRITAIN.
A REPOET
OF
THE SPEECHES AND PROCEEDINGS
AT A PUBLIC MEETING HELD AT
THE HANOVER SQUARE ROOMS,
JULY 1, 1851.
SIR EDWARD BULWER LYTTON, BART.
IN THE CHAIR.
WITH NOTES BY HENRY G. BOHN.
LONDON:
HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
MDCCCLJ.




PREFACE.
presenting the public with a detailed report of the
proceedings at a Public Meeting, held July 1, 1851, at the
Hanover Square Rooms, it seems desirable to prefix a short
view of the circumstances which gave rise to it.
It is well known that for many years past, all our best
books have been systematically reprinted abroad, some-
times in France or Germany, but oftener in America,
without consent of the English proprietor, and always at a
price which defies competition from those who incur the
cost of Copyright. We perhaps should have no right to
complain of this, as it is according to the laws of the country
where it is practised, and every State must be presumed to
know what is best for its own subjects ; but it has been
assumed, on the other hand, that foreigners, by first or even
simultaneously publishing their works in Great Britain,
whether resident in it or non-resident, are entitled to the
benefit of our statutes, and may therefore claim for themselves,
and their assigns, an exclusive Copyright in this country
although we are denied one in their own.
Under this construction of our laws, all negociations for
an International Copyright Act have of course proved unavail-
ing, as we have little to give beyond what foreigners already
assume to possess, and what we ask in exchange is to them
of great commercial value.*
* I have repeatedly been assured by the most intelligent American pub-
lishers, that while this view of the Copyright laws is supported,, there can
be no chance of obtaining an international Act with the United States of
America.


The only foreign literature, it may be as well here to ob-
serve, upon which those aggrieved could in the least indem-
nify themselves by reprisals, and so bring the legal question to
issue, consisted of a very limited number of American books,
and the musical publications of Germany, Italy, and France.
As all of these which were worth reprinting, had, with
scarcely an exception, been already taken possession of by
London publishers, there remained little choice clear of some-
times treading on the toes of a friend or neighbour.*
In this state of things one or two spirited publishers in
the music trade felt justified in printing certain portions of
the works of foreign composers which had been published as
English Copyright. They sustained several actions suc-
cessfully, and the judgments and strong opinions pronounced
on these occasions by the soundest lawyers, taken in con-
nection with the manifest intention of the International
Copyright Act, pointed out to others the course open to them
to pursue.
At and about this period several of my most popular Copy-
right books had been reprinted in America to my serious loss,
and on the other hand, an American book, Emersons Repre-
sentative Men , of which I had arranged for the so-called
Copyright in this country, was reprinted against me by a
London publisher. As the rival printer of Emerson had
previously begun reprinting Washington Irving’s works, I
at once determined on the double retaliation of printing
Irving against him, and reprinting American literature
generally.'!'
1 did not happen to be either first, second, or even third in
printing Washington Irving, as several others had com-
menced before me; indeed the question seemed surrendered
* See the Preface to my edition of Irving’s Life of Mahomet,
j' See the Preface to my edition of Emerson’s Representative Men, which
formed the first of my cheap, or so called, Shilling series.
IV


before I began; which I mention, that I may not be accused
of more want of courtesy than belongs to the occasion.*
On the question of courtesy, too, I feel it due to myself to
add that Mr. Murray had not shewn much to me in reprinting
Croker’s Boswell’s Johnson, for which I had given his father
£9OO, but unfortunately with a reserved leave to him “to print
an edition in Bvo. or any other form.” This leave is in
writing, but was understood verbally to extend only to an
expensive library edition, not likely to interfere with my pur-
chase, even should Mr. Murray ever avail himself of the
clause, which at the time was not regarded as likely. The
edition, however, which the son has printed, though in double
columns and less complete than mine, has damaged me more
than any profit I am likely to make in printing Washington
Irving will ever repay.
But courtesy cannot very well be anyconsiderable ingredient
in copyright reprisals, and I have before me tfie highest
example for confirming the propriety of my own course.
When the Oxford University press published the Oratores
Attici for which that distinguished scholar, Bekker, furnished
the collations, and was paid liberally,the work was immediately
reprinted at Berlin, and that too at the establishment of Bekker’s
father-in-law, the eminent bookseller Reimer. Our learned
Greek Professor, the Dean of Christ Church, remonstrated,
and Bekker too, it is said, interfered, but both to no effect.
In consequence of this, when Bekker’s Aristotle came out
* The only London booksellers interested in advocating Foreign Copyright
claims in this country, are Mr. Murray and Mr. Bentley: the former, on account
of Washington Irving ; the latter, on account of Irving, Prescott and Cooper.
But their influence, direct and indirect, is powerfully exerted. Other houses,
including the principal (Messrs. Longman & Co.), have always avoided
American Copyright as an untenable investment. The publishers in that
universal language Music, who have ventured to embark in Foreign Copy-
right, are rather more numerous : they are chiefly Mr. Boosey, Mr. Cocks,
Mr. Novello, and Messrs. D’Almaine.
V


in Germany, likewise printed by Reimer, it was forthwith
reprinted here by the University Press.
Mr. Murray, who asserts Copyright in eight of Washington
Irving’s works, had not printed the greater part of them for
many years, and seems to have attached very little value to
any. Be took no notice whatever of my republication, and
laid no claim, until I had proceeded with the Shilling Series
to the extent of 21 vols., and had included, with a single ex-
ception,* all the works he claims. Notice of injunction was
served on me, July 27th, 1850, and after many elaborate
affidavits on both sides, chiefly as to alienage and first pub-
lication in America, it was dismissed, August 7th, with leave
to Plaintiff, as a matter of course, to bring his action, if he
thought fit, at common law. Mr. Murray has since com-
menced proceedings in the Court of Queen’s Bench, and a
demurrer has been pleaded, (May 9th, 1851, by Sir Fitzroy
Kelly, before Lord Campbell) and there for the present the
matter rests.j"
In the meantime one of the judgments on which I relied,
Boosey ©. Jeffreys, was unexpectedly reversed in a Court of
Error, over which Lord Campbell presided. The defendant
having been advised to appeal to the House of Lords, called
a preliminary meeting, at which I attended, to consider
the best mode of proceeding. It was there unanimously
resolved to convene a public meeting and that a deputation
should wait on Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton to request him to
take the chair, to which he kindly consented.
The meeting was quite public, and advertised extensively
in all the London papers; and there was a large attendance.
The following pages tell the rest.
H. G. B.
* This exception was Bracebridge Hall, which the author himself says in
his American preface was first printed in America.
t -While these pages are printing off. notice has been served by Plamtiff to
determine on a commission (of perhaps four persons), either to be sent ont to
the United States, or appointed there, to inquire into facts of alienage and fret
publication. The cost of this item alone may be conceived.
VI


POSTSCRIPT.
' Henry G. Bohn, as the Editor of these pages, and
largely concerned in the question at issue, thinks it right
to assure his American brethren, with whom he is happy
to be in constant intercourse, that he is actuated by no
other motive than a desire to protect himself against
severe and unnatural losses arising from a condition of the
law which ought not to exist. He is satisfied that the
right-minded will regard his efforts only in this light, and
will defend him against illiberal adversaries.
Whenever an International Copyright between the two
great countries shall be finally established, he will be found as
ready as any one to encourage the literary productions of
America by purchasing at its fair value the right of pub-
lishing them in England.
August 18 th, 1851.
VII


THE MOST RECENT REPORT
AS TO THE STATE OF THE COPYRIGHT NEGOCIATIONS WITH
FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
From the Literary Gazette, August 16, 1851,
“ The intelligence this week on the grave question of lite-
rary piracy, is, I am sorry to say, far from The
negociations opened by the French Government with Prussia,
Saxony, and Hanover have failed. The German Cabinets,
after consulting the booksellers, have answered, that the
piracies of German works in France are so trifling, that it
is not worth while losing the profit of the piracies of French
works in Germany, to put an end to it. The reply, you see,
is possibly immoral ; and it is truly singular that it should
have been made by the very Governments which, on grounds
of public morality alone, entered some years ago into treaties
with England for the suppression of piracy. The Saxon
Government, however, recommended the French negociators
to employ all their efforts ; first of all, to destroy piracy in
Belgium : saying, that, as long as it existed there, it would
not be much use to put it down in Germany, as the Belgians
would be sure to inundate the country more than ever with
their pirated editions. The Hanoverian minster frankly
admitted that he did not think there was any likelihood
that his own, or any other German government, would be
brought to consent to the annihilation of a system which is
profitable to so many of their subjects : but he had the good
nature to recommend the French to apply to the Germanic
Diet at Frankfort, whose authority supersedes that of indi-
vidual cabinets in matters affecting, as this does, the whole
country. From Italy, also, the news is not cheering. The
negotiations with Tuscany, which at one time were very
promising, have gone off. Naples and Rome are in too
agitated a state to attend to them ; and the other Italian
Governments, with the exception of Sardinia, display culpable
indifference.”


INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT.
SPEECH
Delivered Tuesday } July 1 ; at the Hanover Square Dooms,
BY
SIR EDWARD BULWER LYTTON, BART.
Gentlemen,
I have been requested to take the Chair at this
Meeting in order to afford an opportunity of bringing before
the Public a question which is interesting in itself, and
extremely important to all those who are possessed of pro-
perty in literary Copyright. I shall endeavour, as briefly
us possible, to explain the objects of the Meeting.
In so doing, I shall frankly state my opinions, simply
premising that the instant I take possession of this Chair, I
shall become strictly impartial, and will endeavour to obtain
for all, who, differing from myself, are disposed to address this
Meeting, the fullest and fairest hearing.
Gentlemen, it is a matter of dispute among the most
learned legal authorities whether an author is not possessed
of Copyright by common law, as a personal property. But
that at present is a purely abstract and metaphysical question,
with which we have not now to deal No English
Author, or his assign, is disposed to entrust his rights to
the uncertainty of a judgment by common law—upon which
judges are divided, (notwithstanding the opinion of Lord
Mansfield in his favour, if he did so). Our Authors
prefer to rest their claims upon the statutes, and by the
statutes has the case we are met to consider been decided.
That case involves this question : Are the natives of foreign
states, which pirate English works, and refuse all protection
B


to English authors, entitled to receive at our hands the same
privileges of property m Copyright which the English statutes
bestow upon English subjects ? The answer to this question
depends upon the construction of the Act of Parliament of
the Bth of Anne, which was the first statute that created
property in Copyright. Subsequent Acts having confirmed
the purport and extended the provisions of this Magna Charta
of British Literature.
Primd facie , a State, in creating a beneficial property
distinct from personal, may be naturally presumed to legislate
only for its own subjects. This is more especially the case,
when, in strictly defining the provisions, and clearly stating
by preamble the object, of an Act, the proposed benefits have
the character of being purely national, and no reference is
made to aliens or foreigners. By this Act of the Bth of Anne
the property created is made wholly distinct from personal,
and limited to a certain number of years—the object stated
is the Encouragement of Learning by vesting in authors,
under such limitation, the possession of their works secure
from piracy—and thereby inducing them ‘ to write and com-
pose good and useful works.’ The State here may be reason-
ably supposed to mean the encouragement of learning in its
own dominions by the inducement to its own Authors to
compose works to instruct or delight its own population—
it can scarcely be held to have contemplated a boon to
authors in France with which it was at war —nor to some
future independent Commonwealth like America, destined to
shake off its yoke.—ln short it would appear to come under
the ordinary category of English Laws, designed solely for the
benefit of this people of England. And this view of the case
is confirmed by analogy in all foreign countries, without a
single exception, where precisely for similar objects a Copy-
right has been created and defined. In no such country is
the foreigner or alien permitted to claim the Copyright


assigned to the native—save only in those states which have
accepted the long subsequent and very recent privilege of
reciprocal exchange of benefits under the International Act
of Copyright. \ou will not therefore be surprised to hear
.that for more than a century after the Act of Anne was passed,
no foreigner, not naturalized, attempted to claim the benefit
of its provisions, and that it was tacitly, but uniformly, held,
that the law was confined exclusively to the subjects of Great
Britain.
It may be said that until lately Foreign Authors had no
pecuniary interest in advancing a claim to Copyright in this
State, since every author finds his most lucrative public in
his own countrymen, who are familiar with the language in
which he addresses them. Nevertheless, Foreign Authors
have, at various times, published their wmrks first in other
states than their not so much for the sake of pecu-
niary profit as for safety, in cases where their theological or
political opinions differed from those of the countries in
■which they were subjects. Not to mention many eminent
Italian writers, I pass at once to an instance bearing directly
upon the subject before us—the instance of Voltaire. Voltaire
published first many of his works in Holland, but so little, as
a foreigner, could he obtain a Copyright there, that we find
him constantly complaining of the mutilated piracies to
which he was exposed in that country. Voltaire came to
England a few years after the passing of the Act of the Bth of
Anne: he resided in London; and here the foundation of
his fortunes was made by the subscriptions for his poem of the
Henriade, which was first published in London in 1728.
Those subscriptions were headed and promoted by the Prin-
cess of Wales, (afterwards known to us as Queen Caroline,
wife of George the 2nd.) Voltaire was living upon intimate
terms with the most eminent statesmen and authors in Eng-
land. He was especially intimate with Lord Bolingbroke,
b 2


who had been the most accomplished and influential member
of that Parliament in which the Bth of Anne had been passed.
He had pecuniary dealings with the very booksellers in
whose exertions the Act itself had originated ; it is, therefore,
perfectly clear that if by that Act it had been intended by the
framers to give a Copyright to Foreigners, Voltaire would
have been advised as to the law, and would have had every
motive and interest in availing himself of its privileges and
advantages. But no patron, no legislator, no lawyer, no
bookseller, ever led this illustrious visitor, then so intent upon
making his fortunes, to believe that he, as a foreigner, could
be possessed of a Copyright in Great Britain. I will place
that fact beyond all dispute. Voltaire got by subscriptions
for the Henriade, a very large sum —as much as £6000; so
that he had the strongest inducement to protect a Copyright,
if possessed of one. He issued a cheaper edition of his poem
in London the same year, (its publication being at this time
forbidden in France, where the Clergy deemed it heretical,
and the Court seditious). He corrected a third edition for
London in 1730—a fourth, with notes and variations, in Lon-
don in 1733—yet despite all these personal pains on his part,
so little Copyright did he possess, that in 1734 an edition,
without his consent, was published by Tonson,—another, not
only without his consent, but without his knowledge, appeared
in London, 1741—an edition with which he could have had
so little to do that it is extremely imperfect as to his varia-
tions, and actually rejects or adopts his emendations according
to the caprice of the editor. And in 1771 Oxford took also the
liberty to commence a collection of his works for the sake
of the Academicians, containing his Essay on Epic Poetry,
which he had not only first published in London, but
written in England, and composed in English with the help
of his master ; only this Oxford edition adopted all the blun-
ders of a translation of that Essay made by Desfontaines,


which Voltaire had corrected himself in an edition published
in London in 1732, and entirely re-translated with his own
hand in 1733 ; —the blunders being retained, 1 suppose,
—also for the sake of the Academicians ! So that we have the
most remarkable instance that can be adduced —the case of
the most illustrious writer of his time, befriended by the most
illustrious men of England, publishing his works first in this
country, personally intimate with the very persons who had
framed the Act, and who were living at the time, and yet
we find that he never had the slightest reason for supposing
that he, as a foreigner, could be possessed of a Copyright in
England, and that neither he nor his publishers ever secured
or even claimed one. So far as the intention of the framers
of the Act, and the construction of the law during the lives
of the legislators who enacted it, are concerned, this simple
instance of Voltaire seems to me to settle the question.
Not to fatigue you with the history of the first litigations
in which the claim of foreigners was put forth, and which I
have no doubt we shall hear much better in detail from
the minute information of the Vice-Chairman, Mr. Bohn, who
will follow me, I will merely observe that the Law, as I have
now stated it, namely, that it was solely for the benefit of
English authors that the English Act of Parliament was
passed, never appears to have been disputed till 1822. And
that, after one or two cases of minor importance, by which
the dispute was raised, the case of Boosey v. Purday was
decided two years ago, in 1849, by Baron Rolfe, (now Lord
Cranworth,) in which that distinguished personage, by a
very luminous and comprehensive judgment, declared that
the Act could be only interpreted for the benefit of English
authors and English learning, and that by the mere fact of
first publishing in this country, a foreigner did not become
entitled to Copyright. That decision seemed to remove the
last doubt upon the point. But miserable is the man who
puts his trust in Law ! Recently the whole of this judgment
5


has been reversed by my Lord Campbell, who has stated
that he sees no reason for supposing that the Act excludes
foreigners from its benefits, and that the foreigner, if he pub-
lishes first in England, is entitled to the same privileges and
advantages as a native.
Now, Gentlemen, this decision is the more formidable
as coming from a Judge like Lord Campbell, who has
added the honours of a Statesman and a man of letters to an
unsurpassed forensic reputation, and unquestionably if this
were merely a knotty point of Law to be decided by learned
references, or had been so decided by my Lord Campbell, I
should not for an instant entertain the presumption of saying
a word against that judgment. I should simply say if that
is the Law, it may be expedient to alter it; but I confess that
Lord Campbell seems to me rather to argue the question
according to his views of literary philosophy or political
economy than to decide it as a Judge by analogous examples,
or erudite authorities. The case in dispute shrinks into the
construction of plain English words which are very plain
and very intelligible, and which are as open to any man of
ordinary understanding to construe as they are to the most
learned Judge. For instance, Lord Campbell says, that the Act
of Anne is entitled ‘ an Act for the encouragement of learning/
and then asks ‘ whether even supposing that the words
applied only to the learning of Great Britain, it would not be
for the advantage of learning in Great Britain that foreigners
should be induced to publish their works first in this
country ?’ Certainly it would be for the advantage of our
learning if we could not otherwise obtain the works.—But, if
we get the works all the same, whether first published in
New York, in Paris, or in London, —I do not see what
possible advantage is gained. Lord Campbell’s argument
would suppose that unless we so induced the authors first
to publish their works here, we should be deprived of the
opportunity of having those works. But on the contrary, ■


so far as the diffusion of learning amongst us is concerned,
it is obvious that a Copyright to foreigners tends to restrict
the supply, and augment the price of their works, by
confining them to a single publisher, while the absence of
Copyright at once ensures the amplest supply and the
cheapest price, by calling into play the unlimited com-
petition of our publishers Lord Campbell here seems to
me, to confound the question as relates to the producers of
the books with that which relates to the supply of the
productions, for he proceeds to cite the Acts of Edward
the Fourth and Richard the Third —to shew that even in
those early times the Legislature encouraged the introduction
of Foreign Books, for that by these Acts any trader was
at liberty to bring over Foreign Books, and to sell them
retail or otherwise.
But that privilege is again expressly repeated in the Act of
Anne, which making no mention of Copyright to foreign
authors, sanctions the introduction of foreign books, —thereby
strengthening Baron Rolfe’s construction of the law, by mark-
ing emphatically the distinction between introducing foreign
books, and giving to their authors the power to restrict their
sale in this country by a Copyright. Hence, whatever other
reasons may exist for bestowing this Copyright upon foreign
writers, it is clear that they are not to be found, as assumed
by Lord Campbell, in any advantage to the diffusion of foreign
learning in Great Britain, since we get the books that con-
tain the learning cheaper without the Copyright; nor upon
any belief in the framers of the Act that such learning could
be better advanced by inducing foreigners to publish their
works first here; since, while showing their care for that
learning by expressly admitting the books, they say not a
single word as to securing their authors any privilege whatso-
ever of that Copyright bestowed upon our own writers.


I have said that Lord Campbell does not seem to me to rest
his judgment much upon decisive precedents. His Lordship
cites two cases as illustrations of argument, and appears to rely
on them as indisputable facts—l mean the cases of De Lolme
and Rapin. He says :— e supposing that these authors had
never visited England, could it be contended that they should
be debarred assigning or selling their property to an English
publisher V Lord Campbell, therefore, here plainly assumes
and takes for granted that De Lolme had a copyright for his
work on the English Constitution, and Rapin for his History
of England. Well, Gentlemen, I will leave it to Mr. Bohn to
prove to you that there is no reason whatever to believe that
either Rapin or De Lolme did obtain copyright in England
for their works, which were first written in French. And
thus the very cases on which the great judge most relies, and
upon which he builds up an edifice of logical deductions, will
be shewn, by the minuter knowledge of a bibliographer, to
be two of the strongest cases against the precedent which that
judge would establish. This is no disparagement to the great
general learning of Lord Campbell; it is simply a proof how
difficult it is for the most learned judge to get at the precise
facts in those obscure details of literary history which are
comprised in the negociations between the writer and his
publisher.
And now, Gentlemen, we have cleared our way to the heart
and kernel of the great question which we are met to consider.
Granting that the Act of Anne is intended for the encourage-
ment of learning, and, to quote its own words, that it is ‘ to en-
courage literary men to compose good and useful works
granting this, is there nothing in the construction of the Act
by Lord Campbell which will operate against the removal of
the most serious injury that can be inflicted upon English
learning - namely, the system of Foreign piracies abroad ?


Let us examine this point. You are aware, that it is only
since the Peace that our literature has been universally
cultivated abroad.
It is to the surpassing popularity of Byron and Scott that
we mainly owe the distinction, if the culture of our language
and our letters has spread beyond the closets of critics, and
the lecture rooms of Colleges, and that our authors maintain
the fame of our voyagers of old, penetrating remotest shores—
completing the Anglo-Saxon destinies,—civilizing and teach-
ing where they go. And what is their return ? They are
punished for their celebrity. And this new reading public
they have called into existence, swelled by numbers of their
own countrymen, either residing abroad or visiting the conti-
nent annually, receive their supplies of English works from
foreign reprints, without contributing a single shilling to the
maintenance of the poets who charm or the scholars who
instruct them.
To what extent this has affected English learning and
literature, in all its branches, the experience of every
author or publisher who may be amongst you, will bear
witness, for it is a fact equally- startling and acknowledged,,
that in spite of the vast increase of our own reading public—
that in spite of the cheaper rate at which English works are
published—there is, in all the departments of English litera-
ture, a considerable diminution in the sale of books pub-
lished in England. Lighter literature, —novels, for instance
—addressing a curiosity that must be immediately satisfied
and taken off in large numbers by circulating libraries
is, though the most seriously invaded by foreign pirates, still
sufficiently remunerative at home to maintain itself. But
vhen we look to the graver learning, which, no doubt, it
was chiefly the intention and object of the Act of Anne to
encourage —to works addressed to a more limited class of
readers and relying upon a slower sale, I will ask any book


seller whether the sale of two or three hundred copies more or
less does not make all the distinction between profit and loss?
and that distinction is at once created by those who were for-
merly purchasers of English works printed in England, now,
taking copies of the Foreign Piracies in their excursions
abroad, and by large numbers of the American Pirated Editions
reaching Canada and our Colonies. Indeed, Gentlemen, this
evil has so increased, that what we call our Belles Bettres,
distinct from fiction, and periodical writings, has year by year
been gradually becoming almost extinct amongst us. I was
so aware of what would be the injurious consequences of this
system of piracy, that when I was in Parliament, some years
ago, I placed upon the books a motion for an International
Copyright. I was, I believe, the first person who ever prac-
tically took up that question. I did not withdraw that motion
from the books until there was an understanding with the
Government that they themselves would attempt negotia-
tion. The result has been the well-known International
Copyright Act, by which we, the English, according to what
I consider the just and fair principles of commercial inter-
change, give to the Foreign Author of all States a Copyright
in this country, provided those States do the same to our own
writers. As yet, it is only some few of the German States that
have availed themselves of this equitable exchange. Two
countries with which it is most desirable to effect it, France
and America, have taken no steps towards it; but lam told
it has made progress in France —Belgium, 1 believe, being
the chief obstacle ; and in America I know it has gained
ground. In the last it has obtained the advocacy of nearly
all their writers—the consent of their most leading statesmen ;
it has received valuable co-operation from their Press; and
I had not the smallest doubt, until the recent construction
of the Act of Anne, that a reciprocal treaty would have been
ultimately accomplished.


Therefore, Gentlemen, granting that it is for the interest of
Literature to create a property in Copyright—granting that
it was the intention of the Act of Anne to encourage English
learning, and to induce English writers to compose good and
useful books —I say, that nothing in the whole power of
Legislation could be so conducive to those objects as an Inter-
national Copyright with America, the country in which we
are more read even than in our own; and nothing could be
so injurious to English learning as any obstacle that may
tend to impede it. Yet I greatly fear that for many years at
least—if this construction of the Act of the reign of Anne be
upheld, or if no new law be framed, —that Act of Inter-
national Copyright which we have taken so much pains to
procure, will be little better than parchment for battledores.
For the ordinary commercial considerations of barter over-
come all other more subtle ones in commercial States, and
I fear that it may be in vain to ask America to give us
something when we no longer have anything to offer in
return.
I need not say, Gentlemen, what an advantage it would
be to us—to all literary men —to obtain a reciprocal Copy-
right in the United States of America. Had I been in
possession of Copyright there when I first commenced
writing, it would have made a difference to me now of about
£60,000. You may therefore judge by one writer what would
have been its effect upon all writers of the more popular lite-
rature ; and with regard to that more solid learning, which
it is certainly more intended by Anne’s Act to encourage,
it would no doubt recover from its depression at home, if
that Great Republic on the other side of the Atlantic could
be converted into its contributor instead of its despoiler.
I know that there are certain Political Economists who
say that generosity upon our part will produce generosity in
return ; but 1 confess that I have not that sublime reliance


upon what I will call the Romance of (Economics ; and I think
that we have the bitter disillusion of our own Commercial
Tariffs to prove that concession is by no means the necessary
progenitor of reciprocity. On the contrary, experience shews
us that the more we have conceded our markets, the more
rigidly the markets of France and America have been closed
against us; —therefore, to this argument we have the surest of
all answers, — Experience. There are also certain Moralists
who say, “Let this country do what it considers right, no
matter what other countries may do.” But I confess that
I think it the first duty of a country to protect and to secure
the rights of its own subjects. We have done what is
fair and just, in offering to America, and to all foreign States
protection to their writers, if they will give protection to
ours, and I do think that a very great wrong is inflicted
upon English Authors—upon our noblest producers —by any
Act, or by any construction of an Act, which shall tend
directly to sanction, and to reward the very State which
most pertinaciously adheres to that system of piracy which
disheartens their labours, and defrauds their profits.
Nor while we thus inflict a heavy blow and a severe
discouragement upon British learning, do we have the mag-
nanimous consolation of thinking that we do right to the
country that aggrieves us ; —that is, that we do bestow any
real benefit upon the American Republic. We bestow a boon
upon the American authors, it is true, but I will endeavour
to shew that we thereby inflict a very severe injury upon
American literature. And as one reason why I took this
Chair to-day was to have an opportunity of making some
appeal to our brethren across the water, in the hope that
the Report of these proceedings may pass the Atlantic, I will
very briefly state my reasons for believing that, by the ab-
sence of an international Copyright, injury is inflicted upon
American literature, and that a Copyright conceded on our


side to the Americans, not equally conceded by them to us,
can only tend to aggravate the injury by denationalizing
their authors.
I say first that it is impossible to have a healthful
professional literature in America, so long as their own
authors are beaten down to the minimum of price in their
own markets by this wholesale smuggling of English
works. So long as an American publisher can say to the
American historian, “ Why, Sir, how can I entertain the
idea of purchasing your history, when I can have the great
work of Mr. Macaulay for nothing.” And when the young
novelist comes and says, “ Will you buy my book ?” “ Buy
your book ! Why, lam expecting the sheets of the last
work Mr. Dickens, a work that will sell like wildfire.
Can you have the impudence to ask me to purchase a
Copyright, when I can have the works of Mr. Dickens at
the mere cost of print and paper ?”
Meanwhile this smuggled English literature, circulated
throughout the whole of America, selling in various modes
—at the lowest possible price—a few cents —must have a
great effect upon the very style of American composition.
It sinks into the national mind, —it forms the national taste,
and thus the literature of the Americans is liable to become
a reflection and an imitation of our own, rather than the
indigenous and spontaneous offspring of a different society,
growing up under different aspects of nature.
The effect that must be produced upon America, the Ame-
ricans may at once perceive by reference to an example,
that ought to be a warning to them Belgium. The
Belgians, like the Americans, are conspicuous for their
industrial progress. In commerce, in agriculture, in all the
arts of material life, the Belgians are unsurpassed upon the
Continent. But when we look to their literature, they have
absolutely none. A century ago that literature gave a


healthful promise of future excellence. Now it is entirely
extinguished. And why ? Because the Belgians subsist
upon the wholesale piracy of the French writers, who write
in a language familiar as their own to the reading classes
of that country. And thus it has happened, as it always
will happen, that the native plant has withered under the
shade of the transported tree. The same cause will sooner
or later produce the same effect in the United States. Nay,
it is already visible there, for their Jonathan Edwards, their
Channing, their Irving, and their Cooper, are the children
of a former generation, who had arisen before these piracies
were so extensive and systematic; and in spite of the pro-
digious improvement which that grand Republic is making
in every other department of art, we do not find that the
younger generation, with one or two exceptions, such as
Prescott or Longfellow, is producing any writers equal to the
last.
There can be but one cause for this arrested progress of
literature in America. That cause is the absence of av
International Copyright, which gives its market to the smug-
gler ; and there can be but one remedy for it, and that is
placing the American author in his own country upon the
same level with the English author, by making Copyright
reciprocal.
Meanwhile, supposing that the American writers are thus
driven out of their own market, —supposing also that by Lord
Campbell’s construction of the Act of Anne, we give them
this new market in England, which may thus prove more
lucrative than their own, do we not gradually tend to make
those writers adapt themselves more to our Public than to the
American —to consult more our mode of thinking, our interests,
our very style and mannerism, and thus sink into the general
class of English authors, rather than cultivate a literature
that should be original, because national? And, if again,


by the construction of this Act it is necessary for the Ame-
rican author, in order to secure his Copyright, to publish first
in this country, and if this market should become to him more
lucrative than his own, do we not tend to deport and to draw
away from America, the very class which a democracy most
needs, which most tends to supply the place of a Court and
an Aristocracy; —I mean the Nobility of the Mind ; who,
apart from trade, maintain the culture of refined and elevated
ideas, and who introduce the Graces wherever they find an
altar for the Muse.
Thus, if I were an American, anxious for the honour of my
country, I should never cease striving to obtain for my own
countrymen an International Copyright with England, and
until that was done , I should most strenuously remonstrate
against and oppose this one-sided Act which tends to deport
and to denationalize American literature.
I may, however, be told, Gentlemen, that these reasons
ought to be sufficient to decide the Americans to grant
International Copyright; and if so, what harm could be
effected by Lord Campbell’s construction of the existing law ?
No doubt those reasons have their weight upon thinkers and
statesmen in their country, —but even America, —even the
most enlightened community, does not have for the majority
of its population—thinkers and statesmen. And what I regret
is this, —that an argument which addresses itself most clearly
and palpably to the simple understanding of a trading com-
munity ; namely, the argument, “ give us something in the
way of trade and we will give you something,”—is taken
away and we thereby weaken the position of those thinkers
and statesmen in America upon whom we rely.
Nevertheless, I have submitted these considerations for the
reflection of our brethren across the Great Water, in order that
they may take warning by them, and discover before it is too
late, that it is not worth their while to smuggle a cheap lite


rature ready made. A people so great cannot purchase their
own literature too dear !
Here I pause in the general argument —and sum up its
various bearings.
I have shewn by the signal instance of Voltaire, that no
foreigner claimed a Copyright here, by the Act of Anne,
during the lives of the legislators of the Act, and when its
intention must have been best known. I have shewn, that
for more than 100 years from the passing of that Act, it was
not disputed, that our English Law applied exclusively to our
English writers. I have shewn, that all alleged precedents to
the contrary are fallacious, or rather precedents on our side. —
I have shewn, that as regards the argument always so justly
popular with Englishmen—namely, do to foreign nations
what you deem abstractedly right, no matter what those
nations do to you, cannot be here applied —for instead of
our doing good to America by bestowing Copyright on their
writers without demanding reciprocity, we shall thereby
inflict on that country a grave and progressive evil, in the
denationalization of its literature —while we shall defeat the
very object of the Act of Anne, viz. the encouraging of learn-
ing here, by raising a new barrier to the removal of the
main cause by which that learning is discouraged. Think
not, that while contending against piracy abroad, I advocate
piracy here. No, I desire to see the productions of the mind
held sacred amongst all the Nations, which they nurture and
delight. But I maintain, that this sanctity can only be esta-
blished by rendering it universal and reciprocal. And that
you only defer that great Covenant amongst States and Go-
vernments, if you do not demand equal rights for the litera-
ture, which is perhaps the most influential in the world, and
which is now the most invaded and endangered. No man is
more willing than myself, that England shall set the example
of generosity ; but I call that generosity false and vain,
16


which is purchased by the resignation of a single principle
of Justice. Justice is due to the writers of England—and
while that justice be withheld, generosity to the nations that
despoil them, is an abnegation of their rights—and almost a
treason to their cause.
But it may be said, if the reprinting English works in
America, unprotected by Copyright there, injures American
literature, will not reprinting American works, without copy-
right here, equally injure the English; and, therefore, what-
ever be done to our authors, would it not be wise to protect
the American ? Gentlemen, the two cases are not parallel.
The English living literature is so vast and copious, that it
must necessarily overpower that of any younger people speak-
ing the same language, if its price be reduced to the minimum
by the absence of Copyright; but the American books
popular here are so few, that they could produce no per-
ceptible effect on our markets or our literature. In one case
it is the ocean flowing in upon the rivulet, in the other it is
but the merging of a rivulet in the sea. This fear of some far
future contingency is slight indeed beside the immediate and
hourly growing evil produced to both countries by the absence
of English Copyright in America. And if all the energies
of the more enlightened in both nations should be strained
to that, as the all paramount object; do not, I again say, do
not let us reject experience, and rashly adopt that one-sided
concession which we have hitherto found, in all other matters
of barter, only serves to postpone sine die the chance of a
beneficent reciprocity. Look to common sense and to com-
mon life. It is well that our neighbours should eat meat—
it is also well that our neighbours should give something in
exchange for the meat they consume. But if I supply my
neighbours with meat for nothing, do you think they will
listen to my philosophical arguments on the propriety, and
expediency for their own sakes, of volunteering something
in exchange for it? In vain should I shew them by still
17


stronger reasonings than those I address to the Americans
on behalf of their national literature, that John the weaver,
and Joe the tinker, would be better and richer men in the
end, if they would work hard and pay for my knuckles of
veal, and my legs of mutton. ’Deuce a bit would John weave
me a pair of stockings, or Joe mend me an old kettle in
return for their dinner, so long as I first gave them their
dinnei for nothing, and then only appealed to their generous
emotions, or their metaphysical comprehension. No—though
it is just that John and Joe should have meat, it is also just
that I should keep my joints on their hooks, until John and
Joe agreed to pay for them. But I suspect that your butcher
would think it a very bad joke, to be told that he ought to
set an example of generosity, and give his prime bits gratis-
certain that John and Joe will only have to read the sublime
truths of political economy, in order to pay voluntarily for
what they can have for nothing ! Behold, Gentlemen, the
plain moral of all concession without reciprocity! And
before you grant the one without asking the other, just go
and talk with your friend the butcher.
I have but two other words to say. This question has
incidentally become complicated by litigation amongst various
eminent private parties—a litigation that first commenced
with certain respectable and distinguished music sellers and
music publishers, and in which the antagonist interests of
some of our principal literary publishers are now, unfortu-
nately for our dispassionate consideration of the general
subject, warmly engaged. I have a very slight acquaintance,
I am sorry to say, as yet, with our worthy Vice-Chairman,
Mr. Bohn. I know him chiefly as one of those publishers
who to their immortal honour have placed before the less
opulent classes of our reading public, the most valuable
literatuie at the cheapest rate—and have thus outbid and
defeated the panders to immorality and irreligion who, some
yeais since, had almost a monopoly in the works adapted to


the means of the populace. Opposed to Mr. Bohn in the
litigation I refer to, stands the son of a princely house which
ranks amongst the Medici of publishers—a house renowned for
the magnitude and liberality of its speculations, and for its
connection with some of the most illustrious writers of our
age —the house of Murray. Opposed also to Mr. Bohn is
another publisher of high repute—a personal acquaintance of
my own, with whom I have had, and still have, dealings;
and of whom I can only speak in terms of regard and respect
—I mean Mr. Bentley.
I most sincerely regret that I should find myself opposed
in opinion to men like Messrs. Murray and Bentley, more
especially in a case where they consider their interests con-
cerned, and their rights impugned; and it is with profound
submission that I find myself demurring or grieving at the
judgment of a man like Lord Campbell, in whom I revere
one of the brightest ornaments in the long line of British
Jurisprudence. But I felt that after the part I had taken
in promoting the law of International Copyright, I could not,
as a public man, shrink upon this occasion, unpleasant as it
personally was to me, from expressing my conviction that its
objects are very seriously endangered. Yet in consenting to
take this Chair, I, for one, hold myself perfectly clear from
all the disputes, and all the passions, with which the large
question at issue is unfortunately embarrassed ; and I need
not, I am sure, recommend to you to avoid and discourage,
in whatever discussions may ensue at this Meeting, all those
personal allusions which sometimes flavour political dispute,
but from which the serener element of literature and art
should be wholly free.
Furthermore, Gentlemen, whatever may be our feelings
as to the reprint of our works by American publishers, it
is clear that we have no right to blame them so long as
their proceedings are sanctioned by the American law. And
one reason why I wish that Copyright shall be mutual and


international, and one reason why I regret the recent con-
struction of the Act of Anne, which would protect the alien
and desert the native, is, that I perceive already amongst our
own writers a rankling sense of the wrong received at the
hands of our American brethren, which, I fear, the recent
construction of the Act, if it produce no correspondent
generosity, may serve to exasperate. We all know the jealous
pride that an American feels in his country, and how he
resents, with the affection of a son, every expression that
seems to disparage the mighty mother. I have seen that
ardent and haughty love of country treated as a morbid
exaggeration. But I, for one, honour and respect it, and
wish that we had more of it ourselves. It may be a preju-
dice—but it is one of those prejudices that make nations
great and institutions durable; —and knowing that what-
ever in our speeches, our books, or our press, irritates that
noble sensitiveness, tends, more than we are apt to conceive,
to alienate from us the hearts that we should bind to our
own, I trust that nothing may this day be said which would
pain one American to hear. —Proud of our grand Anglo-Saxon
name, I desire to see the ties of our common race extended
and strengthened wherever in America, in Australasia,
amongst virgin forests, or rising towns, the sons of our own
fathers recruit the free blood of the world. Feeling that to
effect this, much may be done by authors as the interpreters
and heralds of the voice of nations, I conclude with the
hope that if these our proceedings should reach the United
States, while pleading there for what we consider the inte-
rest and the honour of letters in both countries, —not one
word may be uttered which belies those sentiments of
affection and respect with which we regard their citizens
as our nearest kindred, and shall exult to find in them our
most cordial allies in the glorious mission of civilization.


MR. HENRY G. BOHN’S SPEECH.
Gentlemen,
The brilliant eloquence of our distinguished
Chairman will cause my dry details of law and precedent
to fall somewhat heavily on the ear, but I must entreat
your patience.
Preliminarily to the resolution which it devolves on me to
propose, I will lay before you, as briefly as I can, the
principal facts connected with the subject of Foreign Copy-
right in Great Britain, and its bearings on the interests of Lite-
rature. As my attention has for some years been directed to
the laws affecting Copyright, and I have ventured besides to
stake considerable property on what I believe to be their equi-
table interpretation in regard to foreign claims, I may, perhaps,
bring some circumstances to your mind which have not pre-
viously occurred to you. What I may say will, I hope, elicit
the opinions and co-operation of gentlemen more competent
than myself to advocate the cause of literary justice, and the
intellectual property of the people.
I propose to give an outline of the question under three
separate heads.
Ist.- An enumeration of the several conflicting judgments
which have recently taken place in the Courts of Law, and
which, as regards those I believe to be adverse to British
interests, are the cause of our meeting here.
2dly. A review of various Acts and Cases which are cited
as authority on one side or the other.
Srdly. An answer to the principal arguments lately
put forth in the Courts of Law, or by opponents elsewhere.
D


And I will then, gentlemen, crave your opinions, as well as
advice as to what course it will be most advisable to adopt.
In the first place, I will mention the case of Boosey v.
Jeffery s ; which, as being the most recent decision, is more
immediately before us. I regard the judgment in that case
as directly opposed to the commercial spirit of the age, inas-
much as it is promotive of foreign monopoly in this country,
imposes foreign restrictions on a large ingredient of our cheap
literature, and by removing all inducements towards inter-
national copyright, puts a veto on the beneficial extension of
our own literature abroad. It virtually holds out a premium
to foreign countries to plunder us more extensively than ever,
our hands being tied from self defence. But of this more in
its place; for the present I will confine myself to a detail of
the facts. They are these :
Mr. Jefferys, a rausicseller, published, in 1847, a selection
comprising three airs, one of which was from the foreign opera
of “ La Sonnarabula,” which had been composed by Bellini, a
subject of Austria, and was performed at one of the Milan
theatres in February, 1831, and on the 28th of July of the
same year at Her Majesty’s Theatre, in London.
In the meantime,—that is, on the 19th February, 1831,
the copyright of the music was assigned by Bellini to Ricordi,
a music publisher in Milan, who, four months later, came over
to England, and sold to Mr. Boosey, on the 9th June, 1831,
what he deemed a copyright of the opera for this country.
That sale included a set of music plates, previously engraved in
Milan , of ten of the airs, from which foreign plates Mr. Boosey
produced his edition the very next day, and at the same time,
that is on the 10th June, entered it (as English copyright) at
Stationers Hall. It appears that by some previous arrange-
ment between Bellini and Ricordi, publication was made, or
intended to be made, simultaneously at Milan and London,
under the impression that this would secure copyright in both


countries.* It was, it should be observed, only after the
lapse of 16 years that Mr. Jefferys published his Selection, when ,
according to the law of Austria , the copyright of the whole
opera had for more than two years expired. Mr. Boosey, claim-
ing the copyright for the term granted by our Statutes to
British authors, brought his action in the Court of Exchequer,
when Lord Cranworth, then Baron Rolfe, gave judgment for
the Defendant, that is, against foreign claims, referring with
some stress to the previous decision pronounced by the judges
in full Court, in the case of Boosey v. Purday. Upon this
Mr. Boosey tendered a Bill of Exceptions, and carried the
cause to a Court of Error, where my Lord Campbell presided,!
who reversed the previous judgment, declaring that a foreigner
by sending his works here for first (or simultaneous) publica-
tion, might acquire a copyright on the same terms as an
English author.
A few days previous to this, in pleadings which took place
* It is a common practice with foreign music publishers to print their
music abroad with the names of English publishers on the title page, and
send it over here in time to publish simultaneously, or as near as may he.
And this is sometimes done without any previous arrangement with the Lon-
don house, and even without any communication or permission, as I can shew.
■f Mr. Justice Talfourd was on the Bench, and coincided in the judgment,
which took the Defendant rather by surprise, as he had been influenced by a
written opinion officially given by that gentleman when at the Bar in 1840.
I take leave to quote it from Mr. Sheard’s pamphlet
“ I am of opinion that a foreigner who has composed music in a foreign
country cannot obtain a Copyright therein in England by publishing such
music in this country and abroad on the same day. This point is not decided
in the case of Chappell v. Purday ; but I think, that inasmuch as the foreign
publication might be imported into England without some special restriction
arising from an antecedent copyright here it would be impossible to maintain
a Copyright in the English contemporaneous publication. The assignee could
be in no better condition than the composer.”— T. N. talfourd , Sergeant's-
Inn, August 9th, 1845.
As two of the other judges on the bench—Maule and Creswell—had, when
in Parliament, voted with Mr. Serjeant Talfourd on copyright questions, it was
but consistent that they should decide with him.
D


on a demurrer in Murray v. Bohn (my own case), the obser-
vations which fell from the Court tended, as far as could be
perceived, to the same result. As the demurrer has to be re-
argued in connection with additional pleas of first publication
abroad, it would not becoraeme nowtosaymore in respectof it. #
Another recent case is that of Ollendorff v. Black, in which
His Honour the Vice Chancellor Knight Bruce, granted an
injunction restraining the Defendant from importing a Frank-
fort edition of the Plaintiff’s Grammar, mainly on the plea
of first publication in Great Britain, connected, however,
with the circumstance that the Plaintiff was himself present at
the time. His Honour thought his residence here a material
point, even admitting, as he did, that it was only temporary, and
that his domicile was originally and continuously foreign.
Mr. Black, not being in a position to try the question at
Common Law, the injunction remains undisturbed.
Foi some time previous to these cases, decisions had been
the other way, that is, adverse to foreign claims.f In 1845, in
Chappell v. Purday, the Court of Exchequer delivered an
emphatic opinion that a foreign author residing abroad, who
composed a work there, could have no copyright in this
country, neither could his English assignee. This opinion
was confirmed by a very elaborate judgment delivered in the
same Court, in Boosey v. Purday, when the Judges, in a full
bench, unanimously decided that a foreign author residing
abioad was not an author within the meaning of the Statutes,
which were intended solely for the encouragement of British
talent and industry, and that a foreigner by first sending to,
* Tlie ar o uments ln this Demurrer, by Sir Fitzroy Kelly, on the part of the
Plaintiff, are very elaborate, and occupied the Court for several hours. They
have been printed verbatim from the short-hand notes; and will, in due season,
be published, together with all the proceedings in this cause.
f In Page v. Townsend, a suit as to the copyright of a set of prints designed
and engraved in Paris, the Vice-Chancellor (Shadwell) refused an injunction
on the ground that the laws of England only protected works designed,
engraved and published in Great Britain .”


and first publishing’ his work in Great Britain, acquired no
copyright. A British subject who purchases from him such
a right as he had in his own country, which could not extend
beyond it, cannot be in a better condition here than the
foreigner.
Between the periods of these judgments in the Court of
Exchequer, the Court of Common Pleas (in 1848) pro-
nounced in the case of Cocks v. Purday,* a judgment exactly
the reverse of those in the Court of Exchequer, which judg-
ment was followed in another case, Boosey v. Davidson, in the
Court of Queen’s Bench.
These are all the recent cases with which we are at present
concerned. I will now glance at the Acts of Parliament and
the principal early cases usually quoted on the question.
The first Act which defined! Copyright in this country was
* This was the case of the Elfin Walzer, which had been composed in
honour of the Silver festival of the Emperor Nicolas, and was publicly per-
formed July 10th, 1842. It was alleged that simultaneous publication of the
printed music took place in Prague and London on the Ist of September fol-
lowing ; and, on the strength of this, a verdict was given for the Plaintiff.
Since then it is found that entry was made in the Musical Copyright Office at
Leipzig the day before, i.e. August, 31 ; and the music, as a matter of neces-
sity, deposited there at the time. An attested copy of the document signed by
the British Consul, and an affidavit, in proof of deposit of the music, has been
made in the Court of Chancery, April 7th, 1849, but too late to disturb the
verdict. So much for the niceties of foreign copyright when contingent on
simultaneous publication.
t In conformity with the words of the Act I ought rather to have said vested.
In the discussions which took place at the time of passing the Act, the word
secured was expunged from the Bill, and vested substituted, it being argued that
the’right did not exist before the Act of Anne, except by special grant or license,
which limited possession to periods varying from 7to 21 years. That there
was previously, from a very early period, no indisputable and common law
right in literary productions, independent of this government grant or licence,
is evident in the case of Whittinton’s Grammar {de Heteroclytis Nominibus ),
which was printed in 1523 by Wynken de Worde, and reprinted, or so to say
pirated by Treveris, without date, but about or before 1530. In a subsequent


that of Queen Anne, passed in 1709. Previously, for some
years, there had been great uncertainty as to the duration
and even as to the existence of vested rights in literary com-
position, there being no express laws on the subject. Opi-
nions ran in extremes. Some asserted that when thoughts
were put to paper, they became public property, and that
(excepting in the case of special grants) only the manuscript
was the exclusive and physical property of the producer;*
others, that there was or ought to be a perpetual property in
literary composition as much as in freehold.
I will here indulge in a digression to observe, that printing
on its first introduction into this country, was considered a
matter of State, subject to the jurisdiction of the Star
Chamber till its abolition in 1640; and the Crown continued
to exercise immediate control over it until 1694, when it expired
together with the licensing system. There is no doubt but
that, as long as the licensing system lasted, the privilege it con-
ferred to print any particular book was exclusive, and was so
far equivalent to Copyright; but as the licensing Acts were only
edition printed by W. de Worde in 1533, the author taxes Treveris severely
for his conduct in a copy of Latin verses printed at the back of the title.
This alleged piracy seems to have been legal, owing to the absence of the
Royal Privilegium, which Wynken de Worde took care to procure for his
second improved edition. It is remarkable that almost every book printed
by Treveris is reprinted from editions first published by Wynken de Worde,
of which fact the Polychronicon is a particular example. But the practice of
reprinting one upon the other must have been pretty general among our
early printers, as the various conflicting editions, produced at short intervals
after their first publication, will testify. There must either have been no
protection whatever in the age of Caxton and his immediate successors, or it
was of a very limited character. Even as late as the days of Shakespeare
there were opposing editions of his plays printed within short periods of each
other.
Among those who have publicly expressed this opinion in later times, are
Sir Edward Sugden and Mr. Strutt (of Belper). See Debates , June 6th,
1838, and April 6th, 1842.


for limited terms, they left intervening periods of uncertainty.
For instance, that of Charles the 2nd expired in May, 1679, and
was not replaced until 1685 (Ist James 2nd), leaving literary
property entirely without legislative protection for six years.
In 1681 and again in 1694, when the licensing system had
finally expired, and no protection was substituted, the Stationers’
Company provided for this deficiency, as far as they could,
hy bye laws ; but as these were applicable only to themselves,
they had no control whatever over those booksellers who
were not members of their body.
Throughout the whole period, certain literary property was
assumed exclusively by the Crown, and in perpetuity, par-
ticularly the Law Reports, Statutes, Year Books, Almanacs,
the Bible and Prayer Book, A. B. C. or Spelling Books,
Catechisms, and the Latin Grammar used in Endowed
Schools. These, so to say, freehold tenements were leased or
granted to different bodies or individuals, and it is but in lattei
times that the public voice has succeeded in abolishing some
of these monopolies, such as the exclusive prerogative of pub-
lishing Law Reports and Almanacs.
Other freehold rights, as I think I am warranted in calling
them, were conferred by special grant; of this kind, the only
one now existing is Clarendon’s History of the Rebellion,
which by some anomaly has been held intact for exactly a
century and a half.* I allude to these facts to shew how closely
Copyright property is in some instances allied to freehold, and
therefore of the nature which our laws always denied to aliens.
Indeed, aliens could never, and cannot even now, according to
the last Alien Act, passed in 1844, claim to hold and trans-
mit even leases as an investment, but can only enjoy them for
their own immediate occupation, and that for no longer
* The paper on which this is printed, like all the University Press books,
is exempted from duty.


than 21 years: leases being considered ‘chattels real/ In
the Act 41 Geo. 111. c. 107, granting copyright in perpetuity
to the Dublin University, they are restrained from leasing it.
But to return to the Act of Anne : its title is “ an Act for the
“ encouragement of learning, by vesting the copies of printed
“ books in the authors or purchasers of such copies during the
“ times therein mentioned/’
The preamble states that it is “ for the encouragement of
“learned men to compose and write useful books, and to
“ prevent the reprinting of books without the consent of the
“ authors* or proprietors, too often to the ruin of them and
“ their families,”
This Act gives 21 years from the date of publication, to
books already printed, and only 14 years to those which
should thereafter be printed, but with a contingency of an
additional 14 years dependent on the life of the author. The
reason for this distinction appears to be that certain booksellers
alleged they had bought properties under the impression
that they had an unlimited right therein, and to indemnify
these, a longer term was given than the Legislature thought fit
to grant to what might be produced thereafter, there being a
manifest tendency in the Parliament of the time to shorten
rather than lengthen literary tenure.
This act was passed in consequence of a petition of the
London booksellers,! among whom were Tonson and Knapton,
and was the result of the united deliberation and judgment of
several distinguished law-lords and some of the principal
* Meaning, of course, authors of Great Britain, as we could not be
expected to provide for the families of foreign authors all over the world. But,
strange to say, this palpable meaning of an English Act of Parliament is vigo-
rously disputed.
t Their petition was for perpetual copyright; it is not very likely that
London booksellers would have asked for perpetual or even statutable copy-
right for foreigners, with whom we were then at war.


authors of the day, none of whom were foreign, or could have
had any foreign interests in view.
I am particular in referring to this preamble, because it
has been contended that our thoroughly English Queen
Anne contemplated the protection of foreign literary property,
as well as British, and “ that there is nothing whatever in
the title, recitals, or enactments of that Act so to confine or
limit it to British subjects.” Whoever calls to mind the cha-
racter of the Queen and the history of the times, that we
were in active war with foreign States, and that we could not
have contemplated the protection of any thing abroad, will
see clearly that Anne could only intend to legislate for her
own country.
There is a clause in the Act permitting the importation of
Greek and Latin and other foreign books, where they do not
interfere with English copyright, but there is nothing to pro-
hibit the reprinting of foreign productions under any circum-
stances, or to shew that any protection was given to foreign
writers.
At that period, the language of learned literature was more
extensively Latin than at present. English books were not then
produced by foreign authors out of this country (excepting in
a few rare instances), and therefore could not be legislated for,
but valuable Latin ones, suitable to the English market, were
published continually, and their publication by foreigners in
this country would have been encouraged by an explicit
clause, had any notion of protection ever entered the heads
of our senate. But they deemed it sufficient to provide for
their importation.*
* So little inclination did our legislature formerly manifest to protect the
works of foreigners in this country, that even the foreign works of Englishmen
published here were left almost without protection. Several scientific works
written in Latin (then the universal language of science) were translated and
published without consent of the author. Sir James Edward Smith found it
necessary to publish an English translation of his Flora Britannica, first


Almost all our best Latin books had been, and were
at all times unscrupulously reprinted abroad. I may instance
the “ Critici Sacri“ Poli Synopsis,” &c. And we returned
the compliment whenever occasion served. There is no instance
of a foreign production being protected here, and none of any
protection to English copyright abroad. As an example, I will
adduce the well-known circumstance of Mill’s Greek Testa-
ment, upon which the Doctor states that he spent 30 years of
his life, and large sums of money. The book was printed at
the Oxford University Press in 1707, and he was so anxious
to prevent what he called the piratical reprinting in Germany,
that he went to the expense of overrunning the types in an
Bvo. form, that there might be an edition sufficiently cheap to
remove the inducement. Notwithstanding this, however,
the book was reprinted at Amsterdam, with improvements by
the celebrated scholar, Kuster, in the fall of the year 1710,
soon after the passing of our protective Queen’s Act. At a
later period we reprinted Kuster’s Latin school-book on the
Middle Verb. Several of our English books were reprinted
abroad in this reign, amongst which were “Burnet’s Own
Times,” “ Milton’s Prose Works,” &c. &c. the importation
of which was of course prohibited in this country.
The next Statute, 12 Geo. 2nd, c. 36, was passed expressly to
prohibit the importation of any books whatever reprintea from
hooks first published in Great Britain , without raising the
question whether they were copyright or not. This shews a
strongly protective feeling on the part of our Legislature. The
preamble states that the duty on books imported was less than
that levied on paper ; the protection was therefore more par-
ticularly to our printers and stationers, and to discourage
generally the interference with “the trade and manufacture
of Great Britain.” At that time there was no thought of
foreigners acquiring copyrights here by sending over for first
printed in Latin in 1804, to protect himself against the publication of one
advertised by a London bookseller.


publication, and the term first published was no doubt used
only as the simplest for pointing to what was likely to be
English copyright in regard to Latin Books. There were,
however, at different periods valuable English books first
published abroad, which the use of this term allowed us to
import, such as Ludlow’s Memoirs, Townley’s Hudibras, &c.
This Act was followed by 15 Geo. 3rd, c. 53 (1774) giving
copyrights in perpetuity to the Universities of England and
Scotland, and the Colleges of Eton, Westminster, and Win-
chester, “ for the advancement of useful learning, and other
purposes of education.”
Then came the 41st Geo. 3rd, c. 107 (1801), the title of
which is “ an Act for the further encouragement of learning
in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland by secu-
ring the copyright of printed books to the authors or their
assigns for the time herein mentioned.” This Act gives the
same term as Anne’s, that is 14 years only, should the author
die within the term, but 14 years more should he survive the
first term. The chief feature in this Act is that it gives copy-
right in perpetuity to all books written for and printed at
the press of Trinity College, Dublin, provided they do not
“ delegate, grant, lease , or sell the copyrights or exclusive
rights,” &c. otherwise the privilege to become void on the expiry
of the ordinary term. There is a clause also against the im-
portation of books “ first composed, written, or printed and
published in any part of the said United Kingdom, and re-
printed in any other country or place whatsoever. And the
Commissioners of the Customs and Excise aie to reward
officers who shall seize any such books.
The 54th Geo. 3rd, c. 156 (1814) extends the copyright to
<2B years absolutely, and then for the author’s life, and no
lono-er. This Act gave 11 copies to our public Libraries, which
caused a great deal of remonstrance on the part of our leading
booksellers, and was eventually moderated to 5 copies.
Then came the International Act, 1 & 2 Vic. c. 59 (1838).


This Act was repealed and enlarged in 1844, but as far as the
present subject is concerned its bearings are the same, and
the earlier date shews that we have now tendered the boon
for more than twelve years The preamble
is:—“Whereas it is desirable to afford protection within
Her Majesty’s dominions to the authors of books first pub-
lished in foreign countries, and their assigns, in cases where
protection should be afforded in such foreign countries to the
authors of books first published in Her Majesty’s dominions,
and their assigns.”* Clause 9is “ That no order in Council
shall have any effect unless it shall be therein stated as the
ground for issuing the same that due protection for the benefit
of the authors of printed books first published in the dominions
of Her Majesty, and their assigns, has been secured by the
foreign powers.” And there is this marginal note to the clause,
“No order in Council to have any effect unless it states that
reciprocal protection is secured.”f
Clause 13, exempts translations from the operation of the
Act, although the original work may be protected.
It has been argued in reference to the term first publication,
repeatedly used in this Act, that the intention of the Legislature
was to provide only for the protection of such works as should
thereafter he first published abroad, which would else b epublici
juris, and that books first published here were already
under the protection of our laws, and needed no recognition
* This Bill was introduced to the House of Lords by the Marquis of
Lansdowne, with these words at the close of the preamble, “ provided the
government of such foreign authors extend a similar privilege to the works
of British authors in their respective countries”—and there was no intimation
whatever that first ’publication would give protection, independent of the
international act.
f That this clause and the marginal note were deliberate and intentional, is
unquestionable, as they were repeated verbatim in the Act passed 1844, and it
had been so printed in the several Bills preparatory thereto. “ Surely,” said Mr.
Warburton (see the Debates, 1838), “it would not be just to give to foreign
publishers increased advantages not previously enjoyed by our own authors,”
—a remark which seemed to speak the sentiments of all.


in the International Act. But this must surely be a fallacy,
as if the legislature merely meant this, it would have been
explicitly stated. The presumed interpretation is, that we
should not call upon a foreign state, say Prussia or Hanover,
to protect our reprints of books first produced in their neigh-
bouring or friendly States, such as Flugel’s Dictionary, of
which a partial copyright is claimed in England, although the
book was first produced, and is really copyright in Saxony.
If the Legislature had considered that foreigners already
had rights here by first publication, it would hardly have
been worth while to pass two Acts of Parliament, and sundry
orders in Council, for the little that remained to protect.
Every work of value, could easily have been protected by send-
ing it here for first publication, as foreign authors are not, as far
as evidence is before us, deprived of copyright in their own
country by simultaneous or even first publication elsewhere.
The last and principal copyright Act is the sth and 6th Vic.
c. 45, commonly known as Talfourd’s* Act, (passed in 1842.)
It repeals the Bth of Anne and the 41st and 54th Geo. 111. but
the former Acts were the only ones operative until 1842, and
they are still, it should seem, of authority in interpreting
some clauses in the present.
* This Bill was first brought before Parliament in 1837, by Serjeant
Talfourd ; but in consequence of great opposition, both in and out of the
House (almost every printer and printer’s journeyman, and various me-
chanic’s institutions petitioning against it), it was not carried. After being
re-introduced every season for five years, and undergoing considerable modi-
fication, it was eventually passed, mainly by the perseverance of Viscount
Mahon, Serjeant Talfourd being then out of Parliament. One of its earliest
modifications (February, 1828), was the excision of the so-called international
clause, which proposed to give copyright to foreigners who should enter
their works here (at Stationers’ Hall), within twelve months after their first
publication abroad! Among the opponents to the Bill, in one or all of its
various stages, were Me. Wakbueton, Me. Macaulay, Me. Hume, Me.
Cobden, Me. Geote, Baeon Rolfe, Sie Edwaed Sugden, Sie John
Jeevis, Me, Wakley, Loed John Russell and Sie Robeet Peel.


This Act takes a very wide range: according to its preamble,
it is passed for the benefit of the world. The term first pub-
lication, is not used in it without the term subsisting copy-
right, or words to that effect, the learned authors perceiving
no doubt that the old term was vague and inconvenient.
This Act extends the term of copyright to forty-two years
and seven years after the death of the author, whichever may
happen to be the longest term.* A praiseworthy extension,
with which I should be sorry to find fault, but it is remark-
able that the hand which tendered this boon, fosters its
counterpoise.
Clause 11 makes a simple entry at Stationers Hall prima
facie proof of proprietorship, subject to be rebutted by an
application to a court of law, which may order the entry to be
expunged. But the remedy, as I know by experience, is in
any controverted case, about as serious as any other lawsuit.
It is besides contrary to the general principles of English
law to rest proof of title with the Defendant.
Clause 17 makes it unlawful for any, excepting “ the pro-
prietor of the copyright, or some person authorized by him, to
import any printed book first composed, written, and printed
or published in any part of Great Britain wherein there
should be copyright.” This clause therefore gives the foreign
proprietor the right to print his works abroad and import and
sell them here , of which we shall say more anon.
Clause 25 enacts that copyright shall he personal property,
which implies at least that it was not so before 1842.
We have now done with the Acts, and have only to con-
sider two or three of the principal cases not before quoted.
* The term originally asked was for the life of the author and sixty years
after his death, but this was opposed very generally, and among others by
Mr. Grote and Mr. Macaulay. Sir Robert Peel thought the existing protection
of 28 years and life sufficient. It was clear that they all deemed copyright
a statutable and not a perpetual property.


The Court of Queen’s Bench, in Millar v. Taylor, 1769,
decided that authors had perpetual copyright in their works,
notwithstanding the Statute of Anne ; but five years later in
Donaldson v. Beckett, the House of Lords decided that
copyright even if it had ever been perpetual, was limited by
the Statute of Anne. # In either case (whether the right be
deemed perpetual or statutable) foreigners would not be
entitled to benefit according to the usual construction of our
Statutes.
The first claim which appears ever to have been made in
behalf of foreign copyright in this country was in 1822,
when dementi the celebrated music publisher, brought an
action against Walker, one of the earliest of our cheap music
sellers, to restrain him from selling what was called a piracy
of a composition by Kalkbrenner, then resident in this
country The suit went off’ with scarcely any argument,
on the ground of first publication in Paris, and because
the assignment was not sufficiently witnessed; therefore there
was no express decision on the point, but the Judges were
clearly of opinion that a foreign author had no British copy-
right. The opinion delivered by Baron Bayley on this
* On this occasion the lay-lords took an active part; and Bishop Shipley,
in an eloquent speech (Works, vol. ii. p. 201, &c.) argued convincingly
against the existence of a common law right in literary property, indeed any
right excepting what was conferred by the statute of Anne. The same views
have since been publicly expressed by some of the most distinguished of our
statesmen and judges. It may be sufficient here to adduce the names of
Lords Camden and Brougham, whose speeches on copyright are among the
most memorable examples of elocution. Lord Campbell (Lives of the Chan-
cellors, vol. v. p. 295) designates Lord Camden’s ‘ loudly praised’ speech
against the Common Law property in copyright as “ rather declamatory, though
founded on right principle .” “ Lord Camden” afterwards opposed the Bill
introduced to extend the period of copyright, and it was thrown out. “ But I
think (says Lord Campbell) he was romantically unjust to literary men, and
the controversy is at last well settled by the exertions of my friend Serjeant
Talfourd.”


occasion is so clear and forcible, that at the risk of repeating
what is already before you in a sensible pamphlet by Mr.
Sheard I will quote it:—
“ The statute of Anne not only gives protection to authors as to
books thereafter to he published but to hooks previously printed; but
the British Legislature must be supposed to have legislated with a
view to British interests and the advancement of British learning.
By confining the privilege to British printing, British capital, work-
men and materials, would he employed and the work would be within
reach of the British public. By extending the privilege to foreign
printing, the employment of British capital, workmen, and materials,
might be suspended, and the work might never find its way to the
British public. Without very clear words therefore to shew an inten-
tion to extend the privilege to foreign publications, I should think it
must be confined to books printed in this kingdom, and instead of
there being any such clear words to shew that intention there are
provisions which strongly imply the latter.”
Until this period no attempt had been made to secure copy-
right for any foreign publications in this country, and the
great operas of Mozart, Rossini, and others, including Don
Giovanni, Figaro, Clemenza di Tito, Tancredi, and Norma,
property of very considerable value, were surrendered to the
public without a question.
There were two or three other minor cases, but they were
not much considered or argued, and appear to have but little
weight as precedents.
I will now consider some of the arguments which have
been brought forward by those who advocate foreign claims,
beginning with the case before us, viz. that of Boosey v.
Jeffery s.
The first argument of counsel is, that copyright was property
at Common Law, that is personal, before the Statute of
Anne, which was passed for the encouragement of learning,
and vested copyright in the author or his assignee. That if


the right existed in the author, an alien was entitled equally
with a natural born subject. That if it was personal property*
it was self-evident an alien was entitled, an observation which
the judge strengthened by adding, that in personal property
the law made no distinction. Counsel proceeded to say, that
if foreigners had a right at Common Law, how could they be
affected by the Statute of Anne ?*
The avowed object of Counsel was to make copyright
property at Common Law, as he said it would be asserted
on the other side, that the Statute only applies to British
born subjects. The arguments on this point are too abstruse
for quotation, but the gist of them is, that a foreigner is
entitled to copyright here at Common Law, irrespective of
the Statutes although in dealing with that copyright, he
claims all the benefit which our Statutes confer, and in
many instances for what by the Statutes of his own country
had ceased to exist, that is become puhlici juris .
If such arguments were valid it would fairly raise the
question why the foreigner should not be entitled to his copy-
right in perpetuity, as would be his right at Common Law, if
it had not been regulated by Statute, and why if such right
were inherent in him, he should lose it at all by first publi-
cation, whether accidental or designed ? Wherever the
Statutes intend to confer privileges on foreigners they are
* In Millar v. Taylor, Judge Willes began his summing up with this
significant postulate: “It is found £ that the work is an original composition,
first printed and published in London; the author a natural born subject
resident in England/ therefore this case has nothing to do with foreign
hooks, which stand on a very different footing.” In a subsequent case,
Delondre v. Shaw, the Vice-Chancellor of England (Shadwell) declared in
very distinct terms, that “ the Court does not protect the copyright of a
foreigner .”
f The arguments against the right at Common Law previous to the clause
introduced into the Act of 1842, are adduced abundantly by Justice Yates in
Millar v. Taylor, and by several other Judges in Beckett v. Donaldson, as well
as in more recent cases.
E


explicit, otherwise their provision must be deemed applicable
only to British subjects.*
It was then argued that a foreigner residing here, would
as a matter of course have copyright, and the Bench confirmed
this view by an incidental observation, that there could be no
material difference between a foreigner resident, or non-
resident, so he published here. Then followed a query, whether
De Lolme if he had written his work abroad and published
it here, would not have had a copyright, implying (as it is
well known that he wrote his book here) that he had one r
which as far as the evidence is on record is not borne out.
As the circumstances of De Lolme’s book illustrate the practice
of the last century in such cases, I will state them. De Lolme
was a native of Geneva, a republican, and Member of the
Council of Two Hundred. He came to this country at the
age of 27, and for many years made England his home.
Whilst here, he wrote his famous work on the English Con-
stitution, in French, and first published it in that language,
Lowndes says, in London in 1770, and Dr. Busby in his Junius
pamphlet states the same year. The next year it was published
at Amsterdam, and I think at Paris. De Lolme finding his
work approved, set about translating it into English, which
translation was not published till five years after the French
work, viz. in June, 1775. In the mean time, two London
booksellers had procured a translation and were on the eve of
publishing it, but consented to sell it to De Lolme, who paid
them ten pounds, “ in order,” to use his own words, “ to engage
* If property in Copyright had always been personal and perpetual, we
might have had no English right to print any portion of the Scriptures in
the original tongue, these being first produced from foreign manuscripts, and
perhaps not even an English version, as it requires but little stretch of law to
include both ; not only our Protestant Bible, but all the works of our Pro-
testant Divines might be suppressed when they descended to Catholics, and
vice versa, and perhaps our Common Prayer, by the same rule, might have been
interdicted by an atheist. Enthusiasm overcomes all mercantile considerations.


them to drop their undertaking.” He afterwards published
his work on joint profits with a bookseller, and there seems
little doubt, but this very translation is the one he used,
the language of the work being very superior to his own
preface, or to anything else he afterwards wTote. In his
preliminary essay he congratulates himself that he was
allowed to sell and profit by his book without molestation.
It seems therefore, that unless he had bought up and made
terms with the booksellers, who had projected the translation,
he would have had no benefit therein. There is no doubt
but that there was a copyright in this particular translation,
but had there been any temptation to make another, there was
nothing to prevent it. In 1781 the work was bought of De
Lolme by the trade, and was thereafter published under their
mutual protection, as what is technically called a share-book.
It was intimated too, that Rapin had or would have
been entitled to a copyright in this country. All we know is,
that Rapin, notwithstanding his long residence in this country,
had no copyright for his great work, which was first published
in French. The only copyright existent was in the trans-
lation. Tindal’s, first published in 1726, belonged to the
booksellers, and there was nothing to prevent any other person
from procuring and publishing a different translation if he
chose. In fact it was translated by others, namely by John
Kelly, in 2 vols. folio, and again in 1732 by Lediard, with a
continuation. That foreigners even when domiciled and com-
posing their works in this country, could formerly enjoy no
copyright here, without express grant, is particularly evi-
denced in the case of Handel. Although on terms of intimacy
with George I. he was obliged to apply to the then Secretary
of State (Graggs) for the protection accorded to British
authors, which was granted him for fourteen years (only) by
an order in Council, dated 1720, a copy of which order is
affixed to his works, after the manner of the old licenses.
I could quote a number of instances to shew that the practice
e 2


has never been to give aliens, resident or non-resident, copy-
right in this country, but will confine myself to one other,
which is not generally known. In 1813 Madame de Stael,
then residing in England, sold to Mr. Murray the manuscript
and presumed copyright of her work “De rAllemagne.’ It
was, however, immediately reprinted in Paris, and imported
and sold here in large numbers. Mr. Murray made some
attempt to prevent this, but was unsuccessful.
At that time, as my own knowledge of the practice will
testify, and as that of our elder booksellers will confirm,
nobody ever dreamt of there being copyright in non-resident
foreigners, and it was generally presumed that there was
none even in residents who had not been naturalized, and
that they could not even hold it by transfer. My father
thought so and was naturalized accordingly, otherwise as
book-shares were the only investments he ever made, he
might as well have saved his money.
It was asked from the Bench whether Gibbon, who resided
at Lausanne for some years, and there composed the latter
volumes of his “ Decline and Fall,” would not have been
entitled to copyright for his work in England, even had
he continued to reside abroad. This seems to me beside the
question. An Englishman cannot denationalize himself by
any act, as he would find if taken in arms against us,
and therefore ought not to lose his rights by temporary
absence either for health or pleasure. Gibbon, too, by
electing to publish here, left no room for mistaking his English
identity. But that he acquired no copyright in Switzerland
by his long domicile there, is illustrated by the fact, that his
History was reprinted there under his nose, the year it was
completed in England, and that edition was sold extensively
throughout Europe, especially in France, Germany and Hol-
land, without his participation in the profits.*
* As a recent instance of the absence of protection to Alien copyright in
France, I may cite the case of Sir Walter Scott. In the debates which


Gibbon besides wrote and published the first three volumes
of his work before he left England, and though he wrote the
other three at Lausanne, he brought them over in MS.
expressly to publish them here, and remained in London to
superintend them through the press. He returned to Lau-
sanne after the publication of his last volume, and continued
to reside there for several years.
Some weight seemed to be attached to an impression that
in America and on the Continent, when a literary work is once
published, the author can claim copyright for it only in the
country where he first publishes, and that to all other countries
it is “publici juris." 1 But existing evidence shews that he con-
trives to claim copyright in two countries, —in his own, it
should seem, by virtue of his citizenship; in ours, by that
construction of our Statutes against which we are now con-
tending. In America, Mr. Irving, Mr. Cooper, and others
claim and enjoy the copyright of their works undisputed,
although they assume that some of them were first ’printed
in England , and by their assigns are proceeding here at
law in virtue thereof. If first published here, their works
would not, on the principle implied, be copyright in
America. There has been no instance yet, of an action on
the case, in the United States, nor is there likely to be, as it is
very well known, that Americans are too national to dena-
tionalize themselves. An American author is required by his
Statutes to deposit his work or some part of it, at least the title,
when he makes entry, and this used formerly, when there
was no motive to the contrary, to be performed with perfect
took place on copyright in March 1838, Sir Robert Inglis stated that Sir
Walter Scott sent over the proof sheets of his Life of Napoleon, by way of pro-
tecting his copyright in France; to which Lord John Russell, (who, with Mr.
Poulett Thomson, brought in the first Bill for the International Copyright Act,)
replied, “ that he merely secured the sale of one impression, as his edition
entered the French market sooner than that of a publisher, who had to wait
till a perfect copy could be procured from England. Sir Walter Scott
possessed no other advantage.”— Debates, March 20, 1838.


faith ; but of late years (since simultaneous notions have set in)
entries have constantly been made for protection under the
American law, while the work is first publishing elsewhere,
with the view of acquiring copyright in two places at once.*
If such a manoeuvre is to be tolerated, and other countries were
to admit foreign copyright on our easy terms, any but an
Englishman might contrive to establish his copyright all over
the world.
Another argument is, that it is for the encouragement of
learning in this country, that foreigners should be induced to
send their works, composed abroad, to be first published here.
I cannot see this at all. The foreigner in every instance in
which any question is at all likely to arise, publishes his works
elsewhere, whence, if wanted, they can readily be imported, so
that the world would not be deprived of them ; and as regards
encouragement to our producing classes, they would benefit
most by free trade in copyright. Any books which are worth
republishing, are produced here a great deal cheaper without
copyright than with, and in many cases where they are not,
it is of benefit to our readers to let them alone. No benefit
therefore is conferred here, but what would be considerably
greater to the public, if protection, unless reciprocated , had
been entirely absent.
It is also alleged that it has been the uniform policy of
Parliament to facilitate the importation of foreign literature,
to which I will answer by stating the degrees in which our
Government encourages or discourages importation. French,
Italian, Spanish, German, Dutch, Danish, and other living
* This privilege holds out a strong inducement to become American; and
in a pecuniary point of view it would be worth while for any popular author
to emigrate to America, and publish his books there, as by so doing he
would obtain a double copyright. Indeed one of our accomplished literati
is said (in the New York Literary World, Oct. 26, 1850), “to have declared
his intention of becoming an American citizen, by taking the preliminary
measures in the proper court in this city. This will at once clearly, entitle
him to the protection of our copyright law, in any book he may publish.”


languages pay only £2.10s per cwt. because they do not inter-
fere with our own literature. Greek and Latin books pay £5.
because the Syndics of our University presses, where Greek
and Latin books are mostly printed, asked for protection.
English books, of course only those of which there is no existing
copyright in this country, pay £5. per cwt. and this is
by way of protection levied upon all English books which
come from h ranee, Germany, &,c. We at first used to pay
the £5. duty upon English books printed in but as
the Act permits books printed in the living language of
countries whence they are to pass at the half duty,
the like immunity was successfully claimed for the “ American
living language/’* Books in any language, printed before 1801
pass at £l. Is per cwt. and books printed in countries which have
accepted the International Copyright Act, pay onlv 15s, what-
ever the date or language. It is manifest, therefore, that
the legislature could not mean to encourage anything which
interfered with its own literature, unless for some equivalent.
The import duty payable on American printed books is 5d
and a fraction per lb. which considering their exemption from
the paper duty and other imposts, and that they may be sold
here without liability to any of our taxes, gives them a great
advantage.
It was intimated that a foreigner by being here for a tempo-
rary purpose, however short the period, might acquire a
copyright, even though the work was composed in his own
country, and brought over by memory or in manuscript.
Then follows the enquiry whether his personal presence signi-
fied at all, and why he should not, by transmission or an
agent, acquire the same rights. This argument is so exten-
sive and bewildering, that I must leave it to be dealt with by
wiser heads than my own.
* This exemption in favour of American literary produce, is not, however,
the deliberate Act of the Legislature, but a concession of the Commissioners
of Customs.


It may be as well, however, to place in juxtaposition what
I am credibly informed the Americans require in respect to
residence, before they grant a statuteable right to aliens. No
one, it should seem, can enjoy it except upon the terms of
becoming, or undertaking to become, an American citizen, #
and surrendering all other allegiance. The following is an
official copy of the oath which he is said to be called upon to
take:
United States District Court for the Southern District op
New York.
Southern District of New York, SS,
I, Richard Roe, do declare on oath, that it is bona fide my intention
to become k citizen of the United States, and to renounce for ever all
allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or sove-
reignty whatever, and particularly to the Queen of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland, of whom I am now a subject.
Sworn in open Court, this Ist day of Nov. 1846,
Signed, Geo. W. Morton,
Deputy Clerk of the District Court of the
United States for the Southern District of
New York.
RICHARD ROE.
I, James W. Metcalf, Clerk of the District Court of the United
States for the Southern District of New York, do certify that the
foregoing is a true copy of the original oath of intention on file and
remaining on record in my office.
Counsel then cited analogies from the moral law, showing
the protection which aliens have in matters of debt, trespass, or
libel, and references to the law of nations, instancing the Sea
* In the Act regulating patents in the United States, passed August 29th,
1842, Art. 3 commences thus ;—“ Be it further enacted, That any citizen or
citizens, or alien or aliens, having resided one year in the United States, and
taken the oath of his or their intention to become a citizen or citizens, who
by his, her, or their own industry, genius, &c. have invented or produced any
new and original design,” &c.
We are not so exclusive in England with respect to Patents, but then our
Government takes proportionate fees, and that too for very short terms. These
fees are said to yield “in meal or in malt” upwards of ,£lOO,OOO per annum.
Copyright yields them nothing, as few entries are made in consequence of their
not being necessary to establish property in it until a suit is about to be
instituted. The fee is besides so trifling as scarcely to repay the cost of
clerkship.
44


Laws, all of which seem to me to be distinct from a question
dependent solely on the construction of our statutes.
But I will not take up more of your time by answering’
arguments; I will merely observe that they are uniformly
forced and feeble when advocating foreign claims, and strong
only in the converse.
I will now say a few words on the mischiefs likely to arise
to the interests of British Literature should the recent views
be established, and then conclude.
In the first place then, if it be conceded, that foreigners
lesident abroad, are by first or assumed simultaneous * publica-
tions to have exclusive rights in this country, while they grant
us none in their own, they can, after once having published here,
even if it were only a single copy, print and produce large im-
pressions abroad, and send them over under a clause in the Act
which gives permission to the presumed proprietors to import
such books, while it prohibits to others to do so. By this
operation, the printers, stationers, typefounders, and all con-
cerned in the materiel of a book, would be deprived of the
due encouragement which belongs to them.
As an illustration of this principle, I will cite two or three
instances of what has already taken place. Several of the
recent editions of the works of Washington Irving, of which
Mr. Murray claims the copyright, were actually printed in
America, and sent over here and sold with Mr. Murray’s
name on the title page, as though they were printed in Eng-
land. The unsold copies were returned to America, which
shews that they were sold here on American account. Another
similar instance is the late American edition of Columbus,
which was printed and stereotyped in America, and a duplicate
set of the stereotyped plates sent over to this countrv, and the
* No Act says any thing about simultaneous publication: if there can be
two firsts, why should there not be three or more ? Simultaneous winnings on
the race course would be rather perplexing at Tattersall’s; and so too the
admission of twin claims to titles and estates.


edition which bears Mr. Murray’s name was printed there-
from.
Irvine’s “ Life of Goldsmith,” and his volumes of “Maho-
met,” are exactly in the same category, and had it not been for
an accident of winds and waves, which kept back the stereo-
type plates, copyright here would have been claimed for these
works also. I could mention fifty books which under the colour
of copyright, have from time to time been printed abroad,
and imported in large numbers, and sold with the imprint of
London booksellers. Mr. Bentley has several books of this
character. Had even the few volumes I have named,
been produced in this country, they would have caused an
expenditure of some thousands of pounds, and have been of
proportional advantage to our printers and stationers;
And but for the cheap reprints which just then set in, and
the uncertainty of the law , this scheme of printing for us
abroad, would have been carried to a much larger extent.
The effect of this one-sided privilege will be to give
to Americans a large extension of their literature in this
country, and in the way they use it, an increased con-
sumption of American paper and print, while, by depriving
us of all reasonable prospect of an equitable interchange, it
circumscribes our own literature, and inflicts a manifest injury
on our authors as well as operatives. Put us on an equal
footing and we fear nobody, but in the face of unnatural mono-
poly accorded to foreigners, while we are subjected to imposts
which they do not share, we are too much crippled to compete
with success. Their paper, as I have before stated, is cheaper
because it is exempted from duty, and they have other
immunities which I need not mention in detail ; but we could
contend successfully even against these, had we an Englishman’s
staff, fair play and no favour. If our publications were
protected in America we could afford larger payment to
our authors because of the increased circulation, while we
should be able to sell all the most popular of our copyright


books at half their present price with even larger profits.
When the public consider what has been afforded for a
shilling in the Exhibition Catalogue, they will have some
idea of how numbers operate, and what might be done in
the case of other volumes likely to command uninterrupted
sale in the two great reading countries. What would be the
increased value of the works of Macaulay, Hallam, Bulwer,
D’lsraeli, Dickens, Thackeray, Douglas Jerrold, and
hundreds of others of the stars of our literary galaxy, if we
were placed on an equal footing.
If the world is benefited by literature, and cheap literature
is held to be a greater benefit than dear, how can the object
of our acts, passed for the “ advancement of learning” be
accomplished by fostering an adverse condition, that is by
crippling our own means of extension, while unnatural
facilities are afforded to competitors on our own ground.
In one of the arguments there was a passing allusion to
free-trade , intimating remotely, as I understand it, that
American monopoly here was consonant to its principles.
Had I felt this to be the case, I should never have grappled
with the subject, as I know the influence of that powerful
watch-word. But I believe the recent decision to be totally
opposed to its principles. “ The principle of free trade
is simply the recognition of the rights of every individual
to exchange his labour or property for food, wherever
he pleases, and can do so the most advantageously. Copy-
right has nothing to do with this principle. It is simply
a provision by which the property a man naturally has in
the products of his skill and genius is secured to him by
law. It has been established by every civilized country for
the protection of its own people , and is wholly a creature of
the law.”
There would be the greatest inconvenience in establishing
partial American rights here, that is rights dependent merely
on the principle of either first or simultaneous publication. As


registry is said to be unnecessary in respect to copyright or its
transfers, until an action for infringement is about to be brought,
no one would be able to tell with the least certainty what foreign
book is open for republication here and what not. Such a law
would virtually be a copyright protection to the whole range
of American literature. We know those who do not scruple
to advertise that they have “made arrangements for books
in which they have no other interest than that of having read
an advertisement in an American newspaper. In the mean-
time somebody else occasionally publishes the book either by
actually making an arrangement, or by obtaining an early
copy. Who, under a condition of copyright so uncertain as it
is henceforth likely to be, can tell what he is at liberty to pub-
lish and what not ? His only security would be to abstain
entirely from republishing foreign literature.
I have a large, almost a vital, stake in the question. My
best property, however cheap it is produced, is taken from
me by reprints where I most counted upon beneficial sale; my
own investments are treated as invalid under former con-
struction of the Acts, and when to redress myself I attempt
reprisals, I am met by a change of views in the Courts of
Law.
I feel that I have said much that might have been said
better, and have omitted a great deal that ought to have been
urged, but those who follow me will, I hope, perceive and
supply my deficiencies.
In accordance with the objects of the meeting, I now beg
to submit the following Resolution :
“ That this Meeting views with apprehension the recent deci-
sion of the Court of Error, reversing the previous decision of the
Court of Exchequer, and thereby declaring that foreign Authors
resident abroad are entitled to British Copyright, (although subjects
of a state which declines to avail itself of the International Copyright
Act). That such decision, if finally established, must prove ex-
tremely prejudicial to the interests of British Literature in all its
departments, whilst it removes a material inducement to the accept-
ance by foreign States of the International Copyright Act.”


The Rev. Dr. Worthington seconded the resolution.
Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton had placed the whole subject so
succinctly before the Meeting that he had left very little for
him to sav. He could not conceive a more important office
than that which Sir Edward held as their Chairman, in
endeavouring to uphold the rights of a property in intel-
lectual production. Prior to the Act of Anne, there was no
copyright, but by custom parties were allowed to enjoy the
profits of their own works. The Copyright Act of Anne
gave authors a property of twenty-eight years in their works,
which had since been extended by Serjeant Talfourd’s Act
to forty-two years. Dr. Johnson was of opinion that authors
should be allowed a copyright for a certain time; but that
books once issued to the public should never be withdrawn.
He agreed with that opinion, and nothing could compensate
the public for the withdrawal from them of cheap editions of
the works of Milton and Shakspeare, though, should their
descendants be in distress, there could be no doubt the
public would not forget them. But he would give them Dr.
Johnson’s own words :
“ There seems to be in authors a stronger right of property than
that by occupancy —a metaphysical right, a right as it were by crea-
tion, which should from its very nature be perpetual, but the consent
of nations is against it; for were it to be perpetual, no book however
useful could be universally diffused among mankind, should the pro-
prietor take it into his head to restrain the circulation. For the good
of the world, therefore, whatever individual work has once been
created by an author and issued out by him, should be understood as no
longer in his power, but as belonging to the public ; at the same time
the author is entitled to an adequate reward. This he should have
by an exclusive right to his work for a considerable number of years.”
After passing in review the various conflicting decisions,
the Rev. Doctor alluded to the pertinacity with which the
Americans refuse all concessions in respect to foreign
copyright in their own country, and illustrated the fact by
an of the late Capt. Marryat. That distinguished
novelist went over to America to publish one of his works
there, but was refused protection unless he took an oath


renouncing all allegiance to England. This the gallant
Captain declined, on the ground that he could not take an
oath which subjected him to the disagreeable consequences
of being strung up at the yard-arm of his own vessel.* If some-
thing was not done to protect the property of literary men,
their literature would be eventually destroyed.
Mr. Ernest Jones (the Chartist) protested against the
resolution. With regard to the legal question but little need
be said, as if the laws were bad, they must be altered and
modified as to meet the requirements and wants of the day.
With regard to the morality of the question, he considered
that an international copyright act would be a good thing;
but there was an old and trite saying, that example is better
than precept, and they ought now to set the example to
other nations by giving to foreigners a copyright in this
country, and then asking other nations to give English-
men the same privileges.')' They would hold a foreign
writer liable for a libel he might publish in this country,J and
therefore he ought to possess the full right of copyright.
He begged to move, as an amendment, “ That this Meeting
views with satisfaction the recent decision of Lord Campbell,
as a preparatory step to obtaining justice, and an international
copyright.”
* Capt. Marryat resided in America for more than 12 months previously,
that by residence he might acquire copyright, as had been assumed in Eng-
land. Under that impression he published there, and upon being reprinted
brought an action. The court pronounced against him, and declared that six
years uninterrupted residence and a subscription to the oath of allegiance
were indispensable. It was observed in addition that even a temporary
absence in Canada, or any other foreign state, would not be admissible.
-(■ Virtually, the example has existed for many years; as, until of late, no one
has taken occasion to raise the question to any extent. In addition to this, the
International Act has been tendered unavailingly for twelve years ; much longer
than it is reasonable we should waste the property of British subjects in
morbid sentimentality.
J On the same principle he is also held liable to our bankrupt laws, but for
the benefit of the subjects of Great Britain , not for himself.


Mr. Wilks seconded the amendment.
Mr. Foggo supported the original resolution, and con-
tended that the present laws affecting literature were injurious
both to this country and to other nations. If the principles of
Mr. Jones were carried out, the foreigner might publish his
works here and in his own country, and the poor English
author might retire from his profession, as he had only the
right of publishing his works in one country. They had long
offered to other countries an international copyright act, and
he maintained that until it was accepted, they ought not to
allow the publication of foreign works under a copyright in
this country.
Mr. Colburn expressed his opinion, that the literature of
this country was seriously endangered by the present unsatis-
factory state of the copyright question, as the booksellers
could not afford to encourage authors by sufficient payment.
He had formerly given as much as £BOO or £I,OOO for works
of fiction, for which in the present condition of things, more
particularly in consequence of the American piracy, he could
not give more than £IOO or £l5O. He had recently published
a novel in 3 vols., which had been reprinted in an American
newspaper for a few cents, and sent from New York to Derby,
and from Derby through the post-office to Woolwich—the
Government thus aiding the piracy. In his opinion, the
only way to obtain International Copyright was by retaliation ;
in addition to which he would recommend publishers never
to give a penny for a foreign copyright while their own works
could be pirated all over the world.
Mr. Jefferys, the defendant in the cause of “ Boosey v.
Jefferys,” offered some observations respecting the difficulties
which beset the authors and publishers of music, in conse-
quence of the want of a proper adjustment of the copyright
question. He dwelt on the injustice of according to foreign
composers a Copyright for operas written for and produced
in foreign theatres. The effect was deeply injurious to Eng


lish musicians, inasmuch as the London claimant asserted the
right of prohibiting them from arranging any airs contained
in such operas, and at the same time assumed (even without
payment) a right over all adaptations made in other coun-
tries of melodies contained in the score. Formerly a large
number of English composers derived both fame and profit
from arrangements, made, according to their several peculiar
talents, of these melodies. Though often only a few bars,
they served as groundwork for fantasias and variations of con-
siderable extent and value. This field once open with ad-
vantage to all was now closed, without benefit even to the
monopolist, and certainly to the loss of the public. On the
other hand English musical productions of every kind were
reprinted by foreign publishers without consent of the owner.
This state of things was unjust. As the author of
“ Jeanette and Jeanot,”* which had been extremely
popular abroad, especially in America, he should have
profited more by protection there than by any thing he was
likely to gain by reprinting foreign music here. He hoped
the time would come when Copyright would be acknowledged
all over the world; but he thought there should be no re-
cognition of foreign claims to Copyright in this country
until fairly reciprocated.
Mr. Novello, the music publisher, contended that Eng-
land was not injured by the works of authors being reprinted
in foreign countries, but he made out no case.
Mr. Cocks, (the plaintiff in Cocks v. Purday,) maintained
that certain English composers had obtained a music Copy-
right in France,'!' and he had received a letter from an English
* No fewer than 27 rival editions of this song have been printed in America.
One publisher (Walker of Philadelphia), would have given 1000 debars for
the copyright if he could have secured it.
f This seems an anomaly. It is notorious that no English Copyright for
books exists in France. Trade combinations an J reciprocities sometimes
come in as substitutes, but this is all.
52


author, stating that he had entered into a contract for ten
years with an American house for all his manuscripts.
Mr. Hyde Clarke spoke to the amendment, and expressed
his opinion that Lord Campbell’s decision would be likely to
bring about a settlement of the question between this country
and the United States.
Mr. Vizetelly supported the rights of a foreigner. He
had just undertaken to produce an English edition of
tine’s new work, for which he intended to claim Copyright in
this country, because some passages of it were written in English
with that object.
Upon the amendment being put, *27 hands were held up in
its favour, and against it about 100. The amendment was
accordingly declared lost. The original resolution was then
put and carried.
Mr. Geo. Cruikshank spoke at some length with charac-
teristic humour. He deprecated the one-sided condition of
the foreign Copyright question. “ Gentlemen/’ he said, “ I
consider that this is a question of vast importance to certain
interested parties, I being one of them. The musical gentle-
man, who favoured us with a few notes just now, described
music as the universal language, in which I quite agree with
him; but there is also another universal language, namely,
the arts —and I find that my language is just as well under-
stood in America, and in fact in all parts of the Continent, as
it is here, and the consequence has been that the Americans
have been reading my books to my cost.
“ I published a work (the Bottle) some few years back, which
had a very large circulation in this country. I sent ten thou-
sand copies of this work to America, and before I had any
returns from that consignment, I sent five thousand as a
sequel, but I had no sooner done that than I found that my
American brethren —for so I must call them, and I beg to saj 7
that 1 fully concur, not only in the words but in the feeling
of our talented Chairman, in hoping that the feeling of
TP


brethren would not only exist but increase both there and all
over the world —they charged £26. for the admission of my
work-s into their country ; but the American gentlemen,
nevertheless, took the liberty of transferring my ink to a zinc
plate, and produced my work at a much cheaper rate than I
could. The consequence has been that I was obliged to sell
my productions there for waste paper.
“ I beg to apologize for intruding my private affairs upon
the meeting, but they are facts which I think bear upon the
question, which, I believe, is one of such great importance,
not only to authors but to publishers, that I think it ought
certainly not to be passed off at one meeting.
“ It is a question of vast importance, and one that should be
settled. The Legislature of this county look at all matters in
such a liberal point of view, that the Arts suffer thereby. If
a man builds a house, the law is made in respect of that by
persons who hold land. It is the landholders who make the
law there; and the law of property is strictly settled : there
is no doubt about it there—it is as clear as the sun at noon-
day, and when an author is standing up for his Copyright, he
also stands up for the right of the publisher himself. I there-
fore, Gentlemen, have much pleasure in proposing the second
Resolution :
“That this Meeting considers the subject to be of great national
interest and importance, and that the expense of determining
the meaning of the law thereon ought not to devolve on a private
individual. That therefore a Society be formed, to consider and
adopt the necessary steps to obtain a satisfactory adjustment of the
law, as well as to provide by public subscription for the requisite
expenditure.”
Mr. Macfarlane seconded the resolution, and spoke at
some length in support of the objects of the meeting. He
had some years ago published a book, entitling it “The
Camp of Refuge,” which met with considerable success. By
that name the Saxons called the retreat where after the death
of Harold they held out for seven years against the Normans,


and on incidents relating to this defence his book was founded.
American publishers reprinted the work ; but one, more cute
than the others in the taste of his countrymen, rechristened it
with a thorough Yankee title, “The Last of the Saxons.” Under
this name it “ created quite a sensation,” and sold extensively.
On being sent over to this country it was received as an
original American production, the papers eulogizing the re-
search of the author, who was said to know more about our
Saxon antiquities than we ourselves. It was only by accident
that the “ alias ” was discovered, and a London house prevented
from issuing a reprint.
Mr. Henry Mayhew rose to move an amendment, de-
nouncing the conduct of those who had reprinted the works
of Washington Irving without license of the English copy-
right holders. He said that Mr. had paid Irving
£3,000 for Columbus, £2,000 for Granada, £ 1,000 for
Bracebridge Hall, and £1,500 for Tales of a Traveller;* and
* Mr. Murray’s representative was in the room, and prompted Mr.
Mayhew as to these figures. It is true that once upon a time Mr. Murray
gave large sums for the works of Washington Irving, although he could
hardly have been uninformed that some of them had been previously printed
abroad ; but he has long refused to give anything at all for them. Although
he presumed himself to be the copyright holder for so many years (from twenty
to thirty!) he has not thought them worth reprinting, with only two recent
exceptions, vie. Bracebridge Hall in 1845, and Tales of a Traveller in 1848,
the sale of which did not encourage him to proceed. The Sketch Book had
been sold to Mr. Tegg in 1834, together with the Family Library, and Mr.
Murray, it is understood, was not at liberty to print any edition at a less price
than 10s. The reprint of Columbus, and the recent illustrated editions of the
Sketch Book, &c. in royal Bvo, were American speculations, though published
in London with Mr. Murray’s name on the title page. It is on record that
he (or his) considered Washington Irving a dead letter in this country, and as
a publishing speculation « not worth the snap of a finger.” Mr. Colburn it may
be here observed gave £lOOO for the Tales of the Alhambra, but when he
separated from Bentley, little or no value was attached to it. As an illustration
of the disparity between the original cost of some copyrights and their
F 2


yet another bookseller who took a prominent part in con*
veiling that meeting had republished them without giving
the author or his assignee a single penny. Here Mr, Mayhew
became so violent and personal that he was called to order
by the chairman, joined by the meeting generally.
His amendment not being seconded fell to the ground.
The resolution having been carried,
Mr. Sheard moved the third resolution :
“That in the opinion of this Meeting, an appeal against the deci-
sion of the Court of Error, in the case of “ Boosey v. Jefferys,”
should be forthwith made to the House of Lords. That in the event
of the appeal to the House of Lords being unsuccessful, application
be made to the Legislature for a Declaratory Act, to determine the
validity of foreign claims to Copyright in this country, with the view
of removing the present uncertainty of the law, and thus prevent
further litigation on the subject.”
Mr. Wm. Howitt, after a few apposite remarks on the inde-
fensible condition of the Copyright law, and advocating the
cause of cheap literature, said ; “Asa party who has suffered
considerably by the American appropriation of my works, I
should, at an earlier hour of the day, have had something to
say upon it; but at present I can only say, that I have come
here, not as a Protectionist, but as a Free-trader—to advance
Free-trade in Copyright; and I consider that the decision of
Lord Campbell has given a great monopoly to foreign authors.
I have, however, never heard but one opinion amongst them :
that there is nothing they are so desirous for as a great Inter-
national Copyright; and I therefore support this Resolution.”
A vote of thanks to the Chairman, which was received
enthusiastically, concluded the proceedings.
mercantile value within a few years, I may mention the following instance :
Mr. Murray gave 4500 guineas for ten years of the copyright of Wilberforce’s
Life, which after three years passed to me with the remainder of the unsold
stock, and was resold by me for little more than as many sixpences. A vast
many copyrights of past years are notoriously not worth a penny in the £. on
their original cost.
56


APPENDIX.
The following are opinions of a few of the public Journals which
have advocated our views. As they either confirm the various speakers’
arguments, or supply some which were not put forth at the Meeting,
it is thought desirable to append them.
“ A subject connected with literature, of considerable present interest, is
that of securing any English Copyright in a hook written hy a citizen of
America, or by any other alien. The question is again to be brought before
a court of law; but if the issue be taken largely on the construction of the
Act of Anne, and not any such incidental point as the claim of a particular
author to the rights of English citizenship, there can hardly be a doubt but
that the latest and most authoritative decision, pronounced two years ago in
the Court of Exchequer, will be finally affirmed. There can be no assign-
ment of a thing that has no existence ; Copyright has no existence in
England, except under the Act of Anne ; and no one who has carefully read
that statute can have failed to arrive at the conclusion that its operation is
strictly and exclusively limited to English authors.” —Dickens s Household
Narrative, Sept. 1850.
The incident of the month most important in connection with literature has
been the reversal by the Judges of the Court of Exchequer Chamber of a
very momentous judgment pronounced by the Barons of Exchequer two jears
ago on the subject of Literary Copyright. By that judgment it was declared
that under the statute of Anne no copyright could be acquired by a foieigner or
his assignee as a consequence of a first publication in England ; and one lesult
of a decision promulgated with such weight of authority, and supported by
great force and clearness of reasoning, has been a perfect inundation of the
English book-market with cheap reprints of American books (conspicuous
among them, those of Washington Irving) which before this decision had been
held entitled to the protection of English Copyright. It is now declared that
those unauthorized reprints have been piracies, and that any foreigner may at
any time secure his right in England by simply electing that his book be first
published here.
The argument on the one side is to the effect that the object of the English
legislature in passing the Act of Anne was not to encourage the importation of
foreign books, and their first publication in England as a benefit to this coun


try, but that its sole object was the cultivation and encouragement of the
intellect of its own subjects : and therefore that the meaning of the act, as its
own language emphatically states, was “to encourage learned men to compose
and write useful books,” by giving them as a reward the monopoly of those
books for a certain period. On the other side it is argued, that, assuming the
legislature to have necessarily intended this boon for the encouragement of
learning in Great Britain, the question remains of whether it might not be
greatly for the encouragement of British learning, even in the sense of the
legislators of Anne, “ that foreigners should be induced to send their works
here to be first published and that therefore this consideration should not
avail or withhold an alien from acquiring and assigning English copyright.
When such grave Doctors differ, who should decide ? Few will be disposed to
think that ihe weight justly due to Lord Campbell, and Justices Cressweld
and Maule, is not balanced pretty equally by that of Lord Cran worth, the
Lord Chief Baron, and Baron James Parke j so that there can hardly be
a doubt of the case being carried to the Lords for final decision, however
doubtful the issue of that decision may be. It seems to us, we must confess,
that the more the history and meaning of the act of Anne is enquired into, the
more clearly will the construction against copyright to an alien be borne out;
but yet/if a reasonable doubt exists, there are many reasons which would tend
to gh e foreigners the benefit of it, and so we must be content to wait patiently
until time, and the temper of the House of Lords, shall put an end to this
“glorious uncertainty.”— Dickens's Household Narrative, May, 1851.
The Court of Error has reversed the decision of the Court of Exchequer in
the case of Boosey v. Purday, and in the case of Boosey v. Jeffreys, of which
a very full and corrected report is given in the last number of The Law Times
(for May 24), at p. 110 of the Reports, has held that a foreigner may obtain
copyright in England by first publishing his work here.
From this view of the law, we have dissented from the beginning, and our
opinion has not been shaken either by the arguments of Counsel or the judg-
ment of the Court. But it is not necessary to repeat now the reasons for an
opposite conclusion. The point is decided, and can only he overruled by the
House of Lords.
At a meeting of some of the Publishers, on Tuesday, it was determined to
take the question before the House of Lords for final arbitrament. But we
cannot entertain the slightest hope of success there. Lord Campbell was
very decided in his opinion, and is not likely to be changed by a repetition of
the arguments. True, we have Lord Cranworth’s opinion to oppose to it, but
the weight of opinion upon the judicial bench is so decidedly in favour of that
adopted by the Court of Error, that we cannot hope to find a dissenting
majority in the Lords.
4he decision is upon the construction of the existing law, apart from all
58


consideration of what the law ought to he. Now would it not be more
practicable to procure an alteration of the law by the Legislature, than to
obtain a different construction of it from the tribunals ?
It will not be difficult to show that the law, as now declared, will operate
very injuriously to the interests of native authors, and to the true objects of
the Copyright Act —the promotion of genius, by securing to it its reward.
We put out of view works in foreign languages. Although Belgium and
France do pirate the works of our authors, their authors have so little to gain
by first publishing in England, that in truth we should have no benefit to
offer them in exchange for an international copyright.
But it is otherwise with America, and, as that is the strongest case, be-
cause of the similarity of language, that should be the one to be urged on the
attention of the Legislature.
As the law is now determined, an American author can send his book to
England, publish here a day before he publishes it in America, and so obtain
a copyright both here and at home. He is doubly blessed.
But how goes it with a British author. Shrewd Brother Jonathan is not
equally generous to us. He takes good care to pocket all the advantages we
are weak enough to give him, and yield us none in return. He pirates the
book of the English author instantaneously, and, without paying the pro-
ducer a sixpence, reprints his work by hundreds of thousands.
Thus, the British author is subjected to a double injury ; the American
writer shares the patronage of readers in England, and the American pub-
lisher plunders him in America.
But some people say, “ True, this is a very hard case upon the Authors of
England, but it is not for us to deprive American Authors of copyright
because America refuses it to our authors. We should set them the example
of liberality.”
To this we reply, that example is of little sendee while profit tempts in
another direction. So long as the American Authors and Publishers can
command the monopoly , both of our markets and of their own, they will not
follow' our example. There is no inducement to their authors now to use
their influence with their Legislature for an international copyright—but
the contrary.
It was otherwise under the former construction of our law. As soon as
the American authors found that we in England could treat them as they
treat us in America, they were strenuously demanding an international copy-
right. That effort will, of course, cease with the inducement to it.
And for negociating with America we have now disabled ourselves. If our
Government demands an international copyright, what will be the answer of
the American government ? “We do not want it: it will be useless to us ;
you have already given us a copyright in England, and we have the benefit of


all your authors without paying for them. Our gain is now twofold ; you
cannot ask us voluntarily to give up half our profits.”
But if the decision had been otherwise, how different would have been the
reply, our Government might have said, “ In England, your authors have no
protection; ours have none in America; literature in both countries suffers by
this; do you give us a copyright and we will give you one, and thus they
who write the language of a third of the surface of the globe will be rewarded
in proportion to their deserts by all who speak and read that language.”
The interest of the American authors being then obviously identical with
that of our own, their Government would doubtless have conceded the boon.
Let, then, the Authors and Publishers of Great Britain make common
eause in this matter, and at once appeal to the Legislature to put them in a
position to secure a reciprocity of benefit, instead of a reciprocity of injury,
from the Authors and Publishers of other countries.
The obvious means of doing this will be to obtain an Act of Parliament,
simply declaring that no foreigner shall have a copyright in this country,
unless he has been resident here for a period of three years. But, with the
express proviso, that if any other country shall concede a copyright to Eng-
lish authors, that then the Queen in Council shall order that a copyright,
similar in extent to that given by such country to English authors, shall be
given to the subjects of such country, and therein describing the nature and
extent of the copyright so reciprocated.
We reserve for another paper the answer to some fallacies which have been
employed on this question by a supposed analogy with free-trade.
The Critic , June I, 1851.
This is not a Publisher’s question ; it is essentially the Author’s question.
Is it to be permitted that American authors shall enjoy a copyright here, in
competition with our own authors, while the Americans deny a copyright to us,
and plunder British authors with impunity ?
The practical effect of the present state of the law, as now settled, is this;
that Americans have the benefit of copyright in both countries for themselves,
and thus make double profits on their own productions, while stealing the
largest portion of the profits of British authors; and those have only the
restricted market of England, further restricted by the supply of American
copyrights.
We can only account for acquiescence in so palpable an injustice by the
presence of. some fallacy in the public mind, and from the tone of the speakers
and writers on the subject, that fallacy would appear to lie in a supposed
resemblance in this'to the principle of Free Trade.
But, in truth, there is no similitude between them. The principle of Free
Trade is simply the recognition of the right of every individual to exchange.
60


his labour or property for food wherever he pleases, or can do so most advan-
tageously to himself, and the denial of the right of every class of producers to
compel consumers by law to buy of them at their own prices.
But Copyright has nothing to do with this principle. It is simply a pro-
vision by which the property a man has naturally in the products of his skill
and labour is secured to him by law. It infringes no liberty of others, it does
not compel others to become his customers. It is, however, wholly a creature
of the law; it has been established by every civilized country for the protection
of the property of its own people ; it has not yet passed into the law of nations,
although it ought to do so. But so long as it is not international, there is
no moral obligation on any one country to extend the protection of that law
beyond its own subjects. It is wholly a question of policy, and, as such, we
have shown conclusively that by giving copyright to those who do not give
it to us, we are positively offering them a premium to plunder us, and giving
them the strongest inducement to refuse an International Copyright by which,
thanks to our Courts, they have nothing to gain and everything to lose.
We entreat the authors of our country to think of this, and then exert
their influence to procure from Parliament a law which shall limit the copyright
of foreigners to the same privileges as they will extend to us in return.
The Critic, June 1 4 th, 1851.
We trust that those who feel any interest in Literature, whether as Authors,
Publishers, or Readers, will join in a request to the Legislature at once to
place the law upon a more satisfactory basis.
That basis is reciprocity . The alteration required is simply this, that the
Queen in Council should be empowered to give to the subjects of foreign
countries the same Copyright as in such countries may be given to our own
Authors, and this simple provision to be accompanied with a declaratory
clause that no foreign subject, unless resident here for seven years preceding
the date of publication, shall be entitled to any Copyright, except where it shall
be so ordered by the Queen in Council.
This would effectually protect ourselves, while it would yield to foreigners
all that in the utmost stretch of liberality could be required, and thus and only
thus could be most successfully promoted that most desirable of arrangements
an International Copyright.
So long as we permit American Authors to enjoy the monopoly of Copyright
here, while American Publishers plunder us with impunity, there can be no
hope of an International Copyright; for it cannot be supposed that they who
enjoy both benefits, will very earnestly promote a scheme which will deprive
them of one. — Critic, July 1, 1851.
The decision of Lord Campbell, yesterday, reversing the previous judgment
of the Court of Exchequer, relative to the question of literary copyright, is one
61


which will excite great attention among authors and publishers. Lord Camp-
bell, it will be seen, took much higher ground, in affirming the right of
foreigners to copyright in their works, when assigned to Englishmen, and
published in this country, than had been taken by any one before. Even the
counsel, in this case, for the foreigner, who sought to establish a copyright
in English editions of his works, did not put the claims of his client on the
same high ground as did the Lord Chief Justice. His dictum is, that the
foreigner has the same property in the works which proceed from his brain as
those who were born and brought up as the subjects of her Majesty. Lord
Campbell knows no distinction, in regard to the right in literary property in
this country, between the Frenchman and the Englishman. He lays it down,
that the foreigner may transfer his property in music, in engravings, or in
books, to any person he thinks proper in this country, in the same way as he
may transfer his interest in land, houses, shares, the rentes, or any other
species of property.
We have neither the leisure nor the space to go at present into the legal
merits of the question. But we cannot forbear saying, that if Lord Campbell’s
view of the matter be a sound one, foreigners are in a much better position in
England, than Englishmen are abroad. The unfortunate English author will
meet with no Lord Campbell in Paris or Brussels. Nor will he find any
such friend on the judicial bench in America. Any Frenchman, or Belgian,
or American, is at liberty to pounce on the products of the brain of the poor
literary man in this country, and turn them to the best account he may for his
sole profit. England is, indeed, a generous country. She accords the most
ample protection to the literary interests of the authors of foreign lands,
though she gets no protection for her own authors in return. In this we
have as fine a specimen of Irish reciprocity as could be wished. Let us only
glance for a moment at the comparative position of English authors abroad,
and foreign authors in this country.
English authors have long been victimised to a frightful extent by the
American publishers. In fact, the superior facilities which the publishers on
the other side of the Atlantic have of pushing books into notice, have enabled
them oft-times to realize large profits, when neither the author nor the
publisher in this country, has received the slightest benefit from the appear-
ance of the work. In America, there is no duty on paper. Composition
and press-work are cheaper ; and advertising, which here comes to a frightful
item in the cost of the publication of a book, is there a mere nothing.
Hence, without running any of those risks which the publisher in England
does, or the author when he publishes on his own account, the American
publisher often realises large sums by that which not only did not cost him
any trouble to procure, but which he stole from both the English author and
publisher, the moment the book was ushered into the world.


It cannot be necessary to point out the hardship of this case. It would not
be possible to conceive a case of greater injustice. As the races and the lan-
guage are the same in both countries, the case is altogether different from the
publication of a book in a language into which it has to be translated. And
yet the American Legislature has, up till the present time, pertinaciously
refused to listen to the complaints of English authors and publishers, when
they have brought the matter before them, and sought for redress.
The public could hardly credit the amount of injury which is done to Eng-
lish authors, from the refusal of the American Legislature to protect their
works from the piracy of the publishers in the United States. We ourselves
are personally acquainted with authors, whose works have been sold in
America in tens of thousands, and which were so exceedingly popular there,
that three different impressions, by three different houses, have been brought
out in one day,—and yet the poor hapless author has never derived a six-
pence of advantage from so extensive a circulation of his works on the other
side of the Atlantic. He may starve in England, while myriads of the
American population are enjoying an intellectual repast of no common order
from the efforts of his brain, and the publishers of the American editions are
pocketing large sums from the sale of his productions.
It requires no slight amount of assurance on the part of the American
Legislature, to be able to talk glibly and with an air of supreme self-com-
placency, of their high moral character, and great regard tor justice, while
they persist in upholding this glaring injustice, this deliberate and barefaced
system of literary felony.
It is idle to tell us that we are, in this respect, on an equality with the
Americans, as we can republish their original works, whenever and however
we please. The cases are altogether dissimilar. For one American book
which is reprinted in this country, at least one hundred English works are re-
published in the United States. Besides, after the judgment of Lord Chief
Justice Campbell yesterday, it will not be safe for any English publisher to
reprint any American work.
Look, again, at the way in which the question of copyright stands as be-
tween France and Belgium, and this country. While Lord Campbell gives
the French and Belgians the same copyright in any work of theirs which is
published in England, as if they were the subjects of her Britannic Majesty,
not only have English authors no copyright in those works which are trans-
lated into French, but they may be, and are reprinted in tens of thousands in
Paris and Brussels, in the English language, and sold to Englishmen at a tenth
part of the London price,—the parties purchasing them being further allowed
to bring them over to this country, if a name be written on the title-page. In
this way thousands of Macaulay’s History of England, and other works of


great popularity, are every year brought over to England, to the great
pecuniary injury, both of the authors and publishers.
If English authors are to be plundered with impunity, if they are to be
deprived of their literary property, let the robery be at least mutual. Let our
right he recognised to plunder others in return. Either let us have a copy-
right in our works abroad, or let foreigners have none in this country. This
is the broad common-sense view of the subject, and it is the view which must
ultimately prevail.
In the meantime, those who take an interest in the subject, are determined
to appeal to the House of Lords against the judgment of Lord Campbell.
They are, very naturally and properly, desirous that all uncertainty as to
what the law is, should be removed, in order that publishers and authors may
understand what they ought, or ought not, to do. Just now the thing is in a
most unsatisfactory position. We have one learned Judge taking a directly
opposite view to another learned Judge. In this unsatisfactory state of matters,
there is no other course open to authors and publishers who are personally
interested in the question, than to appeal to the Court of last resort.
Morning Advertiser, May 21, 1851.
The opera of “ La Sonnarabula” wns composed in Milan, represented
with great success at the Carcanos Theatre in February, 1831, and the music
assigned to Ricordi the publisher there. In June, Eicordi brings over the
engraved plates, and makes an arrangement with Boosey, who, on the 10th
of that month —four months after the first representation and publication of
the opera in Milan —causes an entry to be made in the Stationers’ Hall hooks
as primd facie evidence of his copyright, by an assignment of Ricordi to him.
Now, according to the law of Austria, the term of copyright to Ricordi would
continue for ten years after the author’s death. This happened in 1835,
consequently the work became publici juris in 1845. Leaving the “Inter-
national Copyright Act” of the Ist and 2nd Victoria (1838), the preamble
of which says: —“Whereas it is desirable”—mark that —“desirable”—“to
afford protection within her Majesty’s dominions to the authors of books first
published in foreign countries in cases where protection shall be afforded in
such foreign countries to the authors of books first published in her Majesty's
dominions .” In 1842, the Act of 5 and 6of Victoria was passed, extending
the term of copyright to authors from 28 to 42 years. The entire phrase-
ology, clauses, and conditions of which clearly indicate that the legislature
had in view, and meant solely to legislate for, British authors; as a further
proof of which, the 7th of Victoria, 1844, amending the law of international
copyright, the conditions of which are null and void if not reciprocated, the
19 th clause enacts, “that neither the author of any book, nor the author or
composer of any dramatic piece or musical composition, which shall, after the
64


passing of this Act, be first published out of her Majesty’s dominions, shall
have any copyright therein, otherwise than such (if any) as he may become
entitled to under this Act ” and the last clause of the preceding Act expressly
says, it " shall extend to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
and to every part of the British dominionsconfirming the idea that
foreigners could not have a copyright under British statutes, unless the
Government of which they were subjects accorded the same privilege to
English authors, in other words, ratified the International Copyright
Act. " Laws are made for nations and not for individualselse how is
society to be held together, and the equal rights of trade maintained between
man and man ? If a foreigner is to have a copyright in this country by
merely sending his MS. to be u first published” here, or by simultaneous
publication on the Continent and in England, what is that but giving him
double the advantages of a British-born subject, whilst excusing him, at the
same time, from what the latter is necessarily liable to ? it being the unde-
viating condition of society, that those who require the protection of a State
shall also become amenable to its code of laws, and contribute to the main-
tenance of its exchequer. And yet there are sensible men who argue that
if they purchase of a foreigner a manuscript (which they have an undoubted
right to do), they can multiply copies and secure to themselves benefits which
were exclusively meant for authors , and those native authors, the foreigner
not possessing that status which would enable him to convey a copyright with
his manuscript. The English publisher could effect what has been extensively
done already, namely, priority of publication , but no more. “ Barnes’s
Notes” and other works have been published here before copies could be
obtained from abroad by an arrangement with the English publisher to have
the first proof-sheets sent him, and a day agreed upon for both editions to
appear, by an entry being made at Stationers’ Hall corresponding with the
register required by the Act of Congress; but what is this more than an
assumption substituted for a legal right ? It has been argued that an author
should be able to reap the benefit of his literary intellect as well as an artist that
of his inventive faculties, whenever, and by whomsoever, introduced into this
country for the first time ; but such reasoners forget that patent-right and
copyright are q,uite distinct privileges —one emanating from the Crown,
and, in the case of a foreigner, obtained through the agency of a British subject
for a discovery “ communicated to him,” and for which he has a large sum of
money to pay; the other is a personal right, regulated by the laws of the
country to which the author belongs, having “no extra-territorial power,” and
only to be acquired by residence or denizenship. America, whose laws are
based, in many instance, upon those of Great Britain, requires of an alien the
following conditions before granting him a copyright;—first, that he shall have


been for a specified time, a resident in the United States; secondly, that h«
shall forswear allegiance to his native country, by becoming an American citizen,
and taking the oath prescribed. These particulars will give a pretty correct
idea of how America will continue to act in the matter. As for the plea of
“ first publication” here being a compliance with the statutes, and including
foreigners in the object contemplated by the legislature to promote the culti-
vation of the intellect of the English nation, how could this do so in regard
to works in foreign languages, unless adapted for general reading by being
first translated ? in which case the translation would have all the elfect of
securing copyright through the translator. However, to analyze this judg-
ment, or attempt to do more than contrast it with the one it is intended to
reverse, would be a work of supererogation. There must and will be an
appeal to the House of Lords ; and whether that appeal shall confirm or
annul what has been done, some new act must be passed to remove the uncer-
tainty which so many conflicting interpretations of the law has given rise to,
as well as to put a stop to the ruinous waste of property in litigation, and
protect British publishers, and through them native authors, from the whole-
sale plunder of their copyrights being reprinted abroad, and surreptitiously
introduced into our own colonies. For all purposes of legislation foreigners,
if they will not reciprocrate our international copyright laws, should be treated
in the same way as pirates and monopolists at home. This is the only way
to reach them and annihilate their nefarious proceedings, and also the assump-
tion of copyright by British publishers in foreign works which have merely
been reprinted, or a colourable claim set up through simultaneous registry.—
The Nonconformist, July Ath, 1851.
In the case of Boosey v. Purday, it was decided that a foreigner cannot hold
copyright in this country unless his work be actually performed and executed
in this country,—that is to say, a foreign author or composer cannot sell in
this country a work which he has executed elsewhere. In the more recent case
of Boosey v. Jefferys, precisely the opposite judgment was given,—namely,
that a foreigner can sell the copyright of a work although it shall have beeti
executed elsewhere. Of course this uncertainty of the law has produced loss
to private parties. Acting on the former decision, English publishers who had
previously held foreign copyright, gave up trade; and probably parted with
stock to an extent entailing considerable damage. It now appears that the
trade which they were compelled to forego was quite lawful; but no one will
reimburse them for the loss sustained through the judgment that has been
reversed. On the other hand, the recent judgment cannot be considered as
final: a number of publishers have combined to obtain its reversal by bringing
the subject before the House of Lords.
66


The whole affair exemplifies the discreditable state of our law system. Here
is a question simple enough in itself, and not very obscure or complicated even
in its accessories—one not to be settled by nature, nor necessarily growing out
of our constitution ; it is in fact a new and special question : those who are
interested in its solution are unable to obtain a direct settlement, and are thus
compelled to discover some final resting-point by hunting up more conflict of
decisions, which will at last leave the settlement to a sort of gambling hap-
hazard. It is quite possible that the final decision may not at all agree with
the interest of any party, or of the public at large ; and then it will have to be
disturbed again by a special Act of the Legislature. All this amount of trouble
and loss accrues because tbe managers of public affairs have not had sufficient
diligence and decision to make up their own minds on the matter, and bring
us at once to that final state, which they might so well have done with ease
and credit to themselves.
Those who are united to reverse the decision, are not, we imagine, united in
hostility to the holding of foreign copyright in this country. One manifestly
sufficient motive to the combination, is the desire for certainty. But another
question, undoubtedly, lurks beneath : is not the faculty of holding copyright
in this country calculated to impede the attainment of International Copyright
with that important country whose language is our own —the United States of
America ? The answer to this question is by no means certain even among the
best-informed. One opinion is, that such a faculty in this country would
supersede the strongest motive to an International Copyright, by giving to Ame-
rican writers a certain market for their works; which they never will obtain in
their native land while American publishers can pirate English works. On the
other hand, American publishers themselves begin to be anxious for sounder
relations. They find the present sharp practice both wearisome and unsafe.—
Spectator, June 22>rd, 1851.
“ There is one feasible measure of justice to the British author, which is
pressingly required, and can be advocated by any honest man —an inter-
national Copyright with America. We are not more dependent upon the
Yankees for bread-stuffs, nor are their bodies more dependent upon us for
cotton-clothing than are their minds upon our authors for intellectual nourish-
ment. With but few exceptions, every piece of print that appears here of
the slightest mark or with the slightest amusement in it, is reprinted in
America, and not a farthing of the proceeds comes or can come into the
pocket of its British author. And now Lord Campbell has proclaimed that
while the British author can have no copyright in America, the American
author can have it here ! When you speak of Government encouragement of
literature, some people here cry out, * Authors must take their chance like
67


other people 1’ But they have not got the same chance. A wine-merchant
may keep his port for fifty years if he pleases, and then announce with great
pomp the high value it has received from its existence of half a century.
But the poor author’s book, at the expiration of forty years (in some cases
just when it is beginning to pay) may be seized upon by any bookseller, and,
as regards America, it ceases to be his when it crosses the Atlantic. The
cotton-spinner ships his yarn for Boston or New York ; but the author, if he
ship his book, ships it only to be stolen. Nay, the lecturer, musician, singer,
actor, may fill their pockets by selling their respective wares to the vast public
beyond the Atlantic ; the author is the only person who can derive no advan-
tage from it. Hitherto, in this bad arrangement, there has been this spice of
alleviation (if alleviation it can be called) that we could give the Yankees a
Rowland for their Oliver, and steal their books in return; but, how few of
them are worth the trouble! Now, however, Lord Campbell has deprived us
of even that poor satisfaction, and it was with some interest that I went on
Tuesday to the public meeting, in the Hanover Square Rooms, of British
Authors and Publishers, with Bulwer in the chair, to consider the question
of Foreign Copyright.
Bulwer made a good legal and general speech, delivered with consider-
able address. Mr. Bohn, the well-known publisher of a series, whose
appearance forms an era in publishing, spoke at great length, and read long
extracts from his pamphlet. The resolutions, rather unhappily, I think,
were simply to the effect of procuring a declaratory act, and no mention was
made of reciprocity, which was an omission of considerable importance. It
gave a handle to Ernest Jones, the Chartist, to denounce the whole object of
the meeting as a proclamation of the right of general piracy. I had not seen
Jones since April, 1848, when he was the most frantic orator of the National
Convention. Time, imprisonment, and the cares of newspaper editing, have
sobered his elocution and manner, but the old tone of affected emphasis was
there still. Mr. Jones wished that England would give the example of gene-
rosity to the world—not steal foreign books herself, but allow her own to be
everywhere stolen-and the force of example would naturally bring about
reciprocity. Alas ! human nature and national greed must change first.
Look at Free Trade! It was but the other day, that M. Thiers descended
from the tribune of the National Assembly, among the cheers of a large
majority, after a speech to the effect that France should profit as much as
possible by the Free Trade of other countries, but maintain a rigid system of
Protection at home. —Critic t July 15, 1851.


SOCIETY
FOR
OBTAINING AN ADJUSTMENT
OF THE
LAW OF COPYRIGHT.
At a Public Meeting of British Authors, Publishers, Printers,
Stationers, and others interested in an equitable adjustment
of British and Foreign Copyright, held at the Hanover Square
Rooms, on Tuesday, the Ist day of July, 1851,
Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, Bart., in the Chair.
The following Resolutions were agreed to by a large majority.
Moved by Mr. Henry G. Bohn; Seconded by the Rev. Dr.
Worthington.
I. That this Meeting views with apprehension the recent
decision of the Court of Error, reversing the previous decision
of the Court of Exchequer, and thereby declaring that foreign
authors resident abroad are entitled to British Copyright
(although subjects of a state which declines to avail itself of
the International Copyright Act). That such decision, if
finally established, must prove extremely prejudicial to the
interests of British literature in all its departments, whilst it
removes a material inducement to the acceptance by foreign
states of the International Copyright Act.
Moved by Mr. George Cruikshank; Seconded by Mr.
MacFarlane.
11. That this Meeting considers the subject to be of great
national interest and importance, and that the expense of
determining the meaning of the law thereon ought not to
devolve on a private individual; that, therefore, a Society
be formed to consider and adopt the necessary steps to obtain
a satisfactory adjustment of the law, as well as to provide, by
public subscription, for the requisite expenditure.


Moved by Mr. Henry Sheard ; Seconded by Mr. William
Howitt.
111. That in the opinion of this Meeting an appeal against
the decision of the Court of Error, in the case of “ Boosey v.
Jeffreys,” should be forthwith made to the House of Lords.
That in the event of the appeal to the House of Lords being
unsuccessful, application be. made to the Legislature for a
Declaratory Act to determine the validity of foreign claims
to Copyright in this country, with a view of removing the
present uncertainty of the law, and thus prevent further
litigation on the subject.
In pursuance of the above Resolutions, an Executive
Committee has been formed, with pow 7 er to add to their
number. Gentlemen willing to contribute their names either
as Members of the Committee, or as Subscribers only, will
oblige by forwarding their names to the Secretary.
The objects of this Society have been industriously misre-
presented by interested parties as involving the invasion of
property, and have been but partially understood even by
those who desire to learn the true state of the question.— It is
therefore deemed necessary here to state explicitly what is
proposed to be done.
In the first place, the Society is wholly free from any
personal motive, and does not desire to infringe upon the
property of any one. It is perfectly independent of any
particular class, and seeks only to vindicate the general rights
and interests of the great body of British authors, publishers,
and others connected with British literature. For upwards of
140 years past, up to the present time, the uncertain state of
the law of Copyright has led to constant litigation, and after
all it is now as doubtful as ever. In numerous cases, both
authors and publishers know not how far the law will support
them, and are consequently driven to a sort of compromise
which is unsatisfactory and intolerable to all parties. Re-
spectable publishers are drawn into litigation and called
“ pirates,” because they act upon legal decisions, and thus is
kept up a never-ending round of heart-burning and expen-
sive contests.
In the midst of this chaotic state of things a recent decision
has tended to establish the Copyright in Great Britain of a
foreign author resident abroad, irrespective of the Inter-
national Copyright Act. The obvious result of this most
mischievous decision will be to arrest the progress of all
2


further negotiations for securing reciprocal rights to British
authors in foreign countries —a cruel and flagrant injustice,
opposed as much to natural reason, as it is, in the opinion of
numerous high legal authorities, to the law of the land.
Some persons of ultra liberal views—those who have little
real interest at stake—profess to think that it is better to
concede to foreign authors resident abroad the same rights as
are possessed by British authors, even though the latter aie
peremptorily excluded from all reciprocity. They affect to
consider that if we set an example of generosity, foreign
countries wall imitate us. But will men of practical common
sense adopt this view ? Is it not as right as it is reasonable,
and would be effectual, to say to foreign authors resident
abroad “ you shall have the same rights and protection here
as you concede in your country to British authors. If that
equitable offer (which is in fact the purport of our Inter-
national Copyright Act) were declined, the foreign country
could not complain of any injustice, because the remedy
would be in its own hands.
Several pamphlets containing full expositions of the law
and facts have been recently published, and to them the
reader is referred for further details. It is sufficient here to
add that the Society proposes to adopt measures to secure an
equitable adjustment of the general law of Copyright, but
especially to promote International Copyright by encouraging
an appeal against the recent decision, which threatens to
interrupt its progress. That appeal is now pending with
every prospect of success.
The co-operation of all persons interested in this great
national struggle is earnestly invited, because as it is through
disunion that the past wrongs have arisen it is only by united
efforts that they can be remedied. There can be no time
better than the present, before the evils which must spring
from the recent decision have been fully developed, for this
effort, and no case is likely to arise which can obtain, under
more s favourable circumstances, the decision of the House of
Lords than the case before alluded to.
No Member of the Society will be liable to any
PAYMENT WHATEVER BEYOND THE AMOUNT OF HIS SUB-
SCRIPTION.
Communications may be addressed to the Secretary, Mr.
Charles Stevens, 4, South Square, Gray’s Inn, and Sub-
scriptions will be received by the Treasurers, Messrs. Glover
and Jefferys, at No. 21a, Soho Square.


