

CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION
OF VICTORIA.
ftek,la>lOUS PAMS
Bov i a
THE MASTER OF THE AGE
BEING THE
ADDRESS FROM THE CHAIR AT THE HALF-YEARLY MEETING
OF THE CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF
VICTORIA,
Delivered in the Collins-street Independent Church , on Tuesday
Evening , 23 rd April, 1889,
LLEWELYN D. BEYAN, LL.B., D.D.
Melbourne-.
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-STREET
(OFF 390 LITTLE COLLINS STREET).




CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION
OF VICTORIA.
THE MASTER OF THE AGES
BEING THE
ADDRESS FROM THE CHAIR AT THE HALF-YEARLY MEETING
OF THE CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF
VICTORIA,
Delivered in the Collins-street Independent Church, on Tuesday
Evening, 23 rd April, 1889,
LLEWELYN D. BEVAN, LL.B., D.D.
Melbourne:
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-STREET
(OFF 390 LITTLE COLLINS STREET).




THE MASTER OE THE AGES.
Honoured Fathers and Brethren, —
As your chairman approaches the duty which devolves upon
him at our autumnal gathering, how different is the scene
from that which he reviewed when we met together in the
celebration of our Jubilee. Then, we looked back upon half
a century of ecclesiastical work and life. Now, we assemble
for the engagements of the hour, the transaction of the regular
business of our Union. That was an occasion memorable for
the convocation of representatives of our churches throughout
the world. This is the meeting of the delegates of our own
small organization, few in numbers, with little “ pomp and
circumstance”—the parade of a regiment, not the review of an
army. When last we met it was in the glory of early summer,
in the midst of an outburst of general prosperity and universal
excitement. The chill of the declining year is a fitting symbol
of the change which has passed over our community. Many
a blooming flower has withered, many growths have fallen and
perished. Bright hopes have yielded to anxieties, and large
promises and expectations of future enterprise now experience
the conditions which demand patience and enduring strength.
It is perhaps well that things are so. The alternations of the
seasons in the temperate zones secure permanence and discipline.
The highest attainments of character and action are the result
of the play of diverse conditions, and the changeful fluctuations
of life. To live only in the joyous review of past success, and
in the flush of present abundance, will not ensure man’s
highest excellence; and we therefore take up the quieter and
less showy duty of the day with undiminished gratitude and
with stronger faith and courage.
For, however circumstances may change, there are some
things that nothing can change. The call to service is still
clear and imperative. The faith and hope with which we
would respond may be heightened by adverse events, while
the Lord, who sends both sunshine and shadow, remains ever
living, extending His favour, giving His aid, “the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever,” We meet, then, beneath His
banner, with loyalty unabated, and pray for His grace that we
my continue faithful to the end.


The thought of this present Lord will thus furnish us with
the spirit which should ever mark His servants, and moreover
it seems to be the natural sequel of the subject which engaged
our attention at our former assembly. We then reviewed the
conflict of the century, and we saw, as the result of that
conflict, the emergence, with greater clearness and more de-
cisive apprehension, of the Person of Jesus Christ. It seems,
therefore, to your chairman that the most appropriate subject
of an address upon this occasion will be that ever-present and
living energy which has inspired the Church of every age, and
dominates the life of universal man, that Master of the Ages,
Whose service we are called to discharge, and Whose presence
is real and potent to ourselves. The controversy of our time is
but a part of the ceaseless movement which all time reveals—•
one chapter in that Book which tells the story of the Christ
Who “ was dead but is alive for evermore,”
THE ORIGINAL CONTENTS OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.
The student of the history of faith cannot fail to mark that
the original contents of Christian teaching were concerned
with this living Christ. We have said, and thus interpreted
the result of the most relentless criticism, that no historic
event is more certainly witnessed than that of the resurrection
of Jesus Christ. This fact was the original message of
Christianity. The teaching and the life of the early Church
here found their centre and their strength. The first Christian
sermon preached by St. Peter on the day of Pentecost led up
to this declaration : —“ This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof
we all are witnesses. Therefore, being by the right hand of
God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of
the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which ye now' see
and hear. For David is not ascended into the heavens, but
he saith himself, ‘The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on
My right hand until I make thy foes thy footstool.’ There-
fore, let all the House of Israel know' assuredly that God hath
made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and
Christ.” His next discourse was only the echo of the same
truth. “His name, through faith in His name, hath made
this man strong whom ye see and know; yea, the faith which
is by Him hath given him this perfect soundness in the
presence of you all.” “ Unto you first God having raised up
His Son Jesus, sent Him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities.” It was not a mere fact, nor a
mere doctrine based upon that fact, which St. Peter declared.
He affirms a present and potent influence alike in respect of


physical repair and moral renewal which was exerted by Him
who had xdsen from the dead, and was made by God to be the
Lord and Saviour of men.
According to the apostles, this living and present Christ was
not only the agent of material and spiritual good to men, He
was also a
PERSONALITY BEFORE WHOM THE INTERNAL LIFE AND DISCIP-
LINE OP THE CHURCH WERE TO BE MAINTAINED.
Startling as was that first act of judgment, the tremendous
and overwhelming severity of which finds its justification in
the necessity of making clear to all ages that truthfulness
must form the basis of Christian character, the real sig-
nificance of the event is to be found in the fact that the lie of
Ananias and Sapphira was uttered not to men, even of the
highest authority, but to that Spiritual Presence which was in
the Church. The words were spoken to men. Injury was done
to the community of men and women who formed that original
assembly of believers. But the essence and the heinousness of
the guilt was in the fact that speaking thus to the Church they
had really spoken to the Spirit of the living Lord. They had
tempted and had tried Him, and it was He who alone has the
issues of life and death that marked their guilt by a sudden
destruction. Men, even apostles, were only witnesses. It was
not they who pronounced the judgment, as it was not theirs
to exercise the power. They only could stand by, and inter-
pret, and point out the lesson written in letters of death, that
the life and power of the Church was the presence of the
Lord.
It is not necessary to multiply examples of this, the original
message of Christianity. Every page of the early narrative
bears its witness. Christ’s apostles were not merely moral
teachers, not merely theologians, not merely ecclesiastical
functionaries : they were witnesses to the living Christ.
They knew Him as the Nazarene; they saw Him die; they
beheld Him risen from the dead, and they now declared to all
men that He was the ever-abiding Saviour and Lord Whom
God had appointed to carry out the perfecting of His eternal
purposes of good.
THE WITNESS OF ST. PAUL.
Still stronger is the evidence derived from the life and
writings of St. Paul. The personality and influence of the
Apostle of the Gentiles very soon made themselves felt through-
out the entire Church. The controversies which he raised,
the opposition with which certain sections in the Church met
his endeavours, only make his character and teaching more
clear. They accentuate especially the individual traits of
Paul’s history. He was driven to unfold the inner working


of his nature, and we thus gain insight not only into the
method of his instruction and the topics upon which he chiefly
dwelt, but still more, into those personal qualities and features
which he was compelled to adduce as the reply to his
opponents and the defence of his own claims to apostleship.
The history of St. Paul is thus one long comment upon the
presence and power of the living Christ. When the vision is
granted to him upon the road to Damascus, and the com-
mssioner of the Sanhedrim hears the voice which comes out of
the exceeding brightness, he demands, with the question of the
roused spirit, “ Who art thou, Lord 1 ” and the answer which
he receives is, “I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest,” Saul
accepts in a moment the revelation thus furnished, and all its
significance. The language which he employs in one of his
epistles is not without meaning : “ When it pleased God to
reveal His Son in me.” There was here the internal con-
viction accompanying the external vision. It was the
acquiescence of the whole of Paul’s nature, the moral and
spiritual, together with the external and sensible, in the fact
and power of the living Christ. The reply did not merely
affirm that the speaker was Jesus, but it declared that Saul’s
action in persecuting the church was in reality the persecution
of the Lord himself. It thus accords with St. Peter’s
declaration that the falsehood of Ananias was told, not merely
to the believers, but to Jesus Christ. And it is not surprising
that the burden of St. Paul’s preaching, like that of St.
Peter’s, should be the present and ever operative power of the
living Lord, As at Antioch in Pisidia, when he asserted in
very express terms the great truth that Jesus Christ was
raised from the dead, and that He had become the instrument
of forgiveness and justification, it is much more than a mere
theological statement, a declaration of a reason and ground of
divine action, when St, Paul closes the glowing periods of his
address with its passionate appeal and application. “Be it
known unto you, therefore, men and brethren, that through
this Man ” (and the construction implies agency) “ is preached
unto you the forgiveness of sin, and in Him ” (as the very
element and sphere of being) “ all that believe are justified
from all things from which ye could not be justified by the
law of Moses.” Such is the message of St Paul. Throughout
Asia Minor, in Macedonia, in Greece, in Syria, and finally in
Rome, St. Paul was ever the preacher of a living and a present
Lord.
It was not strange that St. Paul should be faithful to
this message of the original gospel, when he received the con-
tinual proofs that the first revelation of Christ to himself
might be repeated in his experiences. When he was at
Corinth, the Lord spake to him in a vision, “Be not afraid,


but speak, and hold not thy peace, for lam with thee.” He
seems to have received oftentimes the witness of the presence
of Christ, and a theory which would dissolve these visions of
St. Paul into the excitements of a highly nervous, or even
morbidly nervous nature, cannot remove the fact of St, Paul’s
conviction of the living reality of the Lord’s presence, even
though it might destroy the actuality of the manifestations.
Destructive criticism may reduce the vision to a phantasy.
What underlay the vision is not so easily disposed of. At
least the conviction of the apostle, agreeing in this with the
certainly unecstatic St. Peter, cannot for a moment be doubted.
THE LIVING CHRIST THE VERY LIFE OF ST. PAUL.
But St. Paul’s relation to the living Christ was much more
than appears in his preaching or the record of his life. Jesus
Christ, the risen, and ascended, and present Lord, came to be
for St. Paul the elemental circumstance and environment of
all his nature. He bore marks of the Lord upon his body.
Sin with him became the tempting of Christ as with the
Israelites it was the tempting of God. The life and death of
the Christian was life and death to the Lord. He even
referred to Christ’s own dying and living again as His pre-
paration for lordship over the dead and the living. His
phraseology is dominated by the thought of the present Christ.
He speaks of “ putting on the Lord Jesus.” The life which
is being disentangled from sin he describes as a co-resurrec-
tion with Christ. He is “ apprehended ”of Christ J esus.
For, “to him to live was Christ,” and all may be summed up
in the one phrase, “ I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
His absorption was as complete as that which the devout
Indian contemplates and desires into the Supreme Being,
The philosophy of St. Paul was panchristic. His ethics were
the inspiration of Jesus, His entire life was one with the living
Christ. For St, Paul, as well as for St. Peter and the other
apostles, the gospel was the announcement to the world that
there was a present Lord and Saviour.
THE CHURCH FULLY APPROPRIATES THE APOSTLES’ TEACHING.
The message of the original apostles was fully received and
appropriated by the first Christians, *and nothing can be
accepted as an explanation of the growth and peculiar quality
of the Church which ignores the faith of the believers in the
presence of the Lord. What they believed, what they expe-
rienced, we can pretty well determine. That they must have
identified themselves with the name of the Lord seems very
clear from the fact that so early in their history they gain the
name of Christian. It is noteworthy that the name is given,
not in the region which was familiar with Jesus Christ in His


earthly life—in which case the fact might have been referred
to the common occurrence of a community receiving the appella-
tion of its leader—but in a city where Jesus Christas a human
personality could only have been known historically, but where
the people might well have learned to associate the believers
with a name used by them as of one still present in their midst.
The picture of the early Church which the Acts supplies
gives evidence of the nature of its faith. The apostolic
teaching, already reviewed, was the authority of the Church,
and was fully and loyally received. In dealing with ques-
tions of order, St. Paul makes a clear distinction between
that which was his opinion and that which was the teaching of
the Lord—a teaching certainly not of tradition from the days
of His flesh, but a teaching which was then furnished for the
guidance and ruling of His Church.
The Apocalypse is, perhaps, the most definite witness which
we can summon in this connection. It is presented as a
revelation of Jesus Christ. The giver of the revelation is the
glorious Person whom John saw in vision in the Isle of Patmos.
“ I saw seven golden candlesticks, and in the midst of the seven
candlesticks one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a
garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like wool,
as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire. And
his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace.
And his voice as the sound of many waters. And he had in
his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth went a sharp
two-edged sword, and his countenance was as the sun shineth
in his strength. And when I saw him I fell at his feet as
dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not,
lam the first and the last; lam he that liveth and was dead,
and, behold, lam alive for evermore, Amen; and have the
keys of hell and of death. Write the things which thou hast
seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter ; the mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest
in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks : the
seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven
candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.”
Now, this language, whatever may be the particular meaning
of the symbols used, most definitely conveys the truth which is
under illustration. On the supposition that the Apocalypse is
the writing of St, John the Apostle, we find here an added
evidence to that of St. Peter and St. Paul. The leaders of
the three Christian schools unite their testimony to the living
and abiding Lord, He holds the stars, which are the “ angels
of the churches.” He “ walks among the golden candlesticks,”
which are “ the churches ;” and “ He liveth and was dead and
is alive for evermore.” But, let it be the fact that St. John
was not the author of the Apocalypse—postpone the author-


ship to the latest date possible for its introduction to the
church—then the evidence of this writing to the faith of the
early church in the living presence of Christ becomes all the
more striking. What it loses in apostolic light it gains in the
gleam with which it shines upon the thought of those hidden
ages. It must reflect the convictions of its time. Its con-
ception of the Christ must be the doctrine of the church. It
springs out of it. It must have been harmonious with it, or
it could not have hoped for acceptance. In any case we see
a community the life of which was a living Lord, the strength
of whose faith was the abiding presence of the Christ.
HEAR THE FATHERS.
To review the words of the fathers would be too great a
demand upon your patience, but a general consideration of the
condition of the eai’ly Church must compel the emergence of
the same fact as that given us by the writings of the New
Testament. The references in heathen writers to the internal
state of the church are few and fragmentary, but their very
bareness makes them to be more demonstrative. When the
younger Pliny, in his famous letter to Trajan, describes the
Christians of his own time, how suggestive is that single phrase
which tells us that “ they were wont to meet together on a
stated day before it was light, and sing among themselves
alternately a hymn to Christ as to God.” The ancient graffite
found in the chambers of the soldiery upon the Palatine in
Rome, bears testimony to the fact that Christ was more to the
Christian soldier, whoever he may have been, than the merely
historic personage who lived and taught and passed away to
leave His influence in His words and the records of what He
did. Grotesque may have been the caricature of the rude
artist, who completely failed to understand what it was that
his comrade worshipped, but, nevertheless, the fact of the
adoration of the living Christ is sufficiently assured. Does
not the same spirit breathe in that ancient hymn of Clement
of Alexandria, who, with variety of figure and metaphor drawn
from every side of life’s common duties, praises “ the Shepherd
of tender youth,” who was the abiding life and strength of
His Church.
“ Bridle of colts untamed,
Over our wills presiding ;
Wing of unwandering birds,
Our flight securely guiding.
Rudder of youth unbending,
Firm against adverse shock;
Shepherd with wisdom tending
Lambs, the royal flock,
Thy simple children bring
In one that we may sing
In solemn lays
Their hymns of praise,
With guileless lips, to Christ their King.


And through the writings of the ages we may pass and cull the
phrases of which all the meaning can only be found in the fact
of the acknowledged presence of our Lord. “ This is the way,
beloved,” says Clement of Rome, “in which we find our
Saviour, even Jesus Christ, the High Priest of all our offerings,
the defender and keeper of our infirmity. By Him we look up to
the heights of heaven.” He calls Him “ our High Priest and
Protector,” as in the words of Polycarp Christ is “ our ever-
lasting High Priest,” and the prayer of the holy martyr for the
Philippians is, “Be ye safe in the Lord Jesus Christ. "Very
suggestive is the simple chronology of the early Church, when
they record his martyrdom : “He was taken by Herod, Philip
the Trallian being High Priest, Statius Quadratus being pro-
consul, but Jesus Christ being King for ever.” The adversative
is a sublime declaration of the sense which the Church possessed
of the present Lord —to them more real, more near, more
mighty than any legate of Rome or priest of Jerusalem. The
language of Ignatius is couched in similar terms. He pleads
that Christ may dwell in them, “that we may be His Temples
and He may be in us as God.” The events of common life are
beneath the control of the living Saviour, while he himself, as
a prisoner, is “bound in Christ Jesus.” The answer of
Ignatius to Trajan is one of the historic sentences of the
Church. Ignatius had replied to the charge of being wicked,
and had used the term “ Theophorus.” Trajan asked, “ And
who is Theophorus 1 ” Ignatius replied, “He who has Christ
within his heart.” But why pursue the theme ! From all the
writings of the fathers, as from the apostles themselves, we
can gather the one truth—the one fact of the spiritual energy
of the Church dependent upon the consciously experienced
presence of the Christ,
It is clear that the inner life of the Christian community
was the power of the abiding Lord. They, indeed, look for
a visible and sensible appearing, though that seems to have
taken more definite and energetic form in a later age ; but
the spiritual presence of the living Christ was the heart of
the Christian Church, and the strength and inspiration of all
Christian believers.
Do we ask what power enabled them to endure persecution
and to welcome the pains and tortures which fell upon their
fidelity 1 Do we inquire into that sweet and gentle influence
which made the scenes of Christian life beautiful with virtues
which had faded from the heathen homes, and endowed them
with graces altogether new to human experience 1 Do we
seek an explanation of that enormous and preponderating
power which even the maimed and persecuted church gained
in the ancient world! Do we investigate the causes of
Christian advance and the rapid permeation of the empire


with Christian ideas and the forces of the Christian life ? Our
answer to each question must he, not the character or
attainments of Christian men, however learned and eloquent
they may have been, not the power of their apologies, nor the
force of their address—certainly not the prestige of their rank
or the influence of their wealth. It was a power unseen,
known only to themselves. They were its indexes, its instru-
ments—often unconscious, and sometimes unwilling. The
light that shone in their lives, the strength which wrought in
their works, the wisdom that dwelt in their words, were the
light and power and truth of Him who, when He sent forth
His servants upon the great mission of the conquest of the
world, promised them that He would be with them until the end
of the ages.
THE ARGUMENT ILLUSTRATED FROM GIBBON.
It is instructive to observe, in the famous chapter of Gibbon
upon the causes of the growth of Christianity, how that elo-
quent and philosophical writer, while presenting his five points
as an explanation of the “ means by which the Christian faith
obtained so remarkable a victory over the established religion
of the world”—and concerning which I would venture to remark
that too much stress has been laid by Christian apologists upon
the infidel spirit of the discussion, and too little credit given to
the historian for candour and directness of intention—has been
compelled not to pass over the fact of a supernatural presence
energizing and directing the Christian Church in her victorious
advance. He affirms the “ scanty and suspicious materials of
ecclesiastical history” and the “ imperfections of the uninspired
teachers and believers of the gospel,” and says that the
“ scandal of the pious Christian and the fallacious triumph of
the infidel should cease as soon as they recollect, not only
by whom, but likewise to whom the divine revelation was
given;” and he further gives, in answer to the inquiry as to
the means which obtained the victory, what he says is an
“obvious, but satisfactory answer,” that it was owing to the
“ convincing evidence of the doctrine itself ” and to the “ ruling
providence of its great Author.” Hence he relegates the causes
which have made so much noise in the world to a secondary
place, and, as in all fairness his words should be inter-
preted, granting the first place to the “ doctrine itself,” and
the “ruling providence” which must have accompanied the
progress of the church.
And in respect of these very causes—these secondary causes
themselves—are we not bound to ask, Whence came they ? and,
What gave to them their peculiar force 1 He refers to the
inflexible and intolerant zeal of the Christians, derived indeed
from Judaism but purified from the narrow and unsocial


spirit of Mosaism. What sustained that zeal ? And what gave
to Christianity the universalism which the law of Moses
seemed so conspicuously to lack ? Gibbon discusses the power
of the doctrine of a future life. But why should Christianity,
born of Judaism and cradled in the midst of the paganism of
the empire, have evolved the doctrine and given to it so much
force? The miraculous powers ascribed to the primitive
Church must also be differentiated from the magic with which
its age was familiar, and require at least some ground on
which their supposed validity must rest. His fourth cause
was the pure and austere morals of the Christians. Why
were they more pure than their fellows? And what was
the inspiration of that undoubted virtue which drove like
a, wedge into the fabric of ancient society, and crumbling it
into ruins, then built up a new and fairer structure of
domestic and social life ? The fifth cause was the union and
discipline of the Christian republic, which formed an inde-
pendent state in the heart of the Roman empire. But here,
too, we must ask for the centre about which this new state
was gathered. What can explain the slow evolution of the
Catholic church, the formulation of its dogmas, and the
authoi’ity of its discipline ? The truth is, the great historian
has only furnished us with an eloquent description of certain
facts. His philosophical disquisition is only an historical
essay, and he hangs the great fabric of Catholic Christendom
in mid-air with nothing to support it. Like Melchizedek, it
has no generation, and the only answer which critical research
can give to the questions whence came the gospel first, and
whence afterwards came the power which sustained and
developed it, must be—to the first, the resurrection of the
Nazarene ; and to the second, the perpetual presence and power
of that risen Lord in the life and progress of His people.
It is not many days since that I looked upon a beautiful
scene which spread before me in the landscape visible from
the room in which I wrote these words. The storm which
had succeeded to the last long drought had well-nigh spent
its force. The rain had ceased and the wind had fallen, but
clouds still obscured the sky and the damp air hung gloomily,
shrouding the distant mountains, resting upon the lower hills,
and covering the nearer regions with one uniform hue of
grey. Suddenly beneath the lifting pall of clouds the sun
came out, and a gleam of bright light rested for a few
minutes upon one of the lower hills. Then another shone out
in brightness, and while the entire sky and earth rested still
in gloom these two spots showed fair and luminous. In a
short while the whole scene grew resplendent beneath the
sun. The distant hills glowed with rich sunlight. Even a
far-off mountain turned into golden hues. It was, indeed, an


emblem of the ancient world in the midst of which here and
there one can distinguish the beauty and virtue of the
Christian life. Doubt, despair, violence, and vice covered the
earth with their gloom. A few spots are radiant with
divinest virtue and a cheerful hope. At length sunshine
envelops all the scene, and humanity has its new life, its
blessed faith. But what was the sun, whose rays first touched
the life of fishermen and slaves, of simple families, and lowly
circles, with their heavenly fairness 1 What was the sun
which at last shone out upon the whole empire and created a
new order and brought in our modern world 1 There is no
answer but one, and that the one name of salvation and
of grace—the living Christ, the Son of God, the Saviour of
the world.
Our inquiry naturally leads to the next division, in which
we may trace the power of the idea of the present Lord. We
shall find that Christ conceived of as ever-living and ever with
His people is
THE ESSENTIAL LIFE OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRESS OF
THE CHURCH.
It was without any conscious choice that the early fathers
found themselves involved in the controversies which led to
the final decision of Catholic Christendom on the subject of
the Person of our Lord. The apostles and apostolic fathers
were not theologians in the stricter sense of that term. Their
writings are historical rather than discursive, epistolary and
incidental more than philosophic and scientific. That a
Christian philosophy would arise was certain from the neces-
sary laws of the human mind. Men will never content them-
selves with the bare recital of facts. It is impossible that a
religion, although based upon history, and essentially devo-
tional and ethical, should continue always in the region of
mere narrative and practical and experimental piety. Men
will ask for an order of narrative in which causes and effects
shall be duly set forth. They will investigate the meaning of
persons and events, and will seek to lay down in scientific
form the relations which subsist between the persons and
events specially observed, and between these and the other
facts of the universe with which human inquiry is conversant.
Hence, as the Christian Church proceeded there grew up
schools of Christian philosophy. Theology was born and
developed. The Greek mind, always subtle and dialectic,
naturally moved earliest and with most success in these direc-
tions. Alexandria was the origin and centre of this teaching.


Clement, of that city, and his greater pupil, Origen, who
follows St. Paul and precedes St. Augustine as the influential
mind of Christianity, laid the basis of theological science,
and the first great division of Christian thought which was
settled and determined with anything like catholic consent
was that which concerned Christ’s Nature and Person.
WHY THE CHURCH REJECTED ARIAN, MONARCHIAN, AND
NESTORIAN TEACHING.
There must be found some latent and yet all-powerful
cause which determined this. The Arian and semi-Arian
schools promised almost to dominate the creed of Christendom.
They were not wanting in the skill of their supporters, nor
were these men lacking in a devoted spirit and a Christian zeal.
Those high in office sympathized with them, and the power of
the imperial throne was often wielded on their behalf. Their
forms of statement concerning the Lord’s nature are more
acceptable to the general understanding of men, and seem
easier of apprehension, avoiding some of the mysteries which
attach to Catholic doctrine. And yet there was a genius in
the Christian Church which never accepted Arian teaching,
however authoritative, and however supported. The critical
theologian and the average Christian believer alike were not
satisfied with any presentation of the nature of Christ which
might seem to lessen His dignity or narrow the range of His
power. To have reduced the Son of God to the level of a
creature would have been to have robbed the Church of her
life and strength; and hence, spite of councils and decrees, of
synods and imperial proclamations, the Catholic Church
fought against Arianism to the death, and preserved for
Christendom the doctrine of the God-Man who alone could
be the living and ever-present Saviour.
May we not well believe that a similar unconscious sense of
the absolute need of such a Lord secured the rejection of the
Monarchian or Patripassian heresies? Even in their modified
form, as taught by Appollinaris of Laodicea, they were
refused, and the Church preserved the integrity of the human
nature of our Lord, which was thus the link that bound the
living Christ to His people. Without this His presence would
be no more than the omnipresence of God.
In Nestorianism there does not lie the defect of either of
the two former heresies, for it affirms in fullest terms
Christ’s twofold nature, and fails only to distinguish between
His nature and His person. Hooker has pointed out that the
divergence between Nestorius and the Church of Christ lay
only in the affirmation of a personal human subsistence as well
as a divine, and this fact, coupled with the persistent and far-
reaching power of the Nestorian creed, which has been held for


centuries by sections of the Church as large as portions of the
Catholic Church itself, shows that in this deflection from re-
ceived doctrine the Church did not recognize that loss of a
present Lord that would accrue to her if Arianism or Patri-
passianism were to be accepted as the expression of the
Christian faith.
Against these and other less important heresies the ancient
Church struggled—slowly, and in some cases only after long
and painful battles, ejecting them from her midst: first of all
producing them in the fertile soil of her intellectual vitality, and
then weeding them out as she found them noxious to her life.
It is easy to ridicule the fine-drawn definitions of Greek and
Roman and Oriental fathers, to rail at the violence and un-
seemly behaviour of some of their councils, but the sarcasm
will probably be in proportion to the want of knowledge, and
the condemnation of the early Church will be not a little
mitigated when it is seen that the battle was one of life and
death, and in a certain unconscious way was recognized as
such by the combatants. Nicea, Constantinople, Ephesus,
and Chalcedon are significant names to the student of the
Christian faith, but all of them are signs of a deeper truth even
than the elaboration of a Catholic symbol. Indeed, they are
manifestations of the life which was felt to be present in the
early Church, the very life of the Son of God, the ever-abiding
Lord and Saviour.
THE INDIRECT WITNESS OF GNOSTICISM.
In this connection, moreover, a study of the more pronounced
heresies of the first centuries is suggestive. The fathers con-
tended for the faith, not only within the Church, and against
those who probably differed from them only in the form in
which they would express certain common facts received by all
and found by all to be the sources of their spiritual life,
but they also fought against a teaching which could scarcely
be considered as within the Christian sphere, and yet touched
it so nearly, and was so influential, that it presented, perhaps,
the most important intellectual movement of that period. I
refer to the medley of Orientalism, Greek philosophy, Alex-
andrian speculation, and Christian truth which is denominated
Gnosticism, and covers that perplexing and tangled mass of
religious phantasy and reasoning which was found among its
multitudinous sects. Gnosticism was an endeavour to present
a view of the universe, its creation and progress, which should
solve the problem of evil upon the basis of a purely human a,nd
philosophic comprehension. And it is instructive and staitling
to find how large a part is played by the idea of the Logos and
the Christ in almost all the speculations of the Gnostic
schools. It is difficult, perhaps, fairly and completely to gam


a conception of the teaching of these men, for so much must be
gathered from the representations of their opponents ; but this
at least is clear, that the idea of Jesus Christ was for them
much more than the simply historical personage whose life and
works the Evangelist had left on record. The Christian con-
ception of the Son of God, incarnate in the Nazarene, and then
raised to the throne of mediatorial power, was taken by Gnos-
ticism, and, while transformed and often caricatured, yet it was
made to be one of the most powerful factors in their often
grotesque, yet subtle, schemes. Does not this show that the
idea of the living and all-active Christ must have deeply
impressed the thinking of the times ? Gnosticism was a sort of
eclectic philosophy of Being, and not the least powerful element
which had been mingled in the bewildering confusion was the
Christ of God. It is clear, then, that the Christian conscious-
ness of that living Lord must have been most vigorous and
effective. lam not sure that, as a logical elaboration, more is
not made of that idea in the writings of the Gnostics than in
those of the fathers themselves. This suggests that it was an
all-pervasive life in the consciousness of the Church—so active,
so real that it needed no definition. Christianity, indeed, was
Christ ; and when the speculative mind contemplated the
Church and its life, what it saw was the form of the Son of
God, what it felt was the energy of the living, ever-present
Lord.
ROMAN SUPREMACY AND THE GROWTH OF RITUAL.
The succeeding periods of Christian thought and development
were marked by an ecclesiastical growth and a theological dis-
cussion of a different type from that of the pre-Nicene age,
although they were the natural development of the forces which
blended within and without the Church. The establishment
of Christianity by Constantine, and the virtual unification of
Church and State which followed the triumph of the Christian
faith, led to the enormous increase of official power, the growth
of a complex and ornate ritual, and from the development of
the pre-eminence of the Roman Church a direction of Chris-
tian thought under the practical and ethical qualities of Roman
idiosyncracies and habits. The determination of the contro-
versies concerning the person of the Lord marks the cessation
of Oriental and Greek influence upon Christendom, The
Eastern Church became stereotyped, and, whilst Western
Christianity was still the scene of a vigorous, intellectual, and
practical life, Greek Christianity virtually fell into a condition
of torpor and quiescence.
The influential mind of the second period in the history of
Christendom was St. Augustine, and partly by personal character
and partly by the rise of the Pelagian controversy, the thought


of the Church was directed to anthropological discussion
rather than to the purely theological and Christological specu-
lation which was the natural heritage of the Greek mind.
The experiences of St. Augustine are so familiar that it is need-
less to do more than mention his intense and living sense of a
present and abiding Saviour, as shown in a phraseology which
has become almost as common a property of all spiritual per-
sons as the language of the Hebrew Psalter itself. But it must
be acknowledged that the spiritual life of the Church declined
under the combined influences of the destruction of the empire
and the corresponding development of the external and tem-
poral power of the Church. Within the Church, however,
there steadily grew the influence of sacerdotal and ritual
changes which finally took shape not only in the claims of the
Homan Pontiff, but especially in the conception of the priestly
office and the doctrine of the eucharistic sacrifice. It is not
my province to enter into either the details or the significance
of this growth, to estimate the error or the truth involved in
these marvellous departures from the original simplicity of the
gospel. But my reference to them is in order to point out,
that the service of the Mass, in its grossest and most depraved
form, was the endeavour to maintain for human experience
that sense of a present Lord which, once spiritual and vital,
had now become material and sacramentarian. The tre-
mendous error of the Church, whether in the authority claimed
by the successor of St. Peter or in the doctrine of the tran-
substantiated elements, covered, perhaps supplanted, that
which had in all Christian ages been felt to be the essential
and vital support of Christian life, namely, the abiding grace
and ever operative potency of the living Lord. Humanity,
bewildered and despairing, cried with her of Magdala—“ They
have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid Him,” and the cry was as much more despairing and be-
wildered than the tearful woman’s, as humanity felt the greater
loss of a living Christ than Mary did that of her dead Master.
And the answer of a church, mighty in its external forms,
though weak in its spiritual life, was—No! He is not lost ; He
has not vanished. See, He lives ever in the supreme bishop
of the Church, and for each believer the priest can bring Him
near and tangible, in the host which he lifts before the bowing
worshippers, or in the wafer which he lays upon the tongue of
the expiring believer.
THE TESTIMONY TO THE LIVING TRUTH IN THE ERROR.
When we remember this, it is not wonderful, but it is the
very necessity of the events, and, indeed, it shows a certain
insight into human need and even Christian truth, that the
development of the Church should have gathered all its


worship and life about the Eucharist. No part of the ritual,
no side of its teaching—the smallest form which has so care-
fully to be observed —but brings more clearly into view the
need which was felt of a present and abiding Lord. The
controversy with Rome has never sufficiently perceived this
central truth which Rome has enshrined in the midst of her
gigantic corruptions and errors. It is this truth which has
given to them their vitality and force; and it was an error of
some schools of the reformers that they reduced religion too
much to the mere fact of the acceptance of historic or theolo-
gical truth, and changed the great sacrament of the Church
into a mere commemoration and reminiscence.
THE RECOVERY OF THE TRUTH IN THE REFORMATION.
Luther and Calvin fell into no error of this kind, but it is
doubtful whether the churches of Protestantism which recog-
nized the influence of these great teachers have sufficiently
perceived, or, at least, practically applied, the truth to which
they recalled Christendom. Justification by faith has become
with us too much justification by creed. And even the
Calvinistic communities themselves have failed to appreciate
all the force of the teaching of their illustrious master in this
regard.
calvin’s teaching on the eucharist.
The words of the great Genevan doctor upon this subject are
very striking. We must remember that they are controversial,
and in the spirit and manner of the time more violent than we
should employ. In his short treatise on the Lord’s Supper, he
says :
“ When Luther began to teach, he took a view of the subject
which seemed to imply that in regard to the corporal presence
in the Supper, he was willing to leave the generally received
opinion untouched. Eor while condemning transubstantiation,
he said that the bread was the body of Christ, inasmuch as it
was united with Him. Besides, he added similitudes which
were somewhat harsh and rude, but he was in a manner com-
pelled to do so, as he could not otherwise explain his meaning,
for it is difficult to give an explanation of so high a matter
without using some impropriety of speech.
“On the other hand arise Zwinglius and CEcolampadius, who,
considering the abuse and deceit which the devil had employed
in establishing such a carnal presence of Christ as had been
taught and held for more than 600 years, thought it unlawful
to disguise their sentiments, since that view implied an execrable
idolatry, in that Jesus Christ was worshipped as enclosed in
the bread. Now, as it was very difficult to remove this opinion,
which had been so long rooted in the hearts of men, they em-
ployed all their talents to bring it into discredit, showing how


gross an error it was not to recognize what is so clearly declared
in Scripture touching the ascension of Jesus Christ, that He has
been received in His humanity into heaven, and will remain
there until He descends to judge the world. Meantime,
while engrossed with this point, they forgot to show what
presence of Jesus Christ ought to be believed in the Supper,
and what communion of His body and blood is there received.
“ Luther thought that they meant to leave nothing but the
bare signs, without their spiritual substance. Accordingly, he
began to resist them to the face and call them heretics. After
the contention was once begun, it got more inflamed by time,
and has thus continued too bitterly, for the space of fifteen
years or so, without the parties ever listening to each other in
a peaceful temper. For though they once had a conference,
there was such alienation that they parted without any agree-
ment. Instead of meeting on some ground, they have always
receded more and more, looking to nothing else than to
defend their own view and refute the opposite.
“We thus see wherein Luther failed on his side, and
Zwinglius and QEcolampadius on theirs. It was Luthers duty
first to have given notice that it was not his intention to*
establish such a local presence as the papists dream ; secondly,
to protest that he did not mean to have the sacrament adored
instead of God ; and lastly, to abstain from these similitudes,
so harsh and difficult to be conceived, or to have used them
with moderation, interpreting them so that they could not give
rise to any scandal. After the debate was moved, he exceeded
bounds, as well in declaring his opinion as in blaming others
with too much sharpness of speech. For, instead of explaining
himself in such a way as to make it possible to receive his
view, he, with his accustomed vehemence in assailing those
who contradicted him, used hyperbolical forms of speech, very
difficult to be borne by those who otherwise were not much
disposed to believe at his nod.
“ The other party also offended in being violent in declaring
against the superstitious and fanatical opinion of the papists
touching the local presence of Jesus Christ within the sacra-
ment, and the perverse adoration consequent upon it, that
they laboured more to pull down what was evil than to build
up what was good. For, though they did not deny the truth,
they did not teach it so clearly as they ought to have done :
I mean that in their too great anxiety to maintain that the
bread and wine are called the body of Christ because they
are the signs of them, they did not attend to add that though
they are signs the reality is conjoined with them, and they
protest that they had no intention whatever to obscure the
true communion which the Lord gives in His body and blood
by this sacrament.


“ Both parties failed in not having the patience to listen to
each other, in order to follow the truth without passion, when
it would have been found. Nevertheless, let us not lose sight
of our duty, which is not to forget the gifts which the Lord
bestowed on them, and the blessings which He has distributed
to us by their hands and means. For if we are not
ungrateful and forgetful of what we owe them we shall be
well able to pardon that and much more without blaming or
defaming them. In short, since we see that they were and
still are distinguished for holiness of life, excellent knowledge
and ardent zeal to edify the Church, we ought always to judge
and speak of them with modesty, and even with reverence,
since at last God, having thus humbled them, has in mercy
been pleased to put an end to this unhappy disputation, or at
least to calm it, preparatory to its final settlement.
“ I speak thus because no formulary has yet been published
in which concord is fixed as is most expedient, but this will
be when God will be pleased to assemble those who are to
frame it in one place.
“ Meanwhile, it should satisfy us that there is fraternity and
community among the churches, and that all agree in so far
as is necessary for meeting together according to the com-
mandment of God. We all, then, confess with one another
that in receiving the sacrament in faith according to the
ordinance of the Lord, we are truly made partakers of the
proper substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.
How that is done some may deduce better and explain more
clearly than others. Be this as it may, on the one hand, in
order to exclude all carnal fancies we must raise our hearts
upwards to heaven, not thinking that our Lord Jesus is so
debased as to be enclosed under some corruptible elements ;
and on the other hand, not to impair the efficacy of the holy
ordinance, we must hold that it is made effectual by the secret
and miraculous power of God, and that the spirit of God is
the bond of participation, this being the reason why it is
called spiritual.”
A PRESENCE IN THE EUCHARIST.
I have quoted thus at length from Calvin’s work in order to
show how the reformer insisted upon the necessity of finding
in the Lord’s Supper the presence of the Saviour. It must be
remembered that the Roman doctrine involved the change
of the substance of the bread and wine not only into the body
and blood of the Lord, but into His complete humanity and
divinity. All of Christ was in the sacrament, and that great
fact the reformer would not allow to escape from the attentive
faith of the Church, He endeavoured to find room for this
teaching in the more pronounced views of Zwinglius and his


school, while, of course, it was notorious that Luther clung to
the higher meaning of the sacrament with the utmost tenacity.
The Reformation, then, did not lessen the apprehension of the
present Christ to attain which had been the endeavour of
the Church for nearly a millenium. Wherever we turn we
find men bent upon the realization of that presence. It was
the sustenance of many a devout nature whose religious
fervour and saintly life shine out like stars in the prevailing
darkness of the corrupted ages.
THE CRUSADES AND THE CONVERSION OF THE GOTHIC NATIONS.
In the epic of the Church of the Middle Ages there are two
episodes, each of which contains the story of events fraught
with issues of tremendous moment to mankind. Upon the
crumbling ruins of the empire there descended the new, fresh
life of the northern races. Franks and Saxons, and Germans
and Lombards, and Normans and Goths poured out of their
original homes like swarming bees. The ancient valour and
virtue of Rome were departed, and there was nothing to meet
the terrible invaders but the Christian Church, as the force of
order, as the conserver of life and law. The story of the
preacher’s mission and the work of bishop and teacher has been
often told. The vitality of the barbarian hordes encountered
a vitality more potent than their own. In rude ways, often
in fashions which to us seem hardly Christian, these nations
bowed before the new faith, awed, and won, and schooled by
a power which they could not understand, but which, in
church and abbey and cloistered hall, was mightier than their
leader’s castle, and blended their law and liberty into the
great social sytem of our modern world. The victory of the
first century, the missionary conquests of a later time, do not
outshine in spiritual energy the Church’s triumph in the
Middle Ages. And what was the power which wrought these
people into one great faith. Not the prelate’s strength, nor
the Church’s wealth, nor the Pontiff’s ambition. It was a
subtle, an invisible energy of spiritual force which won the
victory in the long conflict. It was a living Christ AVhom the
missionaries preached, and it was His unseen life and unseen
potency which swayed the sceptre before whom the clansmen
and their leaders bowed. Here the Church presented the life
and presence of her Lord, and hence her triumph.
How different was the story of the crusades : In pomp and
external splendour the effort of these wars was far greater
than in the spiritual contest with the heathen. Fanatical
preachers and ambitious popes stirred monarchs and people
alike to the holy enterprise of rescuing the Saviour’s
sepulchre. Again and again great armies marched to the
East, sometimes to victory, but finally to ruin. The Christian


captains held the sacred city, and each epoch of a new crusade
saw its apparent success, but the last crusade only closed the
series in ignominious failure. Vast results, doubtless, sprang
from the intercourse of West and East. Relations between
national and ecclesiastical life were formed which otherwise
had never come into being. Trade and science, research and
art, all received great quickening, but as a spiritual movement
the crusades utterly failed. They were travesties of Christian
enterprise, and possessed scarcely a single feature upon which
the religious mind can rest with content. And what is the
reason 1 They were the Church’s effort after the thing that
was dead. There was no living Christ in any venture. It
was memory and reminiscence and regard for the dead past.
At the head of those armies princes may have ridden, but
there was no Christ, and the result was the confusion and the
shame of Christendom. He was not present, and all things,
therefore, fell into the dishonour and the palsied weakness of
a Church which heeded only the dead Lord, and instead of
serving Him who liveth for evermore, they sought His
sepulchre and forgot that it was empty. The contrast is
remarkable. With the force and influence of regard for a
dead relic, the Church suffers ignominious defeat. As the
instrument of the life of the present Lord, she is everywhere
the mistress of men.
THE HYMNS ATTEST THE SENSE OF THE PRESENT LORD.
The hymns of mediaeval piety breathe a spirit of the closest
attachment, almost a realizing experience of the manifestation
that He was with His tried, struggling, and victorious people.
It has been said that the Latin hymn surpasses the Greek in
its deeper feeling and its more subjective appropriation of and
experience of salvation. May this not have arisen from the
fact that the spiritual apprehension of the Lord’s presence and
grace needed a more direct expression than could be found in
the ritual of the Mass or the authority of the supreme
Pontiff’. In proportion as the life of the Church was centralized
in the Eucharist, or in the voice of its authority, in that
proportion did piety find the need of another channel by
which it might pour forth its experiences of communion with
the Lord. It is fortunate that our modern Christendom has
not been able to check the overflowing of the stream of
Christian song, and to-day the strains of Ambrose, Augustine,
Prudentius, Gregory, Theodulf, Aquinas, and the two
Bernards, and many other singers of the Catholic church, are
heard in languages whose earlier forms were to them but
barbarous, in regions in their age undreamed of, and conjoined
with creeds and ordinances and rules of church communion
which they would have deemed the veriest heresies.


The truth is, the life of Christendom is larger than any
church has ever conceived. Each age but poorly sets forth its
own consciousness, and what it apprehended was but a portion,
and often a very small portion, of the whole. It was the
living Christ in all His churches which not only conserved
their power, but compelled a progress beyond their limits.
Truth might be crystallized in creed, and authority might be
stiffened into ordinance, but the ceaseless presence of the
Lord was a life beyond the creed and an inspiration wider
than the ordinance. Hence, when the Church could not free
herself from her own corruptions, but sought ever to stiffen and
deaden into the narrowest formalism the vitality of the
Christian apprehension of the abiding Christ compelled the
tremendous revolutions which divided external Christendom
but saved spiritual Christianity. Men followed their living
Lord, though they may have had to abandon His visible
ministers, and once again, in the Reformation, the world
learned the deep lesson that Christ was more than Christianity,
and the present Saviour more than the historic creed or
church.
ART AN EXPRESSION OF THE CHRISTIAN CONSCIOUSNESS.
We might pursue the theme as illustrated by the spiritual
conditions of mediaeval Christianity in other spheres of religi-
ous thought and human activity. Take, for example, the
feature of the Christly influence which pervades the art of the
renaissance. Who can visit a gallery of Italy or Germany or
the Netherlands without perceiving the hold which the person
of Christ had gained upon the activities of genius 1 Granting
all that may be said of the naturalism, and, if you like, the
revived paganism of much of the efflorescent-art of the Refor-
mation age, still, along with this, we can see that the concep-
tion of Jesus Christ as the friend and sympathizer of the
human race was as greatly quickened as the sympathy with
the aesthetic activities of the classical world. While theology
revived in her endeavour to reassert the relation between
Christ and the sinful man, art presented her “ Ecce Homo ” as
her part of the new evangel to the world. The transfiguration
of religion from a dead ecclesiasticism to a living faith was
fitly symbolized in Raphael’s masterpiece, and it may be
doubted whether Titian found not a mightier inspiration of
his genius when he sought to bring the life of Christ into
forms which the living world would apprehend than when he
created anew, for a taste which might easily be corrupted, an
ideal of the goddess of beauty which has been forever the
master’s glory and shame.
MYSTICISM.
And what of the mysticism which marked the Middle Ages?
Not unknown in the Eastern Church, it found its most


congenial place in the Teutonic nature. The doctrine of the
Beghards, apparently initiators of the Beguines, those homes
for the widows and daughters of Crusaders, who themselves
were not without mystical tendencies, was elaborated by
David of Dinanto, who was followed by Ruysbroek, Gerson,
and Henry Eckhart. The name of Tauler is still more
familiar, and with him must be named Wycliffe, Huss,
Savonarola, and Wessel—each in his own country a prepara-
tion for the mightier work of the Reformation. To all these
men religion was much more than creed and worship. It was
a life, an experience, a fellowship of the soul with God—an
apprehension direct and immediate of the living Christ.
Thomas a’Kempis is another of the mystics, and his “Imitation”
gathers into a central focus all the consciousness of the
presence of the Lord, and becomes a voice of spiritual life not
only for its own, but for all time. Mysticism was one of the
forces which produced the Reformation, but mysticism was
only one of the forms in which men expressed their sense of
a Living Presence, a personal Lord, who was ever in and with
His Church.
THE REAL MEANING OF THE REFORMATION.
Here, then, we find the true explanation of the great move-
ment which reformed the Church, and, let it be remembered,
not only created Protestantism, but recreated the Roman
Church, for the Roman Church following the Reformation has
been a very different Church from that which preceded it.
It was Christ who conserved the spiritual vitality of the
saints of all ages. It was Christ who ruled His people and
overruled all chance and change in Church and State alike,
and when humanity was ready to perish breathed again of
His own life and renewed the world. All that went to make
up the interest and importance of that age —the invention of
printing, the revival of learning, the discovery of the Western
and the Southern worlds, the birth of a truer philosophy and
the origin of modern science—all these are but circumstances,
the external and phenomenal conditions, which need the
essential life, the inner soul. This is the perennial, the
eternal life of the Son of God. He animates and inspheres
the whole. The points of vitality are where men apprehend
Him. His incarnation created Christianity, His perpetual
life developed it, and the fresh recognition of the reality of
His presence reformed and renewed the world.
THE POST-REFORMATION PERIOD.
I can only refer briefly to the illustration of the same truth
which may be found in the period succeeding that of the
Reformation. The characteristics of this later age have been
those of the purification and the illustration of doctrine, and


the scientific criticism of creeds and churches, and the develop-
ment of practical Christianity, the application of Christian
principle to the secular duties and engagements of the world.
An unprejudiced critic will generally be found to acknowledge
that if it had been possible to reform the Church without a
separation from it, it would have been apparently a better
thing; than the creation of the divided churches of Protestant
Christendom. Whatever may be the opinion held on this
point, all will agree that the worldly, Erastian character which
many of the Protestant Churches developed was a serious
calamity to spiritual religion and the general cause of the
Church. The conditions arising from these features of the post-
Reformation period necessarily required for the preservation of
spiritual life those seasons of revival, those epochs of purifi-
cation, of test and criticism, and even separation, which have
marked the history of the Church.
METHODISM AND REVIVALISM,
Of these the most remarkable is the revival of religion in
the eighteenth century, especially under the influence of
Whitefield and Wesley, affecting chiefly the English-speaking
nations, but not without far-reaching relations to all the
churches. Indirectly, even Rome and the Eastern Church
have been affected by the forces which were set in action in
the revival period. In no period of the Church’s history, in
no form of Christian life, has that fact of the personal presence
and potency of the living Christ been so clearly and definitely
recognized as under the spiritual conditions of the modern age.
The language of the revivalist in all churches became a common
object of ridicule on the part of those who did not understand
—ignorant and unsympathetic through an ignorance and a lack
of sympathy which were either necessary or wilful. It was, in
fact, the utterance of the profoundest and most vital energy of
the Church. The unreformed Church gave men a rite and an
authority. What they needed was life and the living Christ.
The reformed churches fell into a sleep as deadly as that of Rome,
and when men asked them for an evangel they had none to
give but the authority of the king, or the apostolic descent of
the bishop, or the orthodox statement of their creed. This
was no message for the broken-hearted, no salvation for the
sinner, no light for a dark world, no hope for human despair.
It was then that- men turned to the Methodist and the
revivalist, whether in or out of the church they little cared.
He at least had a personal experience. For him there was a
living Lord. He preached not the accurate dogmas of the
pre-existent Logos, not the history of the Incarnate Son of
God, not the closely-reasoned and safely-join ted propositions
of a confession or a creed, but he proclaimed a present Saviour,


who had been found to save the man who trusted Him, to
cheer the man who went to Him with his broken heart, almost
to reveal Himself with a visible glory to the man who would
live the saintly life of faith in Him, It was this great truth
that breathed like a breeze from the ocean upon the dead and
arid plains of the churches. It was this that made men carry
the gospel like a torch of freedom from city to city, from
hamlet to hamlet, from land to land. This drove the slaves
off the seas, this broke the manacles of the oppressed, this
purified the prisons of Europe, and covered the world with
hospitals, and Christian help, and faith in humanity, and zeal
for God.
And it is this, brethren, which will still be the power of
God for the salvation of men. You cannot lock the sunlight
in a lanthorn. You cannot imprison the air in a fold. You
cannot keep the ocean within the banks of a canal. Neither
can you limit the living Christ in creed or church, in book or
official, in institution or ordinance. He may be in all these.
But He is elsewhere. He is everywhere. And wherever
man or woman, having found the living Saviour by any means,
chuchly or unchurchly, constitutional or unconstitutional,
seeks to make Him known to his fellows, there is the true
Church of God, that is the eternal gospel—Paul’s, Augustus’s,
Anselm’s, Xavier’s, Luther’s, Wesley’s—yours, mine, mans.
THE LIVING CHRIST THE VIRTUAL INSPIRATION OF ALL HUMAN
HISTORY.
There is an aspect of the subject of the highest importance
and greatest interest which, for a short time, must occupy our
attention as we close. Hitherto we have regarded Christ and
His relation to the Church—the Church especially so called,
touching, indeed, the world around it, upon many sides,
influencing and being influenced by the secular conditions of
its environment, but still the Church—that community which
has known more or less of Jesus Christ, and has professed His
name and declared itself, in the person of its members, to be
the follower of our Lord.
THE LIGHT OF ALL MEN.
But the claim which Christ made, when He departed from
His apostles, was a much wider one than the mere leadership
of the particular persons who might hear His name and attach
themselves to His Person or His teaching. He declared that
all power was given to Him in heaven and on earth, and men
are only now beginning to understand all that was implied in


that comprehensive declaration. We have been ready to
acknowledge that Mosaism and Judaism were preparations for
the coming Messiah—that prophets, and priests, and kings, and
psalmists, whose deeds and works are recorded in the Old
Testament, were forerunners and types of Christ, and that
these, in ways which apostles interpreted, made ready for the
Lord. But why should we limit the preparation for the
coming Christ to the one race and the one religion 1 God is
the Sovereign of the World, and He administers the rule of
His kingdom through His Son and His Word. All things,
therefore, which have in any way made for goodness and
righteousness, all events which work together for the purposes
of God, are surely part of the power which the Son of God
has exercised, forms in which He has been manifesting the
truth unto men and ruling them by His divine authority. If
He be the light which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world, then either we must conclude that no light hath
shone except within the historic limits which our Bible teaches,
or that wheresoever the light has gleamed, it has been a beam
of the Sun of Righteousness.
In all ages some have endeavoured to express this truth,
though for the most part it has been lost sight of, and even
directly impugned, but in these days a large knowledge of the
varied races of men, especially a more intimate knowledge of
the faiths of humanity, and these brought by our missionary
labours into direct contact with explicit Christianity, have
combined to press home the inquiry upon thoughtful minds,
whether there is not a power of even the unknown Christ
working in the hearts of men to bring them to God, and
assuredly a sovereign rule of the Lord of Lords and King of
Kings which presses all things into His service and leads the
affairs of men to the grand consummation of a reconciled
world, when the universal family of man shall behold the face
of Christ, and therein the undimmed light of God.
THE ESSENCE OF HUMAN HISTORY.
Who can read history, who can study the masterpieces of
human literature, without echoing the declaration of the illus
trious scholar, who, after a life of nearly half a century of
patient research, declared that if he would sum up the result
of all the books which he had studied, and the knowledge
which he had gained, it would be in the one sentence, “ Jesus
Christ is the Master of the world 1 ?” Civilization is Christian
civilization. The races which in the struggle of life prevail,
multiplying themselves, and bringing all others beneath their
domination, are the races whose Lord is the living Christ, and
whose destiny seems to be even consciously and explicitly
directed by Him. After three thousand years of labour, and


war, and philosophy, and religion, the millions of India, ac-
cording to one of her most accomplished sons, who himself
had not accepted the Christian faith in the sense in which we
understand it, have found their Master to be Christ. Some
of the nations of the most ancient civilization and the most
secluded history are stepping into the fellowship of progressive
peoples, and almost in a day adopting the forms and methods
which Christianity has created. The one living religion
to-day is Christianity, Universal heathenism is smitten with
a palsy, and even Islam is pierced on every side by the arms
of our Captain, if, in some cases, with impulse and tonic in
the wound, for the most part with wounds which are unto
death. How far removed from the Christian spirit are the
policies of diplomacy and the intents of the soldier ! Yet every
treaty and every war but lead on to the triumph of the Lord.
The actual growth of the Christian system is more rapid in
our time than in any age of the world, while the indirect
influence of Christianity leaves no people beyond its reach.
We are quite aware that it is vain to seek for the universal
prevalence of any particular creed, or the prospect of the
world-wide extension of any church. But we hold Christianity
to be much more than any creed has yet defined, and the living
Christ, who fills the universe with His power, is not limited by
any church, nor even by all the churches put together.
ULTIMATE CHRISTIANITY NECESSARILY ECLECTIC.
A Christian philosophy which would embrace the thought
and history of mankind as a whole in its conception of the pre-
paration of the world for the reception of Christ, and as, indeed,
in so far as the thought and action were right and good them-
selves, part of the revelation of the word and the outworking of
the spirit of God is not, as we have said, without some great
names to sustain it among the learned and saintly men of the
Church’s history. Clement of Alexandria has a noteworthy
passage in his “Miscellanies”:—“Accordingly before the advent
of the Lord, philosophy was necessary to the Greeks for right-
eousness. And now it becomes conducive to piety, being a kind
of preparatory training to those who attain to faith through
demonstration. ‘For thy foot,’ it is said, ‘ will not stumble
if thou refer what is good, whether belonging to the Greeks or
to us, to Providence,’ for God is the cause of all good things,
but of some primarily, as of the Old and the New Testament,
and others by consequence, as philosophy. Perchance, too,
philosophy was given to the Greeks directly and primarily, till
the Lord should call the Greeks. For this was a schoolmaster
to bring * the Hellenic mind,’ as the law the Hebrews, ‘to
Christ.’ Philosophy, therefore, was a preparation paving the
way to him who is perfected in Christ,”


These were wise words and brave of the Alexandrian
teacher, and we see no reason why they should not be enlarged
with all that width of application which has been already
suggested. It seems to me to be a denial of the essential
glory of the Son of God, if there be truth anywhere that
He has not been the revealer of it. Men surely have
known some truth, even though they have never heard
the music of the name of Jesus. Without this there
could be for man no judgment before God, no moral nature —•
at least, no conditions in which that moral nature could act.
The truth of man’s depravity does not need to be carried so far
as to affirm depravity in all the objective truth which man has
learned. If so, we must be consistent, and deny the possibility
of truth in any sphere of human thought until geometry and
mechanics, numbers and logic, were all alike involved in the
tremendous ruin of man’s fall. Ours is a brighter faith
and a diviner teaching, and we believe, therefore, that God
has always had His witnesses, that those witnesses have
always testified as to the Christ who spoke through them, for
He is the word, the wisdom of God, through Whom alone man
can catch even the slightest gleams of the divine truth.
But, thank God, they have shone in every land, and they are
true sunshine, though they may be the first faint streaks of an
unfolding day, or the last glimmer of a twilight that may fade
into the night to await the coming of the better morrow. But
they are light, and light from the central sun, and the light
shall grow, and the sun shall rise upon the nations, and they
shall see completely Him through whom, however, they have
ever been groping, though only groping, along the way of life.
The noble thoughts, the soaring prayer, the rich hymns, the
incisive laws found in all faiths, and which made them to be
the roots of civilization, the foundation on which society was
possible and man could live, are all of Jesus Christ, and attest
His power working in the ages, and leading all men at last to
the perfect knowledge of Himself.
CHRIST THE LEADER OF THE MARCH OF HUMANITY.
Review the progress of humanity in that stupendous march
which reaches back into the dim past, where the nations move
onward beneath a mist which the keenest vision fails to pierce.
We can almost hear the thunder of their tread, and we see
the graves into which the empires which rose and fell were
gathered, leaving the relics of their greatness a wonder even
to our time. Into the vast procession come the ever-new races,
bringing each its crowd of teeming life, for a while to move
onward through glory and decline until each one falls out of
the progress only to make room for another, stronger, more
ardent, to take its place. The vast multitude ever grows


more varied, more countless, some wearied out and failing; but
the ranks are never empty, the march never ceases. The
road in which they move enlarges. To-day it is wide as the
world itself, and never did the sun shine more brightly upon
its course, never did the hearts of the innumerable comrades
beat higher with the expectation of that divine city to which
they press. See the standard which flies so bravely at the van.
It is the blood-red banner of the Cross. And who is that
celestial figure that leads the mighty host 1 Look at those
lineaments of gentle grace. Sorrow has left its lines, but
every line is transfigured into a mark of glory. He wears a
crown—a crown of thorns, but the thorns have changed into
jewels, each one fit to shine in the diadem of Heaven. Look
again upon that face, and see it is radiant with the life of God.
He is a man—the first of men. He is a God, the eternal Son
of God, and ever He passes from His place at the head of the
innumerable host, and we behold Him in varied aspect com-
forting, aiding, cheering each one in the great company. But
still He leads, and ever leads, and none shall stay that progress
till it ends within the city of our God at the feet of God
Himself.
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.








