

PROFESSOR MEIKLEJOHN’S SERIES
AUSTRALASIA
Its Geography
Resources, Commerce
and Chronicle of
Discovery
M. J. C. MEIKLEJOHN
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY A. M. HOLDEN
23 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
1897
PRICE SIXPENCE.




fIZ. 3*T
*
#




■»>


■»>






AUSTRALASIA
Its Geography
Resources, Commerce
and Chronicle of
Discovery
M. J. C. MEIKLEJOHN
A. M. HOLDEN
AT TWENTY-THREE
PATERNOSTER ROW
LONDON, E.C. 1897
FRUJ


CONTENTS
AUSTRALASIA—
Introductory,
Australia, General Introduction,
~ Map-Practice, .
New South Wales,
Victoria, ,
South Australia,
Queensland, .
Western Australia,
Tasmania,
New Zealand,
Fiji Islands, .
New Guinea, .
Minor Islands (Bismarck Archipelago, New Caledonia,
etc.), .......
Steamer Routes to and from Australasia,
Distances of Ocean Routes,
~ ~ Australian Ports,
History of Discovery in Australasia,
Chronicle of Discovery,
Adventures of Explorers, .


AUSTRALASIA
Introductory. —The name Australasia is now generally-
applied to the island-continent of Australia and the islands
near it, the largest of which are New Guinea, New Zealand,
and Tasmania.
(i) In addition to those mentioned above, the following islands or island-
groups are included in Australasia: New Caledonia, New Hebrides, New
Ireland, New Britain, the Solomon Islands, and Fiji.
(ii) The term Australasia means ‘Southern Asia.’ But the region has, in
reality, nothing to do with Asia, as is clearly shown by the forms of its
animal life, which are peculiar to itself.
(iii) ‘Australasia’ is a term popularly used in England to denote our
colonies only, to the exclusion of the foreign possessions which ought to bo
included under the name.
AUSTRALIA
i. Extent and Area. —Australia is the largest island, or
the smallest continent, in the world. It lies between
Lat. 10° and Lat. 40° South. The greatest breadth of the
continent is measured along the line of Lat. 27°, and it
is 2300 miles from east to west. The longest line that can
run from north to south is drawn from Cape York to Wilson’s
Promontory, and measures about 2000 miles. Torres Strait
separates the continent from New Guinea, and Bass Strait
from Tasmania. The area of the continent amounts to close
on 3,000,000 square miles.
(i) Australia is thus nearly equal in extent to the United States (without
Alaska), or is considerably more than three-quarters the size of Europe.


(ii) In point of civilisation Australia is the youngest of all continents. It
has no buildings more than a hundred years old; no battle has ever been
fought on its soil; nor does there exist in it the smallest trace of civilisation
prior to its settlement by Europeans.
(iii) *lt was, indeed, a bewildering and difficult country to explore: almost
everything in nature seemed to reverse the usual order of things. In this
huge, wild land of the Antipodes, the compass pointed to the south; the
sun travelled along the northern heavens; the mercury of the barometer
rose with a southerly and fell with a northerly wind; the animals seemed
disproportionately large in their lower extremities, carrying their young in
a pouch; the swans were black, the eagles white; the moles laid eggs, the
owls hooted in the daytime, the voice of the cuckoo was hoard at night; the
valleys were cool, the mountain-tops warm ; the north winds were hot, the
south winds cool; while the cast winds were, curious to relate, the most
healthy; the bees were without sting; the cherries grew with the stone
outside ; and some of the rivers were salt and flowed inland. Altogether,
the first explorers must have found it a most singular and perplexing
country.’
2. Coast-line. —The coast-line of Australia is, like that of
Africa, short, compact, little indented, and with very few
islands. There are in it very few inlets that can he made
commercially useful; and those that do exist lie chiefly on
the east and the south-east coasts. The chief features that
strike the eye are the Gulf of Carpentaria, opposite to which
is the deep in-running Spencer Gulf in the south; and the
Cape York Peninsula in the north, which is balanced by the
Island of Tasmania. The Great Australian Bight in the south
is a shallow curve in the land, edged by a continuous stretch
of sandy beach. The northern half of the east coast is edged,
at varying distances from the shore, by the Great Barrier
Reef.
(i) The larger part of the north and west coasts is featureless in contour.
Part of the west coast is edged by ranges of low hills ; while in the north-
west the coast presents a considerable variety of outline, and contains many
island-sheltered inlets. Much of the north shore is a dull stretch of sand
and mud-swamp, in which the mangrove flourishes, even as far as low-
water mark. Melville Island is the chief island on the north coast. In it a
magnificent harbour has been discovered, with many striking points of
resemblance to Sydney Harbour.


(ii) West "of the Great Bight the only good harbour is King George’s
Sound. About 200 miles north-west of this is Cape Leeuwin (= Lioness),
which is the first land sighted by ships as they approach Australia.
(iii) The Great Barrier Reef starts a little north of the Tropic of Capricorn,
and runs along the coast of Queensland for about 1200 miles, till it nearly
blocks up Torres Strait. It is a natural breakwater formed by the so-
called coral ‘insect,’ or polyp, and inside it ships can navigate in perfectly
smooth water. The navigation is, however, risky, owing to the presence
of many sunken reefs that are detached from the main wall. Ships, there-
fore, generally use the passage by day only, and anchor at night. The Barrier
is not continuous. It is broken into in many places by channels—some
narrow, some as much as twelve miles wide. The widest is opposite the
mouth of the Burdekin River, for the outflow of fresh water is hostile to the
formation of coral. Near Thursday Island, north of Cape York, is one of
the few safe channels by which ships may pass the reef-studded Torres
Strait.
(iv) Australia and Africa : a comparison of their coast-lines :
(a) Both have a comparatively short and regular coast-line.
(b) Both have their best harbours on the east and south-east coasts.
(c) The east coasts of both are protected: that of Australia by the
Great Barrier Reef; that of Africa by Madagascar, which is
itself fringed on its eastern coasts by coral formations.
(d) Off the east coast of both a strong current sets southwards.
3. Build.— The build of Australia is simple enough. It
has been compared to <a dish of irregular shape, being de-
pressed towards the centre and raised along the edges.’
Like Ireland and Africa, it is rimmed with mountains along
its outer edge—the chief ranges lying in the east. Like
Africa, its interior is a plateau; but the plateau is a low one.
Like Africa, again, it has a very narrow coast-plain betiveen
the mountains and the sea. The fourth factor in the build
of Australia is the great plain of the Murray-Darling basin.
The resemblance to Africa may be continued still further :
(a) Like the Nile, the Murray diminishes in volume as it nears the sea.
Sands absorb its water, as the irrigation w’orks absorb the waters
of the Nile.
(b) Both continents have extensive desert lands in the interior. Both
the Sahara in Africa, and the central Australian desert contain
low ranges of hills.
(c) In both continents some of the rivers are highest in summer owing


to the melting of snow upon the mountains. The Nile is swollen
from May to September for this reason. So also are some of the
Australian rivers, which flow into the continental basin of the
interior.
4. Mountains. —There is only one great mountain-range,
or, more correctly, a series of highlands, in Australia. This
is known as the Dividing Range: because it divides the
fertile coast-plain from the hot and dry interior. It begins a
little west of Melbourne, runs east, and sweeps north till it
ends at Cape York. In the south-east this chain forms a
nearly continuous cordillera; in the north it is often rather
the steep outer edge of the interior plateau. The import-
ance of this range to, and its influence on, Australia is very
great. It is the most important factor in modifying the
climate; it is the source of nearly all the great rivers ; and
in its deep valleys, that are turned towards the sea, is found
the richest vegetation. It makes abundantly clear to us
what would happen in South America if the Andes had been
on the east, instead of on the west, coast.
(i) The main links in the great chain are, in their order: the Gram-
pians ; the Australian Alps ; the Blue Mountains ; the Liverpool Range;
the New England Range ; and the Craig Range.
<ii) Of these the longest range, which extends for a distance of nearly
100 miles, is the Australian Alps. The highest mountains in them belong
to the Kosciusko group, of which Mount Townsend (7350 feet—or half
Mont Blanc) is the highest mountain in the whole of Australia.
(iii) Other ranges, which arc dissociated from the main chain and from
each other, are: the Macdonnell Range, in the heart of the continent,
which may be regarded as the parallel of the Tibesti Mountains in the
African Sahara; the Flinders Range, which runs north from the head of
Spencer Gulf; and the'Darling Range, along the south-west coast of West
Australia.
(iv) Australia possesses no active volcanoes. But Mount Bogong (6500
feet), which is the highest mountain in Victoria, rises out of a plateau built
up out of materials which .arc entirely of volcanic origin. From this plateau
the rich volcanic soil is washed down to fertilise the plains below.
5. Plateaus and Plains.—On either side of the Dividing


Range lie table-lands of varying breadth. At their widest
point they are about 100 miles across; and they have an
average elevation of 2500 ..feet. West of the table-lands
stretch for hundreds of miles the Upland Plains, which have
an average elevation of 500 feet, and which are mostly desert
or ‘scrub-land.’ The Lowland Plain is the fertile basin of
the Murray-Darling, and fills an area equal to more than
twice that of the Austrian Empire.
(i) The Upland Plain is, as has been stated, mostly desert; but it con-
tains here and there oases, and much of its surface is covered, in wet
seasons, with abundant vegetation. The two largest deserts are the
Victoria Desert, north of 30° South Lat., and the Great Sandy Desert,
between 20° South Lat. and the Tropic of Capricorn.
(ii) Both the eastern and the western parts of the Great Plains suffer
equally from want of water. But the eastern plains are the more pro-
ductive of the two. Much of them is covered with the famous ‘ salt-bush ’
—a grey, stunted shrub, on which sheep thrive quite as well as on grass.
The western plains, on the other hand, are a land of sandy desert and scrub.
They are covered with a spiny grass that cuts like a knife, and furnishes no
sustenance to any useful animal. The explorer that is bold enough to face
this pitiless desert (incurring a danger more terrible than those endured at
the hands of savage tribes or from ferocious wild beasts) has to cut his
way, often foot by foot, through the scrub; and he must endure privations
both of food and water, such as the traveller in no other continent in the
world is called upon to encounter.
6. Climate and Rainfall. —The climate of Australia varies,
of course, with latitude and elevation; but it is, on the
whole, warm and dry. The rainfall is, for the whole con-
tinent, very scanty; but rain descends, in certain localities,
in the form of mighty deluges. Thus the climate of many
parts is one of alternate drought and torrential flood. The
climate is also subject to sudden variations of temperature,
so that the thermometer sometimes falls as much as 60° or
70° in a few hours. One of the most disagreeable features
of the Australian climate is the hot winds—‘bursters’ or
‘ brick-dusters ’ —that now and then blow from the parched


and burning plains of the interior. r I he most important
factor which tends to modify the climate of Australia is the
Great Dividing Range.
(i) This range acts as a condenser of the prevailing wind that strikes the
Australian continent—the South-East Trade. The result is that, while the
coast-strip gets more rain than it needs, the rain-bearing clouds are arrested
by the mountains, and compelled to drop their moisture before they are
able to reach the interior. Thus a very large part of Australia receives
practically no rain at all; and there is less and less rain the further west
you go.
(ii) The amount of rain that falls on the coast-strip increases as we go
from south to north, —that is, the nearer we get to the tropics. For
there the seas are warmer, and therefore the evaporation from the sea-
surface is greater. In the tropics, where the monsoon-winds prevail, the
summer (November to April) is the rainy season. Outside the tropics the
rainy season is generally in winter (May to October).
(iii) In climate, again, there is a likeness between Australia and South
Africa. The following are the chief points:
(a) Both countries have the same sort of surface; and both lie
between two oceans and in about the same latitude.
(b) In both the south and south-east coasts are the most abundantly
watered.
(c) In both countries the coast ranges on the cast catch the rain;
and the interior is left very dry. But South Africa is narrower
than Australia, and therefore the desert regions are not so
extensive, and are also less arid.
(a) The greatest heat is met with in the desert interior. Here the explorer
Sturt found the mercury burst the tube of his thermometer. ‘ Every screw
came out of the boxes ; the horn handles of instruments and the combs split
up into fine lamina;; the lead dropped out of the pencils ; the hair stopped
growing ; and the finger-nails became brittle as glass.’
(b) Rain sometimes falls in terrible floods ; and this heavy rain is alternated with
long periods of complete drought. The Hawkesbury River (in New South
Wales) once rose 93 feet above its ordinary level; and hundreds of people
only saved their lives by climbing into the tops of high trees. In 1884
there was no rain ; and 10,000,000 sheep died of thirst.
(c) One of the most striking characteristics of the Australian climate is the
abundance of sunshine. The grey days of our English climate are unknown;
and clouds seldom obscure the sky for long.
(d) A ‘burster,’ or hot wind, has been thus described: ‘You may know when
the terror is coming by various tokens. Sometimes it is by an ominous
silence. Nature seems to listen with bated breath and hushed whisper ; the
distance darkens, a livid glow overspreads the blue-vaulted sky, closing in


rapidly, while blasts of heated air strike against the cheek as if just escaped
from a fiery furnace. • . . Ere long a vast driving volume of dark clouds,
densely opaque, draws nearer; there is a rush, a giddy whirl, a noise as of
wings in the air, and then it leaps down on you like an avalanche, only not of
pure white snow, but dust—loathsome, gritty, choking, spluttering, ear-
filling, eye-blinding dust. It gets down your neck, up your coat sleeves, and
into your boots and your pockets.'
While the ‘burster’ lasts, the whole atmosphere looks like pea-soup,
murky brown as in a London winter fog. The streets are deserted; every
window is tight closed ; and the heat is suffocating. The wind goes on
blowing for two or three days, and is in general followed by a soft rain. Then
the bright Australian sunshine bursts out, and all nature smiles again.
7. Rivers. — Both the climate and the build of Australia
help us to understand the nature of the rivers. The rainfall
is scanty: therefore there are not many, or highly developed
river-systems. In fact, Australia is practically a one-river
continent. Secondly, the main Avatershed is near the east
coast. Therefore the rivers running east from it are short
but full. On the other hand, the rivers that flow west from
it are long indeed, but poorly supplied with water, owing to
the nature of the climate of the country through Avhich they
pass.' Nearly all the rivers of Australia are also subject to
two serious and opposite disadvantages: they are either
swollen to overflowing, or dried up so as to be unnavi-
gablc; they are in a depressed or a swollen state—a state
either of drought or of flood. The great river of Australia
is the Murray-Darling, Avhich, with its three chief tributaries,
the Warrego, the Lachlan, and the Murrumbidgee, Avaters
the fertile LoAvland Plain
(i) Australia exhibits two main drainage slopes—one east of the Dividing
Range, and the second west of it towards the interior.
(ii) The Murray (with the Darling—234s miles) rises amongst the highest
peaks of the Australian Alps. It flows westward; and in its course forms
a great part of the boundary of Victoria and New South AVales. Shortly
after entering South Australia, it turns nearly due south and discharges
into the shallow Lake Alexandria. This communicates witha long, shallow
coast-lagoon, called the Coorong, which is separated from the sea by a line


of sand-dunes. The great river thus slowly soaks into the sea through a
kind of sand-filter. Its largest tributaries—both on the left bank—are the
Darling with the Warrego, and the Murrumbidgee with the Lachlan. Both
the Murray and Darling are often ‘on strike’—they do not flow at all;
but dwindle down, in dry seasons, into a series of isolated waterholes.
(iii) The rivers running east from the Dividing Range—such as the Fitz-
roy, Burdekin, Brisbane, and Hunter— are all short, but have a more or
less continuous supply of water throughout the year. They bring down
immense quantities of sediment from the neighbouring highlands; and
their mouths arc therefore generally impeded by bars.
8. Inland Rivers and Lakes. —Apart from the lagoons,
which occur most thickly along the south-east coast,
Australia possesses many lakes, most of which are salt, and
shrink in the summer into mere stvamps. The chief are
Lake Amadeus, in the centre of the continent; and Lakes
Torrens, Gairdner, and Eyre, in the ‘ lake-district ’ of
Australia, at the head of Spencer Gulf. The largest fresh-
water lake is Lake George, in New South Wales, which is as
big as Loch Lomond. Lake Eyre is the centre of the basin
of inland drainage, and receives the large, but intermittent,
rivers—the Finke, the Diamantina, and the Barcoo, or
Cooper’s Greek. Western Australia also possesses a ‘lake-
district.’ The chief lakes are: Austin, Barlee, Monger, and
Lefroy. But these are only one or two feet deep in the rainy
season. At other times they are cpiite dry, and become salt-
encrusted swamps.
(i) Both these, and other rivers of the desert interior, are capricious in
their flow. At one time their course is marked only by the trees and grass
that grow along their banks. At others, the Diamantina, for example, is 20
feet deep and 2 miles across.
(ii) Of the salt lakes the explorer Eyre writes: ‘ The refraction from these
lakes was most extraordinary and deceptive. When away from the bed, a
vast body of water seemed to intervene between them and the ranges, mock
water seemed to be laving their bases, and reflecting the outlines of their
rugged summits. The whole scene partook more of the nature of enchant-
ment than reality; and, as the eye wandered over the unbroken crust of
pure white salt, lit up by the glaring sun, the glittering effect was brilliant
beyond description. Certainly all is not gold which glitters here.’


(a) The remarkable changes and caprices of Australian drought and Hood are well
illustrated by the alterations which have taken place in Lake George. In
1824 it was 20 miles long, and 8 miles wide. In 1837 it was a grassy hollow.
In 1865 its bed was again filled with water, 17 feet deep.
(b) Major Warburton, the explored thus illustrates the same phenomenon .
‘ To show you what changes are met with in Australia, I may mention that
the bed of the Oakover (a river in Western Australia) at that point was three
or four hundred yards in width ; but there was not a drop of water in it, and
probably there had not been for a long time. We went to bed one night, when
the channel of the river was quite empty; but at three o’clock in the morning
it was full to the bank, with plenty of ducks and large trees, borne along on
the current, floating on its surface. It was then a splendid river.’
g. River Navigation and Irrigation. —The Murray-Darling
system is the most important navigable waterway in
Australia; and over it river-steamers of shallow draught
penetrate far into the interior. Some other rivers on the
east coast, such as the Hunter, Brisbane, and Fitzroy, are
navigable in their lower courses. But the Murray and its
tributaries are likely to be of even greater use for irrigation
than they have ever been for navigation. What has been
done in India can be done also in Australia. Already a
beginning has been made at Mildura and Renmark on the
Murray, where fruits of many sorts and excellent vegetables
grow profusely on irrigated soil, on which, a few years ago,
there was not enough food even for rabbits.
(i) The Murray is navigable as far as Albury, at which point the railway
between Melbourne and Sydney crosses it. On the Murrumbidgee steamers
can reach Wagga-Wagga, and on the Darling, Bourke. Both of these last
two places are in communication with railways. In wet seasons navigation
can be still further extended; but, on the other hand, in times of drought,
it is stopped altogether. The great drawback to the navigation of the
Murray is that the river has no useful outlet to the sea. Hence the cargoes
of the steamers have to be discharged at Morgan in South Australia, just
before the river begins to take its southern bend, and at different river-ports
on the Victorian border. From the former place a short railway conveys
goods to Adelaide.
(ii) Australia, with a thorough system of irrigation, such as is supplied
in India by the Ganges and other rivers, could support a population ten
times as largo as it does at present. The gradual slope of the Murray-


Darling basin renders it probable that nearly the whole of this vast area,
which is twice as big as the Austrian Empire, could be irrigated. In the
colony of Victoria, the Chinese (those industrious and clever gardeners) have
done much for the colony by irrigation on a small scale. They rented what
every one considered to be useless barren wastes, and raised better crops on
them than their English neighbours did on the richest of soils.
(iii) In addition to procuring water from the rivers, the Australians arc
busy tapping their underground water-supply by means of artesian wells.
In the dry interior there is a vast supply of artesian water waiting to be
tapped. The greatest advances in this direction have been made in Queens-
land. r l here the water from the artesian wells forms small lakes, which are
of inestimable value for watering stock, as well as for agricultural purposes.
(a) A curious fact lias been discovered in connection with the underground water-
supply of Australia. It seems that there is a steady stream of water —a
gigantic leakage—which flows underneath the geological strata and wells out
into the sea at a great distance from land. Far out in the Gulf of Carpentaria
(beyond the influence of flood-water from the rivers which enter that gulf),
fresh water can be drawn up in a bucket. It is also stated that off the
Victorian coast fresh water may be obtained from a so-called spring far out
to sea.
(b) In connection with this fact, it may also be noticed that many Australian
rivers often sink below the earth to form part of the underground drainage.
The Broughton River, in South Australia, which flows into Spencer Gulf,
sometimes does this. In the upper part of its course it is a fine stream; but
Eyre, the explorer, found that towards its mouth it grew smaller and
smaller, till it vanished altogether.
io. Vegetation.— The flora of Australia is very extensive
as to the number of its species. It is also unique among the
floras of the world. But the almost entire absence of fruit-
bearing trees shows it to be of a low order. The three most
characteristic groups of trees arc the eucalypti (blue gum,
red gum, stringy bark, iron bark, etc.); the casuarinas, trees
with thread-like leaves, which the colonists absurdly call
‘oaks’; and the acacias or wattles. Evergreen trees and
shrubs are everywhere prevalent; and their deep green
foliage presents a strong contrast, during the autumn, to the
yellow dried-up grass.
Australian vegetation may be ranged under three heads:
brush, woodland, and scrub according as it flourishes


among the mountains, or on the table-land near the
mountains, or on the interior plains, (a) The richest, the
most tangled, and the most varied vegetation is to be found
in those valleys and clefts of the Dividing Range that face
the sea. (b) The table-land, and the neighbouring interior,
is covered with an open park-like forest, which affords free
passage for traffic, and plenty of pasture-ground for stock,
(c) The far interior, where it is clothed at all, is beset with
the nearly impenetrable mallee scrub (a dwarf species of
eucalyptus) and the mulga scrub (composed of thorny acacias),
or is overgrown with the low and prickly spinifex, the
dreaded porcupine grass.
(i) The eucalypti arc eminently suited to withstand the dry climate of
Australia. They grow quickly; their long roots suck up water from great
depths down in the ground; and their leaves, which hang vertically, and
thus give little or no shade, are tough and leathery. Some species afford
excellent timber—notahly the karri and jarrah of West Australia, which
are now largely used in London for wood-pavements. The planting of
blue gums in marshy districts is an excellent preventive of malarial fever.
One species, the peppermint tree, which grows in the mountain valleys of
Victoria-, is the tallest tree in the world, and sometimes reaches a height of
500 feet.
(ii) In the tangled valleys of the coast-range grow many beautiful and
odd forms of vegetation. Such are : the cabbage-palm ; the giant fig-tree :
a poisonous nettle, fifty feet high; and the wonderful flame-tree, that
makes the Hlawarra Mountains of New South Wales conspicuous for miles
out to sea, owing to their brilliant crimson patches. In the scrub-land
flourishes the grass-tree. From the rugged stem springs a bushy tuft of
drooping wiry foliage; out of the centre of this rises a long rod, not unlike
a bulrush, covered with white stars.
(iii) Some of the native grasses and plants are very useful in grazing. The
kangaroo-grass, for instance, affords excellent pasture; and on the salt-
bush, which seems to want hardly any rain and grows on saline soils, sheep
both feed eagerly and yield the finest and densest wool.
ii. Animal Life. —Australia is peculiar in its flora. But
it is even more so in its fauna. Both of these facts go to
show that for many ages it was isolated from all the rest of
the world, and formed a zoological province by itself. The


group most characteristic of the island is the marsupials, or
those creatures that shelter their young in a pouch. To this
group every Australian quadruped, except some mice and
rats, and the dingo or native dog, belongs. Secondly,
Australia exhibits a very low—an almost reptilian—order
of birds—the ‘mound-builders,’ that deposit their eggs in
earth-mounds, and leave them to be hatched by the heat of
the sun, or by fermentation. But the two most remarkable
creatures in the continent are the duckbill or platypus, and
the echidna or ant-eater, which are connecting-links between
the bird, the reptile, and the quadruped. Both lay eggs,
suckle their young, and have birdlike bills. Insect life is
rich and varied. Most of the snakes of Australia are
poisonous.
(i) The largest marsupial is the kangaroo, which affords both sport and
moat to the colonists, and also docs much damage by eating the grass off the
sheep-runs. Some others are: the wombat, which lives in holes; the koala
or ‘ native bear,’ which creeps slowly about at night on trees in search of
fruit and seeds; a smaller kangaroo, called the wallaby ; and the dasyures,
or ‘ native cats,’ All the marsupials, with the exception of the kangaroos,
are nocturnal in their habits. The dingo, or wild-dog, is a wolf-like
creature, of a ruddy brown colour. He is the terror of the sheep-paddocks
in the less settled districts. ,
(ii) Bird-life is extraordinarily plentiful. The birds are not songless, as is
commonly stated: many sing both by day and by night. The parrot tribe
(including the black and white cockatoos) is more prevalent in Australia
than anywhere else. Other characteristic birds are: the cassowary; the
emu, or the Australian ostrich; the laughing jackass, which is a species of
kingfisher; the black swan; the lyre-bird; and the bower-bird, which
builds itself a bower of twigs, and decorates it with feathers, bones, and shells.
(iii) On the coast the crocodile is found in all tropical rivers, and with it
a vegetable-feeding water-mammal, called the dugong, which is valuable
for the oil and fat it yields. Oysters, both edible and mother-o’-pearl, are
abundant; while Chinese and Malay divers fish for trepang, or seaslug (a
Chinese delicacy), on the Great Barrier Reef. The seas contain several
varieties of turtle, and many edible fishes, which arc preyed upon by the
shark. The.most important fresh-water fish is a kind of perch, known as
the Murray cod, large consignments of which are shipped weekly to Mel-
bourne, Adelaide, and Sydney.


12. Native Inhabitants. —Australia possesses no indigenous
domestic animal that yields milk, nor any native fruits or
food-plants, that could support even a moderate population.
These two facts have made the Australian savage what he is
—a hunter that moves about from place to place in search
of game—a man that does not know the meaning of a settled
life. The Australian race is a diminishing one—it has been
dwindling ever since the appearance of the white man’s face :
it may now number about 200,000 individuals. Of these
Queensland contains the largest number.
The native Australian is of average height, and sparely made. He has a
broad and fleshy nose, a coffee-brown complexion, much curly hair, and
bright, dark eyes. His head is long and narrow, and the forehead low. His
open-air perceptive faculties or ‘instincts’ are matchless; and natives are
often employed by the police as ‘ trackers ’ for discovering stolen cattle, or
criminals who have taken to the bush. Some few also attach themselves
to cattle-stations as stock-riders. The native displays great skill with the
boomerang, and is a clever hunter and fisherman. He will eat, when game
is scarce, nearly anything—snakes, lizards, grubs, and pine-cones—nothing
comes amiss to him. His clothing is scanty, and his house often little more
than a few strips of bark. In useful arts and in beliefs he is the most
degraded- of all savages: he has no weaving, no pottery, and no religion.
His language enables him to count up to five—and no further. A curious
superstition prevails amongst some tribes,—that white men are the ghosts,
or reincarnations, of dead people of their own race. This belief has more
than once saved the lives of Australian explorers. Sir George Grey,
formerly Governor and Premier of New Zealand, was once told by a v
hideously ugly and old native woman that he was the ghost of her son,
who had been killed by a spear-wound in the breast.
13. Immigrants. —The aboriginal inhabitants were totally
incapable of developing their country. Australia, therefore,
had to wait for the arrival of the white man to introduce
domestic animals, to make the soil yield her proper increase,
and to exploit the hitherto untouched stores of mineral
wealth. The first settlement was made in 1788—little more
than a hundred years ago—on the present site of Sydney.
These settlers were convicts; then followed free immigrants,


till the various colonies were gradually built up. Most of
the immigrants come from the British Isles; but Germany
has also sent a good many. Latterly numbers of Chinese
have flocked into the country (though their coming has been
discouraged), to become gardeners, laundrymen, cooks, and
general servants. Queensland has imported many Polynesians
or Kanakas, nicknamed ‘blackbirds,’ to work in the sugar
plantations; and the camel, introduced as a beast of burden,
has brought along with- it its Pathan ( Patdhn ) drivers from
Afghanistan.
With the first convict settlers, in 1788, were brought seven horses, five
cattle, and twenty-nine sheep. To-day Australia possesses million horses,
10 million cattle, and 120 million sheep.
14. Products, (i) Animal.— By far the most useful animal
introduced by the settlers is the sheep ; and avool holds the
first and most valuable place among all Australian pro-
ducts. New South Wales alone has as many sheep as the
rest of Australia put together. The Riverina district, between
the Murray and the Darling, is the best sheep-grazing ground
in the continent. Horses and cattle are reared in all the
colonies. Queensland possesses more than half of the cattle
in the continent.
(i) The most important breed of sheep in Australia is the merino.
Originally a Spanish breed, it spread all over Europe, and was introduced
into South Africa, from whence it was first imported into Australia in 1797.
The merino has always been noted for its firm, silky, and brilliant wool;
but in Australia it produces a longer-stapled and heavier fleece than it has
ever done before or elsewhere. Sheep are reared in enormous flocks—often
as many as 50,000—0 n ‘sheep runs’; and the largest of these runs or stations
are in the hands of ‘ squatters.’ This was originally a contemptuous term
applied to wandering sheep-masters who squatted with their flocks on anj
unoccupied land they could find. Now, however, the squatter class is one
of the wealthiest and most influential in Australia; and the squatters either
sit on their own freeholds, or lease their stations from the Government.
(ii) Both horses and oxen are used as draught-animals in the more fertile
and settled districts. But in the interior, where water is scarce, the camel


has been introduced with great success. While in Asia it is only used as a
pack-animal, it has been trained in Australia to draw wagons; and ‘ eight
of them will draw four tons and travel fifteen miles a day.' Even the camel,
however, has his limitations: for, except he be properly seasoned, he can go
no more than three days without water. ‘As to food he does better; for
Providence has given him a hump, a protuberance of fat, on which he lives
during fast days.'
(iii) A large overland trade is carried on between all the colonies in cattle
and sheep. In the early days the ‘overlanders’ were exposed to great
dangers, from want of water, attacks of the natives, and exposure to the
weather; hut they pluckily overcame them all. Two of the most dashing
overlanders were the great Australian explorers, Captain Sturt, and Eyre
(who was afterwards Governor of New Zealand and Jamaica).
(iv) Two other imported creatures have proved to the Australians an un-
mixed curse. These are the rabbit and the sparrow. These plagues were
introduced by settlers who were anxious to have their surroundings look as
English-like as possible. The same motive induced some patriotic Scots-
men to import the thistle, with the result that different governments have
had to spend large sums in attempts to exterminate it. Rabbits have
increased so enormously that they have nearly swept the sheep off some of
the runs by eating up all the grass; and millions of pounds have been spent
in the endeavour to destroy them, or in fencing them out from the sheep-
walks. In some districts the rabbits, having eaten all the grass, are learn-
ing to climb trees.
, 15. Products, (ii) Vegetable.— Agriculture is not of the
same "value to Australia as the pastoral industry; but the
growing population, and the development of irrigation, will
in no long time give it greater importance. At present,
however, only an infinitesimal part of the surface of Australia
is under cultivation. The principal agricultural jiroducts
are : wheat in South Australia and Victoria; oats and barley
in Victoria; maize in New South Wales and Queensland;
and sugar in Queensland.
(i) ‘ Drought is the worst enemy in Australia, but rain falls sufficient for
all necessities, and only asks to be taken care of ’ (Froude). With a
properly regulated system of water-storage for purposes of irrigation, agri-
culture is bound to advance; and agriculture is one of the foremost
necessities for the true prosperity of any country. The soil of many parts of
Australia is marvellously fertile, and, like the virgin prairie soil of North
America, it can be cropped year after year without the use of manure, and
without showing any signs of exhaustion.


(ii) In addition to the cereals, Australia can grow all sorts of fruits. The
vine is also largely cultivated, especially in Victoria and South Australia,
for wine-making, for which both soil (much of it volcanic) and climate are
eminently adapted. But at present only one-seventh of the yearly produce
is exported.
(iii) Australia is hardly yet recognised as a timber-growing country. But
the continent contains many valuable varieties. Already the karri and
jarrah of Western Australia are in use for wood pavement both in London
and Chicago. Many of the eucalypti of New South Wales (blue and red
gum, iron bark, and messmate) yield admirable tough and hard timber.
Queensland now imports little timber; but makes use of her own Moreton
Bay pine and red cedar.
1 6. Products, (iii) Mineral. —Australia is very rich in
mineral wealth. The most important mineral products are :
gold, silver, copper, tin, coal, and iron. Gold is by far the
most important of these; and, since its discovery in 1851,
Australia has exported gold to the value of over £350,000,000.
But, though gold may help to start a country, it will not
fully develop it. A gold discovery is permanently valuable
only in so far as it attracts people who will settle down to
the more steady, and, in the long run, more profitable pur-
suits of farming and manufacture. Australia is the third
gold-producing country in the world. South Africa is the
first; the United States next.
(i) Gold is found in all the colonies, though to the smallest extent in
South Australia. Victoria produces most; Queensland next. Gold is now
chiefly produced from quartz reefs, and there is now no more excitement
about gold-mining than there is about coal-mining. The stone is simply
quarried out, then crushed, and thus made to yield its gold-dust. The old
‘ rushes’ were made to the alluvial fields, where the metal was found loose
in the soil, or in the sand of dried-up river-beds. The gold was then pro-
cured by ‘ panning out’—that is, by washing away the mud and gravel in a
pan, in which the gold was by its own weight left behind.
(ii) The silver-yield of Australia was inconsiderable till the discovery of
the famous Broken Hill Mines in New South Wales. This put Australia
third after the United States and Mexico in the list of silver countries.
(iii) Copper is produced in South Australia and New South Wales; tin in
New South Wales and Queensland.
(iv) Iron is found in almost all the colonies ; but the expenses of product


tion and carriage are so great that it does not pay to work it. Further, it
is not found near beds of coal. The coal-seams of New South Wales, near
Newcastle, are at present the most valuable. Queensland has also large
coal-fields, mostly undeveloped. The Ipswich field, near Brisbane, is the
most important.
(v) Other important minerals are: manganese, antimony, cinnabar, and
precious stones (such as the garnet, ruby, and sapphire).
17. Commerce and External Communications. —The com-
merce of Australia is, in proportion to its population, the
largest in the world. The value of the imports and exports,
per head of population, is nearly double that of England.
Her commerce principally consists in the exchange of her
wool and gold for manufactures of every sort and luxuries
like tobacco, wine, and tea, for the Australians are the
greatest tea-drinkers in the world.
(i) Every important port in the colonies is in direct and regular steam-
communication with Europe; and some also with North America, China,
and Japan. Most of the European lines use the Suez Canal route, such'
as the Peninsular and Oriental (P. and O.), the Orient, and the French
Messageries Maritimes, Companies. Canada has a magnificent line of
steamers running between Australia and Vancouver. These two colonies
will also, in no very long time, be connected by a submarine cable. The
first ship that readied Australia from England took three months and
fifteen days, and was considered to have made a wonderfully quick passage.
The great ‘ liners ’ now take six weeks, or even less. 1
(ii) By Submarine Cable, Sydney, on the east, is connected with New
Zealand; and Port Darwin, on the north, is joined to Java. The latter
cable is a continuation of the overland telegraph line, which crosses 4hc
continent from Adelaide.
(iii) Nearly half of the whole Australian trade, which has an average
yearly value of £126,000,000, is done with the United Kingdom. Most of the
remainder is carried on between one colony and another.
It is important to notice that, in computing the value of the trade of Australia,
many articles are counted several times over. Thus much of the New South
Wales wool, which is shipped to Melbourne, is counted three times over. It
appears as an export from New South Wales, and as an import to, and as an
export from, Victoria.
1 8. Communications. Internal. —Australia, like many new
countries, began to make railways before she had been able
1 See, for further details of Steamship Lines, pp. 67-71.


to construct proper roads. All the colonial capitals are con-
nected by rail or by telegraph. Indeed Australia, viewed
from ‘ the population per mile of line ’ point, can justly boast
of being better supplied with railways than any country in
the world. Local traffic is served by the roads—(through
the mountains well-made and well-kept, but through the
bush, often mere tracks); and by navigation on the Murray-
Darling (vide p. 11).
There are two railway-systems in Australia of first im-
portance —the Intercolonial Line that connects the towns of
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane; and the pro-
jected and partially constructed Transcontinental Line from
Adelaide, that is to follow the track of the great overland
telegraph to Palmerston on Port Darwin.
(i) The Intercolonial Line leaves Adelaide, joins the Victorian system at
Serviceton, and crosses the Grampians. Passing the gold-mining town of
Ballarat, it enters Melbourne. From thence it travels north-east to
Albury on the Murray; gathers up the leather of Goulburn and the tweeds
of Parramatta ; and drops down upon Sydney. From Sydney the line leads
north to the coal-shipping town of Newcastle; crosses the Liverpool Range;
and, running parallel to the New England Range, reaches the tin-mining
town of Stanthorpe; and thence, vid Toowoomba Junction and Ipswich,
arrives in Brisbane. From Brisbane it continues north to Maryborough
and Bundaberg.
(ii) The Transcontinental Line begins at Gambierton in the extreme
south-east corner of South Australia, and continues north to Adelaide. It
runs on to Kapunda, branching to Morgan to tap the navigation of the
Murray. It then branches off higher up to collect the silver of Broken
Hill in New South Wales. Thence it goes to Port Augusta at the head of
Spencer Gulf, and on, through Beltana, to Oodnadatta, a little to the north-
west of Lake Eyre. A beginning has been made, too, at the other end
from Palmerston to Pino Creek. The total length of the South Australian
railways is 2000 miles.
(iii) Other important lines are;
(a) The Queensland Lines, all of which run west. They run from
Brisbane to the artesian wells of Charleville on the Warrego;
from Rockhampton to Longreach; and from Townsville, through
Charters Towers gold-fields, to Hughenden. The total length
of these railways is 2400 miles.


IZ0 At
ifur a. Sea 1
orres •« Str. . . 1£?
p
-Me/ /. .
fiC.York /
AUSTRALIA r
Darwin J n
) \ bul
rU f Si 0 /
I / =1 \ o /
English Miles X j/T\(
o 2?o *00 j
t, /c CCarpen
p \
)»
);* T - \
y/-/a J X /
K ¥\?P c r^ c
\ r 1 £
ortJierH Territory
Vo- \ /
20
,/ :
\ N.W.Cope. (\ 1 r..rir.rn : -
\ (V 'd^bi 0 1 Trojje of _C- a -t--- ' i-■
f—-
20
- "V" ‘\G94<vneA- '
i i,
L.=^.
\- s]
Oodnadattajo A r
\ <r^
LWrK^
SOUTH frisVfU LI A
y / jy
\ W I
\ Steep -$y
\ T RAlilLA
jf
; ft""** 8.
|
o c\z A Q %^—— — P
vA [>>Cool£aj(tic
\ -r. <w&f5s2?/> 1 *s r
\ \ 1 />' 6 r
\ M&\ 1 --,. A us trah
\ \ <]
\ 1 r
f-Tor
Tu—- —- — q£; Xf-/
30
w >r
«of <_ fflQ j JO?<Y ''"'"'V
q/j Bight \ r*-'7pf-£a^ a j /
VoOAJ xC n eircas fle /
t0 %, /
30
n L 1
110 IZO
30 140
*f#S m . S tx. J „. .so'
PRINCIPAL RAILWAYS SHOWN THUS :
# ..


Name.
Area (in
thousands
of square
miles).
Ratio to the
United Kingdom.
Population
(in thousands).
Capital.
1860.
1896
(estimated).
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia .
Queensland.
West Australia .
310
88
903
668
975
2*
2
3
7 h
4
348
537
124
28
15
1268
1179
347
445
82
Sydney
Melbourne
Adelaide
Brisbane
Perth
(b) In the New South Wales System, branches from the trunk line
run to the sheep-farming centres of Hay on the Murrumbidgee,
and Bourke on the Darling. The total length of these railways
is 2500 miles.
(c) The Victorian Lines radiate from Melbourne, and afford com-
plete communication between all the large towns of the Colony,
and with Deniliquin in the Riverina district of New South
Wales. The total length of these lines (and Victoria is the
smallest colony of all) is 3000 miles.
(d) The West Australian Lines run from Perth north to Geraldton;
south to the port of Albany; and east to Coolgardie gold-fields.
From Geraldton a'lino runs east to the Murchison gold-fields.
The total length of line is 1500 miles.
(a) It has been thought better to give a connected account of Australian railways ;
as all of them, except the West Australian and Queensland lines, really form
one system. Unfortunately, however, the different colonies have chosen to
adopt different gauges for their lines. Thus the expense of carriage from one
colony to another is greatly increased ; for, at the border towns, goods have
to he shifted into different sets of trucks.
(b) The longest railway journey that can at present be made in Australia is from
Charleville in Queensland to Oodnadatta in South Australia—a distance
of 3000 miles. On this route the passenger would pass through Brisbane,
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
19. Population and Divisions. —The population numbers
over 3,250,000. Victoria is the most densely peopled; West
Australia the least. The white population is almost entirel}’
of British descent.


(i) The population tends to draw into the cities. Melbourne, Sydney,
and Adelaide each contain more than a third of the population of the
colonies in which they lie.
(ii) ‘The great hulk of the population of Australia is settled on the
seaward slope of the Dividing Range. Broadly speaking, it may be said
that the industrial and agricultural interests of the country lie on the
seaward side of the range; and the pastoral interests on the landward
side ; while the gold-miner burrows in the gullies on both sides, or sends
down shafts half a mile in depth from the plateaux above on to the quartz
reefs beneath.’
20. Government, etc. —Each of the Australian Colonies
enjoys responsible self-government. They are thus practi-
cally independent, though each is under a Governor, who is
appointed by the British Government, is sent from home,
and represents the authority of the Crown.
(i) Elementary education is good in all the colonies; while in two of
them, Victoria and Queensland, it is practically free. There are uni-
versities, which have the power of granting degrees, in Melbourne, in
Sydney, and in Adelaide.
(ii) Each of the colonies has a small military force of its own. That of
New South Wales, in particular, is in a high state of efficiency; and a
contingent from it gave assistance to the British forces in the Soudan
expedition of 1885. For naval defence the Australian colonies agree to
maintain a fleet of war-vessels, which are built by the British Government.
Sydney is the headquarters of the Australian fleet, and is a first-class
naval station—one of the largest and safest in the world.
(iii) Federation. —Sooner or later there is little doubt but that the Austra-
lasian Colonies will knit into a union resembling that of the Dominion of
Canada. The first step was made by the passing, in 1883, of an Act in the
Imperial Parliament, which authorised all the Australasian Colonies,
including Fiji, to form a Federal Council. The principal power of this
Council was to regulate the relations of Australasia with the islands of the
Pacific, and to control the fisheries. So far, the only colonics which have
taken advantage of this enabling Act are Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania,
Western Australia, and Fiji. Since 1885 several conferences have been
held between the Premiers of the different colonies, with a view of pressing
on the final question of federation.
‘The nationality of the Australian Colonies is at present English; and if the>
leave us it will be by the action of Great Britain herself, not by any action
of their own. To the question, What political measures should be taken to
preserve the union? they would answer generally, No measures at all, save
in a better organisation of the navy. Let well alone. The ties which hold


us together are daily strengthening of themselves. The trade of England
with the colonies grows far more rapidly than with any other part of the
world. Intercourse is increasing. Melbourne and Sydney are as easy of
access now as New York was fifty years ago. Steam and telegraph have
made an end of distance.’— Feoude.
21. History.— Australia is happy in having no history, or
a history, merely, of peaceful settlement and diligent civilisa-
tion. No battle has ever been fought on her soil; nor are
there any buildings more than a hundred years old. The
mainland was discovered'probably by the Dutch about 1606;
and in 1642 another Dutchman, Tasman, discovered New
Zealand and Tasmania. The voyages of the celebrated
Captain Cook, between 1769 and 1774, led to the first
English settlement in New South Wales in 1788. The
only other notable date is the discovery of gold in Victoria
in 1851.
(i) The dates at which the other colonies were formally constituted are :
Tasmania, 1825: Western Australia, 1829; South Australia, 1835; Victoria,
1851; and Queensland, 1859.
(ii) Of the first Convict Settlement in 1788, Anthony Trollope says:
* Nearly all the food consumed for the first years had to he brought either
from England, or from some other distant land, such as Batavia or Bengal.
The land round Sydney, on which attempts were made to create farms, was
found to he poor and barren. The few cattle which the settlers, or rather
which the Governor possessed, strayed away or w T ere killed by the blacks.
For five years Governor Phillip fought his battle against convicts, black
men, recusant settlers, famine, floods, and drought, and he fought it like a
hero. If this vessel or that did not come at the expected time, there would
not be even half-day’s rations per day, either for convicts, freemen, or
for the Governor.’
Note.—For further details as to History, see the Chronicle Of Discovery.
MAP-PRACTICE FOR AUSTRALIA
X- Bays and Gulfs.—On the north: Gulf of Carpentaria, Van Diemen’s
Gulf, Cambridge Gulf, and King Sound ; on the south : the Great Australian
Bight, Spencer Gulf, Gulf of St. Vincent, Encounter Bay, Port Phillip ; on
the east: Botany Bay, Port Jackson, Moreton Bay, Hervey Bay, and
Princess Charlotte Bay ; on the west: Shark’s Bay and Geographe Bay.
2. Straits.— Torres Strait, between Australia and New Guinea; Bass
Strait, between Australia and Tasmania.


3. Capes.— Cape York, the most northerly; Cape Byron, the most easterly;
Cape Howe, in the south-east; Wilson Promontory, the most southerly;
Cape Naturaliste, and Cape Leeuwin, in the south-west; Steep Point, the
most westerly; and North-West Cape.
L Islands.—The chief are: Groote Eylandt (great island), in the Gulf of
Carpentaria; Melville Island and Bathurst Island, off Van Diemen’s
Gulf; and Thursday Island in Torres Strait—all in the north; Great Sandy
Island in the east; Kangaroo Island, King’s Island, Furneaux Islands, and
Tasmania —all in the south; Dirk Hartog Island, in the west.
5. Mountains.—The Dividing Range skirts the south-east and east coasts,
including—(l) the Grampians; (2) the Australian Alps; (3) the Blue
Mountains ; (4) the Liverpool Range • (5) the New England Range ; and
(6) the Craig Range. The highest mountain is Mount Townsend (7350 feet
= half Mont Blanc) in the Australian Alps. Other ranges are: the Darling
Range in West Australia; the Flinders and Stuart Ranges in South
Australia; and the Macdonnell Range in the heart of the continent.
6. Rivers.—(a) Murray, with Darling and Warrego, and with Murrumbid-
gee and Lachlan, to Lake Alexandrina. (b) Burdekin, Fitzroy, and Brisbane,
flowing to the east, (c) Flinders and Victoria, flowing north, (d) Ash-
burton, Gascoyne, Murchison, and Swan, flowing w r est. (e) Finke,
Diamantina, and Cooper’s Creek, to Lake Eyre.
7. Lakes.— Eyre, Frome, Torrens, and Gairdner, in ‘Lake District’ of
South Australia; Amadeus (centre); Alexandrina; Austin, in West
Australia; George, south-west of Sydney. All are salt except Lake George.
NEW SOUTH WALES
(Area, 310,000 square miles— Population, 1,268,000.)
i. Position and Coast line. —New South Wales, the
‘mother colony ’ of Australia, once comprised about half the
continent. It now has an average length and breadth of 500
miles each way. Queensland and Victoria have hived off
from New South AVales.
(i) The coast-line is little indented. Its bold, rocky headlands, separated
by sandy bays, reminded its discoverer, Captain Cook, of Wales; and it was
named by him accordingly. Lord Howe and Norfolk Islands, lying far out
to sea on the east, arc dependencies of New South Wales.
(ii) The boundaries of the colony are: Queensland on the north; the
Pacific on the east; Victoria on the south; and South Australia on the west.


2. Surface and Climate.— The colony falls into three well-
marked divisions : (a) the coast-strip, where the climate is
hot and moist; (b) a mountainous table-land, with a
temperate, but wet, climate ; (c) the western interior plains,
which are dry and hot.
A sea-breeze in summer tempers the climate; but the cool breeze is sometimes
interrupted by a parching hot wind from the north-west, which blasts the
vegetation like a furnace-flame.
(i) The coast-strip stretches from Sydney to the northern boundary of
the colony. It is a rich, undulating country, crossed here and there by
mountain-ranges. The valleys arc thick-set with ‘ brushes.’ The rivers of
this region are all short. But three of them, the Clarence, Hunter, and
Hawkesbury, are navigable in their lower courses, and have their banks
covered with a most fertile alluvial soil.
(ii) The table-land rises abruptly from the coast-.strip, but sinks down
gradually into the western plains. Out of it the chief mountains of the
colony rise. These arc parts of the Dividing Range, including part of the
Australian Alps (with Mount Townsend, 7350 feet); the Gourock Range,
with its north-west offshoot the Mancro Range; the Blue Mountains (so
called from the blue haze which seems to hang about them); and the Liver
pool Range, which is at right angles to the New England Range. The
mountains are grassed to their summits; and much of the table-land is
very suitable for wheat-growing. This chain forms the chief watershed,
and from it the rivers sweep down to water the interior plains.
(iii) The western plains have a gradual slope towards the south-west,
so gentle that some of the rivers have a fall of only six inches in the mile.
The result is that the rivers, every now and then, flood the surrounding
country. Nearly the whole of this region is drained by the Darling and
its tributaries, the Warrego, Culgoa, and Barwan. The south-east is
watered by the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee. Most of the soil is black and
fertile, with grass sometimes twelve feet high, and trees dotted about in
clusters. Here and there occur sandy ridges, covered with scrub or salt-
bush. The plains arc the pastoral region, and are known as the Riverina.
Great attention is paid to the building of dams, so as to counteract the
effects of the frequent droughts. Behind the plains, to the west, lie the
Barrier and Grey Ranges.
The drought of 1895 in the plains killed 303,000 cattle, 26,000 horses, and
10,000,000 sheep. It was not an unmixed evil, however; for the rabbits
died in millions.
3. Products and Industries.— The chief industries of New
South Wales are: stock-farming, mining, and agriculture.


There are some small manufactures —such as hoot-factories,
flour-, saw-, and sugar-mills.
(i) The chief pastoral products are: wool, hides, skins, and tallow. New
South Wales alone possesses about half the sheep in Australia (58 millions).
Deniliquin, Hay, and Bourke, in the Riverina plains district, are the chief
pastoral centres. Both on the table-lands and on the plains, dairying is
actively carried on; and milk, butter, and cheese are supplied to Sydney.
(ii) Gold, silver, copper, tin, coal, and oilshale are the principal mineral
products. Gold and oilshale arc mined in the Blue Mountains, copper at
Cohar (railway to Sydney) and Nymagce in the Riverina, tin in the north-
east corner, and silver round Silverton (Broken Hill) in the Barrier Range.
Nearly the whole of the coast-strip is a coalfield ; but the principal mines
are in the valley of the Hunter. Newcastle is the coal-shipping port. New
South Wales is at present the principal coal-producing colony.
(iii) Agriculture is mainly confined to the coast-strip and the table-land.
Wheat, oats, and temperate fruits are the principal products of the table-
land. Bathurst is the wheat-growing centre. The coast-strip raises maize,
sugar-cane, lucerne (for hay), oranges, grapes, and peaches.
4. Commerce. —The commerce of New South Wales is the
largest in Australasia. It amounts annually to about
£44,000,000. This sum is divided equally between exports
and imports. The chief exports are : wool, silver, coal, tin,
tallow, and skins. The chief imports are : apparel, drapery,
iron and steel, timber, tea, and sugar.
(i) The ports are: Sydney, the first wool-port in Australia; Newcastle
and Wollongong (coal); Grafton, on the Clarence (maize, wine, and sugar);
Ballina (timber).
(ii) Wool is the staple export, averaging annually £10,000,000.
(iii) New South Wales is practically a free-trade colony, while the rest of
Australia imposes duties on its imports. This difference is one of the main
obstacles to Australian federation.
(a) ‘ Port Jackson, the harbour proper, is the largest and grandest in the world.
A passage about a mile wide has been cut by the ocean between the wall of
sandstone cliffs which stretch along the south-east Australian shores. The
two headlands stand out as gigantic piers, and the tide from without, and the
fresh-water flood from within, have formed an inlet shaped like a starfish, with
a great central basin, and long arms and estuaries, which pierce the land in
all directions, and wind like veins between lofty sandstone banks.’ —Froude.
(b) ‘lt is so inexpressibly lovely, that it makes a man ask himself whether it
would not be worth his while to move his household gods to the eastern


coast of Australia, in order that he might look at it as long as he can look at
anything. ’ —Trollope.
(iv) Railways.— The gradients on the New South Wales lines are excep-
tionally steep; as rough and precipitous ranges have to be crossed, before
the interior plains are reached. The northern line at Ben Lomond reaches
a height of 1171 feet above sea-level. The most famous piece of engineering
is the ‘Zigzag,’ which descends from the Blue Mountains into the Lithgow
valley. The railways of this colony are now united, and Sydney is the
centre of the railway system.
5. Towns.—Sydney (425), the capital of the colony, is the
largest town in New South Wales, and contains a third of
the whole population. All the other towns are under 20,000.
(i) Towns on the coast-strip : Sydney, which lies on the shores of that
magnificent harbour, Port Jackson, was once a miserable convict settlement.
The beauty of its situation, its noble buildings, its industry and commerce,
have earned for it the title of ‘ Queen of the South.’ It is not a modern
town, mechanically built and laid out on a severe rectangular plan, but has
grown up irregularly in the pleasant old English fashion. In the harbour
the largest vessels can lie with safety; and Sydney is the Australian
terminus of every great European steamship line, except the British India,
which runs, through Torres Strait, to Brisbane. Further up Port Jackson,
on the Parramatta River, lies the town of that name, famous for its oranges
and for ‘Parramatta tweeds.’ Other lowland towns are Newcastle, and
Maitland, an agricultural centre, both on the Hunter; Richmond and
Windsor, on the rich alluvial soil brought down by the Hawkesbury;
Grafton, Ballina, and Wollongong.
(ii) Towns on the Table-land: Bathurst, which is a wheat and gold
centre. Goulburn, which lies south-west of Sydney, and makes leather and
boots. Lithgow, which lies in a rocky glen of the Blue Mountains, where
the ‘ Zigzag ’ railway ascends that range. It mines coal and smelts copper
and iron.
(iii) Towns on the Plains: Bourke, Wilcannia, Hay, and Deniliquin, all
of which are sheep-farming centres. At Bourke it is not uncommon for the
thermometer to register 117° in the shade. Silverton, Cobar, and Nymagoe
are mining towns. Albury, on the Murray, stands at the point where
the railway crosses into Victoria. Wentworth (named after a pioneer
squatter), at the junction of the Darling and Murray, has a great future
before it—both as a river-port, and because it is destined to be the junc-
tion of railways from Sydney by Hay, from Adelaide by Morgan, and from
Melbourne by way of Sandhurst.
6. Old Sydney. —‘ I think it may be interesting to glance,
in passing, at the town of Sydney, as it appeared in


1829. It contained 15,000 inhabitants. The streets were
wide, well laid out, and clean. According to a traveller’s
account, “ the houses were for the most part built in English
style, and the shops well stocked. The cages with parrots
and cockatoos, that hung from every shop-door, formed the
first feature that reminded me that I was no longer in
England. . . . Ground was not so valuable as it afterwards
became, and commodious verandahed cottages, around which
English roses clustered, with large gardens, were scattered
through the town. Nothing met the stranger’s eye to con-
vey the notion that he was in the capital of a penal colony.
The first impression of Sydney on a summer evening’s visit
was pleasant, and full of agreeable promise.” Then follows
another picture of convicts in chains, yoked to heavy wagons
laden with gravel and stone, with a vivid description of the
enclosed yard, where ten to twenty men were flogged daily,
and filled the air with their groans, screams, and impreca-
tions. Such was Sydney in 1829.’—A. F. Calvert.
VICTORIA
(Area, 88,000 square miles— Population, 1,179,000 —
increasing.)
i. Position and Coast-line. —Victoria lies in the extreme
south-east of the continent. It is the smallest, but the most
fertile, of the five colonies; and its gigantic neighbours allude
to it contemptuously as the ‘cabbage-garden.’
(i) Victoria is bounded by the Murray on the north, Bass Strait on the
south, and South Australia on the west.
(ii) The coast-line, 600 miles in length, is irregular. The two chief inlets
are Port Phillip and Corner Inlet. The coast ends, to the east, in a long
stretch of sand, known as Ninety Mile Beach, which is fringed with lagoons.


2. Surface, etc. —The build of Victoria strongly resembles
that of New South Wales. It consists of (a) a coast-plain;
(b) a mountainous table-land ; and (c) an inland river-plain.
The climate, as in Netv South Wales, varies with the physical
features and elevation of the land; but Victoria, owing to its
southerly position, is on the whole more temperate than New
South Wales. Victoria, however, has also its hot north wind.
(i) The coast-plain contains two groups of highlands on cither side of
Port Phillip, hut is otherwise"a rolling or even a flat country. It contains
many rich, alluvial river-valleys, and, being well grassed, is better suited
(especially in the district called Gippsland) for horses and cattle than for
sheep. In it lies the largest Victorian lake, Corangamite. The Yarra is
the only navigable river, and that only in its lower course. Gippsland, in
the south-east, stretches between Wilson’s Promontory and Cape Howe.
The level parts of it are given over to stock and to cultivation, and the whole
region is rich in minerals. Much of it is still covered with dense hush,
which defied the efforts of the earlier explorers to penetrate. This district
never runs short of water, but is always green, fresh, and lively.
(ii) The table-land region rises abruptly from the coast-plain. In it begins
the Great Dividing Range with the Grampians, Pyrenees, and Australian
Alps (Mount Bogong, 6500 feet). From cither side the rivers run south,
through ‘ brushes ’ and fern-clad gullies, to the Indian Ocean, and north to
the Murray.
(iii) The plains, which comprise half of the Murray basin, slope gently
away from the table-land. Much of the land is suitable for sheep-grazing,
and much, with irrigation, for agriculture. But hundreds of square miles,
in the Wimmera district of the north-west, are overrun with malice scrub.
Even this scrub-land, however, has been found suitable for wheat-growing;
the scrub is crushed with a roller, then burnt, and excellent crops arc the
result. The Murray bounds the plains on the north; and its chief tributaries
arc the Mitta Mitta, Ovens, and Goulburn. It is proposed to make
reservoir and storage dams on the upper courses of these rivers, by means
of which very large areas could be brought under cultivation. The river-
steamers on the Murray tow up barges with freights of stores, and take
down large cargoes of wool.
3. Industries and Products.— Tho chief industries arc
similar to those of New South Wales. But Victoria takes
the lead of Australia in wine-making, gold-mining, and
dairy-farming. Of sheep there are over 12,000,000, and of


cattle over 2,000,000. Gold is the chief mineral, and
Victoria produces more than any other Australian colony.
Wheat is the most important crop; then come oats and hay.
The manufactures, which are the most important in
Australia, include distilling, wool-washing, and tanning.
0) The fruit-raising colony of Mildura on the Murray is a wonderful
example of what irrigation will do. The ground is now covered with
orchards and vineyards, where a few years ago rabbits died by thousands
on the burnt-up soil.
(ii) Victoria is paying great attention to the cultivation of tobacco, flax,
and the sugar-beet.
(iii) Dairy-farming is managed on the ‘creamery’ system: that is—the
farmers send their milk to a central depot, or creamery, where it is made up
into butter and cheese.
(iv) Victoria is now the first wheat-growing colony in Australia, having
outstripped South Australia, which once held the first place for wheat.
4. Commerce.— -The commerce of Victoria is extensive,
and ranks next to that of New South Wales It has a
yearly average of £31,500,000. The chief exports (about
14 millions) are : gold, wheat, live-stock, and wool (above all).
The chief imports (about 17| millions) are : coal, textiles,
sugar and tea, timber, iron, and steel. The largest customer
is Great Britain ; then comes India.
(i) The chief ports are Port Melbourne, Williamstown, on the opposite
side of the Bay, and Geelong. The communications consist of railw'ays and
the navigation on the Murray, on which Echuca is a rising port.
(ii) The Government of Victoria is anxious that nothing shall leave the
colony except of the very best; and steps are being taken to ensure that
every export shall be inspected by Government officials.
(iii) Railways.— Victoria has the closest network of railways of any colony;
and the lines arc all connected at one central terminus— Melbourne. The
M urray is tapped by railway at seven places; and these lines divert into
Victoria much of the trafiic of the Riverina district. The passenger traffic
of Victoria is far above that of the other colonies, chiefly owing to the
enormous suburban traffic about Melbourne.
5. Towns. —Melbourne (440) is the largest town, and
there are three more With populations of over 20,000.


(i) Towns on the coast-strip.—Melbourne, on the Yarra-Yarra, is the
capital of Victoria, and the largest city in Australia. Within the memory
of living men some adventurous spirits from Tasmania built a few slab
huts among the scrub on the Yarra banks. These huts have now grown
into the most stately city in the southern hemisphere. The town is adorned
by splendid public buildings, built of a lasting stone, known as ‘ blue-stone.’
The harbour of Melbourne is Port Melbourne on Hobson’s Bay. Melbourne
is the chief railway centre of Victoria. Geelong (24), on the western arm of
Port Phillip Bay, is a flourishing'seaport, and makes tweeds. Portland and
Belfast, west of Port Phillip Bay, export the produce of the surrounding
agricultural districts.
(ii) Towns on the Table-land.—Ballarat (45) and Sandhurst (42), or
Bendigo, which stand on either side of the Pyrenees. They are, next to
Johannesburg in South Africa, the most famous gold-mining towns in the
world. Ballarat is a town of magnificent hilly surroundings; but its beauty
is somewhat spoiled by the numbers of deserted quarry-holes, and the
mounds of quartz-powder, which lie about the mouths of the shafts of the
gold-mines. The name signifies ‘ the place of rest.’
Froude thus describes a scene among the mountains of the Dividing Range:—
‘As at Madeira, where the climate changes with the elevation, and an hour’s
ride will take you from sugar-canes into snow, so here (at Mount Macedon)
we found the flora of temperate regions in full vigour, which refused to grow
at all at the lower levels. We had still the gum-trees about us, shooting up
freely, 200 feet or more; some magnificent in full foliage; others naked, bare,
and skeleton-like, having been killed by bush fires; but round the house,
oaks and elms, cypress and deodars, seemed at home and happy; filbert-
trees Were bending with fruit,, too abundant for them to ripen, while the
grounds were blazing with roses and geraniums and gladiolus. The
Australian plain spread out far below our feet, the horizon forty miles
away; the reddish-green of the near eucalyptus softening off into the
transparent blue of distance.’
(iii) Towns on the Plains.— The plains, being chiefly given over to farming,
have no large towns. Echuca, at the junction of the Campaspe and the
Murray, does a considerable trade. Craft, both ascending and descending
the river, land their cargoes here, whence a railway carries them on to
Melbourne.
6. The Founding of Melbourne. —One John Batman, a
Tasmanian settler, informed the Governor of New South
Wales that ho had conceived a scheme for civilising the
natives about Port Phillip. His scheme Was to buy from the
natives (who did not understand the nature of a sale), a tract
of land, 750,000 acres in extent, and settle thereon. Batman


and a number of his friends sailed from Launceston in the
year 1835, to take possession of this magnificent estate. The
vendors of the land thus acquired were the aboriginal chiefs,
bearing the high-sounding names of Cooloolook, Jagajaga,
Bungaree, and some others; and for their grant they were to
receive among them £2OO a year. But the New South
Wales Government would not permit the sale, and Batman
had to be content with 20,000 instead of 750,000 acres.
‘Still worse, one John Fawkner, and a few friends, sailed
over to Port Phillip, and paying no regard whatever to their
compact with the natives, coolly squatted himself down at a
little distance from Batman’s hut, on the so-called Batman’s
Hill, turned out his flocks where Melbourne now stands,
and complacently began to plough up the meadow-land just
on the eastern bank of the Yarra. From that location John
Fawkner never budged, but successively opened an inn and a
newspaper-office, whence he issued a manuscript newspaper;
and continued to watch the growth of that extraordinary
town, from his own single hut, to a population of more than
one hundred thousand souls.’
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Area, 903,000 square miles— Population, 347,000.)
i. Position, etc.— This colony fills up the middle of
Australia; and stretches from the Southern Ocean to the
Arafura Sea. You could set down in it Spain, France,
Austria-Hungary, Germany, Denmark, and Holland; and
there would still be a pretty broad rim left round the edge.
But all this vast area contains fewer people than Leeds, and
those nearly all in a small corner in the south. The name


‘ South Australia ’ is, of course, a misnomer. It is due to the
fact that in 1836 only the southern portion was colonised;
and then it was really South Australia, for Victoria had not
yet been separated from New South Wales.
(i) Coast-line.— What little there is, is considerably indented. Port
Darwin, Van Diemen’s Gulf, and the Gulf of Carpentaria lie on the north;
Spencer Gulf (with Kangaroo Island), the Gulf of St. Vincent, and En-
counter Bay, on the south. The coast of Encounter Bay is edged by the
long and narrow Coorong Lagoon, into which the Murray filters from Lake
Alexandrina.
(ii) Physical Features.— The interior, so far from being wholly a desert,
affords plenty of good grazing-ground. But want of water is here, as else-
where in Australia, the great difficulty. The only interior river of note is
Finke Creek from the Macdonnell Range; but that often dries up before it
can reach Lake Eyre. Artesian wells are being sunk round that lake. In
South Australia lie the ‘Lakes’ of Australia. The Flinders Range, the
Macdonnell Range, and Mount Lofty Range, near Adelaide, are the chief
mountain chains.
(iii) The climate of the south coast resembles that of southern Italy. The
climate of the inland plain region is that of fierce, dry heat.
(iv) It is estimated that, out of the whole area of the colony, one-third is
useless desert, covered with rock, sand, or scrub; one-third mountain and
wood-land that might be used for grazing; and the remainder good agricul-
tural and pastoral land.
2. Industries and Products.— The industries are the same
as those of Victoria. Wheat is the chief agricultural product;
and copper (especially from the mines of Wallaroo and
Moonta) is the most important mineral. In wine-making
South Australia comes next to Victoria: and also produces
an excellent quality of olive-oil.
(i) The cultivated, and therefore the most populous, portion of the colony
is included within an irregular lino, known as Goyder’s Line of Rainfall, so
called after a Surveyor-General of the colony. This comprises: (a) a
narrow mountainous strip to the east of Spencer and St. Vincent Gulfs; and
(b) the southern part of Eyre’s Peninsula to the west of Spencer Gulf. North
of, or beyond, this line there is not enough rain to grow wheat.
(ii) South Australia, like Victoria, has also an irrigation colony on the
Murray— Renmark. The water is pumped from the river; and grapes (for
raisins) are the chief crop.
(iii) There is some ostrich-farming on the east shore of Spencer Gulf. Of


sheep there are only about 8,000,000, as the Government of the colony has
always tried to promote agriculture at the expense of the pastoral interest.
3. Commerce.— The chief exports (£8,500,000), are: wool,
wheat, and copper. South Australia also exports large
quantities of silver-ore from the Broken Hill mines of New
South Wales. The imports (£8,000,000) are similar to those
of Victoria.
(i) The ports of the colony are Ports Adelaide, Augusta, Piric (the chief
wheat port), Wallaroo (copper), and Morgan (a river-port).
(ii) The camel is largely used in keeping up communication with the
districts of the interior.
(iii) Railways.— The South Australian railways, with one small exception,
are a united system. They are mainly confined to the south-east portion of
the colony. From Adelaide to Melbourne is 183 miles, from Melbourne to
Sydney 579, and from Sydney to Brisbane 723 miles. In travelling between
these capitals the distance is thus 1785 miles; but during the journey three
different gauges have to be passed over—that is, the passenger must change
carriages thrice, and goods have to be handled six times.
4. Towns, etc. —There is only one large town, Adelaide,
owing to the fact that most of the people are farmers, and
therefore live in the country.
(i) Adelaide (110), on the River Torrens, is the capital of South Australia.
It is entirely surrounded by a grand park that is never to be built over, and
is backed by'the Mount Lofty Range. Its seaport, Port Adelaide, is nine
miles distant, on St. Vincent Gulf; and is connected with the capital by a,n
unbroken series of villas. \
: (ii) Other towns are: Gawler, an agricultural centre, Kapunda, Kooringa,
Wallaroo, and Moonta, copper-mining towns; and Palmerston, on Port
Darwin, which will one day be the terminus of the great transcontinental
railway.
(iii) The Northern Territory (capital Palmerston) is as yet undeveloped.
If the labour question can be settled by the introduction of coolies, agricul-
ture should thrive with a soil and climate well suited for sugar, cotton, and
indigo. Gold is worked, and there are good indications of the presence of
tin, silver, and copper. A railway runs south from Palmerston to Pine
Creek. This is part of the line which will one day stretch right across the
continent] (see p. 20). Port Darwin is occasionally attacked by severe
hurricanes. In 1896 one nearly wrecked the town, and eleven inches of rain
fell during the storm. The population of the Northern Territory consists
chiefly of Chinese, who cultivate rice and sugar-cane.


(a) The botanical gardens of Adelaide are celebrated even in Australia. * The
oleander towers and spreads in pale pink glory. The crimson hibiscus glows
among the bananas ; passion flowers —blue, purple, and scarlet—hang in care-
less festoons among the branches. The air is loaded with perfume from
datura, orange-flowers, stephanotis, and endless varieties of jessamine.
Araucarias, acacia trees, Norfolk Island pines, tulip-trees, etc., are dispersed
over the lawns, grouped, not as science would order them, but as they would
be arranged by a landscape painter.’— Proude.
(b) It is one of the boasts of South Australia that she alone, among the
Australian colonies, has never admitted convicts to her shores.
5. A Drought in South Australia. —‘ In 1864 very little
rain fell in the districts north of Goyder’s line, and in 1865
none fell. The records of this time are terrible to hear. It
was not so much that the sheep were perishing from want of
water. The wells did not run dry, and in that district no
squatter trusts to surface water for his sheep to drink. But
there was not a blade of grass, and the animals were starved.
Hundreds of thousands of sheep were driven south in order
that they might find pasturage as they wandered. . . . Mob
after mob of wretched animals streamed down from the then
barren plains, 300 miles north of Adelaide, to the southern
districts near the sea, and round the lakes, —perishing by the
way, or doomed to perish when they got there. ... As they
went along, the country was strewed with the bodies of the
useless animals, and the only effort was to move on to some
district giving still sufficient grass to keep the flock alive.
Thousands were slaughtered to reduce the number in the
scanty herbage, and I heard of one flock-owner who at last
adopted the course of drowning a thousand in the sea.’—
Trollope.


QUEENSLAND
(Area, 668,000 square miles —Population, 445,000 —
increasing.)
i. Position and Coast-line. —Queensland lies in the north-
east of Australia, and stretches for about 1200 miles, from
Point Danger to Cape York, The first settlement made in it
was a convict-station at Moreton Bay. In 1859 Queensland
was formally proclaimed as a colony, and christened, like
Victoria, in honour of the Queen.
(i) The eastern coast line is fringed with small islands, the largest of
which is Great Sandy Island in the south; and protected, for the greater
part of its length, by the Great Barrier Reef. Queensland includes the
small islands in Torres Strait. The most important of these is Thursday
Island, which is a calling-station for steamers, and the headquarters of the
pearl-fishery.
(ii) Besides the large Gulf of Carpentaria on the north, the eastern coast
has numerous inlets and excellent harbours, such as Hervey, Moreton,
and Princess Charlotte Bays.
2. Surface and Climate. —The build of Queensland re-
sembles, in its main features, that of the two other eastern
colonies. We still find the coast-strip, the mountainous
table land, and the interior plain. The climate varies with
the physical features and the elevation.
(i) The narrow coast-strip is bounded on the west by the slope of the
table-land. The soil is very rich, largely alluvial, and well suited for sugar-
planting. The two largest rivers are the Fitzroy and the Burdekin, both of
which bring down great quantities of fertile soil. This sediment has formed
round the mouth of the Burdekin a large delta, on which are situated many
flourishing sugar-plantations.
(ii) The table-land is a continuation of the Dividing Range, which
culminates, as a range, in the Bellenden-Ker Hills (5158 feet), in the north of
the colony. From the table-land, the rivers flow east into the Pacific ; and
south-west (as the Barcoo) to Lake Eyre. The headwaters of the Darling, the
Warrego, and the Condamine also rise here. The southern part of the table-
land, especially the Darling Downs, is the best pastoral region in the colony.
(iii) The interior plains stretch behind the Dividing Range, from the


New South Wales border to the Gulf of Carpentaria. The principal river is
the Flinders, which flows north into the Gulf of Carpentaria. The Queens-
land plains are in general hotter and drier than those of New South Wales;
but they contain more of the fertile black soil, and in many parts are covered
with the invaluable salt-bush. In the south-west there is a scrub-covered
desert.
(iv) The climate varies from temperate on the southern table-lands to
fierce, tropical heat in the north. The sea-coast is hot and moist; the
inlands dry. Drought is the enemy of the Queensland flockmaster; but he is
doing his best to conquer this by the help of artesian wells.
3. Industries and Products. —The industries are: stock-
farming, mining, and sugar-planting. Queensland stands
second in Australia for the production of gold ; and she has
more cattle than all the rest of the colonies put together.
There are a number of sugar-factories, rum distilleries, and
meat-freezing works in different parts of the colony.
(i) Gold is the chief mineral, and the richest mines are at Charters
Towers, Mount Morgan near Rockhampton, and Gympie in the extreme
south-east. Tin is found at Herberton and Stanthorpe (=Tin Town); and
copper at Cloncurry, south of Carpentaria Gulf. There are also immense
coalfields ; but coal is, as yet, only worked in two places—on the Brisbane
and on the Mary River.
Mount Morgan is a mountain of iron-stone, seamed throughout with veins
of the purest gold. It was originally bought by the Morgan Brothers from a
farmer for £640, and it is now supposed to be worth about £16,000,000.
(ii) The sugar-industry is the most important branch of Queensland agri-
culture. The canes are cultivated in the hot and moist coast-lands; and
the largest sugar-plantations lie between Mackay and Townsville. In some
districts the juice, after having been crushed out of the canes, is, like the
petroleum of Pennsylvania, run through pipes to central refining establish-
ments. Besides sugar, maize is extensively grown; and the forests are rich
in timber (eucalyptus and Queensland cedar).
(iii) The labour in the hot sugar-plantations is chiefly supplied by Poly-
nesians, or ‘ Kanakas.’ These natives are collected among the Pacific
islands by * labour schooners ’ or ‘ blackbirders,’ and contract to work in
Queensland for a number of years, after which they return as (comparative)
millionaires to their island homes. They alone make the sugar-industry a
paying one; for the fierce climate of northern Queensland renders it nearly
impossible for the white man to do more than superintend the labour on the
plantations.
(iv) The fisheries of Queensland are of considerable importance. Native


divers arc employed in the Torres Strait to collect mother-o -pearl; and
trepang and turtle are obtained off the Great Barrier Reef.
(v) Railways.— The Queensland railways, with two exceptions, all start
from seaports, and thus enable the inland producers to bring their goods to
the coast for shipment. It is proposed to run a line from the Gulf of
Carpentaria, through the whole length of Queensland, to meet extensions
from New South Wales and South Australia.
4. Commerce and Towns. —Queensland trade is, for the
number of the population, considerable; and it is increasing.
The chief exports (£9,000,000 yearly) are: wool, gold, sugar,
frozen meat, hides, and tallow. There is a large overland
trade with New South Wales in cattle. The imports
(£4,500,000) are the same as those of the other Australian
colonies, except that sugar is not imported, and flour is.
The chief towns, which are also the chief seaports, are:
Brisbane, the capital, Maryborough, Rockhampton, Mackay,
and Townsville.
(i) Brisbane (with suburbs, 100) stands on the River Brisbane, which flows
into Moreton Bay. It is the chief port of the colony, but it has not, like
Sydney and Melbourne, the practical monopoly of the trade. The river is
navigable. The climate and scenery of Brisbane are delightful. ‘On the
banks of its broad, sweeping river, the feathery palm, the pendulous banana,
and the long, waving bamboo grow in almost tropical luxuriance.
(ii) Maryborough, a seaport, is joined by railway to the gold-fields of
Gympie. Rockhampton, on the Fitzroy, is the port for central Queensland.
Mackay is the chief sugar-centre of Queensland. Townsville, in the north,
is a great gold and sugar-port; near it are the famous gold-fields of Charters
Towers. It is also the outlet of a vast pastoral district. Ipswich lies on a
great, but as yet undeveloped, coalfield.
(iii) Brisbane is the terminus of, and Rockhampton, Mackay, and Towns-
ville are calling-stations for, the Queensland Royal Mail steamers, which
run to Europe by way of Torres Strait.
The Australian aborigines are more numerous in Queensland than in any other
colony; they probably number about 70,000. The Queensland blacks live
not only by hunting, but have their annual feasts on the fruit of the bunya-
bunya pine, which it is forbidden to cut down for that reason. Even yet
conflicts occur between them and the white settlers in the ‘back-blocks ;
and it is to keep down such disturbances that a force of black police has been
organised. These black ‘ trackers ’ have generally shown the greatest ruth-
lessness against the people who are of their own blood.


WESTERN AUSTRALIA
(Area, 975,000 square miles —Population, 82,000.)
i. Position and Surface. —Western Australia—‘the land
of sand, sorrow, and sore eyes ’■—lies on the western side
of the continent, and occupies more than a third of it.
It is the largest of the Australian colonies, but the least
populous. Much of it has never been traversed by the feet
of white men. It is bounded on the east by South Australia;
on all other sides by the ocean.
(i) Coast-line.— The coast-line is generally low and sandy, and edged
throughout its length with many small islands. Along the Australian
Bight the shore rises in grand cliffs to a plateau, two or three hundred feet
above the sea. King George’s Sound, in the south, is at present the best
harbour, and can accommodate the largest vessels. The two chief openings
in the north arc King Sound and Cambridge Gulf, both of which places are
served by regular lines of coasting steamers. Cape Leeuwin, in the south-
west, is the first land sighted by vessels approaching Australia from the west.
(ii) Surface.— Most of the interior is a flat, waterless plain. Hence the
rivers that find their way to the sea are few; and sometimes they do not
flow at all. The Darling Range skirts the south-west coast. North of
latitude 26° there is much ground well suited for agriculture or pasturage.
In the south the surface is about equally divided between desert and forest.
Here, too, large areas are covered with the ‘poison-plant,’ which is fatal to
cattle and sheep. But the south-western coast-district is wonderfully fertile,
and can grow anything in the shape of grain, fruit, or vegetables.
(iii) The chief deserts are: the Great Sandy Desert, in the north; the
Victoria Desert, in the south; and the Salt Lakes Desert, in the west, which
contains Lake Austin and many other salt lakes.
(iv) The Climate in the south and south-west is temperate and cool, with
a good rainfall in the winter, brought by a north-west wind. Elsewhere it
is hot and dry.
(a) Drinking-water at the gold-flelds was at first so scarce that it had to be distilled
from the salt water of the lakes ; and it was sold at fabulous prices per bucket,
(b) In reference to the large quantities of sand to be found in Western Australia,
a sarcastic Yankee once declared that it was the best country to run through
an hour-glass he had ever seen.
2. Industries and Commerce. —The chief industries are:
gold-mining, timber-getting, and sheep-farming. Western


Australia accordingly exports gold (a long way first), wool,
and timber, to the yearly value of about £1,500,000. The
imports (over £2,000,000) include food-stuffs, apparel, rail-
way plant, machinery, liquors, tea, and sugar.
(i) The opening up of Western Australian gold-fields is of very recent
date. It will probably give the colony the stimulus it greatly needs; and
the ‘prospectors,’ who at present scour the country on camels in search of
new mines, will, when the first fever of discovery and new wealth is over,
remain to develop the other and more ordinary resources of Australia.
Meantime the chief gold-fields are those of (a) Kimberley, in the north;
(b) Pilbarra, round the Do Grey River; (c) Murchison, south of the Mur-
chison River; (d) Yilgarn, Southern Cross, and Coolgardie, east of Perth.
Southern Cross and Coolgardie are joined by railway to Perth. It is pro-
posed to extend this line to Eucla, a pastoral centre on the border of Western
and South Australia.
(ii) Besides gold, which is exported to the yearly value of over £1,000,000,
tin, copper, and lead are also mined, the last two at Northampton.
(iii) The principal timbers are: sandalwood, karri, and jarrah ; which
last, alone of all timbers, has been found most useful in India, as capable of
resisting the attacks of the white ant. The great timber region is the well-
watered district round Geographic Bay in the south-west. It is computed
that the forest regions of Western Australia cover an area equal to that of
Great Britain.
(iv) The most useful sheep-grazing regions lie: (a) on the banks of the
Pitzroy River, which flows into King Sound; (b) in the Gascoyne division;
(c) along the coast-ranges of the south-west.
(v) An old industry of Western Australia is the diving for pearls and
pearl-shell on the northern coast. These form the fourth export of the
colony.
Two famous pearling-centres are Cossack and Roeboubne, which lie on the
north-western coast, opposite Dampier’s Archipelago. The pearling is con-
ducted in small boats known as pearling luggers. The divers are either
Europeans, who wear a regular diving dress, or Malays and Australian
natives, who wear nothing. The native divers can, of course, only stay under
the water for half a minute or so, during which time they clutch at any shell
they see. Even the regular divers can only stand the pressure of deep
water for about a quarter of an hour. The diving-trade is a well-paid one, but
it has many risks. Sometimes the air-tubes of the diving-dress become
entangled, and the crew on board the lugger haul up a corpse. Sharks
attack the native divers; and one pearling ground on the north-west was
deserted for years on account of the crocodiles which infested the place. In
one season these fierce reptiles had torn to pieces three divers before the
eyes of their horrified companions. The pressure of the water sooner or


later brings on paralysis of the limbs, which cripples the divers for the rest
of their lives. Pearl-shell fetches from £lOO to £l3O a ton; and valuable
pearls are often found in the shell-fish besides.
3. Towns, etc. —Perth (12), on the Swan River, is the
capital. Fremantle, at the mouth of the river, is its port.
The chief port is Albany, on King George’s Sound, which is
a touching-place for the great ‘liners.’ Northampton mines
copper. Coolgardie (10), and Cue on the Murchison fields,
are gold-centres.
(i) The old name of Western Australia (or Westralia as it is sometimes
called) was the Swan River Settlement, which was established in 1829. In
the year 1848 the free colonists, finding the population so scanty, and labour
so scarce, took the extreme step of petitioning the British Government to
send out convicts to them.
(ii) Western Australia has, so far, been the Cinderella of the Australian
colonics; but her continually increasing output of gold will soon enable her
to take rank with her more fortunate sisters.
Coolgardie lias been thus described: ‘The whole country is bare and dry.
Hardly a scrap of vegetation is to be seen. Standing out alone, condensing-
plant, canvas tents, frame-houses—all seem hideously ugly. Nature has not
made Coolgardie picturesque, and man has not improved on it. The town,
like all Australian pioneer mining-townships—consists of low buildings, and
one-storied frame stores. Bayley Street, Coolgardie (named after one of the
original discoverers of these gold-fields), I take to be one of the streets of the
world. Not for its buildings, not for anything picturesque in its surrounding,
but for the people who throng up and down this thoroughfare—men of all
nations, whose very existence here is a romance. Camel-teams pass to and
fro with Afghan leaders, bringing souvenirs as well as odours of Araby
the Unblest. There are donkey-carts, which Costermonger Joe might drive
on the Old Kent Road. There are cycles and cyclists. There are compara-
tively very few horse-teams, and the bullock-dray is entirely absent. I have
not seen a bullock in West Australia. They drink too much.’
4. Early condition. —From the following extract from the
Parliamentary emigration papers we can gain some idea of
the hardships that beset the earliest Wcstralian pioneers.
‘ The ghastly spectacle of the town site of Clarence, its sole
edifices —crowded, buried, and neglected tombs—its only
•inhabitants corpses, the victims of disease, starvation, and


despair—the sea-beach strewed with wrecks—the hills and
borders of the rivers studded with deserted and half-finished
buildings—speak of brave men, delicate women, and helpless
children perishing by hundreds, on a desert coast, from want
of food, of shelter, and even of water, and surrounded by
armed hordes of angry savages. It were impossible to
estimate the vast amount of property of every sort, buried
for safety in the sands of the shore, and never again re-
covered ; or the vast multitude of valuable and high-bred
stock of all descriptions, whose skeletons whitened the beach,
or filled the morasses they had been forced to enter in the
desperate search for even fresh water. . . . Some demanded
to be led to their lands; others gave way to despair; servants
attacked the spirit-casks; masters followed their example.
The means of the immigrants dissipated; their live-stock
perished; many died; and numbers, as soon as practicable,
fled from this scene of ruin, carrying with them the wreck
of their fortunes.’
TASMANIA
(Area, 26,000 square miles— Population, 155,000.)
i. Position and Coast-line.— The heart-shaped island of
Tasmania (originally called Van Diemen’s Land) is separated
from Victoria by Bass Strait. The strait is 160 miles
across at its narrowest point; and is named after Surgeon
Bass, who, by circumnavigating Tasmania in a small boat,
discovered it to be an island. Tasmania, which is a little
smaller than Scotland, has an average length and breadth
of 160 miles each way. The coast-line is picturesquely in-
dented, and contains numerous good harbours.


(i) The chief islands, which belong to Tasmania, are: King’s Island,
Flinders, and Barren Islands, in the north; and Bruni in the south.
(ii) The principal inlets are: Emu Bay on the north; Macquarie Harbour
on the west; Oyster Bay and Storm Bay on the east.
2. Surface. —Tasmania has been called ‘ the Switzerland of
the South’; and, speaking generally, the island is hilly,
well wooded, and well watered. A high table-land fills the
middle of the island; and from this radiate four mountain
spurs. The highest peaks are Cradle Mountain (5069 feet)
and Ben Lomond. The rivers present a strong contrast to
those of Australia; for they are clear; they have a constant
flow of water all the year round; and they flow in all
directions. The three largest are the Derwent, Huon, and
Tamar. The lakes of Tasmania lie on the central table-land.
The two largest are Great Lake— as large as Loch Lomond —
and Lake St. Clair.
(i) The surface of the country is very irregular and broken. Mountain,
table-land, valley, and gorge are spread about in most admired disorder.
Of plain-land, properly so called, there is none at all.
(ii) Besides the two peaks mentioned, there are nineteen others with a
height of over 1000 feet.
(iii) The Tamar is navigable to Launceston, a distance of 10 miles.
(iv) The whole island is more or less covered with timber. But the densest
growth, both of timber and underwood, is found in the west; where the
thickness of the scrub has prevented or hindered the progress of settlement.
‘Even more than Britain, Tasmania presents in a small area the features which
mark all the various parts of the globe : mountain and plain, forest and rolling
prairie-land, rivers and grand capes, and the noblest harbour in the world, —
all are contained in a country not so large as Ireland.'— Dilke.
3. Climate, Vegetation, etc. —The climate is equable and
healthy, and the air much cooler than that of Australia.
This is owing partly to the general elevation of the island,
and partly to the proximity of the sea. The rainfall is fairly
abundant; and severe droughts are quite unknown. The
vegetation resembles that of Australia, the eucalypti being


the characteristic trees. The Huon pine of the south-west is
also valuable for its timber.
(i) Tasmania is almost free from the hot north winds, which are so un-
pleasant a feature in the climate of Australia.
(ii) The healthiness of the climate is attested by the fact that old age is
the most common cause of death in the island.
(iii) The animals of Tasmania are, like those of Australia, of the marsupial
order. Tasmania possesses 'two large carnivorous marsupials, the ‘ tiger-
wolf ’ and the ‘ Tasmanian devil.’ These lurk among the fastnesses of the
rocks and scrub; and issue forth at night to prey on the sheep of the
colonists. Salmon and trout have been successfully introduced into the
rivers.
(iv) 4 The scenery of Tasmania is thoroughly English, and reminds one of
the finest parts of Kent and Surrey. . . . Amid all this English outlook the
new-comer is reminded that he is not at home by the appearance of gaudily
coloured parrots and other birds unknown in the mother-country.’
‘ Somersetshire cannot surpass the orchards of Tasmania, nor Devon match its
flowers.’—Dilke.
4. Products and Industries.— The chief industries arc:
horticulture (fruit, hops, and potatoes), mining, agriculture,
and sheep-farming. The manufactures, for the size of the
population, are extensive; and include those of jam, beer,
soap, and saw-milling.
(i) Tasmanian farmers have been compelled, by the low prices of cereals
throughout the markets of the world, to turn their attention to horticulture.
Wheat and oats are the chief grain-crops. All the fruits of the Temperate
Zone are raised; and Tasmanian apples and pears, especially, are famous
for their excellent quality.
(ii) The chief minerals are: tin, gold, silver, and coal. Waratah, or
Mount Bischoff, in the west, and Ringarooma in the east, mine tin.
Beaconsfleld, on the Tamar, is the chief gold-mining town.
(iii) Tasmania possesses very few sheep; but they are of a very pure breed.
5. Commerce. —The commerce of the island has a yearly
value of about £3,000,000. It is carried on chiefly with
New South Wales and Victoria; and, after them, with Great
Britain. The chief exports are: wool, tin, gold, silver, and
fresh fruit. In the last a large trade is done with England


by means of cool chambers in the steamers. The chief
imports are: drapery, hardware, tea, and sugar.
(i) The two large ports are Hotoart and Launceston, which do a nearly
equal trade. These two towns are connected by a railway. Another line
runs from Emu Bay to Waratah, in the north-west, to tap the tin-mines of
Mount Bischoff. The progress of railways in Tasmania has been slow, as
the mountainous character of the country presents great engineering
difficulties.
(ii) The fruit trade with England has sprung up very recently. In 1890
there was no export of fruit at all. In 1894 England bought from Tasmania
fresh fruit to the value of £64,000; and now Tasmanian apples are as familiar
to the British greengrocer as Victorian butter is to the dairyman.
6. Towns, etc. —The three largest are : Hobart, the capital;
Launceston : and Beaconsfield.
(i) Hobart (25) lies in the south-east of the island, on the side remote from
Australia. It stands on the estuary of the Derwent, has an excellent
harbour, and trades, chiefly in agricultural produce, with Sydney. The
healthiness of its climate, and the picturesque mountain scenery round it,
attract many visitors to the place. Launceston, its rival in trade, lies on
the other side of the island, at the head of the navigation of the Tamar. It
smelts tin, and trades with Melbourne.
(ii) Government,— Tasmania enjoys responsible government.
(iii) History.— A Dutch sailor, Abel Tasman, discovered the island in
1642; and he christened it, in honour of the Governor of Batavia, Van
Diemen’s Land. It was made an English convict settlement in 1803, and was
formally declared a colony in the year 1825. Some years after that, on the
granting of responsible government to the settlers, the name was formally
changed to Tasmania. The old name (‘tainted, as it was, with the sound
of the gaol, and harsh with the crack of the gaoler’s whip ’) had become
greatly detested on account of its hateful memories of crime, penal servi-
tude, and misery; and the free setters of Tasmania no longer wished to
be associated with the convict ‘Demons’ of Van Diemen’s Land. The
convict labourers, however, did much for the young colony in the way of
clearing out scrub, felling timber, erecting buildings, and making roads.
The splendid road between Hobar; and Launceston, 120 miles long, was
made entirely by convict labour.
(iv) The aborigines of Tasmania have now entirely disappeared. They
resembled, in appearance and habits, the Australian native, except that
they had curly, and not straight hair. The ‘Black War’ between the
natives and the settlers lasted a number of years, till at last in 1830 the
whole native population was transported in a body to Flinders Island.
From thence, in greatly diminished numbers, they were again removed to


Oyster Bay; where, through drink or disease, or both, they rapidly became
extinct.
(v) The early history of the colony was a painful one—a story of hideous
misery endured by the British convicts in the labour-gangs and gaols, and a
record of equally hideous crimes committed by them, when they succeeded
in gaining their freedom and fleeing into the bush. But now, ‘ with a splendid
soil to allure the farmer; with magnificent prospects for the miner; w T ith
promising industries yet undeveloped; with a climate and people second to
none in the world, and physical beauties that few countries can rival—
Tasmania should have a great future in front of her.’
NEW ZEALAND
(Area, 104,000 square miles = twice England —Population,
690,000.)
i. Position and Extent. —New Zealand lies about 1200
miles south-east of Australia, between 34° and 47° South
Latitude. It is thus entirely within the Temperate Zone.
The colony includes one main group of islands and several
small outlying groups. The main group consists of North,
South, and Stewart Islands. The chief outliers are the
Chatham, Auckland, and Kermadec Islands.
(i) The main group is rather more than twice the size of England, and is
about 1100 miles long by 150 broad.
(ii) South Island is the largest of the three, and has an area of 58,000
square miles—just equal to that of England and Wales. The area of North
Island is 45,000 square miles. Stewart Island is a little larger than Hertford-
shire.
(hi) Chatham Islands lie east of New Zealand. The few inhabitants are
engaged in seal-fishing, and in rearing stock which they supply to passing
whalers. The Auckland Islands to the south are uninhabited; and the
Kermadec Islands, to the north-east of the main group, have only seven
people living on them.
(iv) The following are the divisions or provinces of New Zealand :
North Island.—Auckland, Taranaki, Hawke Bay, and Wellington.
South Island.— Nelson, Marlborough, Canterbury,Westland, and Otago.


2. Coast-line. —The shape of New Zealand is that of a
topboot turned upside down. The toe is Cape Maria Van
Diemen ; the heel is East Cape. The coast-line is 3000 miles
long, much indented (notably so in North Island), and with
high, rocky shores. It is to this great and varied development
of coast-line, and to the fact that no part of the island is
more than 75 miles from the sea, that New Zealand owes her
commercial prosperity. But, though there are many fine
inlets on the west coast, North Island especially, the drift-
sand from the East Australian Current has generally blocked
their mouths with a bar. One of the most striking features
in the coast is the far-withdrawn sounds or fiords of the south-
west. Some of these arms of the sea are twenty miles long
—narrow salt-water canals which are walled in by gigantic
precipices 7000 feet high.
‘ The smooth, still water is enclosed on every side with immense perpendicular
walls of rock, banked by yet higher mountains. Islands of various size stud
the surface, and the whole of the visible land is richly covered with vegeta-
tion, like a mantle of rich and varied green, except where the cliff is too hard
and too smooth for even a fern to secure a hold. Over the cliff waterfalls are
tumbling—some, from the melted snow on the mountains, dashing down at a
leap, and others of smaller size winding like a sparkling thread through the
dense green foliage.’ —Wilkins.
(i) Cook’s Strait separates the two larger islands; and Foveaux ( Fovo )
Strait, South Island from Stewart Island.
(ii) Capes.—North Island: Cape Maria Van Diemen, North Cape, East
Cape, Cape Palliser, Cape Egmont. In South and Stewart Islands: Cape
Farewell, South-west Cape, Cape Campbell.
(hi) Inlets.—ln North Island: Bay of Islands, Hauraki Gulf, Bay of
Plenty, Hawke Bay, Manukau Harbour, Kaipara Harbour. In South
Island: Massacre or Golden Bay, Tasman Bay, Pegasus Bay, Canterbury
Bight.
(a) Cape Maria Van Diemen was named by the discoverer of New Zealand,
Tasman, in honour of the daughter of the Governor of Batavia.
(b) Cape Farewell was so named by Captain Cook, as it was the last point of
New Zealand seen by him when he left the island at the end of his first
voyage in 1770. A long spit of sand runs out east from Cape Farewell, and
shelters Golden Bay.


(c) Near the first of these two capes is a lofty wind-swept headland, whither the
Maori Chiefs used to be carried, dying, so that they might, as it were,
spring off from it into the unknown world.
3. Surface. —The surface of New Zealand presents a re-
markable contrast to that of Australia, and a considerable
likeness to Tasmania. No wide interior plain is to be found
in New Zealand ; but the surface is, as in Tasmania, endlessly
diversified with mountain and table-land, valley and terraced
plain. Here are no feebly flowing creeks or strings of muddy
waterholes, as in Australia : the rushing torrents of New
Zealand sweep grandly to the sea, * usually half lost in their
gigantic stony beds.’ In New Zealand, too, the mountain
peaks are generally a thousand feet higher than those of
Australia.
The build of both North and South Islands possesses one
feature in common. Both are highly mountainous, even
rugged; and through both runs from end to end a great
cordillera, or mountain back-bone. This chain, which is
interrupted at Cook’s Strait, is composed of the same kind
of rocks, and runs in the same direction. But in South
Island it is nearer to the west coast; in North Island to the
east coast.
(i) North Island is highly volcanic, and is full both of active and
extinct volcanoes, geysers, and boiling springs. South Island, on the other
hand, displays no trace of recent volcanic activity.
(ii) North Island is the home of the Hot Lakes, which are fed by boiling
springs. South Island is the region of the Cold Lakes, which are chilled by
the melted snow and glacier water.
‘ New Zealand is the place for highlanders. They will find both mountains and
valleys enough to satisfy them, with gloomy passes, deep lakes, lofty water-
falls, mist, rain, cool weather, and all that goes to make up their ideal of
Paradise. It is as if all the titbits of Scotland, Cumberland, Wales, and the
Emerald Isle had been carted off to a southern latitude and planted down
there, with suggestions beside of the blue Danube, Switzerland, and the
Rhine mysteries over all.’—Hume Nisbet.


4. Surface.—South Island. The build of this island con-
sists of a long mountain chain running along the west coast,
and a crescent-shaped lowland in the east. Isolated from
the main chain lies the Kaikoura Eange in the north-east,
which is part of the cordillera system, and is continued in the
mountains of North Island. The watershed of South Island
runs west and south-east from the main mountain chain.
(i) In the middle of the west coast chain lies the highest range—the
Southern Alps. These, like the Alps of Europe, rise above the level of
perpetual snow ; and their highest valleys are filled with immense glaciers,
the lower with beautiful lakes. The highest peak in them is Mount Cook
(12,350 feet)—more than two miles high—which is also the highest point in
New Zealand. The Maories call this peak Aorangi, or cloud-piercer.
These mountains are very difficult to cross; and at one point, the Otira
Gorge, there is the only practicable pass for a distance of a hundred miles.
(ii) The lowland country, which lies to the cast of the mountains, is the
Canterbury Plains. They are about a hundred miles long, and measure
fifty miles across at their broadest part, where the volcanic mountain mass
of Banks Peninsula juts out from the coast. The plains descend by terraces
towards the sea, and are composed of a fertile soil, which has been ground
off the mountains by the glaciers and washed down by the flooded rivers.
The climate of the plains has been described as a mixture of the climate
of the south of France and that of the Shetland Isles. They contain the
best pastoral and agricultural ground in South Island.
(iii) The rivers, fed with water from the glaciers, have a ceaseless flow.
The longest is the Clutha (150 miles) in the south. Others are the Buller,
Grey, and Hokitika, on the west coast, all of which have harbours at their
mouths. But these harbours are all more or less silted up with mud.
(iv) The lakes lie among the Alpine valleys. The biggest are Te Anau,
Wakatipu, l Wanaka, and Hawea. The last three arc drained by the River
Clutha. Wakatipu is approached by a railway, and has steamers on it.
(a) ‘ln New Zealand (South Island) everything is English. The scenery, the colour,
and general appearance of the waters, and the shape of the hills, are very
like that with which we are familiar in the west of Ireland and the Highlands
of Scotland. The mountains are brown, and sharp, and serrated; the rivers
are bright and rapid ; the lakes are deep and blue, and bosomed among the
mountains. If a long-sleeping Briton could be set down among the Otago
Hills, and told on awakening that he was travelling in Galway, or in the
west of Scotland, he might be easily deceived, though he knew those
countries well.’—Anthony Trollope.
1 Pronounced Wakatip’.


(b) Trollope thus describes a journey across the Canterbury Plains, from the
Waitaki River to Christchurch: ‘lt is an uninteresting journey as far as
scenery is concerned. To the left, the great range of mountains which runs
throughout the island was always in sight with its snow-capped peaks,—
somewhat relieving the dulness of the plain but they are not sufficiently
near to create landscape beauty. We passed on from one squatter’s run to
another, through vast paddocks, containing perhaps 20,000 acres each,
without a tree. The grass consisted of long coarse tussocks, brown in colour,
—with nothing of green prettiness to relieve the monotony.'
5. Surface.—North Island. In this island the main
mountain chain still continues; but it lies nearer to the east
coast. The chief ranges in it are the Tararua, Ruahine, and
Kaimanawa. The northern portion of North Island is com-
paratively level—in places even low and sandy; but the
centre is occupied with a volcanic table-land. Out of this
rise the extinct volcano of Ruapehu (9195 ft.), the highest
peak in the north, and the still active Tongariro. On the
table-land lies the largest lake in New Zealand, Lake Taupo,
200 square miles in extent. This lake is drained by the
Waikato River, which is navigable by small steamers for fifty
miles. West of the table-land stands the perfect snow-
capped cone of Mount Egmont (8280 ft.), which rises out of
a very fertile plain.
(i) Other navigable rivers in North Island are the Wanganui and the
Thames; hut neither is of much commercial importance.
(ii) North of Lake Taupo lie the Hot Lakes, of which Roto-rua is the
largest. This is a region of high volcanic activity—a country of boiling
springs, geysers, mud volcanoes, and solfataras. The boiling springs are
continually bursting out in fresh places. ‘You walk one day over firm
ground, where the next you find a bubbling hole, into which, if you unwarily
step, your foot will he of no further service to you.’— Froude.
The Agent-General for New Zealand thus humorously describes the geysers of
the Hot Lakes: ‘Geysers are divided into three classes—the dignified, the
irritable, and the professional geyser. The first, and rarest, may be likened
to a really great orator, who only eloquently bursts forth when stirred by
passion or enthusiasm ; the second to an ordinary Parliamentary debater,
who, when things are thrown at him—mud for choice—begins to fume and
splutter. This treatment, however, ultimately leads to the geyser getting


clogged, so that the Government has been compelled to forbid it, or the
displays will altogether cease. The third, or professional geyser, is neither
romantic nor wonderful,—a mere creature of routine that performs at regular
intervals.’
(iii) The Waikato, about 25 miles from its outlet from the lake, passes
through a most striking group of hot springs. ‘Along its banks white
clouds of steam ascend from hot cascades falling into the river, and from
basins of boiling water shut in by white masses of stone. Steaming
fountains rise at short intervals, sometimes two or more playing simul-
taneously.’ The Waikato often overflows its banks, where they are low;
and on the marshes thus formed excellent crops of New Zealand flax
are produced.
(iv) At Ohinemutu, north of Lake Taupo, which is destined to become the
‘Bath’ of New Zealand, are some sulphur-springs of special medical value.
The boiling springs in the same neighbourhood the native Maories put to
various practical uses. ‘ They cook their cray-flsh and white-fish, which they
catch in the lake, in them ; they boil their cabbage, they wash their clothes
in them, and they wash themselves. They dig out baths, bring streams from
cold springs to temper the hot, and pass half their time lounging in the tepid
water. I heard a grunt as I passed one of these pools. I supposed it was a
pig. Looking round, I beheld a copper-coloured face and shoulders, a white
head, and a pipe sticking out of the mouth.’— Froude’s ‘ Oceana.’
6. Climate. —New Zealand resembles Tasmania in the
character of its surface; it resembles it also in its climate,
except that it is not so hot. Speaking generally, the climate
is much like that of England, only warmer and more equable.
But, naturally, it is to be expected that, as the islands stretch
through some 13° of latitude, the climate must vary con-
siderably. The North Island being nearer the equator is the
warmer of the two, and enjoys a climate similar to that of
southern Europe. Stewart Island, on the south, has much
the same climate as Scotland. Droughts are unknown; and
scarcely any part of the colony goes a fortnight without rain.
(i) The prevailing rain-bearing winds blow from the north-west, just as
they do in the south-west part of Australia. Hence the densest forests are
found on the western side of the mountains of South Island; while the
Canterbury Plains, on the other side, do not enjoy nearly so great a rainfall.
In the North Island, on the other hand, the chief ranges lie further to the
east. Hence the moisture, and consequently the forests, spread further
eastwards.


(ii) ‘NewZealand never suffers from drought. Its natural formation and
its situation effectually prevent that. In seasons when the drought is most
cruel to Australia, New Zealand is at its prime, the unbroken weather of a
dry summer bringing to perfection t)je crops which have been well nourished
by the unfailing rains of winter and spring.’
7. Vegetation and Animal Life. —Like Australia, New
Zealand contains no native fruit nor grain. But there the
resemblance between the colonies ceases. The prevailing
tint of Australian vegetation is a grey-blue, from its blue-
gums, casuarinas, etc. The prevailing tint in New Zealand
is a glossy green; and its characteristic forms of vegetation
are the kauri pine, totara, red pine, phormium, or New Zealand
flax, and every variety of fern. The fauna of New Zealand
is somewhat peculiar. It has no marsupials nor any snakes;
and its native land mammals inckide one species of rat and
two of bats. Among the many forms of bird-life, the two
oddest are the kea parrot and the apteryx (=wingless). All
domestic animals have been introduced.
(i) ‘ The great characteristic of New Zealand scenery, as dependent on
vegetation, are the 'forests, the ferns, and the grassy plains. The forests
chiefly clothe the mountain-ranges; the lower hills are covered with fern ;
while extensive tracts, chiefly on the west in the North Island, and on the
east in the South, are covered with grass and bushes.’
(ii) New Zealand contains no acacias or eucalypti.
(iii) The kauri pine, which grows in Auckland province only, supplies an
excellent quality of timber, and also kauri gum. This is a resin found
either at the foot of the trees themselves, or, in a semi-fossilised state, on
the site of old kauri forests. It is valuable for the making of fine varnishes.
The timber of the totara is proof against the teredo ndvalis, a marine boring
worm.
(iv) The apteryx, or kiwi, is the last descendant of a race of wingless
running birds, of which the hugest species is the moa. From fossil remains
that have been found of this creature it must have been about twelve feet
high. The apteryx itself is about the size of a hen, with hair-like feathers,
and a bill like a snipe’s.
(v) The kea is an owl-like parrot that has acquired the mischievous habit
of tearing at the kidney-fat of living sheep. These birds are not numerous:
and they are destroyed as unremittingly as the dingo is in Australia.
(vi) The rivers of New Zealand have been stocked with trout, which grow


to a very large size. Hares, rabbits, red deer, pheasants, grouse, and quail
have also been introduced into the islands.
(a) As parts of Australia suffer from an introduced plague of thistles, so do large
tracts in North Island from the sweet-briar. The missionaries introduced
the bush ; and it now grows in impenetrable thickets, which the farmer has
to dig out with pick-axes, or tear out with cart-ropes and teams of horses.
(b) In North Island there is,little natural grass available for pasture. Pern
grows instead of it. The fern is burnt off, and grass-seed is sown on the
ashes.
8. Industries and Products. —The chief industries are
stock-farming, agriculture, and mining. The chief manu-
factures are concerned with the preparation of frozen meat,
wool, timber, and flax.
(i) The pastoral industry is not generally carried on on so large a scale
as in Australia, but each farmer rears small herds. The colony owns about
18,000,000 sheep—chiefly merinoes—and nearly a million cattle. Great atten-
tion is paid to dairy-farming ; and New Zealand has a good reputation, both
for butter and cheese, in the London and Glasgow markets. New Zealand
has an area fit for pasturage half as big again as England; and English
grasses, such as Cocksfoot and White Clover, thrive very well. Rabbits,
as in Australia, do much damage to the sheep-runs.
(ii) There is in the colony an area, equal to a third of England, which is
suitable for agriculture. This industry is chiefly carried on in Canterbury
and Otago provinces, where the principal crops are wheat and oats. All
ordinary fruits of temperate climates flourish in New Zealand, but not in
sufficient quantities to supply the needs of the people.
(iii) The chief minerals are gold and coal. Gold is mined in Otago, West-
land, and the Thames Valley( Centre, Grahamstown). It is chiefly procured
by ‘sluicing’—that is, by washing the gold free of the gravel by powerful
streams of water. The best coal is found in Nelson province. Brown coal
is found in Auckland and Otago. The production of coal supplies two-thirds
of the needs of the colony; and would supply all, were it not that New
Zealand vessels come back from New South Wales with cargoes of coal, in
exchange for agricultural produce.
(iv) Other minerals are iron-sand on the west coast of North Island,
petroleum in Taranaki, and sulphur from the volcanoes and from the
ever-smoking White Island in the Bay of Plenty.
(v) The fisheries are not much developed. The chief centre is at
Thames at the mouth of the Thames River. The shark-fishery, conducted
by the natives, is a flourishing industry. The natives eat the flesh, boil the
livers for oil, and export the fins to China for making soup.


(a) New Zealand has been described as a workman’s paradise. The four eights—
Bight hours to work, eight hours to play,
Eight hours to sleep, and eight shillings a day-
are here a realised fact.
(b) ‘ In New Zealand there are mouittain-ranges grander than the giant bergs of
Norway; there are glaciers and waterfalls for the hardy hill-men; there
are sheep-walks for the future shepherd of Salisbury Plain; there are the
rich farmlands for the peasant yeomen; and the coasts, with their inlets
and infinite varieties, are a nursery for seamen who will carry forward into
future ages the traditions of the old land.’ —Froude.
9. Commerce. —New Zealand exports raw materials, and
imports manufactured goods. The commerce has a yearly
value of about £16,000,000, and is carried on with England
first and then Australia. The chief exports (about £9,500,000)
are: wool (beyond all the others), frozen meat, gold, kauri
gum, hides and tallow, and butter and cheese. The chief
imports (about £6,500,000) are: clothing, iron and steel
goods, tea, sugar, and spirits.
(i) Minor exports are: grains, timber, and pbormium.
(ii) The chief ports are: Auckland, Napier, and Wellington, in North
Island ; Lyttelton, Dunedin, and Nelson, in South Island. Lyttelton is the
most important of these. All of them can accommodate the largest vessels
except Dunedin, which can only be reached by vessels of moderate draught.
Larger ships have to stop at Port Chalmers, nine miles further down Otago
Harbour.
(iii) New Zealand has regular steam communication with London, Ply-
mouth, San Francisco, and Sydney. A submarine cable connects Sydney
with Nelson and Wellington.
(iv) English Trade.—New Zealand sends us, among other things, all her
wool, and nearly all her frozen meat and wheat.
(v) Australian Trade.— ‘Not only grain and bread-stuffs, but potatoes,
hay, chaff, roots, vegetables, butter, cheese, bacon, hams, even meat and
fish,' preserved or frozen, are sent over in immense quantities and eagerly
bought at Sydney, Brisbane, and Melbourne, at highly remunerative prices.
This trade is steadily growing, and there cannot be a doubt that in time a
great part of Australia will be supplied entirely with food staples from
New Zealand.
From Auckland to London is 13,000 Miles.
to San Francisco is . 6,000 ~
~ to Melbourne is . . 1,650 „
~ Wellington to Melbourne is . . 1,400 „
’’ Invercargill (Bluff) to Melbourne is 987 „


io. Communications. —Nearly all the large towns in either
island are connected by railway and telegraph ; and in both
islands there are good systems of coach-roads, one of which
crosses the Otira Gorge in the southern Alps. Through the
same gorge also goes the only railway line that crosses the
Alps. The main railway systems are :
(a) The line from Auckland to Ohinemutu, and to Mokau in Taranaki,
with a branch to the Thames gold-field.
(b) The system connecting New Plymouth, Wellington, and Napier.
(o) A long line along the south-east coast from Culverden, through Christ-
church and Dunedin, to Invercargill (Bluff Harbour). This line has many
short branches running inland to tap the agricultural and pastoral resources
of the Canterbury Plains and Otago province.
(d) The line across the Alps from Christchurch to Greymouth. This line
extends north-east to Nelson, passing through the coal-fields of Nelson
province. ,
ii. Inhabitants, History, etc. —The native race of New
Zealand, which is confined mainly to the North Island, is
that of the Maories. They are a brown-skinned, well-made,
and intelligent Polynesian race, very fond of tattooing them-
selves. At first both warlike and given to cannibalism, they
have now settled down to the peaceful arts of agriculture
and stock-raising. In the North Island large districts belong
exclusively to them; and they are now admitted to a share
in the government of the colony. They number about
40,000 souls.
(i) History.— The first European, according to authentic records, to land
in New Zealand, was Abel Jans Tasman, the discoverer of Tasmania.
He named the country Staten Land, in honour of the States-General
of Holland; but shortly afterwards a change was made to the present
name. The country lay unvisited for more than 100 years, till Captain
Cook landed in Poverty Bay in the year 1769. Cook found the natives
had already attained to a high pitch of civilisation. They lived in well-
made houses; wore garments woven out of the native flax; were
governed under fixed laws; and, though they had no written language,
were great and dignified orators, and had stores of national tradition
and song. In his subsequent voyages Captain Cook introduced


domestic animals and English vegetables among them. Little was
done, however, for the real settlement of the colony till the year 1839,
when the New Zealand Company sent out a band of emigrants. They
went out in a quick-sailing frigate, and formally took possession of
the country just three days before a company of French emigrants had
landed from a French man-o’-war at Banks Peninsula. New Zealand
thus narrowly escaped becoming a French possession. The English
Company secured their first stretch of territory round Wellington, for
£320 worth of guns, tobacco, Jews’ harps, sealing-wax, umbrellas, etc.
etc. But much hard fighting with the natives had to be gone through
before New Zealand became a peaceful colony. The Maories fortified
themselves in their pahs— stockaded enclosures on the volcanic hills—
and offered a long and stubborn resistance to further settlement.
Since 1869, however, there has been no further disturbance from the
natives; and the development of the resources of the colony has pro-
ceeded unchecked.
(ii) New Zealand, like all the Australian colonies, enjoys responsible
government.
(iii) Education is free and compulsory for all children, except those of
the Maories.
(iv) The public debt of New Zealand is enormous, and averages per head
of population £5B. About half of the whole amount (£38,000,000) has been
spent on reproductive works, such as railways, roads, and the passage of
immigrants. The public debt of the United Kingdom is little more than a
quarter of that of New Zealand—it is only about £l6 per head of population.
i 2. Towns. —The extent of the coast-line and its highly
articulated indentations offered great facilities both for settle
ment and for commerce; and we therefore find the most
important towns near the coast. The four largest with their
suburbs are: Auckland (51), Wellington (33), the capital, both
in North Island; and Christchurch (47) and Dunedin (45)
in South Island. Two-fifths of the population live in towns.
‘Dunedin,’ says Anthony Trollope, ‘is a Scotch town, and
Christchurch an English town, here planted, —and Wellington
is a chosen site for a parliament; but Auckland is redolent
of New Zealand. Her streets are still traversed by Maories
and half-castes, and the Pakeha Maori (a white man who has
become a member of a native tribe) still wanders into town
from his distant settlement in quest of tea, sugar, and brandy.


(i) North Island.—Wellington stands on Cook’s Strait, about 1200 miles
from Sydney, and has a safe harbour in Port Nicholson. Being centrally
situated, it is the port for much of the coasting trade.
New Plymouth, on the west coast, is the chief town of Taranaki. On the
coast near it are large quantities of iron-sand, which is sent to Onehunga
(near Auckland) to be smelted.
Auckland stands on the Gulf of Hauraki. A railway, six miles long, con-
nects it with the shallow Manukau harbour on the west. Auckland enjoys
the exquisite climate of the Riviera.
Napier, on Hawke Bay, is a pastoral centre, and exports wool and frozen
meat.
Russell, on the Bay of Islands, exports timber and coal. It is also a
whaling port—an industry, however, that is fast declining.
(ii) South Island.—Christchurch, the ‘City of the Plains,’ is the chief
town of Canterbury province. It is connected by railway with its port,
Lyttelton, the chief seaport in the colony.
Dunedin, the ‘ Edinburgh ’ of the Antipodes, is a well-situated and busy
commercial city. It is the chief town in Otago province. Dunedin was
founded by people belonging to the Free Church of Scotland, as Christchurch
was by members of the Church of England. Cromwell, on the Cluthan is
the principal gold-mining town in Otago.
Invercargill lies on Foveaux Strait (Fovo). It does a large trade with
Australia through its port of Bluff Harbour. The distance to Melbourne is
only 987 miles. Hokitika and Kumara, on the west coast, are gold-mining
towns.
Greymouth and Westport ship coal. Greymouth lies on the line of rail-
way from Christchurch to Nelson.
Nelson stands on Tasman Bay. Round the town, which is beautifully
situated, grow quantities of fruit, which is exported to Wellington. Nelson
is the windiest spot in New Zealand.
(iii) Stewart Island is called by the natives Rakiura, which means ‘ Dry
Weather Land.’ As it is perpetually swept by rain and fog, this title is pro-
bably a Maori joke. The island is very mountainous, and covered with
timber. On the largest of the Auckland Islands Government maintains a
depot of provisions and clothing for shipwrecked sailors.
13. New Zealand and Australia —a Contrast.
New Zealand
Australia
1. Highly indented coast-line.
2. Irregular shape—three islands.
1. Regular coast-line.
2. Shape round and compact—one
island.
3. Surface mountainous and broken.
4. Climate equable, with sufficient
3. Surface, on the whole, flat.
4. Climate dry and hot, with scanty
rainfall and frequent droughts.
rainfall and no droughts.


New Zealand
Australia
5. Rivers always full.
5.
Rivers sometimes over-full and
sometimes not running at all.
6. Characteristic vegetation-fern,
6. Characteristic vegetation—euca-
with green as the prevailing
lypti, with grey-blue as the pre-
tint.
vailing tint.
7. No marsupials.
7.
The home of marsupials.
8. The whole of the country excel-
8.
Comparatively small area fit for
lently adapted for agriculture.
agriculture.
9. Native race intelligent; offered a
9.
Natives degraded, and of a low
brave and an organised resist-
type; offered no resistance to
ance to settlement.
settlement except by occasional
cattle-lifting and theft.
10. Colony started by free settlers.
10.
Colonies started by convicts.
‘Physically, it may be said that there is absolutely no resemblance
between New Zealand and Australia, except in the fact that gold and
wool are produced in each. We find, of course, in New Zealand much
that is common to New Zealand and Australia, but common also to
these and the Canadian Dominion—much that is generally colonial:
blackened stumps about the fields; the absorption of the community
in agricultural or pastoral pursuits; good fellowship; the manliness
of the men; the plentiful, perhaps exaggerated, use of tea; even the
slang, descending as it does from the digger’s tongue—just born in
California about 1850: but nothing can be more complete than the
contrast between Australia and New Zealand. Marcus Clarke has
told us that weird melancholy is the dominant note of Australian
scenery, which is true enough, for the Australian landscape is as
lonely, as melancholy, and as solemn as the Roman Campagna, with
the added weirdness of strange bark-shedding trees, and of uncouth
beasts and birds. New Zealand is wholly different —severe and
frowning in the south, open and alluring in the north, with a bright
Polynesian loveliness. Australia is, in summer, a land of dry rivers,
brown grass, yellow lurid glare, and brassy sun; and in the greater
part of winter a land of blue sky and soft, smoky haze. New Zealand in
summer may resemble parts of Australia in winter, but she has a real
winter in her South Island, and a wet winter in her extreme north. The
west coast of the Middle or South Island, whence come the New Zealand
coal and gold, is a country of constant rain, of glaciers, and of tree-
ferns, and chattering parroquets, inexpressibly distinct from the dried-
up Australian gold-fields of Sandhurst. South Central Australia has
the climate of Greece; while New Zealand, owing to its enormous
length from north to south, has, like Japan, and for the same reason,
all the climates of the world except the dry brilliancy of Australia or
of Greece. New Zealand, which is all but tropical at the Bay of
Islands, is Scotch at Invercargill.’— Sir C. Dilke.


THE FIJI ISLANDS
(Area, 8000 square miles —Population, 125,000.)
i. Position, Surface, etc.— The Fiji Islands lie north of the
Tropic of Capricorn, about 1600 miles east of Australia. They
are a British crown colony. They consist of a group of some
two hundred coral-fringed islands, of which the two largest
are Yiti Levu and Vanua Levu. The small island of Eotu-
mah, to the north of the group, is included in the colony.
The area of the whole is not quite equal to that of Wales.
The islands are of volcanic origin, mountainous, well watered, and
well wooded. There are many fine harbours, which are protected
by a natural and indestructible breakwater of fringing coral-reef.
Fiji possesses the most healthy tropical climate in the world; and
the soil is rich, deep, and easily worked.
2. Industries and Commerce. —The chief industry is that
of agriculture. Sugar, pineapples, bananas, and copra are
produced, and exported to New South Wales and New
Zealand. Labour is costly, for the native Fijians are unwill-
ing to labour, and the plantations have to be worked under
white supervision by imported Polynesian labourers, ‘ black-
birds,’ and Indian coolies.
(i) Suva is the chief port, and it has regular steam-communication with
Sydney (1900 miles), and with Auckland (1200 miles).
(ii) Tea and tobacco are also cultivated by European planters. Cocoa-nut
groves, which thrive best where the sea-breeze touches them, are systemati-
cally planted.
(iii) The natives grow for their own use yams, sweet potatoes, and maize,
in which they pay their taxes. They irrigate their crops from the brawling
mountain streams which come down from the interior.
(iv) The coasts abound in excellent fish and turtles; and the natives collect
pearl-oysters and trepang (a species of edible sea-slug).
3. Towns, etc. —The European population is under 3000.
The capital is Suva on Yiti Levu. Levuka, on another island,
is the second town and seaport, and was the old capital. It


is finely situated at the foot of a steep hill, with a wall of
rock rising behind it.
(i) History and Native Inhabitants.— The islands were discovered by
that great Pacific navigator, Tasman, in 1643; but were left unnoticed till
Captain Cook visited them in 1769. The few white men that came to the
islands after Cook’s visit were some escaped convicts from Botany Bay.
Most of these soon perished either through quarrels among themselves, or
at the hands of the natives. • The Fijians were inveterate cannibals, and,
among other revolting customs, were in the habit of burying their old
people alive. In the present day, thanks to the labour of devoted mission-
aries, they have become a peaceful, contented, and good-natured people.
The colonists accuse them, truly enough, of laziness; but it may be urged in
their defence that they have no incentive to, or need for, labour, when a
month’s work will supply them with a year’s food. The Fijian native is of
a dark olive colour, tall and strongly built, with regular features, and a
huge mop of frizzy hair. The islands were ceded to England by the natives
in 1874.
< it is interesting to sit on the broad verandah of the hotel and watch the stream
of natives passing, all more or less dressed in Adam and Eve’s summer attire,
and here you can see specimens from almost every island in the South Seas.
The lighter-coloured and better-looking have eastern blood in their veins.
while the darker ones are of Papuan race.
‘ We walked along the shore through groves of cocoa-nut palms, bananas, and
bread-fruit, where nestle the native huts, and through cool, dark woods whose
heavy masses of foliage were noisy with birds overhead. At low tide the
hard, ripple-marked sand is veined with shallow pools, full of little fish and
shells, which girls, wading about, are picking up for food. On the dry sand
above are small crabs darting about on tiptoe, so fast that at first they seem
to be dead leaves swept before the breeze.’— Log Letters.
NEW GUINEA OR PAPUA
(Area, 300,000 square miles C?) = New South Wales.)
i. Position, etc. —This, the largest island in the world next
to Australia, lies to the north of that continent. The western
half belongs to Holland j the north-eastern portion, known as
Kaiser Wilhelm’s Land, to Germany; and the south-east is
British. The island, except on the coast-line, is still practi-


cally unknown; and offers a fine field to the explorer, who
is not afraid to struggle through the dense forest, with every
leaf pouring a little bucket of water on him as he works his
way through the mass of creepers and underwood. England
is the only country that has done anything to develop its
possessions in New Guinea j and there is some export of
gold, sandalwood, and copra from the chief trading station,
Port Moresby The colony of Queensland is responsible for
the administration of the British portion, which is as large as
Great Britain itself.
(i) Coast-line.—New Guinea (in shape) looks like some grotesque monster
of antediluvian ages, with a rounded peninsula for the head and another
long and narrow one for the tail. The shores are high and rocky, except on
the south, which is swampy and low. Though coral-reefs fringe the shores,
yet there are many excellent harbours. The coast region is, in general, a
waste of mangrove swamps, incessant rain, and sweltering heat.
(ii) Surface.— The country is mountainous and well wooded, containing
giant forest trees lashed together by rattans and other climbing plants and
creepers. It is probable that one great range of mountains runs through the
island from west to east. At present the only known ranges are the
Charles Louis Mountains in the west, and the Owen Stanley Range in the
south-east, which contains the peak of Victoria (13,000 feet). The Fly River,
in British territory, has been navigated by a steam-launch to a distance of
600 miles. The Augusta River, in Kaiser Wilhelm’s Land, is also navigable,
and has splendid land on both sides of it.
(iii) Climate.—The climate, on the coast at all events, is stcamily hot and
very wet. Travellers are bathed in perspiration from morning to night;
and it has been found that a pair of boots, if laid aside for a day or two,
become covered with mildew half an inch thick. In a climate such as
this, we expect malarial fever; and malarial fever is very prevalent on the
coast of the island.
(iv) Vegetation and Animal Life.— The forests of New Guinea are very
rich in timber, and contain the eucalypti and acacias of Australia, iron-
wood, ebony, and palms. Food-producing plants, such as bananas,
sago, bread-fruit, cocoa-nut, and sugar-cane, are very plentiful—Papua
resembles Australia in its mammals, which arc mainly marsupial. The
very rich bird-life includes the running cassowary, the great black
cockatoo (whose bill alone—six inches long by two across—is as big as the
pigmy parrot) and the various birds of paradise. The brilliant colouring
of the males of this last species is well known; it is as brilliant as that of
the females is dull and sober.


One of the many ways the natives employ to capture these birds is to discover
their roosting trees. These once found, the hunter climbs the tree and puts
a cloth over the head of his unsuspecting captive.
2. Products and People.— At present there is very little
trade done in New Guinea. From Port Moresby some gold,
sandalwood, and copra is exported; and elsewhere skins of
the birds of paradise - are collected by Dutch and Malay
traders. But timber, sago, trepang, and pearl-shell will pro-
bably be exported in the future. The natives cultivate yams,
sweet potatoes, bananas, etc., in their gardens.
People. —The Papuans derive their name from a Malay word which means
‘woolly hair’; and the people of the island are distinguished by a huge
frizzly mop, sometimes as big as a guardsman’s bearskin. At night they use
a wooden neck-rest for a pillow, to prevent their mops being disarranged.
Their colour runs from dark to light brown or even yellow, and they arc
strongly enough built, though with slender legs. They are hunters as well
as gardeners, and will eat anything from sago and fowls down to lizards and
insects. The Papuan house, which is as often as not placed in the water, is
always built on stakes. Cannibalism and ‘ head-hunting ’ are two of their
favourite pursuits; and they have a bad reputation for treacherous dealing
and murder.
(a) The Papuans are not without their sense of humour, as the following anecdote
will show. The captain of a Dutch gunboat had landed at a village in New
Guinea, and, anxious to impress the natives, had dressed himself in full
uniform. The native chief insisted on the captain’s visiting his house, and
the visit was so prolonged that the boat’s crew of the Dutchman began to get
anxious and to fear treachery. They accordingly marched up well armed into
the village, where they met an excited crowd of natives. The crowd parted,
and revealed in its midst the gallant captain stripped of his uniform and
dressed in alternate stripes of red and blue paint.
(b) A traveller in New Guinea gives the following account of the Papuan houses:
‘ They stand some fifty yards or more from the shore, and each house is con-
nected by a bridge, of so sketchy and insecure a nature as to render its
passage by a booted European almost impossible. Even more dilapidated
still are the houses themselves, built as they are of rotten mats, bits of old
boats, or anything that comes to hand. Inside, the house is unlighted pro-
bably, except for some accidental gap in the dilapidated wall; and the smoke
of the fire, which is placed on a large flat stone, finds its way through the
roof as best it can. The furniture is not extensive. A wooden drum, a few
mats, some fish-spears, an abundance of bows and arrows, some native-made


pots and wooden bowls, and a couple of admirably carved head-rests or
pillows, would be in nine cases out of ten a full inventory. The rain drips
through the roof into the sea beneath; but the Papuan does not mind, for
there is no carpet to damage, and he is satisfied as long as the holes in the
floor are not so large as to permit of his disappearing in like fashion in his
(c) ‘ Woman is little more than the slave of the man among the Papuans. She has
to make his sago and cook his food, to draw the water, make pottery and
fibre baskets, and often to submit to ill-usage. On the death of her husband,
the wife is confined to her house for some time, for if the ghost of the
deceased individual were to see her going about, he would immediately strike
down people with Sickness. Among some tribes mourning widows are
compelled to wear mats of a most peculiar cowl-like shape over the head
and shoulders.’—Guillemard’s ‘ Cruise of the Marchesa.’
Minor Islands of Australasia
i. Introductory. —There are many groups of small islands
included in Australasia. Bub the chief are the Bismarck
Archipelago (New Britain and New Ireland), the Solomon
Islands, New Caledonia, and the Loyalty Islands, and the
New Hebrides. Most of them are of volcanic origin, fringed
with coral reefs, and well-wooded, especially with palm-trees.
They produce, among other things, trepang, copra, pearl-
shell, and, in decreasing quantities, sandalwood. These
products the natives barter with the island-traders for cotton-
prints, tobacco, and knives. The Polynesian natives that
inhabit the islands are a dwindling race. Ardent spirits,
leprosy, consumption, and European dress are slowly killing
them out.
(i) New Britain is called by the Germans Neu Pommem; New Ireland,
Neu Mecklenburg. Both islands belong to Germany. Germany also owns
the northern half of the Solomon Islands. The southern half belongs to
Great Britain.
(ii) France owns New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands, and exercises a
joint protectorate with Great Britain over the New Hebrides.
(iii) The scenery of the Pacific Islands has been thus described by Louis
Becke, a famous South Sea Island trader: * A long, sweeping curve of coast,


fringed with tall plumed palms, casting wavering shadows on the yellow
sand, as they sway and swish softly to the breath of the brave trade-wind
that whistles through the thickly verdured hummocks on the weather side
of the island, to die away into a soft breath as, after passing through the
belt of cocoa-nuts, it faintly ripples'thc transparent depths of the lagoon—a
broad sheet of blue and silver stretching away from the far distant line of
reef to the smooth yellow beach at the foot of the palms.’
2. New Ireland and New Britain lie to the north-east of
New Guinea. They produce copra and cocoa-nut fibre. The
Solomons, to the south-east, yield sandalwood and tortoiseshell.
(i) The natives of both groups are ferocious, and treacherous in their
dealings with the white traders; and cannibalism and head-hunting are
still common among them. New Britain has a notoriously feverish climate;
and its inhabitants are inveterate chewers of the betel-nut.
(ii) Part of the Solomon Islands was annexed by Great Britain in 18S3.
The method of annexation was a simple one. The man-o’-war hove-to off
an island, and an armed boat’s-crew pulled ashore. The principal chief
was then sent for, and, through an interpreter, a proclamation was read to
him, to the effect that his island belonged to Queen Victoria. If he agreed,
the Union Jack was hoisted, the ship fired a salute, and a notice-board was
fixed to a tree declaring the island English property. At the end of the
ceremony the chief was made happy by a present of a bottle of rum.
(iii) Woodford, author of A Naturalist among the Head-hunters, thus
describes the scenery on one of the Solomon Islands : ‘ Along the coast in
both directions stretches the thick fringe of cocoa-nut palms; behind them
the deep green of the virgin forest; on the shore, among the palm-trees, the
villages of the natives, among which the large canoe-houses are conspicuous
for their size among the smaller huts. At each village a neatly built jetty of
coral stone, planted on the top with grass, projects for some distance into
the sea. Around us is the pale blue water of the lagoon, where we arc
anchored in fifteen fathoms. To seaward, numerous small islands, each with
its centre of tall forest trees and fringe of cocoa-nut palms. On one of them
a little larger than the rest is the village whence the lagoon takes its name.
Farther to seaward a white line of foam, whence at times the dull sound of
The league-long roller thundering on the reef
falls upon the listening ear; and beyond, the deep sapphire blue of the open
ocean.’
The inhabitants of the Solomons are keen hands at a bargain. ‘The native,’
says Mr. Woodford, 1 knows how many cocoa-nuts make ten. As a general
rule it is seven and a half, but I have known it to be as little as six. The
kernels of the cocoa-nuts are cut in half and strung upon strings, in bunches
of ten strings nominally supposed to consist of twenty half-nuts to each


string, so that a bunch ought to consist of a hundred nuts. The price paid
is a stick of tobacco for one string. These kernels have been dried by the
aid of smoke (as the climate of the Solomons is too damp to allow of their
being dried in the sun), and constitute what is known commercially as copra.
This copra is shipped to Europe. The oil contained in it is expressed for
soap and candle-making and other purposes, and the residue is made into
oil-cake for feeding cattle.’
3. New Caledonia, the most important French possession
in Australasia, lies midway between the Fijis and the eastern
coast of Queensland. It is rather smaller than Wales; and
on it live 63,000 people, of whom iOO are convicts, for it is
a French penal settlement. It is rich in minerals, and
produces coal, chrome, cobalt, and, above all, nickel. The
capital, Noumea (4), does a trade turnover of nearly
£1,000,000 a year, and is the collecting dep6t for all the
French possessions in the Western Pacific.
(i) The Loyalty Islands and the New Hebrides, both of which produce
sandalwood, lie to the north-east of New Caledonia.
(ii) The New Hebrides are all more or less of volcanic formation. The
eruption of one of them, Ambrym, was witnessed in 1894 by Captain Gust,
of H.M.’s Ship Dart. ‘ Soon it was apparent that a lava stream was rapidly
finding its way towards the sea; the course of the stream could bo distinctly
traced by the dense black smoke from the burning bush, as it wound its way-
through the hills like a great fiery serpent. Occasionally a puff of white
steam would show where the water had been met with. As the head of the
stream got nearer, bursts of flame could occasionally be seen, and the noise
was most indescribable and awe-inspiring. Presently the head of the stream
appeared—a red-hot, rapidly moving mass of molten lava, some thirty yards
wide. In another moment it entered the sea; and then a most wonderful
sight was seen: a dense pillar of steam rapidly rose straight up to a height
afterwards measured by a sextant and found to be 4600 feet. The morning
after the water was still steaming, and upon its surface a great quantity of
dead fish and turtles was floating about. During the eruption thick dust
was falling continuously, and nothing could be seen that was more than a
quarter of a mile away. ‘ The island changed from its natural hue of bright
green tropical vegetation to one uniform light slate colour.’
4. The South Sea Islands.
The mountain wooded to the peak, the lawns
And winding glades high up, like ways to Heaven,


The slender coco’s drooping crown of plumes,
The lightning-flash of insect and of bird,
The lustre of the long convolvuluses
That coiled around the stately stems.
The league-long roller thundering on the reef,
The moving whisper of huge trees that branched
And blossomed in the zenith, or the sweep
Of some precipitous rivulet to the wave.
Tennyson.
TO AND FROM AUSTRALASIA
i. Principal Lines from Europe. —Some of the chief lines
of steamers from Europe to Australia are: the Peninsular
and Oriental (P. and 0.), the Orient, the British India (B. I.),
the French Messageries Maritimes (from Marseilles), and the
North German Lloyd (from Bremen). All of these lines
take the same route —through the Suez Canal, having first
called at various ports on the north shore of the Mediterranean
(Brindisi, Naples, and Genoa). The Orient Line (which calls
at Plymouth) sometimes sends ships to Australia by way of
the Cape; these touch at Capetown and then go straight on
to Adelaide. After passing Suez, the route followed is the
same for all lines, except for British India. It will therefore
be sufficient to describe the voyage of a passenger in the
chief of them, the Peninsular and Oriental.
(i) If the passenger does not choose to go overland as far as Brindisi and
there catch the steamer, he will embark on one of the P. and O. Company’s
boats at Tilbury Dock, London. The steamer passes down the Channel to
the north of the fertile Channel Islands, and, rounding the dangerous Cape
of Ushant, heads across the celebrated ‘Bay.’ The presence of many cross-
currents in the Bay of Biscay often makes the steaming through it an un-
pleasant experience, but it is not nearly so stormy as is generally supposed.


In four days from London (1300 miles), the ship touches at Gibraltar, where
the ‘ Rock,’ honeycombed with batteries and bristling with guns, frowns
over the sea. The next halting-place is Brindisi, where the European mails
are put on hoard, and the vessel proceeds to Malta. This ‘ little military
hot-house' is a very important coaling-station, and its port, Yaletta, is there-
fore strongly fortified. It was on Malta that St. Paul is supposed to have
been shipwrecked the island is now famed for its lace, fruit, and filigree-
work. Four days more bring the vessel to Port Said (3500 miles from
London), a dirty little coaling-town, at the Mediterranean entrance to the
Suez Canal. The passage through the canal, which is eighty-two miles
long, takes rather more than a day. Ships can now pass through at night,
ns the hanks are lit up by the electric light. The run down the Red Sea to
Aden is at all times of the year disagreeably hot. Aden is the Gibraltar of
the East; and, as the ship lies at anchor in the harbour, little native hoys
throng round it, diving for the silver coins the passengers throw into the
water. From Aden the ship heads straight for Colombo in Ceylon, and
3197 miles from that port the first glimpse of Australian soil is caught at
Cape Leeuwin.
Albany is the first Australian port touched at; and from thence the news
of the ship’s arrival is flashed on by telegraph to Adelaide. A run of over
1000 miles brings the vessel to Port Adelaide, from which a railway runs to
the capital of South Australia, a few miles away. From Adelaide the shore
is hugged till ‘ Marvellous Melbourne ’is reached; and then the steamer,
rounding Port Phillip Head, passes through Bass Strait, and enters, through
Sydney Head, Port Jackson, the largest and grandest harbour in the world.
On an arm of Port Jackson stands Sydney, ‘one of those places,’ says
Anthony Trollope, ‘which when a man leaves it knowing he will never
return, he cannot leave without a pang or tear—such is its loveliness.’
(ii) The British India Company’s steamers call at Naples, whose bay is
overlooked by the great volcano Vesuvius, and after that follow the route
of the other lines down to Aden.
From Aden the steamers hold right across the Indian Ocean to the Straits
of Sunda between Java and Sumatra, through which they pass, and arrive
at Batavia. It was in the Sunda Strait that the volcanic Island of Krakatoa
was blown into the sea in the year 1883. The vessel proceeds through the
island-studded Java and Banda Seas, dotted with Chinese trading-junks in
search of birds’-nests, pearl-shell, and trepang, and first sights the Australian
continent at Cape York. Before she passes Torres Strait, she stops at
Thursday Island, where the pearling-luggers lie, and then makes her way
inside the Great Barrier Reef down the Queensland coast. The navigation
inside the reef is quiet, but full of sunken dangers, as the reef-huilding
corals are constantly at work. On the reef itself the steamer passes groups
of aborigines busy collecting trepang for the Chinese markets—the sea-slug
that is so dear to the palate of the Flowery Land epicure. All the principal
ports of Queensland are visited— Townsville for the gold of Charters


Towers, and Mackay for the sugar of the districts round it. The voyage
ends at Brisbane, where the deep channel recently dredged in the Brisbane
River allows the largest vessels to come up to the heart of the city.
2. Principal Lines from Australia. —The three chief lines
connecting Australia with the West and the East are: the
Canadian-Australian, which runs to Vancouver in Canada;
the Australian and American, which runs to San Francisco
in the United States; and the Eastern and Australian, which
runs to China and Japan.
(i) The Canadian-Australian Line runs in connection with the great
railway that crosses Canada. Its steamers leave Sydney, and run first to
the land-locked harbour of Suva in the Fiji Islands. From those coral-begirt
islands the steamer threads her way through countless coral islets, fringed
with tall plumed palms, to Honolulu, the capital of Hawaii, and the half-way
house to America. There the traveller may stop to revel for a while in the
eternal summer and exquisite scenery of these islands, or to watch the smoke
and flames that are for ever bursting forth from the great volcano of
Kilauea. In seven days from Honolulu, Victoria, the capital of British
Columbia, is reached ; and five more hours’ steaming lands the passengers
at Vancouver, the terminus of the Canadian Pacific Railway. The railway
runs past huge glaciers and through dark pine forests, till it crosses the
Rocky Mountains, and then sweeps through what were once the hunting-
grounds of the dreaded Blackfeet Indians to Winnipeg, the metropolis of
Western Canada. After Winnipeg, the line continues north of the Great
Lakes, through a thickly timbered rocky country, and reaches Ottawa, the
capital of Canada. After a railway journey of five and a half days from
Vancouver, the seaport of Montreal, on the St. Lawrence, is reached.
Thence various lines of steamers carry the passenger on to London or
Liverpool in about a week. Or the traveller may go on by train from
Montreal to Quebec, the scene of General Wolfe’s glorious victory and
death in 1759, and take ship there. In the winter-time the St. Lawrence is
blocked with ice, and the Canadian steamers run from Halifax, further
south.
(ii) The Australian and American Line starts from Sydney, and calls first
at the beautifully situated city of Auckland. Having called at Apia in
Samoa (where Louis Stevenson died), the vessel holds on her way to Hono-
lulu. In six days after that the Golden Gate is entered, and San Francisco
is reached. ‘ The beautiful bay, lined with white cities and reflecting great
mountain-ranges, is traversed by ocean-steamships, ferry-boats, and sailing-
vessels, from the unwieldy junks of the Chinese shrimpers and the lateen-
sailcd feluccas of the Maltese and Greek fishermen to the towering white


MILES
MILES
Sydney to Colombo,
. 5165
Sydney to Malta, .
10,037
„ „ Aden,
7559
,, „ Gibraltar,
11,010
„ „ Suez,
8867
„ „ London,
12,383
„ „ Port Said,
8951
canvas of the clipper-ships. From San Francisco the traveller can choose
several railway routes across the continent.’ The Central Pacific, which
crosses the Rockies, is generally chosen. This line runs near the famous
Yellowstone National Park, a district of immense geysers and a huge game
preserve, and reaches Salt Lake City, the Mormon capital. There stands the
stately Mormon Temple, built of polished granite, and large enough to hold
12,000 people. From Salt Lake City the ‘ cars ’ continue south to the silver-
mining town of Denver, and through the rolling prairies of Nebraska to
Omaha, the heart of the continent. From Omaha the train finally steams
into Chicago, the city of wheat and pigs. From this * porkopolis,’ the
traveller has a choice of several routes to New York. One of the most
picturesque is that which takes him past the grand Falls of Niagara, and
up the Hudson River, through the Catskill Mountains, amongst which Rip
Van Winkle slept his long sleep of twenty years. From New York the
‘ Ocean Greyhounds ’—the Cunarders and the White Stars—do the Atlantic
passage to Queenstown in a few hours over five days, and in a few hours
more are running up the Mersey to Liverpool.
(iii) The Eastern and Australian Line starts from Port Adelaide, and runs
up the east coast of Australia, touching at all the principal ports to Thursday
Island. From thence three days bring the ship to Palmerston, on Port
Darwin, where the overland telegraph from Adelaide ends. From Port
Darwin the course lies through the Arafura and Banda Seas to the Dutch
island of Amboyna, the home of spices, and northwards, through a calm
blue sea and with land in sight every day, past the Philippines. So still
and oily is the sea that flying fish are visible, as little dark specks, a mile
away. On entering the China Sea, the approach to Hong-kong is heralded
by the crowds of clumsy Chinese fishing-junks. The capital,Victoria, is over-
looked by a sombre forest-clad peak, high up on the sides of which peep out
the houses of the wealthy Chinese and English merchants. The next port of
call in China is Shanghai, where the filthy Chinese quarter, on the one side,
presents a striking contrast to the orderly and well laid-out European
settlement, with its streets patrolled by Sikh policemen. The steamer, after
leaving China, runs up the narrow inland Sea of Japan, and finally anchors
off the port of Kobe. From Kobe a railway runs to Osaka, the ‘ Manchester ’
of Japan, Yokohama, and to other towns in the country.
Distances of Ocean Eoutes


Perth to King George’s Sound
(Albany), ....
350
King George's Sound to
Adelaide, ....
1019
ton,
367
Rockhampton to Mackay, .
190
Mackay to Townsville, .
•211
Townsville to Thursday
Island,
715
Thursday Island to Port Dar-
win,
730
Distances of
Australian
Ports
Adelaide to Melbourne, . . 501
Melbourne to Sydney, . . 567
Sydney to Brisbane, . . 503
Brisbane to Maryborough, . 180
Maryborough to Rockhamp-
HISTORY OF DISCOVERY IN AUSTRALASIA
i. Although it is believed that the Portuguese were the first
Europeans to sight Australia, and although we know that the
Spanish navigator Torres in 1606 sailed through the straits that now
bear his name, it is to the Dutch that the honour of first survey-
ing a large part of the Australian coast really belongs. In 1606 a
Dutch vessel sailed into the Gulf of Carpentaria, and first caught
sight of Australian land, at Cape York Peninsula, early in the follow-
ing year. These Dutchmen left a record of their presence in the gulf,
by naming the largest island in it Groote Eylandt, or Great Island.
2. Dutch Discovery. —The different Dutch names round the
coast —they are chiefly to be found on the west —attest the progress
of Dutch Discovery. Cape Leeuwin (Lioness), in the south-west,
was named after the Dutch vessel that discovered it in 1622. Dirk
Hartog, who explored the west coast in 1610, left his name to an
island a little further north. Van Diemen’s Gulf, on the north coast,
was discovered by three Dutch ships in 1705 ; while in the Gulf of
Carpentaria we meet with the significant names of Cape Keer-weer
(Cape Turn-again) and Water-plaats (Watering-place). The names of
the ships in which the early Dutch explorers sailed are commemorated
in the names of Mount Heemskirk and Mount Zeehaan (Sea-line)
(which were the first points of land sighted in Tasmania by any
European), in Arnhem Peninsula, and in Geelvink (Yellowfinch) Bay,


in New Guinea. The Swan River was visited by the Dutch captain
van Ylaming, in 1696, and named from the abundance of black
swans he found there. In his vessel, the Geelvink, he sailed up the
river, and was thus the first European to penetrate any distance into
the interior of Australia. The first Englishman on the west coast
was the famous old buccaneer, William Dampier. In 1699 he dis-
covered and named the Dampier Archipelago.
3. The most famous of the early Dutch explorers was Abel Jans
Tasman. Starting frofti Batavia in August 1642, with his two
ships, the Heemskirh and the Zeehaan, he sighted the Island of
Tasmania on the 24th of November. He christened the island Van
Diemen’s Land, in honour of his patron, Antony Van Diemen, the
Governor of Batavia, who had despatched the expedition. When
Tasman’s ship was lying off the island, the explorer himself put off in
a boat to take formal possession. But the surf was too strong for the
boat to come near the shore ; whereupon the ship’s carpenter, Peter
Jacobs, leaped into the sea with the flag of the Stadtholder of
Holland wrapped round him, and, swimming strongly through the
breakers, planted it safely on shore. Tasman then sailed east, and
in the same year (1642) cast anchor in Tasman Bay in New Zealand.
In 1643 he discovered the Fiji Islands, and, a year later, explored a
large part of the north-west coast of Australia, which was named in
his honour, Tasmanland, Tasman kept a journal of his famous
voyage, and, with the courageous piety that characterised all the
early navigators, both Dutch and English, began his journal with the
words, ‘ May God Almighty be pleased to give His blessing to this
voyage ! Amen ! ’
4. French Discovery. —In the year 1801 two French ships, the
Oeographe and the Naturaliste, under the command of Captain
Baudin, were engaged in cruising oft the west coast of Australia, and
left behind them memorials of their presence there in Geographe
Bay, Cape Naturaliste, and Cape Cuvier,—the last christened after
the great French naturalist. Further up the coast we meet with
Cape Gantheaume, Cape L’eveque (Bishop), and Cape Bougainville,


which bears the name of the first Frenchman who ever circumnavi-
gated the world, Baudin also visited Tasmania, and discovered and
named the Freycinet Peninsula, after two of his most zealous officers.
But this island had already “been visited in 1792 by two other
Frenchmen, Admiral Bruni d’Entrecasteaux and Captain Huon,
whose names still survive in a river, an island, and a channel.
5, English Discovery. —The English explorers confined their
attention principally to the south and east coasts of Australia ; and,
if we look along the east coast of the continent, we shall hardly find
a single name that is not English. The same remark holds true of
the shores of New Zealand, except that there the native names are
numerous, and are still used by white men; whereas, on the
Australian coasts, it is very rare to find a native name at all. This
fact illustrates the difference between the native races of the two
countries: in New Zealand the natives were intelligent, poetical,
and humorous, and christened their headlands and bays accordingly ;
whilst the natives of Australia, caring for little beyond the satisfac-
tion of their appetites, and with no higher feelings than those of the
stomach, gave themselves no trouble about place-names at all, or else
employed a name for one month which they forgot the next. The
shores of Australia teem with names which are records of baffled
enterprise or disappointed hopes: Anxious Bay, Cape Catastrophe,
Massacre Bay (where the Maories of New Zealand killed three of
Tasman’s sailors), Disaster Inlet in Carpentaria Gulf (so named by an
explorer on account of the bursting of a fowling-piece on which he
had relied to procure food), and Encounter Bay, where the English-
man, Flinders, met Baudin and his party in 1802.
6. Cook’s Voyages. —We ought to notice, as frequently occurring
on the map, such names as Endeavour, Resolution, Adventure, and
Discovery. These are the names of the ships that were under the
command of the great navigator Captain Cook, who gave us New
Zealand, and did more than any other explorer to survey the eastern
coast of Australia. He has truly been called the Columbus of the
Southern Ocean ; and of him it has been said : What the immortal


Genoese navigator accomplished in the Northern Hemisphere for
Spain and Europe, Cook accomplished in the Southern Hemisphere
for England and for mankind. Cook was the son of an agricultural
labourer in Yorkshire, and, entering the navy as an able seaman,
ultimately rose to the rank of captain. In his first voyage, 1768-
1771, he circumnavigated New Zealand, and took possession of the
east coast of Australia in the name of Great Britain. He landed,
amongst many other places, at Botany Bay, which he so named,
because four hundred new plants were found there by the naturalists
of the expedition, during a stay of less than three weeks. In his
second voyage, Cook cruised in the Southern Pacific, visiting Tahiti
and exploring the New Hebrides ; and on this voyage he also dis-
covered New Caledonia. In 1779 Cook had landed on one of the
Sandwich Islands to recover a boat, which had been stolen by the
natives, when he was suddenly and treacherously attacked by the
islanders. His own boat was lying near the shore, and he dashed
into the water towards it; but being overtaken, he was clubbed
and stabbed to death by the natives. Only a part of his body was
recovered from the cannibal savages. Other famous names on the
list of English explorers are those of Vancouver, who discovered
and surveyed King George’s Sound in 1791 ; of Surgeon Bass, who
in 1798 demonstrated that Tasmania was an island by sailing round
it in a small boat; and of Flinders (the companion of Bass in his
Tasmanian voyage), who circumnavigated the whole continent, and
who bears the title of the ‘ Discoverer of South Australia.’ But it
was Cook who really started the process of colonisation in Australia.
For in 1788 the British Government, being no longer able to ship
convicts to the revolted American colonies, bethought themselves of
Cook’s discoveries, and fixed on Botany Bay as the site of the first
convict settlement.
7. Inland Discovery. —lt may be said, speaking roughly, that
only a third of the Australian continent has been thoroughly ex-
plored and opened up for commercial enterprise. This area lies in
the east of Australia ; but even there, —even in the mother-colony of
New South Wales -there are large stretches (as in the Riverina


district, and also in Cape York Peninsula), about which very little
indeed is known. The remainder of the continent, except of course
round the coast, still remains a sealed book : or, at all events, many
of its pages are yet to be turned over. The Great Sandy Desert in
the north, and the Victoria Desert in the south, are still nothing more
than blank spaces of the unknown upon the map. Of the two the
Victoria Desert will probably prove the hardest to penetrate (though
it has been crossed once by Giles) ; for it lies below the southern
limit of regular rainfall; and it is the want of water that has made
Australian exploration so difficult and so deadly. Yet even into the
wastes of Western Australia (on the edge of the desert), hardy gold-
prospectors, mounted on camels, are daily pushing their way.
8. The Overland Telegraph.—The only tract—and it is a
narrow one—of the desert interior of Australia that has been
properly explored, lies on the track of the overland telegraph-line
between the city of Adelaide and Port Darwin. This was not only a
magnificent engineering feat, it was also a grand and important piece
of exploration ; for the continent had not been completely crossed
many times before, nor has it been since. The laying of this line
proved that a country, once considered to be little more than a howl-
ing waste of sand and scrub, was in many parts capable of supporting
herds of cattle and sheep. It was for such industrial and commercial
purposes—to spy out the capabilities of the land for stock-raising or
for yielding minerals—that most exploring expeditions in Australia
have been undertaken. The continent contained no large game to
attract the sportsman; there were no great native kingdoms, as in
Africa, with whom a profitable trade might be established ; the
aborigines were not an interesting study ; and of antiquarian interest
the continent had absolutely none. Exploration, for exploration’s
sake, was not a task in which the busy colonists were willing to
engage—indeed, the difficulties of it were enough to daunt the most
courageous. But to discover new runs for cattle or sheep, or in pro-
specting for gold, the Australian explorer has always been ready to
face the most terrible dangers and the most cruel hardships. Some
of the qualifications for an Australian explorer may be judged from


the following short catechism, to which the explorer Giles subjected
a candidate for one of his expeditions : £ Can you shoe % Can you
ride ? Can you starve ? Can you go without water ? and, Are you
afraid of being speared by the blacks % ’
9. Explorers. —Apart from the earlier discoverers, who merely
surveyed the coast-line, some of the greatest names on the list of
Australian discovery are those of Oxley, Hume, Sturt, Mitchell,
Eyre, Leichardt, Stuart (perhaps the most successful of them all),
Burke and 'Wills, Giles, Warburton, and Forrest (now Sir
John Forrest, the first Premier of Western Australia). Most of these
men w ere explorers in the true sense of the word, and were actuated
by a true love of discovery ; but, as has been said, a large part of our
knowledge of the Australian continent has been derived from men who
have pioneered the different ‘ gold-rushes,’ or who have moved further
away from the settled districts in search of new pasture for their
stock. The search for fresh pasture was a necessity ; for, for twenty-
five years after the arrival of the ‘ First Fleet ’ at Port Jackson in
the year 1788, the settlers were confined to a strip of country only
forty miles across. This strip was bounded on one side by the sea,
and on the other by the Blue Mountains, which had hitherto proved
an impassable barrier, and made, ‘ as it were, a prison for them on
the shores of Port Jackson.’
10. Exploration of the Murray-Darling basin.
(i) Oxley, in the year 1817, travelled down the banks of the
Lachlan, till he found it end in an impenetrable marsh. This he
took to be the shores of a vast inland sea. His most important
journey was made in 1823, when he was the first white man to set
foot in what is now Queensland, and when he discovered the Brisbane
River. Of this river he got information from two runaway convicts,
whom he met in the bush. Oxley’s discoveries marked an impor-
tant epoch in the history of the colonies ; for from his time onwards
the pioneer squatters kept pressing ever forward in search of new
pasture for their stock.
(ii) Hume, a young man of colonial birth, and an experienced
bushman, discovered the Murrumbidgee River in 1819. On a later


journey, in the year 1824, he came upon the Murray, which is some-
times known as the Hume River in honour of its discoverer. Crossing
the Murray, he penetrated south to what proved to be the shores of
Port Phillip, and was thus the real founder of Victoria.
(iii) Sturt, an officer stationed at Sydney, is the greatest of the
southern explorers. With Hume for a guide, he discovered the
Darling in 1828, and next year rowed down the Murrumbidgee into
the Murray, and, down that river, into the shallow Lake Alexandrina.
To this lake he gave one of the names of Queen Victoria. The river,
spreading itself among bewildering sandbanks and shallows, has no
outlet into the sea; and he and his party were forced to return by
the way they came.
On the return voyage the hardships were terrific. The boat was
leaky, and often sunk, soaking their provisions, and rendering their
fire-arms useless; they were surrounded by hostile natives, and
more than once ran the risk of being speared, or clubbed to death ;
and the arms of the rowers became nerveless, their persons cruelly
emaciated, and their spirits wholly sunk. This expedition solved
the problem of the drainage of New South Wales, and opened up a
great and fertile country for future settlement.
In 1844-6 Sturt forced his way north-west from the Darling, over
endless ridges of red sand, to the Grey Range, and thence, through
wastes covered with the spiny porcupine grass, to a point within
150 miles of the centre of the continent. Captain Charles Sturt has
been well called the Father of Australian Explorers. The Darling,
the Murray, and Cooper’s Creek all stand to his credit, as well as
the glory of being the first man to come nearest the heart of the
continent. Throughout all his journeys it was his pride that he
never had occasion to take the life of a man.
A member of Sturt’s 1814 expedition thus describes the-barren ground
west of the Darling: ‘Suppose to yourself a great boundless, unlimited
meadow, which has just been run over with the scythe, the swathes of grass
now lying in pretty and parallel rows. Only there was no grass at all, not
even a green thing; nothing but sand, sand, sand, arranged in interminable
ridges. And all this on a most stupendous and Brobdingnagian scale. Thus
the ridges are nearly as high as a man, about sixty feet broad at the base,
narrowing to half that distance at the top. At the very shores of the lake


district these ridges were suddenly chopped off as with a clean cut; and we
gazed down on a vast and level expanse of brine-pits and salty incrustation.’
(iv) John Mitchell was Sturt’s great rival in discovery. In the
year 1835 he discovered the country between the Loddon and
Goulburn Rivers, and the country south of the Grampians. To this
fertile and beautiful region he gave the name of Australia Felix;
and, in a happy spirit of prophecy, wrote of it that ‘we had at
length discovered a country ready for the immediate reception of
civilised man, and fit to become one of the greatest nations of the
earth.’ When Mitchell reached the coast at Portland Bay, he found
some Tasmanians already settled there, who supplied sheep and cattle
to passing whalers. In 1846 he explored some of the best pastoral
districts in Western Queensland ; the heat and drought he endured
during that expedition were so great, that even his kangaroo hounds
were killed by the sun. It was while accompanying Major Mitchell
on one of his earlier expeditions that Mr. Cunningham, a botanist,
was murdered by the blacks on the Bogan River, the first of the
martyrs in the cause of Australian discovery.
ii. Inland Exploration.
(i) Eyre, who was afterwards Governor of New Zealand and
Jamaica, did much to open up South Australia, from 1839 to 1841.
He discovered Lake Torrens, and made a marvellous journey of 1209
miles along the coast, from Adelaide to King George’s Sound, with
only a single native companion.
This journey was one of terrible hardships, which culminated in
murder. When Eyre had reached the head of Spencer Gulf, he
sent back some of the party, and pushed on with the others—Baxter,
his station-overseer, a native servant of his own named Wylie, and
two strange natives. His horses, which could only carry a few
pounds’ weight of stores, had frequently to go for days without
water ; and often all the moisture the whole party —men and animals
—got, was collected from dew with sponges and rags. Sometimes
Eyre would ride ahead by himself, and sink wells in the sea-sand.
When the expedition was 650 miles from its destination, Baxter
cried back ; but Eyre was resolute to hold on. The two natives


then deserted, but soon returned, and begged to be allowed to join
the party again. In the night they shot the overseer dead, and dis-
appeared, never to be heard of again, with two guns and nearly all
the ammunition. Eyre was left alone with his native servant; and
six hundred miles of their journey still lay before them. Their
whole stock of provisions was 40 lbs. of flour, four gallons of water,
and part of a dead horse ; and the last well had been left three days
before. Still they struggled on for a month, existing on a little
flour-paste, an occasional fish, and musty horse-flesh. Fortunately
they fell in with a whaler, which had touched on the coast; and in
the ship they were hospitably entertained for a fortnight, and so
enabled to continue their journey. After more than a year of fearful
hardship and difficulty, Eyre at last reached King George’s Sound.
(ii) Lei chard t, a great German explorer, in 1844-5 explored the
country between Brisbane and the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence
travelled to Port Essington, to the north of Van Diemen’s Gulf. In
1848 he started on another expedition, from which he never returned.
His fate is wrapped in complete mystery, for not a single relic of his
party has ever been recovered. It is conjectured that the party
perished of thirst, and that afterwards a bush-fire destroyed every
vestige of their remains. (For an account of an attack on Leichardt
by the natives, see p. 82.)
(iii) To Burke and Wills belongs the honour of being the first
men to cross the entire continent. They left Melbourne in the year
1860, and reached Cooper’s Creek. There they left most of their
companions, and pushed on with two other men to the Gulf of
Carpentaria. On their way back they died miserably of starvation
at Cooper’s Creek. The rest of the party, with a reserve store of
provisions, had been left behind on that river, and were to remain there
till their leaders rejoined them. Contrary to instructions, they aban-
doned the depot on April 21, 1861, with their camels and horses in
good working condition. A few hours afterwards, on the same day,
Burke and Wills arrived to find their friends gone. King, the sole
survivor of the party, was rescued in 1861, { a solitary figure,’ as his
rescuer describes him, ‘ apparently covered with some scare-crow rags
and part of a hat,’


(iv) Stuart, who had been a comrade of Sturt in his 1844 expedi-
tion, made three unsuccessful attempts to cross the continent from
Adelaide. Once he was stopped by attacks of the natives, and once
by the invincible denseness of the scrub. In the year 1862 he was
successful, and crossed the continent from Adelaide to Port Darwin,
along the meridian that was afterwards followed by the overland
telegraph line. He had long been under a promise to wash his face
and hands in the Indian Ocean : on the 24th of July 1862 the
promise was fulfilled, for, as he writes, ‘ I dipped my feet and washed
my face and hands in 'the sea, as I had promised the late Governor,
Sir Richard Mac Donnell, I would do if I reached it.’ He was the
discoverer of the Finke River, the Ashburton and Mac Donnell
Ranges, etc.
(v) In 1873 Colonel Warburton started with camels from Alice
Springs on the overland telegraph line, and in eight months reached
the coast of Western Australia at Oakover River. In 1874 Sir
John Forrest, with horses only, crossed from the Murchison River
to the telegraph line. Next year Giles travelled 2500 miles, from
the head of St. Vincent Gulf to Perth ; and for a thousand miles of
this distance his way led through nearly interminable scrub. These
three expeditions showed that Australia, between the telegraph line
and the hilly country on the west coast, is little better than a barren
waste of scrub, porcupine grass, and sand.
Warburton gives the following account of the aborigines of Western
Australia: ‘ They are the very lowest in the scale of humanity, and I cannot
conceive how anything could fall much lower. They do not even take the
trouble to put a few bushes up to shelter themselves from the sun or the
rain—when it does rain, though I don’t know when, for I didn’t see it—but
the sun is hot enough. They go on the shady side of a bush when the sun is
too hot for them, and when it rains I suppose they go to the lee side. The
gentlemen take the shank-bone, about nine inches long, of the wallaby, a
kind of marsupial hare; and when it is lubricated nicely in the mouth, they
pass it through the cartilage of the nose, and it sticks out; and having done
this they are in full dress. Ido not know anything more that is wanted.’


CHRONICLE OF DISCOVERY
17th century
The Dutch on the west and north coasts.
trate the continent up the Swan River.
Bass sails round Tasmania.
19th century
Oxley traces the course of the Lachlan.
Mitchell opens up Australia Felix.
1840-1
King George’s Sound.
1844-5
1844-6
Van Vlaming in 1696 the first European to pene-
Tasman discovers Tasmania and New Zealand.
Captain Cook lands at Poverty Bay in New Zea-
Cook at Botany Bay. He surveys a large part of
the eastern coast.
French discoverers on the west coast (Geographe
Bay, Cape Naturaliste, etc.).
Wentworth, Blaxland, and Lawson cross the Blue
Mountains from Sydney, and discover the rich
pastoral plains beyond the mountains.
Hume discovers the Hume River, or Murray.
Sturt rows down the Murrumbidgee and Murray to
Lake Alexandria.
Eyre travels along the sea-coast from Adelaide to
Leichardt travels from Brisbane to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and thence to Port Essington, in the
extreme north of Australia.
Sturt penetrates to within 150 miles of the centre of
the continent (hit. 24° 30', long. 137° 58').
Kennedy the first white man to reach the end of Cape
York Peninsula. He was murdered by the natives.


1855-6
A. C. Gregory travels from the Victoria River in the
north-west to Gladstone in Queensland,
1860-1
Burke and Wills the first men to cross the continent,
from Melbourne to the Gulf of Carpentaria. They
were starved to death at Cooper’s Creek.
Stuart the second man to cross the continent, from
Adelaide to Port Darwin.
1872
1873-5
Overland telegraph line opened.
Warburton, Forrest, and Giles explore Western
Australia between the telegraph line and the
coast.
1878-84
Winnecke explores the centre of the continent, east
of the telegraph line.
The Hon. D. W. Carnegie travels from Coolgardie,
north-north-east to Derby at the mouth of the
Fitzroy River.
The Calvert expedition is exploring Western Australia,
east of long. 120°.
ADVENTURES OF EXPLORERS
l. Attack on Leichardt’s Expedition.— Leichardt, in the journal
of his 1844-5 expedition, gives the following account of an attack
made on his party by the natives of Cape York Peninsula ;
‘ Our fireplace was made outside the trees on the banks. Brown
had shot six whistling ducks and four teals, which gave us a good
dinner, during which the principal topic of conversation was our
probable distance from the sea-coast. About seven o’clock I stretched
myself on the ground, as usual, at a little distance from the fire, and
fell into a doze—from which I was suddenly roused by a loud noise
and a call for help from Calvert and Roper. Natives had suddenly
■attacked us. Doubtless, they had watched our movements during
the afternoon, and marked the position of the different tents. As


soon as it was dark they sneaked down upon us, and threw a shower
of spears at the tents of Calvert, Eoper, and Gilbert, and also one or
two towards the fire. Charley and Brown called for percussion caps,
which I hastened to find ; and, as soon as they were nrovided, thev
discharged their guns into the crowd of natives, who instantly fled,
leaving Roper and Calvert pierced with several spears, and severely
beaten by their waddies (clubs). Several of these spears were barbed,
and could not be extracted without difficulty. I had to force one
through the arm of Eoper to break off the barb, and cut another out
of the leg of Mr. Calvert. John Murphy had succeeded in getting
out of the tent, and concealed himself behind a tree, whence he fired
at the natives, and severely wounded one of the blacks before Brown
had discharged his gun. Not seeing Mr. Gilbert I asked for him,
when Charlie told me that my unfortunate companion was no more.
He had come out of his tent with his gun, shot, and powder, and
handed them to him, when he instantly dropped down dead. Upon
receiving this afflicting intelligence I hastened to the spot, and
found Charlie’s account too true. He was lying speared through the
chest at a little distance from our fire, and, upon examining him, I
soon found to my sorrow that every sign of life had disappeared. As
soon as we had recovered from the panic into which we were thrown
by this sad event, every precaution was taken to prevent another
surprise. We watched through the night, and extinguished our fires
to conceal our individual position from the natives. A strong wind
blew from the southward, which made the night air distressingly
cold ; it seemed as if the wind blew through our bodies. We passed
an anxious night, in a state of most painful suspense as to the fate of
our still surviving companions.
‘ The dawning of the next morning was gladly welcomed, and I pro-
ceeded to examine and dress the wounds of my companions more
carefully than I had been able to do in the darkness of the night.
‘ Very early in the morning we heard the cooees of the natives, who
seemed wailing as if one of their number was either killed or severely
wounded, for we found stains of blood on the tracks. They dis-
appeared, however, very soon, for, on reconnoitring about the place, I
saw nothing of them. I interred the body of our ill-fated companion


in the afternoon, and read the funeral service of the English Church
over him. A large fire was afterwards made over the grave, to pre-
vent the natives from detecting and disinterring the body. Our
cattle and horses fortunately had not been molested. 5
2. Lieutenant Grey’s Adventure. —Lieutenant Grey is now Sir
George Grey, once Governor of the Cape Colony, and once also
Governor and Premier of New Zealand. As a young man, he did
a good deal of exploring on the coasts of Western Australia, and in
1837 was travelling southwards from Shark Bay along the coast.
As the young lieutenant and his party were struggling painfully
along—their ponies sorely jaded and themselves tortured with thirst
—they were suddenly menaced by a band of natives, two hundred
strong. Their attack was invited by the cowardly action of one of
Grey’s two companions, who took to his heels, followed closely by a
native with uplifted spear. Grey fired a shot over their heads, and
with another hit a man in the arm; but they still advanced with
fierce cries.
‘ I now, 5 writes Grey, ‘ made the two men retire behind some
neighbouring rocks, which formed a kind of protecting parapet along
our front and right flank, whilst I took post on the left. Both my
barrels were now exhausted ; and I desired the other two to fire
separately, whilst I was re-loading ; but, to my horror, Coles, who was
armed with my rifle, reported hurriedly that the cloth case, with
which he had covered it for protection against rain, had become
entangled. His services were thus lost at a most critical moment,
whilst trying to tear off the lock-cover; and the other man was so
paralysed with fear that he could do nothing else but cry, ‘ 0 God !
sir, look at them ; look at them ! 5
In the meantime our opponents pressed more closely around ;
their spears kept whistling by us, and our fate seemed inevitable.
A light-coloured man now seemed to direct their movements. He
sprang forward to a rock, not more than thirty yards from us, and
posting himself behind it, threw a spear with such deadly force and
aim, that had I not drawn myself forward by a sudden jerk, it must
have gone through my body ; and, as it was, it touched jny back in


flying by. Another well-directed spear from a different hand would
have pierced me in the breast, but, in the motion I made to avoid it,
it struck on the stock of my gun, of which it carried away a portion
by its force.
‘ All this took place in a few seconds of time, and no shot had been
fired but by me. I now recognised in the light-coloured man an
old enemy, who had led on a former attack against me. By his
cries and gestures he now appeared to be urging the others to sur-
round and press on us, which they were rapidly doing.
‘ I saw that but one thing could be done to save our lives ; and,
having received my rifle from Coles, I stepped out from behind our
parapet, and advanced to the rock which covered our light-coloured
opponent. I had not made two steps in advance, when three spears
struck me nearly at the same moment, one of which was thrown by
him. I felt severely wounded in the hip, but knew not exactly
where the others had struck me. The force of all knocked me down
and made me feel very giddy and faint ; but, as I fell, I heard the
savage yells of the natives’ delight and triumph.
‘ These recalled me to myself; and, roused by momentary rage and
indignation, I made a strong effort, rallied, and in a moment was on
my legs ; the spear was wrenched from my wound, and my haversack
drawn closely over it, so that neither my own party or the natives
might see it; and I advanced again steadily to the rock. The man
became alarmed, and threatened me with his club, yelling most
furiously. But, as I neared the rock, behind which all but his head
and arm was covered, he fled towards an adjoining one, dodging
dexterously, according to the native manner of confusing an assailant
and avoiding the cast of his spear ; but he was scarcely uncovered in
his flight, when my rifle-ball pierced him through the back, between
the two shoulders, and he fell heavily on his face with a deep groan.
‘ The effect was electrical. The tumult of the combat had ceased ;
not another yell was uttered. Native after native dropped away,
and noiselessly disappeared. I stood alone, with a wretched savage
dying before me, and my two men close to me behind the rocks.. . .
The natives had now all concealed themselves, but they were not far
off. Presently the wounded man made an effort to raise himself


slowly from the ground ; some of them instantly came from behind
the rocks and trees without their spears, crowding round him with
the greatest tenderness and solicitude. Two passed their arms under
him, his head dropped senselessly upon his chest, and with hurried
steps the whole party wound their way into the forest, their black
forms being scarcely distinguishable from the charred trunks of the
trees, as they receded in the distance.’
Printed by T. and A. Constable, Printers to Her Majesty
at the Edinburgh University Press




Hit, HO
f 123*17
N
1508
02235938


.
%


PROFESSOR MEIKLEJOHN’S SERIES
Fifteenth Edition. Crown Bz’o, pp. 47°- Price 41. 6d,
Enlarged with Exercises and Additional Analysis
The English Language:
ITS GRAMMAR, HISTORY, AND LITERATURE
By J. M. D. MEIKLEJOHN, M.A.
“There Is not a dull page in the hook."
C. T. Smith, Esq., 8.A., Vice-Principal, St. Mark’s College, Chelsea.
“Jt is the work of a master hand, and covers all the ground which has hitherto
necessitated the use of several text-books." , _ . . _ ...
Rev. T. Graham, D.D., St. Mary’s Training College. Hammersmith.
“I am struck with the methodical arrangement, and the simple manner in which
the subject-matter is laid out.” W. G. Baker, Esq., M.A., The Training College, Cheltenham.
Eighteenth Edition. Crown Bvo, pp. 630. Price 4 s. 6d.
A New Geography
ON THE COMPARATIVE METHOD
With Maps and Diagrams
By J. M. D. MEIKLEJOHN, M.A.
“Your Geography strikes us as quite first rate, admirably arranged, accurate, clear,
incisive. It is the most scientific work we know on the subject."
Rev. H. P. Gurney, M.A. (of Messrs. Wren & Gurney), 3 Powis Square, London.
I am delighted with it. X expected something very good, and the actual product
In no respect falls below my anticipations." . . . „ . _ _ „ „ ...
A. J. Wyatt, Esq., M.A. (Bond.), TTnlv. Corr. College, Cambridge.
“No Teacher, who desires what the age can render in this branch of study, can afibrd
to ignore the materials you have placed in his hands.”
G. A. Christian, Esq., B.A. (Bond ), Headmaster, P. T. School, Southwark.
Eleventh Edition. Crown B vo, pp. 740. Price 41. 6d.
Part I. b.c. 55 to a.d. 1509. Part 11. 1509 to 1890.
A New History of England
and Great Britain
By J. M. D. MEIKLEJOHN, M.A.
'* Your books are simply indispensable to students preparing for the certificate
examination and to pupil-teachers.” One of Her Majesty’s Inspectors.
“ It is thoroughly interesting, and made additionally valuable by the concise notes
and apt quotations on every page from the greatest English historians.”
F. L. Millard, Esq., M.A., Vice-Principal, Bede College, Durham.
“ Simple and terse, scholarly and sufficient; just the book for a pupil-teacher,”
J. A. Yoxall, Esq., Gen. Secretary, N. XT. T.
A. M. HOLDEN, 23 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
