

THE JUDGMENT
THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY
IN THE CASE OF
THE REV. GEORGE KING, M.A.,
Licensed Minister of St. Andrew’s,
SYDNEY,
DELIVERED AT THE DIOCESAN REGISTRY,
MARCH sth, 1861.
WITH AN APPENDIX.
Sgfoneg:
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1861.


SYDNEY:
JOSEPH COOK & CO.,
GEORGE STREET.


THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY v. THE REV. GEORGE KING.
The Bishop of Sydney attended yesterday morning at the Diocesan Registry
Office, in King-street, for the purpose of delivering judgment in the case of the
Rev. George King, of St. Andrew’s, who it will be remembered was cited to
appear last week before the Bishop, to show cause why his licence, as a minister
of the Church of England, should not he revoked in consequence of the procee-
dings which took place at St. Andrew’s Church, in September, last. There were
present—The Hon. Sir W. W. Burton, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, the Rev. A. H.
Bull, Mr. W. Barker, solicitor to the Bishop, and five or six other gentlemen.
The Rev. George King did not attend.
The Bishop of Sydney commenced the proceedings by enquiring whether
the Rev. George King had been informed of the day fixed for the delivery of
judgment.
The Diocesan Registrar, Mr. H. K. James, answered in the affirmative.
The Bishop of Sydney then delivered the following judgment:—
In delivering judgment upon the present occasion, it may be necessary to
advert to the circumstances in which I am placed, and to explain the nature of
the course which I have adopted.
That he who makes the accusation should also be the Judge is, doubtless, an
anomaly which nothing but necessity can justify. Such necessity I believe to
exist. If any other course is open to me, I have failed to discover it: nor has it
been suggested to me by those, who are most apprehensive of the evils which
they suppose are about to be brought upon the Church.
The necessity arises from the office which I bear, from the relation which
exists between the accused party and myself, and from the proceedings which
he has thought proper to adopt.
The Bishop is a person duly Ordained, and consecrated to hold and exercise
the office of bishop by the regular authorities of the Church of England. He is
a bishop of that Church, and is appointed by the Crown to exercise the duties of
his office within a defined locality.
The duty which the Bishop owes to the Church imposes upon him in certain
cases the office of a Judge, “It appertained! to the discipline of the Church
that enquiry he made of evil ministers. . . . and that if found guilty, they
by just judgment be deposed.” Article 26.
Sir Matthew Hale, in his History of the Common Law, asserts that “every
bishop by his election and confirmation, even before consecration, hath ecclesias-
tical jurisdiction annexed to his office, as Judex ordinarius, within his diocese.”
The Bishop at his consecration engages to correct and punish the disobedient,
which he can only do in the discharge of his office as a Judge.
The chief difficulty on the present occasion is the manner in which this
painful duty is to be discharged.


When it has been ruled that the law and method of proceeding, by which
bishops in England and Ireland are enabled to enforce discipline over their
clergy, are not introduced into this colony—that the mode of procedure pointed
out in H. M. Letters Patent, though consistent with constitutional feeling, and
favourable to the accused, cannot he followed by the Bishop, he must either
abandon the proceedings, or act in the only way left open to him. To abandon
the proceedings, would he to leave the Church without rule or government;
would he, in fact, to renounce the duties of the Episcopate, and must, in con-
sistency, he followed by a resignation of the office.
As long as I hold the office I shall endeavour, with God’s help, to discharge
its duties: and lam fully convinced in my own mind that it is my duty to
prosecute this matter to a conclusion.
The course which the Bishop proposed originally to take, is well known.
It is prescribed in the Letters Patent, it is commended as constitutional and
equitable, and the following opinion of three of the most eminent law officers
of the Crown in England is an abundant justification of the procedure:
This opinion is contained in a letter from the law officers of the Crown,
to the Right Honorable Lord Stanley, ordered by the House of Commons to he
printed, 25th March, 1850.
Doctors’ Commons, 27th December, 1845.
My Lord, —In compliance with the request contained in the letter of Mr. Under-
secretary Stephen, of the 18th October last, wo bave referred to the letter of Mr. Under-
secretary Hope, of the 28th of August last, and to the several Acts of the Legislature of
Van Diemen’s Land now laid before us, and with reference to the questions submitted to
us, touching the proceedings adopted against certain clergymen in that colony, and the
status of clergymen there, we have the honour to report to your that, having
also considered the points suggested hy Archdeacon Marriott, we are of opinion, that upon
the appointment of a chaplain to officiate in Van Diemen’s Land, whether hy the
Government here, or in the colony, he cannot lawfully act without being licensed by the
Bishop of Tasmania.
That upon refusal by the Bishop to license, an appeal lies to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to him only ; that a license may be revoked by the Bishop; that upon the
revocation of the license, no formal trial is necessary ; that the Bishop, however, should
not act hut upon what he deems sufficient cause, or without giving the party accused an
opportunity of answering the charge against him. _ j
That there is no form of institution or induction analogous to either in Van Diemen s
Land. The appointment and the license are all that can take place ; and the Bishop may
try, convict, and punish for ecclesiastical offences, without the aid of any new court to be
created by the local Legislature, or otherwise; but he must proceed judicially, with the
assistance of such officers as are created by the Letters Patent, and decide according to the
best of his judgment; there must be a distinct charge; the accused must have due
notice, and a fair opportunity of answering and defending himself, and of examining his
witnesses, and cross-examining the witnesses against him; that the 3 and 4 Viet., c. 86,
does not extend to the colonies ; that therefore, if either of the clergymen in question’was
unlicensed, he could not legally officiate at all; and that if any license had been granted,
the revocation of it hy the Bishop was valid.
We have, &c.
(Signed) J. Dobson.
Frederick Thesiger.
Fitzroy Kelly.
The Right Hon. the Lord Stanley, &c., &c.
In acting upon this opinion the Bishop doubtless deemed himself secure
from interference, or from blame.
If a body so unexceptionable as to its composition and the character of its
members, is not now sitting, to advise and assist the Bishop in this matter, there
is no other cause for this omission hut the conduct of the accused himself. He
succeeded, in his application to the Supreme Court, for a prohibition against


my Chancellor and myself. If the Bishop, on this occasion, sits alone, it is not
by the Bishop’s act or'the Bishop’s will.
This mode of procedure has however been stigmatised as immoral, because it
is in apparent opposition to one of the Minutes of the Australian bishops in 1850,
which runs as follows: —“ No clergyman who shall have been duly appointed and
licensed to any church, or permanent cure of souls, shall be removable there-
from, except by sentence pronounced, after judicial enquiry before the Diocesan
Synod.”
I add the comment of the Bishop of Tasmania who, as one of the subscribing
Bishops, may be supposed to be well qualified to interpret the meaning of his
own words. In his charge of 1857, page 23, his Lordship adds, “or of course
until such a form of Church government shall have been sanctioned, by
competent authority, after due enquiry and trial by his peers.”
Had not the Rev. G-. King applied to the Supreme Court, such trial by his
peers he would have had ; but to suppose that the Minute in question binds the
Bishop not to act as judge, until a Diocesan Synod is established, is a mere
fallacy. This would be to leave the diocese for an indefinite period without any
government whatever, and to hold out an inducement to the disobedient to
oppose the formation of a Diocesan Synod as long as possible.
Under these circumstances, there appears to be no other course left for the
Bishop but to call upon Mr. King to show cause to the Bishop personally, in
order that he may form his own judgment upon the circumstances of Mr. King’s
conduct.
It is without question a safe and equitable rule that no man shall be judge
in his own cause, but even to this rule there are some necessary and inevitable
exceptions.
There are other professions than our own in which such exceptions must be
made, in which the party against whom the offence has been committed is of
necessity compelled to decide upon the character of the fault, and the degree of
punishment to be awarded. No one who was present to hear the defence of the
Rev. G. King would feel any doubt that if such language had been used towards
a civil tribunal^the offender would have been visited with prompt and severe
punishment, imposed by the judge against whom the offence had been
committed.
No doubt there is a danger in such cases, lest personal feeling should be
imported into the proceedings. But this evil need not occur ; being known, it
may be avoided; and it would be mere weakness to shrink from an obvious duty,
through the apprehension that by reason of human infirmity, it might not be
duly discharged.
It shall be my endeavour to shew that in this matter I am not so much
judge in my own cause, as in the cause of the Church: and I trust and desire
so to be guided by the wisdom which cometh from above, that I may say and do
only such things as are agreeable to the word and will of God.
The parties to this proceeding are the Bishop, the nature of whose office has
been described, and a licensed presbyter in his diocese; and it is upon this
relation that the jurisdiction claimed by the Bishop is founded.
The Church, ot which one is a Bishop and the other a presbyter, has a certain


form of government which, when the two parties unite in Church action, places
them in a defined position one towards the other. In the colonies this union on
the part of the presbyter is voluntary. He may accept a license, and thus
become subject to the Bishop’s authority, and he may resign one, and thus free
himself from the obligation into which he had before voluntarily entered.
So long as the union formed by the license exists, so long does the jurisdiction
of the Bishop endure, and the presbyter, on his part, can only escape from
the obligations laid upon him to obey his Bishop, by the resignation of
his license. The Bishop, on his part, can dissolve this union by the
withdrawal of the license. It is, in some cases, given with the proviso that if he
see just cause, he retains the power to revoke that which he alone had the power
to give.
So long, however, as this union subsists, all matters between the paities
affecting their respective positions must be dealt with according to the rules of
that Church out of whose form of Government the position of each arises.
When, therefore, the Bishop or the priest have to deal with a Cathedral, or a
Church, or such matters, both one and the other must deal with it according to
the usages and laws of the Church of England, so far as those laws are applicable
to a colony, and have not been interfered with by the lex loci — the law of the
colony itself.
It is upon the basis of this voluntary union, formed by giving and receiving
a license, that the Bishop claims jurisdiction over the clergy of the diocese, and
in his judicial character exercises the prerogative of declaring what is the law
of the Church in any matters at issue between them, and what is the nature of
any offence with which they may be charged, and the measure of punishment
which is to be assigned to a clergyman if found guilty.*
In this case Mr. King is charged by the Bishop with excluding him from
that Church which has ordinarily been regarded as the Cathedral Church of the
diocese, and has been commonly used as such.
It is admitted that the wooden Church, called the Church of St. Andrew, is
licensed for Divine service, and that the Rev. George King is the licensed
minister authorised to perform Divine service in that building.
It is for practical purposes regarded as the parish Church of St. Andrew’s.
It is not legally a Church under the 7th William IV. No. 3, it was
built by private funds, and a grant through the Bishop of Sydney from the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. There are no trustees, nor any
Churchwardens elected under Bth William 4, No. 5. it has, however, been used
for all parochial purposes by the licensed minister, and his right to use it for
such purposes has never been questioned, and is not now called in question.
This edifice has also been used by the late, and by the present Bishop of
Sydney, as the Cathedral Church ot the diocese. It serves temporarily for a
Cathedral, and has been usually styled the temporary Cathedral of St. Andrew.
The Cathedral Church of St. Andrew, properly so called, is the stone
building now in course of erection. The inscription upon the foundation stone,
the terms in which a grant of public money was made to the Cathedral Church
of St. Andrew, and the universal admission in fact of all who have either
subscribed or solicited subscriptions in aid of the building, goes to show that


when completed it was to be the Cathedral Church of the diocese, to which all
members of the Church of England would have free access.
But until this Cathedral was completed, the wooden structure, commonly and
indifferently called St. Andrews’s Church, or the temporary Cathedral, was to
serve the purpose of a Cathedral.
That the Crown, by patent, may create a church and the precincts of a
Church, a Cathedral (Haywood v. Fulcher, Jones 166), is undoubted law.
By Her Majesty’s Letters Patent (1847), it was ordained and declared that
the Church called St. Andrew’s, in the city of Sydney, shall henceforth be the
Cathedral Church and see of the Right Rev. Father in God, William Grant
Broughton and his successors, Bishops of Sydney.
At the date of these Letters Patent, there was no other Church of that name
open in Sydney which the Bishop could use as his Cathedral but the present
wooden building. If he was not to use that building as his Cathedral, there was
not any which he could use, and the Bishop would be placed in the anomalous
position of being required to perform Episcopal functions without having a
Church in which to perform them.
But it is notorious that the present Church of St. Andrew has, since the year
1847, been used by the late and the present Bishop as the Cathedral. The
Episcopal offices have been performed there, the letters of orders declare that
the ordinations took place in the Cathedral Church of St, Andrew ; the present
Bishop was installed there shortly after his arrival, and Mr, King, the licensed
minister of the district claims also to be the licensed Minister of the Cathedral
Church. In his published letter of September 19th, 1850, Mr, King says, “ I
am minister of the Cathedral Church.”
If, then, there is no question that the wooden structure is practically the
parish Church of St. Andrew, so neither can there be any doubt that though
temporarily it is actually the Cathedral, and that whatever rights or privileges
the Bishop of the diocese will have in the new Cathedral when completed, he
must be held to possess in the temporary building. The Church of St. Andrew
has therefore a double character; it is to be regarded as a parish Church and as
a Cathedral. It may be viewed in these two lights as distinctly as if there were
two buildings. The licensed minister has his rights in the Church, The Bishop
has his rights in the Cathedral.
And here let me notice, what has been said as to the minister’s right of access
to his Church at all times. Had the Church of St. Andrew been built under
the Church Act, 8 William 4, No, 5, the 20th clause of that Act might have
been held to give the incumbent « free access at all times as he shall think fit,
and freely to exercise his spiritual functions therein, without any hindrance or
disturbance of the trustees, or of any person whatever.” But the Church is not
built under the Act; it stands on Government land by sufferance, and upon
condition that it shall hereafter be removed; and, as before observed, there
cannot be legally constituted trustees or churchwardens.
But even if it had been built under the Church Act, the question would still
arise, how far the Bishop’s right of entry inffi his own Cathedral qualified s the
clergyman’s access to the Church at such times as the building was not required
for parochial purposes, but was required by the Bishop for the performance of
an episcopal function.


It is no doubt to be regretted that the rights and privileges of the Bishop and
the licensed minister in respect to their use of the temporary cathedral had not
been earlier defined; a few words inserted in the license, such as are found in the
forms used in the dioceses of Calcutta and Tasmania, would have reserved the
Bishop’s rights to the use of the Cathedral and the appointment of the services
“ on all proper occasions.”
As no such form has hitherto existed in this diocese, and the Bishop’s claim
to the exclusive use of the Cathedral on “ a proper occasion,” that is for an
ordination service, has been resisted, it is necessary to enquire what is the general
law of the Chnrch with reference to the Bishop’s rights in, and use of, the
Cathedral.
And here we must remark that the Cathedral of a colonial diocese stands in
a different position from any Cathedral Church in England, while it necessarily
and essentially differs fron a Parochial Church. It is by comparatively recent
legislation, and by Patents issued since the 12th century, that capitular incorpo-
rations exist in England.
The laws of the Church in a colonial diocese, and the rights and duties of its
Bishop and clergy, must be therefore studied in the ancient system of the Church,
but considered apart from the institution of benefices and the incorporation of
Cathedral Chapters. We should consider how far that ancient system has been
preserved in England, and how far alterations made in England do not extend
to the colonies.
“ In the ancient Church the Cathedral was simply the principal Church of
the diocese.
It was the Church at which the Bishop’s see was fixed, and in which he
ministered. It was Cathedra, his seat; and his seat being fixed there made it
Cathedralis,
Bingham gives the following instance (Antiquities: Book vi., Ch. 4, sec. 7)
“ In the African Church, on account of this residence, every Bishop’s house was
to be near the Church by a rule of the Fourth Council of Carthage,” and
in the fifth council there is another rule that “ every Bishop shall have his
principal or Cathedral Church, which he shall not leave to betake himself to any
other Church in his diocese, nor continue upon his private concerns to the
neglect of his cure, and hindrance of his frequenting his own Cathedral.”
Frequentationem propria Cathedra negligere.
“ From this, it appears,” says Bingham, “ that the City Church was to be the
chief place of the Bishop’s residence and cure.”
The laws of England originally adopted this system as it stood. The
Council of Hadfeldt, 680 a.d., which received the five general Councils then
held, did thereby make this system part of the common law of England, for in
that Council the spiritual and temporal powers acted together. The Cathedral
of an English diocese still preserves its ancient character, it is still the Church
of the Bishop of the diocese. It is the Church of the diocese ; not of a parish.
The whole diocese has an equal right to resort to it, and those who dwell near it
cannot have any exclusive or preferential right in it against those who dwell
more remote.
Now, if this be so, where Capitular Bodies have been established, and


Cathedrals are governed by statutes which have been superadded to the ancient
law of the Church, much more must it be so in a colonial diocese where no such
statutes exist. The alterations in the ancient law of the Church, which have
been made in England, do not extend to the colonies, A Bishop appointed to a
colonial diocese must, therefore, consider the principal Church of the city in
which his see is placed, as the Church of the Bishop, and of the diocese. His
predecessor could not give it any other character, and he cannot do so himself.
The Bishop, as such, is the legal incumbent of this church. He cannot
constitute any other incumbent; this would be to give up his own position to
another. No other can claim to be the incumbent of this church ; it is usurping
the Bishop’s position. No minister of any district in the diocese can claim to be
the incumbent of the principal church of the diocese. The clergyman appointed
to minister in the district in which that church stands, can have no greater right
in that church, as incumbent of it, than the minister of any other district.
“ If in some English cathedrals the Bishop’s power of 'preaching seems to be
limited, this limitation does not extend to ordinations or visitations. The late
Bishop of Salisbury in his replies to the Cathedral Commissioners, says, “ I use
the Cathedral as of right, for the purposes of ordination and confirmation.” Nor
is it made by any general law of the Church, but by the statutes of some particular
cathedral. If there be no local statutes against him, his power is established
by the general law of the Church. No such statutes can exist in any colonial
diocese. Every principle of the laws of the ancient church, and the general law
of our own Church is, therefore, against any restriction being established against
the Bishop in his Cathedral Church. In the colonies, no restriction by statute
exists, and it is most undesirable that it ever should.”
In making these stamements as to the law of the ancient church, and the
argument founded upon it, I am bound to express my obligations to one of the
most learned of living Canonists—the venerable Edward Stafford, Archdeacon of
Meath. He communicated to me his views, in the words I have adopted, more
than six years ago, and every one acquainted with these subjects, is aware that in
matters of ecclesiastical antiquity, no higher modern authority can be quoted.
Having thus considered the position of the Bishop with reference to his
Cathedral, we now turn to the subject of Ordination and the persons who are
entitled to be present and assist at that service.
By the osth canon it is required that the “ Bishop before he shall admit any
person to holy orders shall diligently examine him in the presence of those
Ministers that shall assist him at the imposition of hands.” It is further de-
clared by Lynwood as quoted in Gibson’s Codex, page 147, as the Canon
upon the regular method of examination, inserted in the body of the Canon Law,
“ That when the Bishop intends to hold an ordination, all who are desirous to
be admitted into the Ministry are to appear the fourth day before the ordination,
and together with the Archdeacons (al: presbyters) who ought to present them ;
and then the Bishop shall appoint some of the priests who attend him (his
Chaplains) and others skilled in the Divine Law and exercised in the ecclesias-
tical functions, who shall diligently examine the life, age, and title of the persons
to be ordained, and they shall be diligently examined for three days successively,
and they who are approved shall be presented to the Bishop.


In the 31st Canon it is further provided that the ordinations shall take place
in the Cathedral, or the Parish Church where the Bishop resides, in the presence,
not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Dean and of two prebendaries at the least,
or (if they shall happen, by any lawful cause, to be hindered) in the presence
of four others. The Rubric requires that the candidates shall be presented by
the Archdeacon, or in his absence, one appointed in his stead.
It is evident, therefore, that the Bishop has the appointment of the examining
clergy, who are also to assist at the laying on of hands, and these are further
declared to be the Archdeacon and the Dean, the prebendaries and the Bishop’s
Chaplains. No person, unless he bear one of these offices, can claim to assist at
an ordination. If, in the absence of these official personages, other Clergymen
are required to assist, they must be “ appointed, ” doubtless by the Bishop
himself.
When the Ordination takes place in a Parish Church, the parochial Minister
has no right to assist at the ordination unless he is appointed to do so. Ordina-
tions frequently occur in Parish Churches in England, when the Incumbent is
not present, and though, as a matter of courtesy, and because the question may
not have been raised, he would ordinarily be invited to'assist at the laying on of
hands, yet if the Bishop desired, for any cause, to prevent him from doing this,
he would be excluded. No person can claim to take a part in this service
unless appointed by the Bishop.
The general law of the Church of England and Ireland has in no way altered
the Bishop’s rights and duties in respect of preaching. By that law all cure of
souls throughout the diocese is in the Bishop. When a Bishop in England enters
a parochial Church in his diocese, he is the chief Minister of that Church. The
Incumbent cannot claim the office of preaching in it during the Bishop’s
presence, unless the Bishop will that he do so. The parochial system has in no
way limited the Bishop’s office in this respect. In a colonial diocese, the
Bishop’s right and duty is, of course, equally unlimited.
Now if this he the case on ordinary occasions, much more is it so when the
service is an episcopal function, in which no one can claim to take part unless he
is appointed by the Bishop.
If the Bishop sees fit, on the occasion of an ordination, to appoint the persons
who shall take part in the service, to the exclusion of the parochial Minister, he
has a right to do this.
But this is not the present claim. The present claim is to the use of the
Cathedral the Bishop’s Church—and the Church of the diocese for an ordina-
tion service—a service in which no one has a right to take part unless appointed
by the Bishop.
On what ground, then, is the Bishop’s claim resisted ? Because the tempo-
rary Cathedral is also the Church of St. Andrew, the licensed minister claims
access to it as a matter of right to assist at an ordination held in it on a week
day, when the Church is not required for any parochial service, and fortifies
this claim by the prescription of thirteen years, and by the plea that he would be
degraded in the eyes of his congregation and the world at large by his exclusion
from a service held in his own Church.
Now, admitting that, as far as practicable, the licensed clergy of this diocese


ought to hold the same status as incumbents in England, and having respect
also to the fact that the law of the colony gives them free access to their own
Church, yet even in such cases the common law of the Church requires that the
Bishop shall he regarded as the chief minister of the Church into which he enters,
and that when an ordination service is held, no persons shall take part in that
service unless appointed by the Canon or by the Bishop.
Under these circumstances the claim of the licensed minister of the parish to
be present and to take a part would be at least questionable. But what are the
facts of the base ?
Knowing, that on a week-day, no service was ordinarily held in the temporary
Cathedral, and that no inconvenience could arise by his doing so, the Bishop
appoints an ordination to be held on Friday, September 21st, 1860, being St.
Matthew’s Day, and attended by his chaplain, and having appointed him and
the canons to take part in the service, and the Dean of Sydney, the Rev. W. M.
Cowper to preach the sermon, and having given due notice to the licensed
minister of his intention and of the arrangements, and having presented himself
with his chaplains at the door of the Cathedral, he finds himself, by the act of
that minister, excluded from his own Cathedral.
It is not the parish church of which the Bishop claims the use, but the
Cathedral ; it is not to supersede the ordinary ministrations of the licensed
clergyman, but to perform an episcopal function in which that clergyman has
not been appointed to assist.
The fact that he is the licensed minister of the district in which the cathedral
stands, gives him no greater claim to assist on such an occasion than any other
licensed clergyman in the diocese. There are several instances in English
cathedrals, in which the parishioners of the parish in which it stands are
permitted to have a service within its walls, “ but in no case does the parochial
minister, as such, belong to the Chapter; or set up any claim different from those
of other ministers of the same town.”
That the licensed minister of St. Andrew’s had assisted at sixteen ordinations
in no way affects the question of his original right to do so, or of the Bishop’s
right to use the Cathedral for an ordination service.
The question had never before been raised : but when it was understood by
the general body of the subscribers to the new Cathedral that it would be claimed
by the licensed minister of the parish as his Church, it became evident that the
question as to what character the new building should bear, must be settled,
otherwise the Cathedral would not be completed. This question could not be
deferred until the Cathedral was ready for consecration: because, until this
question was decided, no further subscriptions would be given towards the
completion of the Church.
The Bishop then, having for his convenience, and in accordance with the
terms of the Canon, for two years held ordinations in the parish Church of
Randwick “ where he resides,” appointed an ordination to be held in his own
Cathedral; and also appointed the persons who should assist, being all official
persons named in the canon, •or who had assisted at the examination of the
candidates, without including the licensed minister of the district, and did
thereby assert his right to the use of the building, as his own cathedral, and
declared that it should be held to be a cathedral, as well as a parish church.


The allegation of Mr. King that he had assisted at sixteen ordinations only
made it more imperative that no further time should he lost in showing that
this fact gave him no right to interfere with the services of the Cathedral ; and
that, as licensed minister of St. Andrew’s, he had no claim in the huilding
qua Cathedral, different from that of any other licensed minister in the diocese.
The supposition that any degradation could have been incurred hy submitting
to the Bishop’s directions has arisen apparently from two causes. First, from
an inability to distinguish between the use of the huilding as a Parish Church
and as a Cathedral. As a Parish Church the licensed minister has certain
privileges, which he is right in maintaining in a proper and becoming manner.
As a Cathedral, the licensed minister of the Church has no claim whatever to a
position or place in it, and to insist upon intruding himself into the Cathedral at
an ordination service, and to exclude the Bishop from the huilding, because he
himself is not allowed to take part in the service, is undoubtedly a grave
ecclesiastical offence.
A further consequence of this mistaken view of his own position is, that the
directions of the Bishop are not regarded as lawful and honest, nor such as he is
hound, by his oath of canonical obedience, to follow.
Canons are laws of the Church: and canonical obedience is that which is
due according to the canons, to an ecclesiastical superior. The canons of 1603,
made in the Convocation of Canterbury, and ratified by the King, for himself,
his heirs, and successors, are universally admitted (says Stephen, 227) to be
binding on the Clergy. A lawful canon, says Chief Justice Vaughan, is the
Law of the kingdom.
The canons which Bingham quoted from the Councils of Carthage, are still
law in England. (See Stephen, 224; and the opinion of Lord Hardwicke in
Middleton v. Croft.) After the institution of benefices and chapters, those
canons were embodied in the canon law, and received as such in England and
never since set aside. Under those laws the Bishop claims free access to his
own Cathedral for the performance of episcopal functions, and the presbyter who
has received a license from the Bishop, upon taking the oath of canonical
obedience should be very clear that his disobedience is not founded upon a
misapprehension of his own position and of the Bishop’s claims, before he sets
aside an obligation of so solemn a character.
There could be no degradation incurred hy submission to a lawful demand,
and that the Bishop’s demand of admission to his own Cathedral on the occasion
in question was lawful, admits of no doubt whatever.
In a huilding, however, which was to serve a two-fold purpose, it would have
been well that the rights of the respective parties had been clearly defined.
Occasions have arisen in other colonial dioceses for making such arrangements,
and of these I may note two.
The Bishop of Calcutta —(Dr. Wilson, Life of—vol. L, p. 315, 316) on his
arrival at Calcutta, informed the presidency chaplains of his intention to preach
in the Cathedral on the following Sunday, and intimated a wish that his domestic
chaplain should take part in reading the communion service on that occasion.
The intimation was met hy an immediate refusal—a denial of the Bishop’s
authority, and an expressed determination on the senior chaplain’s part to take
the service alluded to himself.


In this case the Bishop cancelled the licenses of the presidency chaplains :
and directed others to he prepared. In these a clause was introduced, clearly
defining the chaplains’ rights whilst officiating in the Cathedral.
They were summoned to take the customary oaths to he licensed. At the
time appointed they attended, and having been informed of the Bishop’s wish
respecting his chaplain, they acquiesced and received their licenses.
The other case occurred in a neighbouring diocese, and though I cannot refer
to published documents, and do not mention the names of the parties, I can
quote the ipsissima verba of the arrangement. It was drawn up by the
highest legal authority, was agreed to by the parties, and received the sanction
of the late Archbishop of Canterbury : it is as follows :
“ First. —I propose that the senior chaplain should exercise his hitherto
accustomed rights in discharge of all parochial services as Minister without
interference on the part of your Lordship.
“ This proposition is, of course not to be understood as affecting your Lord-
ship’s episcopal supervision over—in the mode of discharging his duties as one
of the Clergy in your Diocese, nor to preclude your Lordship from preaching in
the Cathedral at your discretion, or performing any episcopal ceremony therein
upon due intimation, as matter of courtesy, to the Senior Chaplain, of your
Lordship’s intention to do so.
Secondly, I propose that it should be conceded to your Lordship to institute
in the Cathedral, as you may deem advisable, 'any extra services, not interfering
with the usual parochial ones, and that it shall be in your Lordship’s power to
appoint both the seasons at which such services shall take place, and also the
persons who shall perform the same. ”
To arrangements of this character there can be no reasonable objection,
preserving as they do, the respective rights of the Bishop and the licensed
Minister: and until the ultimate destination and government of the new Cathedral
are finally settled, such an arrangement must be made.
But it would appear to me to be far preferable that the intention of my right
reverend predecessor in this matter, as it has been represented to me by one
who was much in his confidence, should be carried out. It is as follows : —That
the present Parish of St. Andrew’s should be divided, and while a portion was
retained under the cure of a Dean in connection with the new Cathedral, to build
a new Church for the larger portion of the Parish thus divided off, and make a
separate cure, to which Parish and cure the licensed Minister of St. Andrew’s
would naturally succeed.
Whatever may be the grounds for this statement, the author has long enter-
tained the belief that this was the natural and settled course.
A plan of this kind I hope to see carried out.
I will now advert to an objection taken to the manner in which the Bishop
made his claim to appoint the services in the Cathedral. It is urged that it was
his duty to signify to Mr. King, more clearly than was done in the letters ad-
dressed to him, the character of the Bishop’s claim, and that if he sincerely
believed the Church of St. Andrew’s to be his Cathedral, the Bishop should
have stated this to Mr. King, as the ground of his claim.
On the supposition that the Bishop’s claim was not rightly understood by
Mr. King, and that if it had been, there would have been a disposition on his


part to admit it, and that his opposition to the Bishop’s directions was founded
on misapprehension of his own position and of the law of the Church, the
gravamen of his offence is diminished. Because, the question at issue is not the
manner in which Mr. King has conducted his opposition to the Bishop’s
authority: with regard to that no condemnation can he too strong. But the
question is one of right to the use of the present wooden structure, and being
assured that it is temporarily the Bishop’s cathedral, that by all church law and
usage, and by reason of the very idea of a cathedral, the Bishop should have free
access to it, and more especially for episcopal functions, and that in putting
forward and acting upon this claim, the Bishop had no intention of interfering
with the licensed minister’s use of the building as his parish church, and that
Mr, King in obstructing and preventing the Bishop from entering his cathedra],
acted unlawfully, and was guilty of a grave ecclesiastical offence, my decision is,
that the license of the Rev. George King shall be forthwith withdrawn, revoked,
and cancelled.
Such is my decision in the present case.
As, however, Mr. King appears to have acted in the belief that he was
defending his rights as a parochial minister, and in uncertainty as to the Bishop’s
claim, and as the object of this judgment is not to inflict punishment, but to
maintain the due authority of the Bishop, and to bring this matter to a satisfactory
termination, I am willing to grant Mr. King another license for the same church.
This license will be in the usual form, but will contain a proviso in the following
words:—
“ Provided, nevertheless, that nothing in this license shall extend or be
construed to extend to abridge our episcopal authority and office or the episcopal
authority and office of our successors in administering holy ceremonies and
performing the functions belonging to us, or to prevent us at any time in the
exercise of our episcopal authority from specially appointing aard authorising
the dignitaries and other ministers, by us directed and authorized to read and
take part in Divine service at the said church, and to preach therein
whenever the said church shall be used by us as our Cathedral Church.”
This license may be obtained by the Rev. George King, on his application
for it at our Registry any time within three days from the present date.
F. SYDNEY, (M).
At the direction of the Bishop, the Diocesan Registrar then read the
following revocation of the Rev. George King’s license.
To the Rev. George King M.A. licensed minister of
the Church of St. Andrew in the Diocese of
Sydney with the parish annexed.
Whereas hy the license under the hand and seal of our predecessor the late William
Grant Broughton hy Divine permission Lord Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan hearing
date the 15th day of July 1849 our said predecessor did give and grant unto you his
license and authority to perform the office of minister in the above mentioned Church of
St. Andrew with the parish annexed in the words and figures or to the purport and effect
following that is to say
William Grant by Divine permission Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan To our
beloved in Christ George King clerk B, A. greeting. We do by these presents give and
grant unto you in whose fidelity morals learning sound doctrine and diligence we do
lully confide our licence and authority to perform the office of minister in the Church of
Saint Andrew with the parish annexed at Sydney within our diocese and Jurisdiction in
reading the common prayers and performing other ecclesiastical duties belonging to the


said office according to the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer made and
published by authority of Parliament and the canons and constitutions in that behalf
lawfully established and promulgated and not otherwise or in any other manner (You
having first before us subscribed the articles and taken the oaths' and made and subscribed
a declaration which in this case are required by law to be subscribed made and taken)
And we do by these presents assign unto you in addition to such stipend
allowance or advantage as may be lawfully annexed to the said office all such fees
commonly called surplice fees as are authorised and allowed by us and duly
recorded in our registry office at Sydney And we require and appoint that you reside in
the Parish of St. Andrew In witness whereof we have caused our seal which we use in
this case to be hereto affixed dated the fifteenth day of July in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and forty-nine and of our translation the third.
(L.S.) W. G. Sydney.
And whereas upon the death of the said William Grant Broughton her Majesty was
pleased by Letters Patent under the great seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland and hearing date the 19th day of October 1854 to nominate and appoint us
Frederic Barker doctor in divinity to be successor to the said William Grant Broughton
deceased as Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan And whereas by a certain requisition or
summons under our hand and espiscopal seal bearing date the 20th day of February 1861
we did require you to appear before us at our Diocesan Registry-office in King-street
Sydney aforesaid on Thursday the 28th day of February 1861 at 11 o’clock in the forenoon
to shew cause why the license granted you by our predecessor the late Right Reverend
William Grant Broughton Lord Bishop of Sydney under which you officiate as the Minister of
the above mentioned Church of St. Andrew being a Church duly licensed as a place of
public worship according to the rites of the United Church of England and Ireland and for
the administration of the Holy Sacraments therein and all or any other licenses held by
you under which you are entitled or claim to be entitled to officiate within the diocese of
Sydney as a clergyman of the United Church of England and Ireland should not be with-
drawn cancelled or revoked by us for that you did on the 21st day of September last past
contrary to your duty as such licensed clergyman as aforesaid to us your Diocesan wilfully
unlawfully and without any reasonable excuse obstruct and hinder us in the performance
of our episcopal functions excluding us from the said Church of St. Andrew such Church
being used as the Cathedral Church of the said diocese and in which we had appointed to
hold an ordination service on the said 21st day of September and of which appointment
due notice was previously given to you as the licensed Minister of the said Church and
thereby prevented us from holding the said ordination service in the said Church in
accordance with our said appointment.
And whereas you did on the said 28th day of February 1861 duly appear before us in
obedience to the said requisition and did make crtain admissions and statements in
reference to the matter in the said requisition mentioned and set forth We therefore
having duly weighed and considered the several matters and things mentioned and set
forth in the said requisition and the several matters and things admitted and stated by
you as aforesaid do find and determine that no sufficient cause has been shown by you why
we should not _ for the causes in the said requisition mentioned revoke the herein-
before recited license and all or any other licenses held by you under which you are
entitled or claim to be entitled to officiate within the said diocese of Sydney as clergyman
of the United Church of England and Ireland And we do as such Bishop aforesaid and
by these presents withdraw and cancel the said hereinbefore recited license and do hereby
revoke the same and all things therein contained And we do hereby also withdraw cancel
and revoke all or any other license or licenses granted to you by us or our predecessor and
under which you are entitled or claim to be entitled to officiate within our Diocese of
Sydney as a clergyman of the United Church of England and Ireland.
Given under our hand and the episcopal seal of our said
Diocese which in this behalf is used this fifth day
of March a.d. 1861 and of our consecration the 7th
, (US ) (Signed) F. SYDNEY,
Ihe proceedings thereupon terminated. *


APPENDIX.
From the Bishop of Sydney to the Rev. George King,
Sydney, 2 3rd July, 1858.
My Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 19th
instant,* on the subject of the future services at the Cathedral on the appointment
of the Dean, and thank you for the openness and confidence with which you
have addressed me.
I regret that anything should have occurred to awaken an uncomfortable
feeling in your mind, as to your position at St. Andrew’s. It is as far from my
wish to cast any slight upon you, as it is from my intention to interfere with
the rights and privileges of the Incumbency you hold.
The circumstance of the Archdeacon’s death alone led to the appointment
of a Dean being made at the present time, and until the Cathedral is consecrated
the office will as regards the services at St. Andrew’s he as nominal as that of
Canon has hitherto been.
With reference to the suggestion you place before me concerning your
own position as Minister of the Parish, I beg to assure you that your claims
will not be disregarded by me when the proper time for taking them into
consideration shall have arrived, should you then be the Incumbent.
Begging to assure you of my desire and prayerful endeavour while
promoting the general good of the Church not to be unmindful of the individual
interests of my clergy.
I remain, &c.,
F. SYDNEY.
* This letter has been mislaid and cannot he found. Mr. King has been requested to
furnish a copy, but the application has not been acknowledged.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St, Andrew’s, July 21/7t. [1858.]
My Lord,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s letter
of yesterday, for the kind tone of which I truly feel grateful, but which notwith-
standing I regret to say differs considerably from what I had expected after the
gracious manner in which you listened to my hasty explanation on the evening
of the 19th instant, when you were pleased to ask me “would you like to be
made Canon, &c.”


It is well known and generally acknowledged, except by a certain party,
that when the late Bishop instituted an order of Canons in connexion with the
Cathedral Church of which I was Minister, that the cause which prompted the
passing by of myself alone of all the beneficed clergy of Sydney, was to be
found in the stand which I made against the introduction of romanizing
practices, and that those appointments afforded grounds to a certain section of
that party to annoy me for a considerable period of time.
These Canons have now existed for six years, and although your
Lordship would appear to say that the office is merely nominal, yet it must be
confessed that if there is a power deputed to the Head of the Colonial Church
(which I believe there is) to perpetuate her offices and services in their
integrity according to the order of the Church of England and Ireland by law
established, those clergy are as justly entitled to the name and office of Canon as
are the Members of any Chapter at home. Moreover, the late Bishop ordained
that the office should not be merely titular for he appropriated a particular
salary to it, which the three Canons did receive, (I know not whether it is still
received) although forfeited from year to year on account of the non-performance
of the duties required by law. Certain it is that they are acknowledged and
take precedence of the Minister of the Church so often as their services are
required in the Cathedral. Thus the existence of this office, exclusive of the
Minister sinks his status in a way unprecedented in the history of the Church
of England, and so long as it exists constitutes an anomaly which dissimilates
this remote branch from the character of its parent stem.
Your Lordship would appear to look forward to the remote day when the
Cathedral will be consecrated as a suitable time for taking the claims of its then
existing Minister into consideration, but long before that day according to present
appearances, and human calculation, the voice of the present Incumbent may be
hushed in the silence of the grave. But surely it is not the material building
which consecrates the service, but the worship of the living Church which
sanctifies the place.
Perhaps your Lordship will be pleased to pardon my freedom of speech,
and believe me
My Lord, &c.,
G. KING.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St. Andrew's, August I'iih. [1858.]
My Lord,
After my interview with your Lordship yesterday, I felt very
much perplexed to find that the question regarding the appointment of Dean in
St. Andrew’s, which has created so much disquietude of mind to myself, seemed
to remain in the same state as when first that appointment was announced.
I cannot but regard my own status in the Church under the authority of
a Dean as very much lowered from my original position here, nor can I look


forward to the arrangements for the future when the new Cathedral shall have
been consecrated without a feeling of humiliation which to me is very distressing.
I am fully assured that your Lordship is actuated in this matter by the highest
and best motives, both towards the Church, and to myself personally, and that
it is from this feeling and a desire on your part to maintain my standing as
far as in your Lordship lies under the altered circumstances in which I should
he placed, but knowing that I should he also under other authority which I
never contemplated, nor could for a moment conceive, I beg that you will be
pleased to relieve me from the difficulty thus imposed upon me.
Indeed, I feel so desirous to have this misunderstanding which appears
to exist finally and peaceably settled that I should be willing to vacate the
Church and Parish, thus leaving to your Lordship an opportunity to make the
arrangements which appear to you most proper if you will be pleased to appoint
me to a parish where I shall be able to continue the education of my children. A
similar proposition was made to me by the late Bishop on my first arrival here,
on my way to New Zealand. His Lordship stated that he had written to the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, for a clergyman for St. Andrew’s, and
had afterwards informed them that he had obtained a suitable person here. He
then thus addresses me : —“ Should the clergyman of the Society’s choice arrive
within three months, and you were then displaced, I should consider you as
having the first claim to any parish in which I could station you with an income
and other advantages as far as possible equal to your present.
I remain, &c.,
W. G. SYDNEY.”
Now after more than nine years service in a parish where I have
experienced very great kindness and affection from my parishioners, I
shall be content to sacrifice my own personal feelings in the matter, and devote
my energies to another district rather than jeopardize the peace of the Church.
I beg to remain, &c.
G. KING.
To the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Sydney.
From the Bishop of Sydney to the Rev. George King,
Sydney, 1 9th August, 1858.
My Dear Sir,
I trusted that the personal explanations I had given to you
upon the subject of the appointment of the Dean would have been satisfactory,
I regret to find they have not been so, but I shall again go over the principal
parts of our conversation and, your own letters, in the hope that the deliberate
consideration of them will serve to assure you that as no injury was intended
to you none has been done.
1. The Creation of the office of Dean under the powers conferred by
my Letters Patent, is not as I understand a ground of complaint.
2. The reason of my making the appointment at the present time I
have already stated to you and it is I believe satisfactory.


3. The character of the clergyman appointed, his position in the Diocese,
and his fitness for the office, make his appointment unexceptionable.
4. It is necessary that the office should now be created, and I have
appointed the person whom I deemed to be best qualified to fill it.
5. Your complaint is that I have not appointed you a Canon and
Vice-Dean, and also
6, That by appointing a Dean and not complying with your request I
have degraded you and made your position as minister of St. Andrew’s so
questionable as to induce you to wish to resign it.
7. I have not appointed you a Canon because I do not think the time
has arrived when it is necessary to fill up the number of the Cathedral
body, and that it is inexpedient to do so until the Cathedral is ready to be
opened.
8. I have already informed you that if when the Cathedral is opened
you occupy your present position, I shall regard the minister of St. Andrew’s
as a very proper person to form one of the Cathedral body.
9. The difference between us at this period is one of time only, and I
would suggest to you that as the appointment is one made by me with
reference to the interests of the Church at large, I must be permitted to judge
as to the time when the appointment should be made.
10. I would also observe that if I followed the precedent laid down by
the late Bishop there are several clergymen whose claims to such a dignity
are superior to your own.
11, You complain that by not appointing you at the present time I
degrade you. If I had appointed some one to fill the vacant canonry there
might have been some reason for such a statement, but as I have not done so
Ido not think you have any ground for making such an assertion. The
appointment of a Dean leaves you precisely where you were before.
12. Neither is there any interference whatever with your position as the
parochial minister of St. Andrew’s.
13. But you apprehend that there will be some interference with your
rights and privileges as the Incumbent of St. Andrew’s, and in order that you
may be in a position to protect yourself from such an invasion, you ask me
to appoint you Canon and Vice-Dean.
14. But it is precisely because you are minister of St. Andrew’s that
I decline making you a Canon until the relation between the Dean and the
Incumbent shall have been satisfactorily arranged.
15. It is to be remembered that while the building now in course of
erection, is to serve as the parish Church of St. Andrew’s it is also the Cathedral
Church of the Diocese, and that it is my duty to take care that the members
of the Church of England in the colony, who have subscribed towards its
erection as a Cathedral, should have that use of it to which they are entitled.
16. To allow that the minister of St. Andrew’s parish Church
must necessarily be a member of the Cathedral body would go far towards


recognizing a claim on the part of the parochial authorities, to the
exclusive use and management of the Cathedral, a claim which I am not
at all prepared to admit.
17. It will hereafter he necessary to make arrangements for the
parochial and the Cathedral use of the new building, in order that the duties of
the Dean may not encroach upon the privileges of the Incumbent of the parish.
18. The good understanding existing between Mr. Cowper and yourself
would make it easy with my assistance to arrange these duties whenever the
Cathedral shall be ready for divine service, and at such a time it would be a
natural and proper tribute to your character and position, that you should become
one of the Cathedral body, as well as retain your independent position of minister
of the parish.
19. I have already said most of the above to you, and I can only add
with reference to one or two points in your last letter:—
I. That if after this explanation you desire to resign St, Andrew’s,
i shall be willing so soon as I am able to give you the charge of another
parish, and to take care that you shall be no loser by the change. lam
quite willing to adopt the language of the late Bishop in reference to such a
contingency.
11. That while I do not admit that you have just cause for your
complaints, I fully appreciate and thank you for the sacrifice you are prepared
to make in order that the peace of the Church may be preserved.
111. I also beg to thank you for the expression of your belief that in
this matter I am actuated by the best and highest motives towards the Church
and towards yourself personally. I assure you that I feel very great regret at
having, however unintentionally, been the cause of the distress and anxiety
you have suffered. I trust that the fuller explanation I have now given of
my motives coupled with the assurances you have heretofore received will
serve to remove those feelings and restore that harmony and confidence which
thus far existed between us.
Believe me, &e.,
F. SYDNEY.
From the Rev, George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St. Andrew's, August 2\st, 1858.
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s letter of the 19th, has been handed to me to
ay at noon, which I regret to be obliged to say, leaves me no alternative but
to protest against the appointment of Dean of St, Andrew’s, as an invasion of
ary rights as Incumbent and Minister of the Cathedral Church and Parish.
Had Mr. Cowper, as Mrs. King suggested to Mrs. Barker, consented to
an immediate exchange of Parishes, I should most willingly have submitted to
the sacrifice, for the sake of peace, and have thus opened the way for his appoint-
ment as Dean of St. Andrew’s without any impediment. But I cannot, in


justice to my children, subject myself to the possibility of being located in a
district, where the present opportunities of carrying on their education might
not he within my reach.
I announced to the Churchwardens, on Sunday last, in the Vestry before
morning service, your Lordship’s intention to preach on Sunday next, and that I
had arranged to have a collection on that day for the Church Society, but the latter
proposition met with such an expression of unwillingness that I deemed it
prudent to acquiesce in their decision, and consequently did not give notice
of the sermon.
However, from a further conversation during the week, I am led to
believe that your Lordship’s circular regarding the Church Society, will be
fully responded to by us at some future day.
I remain, &c.,
G. KING.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney.
St, Andrew's Parsonage,
Sydney, August 23rd, 1858.
May it please your Lordship,
I regret exceedingly that your Lordship’s nomination of
Dean to St. Andrew’s Cathedral, in a way calculated to supersede me as the
Incumbent of it, and your refusal to meet any of the concessions, which for the
sake of peace, I proposed to make in order to remove existing impediments out
of the way of the proposed appointment, throws upon me the painful duty of
remonstrating against this extraordinary procedure.
I must express my regret also, that you did not deem it proper to
communicate with me on the subject previously to the public announcement of
it through the press, not only as an act of courtesy in an appointment which so
nearly interests myself, but also, because such an act of condescension might
have led to an amicable arrangement for carrying into effect your wishes in a
manner more conformable with the complex character of the Parish and
Cathedral Church.
Perhaps, as your Lordship has hut recently arrived amongst us, you will
pardon me if I state here, briefly, the circumstances under which I was induced
to accept the appointment of St. Andrew’s Cathedra], Church and Parish.
According to the arrangement of the Government and the late Bishop, the
Temporary Cathedral, and the new are to be regarded as identical; the one
merges into the other, and the Minister of the former will be expected to carry
his ministrations into the more permanent structure. The new Cathedral hears
also the character of a Parish Church, this, its original character has been
agreed to by the Building Committee, and sanctioned by the subscribers at a
Public Meeting in the Castlereagh-street School-house, presided over by the
late Bishop, on the 3 Oth of April, 1849. The report of the Committee contained
the following paragraph:—“lf we regard it as Christians, we seek to build a
21


goodly temple to the honour of Almighty God ; if as Members of the Church
of England, we would erect a Cathedral worthy of her claims and position in a
city which is the site of the Metropolitan See ; if as citizens, we desire to
complete a structure, which, though neither elaborately beautiful, nor adorned
with expensive sculpture, will be a lasting ornament of the Capital of this nascent
Empire, even as a Parish Church in a densely populated part of the city, the
building has its claims upon the community.” This report was unanimously
adopted and printed for circulation, and a resolution was then moved, seconded,
and carried unanimously to this effect. —“ That St. Andrew’s Cathedral being
not only a Parochial, but a Cathedral and Metropolitan Church, &c.” And as
if to mark this resolution with a peculiar emphasis, the late Bishop, before
putting it to the Meeting, addressed the assembly in these words.—“ Perhaps, as
I am concerned in carrying out this resolution, I might be expected to make a few
observations. The report and the resolutions describe the intended Cathedral as
a Parochial Church, and very truly ; this is a point which ought never to be lost
sight of, &c.”
At that Meeting I was present on the platform, as a visitor on my way
from Swan River, intending to proceed to New Zealand. After this Meeting
the Bishop proposed to me to accept the Living, with the full understanding of
my position as Incumbent of the Parish, and sole Minister of tho Cathedral. At
this period the congregation of St. Andrew’s was in a perplexed and scattered
state, on account of the secession of its late Minister, Mr. R, K. Sconce to the
Church of Rome. This melancholy lapse into error appeared to have been
aggravated, in the mind of his hearers, from the circumstance of his having
read the exhortation to Holy Communion on the last Sunday of his ministration
among them, and on the following Sabbath, having been seen on his knees
before the Host in St. Mary’s Romish Cathedral, many were confounded at
the suddenness of the change and disposed to doubt the truth of Christianity
altogether; whilst others were wavering towards Rome, and two or three
persons were actually carried with their Pastor into the vortex of superstition.
Mr. Naylor who was nominated to succeed Mr. Sconce, and held the
office for four months, was then broken down in constitution, and unable
to perform the duties. In this emergency the late Bishop requested me
to take the post; which I accepted at once as a matter of duty for three
months, and wrote to the Bishop of New Zealand to apprize him of the cause
of my delay here. Soon after the expiration of this term, the Bishop of New
Zealand engaged a passage for myself and family and gave me a kind invitation
to Auckland. This letter I submitted to the late Bishop of Sydney, and
received an immediate reply, in which he states—” It appears to me that his
Lordship” (of New Zealand) “freely leaves to you the election as to which
Diocese you will attach yourself to, as you feel no desire to remove from your
present sphere of duty, I regard that determination on your part as conclusive
of the question. You will have no difficulty, I am sure, in explaining to the
Bishop of New Zealand, the importance of that trust, the providential course


by which you were led to it, without your seeking, and the urgent occasion
which has arisen for the continuance of your Ministry here,”
At the same time, I received a letter from the Secretary of the Gospel
Propagation Society dated—“ 79, Pall Mall, London, June 19th, 1849.” In
which, after acknowledging my services, he continues. —“ And through God’s
blessing you seem to have been an instrument of great good both to the British
Settlers and to the Natives. In the midst of this career of usefulness, it is
painful to hear that you are compelled by the state of your health to resign
your Mission, and as the Bishop mentioned in his last letter, that you were
about to sail to New Zealand. I most sincerely trust that the change of
climate may tend to restore your health ; and I am quite sure that we need no
better guarantee than your last seven years of service, that as soon as your
strength permits, you will renew your labours in the cause of our Great Master.
I am your’s very truly,
Ernest Hawkins.”
When the late Bishop placed the acceptance of St. Andrew’s before me as
a matter of duty, I accepted it, and since that day, now a period of more than
nine years, I have endeavoured to discharge its onerous duties. In this
position you found me on your arrival here; and now, after labouring under
your Lordship’s supervision for three years, I read, on the third instant, in
“ the Chronicle ” the announcement, that the late Minister of St. John’s at the
Glebe had been translated to the Parish of St. Philip’s, and at the same
nominated Dean of St. Andrew’s Cathedral.
When I called upon you to ascertain your intention in this nomination,
you led me to understand, that it was your wish, when the new Cathedral
should be ready for consecration, to separate the Cathedral, from the parochial
department, and to make them distinct. On this occasion I endeavoured to
explain to you the anomalous position in which the Incumbent should be thus
placed ; excluded from the Chapter or Council in his own Church ! placed in
the position of a Clergyman shut out of his own Vestry, and lowered to the
state of Curate or assistant Minister in his own Church j and for the purpose
of escaping the possibility of such a degredation, I proposed, that the Incumbent
should be constituted a Canon and Vice-Dean, inasmuch as the nominated
Dean, was at the same time, to be the Incumbent and officiating Minister of
St. Philip’s : But this proposition you decidedly opposed.
On a subsequent interview you informed me that the Cathedral must
retain its double character of Parochial and Cathedral Church. On this
principle then, seeing that its acknowledged character must stultify the
appointment of Dean in the person of any other than the licensed Minister and
Incumbent of St. Andrew’s, I proposed to vacate the Cathedral Church and
Parish, in favour of the person nominated Dean by you, provided you appointed
me to another, where I could continue the education of my children. I made
this concession for the sake of peace in the church, and in doing so, I felt that I
proposed to sacrifice my fondest and best affections, in consenting to relinquish


my connexion with a parish where I had received uniform and increasing
kindness and attention from every member of it, far beyond what I can here
express, but for the sake of harmony and concord in the Church, I readily
consented to carry this proposal into effect; and Mrs. King, at the same time,
suggested to Mrs. Barker the propriety of the nominated Dean and myself
exchanging parishes, to which I consented, in order to open the way for his
appointment as Dean without any impediment. In noticing this proposal you
write to me, to the following effect —“ If you desire to resign St. Andrew’s, I
shall be willing, so soon as I am able, to give you the charge of another parish,
and to take care that you shall he no loser by the change.”* To this I reply,
that I cannot in justice to my children, subject myself to the possibility of being
located in a district where the present opportunity of carrying on their
education might not be within my reach. Indeed, I know of no place in the
Diocese out of Sydney, where the education of my seven children could be
attended to.
Since my concessions have proved unavailing, I am now compelled, mos
respectfully, to remonstrate against the present nomination of Dean of St
Andrew’s Cathedral, as an act of injustice to myself, inasmuch as it is calcu-
lated, if carried into effect, to reduce me to the position of a Curate or Assistant
Minister in a Church, where, for upwards of nine years, I have laboured as
the Minister and Incumbent; and I beg leave to request that you will be pleased
to forward a copy of this remonstrance to His Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
I have the honour to be, &c.
G. KING,
* Also lam quite willing and adopt the language of the late Bishop in reference to such
a contingency.”
From the Bishop of Sydney to the Rev. George King.
Sydney, 27th August, 1858.
Reverend and Dear Sir,
I much regret to find from your letter of the 23rd instant
that the friendly explanations already afforded of the motives which influenced
me in the appointment of a Dean have failed to remove the objections raised by
yourself, and I am under the necessity, therefore, of declining to prolong the
correspondence, or to allow further question of my right as Bishop of the
Diocese to exercise the powers conferred by the Royal Letters Patent.
I have expressly disclaimed all intention of interfering with your rights
as minister of St. Andrew’s Parish, and have promised not to neglect your just
claims ; whilst at the same time, I can recognize nothing in those rights or
claims, conflicting with my undoubted authority to constitute a Dean and
Chapter of the Cathedral; or necessitating a reference to yourself as Parochial
Minister. Referring to your narrative of certain circumstances antecedent to
my arrival in the colony and the inference you would wish me to draw from


them I must observe that they appear to me to admit of conclusions entirely
opposed to the idea of your promotion to any Cathedral dignity.
In April, 1849, the date of the meeting to which you refer you were not
the minister of St. Andrew’s, you state that you were then en route to New
Zealand and that you accepted employment in this Diocese only for three
months “in an emergency” occasioned by the illness of the Incumbent (the
Reverend Mr. Naylor) whose locum tenens you afterwards were during his
leave of absence from the colony and it was not till some time after the decease
of Mr, Naylor and the non-arrival of a Clergyman expected from the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel that your appointment as minister of St.
Andrew’s became permanent.
I cannot fail also to observe the fact that when the late Bishop three
years subsequently founded Canonries and appointed the first Canons of St.
Andrew’s Cathedral, three other incumbents were preferred before you affording
as I should have supposed far stronger grounds for remonstrance than any that
you can now reasonably offer and at the same time a favourable opportunity for
recording any lawful protest against the invasion of your alleged rights.
I regret that you have introduced the name of Mrs. King into this
correspondence, I understood that Mrs. King’s first visit was entirely a voluntary
act on her part. Had I supposed that on the second occasion you had made
her the bearer of a proposal to be submitted to me through Mrs. Barker, I
should have refused to admit Mrs. King in any such capacity I regard the
proceeding itself as highly improper and your reference to it in the formal
document, as extremely indelicate.
In conclusion I would observe that whilst I do not admit that the matter
of your complaint is cognizable by His Grace the Primate—l shall have no
objection to comply with your request by transmitting your communication to
the Archbishop of Canterbury for which purpose I shall feel obliged by your
furnishing a duplicate,
I remain, &c.
F. SYDNEY.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St. Andrew’s Parsonage,
September Ist. \ 1858.1
My Lord, L J
I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 27th ultimo,
and beg to enclose hereby a copy of my remonstrance for transmission to his
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury ; with one correction, namely, the substitu-
tion of invalidates instead of stultifies towards the end, which correction I
request may be made in the original paper.
I have to observe that you greatly mistake the object of Mrs. King’s
visits: they were purely of a charitable character towards the Church, and if
she failed in her good intentions, it was not her fault.
I have the honour to be,
G. KING.


Sydney, New South Wales, 9th September, 1858.
My Lord Archbishop,
At the desire of one of my clergy I send to your Grace a
letter which he has addressed to me in the form of a protest against the appoint-
ment of a Dean in the cathedral church of St. Andrew’s, in this city.
The clergyman in question is the Rev. G. King, Incumbent of the parish
of St. Andrew’s, in which the cathedral is being built. He officiates in a
temporary church, which, on the completion of the cathedral, is to be pulled
down, and the parishioners of St. Andrew’s will be accommodated in the cathedral
itself. The cathedral will, probably, be completed in two years, and the Dean,
who is at present the incumbent of an adjoining parish, will enter upon his
duties at the cathedral.
Mr. King is apprehensive that the appointment will tend to interfere with
his privileges as the parochial minister; and although I have assured him that
such will not be the case, and that the arrangements for conducting divine
service may easily be made so as to suit the convenience of all parties he is
greatly dissatisfied. I have also declined making him a canon, and vice-dean,
as he requested me to do ; at all events I saw no necessity for doing this at
present, and several disadvantages might arise from a premature appointment
of this kind. The correspondence I have had with Mr. King only seems to
increase my conviction that the course I have adopted is the proper one.
The gentleman whom I have appointed dean is the son of the late
beloved and lamented archdeacon. To his character and fitness for the office
not a single objection has been raised. On the contrary, all persons, even those
who are commonly opposed to me, have commended this act; and a Melbourne
paper speaks of it as giving satisfaction to all the members of the Church of
England throughout the Australian Colonies.
I regret that your Grace should be troubled with these documents, nor do
I see any advantage which Mr. King can hope from your reception of them ;
but as I might be exposed to the charge of dealing unfairly with one of my
clergy, and then of being afraid to allow his protest to reach your Grace, I
venture to trespass upon your attention, unreasonable as I feel it to be to do so.
I beg to, &c.,
N.B.—A protest in Mr. King’s handwriting but without signature having been
sent to the Bishop, was returned to Mr. King with the following letter.
From the Bishop of Sydney to the Rev. George King,
Sydney, 15th October, 1858.
My Dear Sir,
I have received the enclosed which being in your hand-
writing, I presume comes from you, though it does not bear your signature.
You have already received my assurance that in the appointment of a
Dean, there was no intention to interfere with your rights, or privileges, as


Minister of St. Andrew’s parish Church. I think therefore this document is
unnecessary and uncalled for as to its professed object.
I must also observe that as I have on all occasions treated you with respect
and kindness, and complied with your wishes whenever they were made known to
me, I regret the course which you are now' taking. I think that if you had
been willing to trust to the justice of your Bishop, and been content to wait
until the time when the Cathedral is opened, as suggested in my former note,
you might have spared yourself much annoyance and trouble, at all events you
would have been withheld from sending to him a document, which is liable to
be regarded as the act of a hasty moment.
If upon reflection you still think it necessary to address the enclosed
paper to me, you will doubtless desire that it should hear your signature. In
returning it I intend nothing disrespectful to you, but am not without hope
that you may prefer withdrawing it.
I remain, &c.
(Signed) F. SYDNEY.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop op Sydney,
St, Andrew's Parsonage,
October 14 th. [1858.]
My Lord,
I beg leave to submit to your Lordship a copy of a protest
which has been presented to me signed by 830 members of the Church as
follows:
“We, the Church of England parishioners, of St. Andrew’s, and members
of the congregation of St. Andrew’s Cathedral Church, having seen, with much
pain, the announcement of the nomination of a Dean, whose office if appointed,
is calculated to supersede the Incumbency of the Rev. George King, our
Minister, who for more than nine years has faithfully and efficiently discharged
its duties, do hereby protest against the injustice of the act; and we beg to
record an expression of our affection and esteem for him as our Minister.”
Here follow the signatures of 830 members.
I remain, &c.
G. KING.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St, Andrew's, August 16th, 1859;
My Lord,
When I informed your Lordship, on Saturday last, that I
took exception to certain points in your letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
it was not wdth the intention of asking you to lay before his Grace any statement
of mine on those points, especially as no notice has been taken of the matter
already submitted to the Archbishop, but for the purpose of showing your
Lordship my own views of the question, my protest having been addressed to


yourself, although a copy of it was transmitted to the Archbishop. Nor was it
my intention to precipitate a dispute, which from its beginning has been to me
most painful, and to prevent which, I used all means within my power, consistent
with my own sense of justice and propriety ; hut regarding a personal interview
as more likely to be conducive to an adjustment of a question, which has
already disturbed the peace of the Church, than an epistolary correspondence, I
adopted the former mode.
One half of the period which you stated in your letter, would probably
elapse before “the Dean who is at present the Incumbent of an adjoining
parish, will enter upon his duties at the Cathedral,’’ having already passed, it
appeared to me high time that some understanding should be arrived at on the
whole question.
“ To heal lightly ” a wound once felt in the Church is not, in my
opinion, the way to obtain a permanent peace. In order to secure a thorough
harmony of action, there should be no portion of the thorn left lingering in the
flesh. Life is too short, the work of the Church too great, and her difficulties
too manifold, to admit of internal divisions. The olive branch is what we long
for, that the Ark may rest, and the waters abate.
I beg to remain,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s obedient Servant,
G. KING.
From the Bishop op Sydney to the Rev. George King,
Bishopscourt, 22 nd August, 1859.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your note of the 16th instant, I have to inform
you that in the present state of the Cathedral building, I see little prospect of
its being opened for some time to come, and do not think it necessary to
propose any arrangements for the services to be performed in it when completed.
As I cannot undo what I have done if I would, and cannot express any
regret for what I have done in the matter of the appointment of a Dean, I am
at a loss to know what is meant by the latter part of your letter. I can however
truly say that I do not feel and have not at any time felt resentment at the part
you thought yourself obliged to take in reference to the appointment of a Dean,
and that it is my sincere desire to live in peace with you and with all men.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
F. SYDNEY.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St. Andrew's, August 25. [1859.]
My Lord,
I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 23rd Instant, in
reply to mine of the 16th, and to inform your Lordship that the expression in


my communication to which you advert namely “it appeared to me high time
that some understanding should he arrived at on the whole question,” had no
reference to the services in the Cathedral, in the sense in which your Lordship
seems to have understood it. My observation had reference to the anomalous
state in which Mr. Cowper, by your appointment, stands with respect to me
in my own Church.
You state that you cannot express any regret for what you have done in
the matter of the appointment of Dean. On this point I beg to assure your
Lordship, that the great majority of the members of the Church in Sydney, do
regret it; and that many of your own best friends have expressed deep sorrow
on account of it. But even yet, it is not too late to heal the wound which has
given so much pain. We are willing to acknowledge that the all absorbing
feeling of sympathy, which you entertained towards his family on the occasion
of the death of the late Archdeacon, entered deeply into the motives which
prompted the appointment in question, seeing that the nomination was first
notified in the same paper which announced the funeral of the late Dr.
Cowper. We are willing to believe that you did not, at the time, suppose that
the appointment of a Dean in St. Andrew’s Cathedral, would interfere with
my rights, and privileges, as the Minister of that Church. And we feel assured
that the step would not have been taken, had it occurred to your Lordship, that
grave doubts had arisen as to the legality of such an appointment at all.
And here I beg to bespeak your Lordship’s indulgence while I presume
to make a suggestion, which, under any other circumstances I would not
venture to offer, but to which, in the present case, I feel myself impelled by an
ardent desire for the prosperity of the Church.
Since your Lordship has selected Mr. Cowper in the present instance, I
would respectfully suggest that he be appointed Archdeacon, which your
Lordship’s letters Patent specifically authorize. He would thus be possessed of
a legitimate title, and hold a legal standing in the Diocese, which at present,
he cannot have as Dean. He might then enjoy his extra salary without a
murmur, which in the present case, appears to meet with universal disapproval-
I believe, in common with every individual whose opinion I have heard
on the subject, that such a course would ensure to your Lordship the respect
and love of the members of the Church generally, and that Mr. Cowper would
he thus much more efficient in the discharge of the duties which he may he
called upon to perform, standing officially between your Lordship and the body
of the Clergy.
I beg to remain,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s obedient Servant,
G. KING.


From the Bishop of Sydney to the Rev. George King,
Bishopscourt, 17 th September, 1859.
Dear Sir,
I did not hear from the Archbishop of Canterbury by the
last mail.
I have not replied to your letter of the 25th of August, because I could
scarcely suppose that the proposal contained in it would on further consider-
ation he regarded by yourself as one which I could seriously entertain.
It involves a denial of the validity of the appointment of a Dean, offers
a direct affront to the brother clergyman who holds that office by refusing to
him the title which belongs to it, and seems to imply that the extra salary is
with him a principal consideration in holding office.
I have no doubt that you desired to make an amicable proposal, and
I do not impute to you any other error than that of having greatly mistaken
the nature of the proposition you have made.
I am also assured that you are equally mistaken as to the opinion
generally entertained both of the appointment itself, and of my power to
make it.
I remain,
Dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
F. SYDNEY.
From the Rev. George King to the Bishop of Sydney,
St. Andrew's, September 20 th. [1859.]
My Lord,
In your letter of the 17th instant, you are pleased to attach
the idea of an amicable intention on my part to the proposition which I have
presumed to make, for the adjustment of the Cathedral question ; and very
justly. In my suggestion I had respect both to your Lordship’s dignity in
respect to the movement which has been made, and to the position of the
clergyman who is the object of it, my desire being to point out a course
involving no compromise of dignity or character on either side. I am resolved,
on my part, not to hold a subordinate position in my own Church.
Surely you do not consider it reasonable, that a clergyman, to whom was
offered without his seeking, and who accepted the Incumbency of the Cathedral
Church most absolutely ; and who never would have accepted it had any conditions
been suggested, or once thought of, and who for ten years has occupied that post;
surely you do not consider it reasonable that he should be quietly superseded in
his own Church, and have a state of inevitable degradation placed constantly
before his eyes, a prospect which would consume the spirit of any reflecting man ;
to know that every effort of zeal and activity spent in forwarding the completion
of his New Church, was but an effort to sink himself into a subordinate position
in it, and to raise a platform above his head for another. Since my proposal*


however, does not appear to meet with a favourable reception on your part, may
I take the liberty of asking whether you are disposed to propose any other mode
by which the difficulty which now exists, may he evaded or removed.
On a former occasion you offered to give an equivalent exchange, hut you
did not mention any other circumstance regarding it. But to a person like
myself, with several children under education, for whose advantage he must
live more than for his own, it is not to he supposed that he would willingly
forego their present interest without a certainty that they should not he the
sufferers.
My friends advise, and would precipitate a different course, but for the
sake of peace, and the welfare of our Church, I am prepared to make the
sacrifice; hut how great that sacrifice is, none hut myself can appreciate.
I remain,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s obedient Servant,
G. KING.
Note.—To this letter no reply was sent under tlie following circumstances
The correspondence had been resumed suhsequetly to the letter of the
14th October, 1858, by Mr. King wishing to re-open the question in a personal
interview with the Bishop. This for obvious reasons the Bishop declined:
but said that if Mr. King had any objection to make to the letter addressed by
the Bishop, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, he had better do so in writing;
upon which the letter of 16th August, 1859 was written by Mr. King, and this
led to the four subsequent letters above set out.
After receiving the letter of 20th September 1859, the Bishop advisedly
determined to discontinue the correspondence. A distinct promise had been
made to Mr. King that if when the Cathedral was finished he remained in the
same position, the Bishop would regard the licensed minister of St. Andrew’s, as
a very proper person to form one of the Cathedral body, (Letter of 19th
August, 1858, sec. 8.) and that if he wished to resign St. Andrew’s the Bishop
would do whatever his predecessor had promised, and consider Mr. King as
“ having the first claim to any parish in which I could station you with an
income and other advantages as far as possible equal to your present.” (Letter
of same date, sec. 19. I.) The Bishop, by these two statements, made and
repeated to Mr. King, had promised all that was in his power, and had no more
proposals to make. Mr, King had already limited his offer of exchange, to St.
Philip’s parish, or one of equal amount to St. Andrew’s in Sydney, (Letter 23rd
August, 1858, at the end.)
The Bishop, on public grounds, had declined to accede to the proposal
that Mr. King should exchange with the Dean. Moreover when Mr. King
characterized that exchange as “a sacrifice” (Letter 21st August, 1858,) it is
evident what kind of exchange would alone satisfy him. It must be in Sydney—
and it must be of equal value (at least) to St. Andrew’s : a proposal which


~T*/\ P"
vj As p
3-. 6.161 io
' F tt>FF
Mr. King knew perfectly well that the Bishop had it not in his power at that
time to make, and as a matter of fact the Bishop has at no time since been in
the position to make such a proposal.
Such were the reasons which induced the Bishop to discontinue the
correspondence, and rendered it unnecessary in the opinion of the Bishop to
reply to the letter of 20th September, 1859. The following note from Mr. King
was the first intimation which the B : ,p received that Mr. King complained
that no acknowledgment had been sent.
St. Andrew's Parsonage, April sth, 1860.
My Lord,
Although my last letter to you, written more than six months
ago, never obtained the slightest acknowledgment, I have the honor to return
thanks for your invitation to dinner for Friday the 13th instant, which I beg
leave to decline.
I have the honor to he
Yours faithfully,
G. KING.
"F
In consequence of this note the Bishop intended to send a formal acknow-
ledgment of the letter of 20th September, 1859, and until the recent statements
to the contrary made by Mr. King, believed that such acknowledgment had
been sent. If however this was not done the omission has h.en purely accidental.
