





THE GEEATNESS OF MAN.
The topic which is to engage our attention
to night is sufficiently well known. I only
wish I was qualified to do adequate justice to
it, and to bring it before you with an eloquence
and an effect corresponding to its claims. I
trust, however, I may be the means of exert-
ing some quickening influence on youthful
feeling, and kindling some aspirations after
that lofty excellence of character which, in
proportion as it is realised, constitutes the
happiness as well as the glory of man.
Man is full of contradiction. He is a para-
dox in the universe. His life is marked by
strongest contrasts and strangest inconsis-
tencies. He exhibits the most opposite fea-
tures of character. His history is a blending
of light and shade; of magnanimity and base-
ness; of perfections and deformities ; of the
most brilliant splendor and the deepest gloom.
We have to speak to you of his greatness. But
we could speak of his littleness, his frivolities,
his despicable follies, and degrading vices. We
could refer to his low cupidities, his vicious
passions, and revolting selfishness—to the
manner in which, from the most trivial in-
ducements, he will often perpetrate the darkest
deeds and the foulest crimes, and surrender
himself a willing victim at the shrine of some
hideous propensity which revolts the better
feelings, and disgusts the sight of virtue.
Look at him, and you may frequently see, in-
stead of manliness, meanness; instead of in-
tellectual superiority, mental degeneracy; in-
stead of virtue, vice; instead of goodness, evil;
and instead of religion, the most grovelling
superstition, prompting a worship offered to
the im age of some offensive reptilg or personi-
fied demon. Such are some of the phases of
his being.
But it is not with these that we shall occupy
your time. We have a more pleasing theme.
The depth to which man may descend is the
measure of the elevation to which he may
attain. His sunken debasement is the inverse
ratio of that lofty nobleness which is within
his reach. If in his degradation he resembles
the brute, yet be may resemble a god. A
capacity for princely dignity is native to
his being; the elements of true great-
ness are in him however they may be
repressed. And if man were what he might
become, he would be a meet companion for
angels ; and our beautiful world, pervaded
with blessedness as it is with beauty, would
anticipate Heaven.
Man occupies a middle sphere; there is a uni-
verse above and beneath him. But that which
he pervades is his realm. He is made to rule.
He is a delegated potentate. He is invested
with authority and has dominion. The ele-
ments are his servants. All nature is subser-
vient to him. All creatures pay him homage
as a Divine representative. They feel his
power, and they acknowledge his sway. He is
amenable to no tribunal but that of the Omni-
potent. He knows no superior but the Infi-
nite Supreme, and if he were but as good as he
is great, he would reflect the radiance of the
image of God.
Pascal has profoundly observed, “ that man
is so great, that his gieatness appears in
knowing himself to be miserable. A tree
has no sense of misery. It is true, that to
know we are miserable is to be miserable.
But to know we are miserable is also to be
great. Thus the miseries of man prove his
grandeur. They are the miseries of a digni-
fied personage—the miseries of a dethroned
monarch.” Dethroned, Pascal means, by his
own vices.
It is, not, however, from such a statement
that we would reason out the greatness of
man. We would rather look at his nature
and capabilities, and gather from an induc


tlon of facts, derived from what he has done,
an irrefragable inference as to what he is and
may become.
It has been beautifully and eloquently ob-
served by Sir William Herschell, in his “ Dis-
course on the Study of Natuial Philosophy,”
that “ the situation'of man on the globe he
inhabits, and over which he has obtained the
control, is in many respects exceedingly re-
markable. Compared with its other denizens,
he seems, if we regard only his physical con-
stitution, in almost every respect their infe-
rior, and equally unprovided for the supply
of his natural wants and his defence against
the innumerable enemies which surround
him. No other animal passes so large a por-
tion of its existence in a state of absolute
helplessness, or falls in old age into such pro-
tracted and lamentable imbecility. To no
other warm-blooded animal has nature denied
that indispensable covering, without which
the vicissitudes of a temperate and the rigors
of a cold climate are equally unsupportable;
and to scarcely any has she been so sparing
in external weapons, whether for attack or de-
fence. Destitute alike of speed to avoid and
of arms to repel the aggressions of his rapa-
cious foes, tenderly susceptible of atmospheric
influences, and unfitted for the coarse ali
ments which the earth affords spontaneously
during at least two-thirds of the year, even in
temperate climates, man, if abandoned to mere
instinct, would be of all creatures the most
destitute and miserable. Distracted by ter-
ror and goaded by famine; driven to the
most abject expedients for concealment from
his enemies, and to the most cowardly de-
vices for the seizure and destruction of his
nobler prey, his existence would be one con-
tinued subterfuge or stratagem; his dwelling
would be in dens of the earth, in clefts
of rocks, or in the hollows of trees ; his food
worms and the lower reptiles, or such few
crude productions of the soil as his organs
could be brought to assimilate, varied with
occasional relics, mangled by more powerful
beasts of prey, or contemned by their more
-pampered choice. Remarkable only for the
absence of those powers and qualities which
obtain for other animals a degree of security
and respect, he would be disregarded by some
and hunted down by others, till after a few
generations, his species would become alto-
gether extinct, or, at best, would be restricted
to a few islands in tropical regions, where the
warmth of the climate, the paucity of ene-
mies, and the abundance of vegetable food
might permit it to linger.”
But yet man is the undisputed lord of
the creation. He has powers, though requir-
ing culture and slow in their development,
which lift him to supremacy above all the
other creatures that crowd around him,
whether they swim the sea, wing the air, or
tenant the earth. In strength, in vigor, in
fleetness, in intuitive contrivance, and in
natural means of protection, they may sur-
pass him; but yet they are all his servants.
Mysterious as this may seem, yet the mystery
is soon solved when we call to mind that man
can think,—he can reason, he can remember,
he can calculate and devise, he can subserve
and control, he can, therefore, frustrate the
stratagems of the most cunning, and can con-
quer the resistance of the most powerful.
He can capture the swiftest, and prostrate
the most terrible. He can rifle the eagle’s
nest, though built on the loftiest mountain
cliff, and can track the tiger to his lair, and
dislodge him from his retreat. He has
yoked the lightnings to his car, and can
hurl thunder-bolts from his hands.
His outward frame and the constitution of
his being correspond to his superior dignity.
His form is most beautiful; his structure
most perfect. His functions are diversified
in their range, and most exquisitely adapted
to his condition. His posture is erect, not
prone, with a countenance looking to the
heavens. There is majesty in his mien, and
sovereignty in his eye, while his various
limbs, qualifying him for every variety of
attitude and action, are susceptible of the
most diversified and extensive appliances.
Many of the celebrated writers of antiquity
have noticed this peculiarity in the superiority
of man. Cicero has said, “How many excel-
lences has God bestowed on man; he has
raised him from the ground, and made him
lofty and erect, that by contemplating the
skies he might attain to a knowledge of the
gods.”
Sallust alludes to the same idea in the first
section of his “Conspiracy of Cataline;” and
few are ignorant of the beautiful lines of
Ovid, which Dryden renders—
“ While the mute creation downward bend
Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend.
Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes
Beholds his own hereditary skies. - ’
These, however, are surpassed by our own
Milton :
“ There wanted yet the master-work, the end
Of all yet done; a creature, who not prone
And brute as other creatures, but endued


With sanctity of reason, might erect
His stature, and upright with front serene
Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven.”
But it is not in his external aspect,. distin-
guished as that is for eminent superiority to
every other form of sentient being, that we
are to seek for the elements of man’s great-
ness ; hut in his mind, his mental attributes,
his moral faculties, his capability of intel
lectual excellence and lofty virtue—in his
power of will, of self-government, of subju-
gating the passions to the dictates of reason
and the voice of conscience, of trampling on
difficulties which may confront his efforts,
and of vanquishing whatever is hostile to his
highest interests and purest happiness—in
his power of enshrining his thoughts in words,
of conveying his ideas to others, many a time
clothed with beauty and instinct with the
living fire of a burning eloquence, which in-
spires the listener, and entrances whilst it
inspires—in his power of giving form to
his conceptions, breathing into them the soul,
and investing them with the graceful charms
of poetry; or bodying them forth on the
glowing canvass, pregnant with imagination
and rich in sentiment; or chiselling them in
marble, till
“ It seems to breathe, and soften into flesh
Beneath the touch of forming art;”
or fashioning them into the diversified pro-
ductions of utility, which minister to the con-
venience of life, or adorn it with the decora-
tions of elegance and grace. We are to seek
for it in his power of admiration, of virtuous
love, of intelligent joyousnes's, of reverential
worship at the altar of piety, and of rising
in his contemplation to things invisible to
the outer eye, but bright and radiant to the
purified vision of an inner sense; while,
amid the unseen realities, he recognises the
supernal source of life and blessing—can
know him, enjoy him, commune with him in
intelligible converse, till the soul, rapt in the
enthusiasm of its emotions, is sometimes
borne upward, so that whether in the body or
out of the body it cannot tell; and thus,
from the depths of feeling, and by a prophetic
instinct, he is conducted onward in his anti-
cipations to a destiny corresponding to his
dignity, amidst scenes of Dublimest loveli-
ness, of enduring and unmingled bliss. It is
among these peculiarities and capabilities of
his being that we a T tc search for the ele-
ments of humqn greatn and in our search
we shall soon find enough to convince us of
the truth of a sentiment found in a book
only too much despised, “Thou hast made
him but a little lower than the angels.”
Between man and the constitution of
things in the midst of which he is placed
there is a delightful harmony : the world
without and the world within are in exquisite
unison. The Great Designer has revealed the
perfections of his being, and the thoughts of
his heart, in the productions of his hand.
Nature is as a storehouse of facts, embodying
the most comprehensive intelligence, astonish-
ing skill, and beneficent wisdom. But the
Author of nature is the creator of man, and
He has fitted him to learn the lessons of truth
and philosophy which teem everywhere in
the phenomena around him. They are the
hieroglyphics of celestial science which man
has to decipher, but which he is qualified to
decipher—they are the symbols of a divine
knowledge which man has to interpret and
translate into intelligible language, but for
which he is adequately gifted. They are found
in the heavens, in the atmosphere, in the sea,
on the land, among vegetables, and rocks, and
animals—from the tiniest moss to the tallest
cedar; from the atom on which we tread
to the crystallised granite that has boiled
up in unknown ages from central depths of
liquid fire; from the diminutive insect, per-
ceived not by the unassisted eye, to the more
gigantic manifestations of organised and
sentient being. They are found in the con-
stantly operating forces of nature and life,
whether mechanical, chemical,electric,or vital,
developing themselves in endless vicis-
situde, but according to laws and con-
ditions fixed by the divine Lawgiver
which they cannot pass. They are found
in all the peculiarities and modifications of
individual and associated humanity, whether
coporeal, mental, or moral, from the most
contracted intellect to the loftiest genius,
the most barbarous tribes to the me st civilised
communities, the most revolting exhibitions
of moral obliquity to the most finished speci-
mens of living virtue. And man, looking
forth on all these wonders of the unseen mys-
terious agency that originates and sustains
them, has his attention arrested, he is induced
to gaze, his mind is quickened, thought is ex-
cited and inquiry stimulated. He observes,
examines, investigates, tries experiments, and
registers his facta. He analyses, compares


classifies, generalises, and arranges his genera,
species, and orders, according to definite rela-
tions. He reasons from his facts, and deve-
lopes conditions, laws, principles, thus build-
ing up, in his progress of discovery systems of
science based on irrefragable demonstrations
of calculation and experience. And when we
think on the intelligent vigilance, the scruta-
nising observation, the amount of protracted,
subtle, and profound thought, the powers of
reasoning extended through long processes of
complicated argumentation, from axiomatic
principles to the most sublime results, which
these involve, we feci that there is something
in all this which must redeem man from con-
tempt, even in the estimation of highest intel-
ligences, and which lift him to a pinnacle of
conspicuous greatness in the dominions of
God.
He has climbed the heavens, numbered the
stars, called them by names, arranged them
according to their orders, weighed them, mea-
sured them, estimated their distances, traced
the orbits, calculated the perturbations, evol
ved the relations of planets. He has deve-
loped the laws of that mystic influence which
binds satellite to satellite, sun to sun, and
system to system. He has analysed the light,
determined its speed, tracked the path of
comets in their mysterious circuits, and pre-
dicted with mathematical certainty the year,
and almost the hour, of their return,
though ages may roll away before their re-ap-
pearance. He has fashioned instruments of
uncommon skill and enlarging power by
means of which he is continually discovering
to the view new worlds in the distant regions
of space, and resolving indistinct nebulae,
which previously appeared but as so much
star dust into central luminaries, and thus
expanding our conceptions of the unutterable
vaetness of the universe till we are over-
whelmed and confounded by the thought.
From his flight through the empyrean he
has descended to the earth on which he
dwells, he has directed his inquisitive glance
to its conditions; he has ascertained its posi-
tion and relation to the system of which it
forms a part, and to its sister planets. He has
fixed his ever curious eye on its surface, till,
kindling with admiration at its varied mani-
festations, he has been prompted to investi-
gate its soils, and superficial accumulations of
block and boulder, of sands and gravel, of
deltas and estuaries. He has explored its
ossiferous caves and fissures, its submarine
forests and peat beds; its shingle beaches and
coral reefs. He has pursued his search in the
descending series of rocks, through the diver-
sified superpositions of tertiary, secondary
and transition strata : and in his inves-
tigations he has brought to light multifarious
remains of non existing species of once
animated beings, from the huge Megatherium
and Saurian tribes down to the fossil animal-
culm, 40,000,000 of which may be contained in
a cubic inch. He has descended lower still —
to the granitic base of the earth’s crust; has
determined its origin and the nature of its
materials. He has elucidated the ancient
conditions of our globe at different eras in
the process of its fo;mation, and has thus
carried back our wondering imaginations
myriads of ages anterior to the existence of
our race. He has developed most clearly the
action of agencies in their endless operation—
atmospheric, aqueous, igneous, and organic,
contributing, sometimes by their slow, at other
times by their sudden and convulsive move-
ment, to the present constitution of our earth.
And from all this there has been erected a
fabric of geologic science forming one of the
most splendid and enduring monuments of
human genius of which our age can boast.
Not satisfied with such triumphs, he has
laid the whole of creation, as far as he can
explore it, under tribute to develops his
mighty capabilities, and to add effulgence to
his glory. He has seized hold of the materials
of things, whether metallic, earthy, or gaseous,
and has analysed them too—reduced them to
their elements, settled their proportions,
elicited their properties and the influence of
their affinities, and has exhibited to the world
all the marvellous wonders of chemistry. He
has decomposed the atmosphere, separated it
into its constituent parts, determined its
height, and temperature, and pressure. He
has floated on the wings of the wind, soared
into the clouds, detected their nature, their
origin, their currents, and their influence on
light, and climate, and vegetation. He has
tracked the path of the lightning, and traced
it up to its secret place of thunder. He has
plunged into the depths of the ocean, explored
its recesses, studied the character of its pro-
ductions and inhabitants, calculated the mass
of its waters, solved their constitution, pur-
sued the course of its floods, rode upon its
billows, evolved the laws and action of its
tides, the rapidity and violence of its waves,
and subdued the mighty, heaving, restless,
majestic ocean to his use.
Untiied in his pursuit, he has turned his
attention to the vegetable region. He has
looked with an eye of beauty on its thousand


charms, and yielded himself to the influence
of its delicious attractions. He has roamed
in his search over hill and valley, through
woods and forests; and has penetrated every
accessible nook of nature with all the ardor
of a votary, and all the enthusiasm of love, to
gather specimens to investigate, and to gratify
his taste. He has arranged their tribes, fami-
lies, and orders, according to resemblances in
appearance, or to affinities of structure, with
unusual accuracy. Their shape, aspect, size,
loveliness, and fragrancetheir nutritious
uses, medicinal virtues, or deleterious pro-
perties,—have all a record in his memorial.
Roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits, in their
endless variety, have come under his observ-
ing scrutiny, and have been classified with
intelligent care. Their relations to soil, to
locality, to climate, have all been duly traced
and registered. Not satisfied with this, he
has penetrated the interior of plants, dissected
their organs and tissues, acquainted himself
with their diversified functions, resolved the
liquid nutriment which floats in their veins
or abides in their cells, traced the bearing of
heat and light and atmospheric agency on
their growth and appearance; and from the
whole has presented us with a philosophy of
vegetation as fascinating as it is useful, and
as manifestive of the wisdom and the good-
ness of the Infinite Father as the sublime
productions of His hands.
Pursuing his intellectual search, he has
pervaded with mental inquisitiveness the
realms of sentient life. All classes of animals
he has studied —from the tenants of the desert
and the jungle to the more quiet inhabitants
of our fields; through all the graduated de-
grees of habit and character, whether raven-
ous or tame,—living on the flesh of captured
victims or browsing the herbage in peaceful
repose, acknowledging in subjection the
dominion of man. Their anatomy and
physiology, tbeir structure and modes of life,
their instincts and tendencies, have all
arrested his observant eye, and have been
chronicled in his histories.
He has lived with the birds in the garden,
and in the wood, with those that make their
homes on sea cliffs or on mountain tops.
He has sought the companionship of the
eagle and the falcon, the wren and the sparrow;
he has courted their acquaintance, that he
might know and understand them. He has
listened to their melodies or discords, has
been arrested by their forms, and delighted
with their plumage, and he has come away
from their society enriched with stores of
intelligence respecting the means of their
subsistence, and the ways of their being,
which has vindicated the supremacy of his
intellect and the grandeur of his capa-
bilities.
The insect tribes which crawl the earth or
skim the air, that dance in the sunlight or
frolicksome play upon the stream, have caught
his scientific eye, and tasked his scientific
skill; myriads on myriads he has examined,
reflected on their history, and written their
biography. He has brought his magnifying
instruments to bear, which have revealed to
his astonishment, a world of sentient life in-
visible to the naked eye. In a globule of
water he has discovered monstrous gorgon
shapes of existence, whose voracious propen-
sities he has described, and whose fitful move-
ments he has attempted to delineate, while
he has detected among the thousand forms of
these living animalcule functional arrange-
ments as complete and as perfect as in the
higher grades of being.
The manner in which he has subjugated
the forces of nature to his use is no less illus-
trative of his superiority. He has ascertained
their character, calculated their degree and
momentum, put them into requisition, and
yoked them to his service. The mechanical
powers of leverage, pulley, and screw, through
all their complicated applications, have been
evoked to do his bidding. Heat, in- all the
degrees of its intensity, has yielded him mul-
tifarious service. Water he has concentrated
by currents to revolve his machinery. The
winds he has gathered in his sails to grind his
corn, or to impel him in his adventures on the
deep. From the vapor steaming from a
tea-kettle, by thought and experiment he has
discovered an energy of propulsion which
whirls huge vehicles on our tram lines fast as
the eagle flieth. He has learned to speak by
electricity, and to convey thought by light-
ning. The properties of the magnet have been
employed to point the course of the mariner,
and to guide him over his world of waters.
The subtlest influences of light have been
arrested and converged to transmit to the
silvery surface the features of the human
countenance with an accuracy of delineation
and expression which has equalled all the
wonders of the pencil. Chemistry has pene-
trated the secrets of nature, and has liberated
latent activities, which are conferring on man
an infinitude of benefit—the very subser-
vience of which is an impressive manifesta-
tion of his wonderful genius, and of the apti-
tude and greatness of his powers. Man! man!


what has thou not accomplished within the
limit of thine own realm?
“ How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
How complicate, how wonderful is man !
How passing wonder he who made him such !
Who centered in our make such strange extremes
From different natures marvellously mixed.
Connection exquisite of distant worlds!
Distinguhh’d link in being’s endless chain !
Midway from nothing to the Deity !
A neam etheral, sullied, and absorpt!
Though sullied and dishonored, still divine !
Dim miniature of greatness absolute !
O what a miracle is man to man! ”
But splendid as have been his discoveries
and achievements in the world of matter, they
have been not less so in the department of
mind.
It is one of the distinguishing peculiarities
in the greatness of man that ha can know
himself; and it would have been strange if,
with his excursive intellect, his attention bad
not been arrested to his own being, and his
inquisitiveness had not been directed in its
meditative pursuit to his own nature, faculties,
duties, and destiny. His corporeal constitution,
possessing much in common with other
animals, he has diligently investigated. There
is not a bone, not a muscle, not a sinew, not
a nerve, not a vessel, not a vein or an artery,
not a gland or a secretion, that has escaped
his scrutiny, and which he has not carefully
studied; together with their functions, their
relations, their physiological uses, their exqui-
site adjustments and beautiful harmony. But
the more he has investigated and studied, the
more accurately and extensively he has con-
ducted his researches, the more vivid has the
impression become that he is “ fearfully and
wonderfully made.” His knowledge of these
facts alone, resulting from his own experi-
ments and inquiries, lift him at once to an
immeasurable elevation above the creatures
around, and qualify him for the mastery. The
horse and the lion know not their own
nature.
But it is iu the science of mind, and in the
exercise of his imaginative genius, that man
has achieved some of his most signal triumphs
and won for himself some of his proudest
distinctions.
That there is something within, and be-
neath the mechanical structure of the out-
ward frame, which constitutes man’s essential
being, of which the body is but an appendage,
not a necessary part; an instrument, not the
agent; an object, not the subject (using the
often repeated German distinction) —was one
of the earliest inferences, as a probability, of
abstract thought. It is here where we alone
can recognise the seat of all those energies
which have been developed in the researches,
activities, and various productions of man;
and a knowledge of which must necessarily
constitute the basis of all intellectual philo-
sophy. This something has been called
mind; and to determine its nature, its laws,
its capabilities, its modes of operation, the
manner of its intercourse with the external
world and the conditions of its knowledge,
tasked, in a distant antiquity, some of the
profoundtst and subtlest efforts of thought
and analysis. On these topics the ancient
Greeks, and after them the schoolmen in the
middle ages, plunged into endless specula-
tions, and endeavored to solve problems and
explore mysteries which proved utterly abor-
tive from their too frequently baseless assump-
tions, and from the flagrant errors of their
method.
But yet, in their adventurous, daring, and
sublime wanderings, they not seldom dis-
covered a wondrous acumen and a capability
of thinking which constituted no insignificant
proof of their greatness and power. It is
only to be regretted that their d priori reason-
ings and their unscientific processes, issuing
iu such fruitless results, had not for ever
dissipated the cloudland of transcendentalism
in which many of our German neighbors
love to build their splendid but unsubstantial
theories, and to lose themselves in the unin-
telligible realms of the Absolute and the
Infinite, instead of descending to the common
facts of consciousness, and with the mighty
energies which must be conceded to them,
rearing up from these a massive fabric of
intellectual science, as enduring as the facts
themselves, and as sure as the laws by which
they are governed. But, in spite of the con-
tempt which has been poured by these giant
mystics on the humbler laborers in this de-
partment of knowledge, who, content to pro-
ceed by the slower process of induction, and
having carefully and patiently gathered, clas-
sified, and registered the instructions of con-
sciousness, have contributed more towards
a true system of mental philosophy than
all the profound thinkers who have
sought to evolve such a system from
the subtleties of a complicated logic. I
know very well at the hazard of what reflec-
tion on my judgment I make the assertion,
yet I hesitate not to express my conviction,
that the names of Locke,with all his errors, and
Berkeley, and Reid, and Stewart, and Brown,
and Hamilton, notwithstanding their more


modest pretensions, together with others who
have pursued a similar course in France and
Germany, will be mentioned with reverential
respect, when men of prouder name and more
pompous assumption, are forgotten in the
oblivion of ages, and their works are lost.
And when I think on the discoveries which
have been made by such men in this sphere of
investigation, and on the eloquent and mas-
terly works which they have left behind them
as the memento of their genius, one is
tempted to feel something like elation, from
the fact of having an affinity of nature and
capacity (however limited), with minds so
acute and vigorous, so comprehensive and
profound.
Not content with the knowledge of the
anatomy and physiological structure of the
ind, man has studied, if I may be allowed
to say so, its dynamics. He has discovered
there forces inaction, the laws which regulate
their activity, the conditions by whicn they
are limited, and must be controlled in there
operations, in order to accuracy of reasoning,
the deduction of legitimate inferences, and
the attainment of truth. He has evolved the
laws and explained the varieties of evidence
by which truth is sustained and rendered
manifest, so as to win conviction and elicit
faith. He has clearly established the doctrine,
that the possession of truth is within reach,
that faith in truth is the normal state of the
human mind, while scepticism is a disease
induced by prejudice, and by the perverting
influence of diversified feelings on the judg-
ment and the intellect.
But another aspect of human nature has
fixed his contemplations. Man is not made
to live to himself. He is a social being—one
among many. He is identified with his fellows,
sustains towards them diversified relations,
involving obligation, and giving birth to
duty. He is susceptible to impressions of
right and wrong, and to corresponding emo-
tions, while there is within him a certain
mysterious faculty of peculiar force and
authority, urging him to the one and warn-
ing him against the other. In proportion,
therefore, as the one is resisted, and the other
is yielded too, there are feelings awakened of
approbation or disapprobation, of self satisfac-
tion or remorse, and with this condition is
associated our hopes and fears, our men-
tal pleasures and pains,—in fact, the
whole range of our moral sentiments.
And it is from this peculiarity in
the nature and relations of man that has
arisen the science of ethics,our various theories
of morals, the laws which regulate society,
the systems of jurisprudence on which those
laws are arranged and classified, the consti-
tuted governments of countries by which
they are framed, and from whom they ac-
quire validity and force. Hence it is from
all this that we acquire our conceptions of
the rights inherent in man, of the equity
which ought to lie at the basis, and of the
justice which ought to preside over the execu-
tion of law; and it is just in proportion as
these are understood that we realise a vivid
apprehension of liberty and tyranny, of free-
dom and slavery, of equity and wrong, not
only between individuals, but throughout the
whole social state. Aud reflecting much on
the sagacity, the penetration, the deep insight,
the compass of mind, the energies of thought,
the subtleties of argument, and the profound
inferences embodied in these systems of mo-
rals and codes of law, —when I turn to
the productions bearing on these topics in
some of the writings of Plato, and Aristotle,
and Cicero, and Grotius, of Puffendorf, and
Selden, of Coke and Bacon, together with the
immense fund of political wisdom breathed
in strains of the richest and most gorgeous
eloquence of our own immortal Burke, I seem
to acquire from this wondrous development of
the powers of man’s intellect a still deeper
impression of that sublime grandeur and
dignified superiority which lift him to a lofty
position in the scale of being, aud in the uni-
verse of God.
But there is another phase of his character
under which he appears to us radiant with a
still more peculiar glory. He is endued with
the faculty of imagination, which in its vigor,
and when combined with other faculties, has
enabled him to produce what must remain an
ever-enduring demonstration of his greatness.
It is here where his creative genius and in-
ventive power have shone forth with sur-
passing lustre, and which have enshrined
themselves in painting, in sculpture, in
poetry, in the charms of music, and in the
inspirations of an enkindling eloquence.
Man is so constituted as to be able to con-
ceive ideas of objects which have appealed to
his senses, but which are no longer present;
while from the attribute of imagination he
has the power of selecting, arranging, com-
bining, and re-shaping them into ideal forms,
exhibited either under an aspect of sublimity,
or invested with the charms of an ethereal
beauty, or presented in strange combinations,
both humorous and grotesque, which awaken
their appropriate emotions- While from the


energies of nature he receives the elements of
his wondrous skill, by which he evolves
his mystic creations, yet she, too,
is his true inspirer , to whom we are indebted
as much for everything which is magnificent
in human art, as for those glorious models of
excellence which in the living and inanimate
scene of existing things she has presented to
the admiration of the genius she inspires.
Memorials of this power have descended to
us from the earliest time. In the most
ancient writings we recognise its activity and
feel its presence. In the poetry of the Hebrews
we have some of its grandest, boldest, most
majestic manifestations. Among tribes rude
and uncultured, their ideas, conveyed in
figure and metaohor suggested by analogies,
are colored by its hues. Beneath the fostering
influence of culture and civilisation, ’tis true,
the faculties of reasoning and judgment are
called into more vigorous exercise, which,
if they in any way restrain the loftier flights
of imagination, j et render them more graceful
and attractive. Hence the productions which
have come down to us as a legacy from a dis-
tant age, and which are the offspring of this
high and wonderful endowment, have a ten-
dency to awaken till this hour the feelings of
astonishment and delight.
“ The poet’s eye in a fine frenzy rolling
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to
heaven.
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shape, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.”
We see something of this in the rich and
unrivalled excellence which distinguishes the
poems of Homer—in their charm of beautiful
narrative; in their impressive representations
of the heroic life; in that living, ever-moving
picture which he causes to pass before us, so
instinct with animat-d interest; and in that
vividness and splendor of description by
which, as with a bewitching power, he redeems
from contempt and disgust the scenes of
savageism, slaughter, and blood through
which he conducts us—we see it in the lofty
beauty, the delicious melody, the serene re-
pose, which are characteristic peculiarities of
Pindar’s muse —we see it in the inspiring
sentiments, the moral sublimity, the intense
earnestness, the expression of the terrible and
tragic passions which pervade the dramas of
zEschylus, “who, amid the ruins and frag-
ments of a perishing world, delights to astonish
us with a view of that old gigantic strength,
the spirit of which seems to be embodied in his
own Prometheus,—ever bold, and ever free,—
chained and tortured, yet invincible; ’’ while
in the works of Sophocles the spirit of poetry
seems to have breathed her richest, sweetest,
loftiest strains, and to have clothed herself in
the most attractive forms of the grand and
the lovely, the majestic and the graceful. Of all
the poets of Greece none seemed to approach
more nearly to a faultless perfection than
he. We have this imaginative genius and
poetic sensibility enshrined with elegance and
taste in the accurate delineations and delight-
ful rural scenes of the Eclogues and Georgies,
as well as in passages of sublime loftiness and
tragic pathos in the iEneid of Virgil.
And what shall we say of our own bards—
the singers in our own Israel who, by the
i obleness, the varied excellence, the richness
of thought, the daring originality, and the
fulness of inspiration which distinguish their
poetry, have raised our country to a position
second to none in the annals of the world?
The productions in the times of Elizabeth
and the-First James alone, would bear a com-
parison with those of any other age.
Our own Shakspeare towers alolt in regal
supremacy above all. If ever any being on
this earth comprehended the whole of hu-
manity, penetrated the depths of its spirit,
understood its mysteries and complications,
the operations of its powers, and the ever-
varying phases of its characters; its diversified
feelings and sentiments; all its moods and
aspirations; its hopes and fears, its joys and
sorrows; its guilt and remorse ; the subtle
interlinking of its thoughts, and the darkest
workings of its passions that being was
Shakspeare! From the monarch to the
clown ; from the strange musinas of the mys-
terious inexplicable Hamlet, to the frivolities
and fooleries of the buffoon ; from the adven-
turous daring of the powerful and ambitious,
to the contemptible trucklings of the syco-
phant all the pining dissatisfactions of
envy; the restless and tormenting suspicions
of jealousy; the craft of the cunning, and the
plottings of revenge; the ludicrous and
satiric; the tender and pathetic; the sublime
and the beautiful; the fearful, the horrible
the revolting, the heroic, the chivalric, and the
glorious : all are there depictured on his mystic
page. While with the witchery of a magician
he seems to have the power at will to move us
to laughter or to tears; to exultation or to
agony. Strange, wonderful, mysterious man I
the object of a nation’s idolatry, and the admi-
ration of all who are in any way qualified to
appreciate the marvellous capabilities of the
human mind!


But while he stands alone on the pedestal
of pre eminence,, there are others who are
equally worthy of a position at his feet. The
name of Milton is his monument—surpass-
ing even Shakspeare in some aspects of his
character, and in some attributes of his
poetry. The empire of his genius is immense.
His learning, which he impregnated and
fused with the fire of his own spirit, is pro-
digious. His power is that of an enchanter
He has revealed to us heaven as we never saw
it before; he has opened to our view that
flaming abyss, the abode of the arch fienda
“ Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great furnace flamed.”
such as we could never have conceived. He
has pourtrayed Paradise as the home of
beauty, with a pencil dipt in the colors of
heaven. “ But his natural element is the
great;” quoting the words of another, “He
may love the beautiful, but the sublime loves
him.” He walks at ease on heights “ where
angels bashful look,” and descends with equal
calm and boldness amidst depths into which
other souls dare only timidly peer. How per-
fectly at home is he in that wondrous hell of
his, which he has cut out from chaos, and
wrapt in devouring fires; in chaos itself,
through whose wild and world shaking up-
roar the ship of his genius moves on in
triumphant security; on Niphates Mount,
looking down on half the world, and up to
that ardent angel standing in the sun ; on
the mount of the congregation, in the sides
of the north, beside the chariot and throne of
the Apostate; or over the surge of the
primeval deep, as the spirit is moving its sub-
siding waters, and the Son is taking the com-
passes from God’s eternal store—or near the
brightness of the Father’s glory, as he comes
forth with whirlwind noise to chase his hap
less enemies over the battlements of heaven!
never for a moment on the giddiest of these
giddy heights, or in the sablest of these dark
imaginative depths, does he reel, or blench, or
tremble, display weakness, or indicate terror.
Girt, sandalled, white robed, in “ privilege of
virtue,” he becomes free of the universe, and
is safe in hell as an angel of light would be,
can stand on the crystal battlements, or in
the heart of the sun, with the dignity of a
“ watcher,” and enter the heaven of heavens
with the immunity of a “ holy one.” Such
was Milton. Hence it has been said by one of
his biographers, that if he had been delegated
on a mission to some other world, he would
have awakened a lofty conception of the ex-
traordinary character of the race from which
he had come.
But we might refer you to other marvellous
displays of imaginative and poetic power; to
the productions of the romantic and meli-
fluous Spencer; to the rugged but nervous and
original Dryden; to the exquisite ornateness,
the elaborate felicities, and melodious numbers
“ rippling sweet” of Pope; to the lyric spirit
and lyric tenderness, the scorching fire and
bewitching pathos of Burns; to the number-
less excellences of other poets, in our own and
other lands, whose names are a catalogue.
We might advert to the wonders of creative
and plastic art, produced by the chisel and the
pencil, which have rendered the names of
Rifaelle and Rubens, of Michael Angelo and
Titian, of the Grecian Phidias, and sculptors
and painters of more modern times, immortal.
We might allude to the manifestations of
mental effort and diversified thought in the
thousand forms of literature. To the intel-
lectual power, constructive skill, cultivated
taste, and sublime conception in the various
forms of architecture, whether Grecian or
Gothic, grand or massive, elegant or useful,
from the towering cathedral to the humble
dwelling; from the temples and pyramids of
Egypt to the beautiful bridges which span our
straits and rivers; from those stately and
majestic vessels which, for purposes of enter-
prise, or commerce, or war, are intended to
plow the seas, to the numerous edifices and
structural erections which distinguish our
railways, and which are among the wonders
of the age. Look, in fact, where you will,
explore what you may ; turn your attention
to the acquisitions of knowledge, to the dis-
coveries of science, to the systems of mental
philosophy, or to the enshrinements of imagi-
native genius in the poetry or fine arts, and
you will find that
“ Great men have been among us, hands that penned.
And tongues that uttered wisdom.”
And in their greatness we share, with their
glory we are indentified, and the dignified
position they have reached is but the lifting
up of the race to that rightful pre-eminence
which is the appropriate elevation of man.
But a few words more, conducting you to
another feature in the human character,
which brings us within the sphere of the mo-
rally sublime. There is in the human will,
when concentrated on its object, and when
sustained by heroic resolution, a strength
which has achieved and can still achieve
wonders. And where the object it proposes to


secure is worthy, and the purpose to obtain it
is prompted and regulated by pure and ele-
vated motives, it presents man under an
aspect which wins the admiration of higher
beings and secures their highest praise. I
mention this the rather because this element
of true greatness is within the reach of all.
Yes; and if society could be stript of all that
is adventitious, and the realities of fact could
be presented distinctly to view, it is not impro-
bable that the most numerous and impressive
forms of moral greatness might be discovered
among the conflicts and doings and present
obscurities of humble life. It is not in the
lap of luxury, surrounded with every conve-
nience, coddled with every comfort, screened
from every blast that blows, and sheltered
against every peril that may endanger, that
man can become great; but in the open air
of every-day life, on the arena of conflict, in
the tug and the strife, and the battle under
difficulties; in the manful encounter with
everything that is hostile to our interests; in
the prosecution of arduous enterprises against
resisting obstacles, and through storms and
tempests to a contemplated end. That knit-
ting of the joints, that vigour of nerve, that
compression of muscle and flexibility of limb
which qualifies for the gladiatorial combat
can only result from a due discipline of the
energies. And where there is strength of will,
a stout resolve, a noble purpose, and an in-
vincible perseverance, man, whatever may be
his sphere, must be great. The sickly hot-
house plant may exfoliate, bud, and bloom-
may diffuse its perfume in fragrant loveliness,
but take it from beneath the fostering care
of the gardener, expose it to a ruder tem-
perature, and it perishes ; but the oak,
planted on the mountain-top, exposed to
wind and rain, to cold, and snow, nursed
amid storms and shaken by every blast,
strikes its roots the deeper, and rises slowly
and gradually, till it presents an aspect of
majestic and venerable grandeur, perpetuating
its existence for centuries—an admiration
and a joy-
The celebrated lines of Horace, which have
often been admired, portrays in sublime
beauty a man of heroic purpose and will. I
will give you Addison’s translation, for want
of a better: —
“ The man resolved and steady to his trust,
Inflexible to ill and obstinately just,
May the rude rabble’s Insolence despise,
Their senseless clamours, and tumultuous cries ;
The tyrant’s fierceness he beguiles.
And the stern brow and the harsh voice defies,
And, with superior greatness, smiles.
Not the rough whirlwind that deforms
Adria’a black gulf, and vexes it with storms.
The stubborn virtue of his soul can move;
Nor the red arm of angry Jove,
That flings the thunder from the sky.
And gives it rage to roar, and strength to fly.
Should the whole frame of nature round him
break,
In ruin and confusion hurl’d,
lie, unconcerned, would hear the mighty crack.
And stand secure amidst a falling world.”
I cannot think of Luther, take him in what
light you may, without a feeling of sublime
awe. When smitten with convictions of what
he considered to be the truth, emerging from
his obscurity to do battle with a power which
had enthralled Europe, and which he con-
ceived to be hostile to the interests of the
race, shaking kingdoms by his voice, pro-
voking potentates and princes, popes and
cardinals to the encounter, and girding him-
self for the terrible strife with a calm, steady,
unconquerable soul that knew not fear,
though, for any thing he could tell, mar-
tyrdom would be the issue of his course, I
cannot, without being entranced with ad-
miration, reflect on the invincible energy of
determination displayed by Howard in what
Burke calls “ his circumnavigation of charity.”
“It was,” says Foster, “ the calmness of an
intensity kept uniform by the nature of the
human mind, forbidding it to be more, and
by the character of the individual, forbidding
it to be less ; and as his method referred
everything he did and thought to the end,
and as his exertion did not relax for a mo-
ment, he made the trial, so seldom made, as
to what is the utmost effect which may be
granted to the best possible efforts of a
human agent.”
But take another illustration from a man
whose name has become a household word
in England, and who has awakened the
sympathies and solicitudes of two continents.
I refer to Sir John Franklin. He undertakes
an enterprise, he knows its difficulties, he is
fully acquainted with its perils ; he is not
ignorant of the possibilities of failure—others
had failed before him, he himself had failed:
he had been out four times before. In his
first land expedition he had encountered
sufferings from cold, from fatigue, from
hunger, from famine, from emaciation, from
what was little better, in fact, than a slow
lingering death, which amazes the reader how
he could endure, and at the endurance of
which he stands almost petrified with wonder
and horror. But with all these recollections
of the past, and all the dread possibilities of


the future, he, nothing daunted, hut with a
brave, unconquered spirit, commits himself
once more to the undertaking. Discourage-
ments, however, in abundance, are thrown
in his way, but, —
" No ! that proud, intrepid heart still held its pur-
pose high,
Like Afric’s martyr traveller, resolved to do or die.
Like him who found a lonely grave, in desert lands
of flame,
To win a bright eternity of high and glorious fame.
“ Oft amid famine, danger, death, where meaner
spirits quailed,
Have thy unfailing energies to cheer and soothe
prevailed ;
For well thy hope-inspiring voice could speak of
perils past,
And bid each coming one appear less painful than
the last.
“ And oft e’en that brave heart of thine has saddened
to despair.
When o’er some wild and ice clad scene, the sun
light shining fair,
Hath bid thy softened spirit feel how lonely were
thy lot.
To die—thy mission unfulfilled—unknown, unwept,
forgot.
“ Proud man ! in after ages the story shall be told,
Of that adventurous v }yager, the generous, the bold,
Who, scorning hope of selfish gain, disdaining soft-
repose,
Went forth to trace a pathway thro’ unyielding
ice and snows.”
A few moments more, and I have done.
Nothwithstanding all I have said, I should
give you a very incomplete view of man’s
capacity for greatness were I not to glance
at the triumphs he is capable of achieving in
the sphere of virtue, beneficence, and religion.
No man was ever truly great who was a
victim to his inferior propensities,—the slave
of his passions. The prevalence of these
over his higher faculties are his degradation
and ruin. The mere sensualist is a brute: in
proportion as he allows his appetites to pre-
dominate over his intellect and his conscience,
he humiliates his noble nature, entails on
himself the brand of infamy, and deserves
not the name of man. He lowers himself in
the scale of being, and his proper place would
be with the animals around him,
But when he aims at vindicating for him-
self the character for which he is designed,—
when he seeks to realise the acquisition of
knowledge,—to bring his mind under an
educational discipline, to yield himself to the
dictates of reason and the biddings of con-
science. When he fixes on some noble end,
adopts for himself high principles, endeavors
to regulate his conduct by their control,
and to form his habits beneath their influence ;
when he aspires after a dignified reputation
for rectitude, integrity, and honor in the
transactions of life; when he discharges
the various duties devolving upon him
in the relations he sustains, and wins
for himself the respect and confidence
of all who know him; when he cul-
tivates the moral sentiments, the more
amiable feelings, the benign emotions; when
he puts away far from him everything like a
low, mean, vulgar selfishness, and cherishes
the benevolent affections which would distri-
bute with no penurious hand a portion of the
blessings he has received, to diminish the
wretchedness of humanity, and to raise others,
with a generous love, to a possession of ex-
cellences and enjoyments equal to his own;
and when, above all this, he rises in thought,
and feeling, and desire to higher realities;
when he keeps this world in subservience to
another and a better; when he aspires to
link himself to the great Father of the
Universe, and to secure for himself, on condi-
tions which He has prescribed, His favor and
guidance, His guardianship and benediction;
delighting in His works, His character, His
ways, and His fellowship; then he realises for
himself the noblest attainments, wins the
proudest distinction, exhibits the highest
style of man, and comes into the possession of
a blessedness over which Time has no power
and Death will not destroy. For can it be
that this limited life bounds the existence of
a being so glorious as man is capable of
making of himself? No; the instincts of our
nature, the dictates of reason, the testimony
of ages, and the voice of Revelation says—No!
no! Heaven is his home, and Immortality
his day!
“ The Sun is but a spark of fire,
A transient meteor in the sky.
The Soul, immortal as its sire,
Shall never die.”
Young men! aspire after true greatness. Be
ambitious to excel. Spurn the low, mean,
grovelling existence in which so many are
content to live ! Strike for a manly heroism
of character—intent on victory over everything
vile, degrading, contemptible! Scorn not
work, be not ashamed of labor, do battle with
difficulties ! Seek knowledge, cultivate your
reason, discipline your heart, do homage to
Conscience, commune with Nature, worship
God! Leave no excellence behind you, no virtue
unattempted ; struggle towards that summit
of imperial dignity for which God made you-


Excelsior,Excelsior! higher and higher still; let
this he the blazon of your ensign, the motto of
your life, Then you will present an open brow
and a noble front amid your race, and you
will not have lived in vain.
“ The lives of great men all remind us
We may make our lives sublime ;
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.
“ Let us, then, be up and doirg,
With a heart fur any (ate;
Still achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labor and to wait.”
At the conclusion of the lecture Mr. New
was loudly applauded. H. Langlands, Esq ,
M.L.A., moved a vote of thanks to the Chaii-
man (the Hon. George Harker), which was
seconded by Mr. New, and pasted.
STEAM PRESS OF W. FAIRFAX AND CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST, MELEOUENE.
