



M" ' '•• - : .
■ . -v’ ’‘.-v'•''■ . i -. ■■■ ',- ■ 71
’ * "* * V > . '* fc*' »* •“ * * \
r.'- ,;i;r v" .' ■■
’'■ I>r: .-.
>'=■' , >■ z'- ■ >..‘' -V.-", '.'>i ■:,' . X • •*• '• ,->;..
' . ' ' '.'‘'f. ‘/' ' ‘,\i ’• >1 -I- ' .•' • ’ ' ’“, ''’■,- ,' "i
tik
■ ■■ ■: v:-. '
.. .■// . ': ■' ■ -S',


DOCTOKS DIFFEE
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT THE MELBOURNE ATHEN^UM,
ME. J. G. BEANEY, F.R.O.S.
Senior Honorary Surseon to the Melbourne Hospital.
glulboitrttt:
F. F. B'AILLIERE, PUBLISHER.
1876.
\_PBICE SIXPENCE.I


This Lecture loas delivered in the interests of the Australian
Natives Association, on the evening of the 12th February,
1876, the Mayor of Melbourne (Mr. A. K. Smith), in the
chair.


nil 4.
DOCTORS DIFFER.
When the title of this lecture was first announced,
several of my friends were astonished at it. What
could it mean? Who ever heard of any difference
among doctors? Were they not celebrated for the
warmth of their professional friendships, and the
depth and sincerity of their professional affection?
Does not every medical man love every other
practitioner of the healing art as Tam O’Shanter
loved Souter Johnny —that is to say, “like a verra
brither?” although of course, for the same
reason, because “they had been fou for weeks
thegither,” for, as everybody knows, no member of
the faculty was ever the worse for liquor.
These, however, were a few of the questions asked
me by some of my patients, one of whom, as excellent
a Scotchman as ever broke bread, or drank a
mutchkin of whisky, observed to me that, “ Ye maun
be clean daft, sir, to gang aboot the world speaking
all ill word o’ your brithers.” An old patient of mine
from the Emerald Isle said the other day, “ Begorra,
Docthur Baney, and is it yourself that’s going to be
afther blaggardin the docthurs that don’t loike the


loikes of yourselfand my American friend met me
in the street and observed, “Well, Doc., I guess you
are going to talk pretty tall to some of these phy-
sicians out here. I can only say you medical sharks
are pretty numerous out here, but in New York the
bowie-knife or six-shooter would soon square ac-
counts, I reckon.” I was prescribing last week for a
Yorkshire client, who observed, “Oi see thee is going
to lectur about the doctors, lad; well, oi hope thee’ll
give it ’em pretty hot, lad, they’ve been rough
enough on thee. Dash moi buttons, ef I won’t tuk
some tuckets at once, I’d loike just to hear thee.”
To which I could only reply by assuring him
that I had no such intention, for the differences
to which I may have occasion to allude in the
present lecture do not occur, and could not
occur in this colony, where the medical prac-
titioners constitute the happiest family to be met
with on the face of the globe. Indeed, our liking for
each other is unspeakable. This must be felt to be
appreciated. It must be seen to be understood.
Look how sincerely and unanimously we congratulate
those who are successful. When a surgeon leaves off
tramping about the town and suburbs on foot, and
sets up a buggy, we are all so pleased. When he sells
a buggy and buys a brougham, we are delighted.
When he supersedes the brougham by a handsome
carriage and pair, we are enraptured. Such, you see,
is the essential goodness of human nature; and
medical nature, you know, is human nature with an
extra gloss on it.


I knew a practitioner once who had a hobby
for diamonds, partly because they are beautiful
objects, and partly also, because, as somebody
or other said of a very pretty but very diminu-
tive woman, they are “infinite riches in a
little room.” Well, the way my friend was com-
plimented on his taste was quite touching to behold.
Nobody envied him. Nobody sneered at him.
Nobody had an unkind or censorious word to say of
him behind his back. This shows what a fine thino;
human nature is; especially after it has been
improved upon by a medical education, a good deal
of general practice, and a certain amount of acquaint-
ance with the sick wards and the operating rooms of
a large hospital. Then, again, we are all so charmed
by the professional successes of our brethren, espe-
cially in everything that relates to surgery. If a man
is prompt and skilful as an operator ; if he simplifies
or improves upon old processes, or introduces
new ones; if he exhibits nerve, promptitude, readi-
ness, foresight, and swiftness and decision and discretion
of action in critical and unprecedented emergencies,
he is embarrassed by the congratulations and praises of
every other surgeon in the city. Not one of them
attempts to depreciate his skill, or detract from his
merit. Not one is jealous of his success. Not one
would dispute his title to both solid pudding
and the empty praise” which accrue to him for his
performance. The oldest of his rivals
I’m wrong; he has no rivals! there is no rivalry in
the medical profession; the oldest of his colleagues


feels that ours is a science in which we are always
learning and never arriving at completeness; always
gaining fresh accessions of knowledge from ex-
perience, without ever being perfectly equipped; and,
therefore, he is not above being taught by a younger
practitioner; while the junior members of the pro-
fession are equally eager to profit by, and to acknow-
ledge, the instruction of a surgeon who has made a
specialty of various branches of his art.
Therefore, when I say that “ Doctors differ,” you
will please to accept the statement with certain re-
servations and qualifications. I mean that they differ
at the antipodes; not in Victoria; far less in Mel-
bourne, where, as I have said, we constitute such a
band of brothers—such a happy family, that we have
much ado to refrain from embracing each other when
we meet in the public streets. As for consultations,
every one of us regards these as veritable oases in
the desert —bright spots in the journey of our daily
lives, where we sit, metaphorically speaking, under
the palm-trees of professional esteem, and refresh
ourselves with the bright cold stream that wells uj)
fresh and sparkling, from the unfailing springs of
fraternal affection. ISTo surgeon or physician in this
city was ever known to refuse to meet a brother
practitioner at a consultation. No, Mr. Chairman
and gentlemen, ours is a liberal profession ; one in
which, as the Latin grammar says, “The study of
the ingenuous arts softens our manners, and prevents
them from becoming brutal.”
I have introduced this little bit of Australian sun-


shine at the outset, just for the sake of artistic effect.
lam coming to the shadows next. lam going to
speak of the profession at the antipodes. Ah !
they are sad fellows there—that is to say, some
of them are. They make terrible mistakes
occasionally; and, I grieve to say, they are
addicted to quarrelling with, and backbiting each
other. Yes, doctors really do differ at the antipodes.
I was once engaged in general practice in the town
of Kennaquhair, in the south-west of Scotland. You
may not be able to find it in every atlas, perhaps;
but I assure you that it is a very important place. Its
inhabitants assert that it is superior to London, or
Edinburgh, or Glasgow. I never went to that
length myself, but I always stood up for Kenna-
quhair if I heard anybody running it down. The
people took very kindly to me, and I took very kindly
to them. I gave them the best of advice, and they
paid me sterling compliments in return. Most of the
medical men lived in the same street, at one end of
the town. The wags call it “Leeches’ Corner,” and
some of them “Butchers’ Row;” but this was ill-
natured of them. They also said we were as
thick as thieves, and just as honest ; which was
downright scandalous. But we continued to huddle
together in spite of it all ; for all those members of
the faculty who had not much practice could beguile
their leisure hours by watching the proceedings of
those who had. And this they did with a right good
will. If a flourishing practitioner gave a dinner-
party or a dance, his professional brother over the


way knew all about it ; could tell you the number of
courses there were ; at what hour the gentlemen
joined the ladies in the drawing-room, and whether
coffee was handed round on a silver or a german-nickel
salver ; at what hour the party broke up, and what
they said on taking leave of their host and hostess.
If a poor medico had the bailiffs the house, that,
also, was the talk of the whole neiglibourhood ; and
speculation was rife as to the cause of the trouble.
A said that Bolus was in the habit of playing unlimited
100 ; B averred that he was addicted to betting; on
o
horse-races ; C hinted that he had another wife in
Canada; and D was firmly of opinion that Mrs.
Bolus drank, and that it was real Glenlivat and not
indigestion that made her nose so red. There must
have been something in the atmosphere of Kenna-
quhair, I fancy, that made people so censorious, that
split the medical profession up into feuds and fac-
tions, and that caused the most successful practi-
tioners to hate each other like poison. It was so ex-
traordinary, was it not ? So unlike Melbourne ?
which, as everybody knows, is a professional Agape-
mone, a dove-cot, an abode of peace and harmony.
But in Kennaquhair, as in some other parts of Her
Majesty’s dominions, envy, as has been well observed,
was “the shadow of success and detraction was the
echo of its voice.” This, however, lam sorry to say,
has been the case in England and Scotland for the last
two centuries. Many of you will be familiar with the
name of the celebrated Dr. Mead, of whom his friend
Dr. Johpson declared that “he lived more in the broad


sunshine of life than almost any man.” Even-tempered,
skilful, courtly, a scholar, and a gentleman, Dr. Mead
possessed one fault —he was successful. The other
members of the faculty could have forgiven him any-
thing but that. Success, you know, is a crime for
which there is no pardon here, whatever there may be
hereafter. His income, in the reigns of Queen Anne
and George the First, was between £SOOO and £6OOO
per annum; which would be fully equal to £IO,OOO
now a days, when money has so -altered in value.
And this was Dr. Mead’s inexpiable offence. He
was hospitable to a fault, a liberal patron of the fine
arts, and he did one of the finest things on record.
Party spirit at that time ran very high. Mead was a
Whig, but Dr. Freind, who represented Launceston
in the British House of Commons, was a Tory and
a Jacobite, and being suspected of complicity in the
Atterbury plot. Dr. Freind was imprisoned in the
Tower. Dr. Mead pleaded his brother professional’s
case so pertinaciously with Sir Robert AValpole,
that, at length, that minister allowed the prisoner
to be released on bail, one of the sureties being
Dr. Mead himself. All this time the latter was
diligently attending his friend’s patients. When
Freind came out of prison. Mead gave a dinner
party to celebrate the event, and when the guest of
the evening was about to take his departure, his host
drew him aside into a private room, and presented
him with a case. What do you suppose it contained?
Surgical instruments? No. A Bible and Testa-
ment? No. A choice collection of tracts? No.


But a sheaf of bank notes of the value of 5000
guineas, representing the fees which Dr. Mead had
received from Dr. FreincVs Tory patients during his
incarceration !
Now this was just the sort of man to be hated by
poor and ill-conditioned rivals, and accordingly, as one
of his biographers tells us, “a host of pamphleteers,
with just courage enough to print lies, to which they
had not the spirit to affix their obscure names, hissed
their malignity at the fortunate doctor. The mem-
bers of the faculty, accustomed though they are to the
jealousies and animosities which are important under-
currents in every fraternity, would, in these days,
scarcely credit the accounts which could be given of
the coarseness and baseness of the anonymous rascals
who lampooned Mead. It is painful to know,” adds
his biographer, “ that some of the worst offenders were
themselves physicians.”
If any of my hearers have lived in Kennaquhair
they will be able to bear me out in the assertion that
the race of anonymous rascals has not altogether
died out in the old country. I remember one who
eked out his scanty earnings as a medical man by
writing for the country newspaper. He was a sple-
netic little Irishman, with a fondness for private
theatricals and a great liking for pretty actresses.
Not that I blame him for that; for I dare say most
of us have been taken, at some time or other of our
lives, with a violent fancy for a winning face upon
the stage. His practice lay principally in that direc-
tion, and in what are technically called post mortems.


He was a great authority on medical ethics. Indeed,
he was nothing if not ethically or gcsthetically criti-
cal ; and yet this worthy, who was so ready to lam-
poon other practitioners whose ethics happened to
differ from his own, I have known to go from the
dissecting-room straight to the sick-room of a lady
at one of the most critical periods of her life, regard-
less of the fact that it was almost certain death to
his patient to do so. May we not well exclaim, with
Burns—
“ O wad some power the giftie gie us,
To see oursels as ithers see us.”
Another practitioner in Kennaquhair, who had got so
much into the habit of “ sir”-ing everybody that he
used to say “ sir” to the matron of the local hospital,
actually put an iron ring on the fractured patella of
a woman’s leg for the purpose of keeping the limb in
position. The result was just what might have been
expected; gangrene set in, and the leg had to be am-
putated. Oq another occasion he operated on a female
patient for ovarian tumour, and found he had wholly
mistaken the symptoms; but this was not so bad as
a similar operation performed for a similar malady
by another gentleman on a lady who proved to be on
the eve of making an addition to the population of
Kennaquhair. Another instance occurs to my recol-
lection of what was facetiously called a case of “ dry
tapping,” in the hospital at Kennaquhair; the poor
sufferer, as it turned out, not being afflicted with
dropsy, but with tumour. I remember also how a
surgeon in extensive practice at that place mistook


an aneurism in the femoral space for an abscess,
plunged his knife into it, and out spouted a torrent
of arterial blood. The result was that the leg had
to be amputated, and the patient was fortunate to
escape with her life. Indeed, such instances in
surgical practice are common enough. I myself
know that a gentleman who claims consideration as
a practical surgeon cut, cauterized, and tormented
for twelve months an unlucky constable, finally
recommending his discharge from the force as an
“ incurable,” while another surgeon succeeded in
curing the man by means of one operation. As
FalstalF says to Mr. Ford in the Merry Wives of
Windsor,” “What do youthink of that. Master Brook ?”
It is a well-known fact that Cheselden, one of the most
celebrated anatomists of the 17th century, who was
a Fellow of the Royal Society, and the friend of Pope,
frequently cut for stone in the bladder and found
none; so easy is it for men of even the highest emin-
ence in the profession to err in their diagnoses of
certain cases.
Whilst in England, the late Dr. Tracy sent a gos-
siping letter to the local surgical journal of Kenna-
quhair, about a surgical calamity that befell one of
England’s grandest operators, exclaiming, “ If the like
had befallen anyone at Kennaquhair, what would
Mrs. Grundy say?” Who is Kennaquhair’s meddling
Dame Grundy? Is Dr. Cool she? or Dr. Farqhuar?
or Dr. Yeild? Or is the Daily Thunderer that
querulous old crone? If one of our '■’‘practical
surgeons” were to play the role of the “Geeen


Bird,” that in the fable tells everything we wish
to know, and eager to mother well her brood,
wings her spiritual flight across the Stygian ford,
eager to interview the departed—would not the
gruff spirit of the burly doctor give him “ fits” for
answer ?
There was the well-known instance of the operation
for stone by Mr. Bransby Cooper, the celebrated
nephew of the still more celebrated Sir Astley,
which made so much noise in England in 1828,
owing to the trial for libel to which it gave rise.
Mr. Cooper was hospital surgeon at Guy’s, and
on the 18th March, 1828, with the assistance
of Mr. Callaway, the only member of the sur-
gical staff present, operated on an in-patient for
stone. It was brought away, although with great
difficulty, and the sufferer succumbed about twenty-
nine hours afterwards. A savage, malicious report
of the case, written by a surgeon named Lambert,
appeared in the Lancet, which had then but newly
started, and went in for slashing writing and for
personal lampoons, and the editor, Mr. Wakley, was
prosecuted for libel. The trial excited great interest
on account of the celebrity of the plaintiff, and of the
eminence of the counsel retained on both sides.
Mr. Bransby Cooper obtained a verdict, but the
damages awarded were only £IOO, a most inadequate
compensation to the plaintiff for the injury he had
sustained by the calumnious and cowardly article in
the Lancet. It is gratifying to add that the writer
of it did not go unpunished. Lambert, who was a


Fellow of the Medical Society of London, was ex-
pelled from it by an almost unanimous vote; and he
was also thrust out of the Westminster Medical
Society-by an overwhelming majority. He was
likewise expelled the Borough hospitals, and his
connection with journalism then ceased. He con-
tinued to carry on practice as a surgeon in Walworth
for some little time afterwards, but the shock which
these events gave killed him. So our great dramatist
was right when he said —
“ The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make whips to scourge us.”
And thus, you see how “doctors differ.” Some-
times their discussions assume an aspect that borders
on the grotesque. At one time, Avhen erysipelas was
almost epidemic, both amongst the medical and
surgical patients of University College Hospital, in
London, there were four medical practitioners of the
highest eminence and skill treating the disease in
four different and distinct ways! “Elliotson was
painting the face with a strong solution of nitrate of
silver; Anthony Todd Thomson was smearing the
surface over with mercurial ointment; Samuel Cooper,
with his usual caution, modified the topical treat-
ment by attempting to isolate the disease by drawing
lines of lunar caustic round the margins of the
efflorescence, to prevent it spreading beyond them,
while Liston confined himself to the older mode of
treating the disease locally by means of fomentations


and the application of flour.”* Of course, each of
these distinguished men considered the other three
to be wholly in the wrong. Liston', who was in the
habit of saying very curt and bitter things, was very
rough on Elliotson for adopting a mode of treatment
which, as he said, “turned a white man into a
nigger,” as well as Cooper’s method of “drawing
lines horizontally, perpendicularly, and slanting-
dicularly over a patient’s body.” It is a curious fact
also, as bearing on the subject of my lecture, that
Elliotson and Liston were at daggers-drawn for three
or four years. Both were immense favourites with
the pupils in the hospitals, and neither of them could
“bear a brother near the throne.” Probably their
moral education had been neglected in their youth,
and they had never learned those goody-goody hymns
by Dr. Watts in which you and I were instructed,
that—
“ Om’ little liands were never made
To scratch each others’ eyes,
Nor in the gutter should we sit
To fabricate mud pies.”
The enmity of these famous men continued until
Elliotson was forced to resign his appointment on ac-
count of his craze on the subject of animal magnetism.
1 have heard a rumour to the effect that his “ per-
turbed spirit” is occasionally heard of as “knocking
about” certain consultation rooms in this city; but I
* Clarke’s ‘‘Autobiographical Eecollections of the Medical
Profession.”


don’t believe it. Such things might occur in Kenna-
quhair, but I feel sure they couldn’t occur in Mel-
bourne; where we are all so clever that we don’t
require any ghostly instruction, and where we are all
so friendly that if a practitioner should stand in need
of information on a special subject, the whole of the
faculty would be eagerly competing for the pleasure
of furnishing it. Nobody here makes mistakes. No-
body stabs a rival practitioner in the dark. Nobody is
jealous of a brother surgeon’s celebrity and prosperity.
Nobody goes crawling about the place whispering
innuendoes which he dare not put in the form of direct
allegations. Nobody writes anonymous letters to the
newspapers, under cover of which ' the cowardly
slanderer gratifies his own malevolence, and endeavours
to defame a more successful operator.
In speaking—as an after-dinner orator would say —
to the sentiment of “ Doctors differ,” I must not omit
to remind you of the difference between the Materia
Medica of our own, and other times. Dr. Adrian
Gilbert, a physician of some celebrity in his day, used
to prescribe a most sovereign cordial water for all
kinds of fevers. Twenty-nine plants were used in the
composition of it, besides hartshorn, figs, raisins,
gilliflowers, cowslips, marigolds, blue violets, red rose-
buds, ambergris, bezoar stone, sugar, aniseed, liquor-
ice, and “ what else you please.” People must have
had remarkably strong constitutions in those days.
Either they took a great deal of killing, or they didn’t
often call in a medical man. But some of the f>re-
scriptions of the period were probably preferable to


what young ladies call “ the nasty mixtures” which
are made up for them at the modern chemists. There
was the Water of Life, for example, which was com-
pounded of as many ingredients as the witches’ hell-
broth in the caldron in Macbeth. Among these were
a fleshy young capon, the loins and legs of an old
rabbit, the red flesh of the sinews of a leg of mutton,
four young chickens, twelve larks, the yolks of twelve
eggs, and a loaf of white bread, all to be distilled in
white wine. Whether these were classified under the
head of “medical comforts” in the old time, I am
unable to say. They certainly ought to have been.
Gervase Markham, who wrote a book called “ The
English Housewife,” in which he was honest enough
to confess that “ the depths and secrets of this most
excellent art of physic are far beyond the capacity of
the most skilful woman,” gives some “receipts,” as he
calls them, which he had from “two excellent and
famous physicians.” One of these was for the cure of
quinsy. “Give the party to drink,” says he, “the
herb mouse-ear, steept in ale or beer, and look when
you see the same rub himself, and then upon the same
place rub a slick stone, and then with it slick (sleek ?)
all the swelling, and it will cure it.” Another was to
cure baldness. The process was rather tedious, but
time was not so precious then as it is now. Yon had
to collect some garden snails, take them out of their
shells, and pound them in a mortar, with an equal
quantity of horse-leeches, bees, wasps, and salt. Then
the mixture was to be buried in a hot-bed for eight
days, and afterwards applied to the bald pate. It


may have been very efficacious, but I cannot say that
ever I tried it. Pearl-powder taken internally was a
favourite remedy for consumption. Now-a-days, I
have been told, some ladies apply it externally, with-
out being recommended to do so by the faculty. But.
of course, I don’t believe it; do you ?
George Coleman, the younger, who has given us
such a lively picture of Cornet Ollapod, the village
apothecary, who flourished at the beginning of the pre-
sent century, asserts that, although “ Doctors differ,”
yet, in reality,
“ISTo enemies they are;
But meet just like prize-fighters iu a fair.
Who first shake hands before they box,
Then give each other plaguy knocks
With all the love and kindness of a brother;
So many a suff’ring patient saith,
Though the apothecary fights with death,
Still they’re sworn friends to one another.”
But even apothecaries differ quite as vehemently
as physicians or surgeons; and there is a well-known
story of a wholesale druggist in London visiting a
large country town in which he did an extensive
trade, and asking all the chemists of the place to
supper with him at the principal inn. But when the
guests began to arrive, the entrance of one was fol-
lowed by the precipitate departure of another, and at
no time were there more than three persons in the
room. Finally, he sat down to supper with only one
guest instead of a dozen; and, next morning, when
he called on A for an explanation of his conduct.


“ Sir,” was the answer, “ I could not stop in the same
room with such a scoundrel as B.” So it went
straight down the line. B had vowed never to ex-
change a word with C, and C would rather be shot
than sit at the same table with such a villain as D,
and so on, and so on.
When the city of Bath was at the height of its re-
pute as a resort for invalids, of which Sheridan has
left us such a pleasant picture in “ The Rivals,” Dr.
Cheyne was a physician enjoying an immense prac-
tice. He was literally one of the greatest men of his
day, for he weighed thirty-two stone ! His rival and
opponent was Dr. Wynter, of whom it is said that
“he had two good reasons for hating Cheyne :
Wynter was an Englishman, and loved wine ; Cheyne
a Scotchman, and loved milkbut I think it must
have been “Cream of the Valley.” Winter ad-
dressed the following verses to Cheyne:—
“Tell me from wliom, fat-lieaded Scot,
Thou didst tliy system learn ;
From Hippocrates thou had’st it not,
Nor Celsus, nor Pitcairn.
Suppose we own that milk is good,
And say the same of grass ;
The one for babes is only food.
The other for an ass.
Doctor, one new prescription try
(A friend’s advice forgive).
Eat grass, reduce thyself, and die ;
Thy patients then may live.”


To these smart, but ill-natured verses, Clieyne
replied with equal smartness, and with greater tart-
ness —
“ My system, doctor, is my own.
No tutor I pretend ;
My bkuxders hurt myself alone.
But yours your dearest friend.
Were you to milk and straw confin’d.
Thrice happy might you he,
Perhaps you might regain your mind,
And from your wit be free.
I can’t your kind prescription try,
But heartily forgive—-
’Tis natural you should wish me die.
That you yourself may live.”
When duelling was in vogue it was a very common
occurrence for doctors who differed to settle their
differences with powder and shot. In England,
in the last century. Dr. Bennett was out with Dr.
Williams, and both were shot dead. A similar result
followed the duel between Dr. Smith and Dr.
Jeffries, near Philadelphia, as recently as 1830.
They blazed away at each other four times, the last
time at a distance of six paces only. “ Dr. Smith
dropped dead with a ball in his heart. Dr. Jeffries
was shot through the breast, and survived only a
few hours. The conduct of Dr. Jeffries during these
last few hours was quite in keeping with the rest of
the proceeding. On seeing his antagonist prostrated
the doctor asked if he was dead. On being assured
that his enemy lived no longer, he observed —‘ Then
I die contented;”’ This was, indeed, “the ruling


passion strong in death,” and reminds me of an aged
practitioner who, having prescribed for himself in his
last hours, asked his wife to transfer a guinea from
his right-hand to his left-hand waistcoat pocket ; and
observed with a grim sense of humour, that that
would be his last fee’d. Only extreme illness could
justify such an atrocious pun.
111-natured persons have suggested that when
“ Doctors differ” they are only disagreeable to each
other, but that when they agree they are dangerous
to their patients; and this is the idea expressed in
the well-known epigram of Dr. Garth:—
“ Like a pert sculler, one physician plies,
And all his art, and all his skill he tries;
But two physicians, like a pair of oars,
Conduct you faster to the Stygian shores.”
One thing, however, is very certain, and that is that
those, who in moments of health and hilarity are
ready and apt at shooting witticisms at the faculty,
are eager enough to avail themselves of our advice —
in spite of our differences—directly they are disabled
by sickness or accident. And some of the fees that
have been paid to eminent physicians and surgeons
have been so large and liberal, that I do not wonder
that their recipients excited the envy and hatred of
their professional brethren. When Sir Astley Cooper
commenced practice, his first year’s earnings were five
guineas, the second, twenty-six pounds, just ten shil-
lings a week; the third, sixty-four pounds. Later in
life, they ranged from £15,000 to £21,000 per annum.
Once, attended by Drs. Lettsom and Nelson, as phy-


sicians, he performed a delicate and critical operation
on a wealthy West Indian named Hyats. It was per-
fectly successful, and he gave the physicians 300
guineas each.
“As to you, sir,” said the old man, sitting up in
bed, and shying his nightcap at Sir Astley, “take
that, sir, take that.” The surgeon courteously re-
plied, picking it up, “ I’ll pocket the affront.” But he
pocketed something more than the affront, for a cheque
for a thousand guineas was found stowed away in the
nightcap.
But a still more munificent fee was paid to
an Austrian physician for speaking the truth. He
was not at all like that adroit preacher, who began a
sermon in the presence of Louis XIV. in these
words, “ All men are mortal,” and then added with a
polite howto the King, “exceptyour Majesty.” The
physician I speak of, whose name was Quarin, was
asked by the Emperor Joseph, on his deathbed, how
many hours he had to live. “ Not more than eiglit-
and-forty at the very outside,” was the honest and
frank reply. Truth and candour being as rare in
royal palaces, as among some medical societies I am
acquainted with, the dying Emperor created his phy-
sician a baron on the spot, and bestowed on him a
pension of £2OOO per annum to keep up the dignity
with.
And, speaking of Doctor Lettsom—Dr. Isaac
Lettsom, —that worthy man had a fine sense of
humour. He wrote an epitaph on himself, but I
cannot assert it was ever cut upon his tombstone—


“ When people’s ill, they come to I,
I physics, bleeds, and sweats ’em ;
Sometimes they live, sometimes they die—
What’s that to I
And he signed his name—
I. Lettsom.”
But as I stated at the outset, and as I must repeat
at the close of this lecture, it must be a matter of
sincere congratulation to you and me, and to every-
body in the colony, that none of these things can be
laid to our charge. Doctors may differ in other
parts of the world, but in Victoria, as a certain
politician said the other day, “ Never! Never!!
Never!! I”
We are the best of friends, and the closest of cronies.
We never disagree as to our methods of treatment,
surgical or therapeutic. We never write anonymous
letters to the newspapers, for the purpose of decrying
the skill, or injuring the reputation of a brother
practitioner. We never make mistakes; such, for
example, as delivering a child, and forgetting to
bring forth the infant’s head with the rest of the body ;
never operate for “phantom tumours;” never remove
the entire bladder while professing to extract a
tumour only; never tell a man who is taken from the
watch-house to the hospital with a compound
fracture of the leg that it is nothing but an ordinary
bruise, and send him back to the watch-house, so
that gangrene sets in, and the poor fellow’s leg has
to be amputated; never pronounce a broken back to


be a mere sprain; never perform surgical operations
while under the influence of liquor.
These are things which are done at the other
side of the world, and not in Melbourne. In this
city the medical faculty is a regular cage-full of
love-birds, such as you may see in some of the bird-
sellers’ shops, where the innocent and affectionate
little so bright of eye and sleek of plumage,
may be observed perched all of a row, and never
shouldering each other aside, or snapping the food
out of one another’s mouth, or plucking each other’s
feathers out, or otherwise misbehaving themselves;
and those birds, as yon must have noticed, have vpry
short bills —so have we.
In fine, whatever dissensions may prevail among
journalists—for even they do not always agree—or
among clergymen, musicians, actors and actresses,
public singers, lawyers, merchants, politicians, and
so forth, —who that is acquainted with the medical
faculty in Melbourne would venture to insinuate .that
Doctors differ ?
M'CARRON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS, 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE,
24
DOCTORS DIFFER.




NATIONAL
library of AUSTRALIA
