

THE
COMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA
Conducted by
LIFE AND EDUCATION
BY
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER, Esq.
(Editor Sydney Morning Herald)
First Series, 1927/8


The
Commercial Educational Society of Australia
Business Lectures for Business Men.
THE AIM
as the name of the Society indicates, is educational. The
function of education is not merely to impart knowledge, but
to awaken interest, to inspire enthusiasm, and to create a
desire for self improvement.
To that end, prominent professional and business men are
delivering a series of lectures, covering many important and
interesting subjects of great value to students, accountants,
secretaries and all members of the business community.
It offers to you a fine opportunity to add to your knowledge,
to widen your outlook, to develop your perspective, to meet
with others of congenial tastes and pursuits; and to increase
your efficiency.
The object is to improve and to enlarge your capacity for ser-
vice; and it is your privilege to assist us to realise our purpose
by attending the lectures, and by bringing this syllabus under
the notice of your friends.
Meetings are held regularly each month at the King’s Hall,
69 Hunter Street, Sydney.
The subscription to the Society covering the first series of
lectures is 5/-, and a copy of each lecture in booklet form
will be posted to every subscriber.
Address all enquiries to —
E. N. BLENNEEHASSETT,
F.N.Z.A.A., F.A.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.),
Hon. Secretary,
C!/o Blennerhassett’s Institute of Accountancy Ltd., Herald
Building, 66 Pitt Street, Sydney. ’Phone: B 5388.


Life and Education
LECTURE BY
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER, Esq.
(Editor Sydney Morning Herald)
On Wednesday, 19th October, 1927, at the King’s Hall,
Hunter Street, Sydney
Copyright




LIFE AND EDUCATION
By C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER, Esq.
Lecture given before the Members of The Commercial
Educational Society of Australia.
INTRODUCTION.
Some years ago the late Sir Charles Mackellar visited
Europe and the United States and returned with some
exceedingly interesting data dealing with child welfare and
the treatment of mental deficiency. Especially had he been
impressed with the work done in America. He had visited
the Vineland Institute for the Mentally Deficient, and had
seen Dr. Goddard, who was then in charge. One of the
things, however, that we discussed very often on his return
was the method of testing children and adults for mental
efficiency; and the Binet-Simon tests naturally came in for
much argument pro and con. Could they be accepted as com-
plete and accurate? Were they fair to nervous folk who
took fright at examination tests of any kind? One day, after
lunch, we were walking down Macquarie Street together, and
the issue was again raised. Sir Charles would not allow
any suggestion that the tests might be themselves inefficient,
and as we stopped at his destination he said with a
laugh, “Let me tell you a story. There was an old Scots
body who was a great kirk-goer and a notable sermon-
taster. She tried out every new preacher, and on one
occasion she dealt faithfully with a visiting minister who,
however, stood to his guns. She turned on him with a retort
which settled everything. ‘You no can argue wi’ me, because
I know I’m right.’” Well, Sir Charles was certainly right
in the main, for the Binet-Simon tests have been proved
efficient. But at the beginning of the new developments
with mental deficiency they were found to be somewhat
drastic; and when applied to the drafts for the American
Army when the United States entered as a combatant in


the Great War, they gave some depressing results. These
led to subsequent elaborations and simplifications. The
manhood of the United States was not mentally as low in
the scale of efficiency as the report of the Commission which
used the tests indicated. But the discovery was made that
the individual had to be dealt with as a personality and not
as a mere unit in the vast examination test. Many men
became nervous and failed to do themselves justice when
they realised they were being put under a new kind of
microscope.
Now this fact of individual differences is one of the
most important things we have to deal with, but it is only
mentioned here to explain that this address will not discuss
the new psychology. Bather is it intended to present a more
familiar matter in the outlook of Australia as a whole upon
modern life. But the individual comes in, nevertheless,
because the Commonwealth will be what the citizen makes
it. Perhaps the title of the address might be better given
as “Environment and Education,” and a good illustration of
what is meant may be found in a statement of the late Sir
Henry Jones, who was Professor of Moral Philosophy in the
University of Glasgow. Sir Henry paid a visit to Australia
before the War, and made many friends. It was an in-
spiration to meet him. He had been writing a series of
articles for “The Hibbert Journal,” and in one of them
he said that “the power of society over unformed childhood
is indefinitely great, and it must be turned more deliberately
and systematically in the direction of developing the
character, more especially in the cases where the home in-
fluences were evil.” But his point was that children taken
young enough, even from the lowest depths of the slums of
Glasgow, proved to be of essentially sound stock. They
make good citizens. S'ome 630 of them were gathered in by
one of the Poor Law Inspectors and kept under observation.
They were sent to decent homes in the highlands and low-
lands of Scotland, and only 23 turned out bad. Consider
then what it must mean to be living in the vast sunshine
of Australia! But what are we doing with our heritage, and


is life in this wonderful continent educating us as it should
for the work w'e have to do in developing the Common-
wealth? That is the question for consideration at the present
moment.
A JOURNALIST TO BUSINESS MEN.
This address is not intended to discuss life at large or
education in the abstract. Nor is it desired to deal with
even the ways of life in our midst which may seem to be
dissipating our national energy instead of conserving it;
and certainly there is no wish to enter the field of con-
troversy and break a lance in supporting or condemning
Australian methods of education. To an audience of busi-
ness men and women a working journalist has another
message at the present moment, when the anxieties of world
politics and our own financial and commercial outlook are
foremost and when the wisest amongst us have been asking
very seriously, “What of the future?” as though it were
black night ahead.
May I preface my remarks however, with a reminder. The
responsible journalist in charge of a newspaper to-day is
probably facing a wider horizon and is a harder worked
man than ever before in the history of the Empire. At
any time he is naturally on the frontier, skirmishing ahead
of the army. His business is with the new thing—the news—
and if honestly determined to present the truth as far
as he is able, he is oftentimes faced with some tremendous
problems. So much is dependent nowadays upon the daily
news. The world is smaller than it has ever been known
and infinitely larger. The paradox may be explained in
the advances of science. These are annihilating distance and
bringing the ends of the earth into everybody’s reach, and
the news of the world into the compass of a wireless set;
and the new problems for the responsible journalist consist
in the choice of facts, the weight to be given them in
headlines, and in the dangers at all times of over-emphasis.
One of the best illustrations of this to me always lies in
the experience many years ago when upon the staff of “The


Brisbane Courier.” The news had come through by cable
from Vienna that a means had been discovered of seeing
through a man’s clothes and flesh and discovering his skele-
ton as if it were stripped in a surgical museum. Dared we
publish it? Could it possibly be true? Would anybody
believe it if it were true, and how should it be treated in
any case? Not long before we had been discussing a clever
canard which solemnly announced the discovery of Noah’s
Ark on Ararat, with a circumstantial account of its ribs
seen sticking out from the glacier which had slipped down
and suddenly disclosed the marvel as it might have been
another Tutankhamen’s Tomb. The story had run through
the United States and across the Pacific, each reproduction
causing more and more excitement until common sense and
cold science settled the fraud and made a multitude of
believers look and feel foolish.
Another clever story without foundation originated, I think,
in New Zealand, travelled across to the Unite'd States and
was magnified and embroidered, came over the Pacific again
to Australia, and was repeated with fresh headlines and
increasing detail until the whole thing was exploded in the
laughter and revelation of truth at the point of origin.
Briefily, the whole thing was based upon the wonderful way
in which hornets store up spiders after rendering them help-
less, as food for the coming broods of young hornets emerging
from their eggs. You may see the clay nests which adorn the
eaves of multitudes of houses and convenient nooks all over
the earth. A sting at the critical nerve centre paralyses the
spider, and it lingers alive and wholesome long enough to
feed the hungry youngsters, whose instinct sends them to
the work of slaughtering and butchering as soon as they can
move. Now, a clever storyteller in New Zealand took all
this as the basis of an alleged new discovery of a method
to preserve fat cattle alive for export. They were to be
paralysed by a suitable prick at the critical nerve centre
and comfortably packed away as wholesome live flesh in
the holds of vessels properly prepared for the new venture;
and when the European commercial cities or ports were


reached, the passive and profitable bullocks were to be
killed outright and the flesh sold in the markets in better
condition than if the beasts had been recently slaughtered
in New Zealand and Australia. It was a great “stunt”
while it lasted for many journalists, but it had its lessons.
DANGER IN OVER-EMPHASIS.
In these days one does not need to hesitate about such
attempts up-on public credulity. The danger lies in an over-
emphasis of actual facts. The Mississippi flood, for instance,
has been recorded day by day and commented upon all over
the world in terms of great head-lines and hushed expecta-
tions. Earthquakes and flying disasters are our meat day
and night, and instead of Mother Shipton’s phophecy to
scare people out of their beds, we have the forecast by
Professor Gregory of an approaching all-world earthquake,
which has filled many people with apprehension. Marvel upon
marvel is reported, but one can generally trace the develop-
ment of the least likely of them either through the scien-
tific magazines or by the aid of experts in our own or
other Universities all over the world. This, too, is the
working journalist’s problem- —that he can get too much and
too little. Even in these days of universal education and
easy access to the high schools and universities, newspaper
readers skim rather than read. The multitude still has to
be given much of its news with a spoon or out of a feeding
bottle. This, however, is not my theme. It is my explana-
tion for taking so much time in introducing my subject.
A working journalist talking to business men has to show
his warrant fcr talkirg at all, and it is urged here 'that
we are upon common ground, because the modern business
man has to be a citizen of the world, a student of the
latest results of science as they affect his own line of
activity, and one who scans political horizons with his hand
over his eyes to save them in the glare, lest he go down
in the increasing competition.
This then is the whole point of my address. We are on
common ground in dealing with life under the new conditions


of contracting distances and concentrating news from the
ends of the whole earth. Moreover in Australia we have
some very special and exceedingly difficult questions always
before us demanding answers of some sort, and we find
ourselves to-day in danger of slipping into one quagmire after
another because we are not properly equipped. It is one
thing to muddle along in an empty continent with thousands
of miles of sea stretching South, West and East, and the
British Navy keeping the further marches safe no matter
what follies we may perpetrate. It is quite another thing
to find the nations discussing us, sometimes as a nuisance,
at other times as an equal to whom has been granted all
the privileges of nationhood and from whom has been
demanded a recognition of all its responsibilities, with the
British Navy in process of denudation and the nearest
possible dock for any of her best battleships when in
Australia as far off as Malta. It was one of the great
anxieties of the naval authorities, while the “Renown” was
in these waters that should anything serious happen to her,
Australia or New Zealand had no adequate provision for
repairs, and that the Pacific Ocean might provide a trap
instead of a trip for Royal visitors. Also we are finding
that Asia to the North is indeed our nearest neighbour, and
that both India and China demand urgent attention. Is the
fact of abounding life among our nearest neighbours
troubling us at all? India, for instance, has increased her
population in fifty years from 200 millions to 320 millions.
The British Empire is not white, but coffee coloured or
black, for out of a total population of more than four
hundred millions one-seventh only is white —with the
coloured folk multiplying fast and the rest slowing down
into a people of small families oppressed with the heavy
responsibility of getting work done by anybody.
AN OUTSIDE VIEW.
Here is an extract from a recent number of “The Hib-
bert Journal” which is not offered to raise alarm, but just
to show how dispassionate observers are turning keen eyes


upon us and are discussing our problems from the outside. The
title of the article is “Empire and Colour,” and the writer
is discussing the question of Western claims to superiority
and the demands of the coloured races, which are increasing
so fast, for equality of status and treatment. He says:
“A citizen of the British Empire possesses an unrivalled
opportunity of acquainting himself with the practical side
of the question, for he has, within the limits of the Empire,
specimens of practically all the problems with which it is
beset. In Australia the problem turns upon the question
of immigration. Are a handful of whites to be allowed to
exclude the teeming populations of China and Japan from
an immense continent, a continent which they cannot hope
to populate adequately within any reasonable period of
time, and much of which, for climatic reasons, they are
never likely to be able to occupy or use? When the question
of taking‘possession of fertile native lands in Africa is
being debated, the favourite argument is that the English
settler can make very much better use of the land, and that
barbarians must not be allowed to pursue a dog-in-the-manger
policy while the world is going short of foodstuffs and raw
materials. Needless to say, however, that argument is never
heard in Australia, for its outcome would be the admission
of hundreds of thousands of diligent Chinese labourers who
would outwork and undersell the white man to such an
extent that he must, in a comparatively short time, com-
pletely disappear. It is a well-known fact that wherever
Asiatics have been allowed to compete on equal terms in the
labour market (as in Natal and Mauritius) the white work-
man actually has been wiped out. The Chinaman is probably
the best worker in the world; and even Japan, despite its
own deplorably low standard of life, has been obliged to pass
laws to keep him out of the country. We thus perceive
that the issue which Australians have to face is an extremely
grave one. If they persist in keeping out the Asiatics (and
this they cannot d‘o in the long run except by bayonets and
Dreadnoughts), they will be accused of selfishness and disre-
gard of the interests of the world as a whole. On the other
hand, if they freely admit Chinese and Japanese, they will
undoubtedly thereby be sealing their own death warrant
as a nation —a thing no people has ever been known to do
voluntarily and with its eyes open. An impasse evidently
faces the statesmen of the Australian Commonwealth, and
so far as we can see at present the only way out is by frank
recognition of the fact that races must, by a process of
blending, form new ones. The future in Australia lies with
a people yet unmade. The making of it will be a supreme
test of statesmanship.”


It should be explained that the writer of this article does
not press the argument against Australia as of immediate
importance. He admits that the field on which the fight
is being pressed is Africa —especially South and East. There
the white man finds he can work and prosper along great
stretches of fertile territory and inland upon plateaux where
climate and conditions of production give him every induce-
ment to settle. But the tribes of natives swarm everywhere
and the British white man is finding it very difficult to deal
with the multitudinous negro on the one hand and the people
of India who demand admittance to Africa as citizens of
the Empire. For the present we may watch developments,
but this surely gives point to the title of this address.
“Life and Education” may rather become “Life as Educa-
tion,” as the teeming millions of native-born Africans assert
themselves against the white man, and the thousand millions
of Asia begin to ask questions in earnest about an empty
continent nearer than Africa and equally desirable should
the dark continent be closed to them.
OUR PROGRESS AND PROBLEMS.
But again the abject of this address is not so much to
direct attention to the outside responsibilities of Australia
as a nation, as to our progress within and our attitude to the
continent which we hold in trust for the Empire. How do we
regard this Australia of ours, and what has life within its
boundaries done for us in the 138 years since Captain Phillip
landed in Port Jackson? Two lifetimes, as the Psalmist
has measured a man’s life, have almost ended, and we are
just about to begin a third with possibilities of progress or
the reverse -which make one sometimes hold one’s breath.
Just think of what life meant in 1788, then in 1850, seventy
years after, and now in 1927 —with 1931 looming in many
ways as a possible annus mirabilis with its advertisement to
the world that Australia is the prize of the earth in spite
of its droughts. What will the ensuing 70 years bring to
us, and are we being educated by our experience in the
two lifetimes just behind? Has life so far been teaching


us in Australia that a prize is actually in our hands, and
can we face the future with confidence? Unless we acknow-
ledge all that the past has done for us under the Union
Jack the reply must be, No. These are the crucial questions
to-day, and perhaps one may be allowed to discuss them
from a more personal point of view than is usual under the
circumstances. When one is English-born and for so many
years has been actively a resident in New Zealand and
Australia and a student of the Pacific from the moment when
a tub of salt water .on the deck of a sailing ship was the
first introduction, there may be something to offer on the
theme of “Life as Education.” It is perfectly true that I
can remember that tub of Pacific water —it may have been
from the Indian Ocean, for we had passed the Cape—
but my father had brought me up on deck and stood me
naked in the early morning among the laughing sailers for
my first sea bath in the new life. The “Surat” was one of
the first iron sailing ships, of 1,000 tons, hastily fitted up as
a passenger vessel, but taking immigrants; and my father
and mother and five children were passengers on a four
months’ voyage with all the possible terrors of a life in
New Zealand when the Maori war was still dragging on.
We landed at Auckland, in fact, with the sound of the
guns in our ears and with the manhood of the population in
uniform or under orders. This is just offered as a reminder
of what our own flesh and blood had to face at the beginning
of our second term of colonial life as a people making new
discoveries. For eight years—the most impressionable of
my life—l lived with the Maoris as part and parcel of the
day’s experience, for on the Thames goldfield they swarmed
about, and sons of the chiefs actually sat by my side as
pupils in the High School that had been recently estab-
lished. Memory recalls among first recollections two Maori
chiefs, dying of consumption, who lived in two hutches on
the deck of the “Surat,” and who found a continual and
sympathetic observer in the small boy whose first morning
tub on deck made such a mark in his memory. The native
question in the Pacific thus was one of my first problems,


and when we came to Australia in 1872, and went up the
Parramatta River to stay for a while at old Newington
College, there was a Fijian outrigger canoe on the bank,
belonging to Ratu Joseph, a son of King Thakombau, of
Fiji. “Ratu Joe” was a pupil at the College at the time,
and his father had come to Sydney on business. When they
returned to Fiji “Ratu Joe” had only just recovered from
measles, and this resulted in a tragedy for Fiji. The disease
was introduced to the group and a fourth of the population
died —so Dr. Fison, a trustworthy authority, reported. Again
the Pacific and its problems came into view.
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.
But more important still, Newington College—the old
Blaxland home —opened up vast interests in the history
of Australia. Later on when one became a cadet in the
Government Survey Office, another vista of history was
found, for the present Land Office had not been built in
1876, and the old office was one of the original buildings of
the settlement in which the first Chief Justice lived at one
time and in which later on Sir Thomas Mitchell exercised
authority and became a power in the land. The old buildings
seemed to ooze romance for a sensitive youth already blessed,
or cursed, with an imagination all alight and ready for any
additions to his education on this side of experience. Later,
when the work of surveying took one far afield, the old
grants and much new country added their quota to the rest
and now, on looking back, one realises what a wonderful
asset it has all been. What a light has been thrown upon the
developing Empire in this part of the world when one has
lived throughtout nearly a whole lifetime on the Psalmist
scale with the Union Jack always flying and the Old
Country still leading among the Nations of the world.
This short resume of life is not offered in any spirit of
boasting. It has just happened, and for the purposes of this
address it offers the best illustration known to me of the
value of life as an interpreter—as a school master of


incredible influence and power if one has been ready for it.
Now one wants to help others to think of the future in
terms of a very wonderful past In this Australia of ours;
and first, just consider what has been given to us as an asset,
as yet unappreciated, of incalculable value. Here is the
actual heritage of a continent in the first place. We are
in possession of three million square miles free from the
problems of race so that English speaking people in Africa
and America envy us therein. In the second place all we
have we owe to the constant guardianship of a great navy
under the Union Jack that has literally set us behind and
before and laid its hand upon us, so that our ways and our
very whims have been respected by the nations of the
earth. Has there been anything like it in the world’s
history? Do we quite realise that we are indeed
“The heirs of all the ages in the foremost files of time,”
and that our education in nationhood has hardly begun
though we like to think of ourselves as of adult stature
because our great Mother has clothed us with the garment
of manhood and handed us the insignia of a great authority
in this vast Pacific. It reminds me that there are always
surprises in this development of virile youth, and one should
be willing to believe all things and to hope all things of a
people whose manhood proved itself to such wonderful pur-
pose in the Great War and whose womanhood amazed us by
its resources and courage and endless initiative while
husbands, sons, and daughters were at the front. The youth
in ordinary life under healthy conditions reaches a point
at which the feeling for independence is all absorbing. No
parent knows as much, no father or mother can understand
the world so well, as the son or daughter facing the dawn.
We are like that. But those of us who have lived long
enough know that life as education leads to reaction. At
last the son and daughter, with families of their own and
real burdens to carry, often think at last that nobody
knows quite as much as the father or mother; and so the
round of co-operation becomes complete.


A FIRST LESSON.
Let us then take this wonderful racial heritage as a first
lesson in thinking of the education of life. Perhaps I am
inclined to make too much of the question of origin; but in
a long life, begun in England, continued in its most impres-
sionable years in New Zealand, and now being finished in
Australia, the sense of a magnificent foundation has been
with one from the beginning. My ancestors and yours have
been of the blood that went to sea in Queen Elizabeth’s
day, and defied Spain and her navy, so that even the Pacific
was traversed, for what is now known as British Columbia
was first called New Albion by Sir Francis Drake four
hundred years ago. These forbears of ours crossed the
Atlantic and settled in North America, and even the War
of Independence has not prevented in our own day the
opening of a Bridge of Peace between Canada and the
United States, though boot-legging and prohibition have
produced humorists who can only call their three thousand
miles of common boundary “that far-flung bottle line.” It
was still the same breed that came to Australia two life-
times ago —four generations if you like —and with cargoes
of derelicts laid the foundations of an enduring dominion for
a great Empire. And do not forget two things in this con-
nection. The War of Independence which brought the
United States into being was practically a civil war, for
recent investigations have shown that English newspapers 150
years ago were full of hostile comment upon the course of
events, and volunteers to serve in the English army and
navy against the people on the other side of the Atlantic
were so hard to get that the English Government had to
pay Hessian troops to fight on land and many pressed sailors
had to be sent to Botany Bay. Germans in those days were
paid to fight for England. They were taken across the
ocean to do what the common folk of the old land refused
to do.
It is curious that in a book just published this has been
proved by numerous quotations, not from newspapers pub


lished in America in the Eighteenth Century, hut from
journals printed and published and read in England 150
years ago. Moreover, stranger still, the writer is not an
Englishman. He is an American professor concerned to
state the truth and not to prove a case from half of it.
This is by the way, but what may be further emphasised is
the fact already offered that Captain Phillip did bring with
him in the First Fleet to Australia a number of English
sailors transported for various offences, and that not the
least of his troubles in the four years of his administration
was to keep them from the sea. The press gangs of those
days and for all the years of Napoleon’s desperate grasp
at world power, went up and down England forcing men
into the navy; and out of it all came the reactions and
defiances which led to transportation and the chance of a
new life in Australia. Along this continent’s coast the
British seaman has found a home, often after desertion from
the navy, and year by year as he has served his time and
been paid off. It would make an interesting book to tell
of the men who have made good in this country whose first
knowledge of it came with sea service and whose sense
•of what the British Navy has meant to us has kept a solid
core of loyalty within us. But that is a story to come. It
may be enough to say that not so long ago I came across
an old salt on the South Coast, with his trophies of the sea
.all round him, who claimed to be the only man in Australia
who had carried the present King upon his shoulders. He
said that he had been boatswain of the Government boat at
Albany in Western Australia when the two Princes made
their world tour in 1879, and they landed at Albany in his
boat. As the landing was still short of the shore, the
boatswain got overboard into shallow water to haul the
boat in and Prince George jumped on to his shoulders so
suddenly that both of them nearly went down. It was just
like the Prince’s boyish way of taking a short cut, and the
old salt told his story with real gusto. The Prince, long since
become a King, was still his hero. But one has heard so


many sailors’ stories in all parts of the country, and under
so many varied conditions, that one keeps the sea sense
of Empire in spite of overwhelming land conditions and
the drag of our politics. All that may be offered at this
point is the reminder that while a multitude of our own
ancestors were made of the stuff of Elizabethan, Tudor, and
Georgian adventurers, and were not sailors, but sober
settlers upon the land in new countries, the sea has still
been our salvation, and the British Navy our wet nurse.
THE ORIGINAL STOCK.
When one remembers, however, the original stock of
Australian nationhood, and the immigration which has kept
us 95 per cent. British, surely we are bound to think upon
the future in terms of increased migration —apart from the
strains and stresses of Asia’s proximity and the jealousy
of peoples who are asking ever more insistently how much
longer we propose to keep Australia empty. My own
education is not yet finished in this regard, for I am con-
tinually amazed as my researches continue to find how
fine is the stuff from which we have been made, and how
little the original so-called convict strain has mattered in
our development. The early gold rushes and ensuing settle-
ments blotted out the whole thing as if by a magic sponge,
so quickly was all that was evil in our origin submerged
by what was good. We are as truly the result of the best
that the motherland could do for us as were the majority
of American colonists who revolted. In them the real
heart of England beat true all the time. The English
people were as loth to coerce the American colonists in
those far-off days as they have been ready to serve and
strengthen the Australian Commonwealth in these nearer
days after the Great War, in which the Empire is becoming
a factor of supreme importance in the recovering world’s
equilibrium. If our education as a nation is not teaching
us that, we shall learn nothing worth while; our whole
future life and progress must depend upon and develop with


the Empire. We shall probably go down in history as the
failure of the ages if we do not fill this land of ours speedily
and hold it wisely. But because we are children of a great
race, and the heirs of a fine tradition on sea and land, life in
my belief is surely educating us and our instincts will prove
our sure guide where the emergencies of nationhood call
for the deeper sense of Empire.
Now for a last word about the navy as our enduring friend
and instructor —our very present help in time of trouble.
It would have been easy to elaborate this point so as to
take up the whole of the address, but let it suffice to say
that while it was the navy that brought us here in the
first instance, and provided some of the finest of its men
to explore our coast and police the Pacific while we were
finding our feet, it has never ceased its peace-making
provisions for our safety. Take one illustration alone in
the activities of the Department of the Hydrographer-
General in London, which was begun soon after Australia
was settled. This arose because the results of exploration
multiplied so fast and charts became so urgently needed
that something had to be done. This Department of the
Navy was founded in 1793, and here is a precis of its latest
report, offered by a writer in one of the London newspapers
who recently remarked of the annual report of Rear-Admiral
H. P. Douglas, Hydrographer of the British Navy, just
published, that a whiff of salt water comes from its pages.
He says:—
“In the course of the year the Hydrographic Department
printed no less than 634,793 charts for the use of the Royal
Navy. Nearly 250,000 corrections were made in charts, all
inserted by hand. The British Navy's hydrographic service
is, in fact, the most comprehensive and efficient in the
world.
“Some striking revelations on this subject have been made
officially in Washington. There are stated to be 1,200
points of the globe to which American naval and merchant
vessels can only navigate by means of British Admiralty
charts. In the Eastern Atlantic and along the west coast
of Europe, for instance, 75 per cent, of all the charts used
by American ships are supplied by the British Admiralty.


Some time ago, when a flotilla of American destroyers was
ordered to Constantinople, £2,400 had to be spent on the
purchase of British charts before the ships could sail.”
U.S.A. AT WAR.
A former head of the United States Hydrographic Office
has made the following statement: —
“With the United States in a war which precluded the
British Empire from lending such aid, an American battle-
ship would have to await the completion of a chart. Wholly
aside from the naval aspect of the situation, which has its
picture of American battleships waiting a month or two
to give battle for lack of navigation charts, thousands of
dollars are being spent by the United States Navy on British
charts, and 37 per cent, of American shipping goes regularly
into waters where the British must be depended upon for
the necessary charts.”
Australia is taking up this burden of surveying and
charting her own coasts, but some stretches of it are down
as Captain Cook and his predecessors found them and
reported upon them. Those old surveys still stand and bear
witness to the accuracy and sound work of naval explorers
a century and a half ago. Yet all the old surveys on sea
and land are reminders, not only of what we owe, but of
what lies ahead. We have hardly begun to possess this
great land or to understand the Pacific Ocean and its groups
which are so vital to our peace.
What do we know about droughts, for instance, except to
suffer under their terrible impact? Has life in continuing
dry spells meant education in that a literature has grown
up around them, and are we beginning to face them as
Canada faces her winters? Are we not still gambling upon
the turn of the seasons and the chances of rain instead of
making the storage of water and fodder a prime considera-
tion? This surely is a matter for the business men of
Australia. So the history of our possession by sea, and the
enduring work of the British Navy in the past, must also
be part of our education, because life in the present promises
fo be harder and more complicated for everybody.


VALUE OF MAPS.
At the close of the address Mr. Brunsdon Fletcher directed
attention to two wall maps which had been kindly lent
for the occasion by Mr. H. E. C. Robinson, to whose valuable
work as a cartographer a warm tribute was paid by the
lecturer. The first map, only now published, showed all the
explorations of Australian coasts, and the tracks of land
explorations up to date. It is a compendium of information
on this subject, and was commended for its thoroughness and
accuracy. The second map was intended to show how the
bulk of the population of New Zealand and Australia lies
within a circle round the Tasman Sea of 800 miles radius.
Such a ring covers most of New Zealand, and includes
Hobart and part of Tasmania. It also takes in a ledge of
Australia, with Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane within
its circumference. It is densely populated—with fish. Yet
out of the seven millions of people in the whole of Australia
and New Zealand six millions live within this circle. It
was clear from the map dealing with the matter how empty
Australia really is, and what a problem has to be solved
in maintaining the semblance of possession apart from the
British Navy.


The
Commercial Educational Society of Australia
Business Lectures for Business Men.
Conducted by
Blennerhassett’s Institute of Accountancy Ltd.
OFFICE BEARERS.
Patrons:
C A GREATREX. Esq., F.A.A.; RT. HON. WM. M. HUGHES,
K.C., M.P.; J. M. MAUGHAN, Esq., 8.A., (Oxon.) ; A. E.
NORDEN, Esq., F.F.1.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.).
President:
PERCY A. ASH, Esq., F.l.Arb. (Lond.), A.F.1.A., etc.
Vice-Presidents:
HON C A AKHURST, M.L.C., F.1.T.5.; Messrs. H. H. BARTON,
ACIS.- R, BENNETT, L.1.C.A., A. 1.1.5.; A. A. BRACKPOOL,
AI 0 A A.F 1.A., A.C.1.5.; CECIL BRIERLEY, F.F.1.A., F.F.C.A.
FI A (Lond.); H. C. BRIERLEY, F.F.1.A., F.1.C.A., F.I.A. (Lond.);
L. A. BROOK, F.A.A., F.A.1.5.; O. I. CARLILE, L.1.C.A., A.8.1.A.;
V CAWOOD, L.1.C.A.; R. S. COATES, Dip. Ec., A.A.1.5.; A. E.
DENT AFI A. F. 1.1.5.; C. EARLE, F. 1.1.5.; D. M. FORSYTH,
F.N.Z.A.A., F.A.A.; R. W. HAMILTON, F.F.1.A., A.A.1.5.; J. 0. HOLT,
F.1.1.A., F.A.1.5., CONRAD F. HORLEY, F.A.A., F.1.1.A.; E. W. E.
JONES F.1.1.A., A.C.1.5.; S. V. LARKIN, F.C.P.A.; H. 0. MACFIE,
FCPA F C. 1.5.; R. C. A. MARLOW, L.1.C.A., A.C.1.5.; R, A, MILNE,
FI A.A.; W. B. RAINSFORD, A.1.A.A., A.1.1.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.);
H ROACH, A.1.C.A., A.C.1.5.; GEO. G. RUSSELL, M.A. (Cantab.),
F 1.C.A., F.I.A. A.; C. G. WATSON, A.A.A.C., F.A.1.5.; W. H,
WILLIAMS, A.A.A.C., F.C.C.S. (Eng.); J. E. W. WRIGHT, L.1.C.A.,
A.C.I.S.
Council:
S T ANDERSON, A.F.1.A.; J. S. AUBREY, A.1.C.A.; W. A. AUDS-
LEY, A.1.C.A., A.A.1.5.; H. BEECH, L.1.C.A., A.F.1.A., A.A.1.5.;
4 D BRIDGES, A.F.1.A.. A.A.A.. A.A.1.5.; R. J. NEALE BROWN,
A AIL, A.C.1.5.; W. B. DAVEY, A.F.1.A.; J. A. FARLEY, L.1.C.A,,
A A 1.5.; S. A. GRAY, A. A. A., A.A.1.5.; A. S. HAWLEY, A.F.I. A.,
AI A A • A. R. LEE, A.C.1.5.; T. LOVE; W. G. MIDDLETON,
A.F.1.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.); A. G. F. MILLER, A.F.1.A.; S. V.
MOFFITT, A.F.1.A., L.1.C.A.; J. O. PLIM, L.1.C.A.; F. F. PORTER,
L.1.C.A.; C. G. SCARD, A.F.1.A.; F. S. STONE, A.F.1.A.; E. J.
THOMSETT, A.F.1.A., A.A.1.5.; W. H. A. TOOTILL, A.F.1.A.; F. L.
VENN, A.F.1.A.; WM. 0. WELSH, F.A.A., A.1.1.A.; H. C.
WILLIAMS, A.1.1.A.
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer:
R. N. BLENNERHASSETT, F.N.Z.A.A., F.A.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.).
do Blennerhassett’s Institute of Accountancy Ltd.,
Herald Building, 66 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Phone 85388.
Printers Limited, Rosebery, Sydney—7l2B


SYLLABUS OF LECTURES.
1927.
June 15th—“Psychology—Its Relation to Business—(Mentimetry—
Can we measure the mind?)’’
Dr. DONALD FRASER, M.A., M. 8., Oh.M.
July 21st—“ Post War Finance.”
HON. W. A. HOLMAN, K.C.
August 17th—“ Marine Insurance—Principles and Practice.”
A. W. H. PADFIELD, Esq.
(Manager Union Marine Insurance Coy., Ltd.).
September 21st —“Secretarial Practice in Relation to Company
Accounting.’ ’
IYO W. KERR, Esq., F.1.0.A., B.Ec., A.C.I.S. (Eng.).
(Messrs. Kerr & Roach, Public Accts.).
October 19th—“ Life and Education.”
0. BRUNSDON FLETCHER, Esq.
(Editor “Sydney Morning Herald.”).
November 16th—“Banking—Past and Present.”
WM. MOFFATT, Esq., (General Manager
Primary Producers’ Bank of Australia, Ltd.).
1928
January 18th—“ Negotiable Instruments.”
VERNON TREATT, Esq., B.A. (Syd.), M.A., 8.C.L., (Oxon.),
Barrister-at-Law.
February 22nd—“ Business Investigations and Reconstructions.”
B. S. STEVENS, Esq., A.F.1.A., L.G.A.
(Messrs. Stevens, Noble & Co., Public Accts.).
March 21st —“The Effect of Public Finance on Commerce.”
PROFESSOR R. C. MILLS, LL.M. (Melb.), D.Sc. (Econ.), (Lond.),
Professor of Economics, University of Sydney.


