





PLAN
CAMPAIGN
By DAVID A. ANDRADE.
Ijftelbouvne:
CO-OPERATIVE PUBLISHING COMPANY,
47 Victoria Avenue, Albert Park.


THE WORKERS OF THE WORLD
AND MORE ESPECIALLY
THOSE WHO BEAR HATRED TOWARDS ME
FOR MY UNTIRING ATTEMPTS TO BETTER OUR SAD CONDITION
THIS SLIGHT ATTEMPT
TO EXPLAIN TO THEM A METHOD OF ESCAPE FROM THEIR
INTOLERABLE SLAVERY
DEDICATED.


AN ANARCHIST PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.
For the political and economic emancipation of the workers to be accom-
plished, it is now clear to all intelligent people that the old stereotyped
methods must be discarded, and their place superseded by more rational
methods of action, based upon the practical experience gained from the past.
It is utterly hopeless to look to the political machinery for the bettering
of the workers’ condition ; the privileges which surround it are inevitable
to its existence, and those privileges are at the expense of labor, and inim-
ical to labor’s interest ; if it does not corrupt the best individuals who
strive to employ its agency, it will crush them. Legal advantage is the
exclusive luxury of the wealthy ; for the ultimate object of all law is to
protect wealth and those who hold itthe poor can rarely employ it, and
if they can it almost invariably ruins them.
Trades unions (as now understood) are established on a basis which is
economically unsound ; being on a profit-making basis, they create a class of
profit-mongers, who, by continually absorbing the fruits of labor, accu-
mulate immense capital, to the detriment of the workers themselves, who
thus become eternally dependent upon them. Besides which, the leaders who
control trades-unions are as open to bribery and corruption as their political
prototypes, and can no more be trusted than they can. The same ho'ds
true of all public leaders who are not of the labor ranks themselves, but
who trade upon the hopes of the oppressed proletariate, and are necessarily
interested in the perpetuation of their oppression.
Agrarian reform is a hopeless thing to expect from the political institutions
which make possible agrarian monopoly, and necessitate the institution of
landlordism.


Nor can any advance be made by imposing new regulations upon the
holders and loaners of the currency, for, the system of usury itself continuing
to exist, the laborers who bear the whole burden will be dependent as long as
this drain upon their resources continues.
All change to better the conditions of labor must come from the laborers
themselves, must be effected by those in the ranks of labor, and must solely
consider the interests of labor. All measures which consider the claims of
privilege, the sacredness of property, or the reward of abstinence, are opposed
to the interests of labor, and must be uncompromisingly rejected, if not at
once, at all events by degrees.
Education must precede practice—for the only successful physical revolu-
tion is that which follows a mental revolution—and the laborers who desire
to free themselves must forego a few luxuries, and regularly contribute a small
portion of their earnings, to the issue of a representative newspaper, a plenti-
ful distribution of leaflets, the publication of books and pamphlets, formation
of clubs for propaganda (these could be held in the private house of anyone
who has five or six like-minded acquaintances, and would then cost nothing
for rent or advertising ; or they might rent a public room, and have a perma-
nent office, as soon as their numbers and influence justified the undertaking).
Much can also be done by speaking at public debate meetings, or addressing
meetings in the open air—though the former of these are generally guarded
with restrictions to prevent the full ventilation of any ideas other than those
of the promoters, and the latter are mostly patronized by the unthinking, the
fickle-minded, and the mischievous ; the greatest reforms are those which
emanate from small gatherings of earnest thinkers, and it is from them that
advancement must he primarily expected, though the secondary value of the
“ scout” is too important to be ignored. When a few persons in any com-
munity are sufficiently educated in social principles, there need : e no delay
in carrying into practice the plan of campaign.
Profit-making is the first form of exploitation that the laborer must under-
mine. To guard against any possible violation of this principle, it shou’d l>e
a fixed understanding introduced into the constitution of the Cooperation at
its inception, and only alterable by the unanimous consent of the members.
This would prevent its being swamped by intrigirng schemers, who might
secure a majority to introduce the profit system, and thus entirely wreck t he
scheme.
Cooperate to effect mutual purchases of commodities. Form a cooperation
of six, twelve, twenty, or as many more members as po sible ; and purchase
your groceries &c. in bulk.
Draw up a Constitution somewhat like the following, to which each mem-
ber shall sign adherence :


CONSTITUTION
OF THK
MELBOURNE CO-OPERATION, No. 1.
1. We, the undersigned, form ourselves into an organization called
“ The Melbourne Cooperation of Laborers.”
3. The members are mutually combined for the purpose of purchas-
ing, producing, and exchanging on the cost principle ( i , e., esti-
mating value upon the cost of labor and material, to the exclusion
of profits), and selling to the public on similar terms.
3. The cooperation shall issue labor notes, duly signed by the res-
ponsible officials, and bearing no interest ; and they shall (if
possible) be offered for circulation among members and the public
also.
4. Any purchase of landed property, that the cooperation shall make,
' shall be included in estimating the cost ; but shall cease to be
included in estimating the cost when purchase has been complet-
ed. And every member having access to any such property, shall
have such access free of all charge, no rent being demanded for
its use.
6. The payment of taxation to the organized State shall be evaded,
or minimized as far as possible ; but should any such taxation
be levied, it shall be included in the cost of production.
6. Every member shall be equally remunerated, on a time basis, for
any services performed ; and there shall be no recognized inequal-
ity or other distinction, on account of sex.
7. The capital and property of the cooperation shall be owned by the
whole body, each one possessing an equal share ; unless statute
laws forbid such possession, when it shall be vested in the hands
of as many members as possible, over whom the remainder shall
hold security proportionate to each one’s share.
8. Membership shall be open to all who sign adherence of this consti-
tution.
9. Any member, who desires to withdraw from the cooperation, shall
be free to do so, when he shall sign his notice of withdrawal in a
book kept by the cooperation for the purpose, and the manager
shall give him a signed acknowledgment of the withdrawal ; after
which the cooperation shall have no claim upon him whatever ;
neither shall he have any claim upon the cooperation for any
share which he has deposited in the cooperation, except that which
is represented by labor notes in his possession.
10. Should any member violate any part of this Constitution, a majo-
rity of the members shall have power to expel him ; and he shall
not be eligible for re-admission.
11. The cooperation shall hold ordinary meetings monthly for the tran-
saction of general business, and annual meetings for the balancing
and auditing of accounts.
12. The cooperation shall, at their monthly meetings, appoint manag-
ers, or contract any necessary business, and shall make such bye-
laws as are found necessary, provided they do not violate any
article of this Constitution.
13. Any article of this Constitution shall only be rescinded, or altered,
or new one added to, by the unanimous consent of the members
present at a special meeting convened expressly for the purpose,
due notice of which shall have been made fourteen days previously.
Appoint one of the most trustworthy of the number (especially if he
understands the nature of the cost principle of exchange and the evil of
profit-making) to execute your orders, to purchase from the wholesale store,
to distribute the articles as you require them for your consumption, and to


Iceep record of all transactions—such accounts being duly open to the in-
spection and regular auditing of the members. Pay him a moderate sum
to recompense him for his loss of time and incidental expense incurred,
reckoning it as a percentage (say 2^°/ o ), and perhaps fixing the salary at a
maximum of £3 per week, until the perfection and adoption of the labor
note system, when he will be paid by time measure, irrespective of all legal
coinage and prevailing rates of remuneration. As his labors become too
severe, others may be employed to assist him on exactly the same terms—
always dividing the wages equally, and never allowing monetary distinctions
to be proportioned to the nature of the services rendered. Thus privilege
cannot grow up, for each is remunerated equally ; and idlers cannot reap
advantage of others’ toil, for only those who gave satisfaction would be
employed by the Cooperation.
For storing the articles purchased, a spare room could be found at the
outset in the dwelling place of one of the cooperators (that of the distribu-
tor, if possible) ; this would avoid the payment of rent.
As the commerce of the store increases, a cottage may be rented for the
purpose in some accessible and cheap neighbourhood, and a horse and cart
purchased ; these expenses would of course be included in the cost of the
commodities, and they would be charged proportionately—thus the extra
amount charged, instead of going to profit, as under the present system,
would go towards the accumulation of the mutual capital, and would cease
to be levied when the capital had sufficiently accumulated to allow the trans-
actions to be conveniently made.
All the time, the store could supply the public at the same price as mem-
bers, thus enabling them to purchase in larger quantities, to extend their
custom, and to draw the public from patronizing those who continued to
adhere to profit-mongering.
Now a new departure can be made. Instead of purchasing shoes from
the factories, a shoemaker can be engaged at the store's rate of remunera-
tion (the same as that paid to tlie official ng distributor), and he can
supply the wants of the store in that particular. Workers in other indus-
tries—tailors, hatters, bakers, &e.—can be engaged on equal terms.
Many of the merchants and storekeepers who sell for profits, wib probably
try to ruin the cooperative stores by underse ling them and offering their
commodities at a loss and at a lower rate than the cobperators can produce
them for ; this contingency the cooperators can readily overcome by ceasing
to manufacture (their temporary lack of employment not injuriously affect-
ing them under the new conditions) and buying the reduced articles of the
merchant, until his losses have reduced his capital, so that he can continue


those tactics no longer, and has either ruined himself or become a cooperator.
Even already, the advantages of the new economic system will be felt :
workers are purchasing their articles of consumption cheaper, and the vendors
thus extorting less profit from them ; men, who might otherwise be vainly
competing for employment in an overstocked labor market, are engaged at
a high rate of remuneration (no huge profit being deducted from their pro-
ducts by their employers); and the workers are at their labors only so long
as it is necessary in order to satisfy the demand—working three or four
hours a day instead of agitating for legal compulsion to work eight, and
ceasing to work when enough has been done instead of “over-producing”
six months of the year, and then being thrown out of employment the other
six months.
The factory will now have developed considerably, and it will be necessary
to separate it from the store. This will be no difficult matter, for the store
being located in a neighborhood where rents are low, the building can be
added to, at the cost of little extra for ground rental. And if the ground
has been purchased—the purchase extending over a term of years—and
sufficient ground secured in the first instance, the enlargement of premises
will merely cost the expense of material and the wages of the builders
reckoned by the prevailing time-rate of the cooperation.
The purchase of land may be effected by cash purchase if sufficient
funds be available, or by time purchase through a building society, although
the latter charges a heavy interest for the loan of the money. A method
somewhat like the following would be better : Several members (say 10)
combine together and purchase (through one of their number, with whom
they hold a written agreement) say 4 acres of land, in some healthy accessible
suburb at a cost of say £3,000, and upon it they erect 10 comfortable cot-
tages. One of the cottages may be used for the cooperative store ; another
may be used as a cooperative home or mutual lodging house, possessed and
conducted on the same principle as the cooperation itself ; and the others
may be occupied by separate families. The members borrow the money
necessary for the purpose from a private individual, for 10 years, and agree
to pay him a certain percentage upon the loan. They each deposit about
15/-(or half that amount if there be 20 buyers) weekly into the bank at the
current rate of interest. At the end of the first year, they draw out the
amount due for one year’s interest on the loan and pay it to the loaner ;
and they deposit the balance at interest, for one or more years, at the high-
est rate of interest they can command. This practice they repeat each year.
If any member fails in his payments, he ceases to be a shareholder and
either forfeits what he has deposited, or has it refunded to him by a new


purchaser, or makes such other arrangements with the members as shall
have been previously agreed upon. All the time the deposits will be bring-
ing in interest, with which to pay the interest on the loan ; and if proper
precautions have been taken, and the rates of interest are at all favorable,
the members will, at the end of the 10 years, have paid scarcely any inter-
est (if any) and have purchased the property upon what is practically a
non-interest-bearing loan, for the interest will have paid itself—or, to express
it correctly, the interest will not have been paid by the members but by the
bank’s borrowers.
But here arises a legal difficulty, springing up out of the unjust political
conditions under which we are living: Who are the owners of the cooperative
store, its machinery and other contents, and the land upon which it is situ-
ated ? This must be largely determined by the nature of the statute laws
of the country in which the cooperation is being conducted. Of course, the
principle to be realized is that each cooperator shall hold an equal share in
all possessions of the cooperation. But the laws of most (if not all) countries
have guarded against such a contingency, by making it imperative that any
such large organization shall be registered under statute law—become “ incor-
porated”—and so amenable to, and tied down by the regulations and restric-
tions of, the very laws and legal institutions which we are striving to abolish.
The only practicable way of overcoming this difficulty appears to be that of
vesting it entirely in the hands of one (or as many more as possible) mem-
bers of the cooperation, and giving each a bill of sale, or other security, over
him (or them) for such portion as falls to each one’s share. Of course, ij
the laws existing allowed the cooperators to jointly hold their possessions
without requiring any registration, there would be no such difficulty ; but I
know of no place where there exist such favorable conditions for the laborer.
But another factor must be introduced into the operations of the cooper-
ation. Concurrently with the abolition of profit-making, means must be
employed for the abolition of usury.* A labor currency bearing no interest,
resting on no fixed basis, redeemable by either labor or product, and issued
on the joint security of the cooperation, must be inaugurated at an early
stage of the factory’s career. Labor notes must be issued, artistically
printed on good bank-note paper, duly numbered, signed and chronicled by
those authorized by the members to do so. The notes might somewhat
resemble the following
*For an investigation of the nature of usury, and the reasons for the absolute ne-
cessity of its abolition, see Money : a Study of the Currency Question , by the same
writer.


0 ■ J O
• 2 Hours • : No. 1. •
MELBOURNE CO-OPERATION, No-1-
MUTUAL BANK.
Melbourne , April 20, 1888.
Pay to Bearer, on demand, in labor or commodity, the sum of Two
Hours, value received at this bank.
• - ( John Brown , Manager.
: Official • Signed < Henry Smith I . ...
: Stamp ! ( Thot Jone, j Audlto «-
[
On the back of each note, should be a clear, concise exposition of the
nature of equity and usury, profit-making and the cost principle, and the
general economic objects of the cooperation, as for instance :
0 So g a 51-s BJ.-1 &
£ g-g -a| |s§ 'asg|« a -§ sa
w 5 S 5 5,2 $ y *8 2 5 fl 2«£ .2 a j- .3 £ ~g. ££ c 55 ” |
£ I§s £«-|f oal-ci'S'g -I
r £*&►» 9? .a .5 a » o-5 o s# SS£io»s? £
° ga•-« s 7 S *g “ oy g ? 5-3iT « cS r- *• o*;
« 2£ g a 2 °*g .£ - ° g-~ . ¥ btt-t A -5* g g
2 It'll s I a ifs ■ a -2 1
fc .H O,« *g s g.s £2 I U|a3 2 - g 2-5 ®- s J.2-g g - | g S §3.
>« 5 " o-r 3 „ 3 gi£ 5s S 3 s- b
g § 2j? sS 4 S-2* 'g 11 S 5 fe**| s«y* £
“ i&IE’SS § cel Si'S is 5.= if gJ||.g;|=s°® |2-|
>— l ocC3£• 43 CO O S'. .£ .5 C 3 "F C— c S C 3 53 "»43 --—■ y 3 ’55 >- 3 O 0
«c 5,c K y 243 , S i- 3 3 i? iOi 5r ; u 5 5 - ® 2 5 W 5 O" . B .S 3
S 'C” 2 43 •»£ *» yOB *» £<■ c y Cd 3
1 I l!3 SI fillNll fJIII! |l |J Ssl
g |||j|f||Uiii“|s!| g .l 1111 MflEiisi!l=
►S . » Fv*' =; - > Sl«q ?£ ° a T,- if i2 v - * £of- >
c3 S!S.2(=,= = = 5J53g 2» « g -r4SS>3««3s''
« 4» 5 V -g su•£ g 3 3 = -343 „• I S" o J C J *j 32, 2 £§s® 3 1
n •- 2-g-iS x y >. £ _■* ®5 2 ?n-2 S' a 2 « S ». ~ w 3 -5 -s -H. •£
»-3 £st a 23 S.-3 2£ - a s* 2 ? bZ g S g| "•= ag &
s liis8&!■;?! U-a 114 i
S soi Jf-i 5 g-43 y 243.2 44 -SS®.2w 3—a ° P c "c -
,** S S C * « - u a " 11 2 "5?33 2 « 03 a i s 5 b. O
gi sj, o :4b Safin k«£.s B 8 S k* &•£ SS'Ss^r
>* en c«-3 43 «c- n £ 4<saa42i: 43
These labor notes could vary in amount, and would be tendered to all who
deposited any commodity for sale at the store, or who labored at the factory.
They could be exchanged for legal coinage (which would merely represent


an ordinary marketable commodity), though that should be non-obl igatorv.
The ordinary transactions with profit-making firms, and all outside the
cooperation w ho did not care to accept the labor notes, could be paid in the
legal coinage received by the sale of the various articles to the general pub-
lic. taxation and other legal robberies could be met in the same manner.
Moreover, if the Mutual Bank should have occasion to require more legal
coinage than it possesses, the members of the cooperation w ho do not work
at the factory, but merely purchase through the store, could readily change
some of the money earned elsew here for the labor notes of the mutual bank
—or in other words, the Bank could purchase legal coinage with the labor
notes ; besides which, the resources of the stores having become so extensive,
and the evil nature of usury becoming generally understood, the public them-
selves will have no hesitation in “cashing” the labor notes.
There will be no occasion to interfere with the privileged bankers, who
may continue to extort usury (Interest) as long as the public are foolish
enough to pay for it ; if they beseech the legislators to prohibit the circu-
lation of tlie labor note, they must be checkmated. Of course, if there be
a method of observing the law in form, while defeating it in spirit, it may
be practised ; otherwise it must continue to be circulated, and the bankers
and legislators will find themselves in conflict with a growing public opinion
which will refuse to tolerate their mutual monopolv.
As the capitalistic press will not likely deal honorably with the new
cooperative movement, but will no doubt either misrepresent or ignore it, a
complete printing plant must be added to the factory, and a journal and
general 1 terature issued and sold at cost to educate the public concerning
the princip'es and methods adopted, besides printing the labor notes and
all such work required by the cooperation or its individual members.
Stores, conducted on the cost principle, will now be springing up every-
where, the laborers in other districts and other countries having imitated
our example ; and (by mutual agreement) the notes may lie made accept-
able at any store, and without being made subject to discount on the
exchanges.
Establishments conducted on a profit-making basis will experience a
“ tailing off in business,” for the consumers will go for their commodities to
the cooperations, they being the cheapest markets ; and many capitalists
will find it to their interest to form their businesses into cooperations also,
by making all their employees joint owners with themselves, and ceasing to
bring profits, usury, and rent (if they own the property upon which their
warehouses are situated) into their computations ; those who stand out for


profits will lose patronage, and fail.
The codperators, having overthrown the major systems of exploitation, and
retaining the surplus of their products for themselves, will have acquired the
means for the purchase of property, and most of them will soon be in pos-
session of their own homesteads (constructed by builders who have this new
field of employment opened up to them), others have taken up their abode
in the cooperative homes, and most are directly settled upon the land. The
result is that the large landed estates are an incubus to their owners—
“ white elephants ” upon their hands ; they cannot employ labor to work
them, for the laborers are no longer expropriated slaves, competing on a
capitalistic labor market for employment ; but free men, possessing their
own property and capital, and employing themselves. The large estates
will become broken up and forsaken ; the land monopolists who had stood
out for the old order of things having expropriated themselves ! The lands
being forsaken, future comers will “ jump ” them as they require them,
paying no one whatever for their use ; and rent will be abolished.
The construction of roads, railways, tramways, and canals, will keep pace
with the necessity for them, there being no land monopoly and rent extor-
tions to hinder them ; and they will be constructed and worked by the
collective capital and skill of the laborers themselves, who will be free to
retain their own products and work them for their own mutual benefit,
instead of for the advantage of a privileged body of idle capitalists.
The economic fetters be : ng removed, and woman becoming the equal of
man, her wretched dependence upon him will have vanished, and she will
be sovereign over her own body, her own mind, and her own passions, in-
stead of being the property of a husband and subject to all the rights or
wrongs that he may choose to inflict upon her. Woman freed from her
present economic slavery (for the marital slavery is in reality economic sla-
very, nothing more nor less) will be stronger, healthier, and happier than
in matrimonial bondage. Being healthier herself, her children will be
healthier and happier ; and the children being healthier, the nation will
become healthier, happier, and freer ; and the miserable, puny, vicious, li-
centious generation of the present will make way for a higher and nobler
humanity than the world has yet seen.
The avenues of honest employment being open to all, and economic
independence being accomplished, political independence will inevitably
follow. Free men require no rulers, nor will they tolerate them. Voluntary
cooperation will have accomplished for them what compulsion had ever
failed to do ; and the practice of equity in their dealings with their fellow-


JAFp
men will have tanght them the fallacy of reliance on political plunder to
secure freedom and happiness. Being free, they will yearn to make others
free ; and the spirit of Fraternity, which for centuries they had striven by
statute laws to destroy, will develop as with freedom it only can develop.
Crime will have vanished, being no longer necessary to the conditions of
existence—in fact, it will be impossible for it to thrive where liberty exists.
And the toiling millions who, for countless centuries, have groaned in
misery under the yoke of law, authority, plunder, and crime, will feel a new
life within them as they step out into the full light of liberty.
David A. Andrade.
The Principles of Anarchy,
Essential to
The Happiness and Prosperity of Society,
LIBERTY.
Equal liberty for all.
Equal opportunity for all to work
for their own sustenance without
let or hindrance.
Freedom for every worker to exchange his pro-
, duct with other workers upon his own terms. 2
Security to the laborer in the possession of the whole of his p>
h* product. H
Freedom for every individual to think, speak, and act, as he pleases.
Resistance to all crime—crime being the prevention of others from think-
O* ing, speaking, and acting, as they please.
The utter abolition of all monopoly, all theft, all privilege,
and all imposed authority. *
The absolute sovereignty of every individual over
himself.
The equality of the sexes.
Voluntary organization.
LIBERTY.
Liberty the Alpha and Omega.
Printed by J. A. Andrews, 47 Victoria Avenue, Albert Park, Melbourne.




TO APPEAR SHORTLY.
OUR SOCIAL SYSTEM,
AND
HOW IT AFFECTS THOSE WHO WORK FOR THEIR LIVINO.
By David A. Andrade.
A concise and careful examination of the present civilization, its
laws and institutions, its wrongs and its remedies ; viewed in the light
of science, economics, statistics, and common-sense.
MONEY: A
A Study of the Currency Question, especially in its Relations to the
Principles of Equity, Utility and Liberty. ttdjm
By David A. Andradb.
“The little work is a clear, brief and pungent exposure of some of
the evils connected with our system of currency, and is well worthy
of being perused by those who have to work for their living.”—
Hamilton Radical. ]
“ Have we your permission to bring out an American edition ? . . \
Quite a valuable addition to the literature of the currency question."
—E. 0. Walker,
“ This exq^Tpin f TiTn^ggsa^ a warft~m the'
ffopsgtvda. . . I shall probably take an early opportunity of reprint-
ing this pamphlet." —Editor Anarchist, (London, England.) >v js
“ A mass of assertions unsupported by evidence, untrue, and utter-
ly absurd in themselves. . .”— Our Commonwealth, (Adelaide, S. A.)
“ Really quite bewildering in its mixture of sound sense and—
opinions on currency."— Freedom (London, England.)
Price Threepence, or Fourpence posted, of the Cooperative Pub-
lishing Co.; or of the Australian Socialist League, 633 George Street,
Sydney, N. 8. W., Fourpence.
ANARCHIST
NEWSPAPERS, BOOKS, PAMPHLETS. &c.,
In great variety.
Catalogues gratis. David A, Andrade,
Cooperative Home, Albert Park.
HONESTY,
An outspoken advocate of Social Reform on the basis of
JUSTICE, EQUITY, AND LIBERTY.
Honesty is the Working People’s Paper. It seeks equality of
opportunity for all and an end to robbery. Hence it aims at the ab-
olition of rent, interest, profits and taxes, and the State which has
created them. It shows the laborers how to cooperate on the cost
principle, and retain the full fruits of their labors.
Published Monthly. 35.6 d. per annum.
Cooperative Publishing Co., Cooperative Home, Albert Park, Melb,
