



George Howe
SYDNEY GAZETTE PREZS
FERGUSON COLLECTION
NATIONAL LIBRARY
CANBERRA






TASMANIA:
The Colony as it Was in 1837,
WHEN QUEEN VICTORIA ASCENDED THE THRONE,
AND
Its Experiences during the last
Sixty Years.
1837
1897
BY
JAMES BACKHOUSE WALKER,
F.R.G.S.
[Written especially for “ The Daily Telegraph" Diamond Jubilee Number .]
Price Sixpence.
LAUNCESTON:
Printed and Published at “The Daily Telegraph” Offices, Patterson Street.
1897




TASMANIA:
The Colony as it Was in 1837,
When Queen Victoria ascended the Throne,
and
Its Experiences during the last
Sixty Years.
,1837
1897
BY
JAMES BACKHOUSE WALKER,
F.R.G.S. .
[Written especially for “ The Daily Telegraph ” Diamond Jubilee Number. ]
Price Sixpence.
LAUNCESTON :
Printed and Published at “The Daily Telegraph ” Offices, Patterson Street.
1897


TASMANIA! PROGRESS
SINCE THE YEAR 1837.
1837. 1895.
Population 42,698 160,833
Revenue ... £154,207 £761,971
Public Debt ... nil. £8,180,924
External Trade ... £1,103,365 £2,467,520
Shipping (tons) ... 118,905 937,525
Railways :
Miles open ... nil. 475
Capital Invested... nil. £3,771,558
Gross Receipts ... nil. £162.415
IS'et Receipts ... nil. £34.707
Post Miles ... 470 2,426
Land in Cultiva-
tion (acres) ... 79.429 788,120
Land in Crop (acres) 79,429 212,703
Live Stock—Cattle... 74,075 162,801
„ Sheep... 765,552 1,523,846
„ Horses... 7,115 31.580
„ Pigs ... 70,142
Wool Exports (lbs)... 3,165,900 8,811,433
~ (value)... £220,739 £290,971
Gold, Silver, Tin, and
Copper Exports ... nil. £623,655
Coal produced ... nil. £14,029
Agricultural Products £1,395,350
Pastoral Products ... £1,179,392
Property Assessed:—
Annual Value ... £989,994
Capital Value ... £19,799,800
Private Wealth ... £42,000,000
Population True
Annual rate of in-
crease since 1837... 2-26 %


TASMANIA:
THE COLONY AS IT WAS
IN 1837.
fT is proposed in the following article
to lay before our readers a comparative
abl. view of the condition of the colony, eco-
nomic and social, in the year 1837, and to
sketch in brief and broad outline the history
of its development down to the present year.
Such a survey will not only be interesting,
but’ at the present juncture it may also
prove to be of practical value, by way of
warning and encouragement.
At the Queen’s accession the colony had
been founded just 34 years. In its early
years it had been merely a large gaol, in
which convicts and their officers lived in a
sort of moral anarchy ; but Providence had
reserved for Tasmania a better destiny than
to be a mere dumping ground for England’s
criminals.
About the year 1820 the advantages
the island presented for settlement began
to be made known, and from that time
onwards a constant stream of free settlers
flowed to its shores. Each new settler on
his arrival was entitled to a free grant of
land in proportion to the capital he brought
with him—one square mile for each £5OO.
The lands in the vicinity of the two towns
were first appropriated, and new comers had
to push out further and further into the
wilderness. They gradually advanced their
“locations” through the lightly timbered lands
in the centre of the island, until the country
right and left of the track between Hobart
and Launceston was occupied by flocks and
herds, and dotted with modest homesteads
and clearings of cultivated land. In the
South small agriculturists occupied the
fertile lands about Bagdad, Richmond, and
Soreli. The pastoralists took up “ locations”
in the valley of the Derwent, and on the
banks of its tributaries, the Ouse, Clyde,
and Shannon, and a few found room for
their flocks as far away as the Bast Coast.
In the Horth, the rich lands on the North
Bsk and about Evandale and Longford were
brought under cultivation, and the graziers
found fine pastoral country on the Macquarie
and Lake Rivers, in the South Esk Valley and
in the Midlands. This early pioneering de-
manded steady work, perseverance, and
pluck, and was not accomplished without
the endurance of much hardship, and the brav-
ing of many perils from the violence of
marauding bushrangers and the murderous
attacks of black savages. All honor to the
men of the twenties and the early thirties,
the hardy pioneers in the making of Tas-
mania.
At the accession of the Queen the colony
had passed successfully through the rougher
stages of colonisation. Bushranging had
been put down with a strong hand. The
remnant of the aborigines had been caged on
Flinders Island. The community was peace-
ful, orderly,and prosperous; and the colony
of Van Diemen’s Land had attained a very
respectable place as one of the most
promising possessions of the British Crown.
The exports, which in 1824 had been only
£14,000, had in 1837 advanced to over half


a million. In the same period the popula-
tion had risen from 5400 to 43,000 —that is,
more than one fifth of the then total popu-
lation of Australasia. The census of 1838
shows that of 46,000 persons in the
colony, over 18,000 were convicts under
sentence. Of these, the great bulk were
either assigned servants or out on ticket-
of-leave, and therefore enjoying a modified
freedom. 3 he military guard and their
families numbered over 1500. There
were some 26,000 free people —comprising
those who had arrived free, those whose
sentences had expired, and those born in the
colony.
In 12 years (1824-1836) over a million and
a half acres of lands had been granted to
settlers, and though free grants had been
discontinued in 1831, and lands were now
sold by auction at an upset price of 5s an acre,
settlement was rapidly advancing. The
population was, however, spread over a com-
paratively limited area. The heavily tim-
bered lands were as yet untouched. The
North-West, now so populous, was an unex-
plored forest. On the North-East —save for
a narrow fringe on the bank of the Tamar—
the country eastward to George’s Bay and
Cape Portland was an uninhabited wilder-
ness. The Huon district was still virgin
forest. The western half of the island was
absolutely untrodden, and the sprinkling of
settlers on the East Coast from Tasman s
Peninsula to Cape Portland was a handful
hardly worth counting. Of the total popu-
lation of 46,000 the Hobart district contained
14,000; and Launceston, 6000; Richmond
and Sorell, 4500 ; New Norfolk and Both-
well, nearly 4000 ; Brighton and the Mid-
lands, over 3000. In the North, Longford
and Westbury numbered over 2500, and
E vandale and Avoca 2000. In the far North-
West the Van Diemen’s Land Company,
with its centre at Circular Head, had barely
200 souls on its grants of 350,000 acres.
The settlers were prosperous, if not con-
tented. The labor they required, whether
for farm work or for domestic service, was
provided by convict “ assigned servants,” or
by ticket-of-leave men. The “ assigned ser-
vant ” was entitled to a specified allowance
of rations and clothing, but not to money
wages. When he'obtained his ticket of leave
he was free to choose his master on the best
terms he could make as to wages. Under
this system—with wool (washed) at Is 6d to
2s 6d ; wheat at 7s to 8s ; oats, 6s 6d ; pota-
toes, £lO ; and hay, £5 or £6—the farmer
could do fairly well. Eighty thousand acres
were in cultivation in 1887 —about one-
tenth of the present amount. The export of
grain and other agricultural produce was
£40,000, as compared with nearly £290,000
at the present day. But the mainstay of the
country —the staple then and for many years
after —was wool. The yield of wool was then
about three million pounds, realising
£220,000. To-day, with a yield of 7J mil-
lion pounds, we realise only £202,000. In
addition to sheep and cattle, the breeding of
horses was an important industry, and Tas-
manian horses had a high reputation.
The means of communication left much to
be desired. There were only 110 miles of
macadamised road in the island. Convict
labor had been employed on parts of the
main road; the Bridgewater causeway had
been formed, the Boss bridge and some
other bridges had been built; but the greater
part of the Hobart and Launceston road was
little better than a bush track. The roads to
Richmond, New Norfolk, and Longford had
been partly made by the Government; but
everywhere else bush roads were the only
means of communication, and these had
mostly been made by the enterprise of the
settlers themselves, who in those days had
not learnt to depend on Government for
what they required, but were ready to help
themselves.
The postal conveniences of 1837 would
excite astonishment and indignation in the
present year of grace. Down to 1832 the
Post Office had belonged to a private indi-
vidual. In 1837 it was managed as a Govern-
ment institution. Four hundred and seventy
miles of post road were travelled. There
were 33 post offices; the mails for the most


part twice a week. At the present time,
with about four times the population, there
are 327 post offices, and everyone who does
not get a daily mail counts himself a much-
aggrieved person.
In 1832 Mr Cox started a conveyance be-
tween Hobart and Launceston, taking one
passenger only. In 1837 a coach ran from
Hobart twice a week. Starting from Hobart
at 8 a.m. it reached Oatlands the same
evening, leaving the next morning and
reaching Launceston at 6 - 30 in the evening.
The fare was £5 inside and £4 outside. Two
coaches ran daily between Hobart and New
Norfolk. These were the only public con-
veyances. The only steamer in the colony
was one plying between Hobart and Kanga-
roo Point.
The provision for education was lament-
ably insufficient. The Government schools
numbered only 33, with 13L2 children, and
cost £3400 a year, an average of a little over
£IOO each. There are no statistics to show
what proportion of the population were un-
able to read and write ; but anyone who can
carry his memory back to the forties, or even
the fifties, will know that it was very large.
At the present day, with 258 schools, having
20,000 children on the rolls, and costing
£40,000 a year, it is rare to find an adult
who cannot write his name. As to secondary
schools, the case was quite as bad. Private
schools there were—some fairly good, some
much the reverse—but years passed before
any properly-organised secondary school was
established in Tasmania.
In one respect the people of the colony
were fairly well supplied. There were six
newspapers published in Hobart, and two in
Launceston. The Launceston papers were
the Launceston Advertiser (belonging to
John Pascoe Fawkner), and the Cornwall
Chronicle (edited by William Lushington
Goodwin.) These papers appeared weekly,
and were less concerned to provide news
than to criticise the conduct of public, and
sometimes private, affairs. Few of them
were distinguished for moderation of
language, and their amenities were too often
those of the immortal Eatanswill Gazette.
Other educational aids were not plentiful;
though Hobart could boast a Mechanics’ In-
stitute and a Subscription Library; and
also a theatre, built in 1883. Amongst
amusements must be mentioned the races on
the old New Town course, at Hobart, and at
Mowbray, Launceston.
With regard to the social condition of the
colony, it may fairly be said that the great
body of the settlers would have compared
favourably in character and intelligence with
those of any British possession ; but where
half of the population had been selected for
compulsory emigration, not for their virtues
but on account of their misdeeds, and where
this class supplied the whole of the labor of
the farm and domestic service, and most of
the skilled labor, it could not be expected
that the general tone of the community
would be very high. In these days, when so
much that is sensational is written about the
iniquities and cruelties of penal discipline, it
cannot be too strongly insisted that the bulk
of those transported conducted themselves
reasonably well and were fairly happy and
well off. Many proved themselves excellent
and faithful servants; a large number rose
to positions in which they became prosperous
and respected. Yet there could hardly fail
to be a large number who could not lay
aside vicious habits. Drunkenness in par-
ticular was the prevailing vice and the curse
of the colony. It is not necessary to do
more than refer to the villanies of the more
incorrigible of the convicts; to the state of
the road gangs; to the harsh and often
barbarous discipline of the penal establish-
ments at Port Arthur and elsewhere. These
have been described ad nauseam by writers
like Marcus Clarke and others.
It was inevitable in a penal colony, such
as Tasmania then was, that the ordinary
liberties which free-born Englishmen claim
as their natural inheritance should be some-
what curtailed. Yet we can hardly read
without a shock of surprise that the ordinary
right of trial by a jury of his peers was in


those times denied to an accused man in
Tasmania. The accused, whether bond or
free, was tried by a jury of seven military
officers ; and even in civil cases, unless the
parties agreed to apply for a jury, the matter
was adjudicated on by a judge and two as-
sessors.
It goes without saying that such a thing
as political liberty was unknown. A nominee
Legislative Council, in which the Govern-
ment officials were the majority, enacted
laws for the community. Even the power
of initiating measures was not allowed them.
This was the prerogative of the Governor.
The Council might criticise and amend, or
even reject, but they could not propose. It
is well to recall these things for the benefit
of those who exclaim against the manifest
evils which attend popular government, and
who are inclined to long for the restoration
of a despotism. Our fathers had a long ex-
perience of the despotic form of government,
and groaned aloud under its burden.
It is time, however, that we proceeded to
a survey of the trade of the colony at the
time of the Queen’s accession. It would
probably come as a surprise to our readers to
be told that in 1837 New South Wales and
Van Diemen’s Land were the only colonies
of Australasia that had any external trade
at all. In the year 1837 the imports of Tas-
mania amounted to £563,000, and the exports
to £510,000. At the present time these
figures are about doubled the exports
more than doubled.
In 1837 Tasmania was pre-eminently a
pastoral colony. The leading export, as has
been already mentioned, was wool, £220,000.
In this year, from causes which will be after-
wards explained, the export of live stock,
especially from Launceston, was very large.
In that year £IOO,OOO worth of live stock,
principally sheep, was exported to Port
Phillip and South Australia. This brought
up the pastoral exports in 1837 to £325,000
i—over half of the total (56 per cent). Wool
and live stock were the principal productions
of the Midlands and North. In the South
the most important industry was the fisheries.
Fleets of boats went out from Hobart to
prosecute what was known as “ bay whaling.”
They had stations not only in the Derwent
and its neighborhood, but all along the coast
from Port Davey to the Bay of Fires, at
which they captured the black or “ right
whale.” In 1837 730 black whales were
taken by the boats and by whaling vessels,
and 38 sperm whales, yielding oil to the
value of £135,000. The days of sperm
whaling were to come later.
It is interesting to note that in 1837 the
export of pastoral products was £325,000,
and of oil £137,000, totalling £162,000, or
82 per cent, of the whole exports, and that
to-day the whole export of wool and oil
represents only 15 per cent, of the exports.
In comparison with these, grain, agricultural
produce, and timber were insignificant ex-
ports, amounting to only about £13,000, less
than 8 per cent.
The amount of shipping in and out was in
1837 about 60,000 tons each way. At present
it is just 170,000 tons each way.
The development in trade led naturally to
the establishment of banks. Stimulated by
the success of the Van Diemen’s Land Bank,
which was founded in 1823, and had made
enormous profits, several other banks had
been established. In 1828 Captain Swanston
established the Derwent Bank in Hobart,
and in the following year Mr John Dunn
followed with the Commercial Bank, which
extended its operations to Launceston in
1838. In the North the Cornwall Bank had
a brief existence, and its place was supplied
by the Tamar Bank, founded in 1835. The
Bank of Australasia, first of the English
banks, obtained its charter in 1835, in
the same year began operations in Hobart,
and in the following year opened a branch
in Launceston. The discount rate was 10’
per cent., and the average bank profits some
16 per cent., with occasional bonuses. In-
terest on mortgages was higher, but scarcely
maintained the rates of a few years before,
viz., 15 to 20 per cent. But in those early
years almost any interest could be had for
loans. Mr Sheriff Fereday was said to have


acquired a handsome fortune by lending
money at the very moderate rate of 35 per
cent. When a man could invest his money
in pastoral property and look for a profit of
50 per cent., or in whaling and calculate on
100 per cent., perhaps the Sheriff’s rate was
not exorbitant.
When we turn to the estimates of the
colonial revenue and expenditure, the first
thing that strikes us is the enormous propor-
tion that the police expenditure bears to the
total. The whole expenditure was £137,000.
Of this the civil establishment cost £70,000 ;
while the police and judicial cost £40,000,
or nearly 30 per cent, of the whole. At the
present time the cost of police and judicial
establishment is only 5 per cent, of the expen-
diture. This is a significant fact. Another
large item is the ecclesiastical establishment,
costing £ 12,000. When we look at the revenue
we are almost inclined to sigh for those good
old times. The total revenue was £154,000;
of this the land revenue was £36,000,
licences, fees, and fines another £19,000,
and Customs and excise £72,000. In those
happy days Customs was the only form of
taxation, and three-fourths of the whole was
derived from the duties on spirits. There
was no public debt on which interest had to
be paid—to-day we pay £328,000 for interest
on a debt of eight millions —and there were
no other taxes, general or local.
Verily, we have to pay a price for our free
institutions, and for the demand of each dis-
trict in the colony to have its share of public
expenditure.


THE COLONY’S PROGRESS.
FROM 1837 TO 1897.
It has been stated already that at the time
of the Queen’s accession the colony was pro-
gressing rapidly ; the pastoral and agricul-
tural interests were highly prosperous, and
external trade was expanding. The advance
was in part due to the natural growth of
settlement and the internal development of
the country ; but this natural growth had for
some few years received a most powerful
stimulus from without, in the creation of
new markets near at hand. The agricultural
distress in England had directed public
attention to emigration as a means of relief
and various schemes were projected for
founding new colonies in Australia which
should be free from the evils of transporta-
tion. The first scheme to be put into execu-
tion was the planting of the Swan River
settlement in 1829, and this was followed
(1835) by the colonisation of South Aus-
tralia. At that time New South Wales and
Tasmania were the only colonies which had
any external trade. Tasmania, rich in every-
thing that the new settlements required,
stood open-handed at their doors, and
became their provider. She sent them sheep,
cattle, and horses for their farms, grain and
potatoes for their support, and timber for
their houses. When distress came to the
new colonies she opened her doors and gave
the disappointed emigrants a new home.
The creation of a still larger market, far,
more valuable than Swan River and Ade-
laide, was due to the energy and enterprise
of Tasmanians themselves. For it was the
settlers of Tasmania who discovered and first
exploited the fertile lands of Port Phillip,
and laid the foundations of the great colony
of Victoria. Mr Gellibrand, as early as 1827,
had made an attempt, which proved abortive,
to take up land at Port Phillip for pastoral
purposes. In 1834 the Messrs. Henty, of
Launceston, occupied the country at Port-
land Bay with their flocks. In 1885 some
Tasmanian settlers formed an association to
purchase from the natives a large tract of
country at Port Phillip. Amongst the prin-
cipal members of this association we find
the well-known names of Gellibrand, Swan-
ston, Robertson, Wedge, and Sams. On May,
12, 1835, John Batman sailed from Laun-
ceston for Port Phillip in the Rebecca, 15
tons, and shortly afterwards purchased from
the blacks for a few blankets and axes some
thousand square miles of land, including the
present sites of Melbourne and Geelong. Two
or three months later, John Pascoe Fawkner,
representing another partnership, followed
Batman, and established his party on the
site of Melbourne. Others soon followed
these pioneers, and the new country was
occupied by many adventurers from Tas-
mania. Their flocks and herds were rapidly
transferred to Port Phillip, being drawn
chiefly from the Northern and Midland dis-
tricts of Tasmania.
The new territory developed rapidly, at-
tracting settlers and capital from all quar-
ters. Their wants were almost entirely sup-
plied from Van Diemen’s Land, and a great
trade sprang up in consequence, having its
chief centre at Launceston. The prices, not
only of stock, but of all produce, rose enor-
mously. Sheep ran up from 5s to £2, wheat
to 10s, oats to 7s 6d, potatoes to £lO, hay to
£6. In consequence of a severe drought and
scarcity in New South Wales in 1839, wheat
stood for a time at 26s per bushel, and pota-
toes at £2O per ton. Production in Tasmania
was enormously stimulated. Small farmers
began to clear little holdings of forest land,
and the rich marsh lands at Westbury and
Deloraine were put under the plough. Eng-
lish capital flowed to the colonies, and


offered tempting facilities to those who
desired to borrow. In 1835 the “ Leviathan,”
as the Bank of Australasia was called, com-
menced operations in Hobart, and in the
following year at Launceston. In 1837 the
Union Bank of Australia was formed in
London for business in the colonies. It
opened a branch in Hobart in 1838. The
establishment of these banks gave a great
impetus to speculation. Land was taken up
in large quantities, and improved breeds of
stock were bought at great prices. This was
largely done on borrowed capital. In the
feverish excitement that followed all sorts
of projects for the employment of money
were eagerly entertained, especially if con-
nected with Port Phillip, where the bait of
realising enormous profits by risking a small
sum was too tempting: to the gambling in-
stinct which lies hidden in most men to be
resisted. For a time all went merrily. In
1839 Tasmania exported live stock to the
value of £136,000, and her total exports rose
to £875,000. Labor became scarce and
dear.
The Home Government, which was con-
stantly trying new experiments in penal dis-
cipline, established the probation system,
under which the convicts were no longer
assigned as servants to settlers, but were
employed in large gangs on public works.
To supply the want of labor the Governor
proposed a scheme of immigration, and large
numbers of agricultural and other immi-
grants were brought into the colony at a cost
to the revenue of £50,000.
The speculative mania reached its height
about 1840. Then the tide turned, and
a sudden transition took place from un-
bounded confidence to general distrust.
Large importations of foreign wheat beat
down the price of colonial grain. Wheat,
which was 10s in 1840, dropped to 3s 6d in
1843, and to 3s 3d in 1844 ; oats to 2s 6d,
and even Is 6d ; potatoes to £4, and hay to
£2—say, one-third of the prices of three or
four years before. The produce of the whale
fisheries had decreased by one-half. Add to
this wool fell from Is 6d and 2s 6d to lOd.
The exportation of live stock from Tasmania
had ceased.
The tables had turned, and the settlers
had to contend with the competition of
sheep and cattle from Port Phillip, which
supplied the local market with meat, and
depreciated the prices of stock. The vacil-
lating transportation policy increased the
trouble. In 1840 it was supposed that trans-
portation was to cease. Then suddenly it
came in with a flood. In four years (1840-
1844) 15,000 convicts were poured into the
colony. The new arrivals were distributed
in large gangs throughout the island, and
employed on public works. Their support
for rations, etc., cost the Home Government
£BOO,OOO a year. This outlay was found to
be too expensive, and the Colonial Office
ordered the men to be employed on extensive
agricultural operations, with the view of
making the system self-supporting, thus
coming into competition with the farmers,
and further depreciating the prices of farm
produce. The agricultural schemes proved a
disastrous failure, and the men from the
gangs were hired out to settlers as assigned
servants at a wage of £9 a year. This
swamped the labor market, and the newly-
arrived emigrants, unable to make a living,
drifted away in numbers to other colonies.
Some idea of the state of depression and
panic that prevailed may be gathered from
the language of a letter written from Hobart
in January, 1845 : “ I have heard it asserted
on all sides that there are not more than
seven solvent men in this colony out of a
population of 80,000 free people. Money,
there is none —none to be had. An estate
that would have realised £30,000 a few years
ago would not now fetch £SOOO, and in fact
could not be sold. Wheat costs more to raise
than the market price. Horses are valueless.
Inundated as we are with meat from Port
Phillip, it sells here at a ruinous price. The
worst of it is that there is not the most dis-
tant hope of an improvement.”
Moreover, as the Imperial expenditure was
reduced, the burden of the cost of penal dis-
cipline on the colonial revenue increased. In


1844, out of a total expenditure of £160,000,
the police and judicial establishments cost
£58,000, or considerably over one-third of
the whole. This meant increased taxes,
exciting bitter indignation and violent oppo-
sition, more especially as in the four years
(1840 to 1844) the Customs revenue had
dropped one-third through the falling-off in
imports.
The outlook was indeed gloomy. The
exports (£867,000 in 1840) had sunk to
£408,000 in 1844. The depression extended
throughout the colonies. The settlers in
New South Wales, as well as in Tasmania,
were mostly ruined. Banks and commercial
institutions shared the same fate ; crowds of
unemployed were in the greatest distress ;
and the colonies seemed to stand on the
verge of bankruptcy.
The recovery from this state of depression
was slow and gradual. In Port Phillip and
New South Wales stock once more acquired
a value through the introduction of the
“ boiling-down ” establishments and the pro-
duction of tallow. Wool improved in value.
In Tasmania the exports and imports gradu-
ally increased, principally by the expansion
of trade with the new colonies. Wheat and
bark began to be sent to England, and timber
became a valuable article of export. In 1851
the exports had increased to £665,000 —more
than half as much again as in 1845.
The year 1851 brought the first instalment
of free institutions, with the new Legislative
Council, in which two-thirds of the members
were elected by the people, and only one-
third nominated by the Crown.
In the same year Governor Denison issued
the “ preemptive right ” land regulations,
intended to encourage the settlement of the
lands by the native youth of the colony, but
which, unfortunately, had only a mischievous
effect. Under these regulations the greater
part of the rich lands of Devon were locked
up by speculators, who held for a rise, and
the settlement and development of the North-
West Coast was postponed for ten years.
In 1851 also there came the event which
revolutionised the Australian Colonies—the
discovery of gold in New South Wales on
12th February, 1851. It would be difficult
to picture the frenzy of the next few years.
From all the colonies the people swarmed to
the diggings. Thousands arrived from Eng-
land. All went crazy in the hunt for gold.
The sudden and marvellous influx of popu-
lation and wealth, profited Tasmania enor-
mously. Her timber, grain, and agricultural
products found close to her own doors an
almost inexhaustible market in which
they realised extravagant prices. Wheat
rose rapidly to 10s 6d per bushel ; oats
as high as 16s; potatoes, £2O ; apples, 17s
6d per bushel. Five feet palings are said to
have sold at one time at £5 per 100 or Is
each. The climax was reached in 1858-54,
when the exports had risen to £1,756,000,
having nearly trebled in three years ; and
the exports to £2,604,000, or more than
quadrupled in about the same period.
The gold discoveries drew off large numbers
from the colony. Thousands both of young
and old left Tasmania for the diggings, and
though a large proportion returned, the male
population was considerably diminished.
The census of 1848 showed the number of
adult males to be 36,000; in 1854 only
22,000 remained. The number of bread
winners had diminished by one third. The
abstraction of population had one happy
result for Tasmania. An enormous number
of the “ old hands ” left her shores for the
gold producing colonies, thus relieving her to
a great extent from the serious evils which
would otherwise have resulted from the im-
portation under the transportation system
of an undesirable class of persons. Mean-
time the want of labor was severely felt, and
in consequence a great deal of land ceased to
be cultivated, notwithstanding the high
prices of produce. Out of 168,000 acres
cultivated in 1850, more than 50,000 acres
went out of cultivation in three years.
Transportation was abolished in 1853, and
Tasmanians looked forward to a golden era
of prosperity as a free colony. Their sanguine
hopes were doomed to long and bitter dis-
appointment


FREE INSTITUTIONS.
AND HOW THEY HELPED TASMANIA.
In 1856 the colony received the blessing of
free institutions. One of the first difficulties
the new Parliament had to face was an ac-
cumulated deficit of £BO,OOO. This was pro-
vided for in 1857 by the issue of debentures,
and thus was laid the foundation of the
public debt, which has since attained such
alarming proportions. In 1858 the debt was
increased by £200,000 for the furtherance of
immigration from the home country. This
scheme did not fulfil the hopes of its
originators at the time, though it was in-
strumental in introducing a large body of
useful colonists, many of whom have made
the island their permanent home. But num-
bers of the new immigrants, either immed-
iately or in the course of time, drifted away,
making Tasmania only a stepping-stone to the
richer colonies of the mainland. The same
powerful attraction cast its spell over older
colonists, and especially over the native born.
For a long course of years Tasmania suffered
from the steady loss of the most energetic
and enterprising of her sons, due to the more
lucrative openings presented by the rapidly
growing colonies of the neighbouring con-
tinent, and by the discovery of gold in New
Zealand and the development of that pro-
mising country. Everywhere throughout
Australia and New Zealand there may be
found at the present day Tasmanians hold-
ing good positions who left the colony dur-
ing this gloomy period.
Not only did production decline and trade
languish, but with the decrease of imports,
and consequently of Customs revenue, new
taxes became necessary, which weighed as
an increasing burden on the bread-winners
who remained in the colony. The efforts put
forth by legislature and people to check the
downward course seemed at the time futile,
though after years were to show that they
had not been exerted in vain.
Concurrently with immigration expendi-
ture in 1858 a liberal Waste Lands Act was
passed. It encouraged settlement on the
fertile but heavily timbered forest lands, and
though its effects were small at first it
opened up the North-West Coast for the host
of small farmers who now occupy the thriv-
ing and populous districts of Devon and
Wellington. The institution of local self-
government by the Rural Municipalities Act
was another useful measure, though it was
followed by a grave mistake in withdrawing
the police from the central control and en-
trusting it to the various local bodies which
had been established.
Education was not neglected. The State
school system was greatly improved, and
schools spread throughout the island. Be-
tween 1855 and 1870 the number of schools
doubled, and the number of scholars more
than trebled, with most important results to
the colony. At the Queen’s accession educa-
tion, as measured by those who could read
and write, was disgracefully low. Now Tas-
mania can fairly compare with the more
civilised nations of the old world, and it is
rare to meet with a person who cannot at
least write his own name. In 1887 the se-
condary education of the colony was chiefly
conspicuous by its absence, and boys of the
well-to-do class were constantly sent to Eng


land to be educated. Ten years later the es-
tablishment of Christ College, the Hutchins,
Church Grammar, and High Schools inaugu-
rated a new order of things. Ten years
more, and in 1858, the Council of Education,
with its scheme of examinations and scholar-
ships, was established by Act of Parliament,
and the wisdom and foresight of its founders
was soon justified by the quite remarkable
raising of the standard of education. The
attention paid to educational improvement
during the long period of depression was a
statesman-like policy. Its good effect in the
advancement of the colony cannot be mea-
sured by statistics. It has undoubtedly been
a most potent factor in the progress of Tas-
mania.
The Waste Lands Act of 1858 was doing
good service in putting small proprietors on
the lands. But without roads comparatively
little progress could be made. The country
roads of Tasmania were little better than
bush tracks, and in the rapidly settling dis-
trict of Devon there could scarcely be said to
be roads at all. In 1864 the Whyte Ministry
proposed and carried through Parliament a
vote of £106,000 for roads and other useful
public works, which gave a great impetus to
settlement on the North-West. This was the
beginning of the public works policy which
has now covered Tasmania with excellent
roads. In spite of much extravagance and
waste of money this also was a statesman-
like policy, and to it is due that at this day
the North-West Coast contains 25,000 people,
and that the production of the colony has
largely increased.
During this long and depressing epoch,
when hope often seemed to fail, it cannot be
said that the Tasmanians abandoned them-
selves to inaction, or were content to let
things drift. The persevering and persistent
efforts made during a long series of years to
develop the mineral resources of the island
are a sufficient answer to the oft-repeated
taunt that Tasmanians are wanting in
energy and enterprise. Parliament offered
rewards. Mr Gould and others were des-
patched to examine the untrodden forests in
the search for minerals ; private prospectors
in scores carried their swags on their backs,
fighting their way, amidst hardships and
privations, through interminable miles of
scrub into the remotest corners of the island
searching for gold and other metals. No
success encouraged them, yet their search
only grew keener. Many thousands of
pounds were spent, and many years of perse-
vering search elapsed, before they saw any
result of their labor and outlay. It is to
these plucky and indefatigable explorers—
nameless for the most part and unrewarded
—that we owe the splendid results, the first
fruits of which we are reaping to-day.
Still, in spite of all efforts, the depression
continued. In 1870 it had touched the
lowest point. The country had sunk to a
condition as low as in the disastrous years
culminating in 1845—a condition to all ap-
pearances even more hopeless, as a slow and
exhausting decline is more hopeless than a
sharp and severe illness. The two and a half
millions of imports of 1853-4 had sunk to little
over three-quarters of a million; the one
and three-quarters millions of exports to less
than £650,000. Wool was still the staple
export, closely followed by agricultural pro-
duce and grain. Timber and whaling con-
tributed a comparatively trifling amount.
The population, which was 70,000 in 1851,
had grown to 100,000 ; but for some years
prior to 1870 had become nearly stationary,
owing to increasing emigration from the
colony.
But the seeds of new life had been planted,
were growing, and were about to bear fruit.
The settlement of forest lands, aided by the
extension of roads, was at last beginning to
tell in increased production. Railways were
now about to lend their aid. In 1868 the


first railway—the Launceston and Western
—was begun by a private company, and the
Mersey and Deloraine tramway—precursor
of the railway to Devonport—was under-
taken by private enterprise. In 1870 the
Main Line Railway Bill was passed.
In the same year the Scab Act was carried
in the face of strong opposition, and by the
exertions and pluck of Mr James Whyte in a
little over ten years scab was eradicated and
the production of wool largely increased.
This opened the way for the highly profit-
able export of the famous stud merinos,
with which the names of Gibson and Taylor
will always be associated.
Notwithstanding the long depression the
area of cultivated land in the colony gradu-
ally and almost constantly increased. Men
with small capital, or with only the capital
of their own strong arms, took up small selec-
tions of Crown land under the liberal credit
terms of the Waste Land Acts, and gradually
spread cultivation through the rich forest
lands of Devon, and even to remote Welling-
ton. In the North-East the same process
planted farms in Scottsdale and Ringarooma,
and from Piper’s River as far as George’s
Bay. In the South, where the areas of good
land are more limited, great numbers of
small holdings were reclaimed and culti-
vated, at the Huon, Bream Creek, Tun-
nack, Tasman’s Peninsula, and elsewhere.
The districts in the centre of the island
which attracted the early settlers, as open
country naturally adapted for pasture rather
than for agriculture, have mostly remained
in the hands of pastoral occupants with their
flocks of fine woolled sheep. The famous
stud flocks of the Midlands have a splendid
reputation throughout Australia, and have
brought a considerable profit to the colony.
The richer agricultural lands, with some
notable exceptions, lie more remote, and are
almost invariably heavily timbered. Over
these an industrious class of freeholding
settlers or proprietors have spread them-
selves, felling the forest with incredible
labor, and replacing the bush by productive
agricultural farms. The pioneers in these
new districts have had to face difficulties
unknown to the settlers on the open agricul-
tural areas of the continental colonies. It
is to their labor and energy that we owe the
large increase of cultivated land in the
colony—an amount doubled in the 20 years
between 1851 and 1870, and in the last 25
years more than doubled again. Tasmania
is not a wheat-growing country, only a
limited area being specially suitable for
large grain production. But she excels in
some other agricultural products, and her
fruit, potatoes, and hops are not easily
rivalled. These products have proved most
important items in the wealth of the colony.
They also constitute important articles of
export, although the Tasmanian producer
has the misfortune to find his nearest
markets closed to him, or at any rate'largely
spoilt, by the hostile barriers of import
duties which have been raised against him in
most of the sister colonies. It must be re-
membered, however, that the exports cannot
be taken as a measure of the production in
the colony, for with the quadrupling of the
population since the Queen’s accession a
very large proportion of the agricultural
products are consumed within the island
itself.
In 1853 timber was the largest export
from Tasmania. Since that time it has been
an important export, and has employed a
large amount of labor. The principal centres
of the trade are at the Huon and on the
North-West Coast. The prohibitive duties
imposed in the other colonies have largely
crippled this industry, but there seems to be
a possibility that Europe may yet offer a
profitable market.


The lavish expenditure of capital and
labor in the search for minerals eventually
met with its reward. In 1869 gold was
profitably worked by companies near Fingal.
In 1871 “ Philosopher ” Smith, after extreme
hardships, endured with extraordinary
courage and pertinacity, discovered tin at
Mount Bischoff, and added a most important
industry to the resources of the colony. Tin
also rewarded prospectors in the North-East
—hitherto very sparsely occupied—and a
considerable population flowed thither. The
late Mr Charles Sprent shortly afterwards
opened the way for mineral prospectors in
the dense scrub and forests of Western Tas-
mania. In 1877 the treasures of the Tas-
manian mine at Beaconsfield began to be
developed.
In 1870 the mineral production had
been practically nil ; eight years later (1878)
the minerals raised were valued at £375,000
—gold, £59,000 ; tin, £316,000 —rivalling
the staple (wool) in importance. In 1883
the mineral production totalled over half a
million sterling (£550,000), overtopping
wool. In this year the exports had risen to
£1,731,000, within £25,000 of the exports of
1853 in value, and much greater in quantity.
The imports totalled £1,832,000, approach-
ing the phenomenal years of the gold
mania.
It was perhaps only natural that under
such conditions, and with apparently un-
limited powers of borrowing in the London
market, the Legislature should have been
induced to enter on schemes of extravagant
expenditure on public works. In 1883 we
had only two railways : the Launceston and
Western and the Main Line, 167 miles in all.
From that date the period of reckless ex-
travagance set in. The Formby line, the
Fingal, the Scottsdale, the Derwent Valley,
and the extension to Ulverstone followed
in quick succession. Then late in the eighties
came the Sorell and the Apsley lines, and with
the silver boom of 1890 the line from Strahan
toZeehan. The latter was justified by the
silver discoveries, which produced in 1895
ore to the value of £237,000 ; but some of
the others were a sheer waste of public
money, the traffic being wholly inadequate
to give a fair return for the outlay.
In 1891 the silver boom reached its height.
The imports were larger than in 1883, but
the exports fell short of those of that year
by £300,000. The boom was founded on
speculation in shares, not on actual product
of ore, and it only hastened the inevitable
catastrophe.


THE LAST COLLAPSE,
AND
THE PRESENT SITUATION.
Then came the collapse, not only in Tas-
mania but throughout the Australian colo-
nies. It was the natural result of reckless
over-speculation and inflated credit. Every-
thing collapsed like a house of cards. Private
speculators in land, building societies, public
companies, and finally banks, fell one after
the other in an appalling crash. The
English capitalist shut up his pocket, and
the boiTowing powers of the colonies came
to an end for the time. Universal distrust
followed on universal inflation. A general
fall of prices all over the world was felt
even more severely in Australia than else-
where. Land, which had comma nded
fictitious values, became absolutely unsale-
able. General distress, widespreading ruin
and bankruptcy, paralysed the hitherto
prosperous colonies. Swarms of unemployed
cried to the Governments for deliverance
from starvation, Governments which were
already at their wits’ end to know how, with
a falling revenue, they were to meet their
liabilities. In Tasmania, the first notable
sign of the coming catastrophe was the
stoppage (3rd August, 1891), of the Bank of
Van Diemen’s Land, which had thrown
itself the most recklessly into the mining
boom. This caused great local trouble
and distress. Yet Tasmania, although her
troubles during this time were severe, probably
suffered less than other colonies. With the
exception of the Y.D.L., the banks and
public companies were able to weather the
storm. Private incomes shrank to one-half,
in many cases to nothing. The worst
sufferers, however, were those who had
invested their money in the shares of banks
in the Continental Colonies. These unhappy
people not only lost their capital, but were
called upon for further contributions to
settle with creditors. Many who had lived
in at least moderate affluence were ruined.
Land not only fell heavily, but landed
property, as in 1844, became absolutely
unsaleable. The price of all produce dropped
heavily. Wheat fell to 8s 6d, and other
things in like proportion. Wool fell to a
lower price than even in 1844. All this was
a severe strain on the country people, and
its effects were equally disastrous to those
living in towns.
In four years the imports shrank from two
millions (1891), to one million (1895). The
exports, however, diminished only £67,000,
from £1,440,000 in 1891, to £1,373,000 in
1895. The production had not diminished,
the fall was due to shrinkage in value.
The decrease of imports was, however, most
immediately felt. The largest source of
revenue was the Customs, and, consequent on
the fall in the amount of imports, the
Customs revenue fell £95,000 in three years,
from £376,000 in 1891, to £281,000 in
1894. The alarming deficit thus occasioned
necessitated the imposition of new taxes;
notably, a most obnoxious incometax.
The public debt was nil in 1837. In 1867
it had reached the comparatively modest
figure of one million. In 1897 it amounts
to eight millions, requiring £328,000 a year


for the payment of interest, chiefly to English
capitalists. Of this sum 6£ millions repre-
sent the purchase money of 475 miles of
State railways, and of a complete system of
telegraphs, roads, and bridges, throughout
the island. These have been and will con-
tinue to be important factors in the
development of the country, and the rail-
ways, making a profit of nearly 1 per cent.,
yield us £32,330 as a set off against the
£328,000 interest. Yet when we are groan-
ing under the heavy taxation which the
excessive expenditure on public works has
made necessary, we cannot help lamenting
the folly of the mania from 1883 to 1891,
when the colony’s estate was mortgaged so
far beyond its ability.
It is interesting to note the stages in the
development of Tasmania during the sixty
years’ of the Queen’s reign. The colony
began the reign as a pastoral country.
Wool and live stock were her principal
exports, her whale fisheries came next in
importance, grain and agricultural products
a long way behind. During the gold
diggings in the early fifties timber and
agricultural products were her most im-
portant articles of export. Through the
long depression agricultural exports steadily
increased until they rivalled wool for the
leading position. In 1870 the mineral
production of the whole island was prac-
tically nil —amounting to but £9OOO. In
the 25 years since that date minerals have
become her main export. In 1895 they
totalled £624,000, or considerably more than
her agricultural, pastoral, and timber exports
put together. Agriculture (£306,000) comes
a bad second, and wool (£202,000) takes
a low third place.
If we turn from exports to production,
however, we shall form a truer estimate of
the comparative value of these industries
to the country. The agricultural products
are £1,395,000; the pastoral, £1,179,000;
together, 2J millions, employing 18,500, or
30 per cent of the breadwinners of the
colony. This is more than four times the
value of the whole mineral production,
which employs only 4000, or per cent of
the breadwinners.
The progress of Tasmania since 1837 is
mainly due to the gradual settlement of the
country by small farmers, who, since that
time, have trebled the area of land under
crop. In the same period the area of
improved land has increased tenfold.
Yet, the development of the mining
industry is the most hopeful feature of the
present situation. The eras of temporary
prosperity of 1840 and of 1853 were due to
an accidental impetus from without, which
was soon exhausted. In our minerals we
have a new source of wealth, growing year
by year, for which we have the inexhaust-
able market of the world, and which will
doubtless attract population to the colony.
In the great reserve of water power stored
up in her lakes, Tasmania has another latent
source of wealth, which, in the coming
century, may prove an important factor in
her progress.








