

ONE YEAR
OF
ANTI-CHINESE WORK
WITH
*3-Bunbmts of €mbd,^
BY
JOHN POTTS
The ANTI- CHINESE AT TOC ATT.
OOTVKiUHT RESERVE!).
BRISBANE :
UAVISON ANJj MKICALI'j ÜBNKBAL •‘I'WMTBBS. BW.j UHAIIIajTTE bTKHIST.
MDCCCI/XXXVIII.


ONE YEAR
OF
ANTI-CHINESE WORK
WITH
•fc 3nci&fltt» of Cta&el, &
BY
JOHN POTTS
The ANTI-CHINESE ADVOCATE.
BRISBANE .*
DAVISON AND METCALF, GENERAL PRINTERS, BTC., CHARLOTTE STREET.
MDCOCLXXXVIII.


PREFACE.
Having been connected with the Anti-Chinese Movement
for the past twelve months, during which time I have travelled
from the far North, at Cooktown, to Stanthorpe. on the N.S.W.
border, visiting 29 centres of population, and holding upwards
of 80 Anti-Chinese Meetings, some friends have urged me to
write a book on that Crusade, but as I am only an amateur at
literary work, it is advisable to begin only with a small
pamphlet, which is now offered to a generous public. As it is
my first attempt in thc.t line, I must crave the indulgence of
critics over any errors, or lack of literary style. I may say that
the proceeds from its sale (if any) will be appropriated towards
furthering the Anti-Chinese Cause.
J. P.
Oct. 12, 1887.


ONE YEAR
OF
Anti-Chinese Work.
CHAPTER I.
ORIGIN OF THE PRESENT AGITATION.
V*-, , . r t
First Anti-Chinese Meeting, ot the present move-
ment was held in ‘Townsville, North Queensland,
early in September of 1886, A few days afterwards
wc a g ree( i to have a similar meeting on Charters
tSipS; Towers goldfield. I undertook to canvass the town
for signatures to a requisition to he presented to
His Worship the Mayor. A few local gentlemen formed themselves
into a sort of provisional committee. Mr. O’Kane, editor of the
Northern JKiner, prepared draft resolutions, petition, &c., which were
presented to the committee, and afterwards at the public meeting.
The worthy and famous Editor rendered valuable assistance, by his
staunch anti-Chinese paper. The proposed meeting came off in the
School of Arts, on September 28th, 1886, and was a crowded and
enthusiastic gathering, with good humoured interruptions, such
a ® : —Cut off their tails, and save the bodies, &c., &c. Upon that
occasion your humble servant made his maiden speech, for which he
received fair applause, several slaps on the back, and hearty hand
shakes.
A few days afterwards an open-air meeting was held, when it was
estimated that upwards of 2000 persons were present. Two brass
bands played sweet selections of music, and two large lorries formed


excellent platforms for the speakers. Flags of various nations
fluttered in the breeze, and the whole affair looked quite picturesque.
The meeting made a deep impression on the public mind, and
John Chinaman was thoroughly discussed.
Upon goldfields the people are not precise as to stiff paper-collar
etiquette. There is a kind of happy-go-lucky jovial freedom about
your mining towns, which is indeed pleasing to the eyes and ears
of straying Bohemians. It is quite possible that the writer cut a novel
figure upon those exciting occassions. He has a sort of dim perception
of holding in his hand an apple, and informing his audience that he
did not buy it from a Chinaman. Upon that apple was a small rotten
spot, which, if left alone, would consume the said apple. That dark
and rotten spot was synonymous with the plague spot of Chinese in
our midst, who were slowly but surely destroying our civilization
and material prosperity.
Th e Herald (a local paper) dubbed the New Crusader, “as an
eloquent and earnest individual whose egotistical cranium might burst
with its own swelling importance. An anti-Chinkie itinerant Thespian
(whatever that may mean), who has an apple with a rotten spot upon
it. He further informed his readers that he could call to mind three
historic apples, Adam’s (or rather Eve’s), Toll’s, and Newton’s ; and
now, quoth he, we have a fourth, which may be handed down to
posterity as Potts’s Anti-Chinese-illustrating-apple.”
Subsequent committee meetings were held, but only a few seem
to grasp the idea of taking steps to extend the work, and thereby
secure the aid of the whole of Australia. My old friend, Mr.
Forgarty, however, was most anxious that Mr. P should go forth
—throughout the colonies —-on an Anti-Chinese Mission.
People were anxious that the Chinese should go ; but they failed
to rea.ise the importance of a movement upon a broad basis, and that
it was necessary for a moving spirit to go forth for the purpose
of arousing an agitation. Money was not forthcoming to pay the
expenses of a campaign, so we started alone, with only pot-luck to
depend upon. The uphill struggles were greater than we had antici-
pated, being continually among strangers, who had all sorts of notions
as regards our real object. Was it genuine ? said they. You know
your little game ! said Mr. Knowall. Ambition, my boy ! said Smith,
and really I admire you for it. What is a man in this world without
it ? Money ! remarked Jones, with a knowing wink and a sly glance
from the corner of his eye. A far-sighted scheme, my man, for
making a grand scoop. Brown said it meant a seat in Parliament for
some Anti-Chinese constituency. Everybody appeared to know all
about it, yet they differed in opinions. The mistake was that they
measured us with their own yards. At times we felt sick and sad
at heart, and almost gave up in despair. Some good souls, however,
shook us by the hand, and said we were doinar a good work,
and bade us Q-od speed. Others were in doubts as to the brand
(credentials I mean). It would, however, fill a large volume to relate


everything. It was certainly a great undertaking, and required a vast
amount of enthusiasm to keep on amidst many disappointments, and
especially when the cupboard was bare. It was not considered wise
to be too anxious about money during the infancy of the movement,
as it might have injured the cause. A sacrifice of brain and bodily
exhaustion, time and money had to be made, or the Anti-Chinese
Movement would die out, and never be effectually settled.
CHAPTER II.
IN THE CAIRNS TINAROO DISTRCTS.
Cairns, a coastal town, north of Townsville, was the first place to
visit after leaving Charters Towers. The town is on a level with the
sea, very sandy, and plenty of mangroves. Certainly, not a
healthy situation in a tropical climate. There are large and shady
fig-trees on the shore and in the street, which look picturesque,
and afford an excellent shade. The China town is an off-shoot
of Pekin and Canton, and the bouses are huilt in pure Mongolian
style—with Chinkie chips. The back yards are covered with dingy
dens, and populated with stinking pigs, poultry, and Chinamen. The
streets are narrow, being only wide enough to swing a fair size
cat. Over many of the doors are names written in drunken letters
such as : —Ah Poo, Lee Tup, and Hop Hung, washing and ironing.
They swarm this township like ants on a bed, or flies in sugar, and in
the streets they appear to be in the majority over the whites.
In Cairns we met a dark eyed restless little man—who was bitterly
Anti-Chinese. He canvassed the town for signatures to a requisition,
and succeeded in obtaining 140 names. His Worship (who happens
to be landlord of China Town) point blank refused to convene a meet-
ing, and grossly insulted the Crusader for daring to go through the
country on an Anti-Chinese Mission, carrying a walking stick, and
calling himself a Christian. An open-air meeting, however, was
decided upon, but when this news became known to Mayor Severin
there was a council of war —a confab with the Police Magistrate,
and we were served with the following writ: —
Municipality of Cairns,
Cairns, November 6th, 1886.
Me. Potts,
Sie, —“I am instructed by His Worship the Mayor (Alderman
Severin) to draw your attention to By-law No. 3, Clause 20, of the
Municipality of Cairns, which forbids any public meeting being held


or any obstruction being caused in any of the public thoroughfares
within the Municipality, without first obtaining the permission of the
Mayor.
“ Seeing by to-day’s paper that you have advertised an Anti-
Chinese Meeting to take place to-morrow at 3p m. I beg to give you
notice, that in the event of your attempting to carry it out, the Police
are instructed to prevent your doing so.”
I have the honor to be,
Sir, your obedient servant,
order —
J. A. BUNTING
Town Clerk.
Despite the opposition and threat the meeting was carried out,
the police |were there ; but in the face of the crowd gathered, and
enthusiasm manifested, they did not interfere. Our Anti-Chinese
friends desired that we shoufd visit Herberton,and so after procuring
a horse, we set out for the Tinaroo mining district. Twenty-
two miles of the first portion of that journey consisted of
level, and well-watered lands ; but, alas! the Chinese are gaining a
firm grip of its best soil, whilst the sons of the sod are being slowly
ousted by Mongolian encroachments. The land laws of Queensland
forbid an unmarried Chinaman to take up land. Scheming John,
however, gets over the difficulty by forming a small syndicate with
several of his tribe, when they raise between them £3O, or perhaps
£5O ; they draw lots for the money, after which the lucky one goes
forth with his cash in hand, to all the unmarried maidens, saying :
You mallee me, me give you fiftee pound. A red-head-speckled-face
is often the victim, who takes John and his coins for better or worse,
After which the Chinaman takes up the selection. Another
system is the leasing to to them of land by unscrupulous white
people. These gentlemen take up land from the Government, and
without doing any improvements whatever themselves, lease it to
Chinese for a term of years and rental, and are thereby encouraging
a Chinese settlement in the North. At the present time
the Celestials ship weekly from Cairns 2000 bunches of bananas
(exclusive of other products) to Southern markets. As y
ride along that track towards the Herberton range you are
constantly meeting herds of Chinese, clad in blue baggy breeches,
barefooted, and altogether in native costumes. It is really distressing
to see this goodly land dotted with their pine-apple, banana, and sugar
plantations, whilst they herd together in grassy hovels and dark dens.
Surely it is not necessary to open up the country in this way.
Would it not be better to wait until the white race and their children
are numerous enough to settle upon it.
The native whites are healthy, and adapted by nature for the soil
and climate. It is nonsence to say that white people cannot live in
that tropical clime ; they do! and appear to be as healthy as in any
other part of Australia. The tropical sun, of course, gives them a
sallow sun-burnt appearance. It is only when the country is first
opened up that it is unhealthy.
That journey to Herberton speaks volumes of painful facts to the


intelligent observer as he notes the alarming numbers of stalwart
Chinese invading the land of his fathers. It is quite a relief to the
eye to leave behind the Mongolian settlements, and ascend the steep
zig-zag track that leads to the top of the range. Many spells are
required for man and beast, during which time you may seat your-
self upon a log, and after wiping away the large drops of perspira-
tion, indulge your poetic fancy by gazing upon the charming land-
scape. A grand panorama stretched out before you for many miles
in every direction. This picturesque view consists of mountains and
valleys, along which are rivers (containing no doubt sleepy alligators)
wending their way towards the ocean. Bright green,'grassy patches or
pockets, nestled here and there amid a vast expanse of sombre scrub,
and twenty miles distant in the background, is Cairns and the sea.
When the top of the range is reached, you strike another state of
atmosphere, having passed from the tropics to a temperate clime.
Proceeding on your journey, you emerge into the dense scrub, and
the muddiest track in the whole world. Bidding good-bye to sunlight
and the blue sky, a strange feeling comes over you, as if passing
into some unknown world, the grave perhaps, or portals of purgatory.
The song of birds with gorgeous plumage are indeed a blessing,
and attract the mind from its gloomy surroundings. There is also the
rich tropical foliage, consisting of millions of creepers, entwining,
climbing, and leaping from tree to tree in graceful bowers. Cordy
runners twisting around and ascending to the lofty tops of massive
kaune or cedar, then turning again, and darting downwards, to take
root in mother earth. The unlimited supply of choice timber, rich
soil, ample rain, mild climate, fresh water rivers, and adjacent mineral
fields are valuable resources capable of supporting a teeming popula-
tion in the coming time. Shall it be Mongolian or Anglo-Saxon ?
It is important to carry fire arms to protect yourself from blacks,
who may be lurking in the scrub watching your movements. Ton
have, however, very little time to think of them, for you are forcibly
reminded of the deep and sticky mud through which your Nag is
struggling. The rays of sun never dry that track, it being a rainy
district, and the packing mules passing to and fro with tin ore from
the mineral fields at Tinaroo, help to make it slipity, slopity, pudding
and puddley all the way.
Indeed it is so deep at times as to tickle your horse’s belly, when
he may make spasmodic efforts to kick and cannot.
The attention, however, is directed to the leeches falling from
the leaves on to your clothes, when they hop, skip, step, and buck-
jump in ever direction, until finding flesh they suck your blood in the
most bare-faced and bloated manner. It is impossible to pull them off,
for they stick like leeches, and you cannot kill them, for they are as
tough as leather, and are slippery and elastic. Old North Queensland
bushmen remedies are to first swear furiously ; secondly, light
their pipes; and thirdly, fire them with the burning wax match.
It is, indeed, a pitable sight to behold a bleeding, leechy victim.
If, however, you are also bitten then it is a pleasure to see others in


similar misery. There is, however, a sort of set-off against the leechy
pest —to wit, a tiny and invisable scrub insect. Although you cannot
see them, you have nevertheless the pleasing satisfaction of feeling
their prickly bites. This continues until you are blest with what is
commonly, but I say poetically, known as the Scrub Itch. After sun-
down it keeps your temper in a lively ferment with scratching and say-
ing naughty words, that are not found in a Sunday School Hymn book.
It was a two days’ ride through that jungle, which I believe to be
far superior to the famous Q-ippsland of Victoria. I had some
peaches given me, and I believe apples could be cultivated in that
soil and climate. Keep back the Chinese, and we may have an
Australian city on the banks of the Barron River, a sanatorium —the
capital of the New Colony.
It is 54 miles from Cairns to Herberton, and I well remember a
Chinaman tramping the whole distance with two large basket-full of
apples, which were for sale in Herberton. Is it possible for whitemen
to compete against such plodding slavery without degrading themselves.
On Saturday night we spoke from the steps of the School of Arts,
and on the following Monday evening we had a large and enthusiastic
meeting inside the Hall, when the usual resolutions were unanimously
passed. Ou the following day we continued our journey further inland
to the mining centres of Watsonville, Irvinbank, and Mount Albion.
At the latter place we met with opposition. There are some large
silver smelting works, and a Mr. Y was the proprietor. This
gentleman, I afterwards learnt, employed Chinese cheap labour in
charcoal burning, packing, and other ways. We were anxious to make
known the proposed meeting, and visited the works for the purpose of
obtaining permission to put up some home-made posters. Certainly
we did not cut a very aristocratic figure in our moles, flannel, and jam
pot of liquid paste, with which to stick up the bills. We ask Mr.
Y civily if he would allow us to put them up so that his men might
learn about the meeting. “ Who the devil are you ?” says he. “ Want
to form an Anti-Chinese League here, do you ! ” His eye-brows were
knitted, his mouth puckered, and he shook his head violently. “ You
lecture against Chinese !” he continued, “ why they are the best colonist
we have, hard-working, inoffensive, sober people, but what are you,
Sir, I should like to know ? Why, Sir, you are a humbug, a demagogue,
a disturber of the peace, an Irish land-leaguer, that’s what you are.
AN lEISH LAND LEAGUED.
“ Clear out!” says he, “ and begone, for you shan’t prate here, you
blatherer.” We had to get, and beat a hasty retreat, minus the jam-
pot.
The news of Mr. Y ’s violent opposition soon spread, and a
large crowd gathered round the cart in which stood the Crusader, de-
livering a moonlight oration. Mr. Y did not interfere, although he
was slightly slated by the speaker. At Irvinebank there was also some
interruption by a little man, with a voice like a cracked cow-bell, but
which was soon drowned by the healthy groans and hisses of robust
men. At Watsonville we were highly honored with being able to secure


the services of His Imperial Majesty King William I. as attache and
bill sticker, His attire was of the ancient Adam time, excepting the
modern costume of an old leather belt, and a weapon of warfare, to
wit, a tomahawk. It is needless to remark that His sable Majesty
was staunch anti-Chinese, particularly so. We had a very good
meeting, but were slightly sick from bad water. On our return to Her-
berton we agreed to have a third meeting, and a Mr. B promised to
preside. Strange to relate! that at the time appointed for the said
meeting, we found the Hall rushed with Chinkies, a Mongol pigtail
audience. They planted themselves in front, whilst the few whites
remained in the rear, excepting those who were peeping through
windows and doors laughing at the picturesque view of twisted pig-
tails. Their billious faces had a calm, serene, and oily expression.
The Chairman had the stage or Chinkie fright and bolted, and was not
seen until dinner time next day. We had to ascend the platform
alone, and orate to the Yellow Agony. The introductory part of the
Speech was as follows : —Few fellow wHtemen, and Pigtail pirates from
the slums of Pekin and Canton, We white fellee no wantee to hurtee
you, but we no likee you, you tak um alJee monee allonee Hong Kong.
The Celestials soon got full up, when the boss arose, and after making
a graceful bow and bland smile to the[speaker departed, followed by a
line of his yellow brothers.
CHAPTER III.
TO THE RUSSEL RIVER RUSH.
Christopher Palmerston, the North Queensland explorer, was in
town, with his troop of black boys, bringing with him the most
encouraging news from the Eussel Eiver goldfield. The people had
the gold fever on the brain, and were all going to the rush ; so we
agreed to join then. It was only a6O mile tramp through the jungle,
cutting your way with tomahawks and bush knife, and carrying a 50
lb. swag of rations, &c. Already a party had gone ahead to clear the
track. My horse was returned to its owner by the mailman, as they
were useless on that journey, owing to an almost impassable track,
want of feed, and danger from stinging trees—which sends an electric
shock through man and beast.
A score of us started, jolly boys, with bright hopes and heavy
burdens. We marched in single file, and for effect surpassed a Salva-
tion Army parade. It was an imposing sight the huge swags, towering
above the heads and shoulders of strong men ; and then there was the
ANTI-CHINESE WOBE.


constant music of clattering tin dishes and panikins, which was really
quite inspiriting. If we could only have had a guard of honor, say,
mules and asses, for instance, the sight would have been magnificent
in the extreme. In due time we arrived at Peterson’s pocket. A pocket
is an irregular grassy paddock, which you occasionally meet with in the
scrub. Although, sometimes 50 miles—or more —apart.
We camped near Peterson’s pocket the first night. To a person
who has not been accustomed to camping out, his first experience will
be strange indeed —especially when it is very dark. The awful still-
ness, the creeping insects, croaking frogs, falling twigs and leaves
from trees, are peculiar sounds that startle a new-chum bushman. In
that country the blacks are dangerous, and your excited imagination
Is apt to picture the crouching shaddowy form of a hlackfellow, creep-
ing slowly towards you with spear in hand. Then fancy hears a snake
hissing as it glides along the ground—perhaps to curl with you in
“ bluey.” You look towards the flickering fire for a ray of cheering
comfort, then out upon the dark and dismal night, blacker than ever,
as strange phantoms flash through your mind. At last, covering your
head beneath the blanket, when another sound you hear like doleful
far-off music, which you are pleased to find is someone snoring. Tour
eyelids close, when sweet sleep buries in the grave of peaceful slumber
those anxious thoughts and tired limbs. Perhaps you dream of home,
fairy children, splendid palaces in the midst of charming landscapes,
and sumptuous feasts, and so on, through the still hours of the night.
In the morning you awake at sunrise, to hear chirping birds, and find
that a heavy Queensland dew has fallen, and that the tent will require
to be dried before starting, so as to lighten the burden. The fanciful
dreams having vanished, you settle down to the stern realities of
damper and salt junk.
Soon after breakfast we received a morning call from a little, but
cheerful old man. He had a horse-collar swag around him in scarf
fashion, and had just returned from Kimberly, dissappointed, and so
added one more to our list of wandering diggers.
If .the first day’s journey were described, it would nearly suffice for
the remainder, as they were pretty much alike. The time glided
away, whilst we were struggling, sweating, and swearing beneath a
heavy load. There was a pleasant alteration, however, of stumbling
over roots, dodging lawyers, ducking your head to escape being
strung up, watching for sure places to plant your feet, and so on and
on. Now to the right, then wheeling sharply round to the left, as
you wander where you might go next. Then the welcome cry of
“ Spell-ho, spell-ho,” and down goes the swag and yourself in a fit
of desperation, as you say, “ Well, I’m blowed if this ain’t a stinger! ”
Then follows a cutting up of tobacco and lighting of pipes, accompanied
by yarns of old digging days, and prospect of the present rush. We
also came in for our share of twitting, bearing on the science of
humping drums, and the art of baking damper, budgeri on the coals,
johnny cakes, dough-boys, &c., &c.
The boys, however, were very good to us, and were “ dead ”
Anti-Chinese.


There were frequent enquiries as to our health, were we not
tired, and so on. “ Oh! fine,” and, “ Not a hit of it!” were the cer-
tain answers. Of course, we never told the truth.
In that jungle we discovered pockets that had been cleared by
the blacks, perhaps a thousand years ago, for, encircling them, were
massive lofty trees. The pockets were always on a rise, and near
water. A kind of happy camping ground, where, no doubt, the dusky
savage of the past feasted and fattened to his hearts content, fought
his battles, brandished his spears, made love, and took unto himself a
shiny, dark-skinned lassie for his wife. The pockets are about 50
yards in diameter, circular in form, and a perfect Q-od-send in the
midst of that awful jungle. I well remember a weather-beaten old
digger, who had tramped all the way from (xeraldton without having
struck one. When he entered the one in which we were camped he
lifted up his face with a glad smile, and thanked Grod for sunlight. The
jungle foliage is so dense overhead that it was impossible to see the
sky, and should it commence to rain it is some time before it reaches
the ground, and will continue for days after it has ceased.
In the pockets we found the graves and skulls of blacks, also
their gunyahs, which were built in semi-circular form, with a sort of
bamboo sticks, long grass, and large leaves.
Those places were our lonely homes in that wild part of the world,
and we were surrounded with a circular wall of high green trees, with
a picturesque network of dense foliage. In such places the brotherhood
of humanity is strikingly manifest, as we sit around the fire, spinning
yarns, to pass away those long and lonely hours.
One afternoon we felt very tired and completely worn out, when
myself and the horse-collar, “Humpy Drum,” had a long spell, after
which we agreed to camp alone that night, under a large tree beside a
clear running stream. At sundown we fired our revolvers, not that
we were nervous, but just to let the blacks understand that the devil-
devil was at large. Our fire was bnrning low, and we were stretched
in bluies for the night, but failing to sleep, we kept up the conversa-
tion. Suddenly I was startled by the breaking of twigs. Were the
blacks upon us ? I was certainly alarmed, but wisely kept it to my-
self. I asked my mate in calm, but perhaps shaky tones, “if the
blacks wandered about at night ?” He was an old digger, cool and
serene at ail times, and did not seem to realise the importance of my
question, as he answered by saying, “ that 15 pennyweights to the load
was not at all bad.”
We continued the journey together, and slept another night in
the hollow of a dead log, and were quite snug. One morning we
halted beside a lovely clear water creek, when we were suddenly sur-
rounded by a mob of blacks. They chattered away with some unin-
telligible gibberage, accompanied with considerable gestures. We
were careful to keep them in front of us. After an hours’s interview
with these dusky visitors, we were overtaken by a fresh gang of dig-
gers. This crowd consisted of storekeepers, artizans, farmers, and a


chubby-faced new chum, with torn pantaloons, battered hat, and a
Niagara-sort-of-perspiration. In consideration of red pocket-handker-
chiefs, match boxes, and rations', the blacks agreed to carry our load.
Sometimes we lost them, as they were so actiye, and as surefooted as
greyhounds going through the scrub. My boy had a very woolly head
of matted hair, to which were attached pretty shells. He
did not appear to have a name, so I christened him Confucious.
They were entirely nude, with horribly painted faces, eyes like
hawks, and mouths of enormous size. Their lady companions were
absent ; which is a sign they can show fight if necessary. Their con-
dition was excellent, and they appear to thrive upon the numerous
nuts and fruit to be seen in the scrub. They were certainly far
superior to your rum-drinking civilized black boy, and were as active
and sprightly as grey hounds. The scrub prevents the use of spears
and boomerangs, so they substitute rocks and stones, which they
throw over hand very straight.
In the afternoon a terrific storm burst upon us, and startling claps
of thunder became frequent, which were accompanied with vivid flashes
of lightning. As it appeared to have set in for the night we decided to
reach a pocket before camping. When we did so we were drenched to
the skin, and had the extra pleasure of pitching our tents in a furious
thunder storm. It was certainly rather damping in every respect, and I
would have given anything to have been on Charters Towers, listening to
Mary pealing forth the welcome sound of Mr. Collins’s dinner bell. At
tea time Confucious squat upon his haunches in my tent, and devoured
several huge pieces of salt junk, johnny cake, and gulped down—l
don’t known how many —pannikins of hot tea with evident gusto.
He appeared to be much attached to me. Perhaps he thought I was a
tasty and tender bit. At any rate, he wanted to chum in for the night,
but I declined his offer, as“l detest hed mates. They afterwards built
a gunyah in quick time, and with great smartness, and so camped for the
night—only two yards distant—and were a sort of body-guard. They
appear to keep a night watch, whose business it is to blow the fire'and
keep a sharp look-out. They also make use of each others bodies for
blankets, lying all of a heap during sleep, with their legs entwined
like the roots of a tree. In the morning we gave them another good
feed; after which Confucious bade me adieu (or rather, gave me the
slip), and the last I saw of him was just a glimpse of his rear quarters
vanishing in the scrub.
We had missed the little horse-collar swagman during the storm
on the previous evening, and so went in search. We found him snugly
settled, and smiling contentedly beside his fire in the hollow of a tree.
The trunk answered for a chimney, and the smoke could be seen issuing
high up among the branches. He had a most remarkably knack of
adapting himself to surrounding circumstances, and his present position
was not exceptional. I borrowed his gun and went shooting, but unthink-
ingly wandered far away. Suddenly, the painful thought occured that
I was lost —lost in the jungle —I cooied loudly ! but failed to obtain an
answer, and had not the remotest idea as to the way back to the camp.
There was now no help for it but to keep calm and make the best of


a bad job. So I blazed the trees, to mark the spot, and thereby
prevent me from going farther away. The sun’s direction was taken
with the blade of a knife upon the thumb nail, a kind of bush
compass. I then travelled in straight lines East and West, North and
South, from the blaze mark, cooeing loudly at the end of each journey.
After several attempts my efforts were rewarded by hearing a
a faint and distant cooey, then the report of a gun from our camp.
The direction of the sounds were very misleading, and considerable
time elapsed before I was discovered, as they had despatched from the
camp two search parties. It was certainly a warning not to go too far
away again, which I was careful to profit by. On one occasion we
went fishing by firelight, it attracts the fish in shoals, and affords an
excellent opportunity for netting or hooking, and thus we passed
away the time in scrub camping. The diggers were generally
disgusted with the field, and were leaving in large numbers daily.
We were also full up with our picnicing tour, and agreed to return
once more to civilization, minus any nuggets or gold.
Those diggings were discovered early in December of 1886, and
to-day there are hundreds of Chinese upon that field. Will the
Census taker ever find his way there.
It is well-known in the North that there are thousands of Chinese
in isolated parts, that are not included in the census. Thehomeward
journey occupied a few days, and on emerging into the open daylight
at Peterson’s Pocket we did not present a very elegant appearance.
Our faces were severely scratched, and sadly in want of a barber;
clothes tattered and torn, and covered with an ample supply of mud;
hats crushed and battered ; shoes, ahem ! Well,l should say flummuxed,
with the heels a sort of skew-wiff. It was a very great treat, indeed,
to be once again in open country and genial sun-light, and to feel that
there were many miles between you and the Russel River goldfield.
On our way to Cairns we stayed for one night at a shanty in the
Boar Pocket. The landlady is locally known as the humming bird,
because she never ceases humming tunes. A short time previous to
our visit she narrowly escaped being killed by a blackfellow. During
her husband’s absence from home she was suddenly seized by a nigger ;
a struggle ensued ; she managed to get her revolver, but it failed to go
«ff. Her piercing screams attracted the attention of some surveyors,
who arrived on the spot just in time to save her life. When her
husband leaves home now, she loads the double barrel gun, asix-shooter,
andkeeps a fierce looking bull dog. The next black boy that happens
to come that way, it is expected that ijhe will promptly despatch him
to his happy hunting grounds.


CHAPTER V.
ON THE CHINKIE WAR-PATH AGAIN.
Arriving in Cairns we held a Committee Meeting, and a
general shaking of hands prior to departing for Port Douglas. This
little town is well situated, and has a long stretch of fine sea beach
It is several hours’ steam northward from Cairns. The people are
sociable and hospitable, but are very much mixed with Chinese in
trade and land leasing —indeed, the Chinamen have a large number of
selections in that district, and they appear to occupy nearly half the
town. They have shops and follow various trades, for the convenience
of their country cousins and unscrulous white people who want
cheap Chinkie stuff. We held an Open-air Meeting, but did not
receive any violent opposition, although there were many strongly
pro-Chinese, because of their intercourse in business—the Port
Douglas people believe in peaceful persuasion, not hostile opposi-
tion.
We next visited Cooktown, another hot bed of Celestials. Before
leaving Port Douglas, however, we enjoyed the exciting sport of
assisting to capture a shark 14 feet long, the head and upper portion
of the body were drawn out of the water and lashed to the stern of the
steamer. The captain riddled its pate with bullets, after which the
body was allowed to float on the surface of the sea, and be eaten by
other sharks. We landed in Cooktown early in the morning, and were
much pleased with the picturesque aspect of the town. The streets are
wide, well acadamized, and lined with rows of shady trees. The wide
expanse of the Endeavour River, and the green grassy hills form a
charming picture.
Although very hot in mid-summer, there is generally a cool breeze
blowing from the sea. Their School of Arts and public buildings are
indeed a credit to the people. Cooktown has certainly a prosperous
future before it; having a magnificent harbour and wharfs, to which
the coasting steamers come alongside.
She has, however, a large Chinese population. Indeed, the first
object that caught my eye, was a Mr. John No-save, sitting in a milk-
cart, whilst a white boy was taking the milk from door to door. It is
almost iupossible to enumerate the many callings which they are
following. There was a large blacksmith’s shop, and the Johns were


busy shoeing horses. The Secretary of the School of Arts is an Anglo-
Chinese. It is almost impossible to fully describe the firm hold they
have in that district, and unless steps be taken for their exclusion, we
must expect Chinese cities of cholera and leprosy in Northern
Australia in the future. The few Northern people are helpless to re-
move the evil unless they are aided by Southern support. It is the
duty of all patriotic Australians to preserve their country for the white
race, and keep intact the liberty and freedom of our civilization.
In Cooktown the already formed League rendered us assistance.
An open-air meeting was held on the Saturday night, and on the
following Monday evening in the Town Hall. There was manifest
opposition on the part of persons who, no doubt, would sell their souls
and country for a shilling.
The Cooktown Courier , a pro-Chinese paper, made the following
fierce attack upon ns:—“As a matter of fact,” said they, “not one
fresh point was adduced which could in any way tend to enlighten the
audience. The speech was delivered in a psalm-like drone, and was a
hashed-up medley of ill-digested facts, illogically strung together, and
tortured into meaning to suit the speaker’s own views. The word
crude will scarcely convey to the mind of our readers the line of treatment
adopted when dealing with the question. The arguments have become
hackneyed, and may be heard in every public house bar in Cooktown,
any day, from sun rise to sun down. The speaker did not consider it
necessary to be correct. He told us that the Chinese must go ; but
beyond that point he was incapable of proceeding. Not one word was
uttered concerning the stoppage of Chinese immigration, and the legal
aspects of the question were never approached. With such senseless
exaggeration we have no sympathy. It is simply a pandering to the
greed for the sensational, and may yet lead to the fermenting of a
racial war in Queensland. We condemn such tactics as unworthy of
the very name of men, and especially of the British.”
In the columns of the Independant we returned fire to this sharp-
shooting, as follows : —First, by affirming that the nerves and electric
currents that probably moved the writer’s pen were similar to those
that might guide the pugilist’s fist, or raise a mongrel dog’s bristles,
and cause his teeth to chatter with a savage growl. That the epistle of
«vil rubbish was not written by an inspired mind of high and manly
intelligence ; but with a base and burning desire to exterminate earnest
workers in a good cause. As regards the despised remarks being the
common low talk or Cooktown bar-rooms, we suggested that it was
rather rough upon those who imbibed their daily nobblers. We were
also anxious to learn from what source the worthy editor obtained his
information, and hinted that perhaps he himself might have been a
frequent visitor to places that were not temperance taverns. We also
accused him of gassing over legal points for the double purpose of
“running with the hare and hunting with the hounds,” and thereby
throwing dust in the eyes of his readers. We were still further
anxious to know how it was that such an intelligent editor should waste
his precious time and puzzle his bigotted literary pate in crowding the
columns of his staunch Chinkie paper with a hashed-up medley about


us; whom he styled superficial, nonsensical, senseless, &c., &c. Also,
how inconsistent it was for him to assert that such weak-minded
maniacs (as he would have us) could, by our gossip, bring about a
racial war in Queensland. If, said we, he had only mentioned himself,
such an outbreak might be possible. At any rate, there were more
chances of success than in his feeble efforts to daunt us in our anti-
Chinese work.” The foregoing may appear “ rough on rats ; ” but
Northerners speak their minds, and do not take shelter behind flowery-
terms.
CHAPTER VI.
SOUTHWARD AGAIN.
It was Christmas Day in the morning when we steamed away
from the future Canton of the North. Several friends assembled on
the wharf, and bid us God speed and success, as they waved their hats
adieu.
It may he well to mention that we did not go so for as Port
Darwin, owing to tne limited state of our finances. However, we have
been in communication with responsible persons, such as Mr. Mayhew,
Editor of the North Australian. That gentleman kindly sent us the
following information regarding the influx of the “ Yellow launders ”
(I beg pardon, the Johns I mean). He says that they undertake the
functions of tailors, bakers, carpenters, jewellers, bootmakers, timber
merchants, store-keepers, laundrymen, greengrocers, boarding-house
keepers, and cordial makers. The front of their buildings are of wood
and iron ; hut behind is a perfect nest of dark dens, 6ft. x 6ft., and
low in proportion ; and these are inhabited by the lower class of-
labourers, thieves, and knockabouts. Interspersed freely among them
are fowl-houses and pig-pens, causing an odour of intense sickliness in
that part of the town. Every day the number of huts are increased,
and every week nearly a hundred Chinese arrive from China. Eor
every white man you see going to his work, there will be fifty China-
men —so that they are entirely in the ascendant.
The introduction of Chinese into the Northern Territory, says he,
is a peculiar transaction, and is as follows: —A White employer
requests a Chinese merchant to procure him, say 100 Chinese Coolies,
for perhaps railway work. A message is despatched to an agent in
China, and in due course the number arrives. The White contractor
agrees with the Chinese merchant to pay them at the rate of 4s. per


day, and the latter takes a shilling a day from each man, being a total
of £5 from the 100. He also compels them to purchase all their
rations, &c., from his store. The poor slaves, for such they are, must
obey, for they are entirely at his mercy.
He states that within 100 yards square there are 1000 Chinese
herded together in the most beastly manner. At night the labourers
sleep a few feet above a pen of stinking ill-kept pigs, with only a thin
mat upon a few poles to seperate man from beast. Being nearest to
China we are supplied with the scum of Pekin, Canton, and Poochow,
and the result is anything hut creditable to a British settlement. We
have also sent away no less than six Chinese lepees, one of whom
was employed to a civil servant as cook and nurse. The foregoing
will give the reader a fair idea of Chinese life in the Northern
Territory.
Resuming our journey southward, I may state that the Townsville
people had worked up the agitation, so we proceeded to Bowen to
spend our Christmas holidays. The town is pleasantly situated, and
has a long pier stretching out into its excellent harbour. Indeed, I
consider Bowen to be the finest situation for a town on the Queens-
land coast. It is a pity that it does not tap the interior with a railway.
Of course, there are strong vested interests in Townsville, and their
chief aim is to keep Bowen in the hack ground; but the time must
come when her position with Townsville will be weighed in the balance.
"We did not see any Chinese in that healthy town, and it was a great
treat indeed, after leaving Cooktown, to be so free from the “ Yellow
Agony.”
"We put up at Mac’s Hotel. Now Mf c, beit known, is the jolliest
and easiest going old fossil in Queensland, and is blessed with some
clever and healthy looking children. During the holidays Mac rowed
them-across an arm of the sea to an island, for the purpose of bury-
ing a dead horse. He was followed by his frisky and favourite dog.
Upon their return across the -water, an alligator seized poor Hip, for
such was the dog’s name. The once jovial landlord returned home
without a smile, to relate the sad and tragic story. The event was an
exciting local topic for a few days, and the news was wired to the
Northern papers, and a pithy paragraph appeared in the local paper.
Three days afterwards, when the story had become somewhat stale,
the dog turned up again, like a Jonas of old. How he escaped from
that alligator’s stomach remains a mystery unto this day.
There are lovely walks neai Bowen, through green grassy pas-
tures and undulating lands, and occasionally a very fine view can be
obtained. One day —during our rambles —we w r ere chased by. a
ferocious snake, hissing towards us through the grass. ■'We did not
allow that grass to grow under our feet —you may be sure. I have
seen many of these reptiles, but this was the first time they had ever
shown fight.


CHAPTER VII.
FISHING OFF FLAT-TOP ISLAND.
The next visit was to Mackay, the metropolis of sugarland. We
were anchored for some hours off Plat-Top Island, imprisoned, and yet
within sight of land. My usual practice upon such occasions is to fish
over the stem. It is, indeed, to me a pleasure to feel frequent nibbles
and jerks away down in the deep sea. Exciting also, to have your
line suddenly drawn about by a large fish, as you let out, then
draw in again, and so on, until you haul up your fish and deck it
—with pride—at your feet, amid various exclamations of surprise
from the on-lookers. That morning my luck was in, for I caught
a dozen beauties in no time ; which were served up for lunch, and
elicited for the poor fisherman the jolly skipper’s compliments.
Soon afterwards we were bound for Mackay on board a launch,
and rolling over the sickly bar. The people of that town are jovial
thirsty souls; and indeed blue ribbonism don't stand the ghost of
a show. There is also a marked absence of masherism, such as
Magpie tailed coats and vests, or bell-toppers. Elannel, or stiff-
starchy-shirts, mole, or white linen breeches, strapped-up with fancy
leather belts ; such are the fashionable costumes of Mackayites.
•
The surrounding district is very fertile, and abounds in sugar
plantations. The home of Mr. Hume Black, M.L.A., is pleasantly
situated on an eminence, and in the midst of a not very flourishing plan-
tation. It is 8 or 9 miles from Mackay, and is known as the
Cedars. The hon. gentleman received me very courteously, and
consented to preside at our Anti-Chinese Meeting. It was held in
the open-air—and on the drill-shed grounds. A dray answered the
purpose of a platform, being decorated with flags, and looked quite
gay. A band played inspiring music; a large crowd assembled,
and a good meeting was the result. Subsequent meetings were
held in the open-air and School of Arts, which resulted in the
formation of a large committee. The bell-ringer was a most ec-
centric person; but anti-Chinese to the backbone. His services
were gratituous, and also his pithy amusing speeches on the Chinkies
—as he styled them. We have always had pleasant recollections
of Mackay and its people since our visit, and hope to see them again
someday.
In Rockhampton and the Central District the floods had com-
menced ; which were a great hindrance to holiday meetings and anti-


Chinese agitation generally. The town is situated on flat marshy lands,
and is not over healthy. In summer the heat is unbearable, because
the place is bounded by hills. Gladstone, a few hours’ steam to the
southward, has an excellent and natural situation for a town and port.
The vested interests, however, are too strong in the former town, and
so the people of Port Curtis will, no doubt, dream away their future
peaceful happy days in quiet solitude.
We visited Clermont and Barcaldine before holding any meetings in
Eockhampton. Indeed, the rainy days upset our calculations con-
siderably, and drained our pockets of spare cash immensely. The
Clermont people gave us every support, and for a small town have done
much to forward the anti-Chinese work. It is unnecessary to describe
their pest of a China Town. It is the same old tale of opium and
gambling dens. Sly-grog selling, rendezvous of questionable women,
and miserable shantys. It is a mining district, and the Chinese are
getting gold in the most bare-faced manner ; about 140 without even
licences. Upon that field they out-number the Whites by 3to 1. No
wonder that the people murmur beneath such a burden of yellow
agony. We had an enthusiastic meeting in the School of Arts, and
also another in the open air ; speaking from the steps of Barney
Mullen’s hotel. When we left Clermont, it was amid the many good
wishes of its people for future success.
The journey to Barcaldine was a long and tiresome one, being 358
miles west of Eockhampton. We decided to break it at Bogantungan.
Having planted ourselves in this one-horse township, for a spell over
Sunday, we were agreeably surprised to run up against an old friend
whom we had met in the North, a Dr. H . This medico had
been vegetating for a few days amid the surrounding solitude of that
dreary spot. It was a treat, indeed, to have each others company, and
pass the speeding time away, amid fumes of smoke and yarns about old
times. On Sunday morning, being too late for church, we strolled into
the bush, and were soon engaged shying stones at an iguana, high up
on the branch of an old gum tree. Suddenly we were startled by a
sort of apparition emerging from some dense scrub—to wit,
A VENEEABLE PATEIAECII.
With sheepish shame upon our faces we secretly let go the hand-
ful of stones behind us, and endeavoured to look very goody.
“Good morning!” said the Patriarch. “I believe I have the
pleasure of addressing Dr. H , a graduate from the Cambridge
University. I have some sons there at the present time, and as I take
great interest in their welfare, I shall be most happy to have some


conversation with you respecting that ancient institution. Will you
dine with me to day, and also your friend.”
“ Thanks! many thanks, my dear sirs; we shall indeed, be only
too happy.”
“My house,” continued the Patriarch, “lies just over yon hill.
A nice walk for you young men. Now, mind you don’t disappoint;
I shall expect you. Good morning.”
The Dr. shrugged his shoulders, and said, “ Now, ain’t that fine!
there’s luck for you, old boy !” and with a mischevious dig into my
ribs, said, “ we were in for a high old time.”
The venerable gentlemen was a civil servant of great importance,
and certainly the invitation did confer upon us considerable honor.
The world was not so bad after all, especially with the prospect of
bottled beer, choice wines, and other palatable delicacies floating be-
fore your mind’s eye. There was a great deal of exact shaving, wash-
ing, scrupulous arrangement of toilet, &c., prior to starting.
It was with pardonable pride that we informed the landlady not
to continue the preparation of those fowls that had been specially
killed for our homely fare, as we had been invited to dine with His
High and Mighty of the district. We started in the most frolicsome
of spirits, and were laughingly jocular as to the best recipes for hun-
ger and thirst. The journey lay over barren hills, past numerous
rotten stumps, that once bore aloft some weather-board home,
deserted ghostly dwellings, flocks of nimble long-hairedgoats, heaps of
“ Old Tom ” and other empty liquor bottles, that had been drained
by boozing carriers in those good old days, and so on, until we
sight an odd-looking building, a sort of curiosity shop. Our spirits
fell, but we plucked up courage again and surveyed the quaint domi-
cile from many standpoints. Grave doubts existed as to which was
the back, front, side, or even a door-way of that odd structure. If we
had only brought a spy-glass ! The Dr. humorously advised a loud
cooey. After a good deal of close scrutiny we found a door, but it
was topsy-turvey, and firmly secured with twine. In due time, how-
ever, we managed to squeeze through a small hole in some lattice
work, when the Dr. tore his new pants in a most exposed position with
an ugly nail. After another survey, and stumbles over old lumber,
we find a door, and gave the usual rap-tap-tap. “ Come in !” said
somebody from the inside, and so we marched forward, and finally
found ourseives inside a sort of Church with a theatrical aspect. There
were rows of chairs, pulpit, prayer-books, and everything necessary
for religious worship. The walls and a large water tank were painted
in stage scenic designs. Among the chairs sat our venerable host.
“ Come, have you,” said he, “ had your dinner I suppose ?”
The Dr. looked horrified and gasped ; I also felt a cold perspira-
tion on my temples. We coughed lightly, redened considerable, and
hesitatingly uttered a faint “ No.”
A long shrill whistle from the host was followed by a scratching


of his forehead, as if in profound meditation. Presently he looked
up and enquired if we were partial to peas.
“ G-reen,” said the Dr.
“ Oh, no,” said he, “brown as a berry and as hards as door nails-
Tou will oblige me very much by trying to chew them, for I have
boiled them a dozen times, and they won’t soften. I will also bring
you some cocoa, it is a very healthy beverage, you know, for I drink it
myself. My wife and family are at the sea-side, so I am quite alone,
and as our servant was nice looking I sent her away to prevent the
neighbors talking scandal.
In due time the cocoa arrived, also some cold cabbage (perhaps
Chinkie’s), salty salt junk, and six large tins of biscuits, which he ex-
plained were kept as a tempting bait to entice the children to Church.
We sipped the cocoa, nibbled the biscuits, eyed the junk and peas from
a distance, as we thought of the roast fowl and plum pudding we had
left at our hotel.
After an hour’s conversation, during which time he gleaned a good
deal of information from Dr. H concerning Cambridge, we
returned to the hotel very hungry and. much crest fallen.
MOBAI. —A bird in the hand is worth two in the hush. Never
leave a certainty to go after fine promises and expectations, for you are
sure to he disappointed.
At Barcaldine there were
FEEE EIGHTS AND SERENADES.
We spoke from the verandah of Mr. Shakespear’s hotel. After
the speech, a Mr. L , hotel-keeper, came innocently forward to
v say a few words for John, when he was immediately sat upon, and
serenaded to his home with groans and hisses. Another party alluded
to somebody’s sister being bought by a Chinaman; that individual’s
eyes were soon blackened by the girl’s brother. We held three open-
air meetings, and at the last one a “ half-boozed” man took his stand
behind us, for the purpose of giving tips ; but which caused fequent
interruptions. This action disgusted a muscular young bushmen. A
struggle ensued, and the tippler was thrown over the rails into the
crowd, where he suffered the same indignaties as his predecessor. A
restless dark-eyed civil servant came upon the scene, and in a stirring
pro-Chinese speech, damned us to all intents and purposes, in-
sinuating that £SO of Chinese money could buy us. He, however,
found himself in a hornet’s nest, and was finally consigned to the sandy
track in a very undignified manner. We passed near China Town one


morning, when a number of Chinamen and their women rushed out
upon us,
WITH STICKS AND STONES.
One of the women must have been Mrs. Ah Pat, for she weighed
•quite 20 stone. The pigtails and women’s long hair flew wildly in the
wind, as they rushed after us yelling in cat-like-mews. We, however,
took refuge in a hotel, and so escaped any injury.
On our way to Rockhampton we had occasionally to leave the
train, and row along in boats, owing to the flood time ; but finally
finished our journey in safety.
At Rockhampton a Mr. White appeared upon the platform to
publicly protest against holding any meeting. It was not White Anti-
Tellow on this occasion. However, there were cries for us from
persons in the audience, and the meeting came off, despite the silly
opposition. We also had several subsequent meetings in and around
the town; such as Lakes Creek, the famous Mount Morgan, &c.
Going to the latter place, our coach capsized, and we were in a pretty
pickle. On another occassion the horses had to swim for it. Taken
as a whole, the agitation in that district did not succeed so well, owing
to the rainy season and floods.
If we are to relate a true story, the dark side and hard trials
must be told. The funds with which to carry on the work, were
indeed scarce, and there was no possibility of further replenishment.
Indeed, if it had not be for the seasonable help of a kind anti-Chinese
friend, we might have remained in Rockhampton until to-day. Is it
to be wondered, that amid personal insults, stupid jealous opposition,
hard times, and no hope for the future, that we should become
DISGUSTED AND DESPONDENT.
Were not the uphill struggles, and repeated disappointments enough
to make us, for a time, abandon the work we had taken up. It is
always “ the last straw that breaks the camel’s back,” and so it was


with us. People came to the meetings, heartily applauded our efforts,
and then returned to their homes, without aiding us to pay for halls
or other expenses. Possibly we were to blame, as we were young in
public life, and should have frankly explained our position.
CHAPTER VIII.
A BRIGHTER FIELD FOR WORK.
We arrived in Maryborough by steamer, walked to G-ympie, and
had a spell from Anti-Chinese work. Time passed away, and with
it came a change of feeling. One evening in the School of Arts we
saw, in the Queenslander , the following paragraph :
“At an Anti-Chinese Meeting held in Brisbane, it was decided
that the Secretary be instructed to write to Mr. P , Anti-Chinese
Lecturer, and invite that gentleman to Brisbane, to assist in the
Anti-Chinese Agitation.”
The foregoing gave us encouragement. It was a silver lining in
the dark cloud, and so
TAKING HEART ONCE MORE
We continued the Anti-Chinese work. It was soon arranged to hold
a meeting in G-ympie. The Miners’ Union most readily assisted, and
a large and enthusiastic gathering was the result, the Theatre being
densely crowded, and a band played some inspiriting music from the
balcony of an adjoining hotel. Upon that occasion we were honoured
with the presence of Chinese swells upon the platform—Lin Gloon, Ah
Young, G-im Chee, and Chas. Chien Toy. The latter made a pro-
Chinese speech, which he wound up in his pigeon English by remark-
ing that the Chinese had always welcomed Queen Victoria alongee
G-ympie goldfield. The speaker resumed his seat amid much laughter
and ironical cheers.


We were determined to workup the agitation in Maryborough and
Bundaherg before leaving for Brisbane. Our funds were still low, as
the people were under the impression that our expences were paid
from some mystic unknown fund ; so we walked, as usual, to Mary-
borough. After making the necessary arrangements for a meeting in
that town, we set out to Bundaherg, leaving by the early morning
train as large as life, and as pompous as millionares. A few miles out,
however, we took to the bush for a forty mile walk, which was accom-
plished by 9 p.m. the same night. It was rather amusing next day to
find ourselves dubbed, in the local pro-Chinese paper, as “ Mr. P ,
a paid agitator, &c.,” although we were suffering at the time from
blistered feet and stiff limbs. Truly, one half of the world does not
Tcnow how the other half lives.
The Bundaherg people were in real earnest over the Chinese
question, and some excellent meetings were the result. The friends
forming the committee were very kind, and readily assisted in every
possible way. Being hardy pedestrians, we walked back again to
Maryborough. In this town we had, also, very good meetings ; and
have every reason to believe that a good impression was made
throughout the district. The Maryborough committee treated us well,
and on leaving wished us every success in the future. Early in the
morning we took the train for a few miles out of town, then alighted,
and took a bee line through the bush and scrub for the port of Noosa.
At that place a cheap seven-and-sixpenny passage to Brisbane was
available. After nearly a two-days’ walk the above port was reached.
On the following morning we joined a party of young Gympie men,
who knew us, and in their boat rowed down the river to the sea for a
day’s fishing. My luck was in again, and soon forty whiting were
hooked and lying on the sand ; a portion of which made an excellent
lunch. The small paddle steamer Adonis left late in the afternoon for
Brisbane, and we landed at Bulimba on Sunday morning, and hang it,
as usual, too late for church again. We often look back to that morn-
ing with strange feelings, for we had just completed a long and tire-
some journey from the far north. Certainly, we did not enter the
Metropolis with a flourish of trumpets and gay bunting Indeed, we
seemed to have “ sneaked ” in through its back door, with a seedy sort
of look about us. It is needless to dwell upon the work in Brisbane,
which, thanks to the Courier, has been widely circulated. There was
the open-air meeting at the corner of Queen and Wharf Streets, with
its band and banners ; also, a similar one at Woolloongabba (or South
Brisbane), with its bitter cold winds and dusty afternoon. The
success of these meetings were due to the energy of the hard working
committee. The arrival of the Chinese Royal Commissioners also took
place late that evening, and in the Courier s report on the following
Monday, we noted with surprise the (General's attack on Mr. P ’s
speech, which he designated as “ the most absurd thing he had ever
heard of, and without a modicum of truth.” He denied that the
Chinese were sent out to Australia by slave companies; but sub-
sequently admitted to Sir Samuel Griffith, that such companies did
send Coolies to America. Too thin, Mr. Bung Hi Ho! The General


afterwards expressed a desire to the Courier reporter to see Mr.
P . An interview was arranged, which took place in the Queens-
land Club. He impressed us as a man who was always at home about
meal times Apparently a jovial, courteous gentleman, but to us there
was a cunningness in the eyes, sensuality in the jaw and lips, whilst
the width of the head, bully neck, and sparkle of his half-closed eyes,
told of slumbering passions not to be trifled with. Consul General
U. Tsing gave us the impression of being less animal, and more intel-
lectual, and indeed, the courteous attache, Mr. Alex A. Seng Chai,
made us think that if all the Chinese were like him there would be no
agitation. After our interview, the General expressed to the Courier
reporter a rather high opinion of the energetic anti-Chinese Lecturer.
A little hit too jammy, General.
The Town Hall meeting was indeed a very great success, the
building being densely packed in every part, including the platform.
Prom that meeting the following resolution was wired to the South
Australian Premier: —
“ That this public meeting of the inhabitants of Brisbane, and the
Anti-Chinese Leagues of Queensland, view, with feelings of alarm, the
very great influx of Chinese into the Northern Territory of South
Australia, and desires to make a most earnest appeal to the Govern-
ment of that Colony, praying for immediate restrictive legislation,
tfiere being a danger of Chinese crossing the border into Queensland.”
A few days afterwards, Mr. P , then Secretary of the Anti-
Chinese League, received the following reply:—
Adelaide, August 11th, 1887.
Tours of the 27th July, to hand, re Chinese immigration into
the N orthern Territory ; it is the intention of this Government to
deal with the matter, in a measure that will be introduced into Parlia-
ment this Session.
T. Playfoed, Premier.
Themeasure was subsequently passed through the South Australian
House of Assembly, but was thrown out by the Legislative Council.
So that the Chinese are still arriving in the Northern Territory by
hundreds. A recent steamer brought 200 in one batch. By slow
degrees they are getting a firm foothold in that part of Australia.
The people in the South have not the remotest idea. They are
clamouring for New Guinea and Pacific Islands, whilst the Chinese
are annexing a part of their own continent.
The agitation was extended on to the Darling Downs, and
Stanthorpe on the border. Large meetings were held at Ipswich,
Toowoomba, and Warwick, with good results. Stanthorpe seemed to
us a barren, bleaky country, with piercing cold winds, which tends to
shrivel the sleeky form of a sallow Northerner. At that town a
short stumpy Chinaman appeared to be dodging our footsteps, and
when we left by the train, he smiled blandly, and waved his hat adieu.


Warwick is a fine open town, with well laid out Streets, and
spacious Gardens. There was a good attendance at the meeting, and
Mr. Merry presided. The bell-ringer of that town seemed to have
Herculean lungs, and a voice like the Great Eastern fog horn. He
pretended to be Anti-Chinese, but was very sharp after his Ten
Shillings for bell-ringing. We had two meetings in Toowoomba, and
strange to relate, a prominent local gentleman, who was pro-Chinese,
took the chair on the second night, and made a good Anti-Chinese
speech. Upon the stage were some cabbages grown by a Scotchman,
which excited a good deal of interest, and altogether we had a very
good Anti-Chinese meeting. At Ipswich there were open-air and
indoor meetings. At the latter meeting some local gentlemen spoke,
and I must say that they carried off the palm for public speaking on
the Downs. My first story of a One Tear’s Anti-Chinese work has
come to an end, and to you, dear reader, who has taken the trouble
to scan these lines, I must bid adieu, but I trust not for ever. My
trip to the Southern colonies in continuing the agitation, will I
presume, be only temporary. I hope also from time to time to issue
other pamphlets in connection with future undertakings, and I trust
that with past experience in Anti-Chinese and literary work that such
issues will be superior in every respect, and that our efforts in the
cause we have taken up will bear fruit in ultimately ridding this
country of a detestible race —the Heathen Chinee.


APPENDIX.
CHINESE DENS NEAR MIDNIGHT.
Before describing those of Albert Street, Brisbane, we may note
another, and pernaps a brighter picture.
The morning was clear and sunny, but the bitter cold winds
sharpened our walk to a Brisbane suburb, when on a visit to the
home of a whiteman. A respected colonist was he, having fairly
feathered his nest, and was now snugly settled in his pleasant
Queensland home. His residence was an elegant design, whilst the
tasty flower garden, indicated the refinement of its lucky owner.
Up the clean, stoney steps, and with a rap-tap-tap at the bright brass
knocker, the door flew open, when a smiling, chubby faced new chum
appeared.
“ Is Mr. A at home ? ” we inquired.
“ Tes, Sir, will you please step in.”
"We were ushered into a handsomely furnished apartment (none
of your cheap Chinkie rubbish, but real European workmanship).
Soon the host himself appeared with a pleasant smile, and gave us a
warm greeting. We conversed together upon popular subjects, to
wit—the Chinese question. Business over, we bade him good morning,
and went away feeling all the better for a pleasant confab with an
intelligent whiteman. Another visit was made to the habitation of a
respectable carpenter. Now Mr. B had built his own domeile
and it was a credit to his mechanical genius, whilst its interior
furnishings displayed the superior mind of man and wife, and even
the very atmosphere seemed sweet and healthy. When returning to
the city, we thought of the families we had seen that morning, and of
the parts they were (perhaps unconsciously) playing in the drama of
our lives. In their homes were carpets, made perhaps by the looms
and deft fingers of factory girls in old England. Their merry


children, clad in clean and tasty costumes, and even the building of
their houses, had given employment, food, and luxuries to many
families. Surely such people keep in motion the wheels of prosperity,
and thereby assist in building the foundations of an Australian
nation. Someone has said, “ Show me a man’s companions and I will
describe to you his character,” and may we not by his habitation
measure the height of his morality and civilizations.
HOW THE CHINKEE SLEEPS.
The hour was near twelve, and the night dark and cloudy, when
two Sanitary Inspectors, like guardian angels, escorted me to Albert
Street. Yuen Sing Tai’s store, was the first we entered. The front
shop was fairly pleasant, but behind a nest of yellow faces met our
gaze, slumbering in dazy stupidity, amid a cloud of opium smoke.
The fumes had permeated the very walls, and rendered intensely sick
the atmosphere. The walls were grimy, the rooms low and small,
being only about 6 ft. square, and containing no less than 14
mongols.
We ascended a narrow, steep stairway, when a boss Chink said,
“ You no go da, no Chinee sleepee upee da.” Step by step we ascended
into pitch darkness, when we halted against the roof and struck a light-
To our dismay their were 7 beds, containing 14 yellow bedfellows
against that iron roof.
We peeped into a dozen more such places, until sick and
disgusted. In'one small kennel was a slumbering son from the flowery
land, steeped in opium fumes, lying unconsciously among streaks
of oily fat bacon, dried fish, and half rotten fruit. Some sleeping
rooms were only 3 ft. high. Young girls, insensible with narcotics
and surrounded with several Celestials, lay still like death. We had


some trouble in sliding back a door as a mongol voice from within was
crying—something like —“ chic, chic, chic, chacka, ra too ah.” Upon
opening this door, we saw the partial nude figure of a Chinaman sitting
on his bunk, and his pigtail pate was -just emerging through the top
of his shirt. "We asked his name, when his mistress, who was partly
covered with rags, said it was Ah Kim, and that she would soon give
us his address if we didn’t clear.
They sleep upon wooden bunks, and blocks of wood or boxes for
pillows.
I leave it for the reader to draw his own conclusion as to which
are the best Colonists.


STATISTICS.
The following statistical information has been obtained from the
Registrar General’s Census Report of 1886, and we have to |thank
Dr. Bancroft and other members of the old League for rendering us
such valuable assistance. ¥e are sorry that the limited space in our
phamplet will only admit of it in a most condensed form. It shows
the total number of Chinese in the colony, and also the occupation
they follow, but as we have already pointed out, statistics regarding
Chinese are not reliable. The following, however, will give the reader
sufficient information for thoughtful reflection, and by doubling the
numbers, he might be nearer the mark as to the exact number of
Chinese in Queensland: —
PBOEESSIOKALS.
Ministers (Religious), 10; Law Court Officer,!; Doctors and
Chemists, 23 ; Literary, 6 ; Schoolmaster, 1. Total, 41.
DOMESTIC.
Wives and Widows (Chinese women), 22 ; Sons and Daughters,
43; Hotel Keepers, 8; Coffee, Eating and Boarding Houses, 60;
Cooks, 316 ; engaged in Board and Lodging, 9 ; Domestic Servants,
324; Housekeeper, 1; Inn, Club, and Eating House Servants, 259;
Charitable Institutions, 11; Nurses, 1; generally useful, 59.
Total, 1105.


COMMERCIAL.
Merchants, 22 ; Commission Agent, 1; Clerks,so ; Shop-keepers,
600 ; Pawnbrokers, 3 ; Hawkers, 69; General Dealers, 2 ; Coach
Driver, 1; Carriers, 50 ; Shipmasters and Seamen, 27 ; Engineers,
Stokers, &c., 17 ; Stewards, 33 ; Lumpers, 1; Boatmen, 5 ; Storemen,
9; Porters, 2. Total, 802.
AGRICULTURAL.
Sugar Planters, 7 ; engaged in Sugar Production, 735 ; Earmers and
Market Gardeners, 1175; Overseers, 2 ; Indoor Earm Servants, 2041;
Labourers in G-ardens, &c., 543 ; Managers on Stations, 2 ; Station
Servants (indoor), 538 ; Land Proprietors, 3; [Surveyors, 2 ; Grub-
bers, Bushmen, &c., 73 ; Grooms, 5 ; Animal and Bird Dealers, 21 ;
Eishermen, 166 ; others, 14. Total, 5256.
INDUSTRIAL.
Carver,!; Watchmaker, &c., 3; Saddlers, 2; Ship and Boat
Builders, 2; Carpenters and Joiners, 55; Cabinet makers, 102; Wool
Sorters, 2; Hairdressers, 14; Hatters, 3 ; Tailors, 7 ; Shoemakers,
3 ; Washerwomen, &c., 13 ; Milksellers, 6 ; Butchers, 29 ; Game and
Poultry Dealers, 2 ; Fishmongers, 19 ; Bakers, 32 ; Greengrocers, &c.
205 ; Cordial maker, 1; Grocers, Tobacconists, &c., 40; Tallow Mel-
ters, 1; Eellmongers, 7; French Polishers, 5 ; Timber Merchants, 7 ;
Firewood Dealers, 142 ; Fencers, &c., 82 ; Turners and Sawyers, 12 ;
Basket maker, 1; not described, 16.
MINING.
Gold: Alluvial, 980 ; Quartz, 32 ; and 405 undescribed; Quartz
Crushing, 8. Tin Mining, 202. Silver, &c., 9.
Charcoal Burning, 24; Navies, 24; Water-crrriers, 7; Gold-
smiths, Silversmiths, and Jewellers, 47; Quicksilver workers, 11;
Blacksmiths and Whitesmiths, 16. Total, 2579.
INDEFINITE AND UNPRODUCTIVE.
Labour branch undefined, 483 ; Indefinite occupation, 13.
PUBLIC BURDEN.
Inmates of Charitable Institutions, 46; Prisoners, 25 ; No occu-
pation, 150; Total, 717.


GENERAL SUMMARY.
The foregoing statistics give the following totals in each occupa-
tion :
Professionals ... ... ... ... 41
Domestics ... ... ... ... 1105
Commercial ... ... ... ... 802
Agricultural ... ... ... ... 5256
Industrial (including Mining) ... ... 2579
Public Burdens and Indefinite Occupation ... 717
Grand Totai ... ... ... 10,500
There are supposed to he 56 Chinese women in the Colony.
DAVISON AND METCALF, PEINTEES, CHAELOTTE-STEEET, BEISBANE.
