





THE ENDLESS ADVENTURE
VOLUME ONE 1710-1727


Bj the same c Author
ALEXANDER HAMILTON. An
Essay on American Union. Bvo




The
ENDLESS ADVENTURE
by
F. S. OLIVER


COPYRIGHT
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, EDINBURGH


To
MY WIFE


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME
BOOK ONE
An Introductory Essay on Politics and Politicians
PAGE
I. The general plan ..... 3
11. An outline of Walpole’s career ... 6
in. Some reflections on Walpole’s career . 13
iv. On the variety of witnesses , . . .20
v. Lord Hervey’s evidence . . . .24
vi. How the Art of Politics, like nearly everything else,
is mixed up with Morals . . . .30
vii. The case of Giovanpagolo of Perugia . -32
viii. Some modern dilemmas . . . *34
ix. A digression on several words that most people use
reluctantly . . . . . -39
x. On Idols and Ideals . . . . .44
xi. Idols and Ideals are not always derived from Morals 47
xii. How a politician will use Idols and Ideals for helping
him to gain power and keep it . .48
xiii. How most of the Idols and Ideals in every age have
had a previous existence, and what contradictions
there are among them . . . *s°
xiv. On the rarity of Ideals during the age of Walpole . 5 6
xv. Concerning the part played by politicians in the
recent Russian revolution . . . 5 8
xvi. Lenin as Opposition leader . . . .61
xvii. Lenin as head of Government . . .68
xviii. How all the benefits of a revolution are likely to be
lost if the politicians fail to gain the upper hand in
time ....... 79


PAGE
xix. How little the Art of Politics has changed in two
thousand years . . . . .86
xx. In praise of Politicians . . . . .90
BOOK TWO
From the Flight of James 11. to the Accession
of George I. (1688-1714)
1. Of the parts played by Whigs and Tories in the
‘ glorious ’ Revolution (1688-1689) • * . 115
ii. How the English revolution ruined the European
projects of Louis XIV. (1689-1709) . .124
in. Concerning the remarkable effects of a sermon
(1709-1710) ...... 129
iv. How the duke of Marlborough was dismissed and
disgraced (1711) . . . . . 133
v. How the Tory government proceeded to negotiate
for peace with Louis XIV. (1711-1713) , 139
vi. How the Tory government was weakened by the
dissensions of Harley and Bolingbroke (1710-1714) 150
vii. How, owing to the want of a leader with a clear
policy, the Tory party failed to take advantage of
its opportunities either in Opposition or in office
(1708-1714) . . . . . .158
BOOK THREE
Stanhope and Sunderland (1714-1721)
I. How George I. left Hanover reluctantly and came
to England with misgivings (1714) . • 167
11. Concerning the chief ministers in the first administra-
tion of George I. (1714-1721) . . . 176


PAGE
in. How Bolingbroke fled to France and was attainted
of treason (1715) . . . . 182
iv. How Bolingbroke served the Pretender for nine
months and was then dismissed (1715-1716) . 195
v. How the old Tory and Whig parties lost their
distinguishing marks after the failure of the
rebellion (1715-1720) ... . . 202
vi. How the duke of Orleans became regent of France
on the death of Louis XIV., and how the policy
of cardinal Dubois led to a good understanding
with England (1715-1723) . . . . 207
Vii. Why the treaty of Utrecht was regarded favourably
by France, Holland and Britain, but unfavourably
by Spain and the Emperor . . . ,211
viii. How Alberoni rose to be prime minister of Spain
and a cardinal, and how his efforts to carry out
the Queen’s policy ended in disaster (1714-
1719) ....... 218
ix. How Alberoni before his fall had brought about
the intervention of Sweden, and how this also
ended in disaster (1715-1718) . . . 223
x. Concerning the characters of Alberoni and Dubois . 227
xi. Of the consequences that flowed from the policy
of Stanhope and Dubois, and of the scant justice
these statesmen have received from their fellow-
countrymen . . . . . 233
xii. How Walpole and Townshend tired of opposition
and accepted subordinate offices (1717-1720) . 237
xiii. Concerning the bursting of two bubbles (1720) . 240
BOOK FOUR
Townshend and Walpole (1721-1727)
1. How Walpole became chief minister (1721) . 253
11. Of the composition of Walpole’s administration
(1721) 255
hi. Of Walpole’s aims and methods, and how he dealt
with his rivals and opponents (1721-1742) . 259


PAGE
iv. Concerning the general lines of Walpole’s policy;
how he aimed at fostering national prosperity ;
of his economies ; and of the nature of the work
he undertook and carried through (1721-1742) . 268
v. How Bolingbroke endeavoured to earn his pardon,
and of the delays that occurred in granting it
(1716-1723) 283
vi. How, at a meeting with Walpole, Bolingbroke made
an offer of his services which was rejected (1723) 291
vii. Concerning the sudden rise of lord Carteret, who
won a great reputation in diplomacy, was made
secretary-of-state, and incurred the enmity of his
colleagues Walpole and Townshend (1721-1723) 301
vni. How Carteret, having been tripped up over a treaty
of marriage, was forced to resign his secretary-
ship-of-state and to accept the viceroyalty of
Ireland (1723-1724) ..... 314
ix. How Bolingbroke, having failed to recover his
peerage rights, determined to engage in opposi-
tion (1725) ...... 323
x. Concerning the Pelham connection (1724) . .330
xi. How at the beginning of Walpole’s administration
the Opposition was composed of three indepen-
dent parties (1721-1725) .... 342
xn. Concerning the defection of William Pulteney (1725) 347
xin. How Bolingbroke, Pulteney and Wyndham en-
deavoured to unite the Opposition; but how,
during sixteen years, all their efforts to dislodge
Walpole were unsuccessful (1726-1742) . 351
xiv. How Balance of Power is essential to the sovereign
independence of states, and how the endeavour
to maintain it has led to endless wars . .364
xv. How the adjustment of outstanding differences
among European powers was referred to the
congress of Cambrai, and how, at the end of five
years, no results had been achieved (1720-1724) 370


PAGE
xvi. How disagreement arose between the powers, and
how the peace of Europe was threatened by the
treaties of Vienna and Hanover (1725) . . 378
xvii. How the danger of a general European war was
averted, and how Bolingbroke again failed in his
bid for office (1726-1727) .... 386
xviii. In what respects the views of Townshend and
Walpole differed in regard to the treaties of
Vienna and Hanover (1725-1727) . . . 399
xix. Of the various stages through which Walpole’s
ideas regarding foreign affairs passed, and how
he came to add a fourth fold to his original policy
(1700-1727) 405
xx. Of George I.’s character and of the quality of his
kingship 417


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
George I. From the engraving by George Vertue, 1715,
after a portrait by Sir Godfrey Kneller . . Frontispiece
FACING
Henry St. John, Viscount Bolingbroke. From the
picture by an unknown painter in the National
Portrait Gallery . . . . . . .130
James, First Earl Stanhope. From the picture by an
unknown painter in the National Portrait Gallery . 178
Cardinal Dubois. From the engraving by P. Drevet,
1724, after the portrait by H. Rigaud, 1723 . . 208
Charles Spencer, Third Earl of Sunderland. From
the portrait by an unknown painter, dated 1722. By
kind permission of the Earl Spencer . . .238
Sir Robert Walpole. From a mezzotint drawn and
engraved by G. White, 1715 ..... 254
John, Lord Carteret. From a mezzotint by Peter
Pelham after a portrait by Sir Godfrey Kneller . 302
Charles, Second Viscount Townshend. From the
picture of the School of Sir Godfrey Kneller in the
National Portrait Gallery . . . . .382


BOOK ONE
AN INTRODUCTORY ESSAY ON
POLITICS AND POLITICIANS
VOL. I
B




I. —The general plan.
This is a book about politics. Its subject is the
endless adventure of governing men. Its object is to
show how politicians of various sorts contrived to
carry on governments, and to thwart, discredit and
destroy governments, during the reign of George
the First and a portion of the reign of George the
Second.
The full project is to examine the period between
1714 and 1745. The present volume, however, goes
no further than the death of George the First in 1727.
The next volume carries the commentary down to the
death of Queen Caroline in 1737. The third volume
ends with the death of Sir Robert Walpole in 1745,
and is mainly concerned with the decline and fall of
his great administration. This final volume is still
some way from completion.
This book does not pretend to be a history.
History is a much loftier and more spacious affair. It
does not pay overmuch attention to the idiosyncrasies
of the various actors, but aims at showing all the vital
movements of a certain epoch in their true relations to
one another. History aims at reducing many diverse
things to unity ; whereas in this book no attempt has
been made to do more than follow a single thread of
human activity. I have not concerned myself, except
from necessity, with battles, sieges and campaigns,
with social and industrial progress, or with the evolu-
tion of religion, art, science and literature. My much
humbler theme is the skill and blunderings, the courage
and faint-heartedness, the energy and languor, the


failures and successes of a small number of eminent
persons who followed the trade of politics some two
hundred years ago. My endeavour here has been to
consider their craftsmanship rather than their morals,
and the effects which their actions produced, not so
much on the felicity of their country as on their own
careers.
There is a further reason why this book cannot
claim to be a history. A historian must pick and
shovel for himself. It is not enough to use the results
of other men’s labours, building entirely with materials
already fashioned. I acknowledge, and without shame,
that I have done no digging. It would have been
unnecessary for my purpose, which was merely to
write a commentary on events which history has
already accepted. I have found my materials, not in
a quarry, but rather in a mason’s yard, where many
stones lay ready cut and trimmed. I have used no
books that are not familiar to every reader who has
interested himself in the first half of the eighteenth
century: —Memoirs, Diaries, Letters, ‘ Papers,’ e Char-
acters,’ many of which are well edited and indexed;
histories, biographies and essays of various dates ;
several modern studies by distinguished writers ; and
of course the standard works of reference. Ido not
include in this list the old Parliamentary Reports; but
the fact that these have yielded me litde or nothing is
probably due to my own want of perspicacity. The
National Portrait Gallery, on the other hand, has helped
me in many ways. Men who use the brush are often
as shrewd observers as those who use the pen, and it
is unwise to disregard their testimony. I acknow-
ledge with gratitude my indebtedness to several of
the old painters, and also to those writers, both


dead and living, from whom I have received so
much help.
This book is no more a biography than it is a
history. The fact that Walpole fills the chief place in
it is due to the force of circumstances which made him
the central figure in British politics from 1720 to 1742.
In the present commentary he has been considered
mainly, if not exclusively, as a politician, a parliamen-
tarian and a courtier.
There were many other sides to Walpole’s char-
acter. In sharp contrast with the rigid public econo-
mist, there was Walpole the free-handed prodigal,
whose generous conceptions always needed more for
their realisation than even his immense private income
could supply. 1 There was Walpole the man of taste,
the collector of Old Masters, the builder of houses,
one of which was blamed, even in the eighteenth
century, for its vast dimensions. There was Walpole
the country-gentleman, the practical farmer, the hard-
bitten sportsman. There was Walpole hand-in-glove
with 4 the monied interest ’; in early days almost as
much at home in the City of London as at West-
minster ; a speculator, honest by all accounts, but
shrewd and fortunate. There was Walpole the Church-
of-England man (but possibly a sceptic), who kept a
private chaplain to preach to him at Houghton; and
Walpole the Philistine, whom superior persons found
fault with for his neglect of letters and his contempt
for history. There was Walpole the pattern of friend-
ship and good fellowship, the jovial host, the Fal-
staffian lover. And there was Walpole the patriarch.
1 His income was considered immense in those days. Cf. Lord Morley’s
Walpole, pp. 133-138.


whose solicitude for his children, whether lawfully or
unlawfully begotten, was equalled by his resourceful-
ness in providing for them at the public expense. It
is none of my business to deal with these matters.
The task of writing Walpole’s life would be neither a
short nor an easy one. His multifarious activities
could not be condensed into a brief survey, but would
require to be set out circumstantially. There would
be something inappropriate and absurd in treating this
massive figure lightly. When at last Walpole’s portrait
comes to be painted with truthfulness and sympathy
on a large canvas it is hardly possible that he will seem
a greater minister than he does to-day ; but the reasons
why so many different kinds of people loved him will
be better understood.
II. —An outline of Walpole’s career .
Walpole’s career began when he was twenty-five
and ended only with his life. During these forty-
four years of public service he retained the full use
of his faculties, and till within a few months of his
defeat, enjoyed excellent health.
In Walpole’s earlier days he was twice driven from
office for short periods; but after he became chief
minister in 1721 he had a longer stretch of time in
which to realise his projects than was allowed to any
of his predecessors or successors. 1 A course of such
great length, so normal, and so continuous—in the
sense that it was never diverted by any cataclysm—
1 Only the younger Pitt was chief minister for an equal number of
years ; but with him, before mid-career, there was a cataclysm that forced
him to abandon the policy on which he had set his heart; and afterwards
a break of three years in the continuity of his administration.


is a phenomenon of exceptional interest to the student
of politics.
Our first sight of him is towards the end of William
the Third’s reign, when he brought himself into
Parliament for one of his own boroughs. We see him
at once shouldering his way good-humouredly, with
great assurance and address, into the councils of the
Whig party. He had no natural right of entry there;
for he was neither an aristocrat nor a man of fashion,
but only a stout, fresh-coloured, well-to-do young
Norfolk squire whose manners and accent betrayed a
lack of polish.
In the next dozen years things went very well with
the Whigs, and Walpole turned his abilities to such
good account that in 1705, two years after the accession
of Queen Anne, he was appointed to a minor office.
It soon became apparent that he had a natural dexterity
in matters of finance and in handling members of Par-
liament. But though he rose by rapid promotions to
be the manager, if not actually the leader, of the House
of Commons, the noble oligarchy who controlled the
Whig party continued to regard him, not as one of
themselves, but merely as a useful subordinate.
In 171 1 the Whigs were driven from office, and for
the next three years were hunted unmercifully by their
opponents. Walpole came in for more than his share
of persecution, and this raised him considerably in the
eyes of his own party without causing him any serious
inconvenience. He was now thirty-five years old and
in full vigour of mind and body. His opposition was
indefatigable, his partisanship unfailingly adroit. He
burned incense before all the Whig idols and execrated
all their taboos. But outside his own special province
of finance and parliamentary management, he does not


seem to have yet begun thinking for himself. In such
matters as foreign policy he was content to take his
opinions ready-made from his leaders and from the
Whig tradition. He did not foresee that the peace
of Utrecht, which he denounced with the utmost
vehemence, was essential to the prosperity of Britain;
still less, that it was the foundation on which his own
life’s work was to be built. His attacks were all the
more effective as party business, because they were so
little hampered either by a sense of responsibility or
by too much knowledge. When, in 1712, Henry St.
John was called to the Upper House as Viscount
Bolingbroke, Walpole was acknowledged to be the
most formidable debater left in the Commons.
In August 1714, soon after George the First’s
accession, the Tory administration was dismissed. The
general election that followed a few months later
confirmed the King’s decision, and for more than
two generations the Whigs held a monopoly of
power.
Walpole, now an acknowledged leader of the party,
was made Chancellor of the Exchequer and became
once more the manager of the House of Commons.
The new cabinet, however, did not remain united for
very long. The German courtiers, to serve their own
ends, engaged busily in mischief-making, inflaming
the King against his son and against several of his
ministers, and one set of ministers against another.
Walpole and his brother-in-law. Lord Townshend,
became aware that they were losing influence. After
a short period of dismissals and restorations, of in-
trigues and counter-plots, they found themselves in
Opposition. General Stanhope and Lord Sunderland
were now the undisputed heads of government.


Walpole’s second period of Opposition, lasted no
longer than his first; but it was very different in
character. From 1711 to 1714 Walpole, the pattern of
an orthodox official Whig, had attacked the natural
enemy, a Tory administration; but now, from 1717
to 1720, he was a rebel leader and kept quiscus
company.
After the arrival of George the First the numbers
of the Whig party had shown a sudden and miraculous
increase. Those Whigs who were contented, or still
hopeful of office, were sufficiently numerous to keep
the government securely in power; while the overspill
of hungry, malcontent Whigs provided the Opposition
with more than half its strength. Walpole, having
plenty of his own party ready to follow his lead,
wisely abstained from making alliances with his tradi-
tional foes, the Tories and the Jacobites; nevertheless
he welcomed their assistance, which as a rule was
freely given whenever he attacked the government.
Though Walpole was now a rebel, his position was
more assured than it had been in the earlier period.
He spoke with greater authority. His abilities had
developed and he used them with unremitting energy.
He had by this time learned a good deal about foreign
affairs and other high matters, but he did not choose
to let his knowledge hamper his factious activities.
His sole concern was to give Stanhope and Sunderland
a fall. He scored one sober and statesmanlike success;
but the government, though forced on that occasion
to withdraw its proposals, did not even totter.
Before three years were over Walpole had grown
tired of Opposition. It did not satisfy his ambition
to be the brilliant leader of a hopeless cause; for his
mind was of a positive cast and he longed for the power


that office gives to get things done. In the spring
of 1720, having made terms with his rivals, he and
Townshend rejoined the ministry. The posts allotted
to them showed, however, that their position had been
worsened by their rebellion. Stanhope and Sunderland
were still the heads of government and the returned
penitents were definitely subordinate.
Such an unnatural arrangement of personal forces
could hardly have lasted long in any case ; but in a few
months there came a sudden and unforeseen explosion
which blew it all to bits. The South Sea Bubble burst.
The heads of government were blamed for negligence
and several of their colleagues were found guilty of
corruption. Walpole, by reason of his recent return,
escaped all censure. Certain warnings that he had
uttered earlier in the year, before he rejoined the ad-
ministration, were remembered in his favour. More-
over, his financial abilities were generally believed in.
There was a popular outcry that he should be given
a free hand to save the country from ruin. Sunderland
was forced to resign, and towards the end of winter
Stanhope died.
In April 1721 Walpole became in fact, though not
in name, chief minister; and for the next one-and-twenty
years he governed the United Kingdom.
When the Queen died in December 1737 Walpole
was at the summit of his power. The Queen had
always been his staunchest friend. The King, long
since fully convinced of his loyalty, had lately realised,
that even in the high mystery of foreign affairs, the
judgement of his minister was sounder than his own.
No colleague ventured to oppose or even to intrigue
against the head of government. Parliament, though


the government majority had been reduced in quality
as well as quantity 1 at the previous election, was more
submissive than it had ever been, while the Opposition
was more depressed.
But though Walpole was at the summit of his
power in 1737, he had by that time passed the zenith of
his achievement. Since the failure of his Excise bill in
1733 and his successful ending of the European war in
1735, he had become even more cautious than of
old, and had adventured nothing either in foreign or
domestic affairs.
The course of politics while Walpole’s great ad-
ministration was crumbling is the subject of a con-
cluding volume not yet finished. The story of these
years shows how blindly and ruthlessly our party
system sometimes works for the accomplishment of its
ultimate end. Popular governments are short-lived
plants. The strongest of them soon begins to discover
symptoms of old age. People forget its past services
and become unappreciative of the benefits it continues
to confer. They weary even of its well-doing and turn
welcoming faces to a change.
The character of an Opposition has often very little
to do with its success. Walpole’s assailants were a
leaderless pack, bound together neither by mutual
loyalties nor by a common faith, but only by the
desire of office and by a factitious animosity against
their most conspicuous opponent.
The party system is wasteful; often cruel and un-
just ; but who shall impugn its guiding principle, which
is, that popular institutions cannot keep themselves in
1 Walpole had been beaten in the large constituencies, but had contrived,
with Newcastle’s assistance, to hold enough of the small, corrupt and
* pocket ’ boroughs to give him a comfortable working majority.


vigorous health without constant phlebotomies and
transfusions of new blood ? It is a hard saying, but a
true one, that gratitude is not a sentiment that a nation
can safely entertain towards its servants. Moral obli-
gations of this sort are a matter for historians, on
whose recommendation posterity will sometimes dis-
charge them very handsomely to the memories of
victims long since dead.
From the spring of 1738 to the spring of 1745 was
the period of Walpole’s decline, defeat and death.
The climax of the drama was not when Walpole
reached the summit of his achievement, nor yet a few
years later, at the zenith of his power. It is not till
final defeat begins to cast its shadows that we become
fully conscious of his magnanimity. Fortune turns
against him ; fortune so long his friend. Things go
from bad to worse; he is racked by physical pain;
at every second step he seems to stumble ; and all the
while we feel our admiration growing for qualities in
him which were not fully shown in the days of his
prosperity, still less in those earlier times when he was
fighting his way through factiousness to power.
He fell in February 1742. The three remaining years
of his life were not passed in opposition or intrigue,
but in a loyal retirement. He retained considerable
influence with the King and with several of his
former colleagues who had accepted office in the new
government. Such power as he still possessed he used
always for what he believed to be the public advantage ;
never factiously or for purposes of revenge. He died
in March 1745, in his sixty-ninth year, five months
before the Young Pretender set up his standard at
Glenfinnan.


Statesmen in whose ambitions a love of appro-
bation rather than of power plays the chief part may
find glory in failure or in martyrdom, and occupa-
tion for their declining years in the composition
of brilliant apologias. But great, this-worldly states-
men have no such consolations in their retirement.
In their case downfall is the testing time of character.
For too many of them it is something worse than
eclipse ; they eat their hearts out; their tempers fray ;
they seem to forget the high motives that inspired
their former service; they become mischief-makers
and avengers of their own supposed wrongs without
regard to patriotism. On the other hand, some of
them, and not a few, surprise us by their greatness of
heart, showing themselves in defeat more self-con-
trolled and kindlier than when the world lay at their
feet. Walpole was one of these; and it is a fact which
may be placed to the credit of the much-abused pro-
fession of politics, that there have been so many who
were fit to bear him company.
III. —Some reflections on Walpole's career.
During Walpole’s lifetime the most common charge
against him was that he degraded British politics by
an unparalleled corruption, and this accusation has
gone on echoing ever since. How little justice there
was in singling him out for special condemnation
has been shown by several modern writers. 1 Of course
1 One of the first to set Walpole’s conduct in a true light was Sir Robert
Peel {Lord Stanhope's Miscellanies (First Series), pp. 66-80). The matter is
also dealt with in Lord Morley’s Walpole and in the Right Hon. J. M.
Robertson’s Bolingbroke and Walpole. The judgement of these three writers
is of special value for the reason that practical politics filled a large part of
the lives of each of them.


it cannot be disputed that he bought votes in Parlia-
ment and at elections ; but he bribed no more lavishly
than his immediate predecessors and successors, and
much less lavishly, though much much more shrewdly,
than did George the Third during the first twenty years
of his reign.
Walpole’s capital offence was a less sordid, but a
graver, matter than the hiring of a few score venal
politicians. He must be held in some degree respons-
ible for a lethargy of the national spirit which, apart
from all moral considerations, had become a serious
political danger by the end of his administration.
When at the accession of George the First, Walpole
came into a foremost position the nation was in a ferment
of doubt and apprehension. Within the space of five and
twenty years there had been a revolution ; a change of
dynasty; the failure of that dynasty; a second change
—this time to a dynasty which was regarded with in-
difference by everyone to whom it was not actually
abhorrent. In addition there had been a prolonged
foreign war, possibly the most glorious in our annals ;
but all that most people remembered of it was the
load of debt and the exhaustion it had left behind it.
Within a year of the new King’s coronation a civil war
broke out which smouldered for six months before it
was stifled.
The nation wanted no more revolutions, wars or dis-
turbances of any kind; no reform of the constitution, or
of the law, or of social conditions. Any change in the
dynasty could only be from bad to worse. The utmost
that sanguine people ventured to hope for was a quiet
settling-down under some moderately efficient and not
too dishonest government. Walpole, who saw in this
mood a hopeful symptom of convalescence, made it


the prime end of his policy from first to last to give the
nation rest, prosperity and peace.
If there was to be no war, no revolution, no change
of kings, no energetic recasting of national institutions
or amelioration of the hard lot of mankind—if there
was to be nothing but an orderly, humdrum adminis-
tration, making the best it could of a workaday world
—the most elevated moralist would have found some
difficulty in bringing patriotism, freedom, humanity
and other fine sentiments into the discussion.
At the beginning of Walpole’s administration most
people were acutely conscious of the material need;
and if, towards the end, the spiritual need became a
matter of some urgency, it would have been almost
miraculous had Walpole, the successful artificer of pros-
perity, been conscious of the change. Very fortunately
for England, he was that rare thing, a first-rate states-
man with a first-rate business sense. He would have
been a phenomenon of even greater rarity had he pos-
sessed in addition the highest gifts of moral leadership.
Walpole spoke to his fellow-countrymen in the
same strain that a frank and sensible chairman of a
great public company uses at a shareholders’ meeting.
When he recommended a certain course of action as
being in their true interests he was nearly always right;
and when they would not take his advice they were
nearly always wrong. His public statements shone
with common sense. No one could have made them
who had not possessed in a very high degree several
of the most important political virtues, such as cour-
age, self-control and patience. He seemed to aim always
at getting people to behave like rational human beings,
at showing them the folly of running after will-o’-the-
wisps or of flying into a passion. On the other hand.


his words rarely touched their imaginations, still more
rarely their consciences. He had little to say about
such themes as patriotism, prestige or national glory,
and was never heard discoursing on the duty of
self-sacrifice or the love of humanity. Walpole had
probably a clearer understanding of Everyman in his
Everyday humour than any statesman who has ever
governed England ; but he appears to have had little
or no perception of those inward passionate feelings,
those tremendous hidden forces, which the elder Pitt,
and the younger, and Charles James Fox, each in his
different way, knew so well how to evoke and inspire.
Walpole despised the fashionable cant of patriot-
ism, prestige and glory. Had his life been pro-
longed for another half-century, he would have
despised just as heartily the cant that people then
began to talk about liberty, equality and fraternity.
His own nature was not at all susceptible to the
stimulus of emotion, and he suspected the sincerity
of those who professed to speak under its influence.
He worked ceaselessly for the material prosperity of
the nation; but as he neglected to provide it with
any spiritual nourishment, it sank into a state of fatty
degeneration. By 1744, two years after his adminis-
tration ended, there was such an accumulated loss of
moral force, of manly independence, of alacrity in
national service, that Britain seemed to lie at the
mercy of a foreign invader and a would-be usurper. 1
If Walpole is to be blamed for his public utterances it
1 Horatio Walpole to Mr. Trevor, March 3, 1744 (Coxe’s Memoirs of
Lord Walpole , ii. 70-71). Henry Fox to Sir Charles Hanbury Williams,
Sept. 5, 1745, ‘England, Wade says, and I believe, is for the first comer;
‘ and if you can tell whether the 6000 Dutch, and the ten battalions of English,
or 5000 French or Spaniards, will be there first, you know our fate ’ {ibid.
ii. Ix 3).


must be for a sin of omission; inasmuch as he allowed
the spirit and conscience of the nation to suffocate in
prosperity.
The answer to these criticisms is that Walpole was
a practical politician and not a moralist. His most
imperative duty was to consider the circumstances and
the state of mind in which he found his country when
he came into office. Had he begun by talking in a high
strain, it is unlikely that any one would have listened to
him. Had he set up as a reformer of anything, except
the details of administration and the efficiency of his
departmental staff, no one would have thanked him for
doing so, and the great majority would have cursed
him for an officious meddler. His government, instead
of lasting for over twenty years, would have fallen
within a twelvemonth. And had he gone hunting glory
on the battlefields of Europe he must have neglected
commerce and bled white the already war-wasted
resources of his country. Without his cautious hus-
bandry Britain might easily have sunk into a second-
rate power, and George the Second might have gone
back for good to his Hanoverian Electorate.
The case against Walpole does not, however, rest
entirely on his public utterances. His offence was
something more than a sin of omission when, in his
unguarded private talk with friends and acquaintances,
colleagues and opponents, old and young, he affected
to jeer at patriotism as an unprofitable trade, an insin-
cerity, an illusion. On the most favourable construction
this was the good-humoured, defensive banter of one
who hated talking cant or listening to it, who also hated
talking business out of business hours or with any but
the few persons whose official duty it was to discuss
it with him. Unfavourably regarded, however, it
VOL. i c


was a deliberate attempt to deter young men of fortune
and ability from joining, or if they had already joined,
to detach them from, that section of the Opposition
which styled itself ‘ the Patriots ’ with as little real justifi-
cation as Walpole posed as a despiser of patriotism.
A politician, like a clergyman, is wise not to jest
too freely about the mysteries of his vocation. The
piety of a ribald priest and the honesty of a cynic
statesman are always suspect, though occasionally the
ribaldry of the one and the cynicism of the other are
no more than thin veneers. The less intelligent of
Walpole’s followers took his sayings at their face value.
It cannot be denied that he was to some extent a
corrupter of youth. Fortunately, however, there is no
defect in an old leader which so effectually discourages
the enlistment of young men under his banner as an
appearance of cynicism. Walpole had chiefly himself
to blame for the fact that in his last great struggle
—when right was clearly on his side—all the young
politicians were ranged against him, except, oddly
enough, Henry Fox, the indubitable cynic.
Walpole’s way of talking was largely affectation.
Most men preach much above their own practice; but
with him it was the opposite. When he preached self-
interest and scoffed at patriotism, his own career belied
his professions. In the roll of British statesmen whom
we honour few have held higher notions of duty to the
state, or have used a severer self-discipline in its service.
A minister whose genius accords with the needs and
tendencies of his time, and who is seen fighting his
best, overcoming difficulties and bringing the cause he
believes in to a successful conclusion, is the most
satisfying spectacle which politics displays.


On the other hand, the most heroic spectacle is a man
who remains undaunted when his early prosperous
career is suddenly baulked by a catastrophe. If he
would serve his country he must throw aside the
work in which his heart delighted, must himself pull
down and ruin his own projects, in order to cope
with an emergency repugnant to his ambition and un-
suited to his genius. His inspiration is solely duty. He
can see the end, though the means to it bewilder him.
Lacking a natural aptitude for his task, he botches and
bungles at every stage ; it is sheer force of character
that carries him through ; and, like the younger Pitt,
he may die without realising that his efforts have not
been spent in vain.
The saddest spectacle of all is a man of sterling
character whose genius is so antipathetic to the particu-
lar emergency in which he finds himself as to stupefy his
thoughts and paralyse his actions. He drifts to dis-
aster, grappling blindfold with forces which are beyond
his comprehension, failing without really fighting. And
yet had the difficulties been of some different order,
they might have been much greater than they were,
and he would have surmounted them victoriously.
For rather more than three years before he fell,
Walpole was engaged in just such a hopeless struggle
as the last of these. But if we regard his career as a
whole we are amazed at his good fortune. He had but
little experience of baulked endeavours. Occasionally
he was forced to divert his energies from domestic to
foreign affairs, and to waste valuable time in humouring
or overcoming the prejudices of the court; but for
thirty-eight out of his forty-one years of public service
the current on which he steered his course was one
that carried him on the way he wished to go.


IV. —On the variety of witnesses .
The chief quandary that perplexes the writer of a
book like this is whom to believe, and how far to
believe them; and it must always be the same whenever
an attempt is being made to interpret the disputes and
conflicts of mankind. As a student of Lincoln’s Inn,
about the date of Queen Victoria’s first jubilee, I used
too often to neglect the drudgery of the pupil-room
for the livelier entertainment of the Courts. There
was nothing in that rich and varied comedy so
diverting as the witnesses. The great majority of
these were mindful of their oath to this extent —
they were resolved to tell ‘nothing but the truth.’
Few, however, were willing to tell ‘ the whole truth.’
There was nearly always something that a passing
honest witness was anxious to keep back. The reser-
vation might be important, or it might only be some
little thing that he considered, perhaps rightly, to be
immaterial to the case and nobody’s business but his
own. And yet, no matter how carefully he stood on
guard over his secret, he seldom left the box without
blurting it out. —This, though with many gradations,
was the prevailing type of witness.
The transparently frank and open witness was much
rarer. As a rule the jury knew him at once for what
he was, and gave him their full confidence before his
evidence-in-chief was ended. Only a blunderer or a
very young counsel would try to discredit him in
cross-examination.
Then there was the loquacious egotist, whose
testimony was a tissue not so much of lies as of
illusions. When he departed from the truth, which
he did frequently, it was not from a fixed purpose, but


merely for something to say. It was seldom that he
benefited his own side or id anyone except himself
much harm.
There was the fly-away witness who darted zig-zag
like a woodcock; quick-witted; very voluble about
trifles and personalities; never orderly; often irrele-
vant, distracting, and self-contradictory; yet for all that,
a giver of useful and, occasionally, of disconcerting
information, but heedlessly, as it seemed, rather than
by intention.
There was the cool and sophisticated witness,
unwilling to tell a positive untruth if he could help it;
but anxious at the same time to produce a general
impression that was false. His evidence had been
thought out carefully beforehand. He could keep his
head and his temper under cross-examination, and
sometimes would rap a hostile counsel over the
knuckles ; and he would leave the box with his char-
acter, in a technical sense, unsmirched and his credit
unshaken. But during the pause before the next wit-
ness was called, Baron Huddleston or Mr. Justice
Hawkins or Lord Chief Justice Coleridge would cast
an interrogatory glance at the jurymen ; and the jury-
men, flattered by this dumb consultation, would reply
by glances that seemed to warn the judge against
being taken in by a plausible impostor.
Then there was the witness of an opposite pattern,
whose overmastering desire was to tell the whole truth
without omitting a single circumstance that had ever
come under his observation, or—if the judge would let
him—that he had ever heard tell of. When this morbid
passion for disclosing everything received the slightest
check, his mind, which was none of the most spacious,
became immediately congested; his answers grew


more and more confused; he fell into the rustiest,
clumsiest and most obvious traps. It was fine sport
for the groundlings. There was * laughter in Court ’
as he floundered out of one contradiction into another.
Occasionally he would burst into tears. But when
he left the box the glances that passed between judge
and jury were not unkindly, and seemed to say : 4 A
4 ridiculous fellow ! But we understand what he was
4 trying to tell us and, on the whole, we believe him. ,
Each of these types has its counterpart among the
writers of Memoirs, Reminiscences, Diaries, Letters,
4 Papers ’ and 4 Characters.’ Most of the evidence that
was given during the first half of the eighteenth century
is of the majority type: that is to say, the writers were
reasonably honest men, who did not wish to tell un-
truths, though very few of them had any intention of
telling the whole truth. Bolingbroke is perhaps the
least candid and Chesterfield the least reserved.
At the beginning of the second half of the century
(which is much richer in evidence of every kind than
the first half) we have an admirable example of the
transparently truthful witness in Lord Waldegrave,
and of the loquacious egotist in Bubb Dodington,
whose incredibility reaches such a pitch, that even
his self-damning admissions are too doubtful evidence
to hang him on. 1 Lady Cowper is a good example
of the fly-away witness, 2 and Horace Walpole, son to
Sir Robert, is one of the most glorious that ever
1 Lord Waldegrave’s Memoirs cover only four years, 1752 to 1756, and
Bubb Dodington’s eleven, 1749 to 1761.
2 Lady Cowper kept a Diary from 17x4 to her death in 1724 ; but only
two years (October 1714 to October 1716), and two months (April and May
1720) were ever published. She is believed to have destroyed the remainder
when her husband, towards the close of his life, fell under suspicion of having
been mixed up in a Jacobite intrigue.


put pen to paper. Lord Hervey is a perfect type of
the cool and sophisticated witness. But there is no
exact parallel to the copiously overflowing witness ;
for the old Horatio Walpole, brother to Sir Robert,
though he had a passion for periodically emptying his
mind of all its contents, was controlled by his sense of
order and a deliberate intention.
Unfortunately for my present purpose, Horace
Walpole, who is the most valuable of all these wit-
nesses, does not begin to testify at first hand on political
affairs until 1741, the year before his father’s fall. From
then onwards, till his death in 1797, his Letters , written
with great frequency and freedom, throw a vivid light
on public as well as social events; and though this
light is often wayward and malicious, his travesties
and exaggerations correct one another in the long run
with a charming frankness.
Horace Walpole’s Reminiscences were written near
the close of his long life, and the Walpoliana were
collected by a pious hand from his own notes and
from jottings of his table talk. Though references are
made in both these books to events that happened
during his father’s administration, the value of this
evidence is no higher than hearsay; nor indeed does
it often rise even to this modest level, being rather
the product of Horace Walpole’s ingenious fancy than
a serious record of facts. It would be unreasonable
and ungrateful to find fault with one of the greatest
and most entertaining gossips that ever lived because
he was not also a rigorous respecter of truth. Horace
Walpole wrote as he talked—to entertain his audience.
These later trifles consist mainly of good stories that
he had been telling all his fife, improving them as he
went along. It is amusing, however, to note how


many historians and biographers have been taken in
by the glitter of paste. There is hardly one of them
whose works are not decked with sayings and anec-
dotes culled from the latest, the least credible, though
not the least lively, of Horace Walpole’s writings. 1
V.—Lord Hervey’s evidence.
A judge would do but little justice if he admitted
none but truthful testimony; for the worst of liars,
when he trips, is often the best of witnesses. The
evidence of the cool and sophisticated Lord Hervey is
untruthful, but most important. He often trips, and
finally falls headlong.
The least of Hervey’s offences is that he is often
careless, and does not trouble to check his recollec-
tions with official records. Even when he is telling
the truth, he nearly always sets it aslant. When certain
names are mentioned the narrative runs crooked. His
record of events, taken as a whole, is substantially
true, but his pictures of the various actors are essen-
tially false. He lies, as many others have done, from
malice; but his is not a playful malice, like Horace
Walpole’s—an artistic impulse to make a good story
or to turn an enemy into a figure of fun—a cruel
entertainment perhaps, but one that readers can enjoy
without intolerable twinges of conscience. Hervey’s
malice always leaves a bad taste in the mouth; there
1 Horace Walpole’s famous Memoirs of the reigns of George 11. and
George 111. (1751 to 1771) are of an altogether different character ; but
they do not touch the period with which this book is concerned. The
Memoirs are much less spontaneous than the Letters, having been several
times rewritten and heavily revised. They were not published until many
years after his death.


is no gaiety in it; it is slow, morose and vindictive.
A man must be blamed for lying who puts it to such
anti-social uses.
Hervey has a case to prove that simple truth is
incapable of upholding. He seems to hope that the
favourable judgement of posterity may do away the
discredit he had earned among his contemporaries.
He would have us believe, not only that he was
more intelligent, but also more disinterested and more
honourable than the contemptible throng he saw
around him. But he loses our sympathy from the
start through an inability to restrain himself from
bespattering with jets of detraction people whom he
professes to admire, people who had shown him
constant kindness, people to whom we may even
believe him to have been sincerely attached. Nor is
he unconscious of what he is doing; but he would
have us understand that he does it in the interests of
truth. He aimed at presenting his characters in the
dryest possible light. But the atmosphere is much
too dry, and needs some moisture of human kindness
to make it translucent. The final result is not a vision
of superlative clarity, but a displeasing and incredible
distortion.
It does not need much knowledge of the world to
realise that the men and women he describes were merely
the usual human crowd that busies itself on the stage
and in the wings of politics and courts; people who put
their own interests before those of their neighbours
most days in the week; whose ambitions are often
tawdry; who act meanly and unscrupulously on many
occasions. But we know there was another side that
Hervey does not show us. The players were not as
he painted them—mirthless people without bowels.


all bent on self-advancement and nothing else. They
played their game for place, and power, and pleasure
with gusto. With gusto ! —and this is one of the chief
differences between them and him. It was a society
honeycombed, like our own, with jealousies and
rivalries; but for all that, there was a great deal of
friendship, gaiety and honest laughter.
Hervey could not believe in the existence of any
world more spacious than that one in which the
narrowness of his own soul had pent him up. Those
whom he might well have envied he merely despised.
He looked on them as his inferiors because of their
exuberance, their lack of logic, the energy and eager-
ness with which they pursued a large variety of irre-
concilable interests. He could not realise that these
objects of his contempt lived in a wider and a freer
world than his own. He had no sympathy with the
lusty vitality of ordinary men. He scourges their folly
and is still more severe upon their morals. But can
we be sure that the morals he charges them with were
in fact theirs ? Another view is possible—that without
realising what he was doing, he had taken a tracing
of his own heart and made all his characters in his own
image.
Hervey had exceptionally favourable opportunities
for using his eyes and ears. As Vice-Chamberlain, he
was Walpole’s minister in attendance on the Queen
from 1730 until her death at the end of 1737. All this
time he lodged at court, where he led the life of a tame
cat. Caroline delighted in his wit and gossip, and
treated him less like a courtier than a favourite impish
son. We have no means of knowing if his judgement
carried weight in council; but he was a faithful inter


mediary. Both Walpole and the Queen gave him a
large share of their confidence, which is a testimonial
of some value. He was disliked by the King, whose
antipathy he returned most cordially. Though frail in
body and effeminate in manner he was no coward; he
fought his own enemies and Walpole’s with speeches,
pamphlets and the sword.
After the Queen’s death Hervey’s opportunities of
knowledge were not so great and his conduct became
equivocal. He at once attached himself to the King
and succeeded in winning a considerable measure of
his confidence. In 1740 he was taken into the cabinet
as Lord Privy Seal; but by that time Walpole’s ad-
ministration was drifting very near the rocks.
On a casual reading of Hervey’s Memoirs we are apt
to take the bitterness of his moralisings for a genuine
thing; but his editor has destroyed this illusion in a
supplemental chapter. 1
When Walpole fell in 1742, Hervey did not choose,
like Henry Fox, to share the fate of his leader, but
clung to office so tenaciously that it needed almost
physical force to remove him. The new ministers had
no wish to avail themselves of his services, for they
regarded him as a self-seeking intriguer who would do
them mischief with the King. Hervey’s own corre-
spondence 2 proves that their suspicions were fully
justified.
Carteret, who was the chief figure in the new
1 Hervey tells the whole story with great naivete in his letters to his
father, Lord Bristol (July 1742). ( Memoirs , edited by the Right Hon. J. W.
Croker, vol. iii. pp. 378-397.)
2 ‘ One point the Duke of Newcastle, Mr. Pelham and Mr. Pulteney
‘ certainly agree in is to get me from the King’s ear, and not to suffer the
‘traversing power to all their schemes, which they have felt in so many
‘instances I have there,’ etc. etc. ( Memoirs , vol. iii. p. 388).


cabinet, behaved with his usual courtesy and consider-
ation; but he made it clear that the Lord Privy
Seal must resign. Hervey protested: if he was to
suffer such an outrage, at least he might justly claim
an office of equivalent dignity as compensation.
Carteret regretted that no such office was available.
Hervey, continuing to protest, slowly abated his de-
mands, but met with a refusal at every stage. It is his
own description, and not that of an enemy, that shows
him cringing, whining and snarling; trumpeting his
supposed great services in the past; offering to protect
the King from the new ministers ; scolding and bully-
ing when his offer was refused ; imploring the King to
take pity on him ; back-biting the ministers ; begging
Carteret to enrol him among his followers ; flattering
Carteret and vowing fidelity to him, but at the same
time seeking to sow dissension between him and his
colleagues ; finally threatening in round terms —‘ lam
‘ not humble enough neither to think I shall be quite a
‘feather in whatever scale your lordship chooses to
‘ throw me/
It was all in vain. Even his last piteous supplication
that he might be made a lord of the bedchamber with a
pension of two thousand a year was denied. 1 Weary of
his importunities, the King offered him a pension of
1 ‘ If your Majesty, to prove I am not banished your presence and
‘ councils, will make me a lord of your bedchamber ; and to show you do not
‘mean to limit me in my circumstances, will add a pension of £2OOO per
‘ annum for thirty years on Ireland—though by this I shall fall so much in
‘ rank, and lessen my present income six or seven hundred pounds a year, yet
‘ as I desire nothing but a creditable and plausible pretence to support your
‘ Majesty’s measures with the same steadiness I have hitherto done, so I think
‘ I can justify the acceptance of this small compensation for the hardship the
‘whole world allows has been inflicted on me’ ( Memoirs, vol. iii. p. 389).
There is nothing unusual in the pattern of this letter, which is probably
as familiar to a modern Prime Minister as it was to George the Second.


three thousand a year for life. This, with an air of
virtue, Hervey refused: unaccompanied by any mark
of royal confidence, 4 it would hurt his character/
Moreover, money was not his main object, for he had
a rich and generous father. What he could not bear
was to be cut off from those pleasures of the back-
stairs that he had enjoyed for so many years. A post at
court, however humble, would give him opportunities
with the King and enable him to make his market
with individual ministers who might fear or favour his
intrigues.
For once Hervey’s sympathies are wholly on the
side of his victim. There is not a touch of mockery or
scorn in his self-portraiture. He mistakes an abject
confession for an apologia that must set him forever
beyond reproach. Nowhere in the Memoirs that he
wrote with such cold detachment does he describe so
vividly as in these letters to his father the character of
a time-server who has lost his self-respect.
Many a politician has been a fine jumble of contrast-
ing qualities, and of such a one it is usual to say that
he was 4 a strange mixture.’ If Hervey seems stranger
to us than any of his contemporaries it is because he
was so little of a 4 mixture,’ and because so many of
the common elements of humanity were left out of
his composition. He saw nothing by sunlight. His
own character was visible to him only as a shadow
reflected darkly in a looking-glass. Lady Mary Mon-
tague, a friendly critic, divided the human race
into 4 Men, Women and Herveys,’ and her conceit
comes nearer the mark than Pope’s elaborate ferocity.
The famous character of Sporus reveals more of the
poet’s mind than it does of his enemy’s. We can see
Pope quivering with rage —a painful and terrible


reality; but his execration of Hervey is hardly more
than a magnificently witty abstraction.
VI. —How the Art of Politics, like nearly every-
thing else, is mixed up with Morals.
The politician in the practice of his peculiar art
must take account of several outside forces; and among
these is morals, which can never be kept out of any
discussion on human affairs.
We are told that there is water in all our food,
even in a cracknel biscuit, and that in most of our
food there is more water than anything else. It is
somewhat the same with morals as with water.
Revolts have been frequent against its overweening
pretensions to be consulted on every occasion; but
these revolts never seem to be permanently success-
ful. Two generations ago there was a great struggle
to rid the fine arts of this tyranny, and Ruskin,
who maintained that it was part of the painter’s
business to inculcate virtue, appeared to suffer a
defeat. The dog with tears in its eyes, mourning its
dead master, was at last hooted and pelted off the
course. But one has only to read a few lines of a
modern art criticism to discover that morals, having
been turned out of the door, have crept back again
through the window. And not even natural science
is a sanctuary where one is safe from the intrusion.
Astronomy has always been suspected of a dalliance,
and not long ago it was claimed that morals could not
be apprehended in their naked perfection by anyone
who was not conversant with the higher mathematics.
Even in a ‘thieves’ kitchen’ there is probably much
talk of morals of some odd kind.


In a thousand ways the art of politics is directly
affected by moral considerations. Nevertheless, politics
cannot properly be regarded as a branch of virtuous
conduct; for though the two things are often inter-
twined, each has its own separate root and stem. The
prime motive of the politician is not to do good to
humanity or even to his own country, but simply to
gain power for himself. Yet he will inevitably fail if
he refuses homage to the moral standards of his par-
ticular age. And moreover—though this is a different
matter —the great majority of politicians are to some
extent restrained and impelled by their own con-
sciences. In taking stock of a politician, however, the
first question is not whether he was a good man who
used righteous means, but whether he was successful
in gaining power, in keeping it, and in governing ;
whether, in short, he was skilful at his particular craft
or a bungler.
If a politician would keep his followers loyal to
him, he must be careful not to outrage their feelings
of right and wrong. His course of action is therefore
determined from the beginning by the morals of other
people. Unless he can persuade his own party that
his intentions are consistent with its standards of
public conduct, he may as well go out of business.
For the approval of his adherents is the breath of his
nostrils, the wind in his sails; without it he can do
nothing. An artist, starving in a garret because he
has ventured to outrage the popular taste, may yet
paint masterpieces; but political masterpieces can only
be made by a politician working in energetic partner-
ship with a prevalent opinion.
To gain power, to keep it, and to govern —these
are the special business of a politician, just as it is a


working bee’s business to make honeycomb and
honey. But we are entitled to ask—how did he gain
power ? how did he keep it ? what did he do with it
when he had it ? And the answers to these questions
are always mixed up with morals.
Morals indeed are waiting for us on the very
threshold of our inquiry; for it is not merely the
business but the duty , of a politician to govern. The
first need of human society is to be governed. If
a politician does actually succeed in governing, he
thereby produces some good, no matter how he governs.
His laws may not be founded on strict justice; but
the probability that they will be enforced by his strong
hand is something to be thankful for; an escape,
by so much, from anarchy. If he keeps order of
any sort, people are no longer desperate from un-
certainty, but are encouraged to begin thinking of
the future. Peaceful citizens, who desire nothing so
much as to get on with their work, may continue to
groan under a load of taxes ; but at least they are
protected to some extent against an unofficial horde of
cunning, treacherous and violent oppressors.
On the other hand, if a politician, having gained
power, should neglect to govern, and should dissipate
his energies in an endeavour to do good of other
kinds, he will certainly fail both in his endeavour and
in his duty. And of this, history shows many sad
examples.
VII. —The case of Giovanpagolo of Perugia.
Even at the end of the fifteenth and the beginning
of the sixteenth century the voice of conscience and
the fear of public disapproval both acted as restraints


upon political ambition. An instance is given by
Machiavelli in his account of Giovanpagolo, who had
usurped the government of Perugia. The character
of this man was such that he might have been believed
free from all scruples. He lived in incest with his
sister, and in order to obtain his princedom he had
murdered his nephews and many others of his kin-
dred.
Perugia had the good or ill fortune to excite the
greed of Pope Julius the Second, who determined to
seize it by force of arms. Pushing on impetuously
ahead of his troops he entered the hostile city with an
insignificant bodyguard. By this extraordinary act of
rashness he placed himself, and the whole College of
Cardinals who accompanied him, at the mercy of a man
whom he had come openly and avowedly to destroy.
Giovanpagolo had the game in his own hands.
He had only to give the order and the gates of the city
would have been closed and the Pope’s bodyguard
cut to pieces. He could have filled his treasury with
the ransoms of the cardinals and made an end of
Julius the Second. The Papal army of mercenaries,
left without a leader and a paymaster, would have
melted away.
Giovanpagolo was not squeamish, but he baulked
at putting down a Pope. Machiavelli blames him for
lack of spirit: he should have been ‘ splendidly wicked/
and won ‘ a deathless renown as the first to teach the
* prelates how little those who live and reign as they do
‘ are to be esteemed.’ By such an action *he would
‘ have shown a greatness far transcending any infamy
*or danger that could attach to it.’ But Giovanpagolo
thought differently, and meekly suffered himself to be
led into captivity,
VOL. i d


VIII. —Some modern dilemmas.
At the present time there are states in western
Europe and in the New World where no one would
think of using assassination or any of the cruder
forms of physical violence for the achievement of
his political ends. But even in countries where these
methods are obsolete or in abeyance, the modern
politician is often faced, like Giovanpagolo, by
dilemmas in which his conscience, or his fear of public
opinion, restrains or deflects the natural current of his
ambition.
A common example of such a dilemma is when a
politician sees an opportunity for setting the policy and
motives of his opponents in an odious light. He may
be well aware that their motives are honest, and that
their policy has been determined under pressure of
circumstances, and solely by a regard for the national
interest. On the other hand, he may see his way to
distort their proceedings so as to inflame popular
prejudice against them. He may believe that, riding
on a whirlwind of calumny and misrepresentation,
he will succeed in destroying the government and
stepping into its shoes. Is he to seize this obvious
advantage, or is he to let it slip ?
As a wary politician he will consider carefully,
before coming to a decision, whether the calumnies
and misrepresentations he thinks of using are likely
to recoil upon his own head. If it seems pretty certain
that, with good management on his part, they cannot
be refuted in time to prevent his victory, he will
next consider whether subsequent exposure is likely
to make an indelible black mark against him on the
popular memory, or whether, falling on indifferent


ears, it will be soon forgotten or easily explained away.
If he should come to the conclusion that popular
disapproval is not a serious danger, he may then refer
the matter to his conscience. His chief object is to ruin
his enemies, whom he knows to be equally desirous
of ruining him. What he proposes to do will un-
doubtedly hit them very hard ; incidentally, however,
it will injure his country. True ! But taking a broad
view of the problem, surely the immediate injury to his
country must appear a trivial thing in comparison with
the ultimate benefit which his country will gain by
sending the present ministers about their business and
installing himself and his friends in their place ? If
his conscience is not appeased by these reflections, he
may go a step farther and consider whether the pro-
posed line of attack is one that he would condescend to
use in his private affairs. Should this final test prove
unfavourable to his project, he may nevertheless
conclude with a sigh, that public and private affairs
stand on different footings. Nor will anyone but a
dreamy idealist deny that this is true, and that it must
ever remain true until the government of mankind is
conducted on some other system than any that has yet
been practised.
Few men are placed in such fortunate circumstances
as to be able to gain office, or to keep it for any length
of time, without misleading or bamboozling the
people. A classic instance of the difficulty of plain
dealing is, that though men can often be induced,
when their faculties are on the alert, to make an
admirable resolution, they are not easily kept at the
sticking point. Their decision is rarely fixed so firmly
or so permanently in their minds that when the bills


fall due which by implication they have accepted they
will honour them without protest. It is often harder
to induce them to do the things by which alone their
resolution can be carried into effect than it was at
the beginning to lead them to it. This arises not
from perfidy, but from forgetfulness or confusion of
mind, or because some new interest has driven out
the old. Sometimes, as with children, their attention
must be occupied with an entertaining toy while the
politician stealthily makes the matter secure; some-
times, like horses, they have to be blindfolded in
order to get them out of a burning stable.
In dealing with foreign nations the politician who
wishes to act uprightly is even harder put to it; for
there the difficulty is not popular ignorance and sim-
plicity, but the expert knowledge of able officials who,
as part of their professional training, have had to make
themselves conversant with the blunders, deceptions
and disappointments of the past, and who are filled
with suspicions that are none the less justified because
they happen to be centuries old.
If the conscience of an honest man lays down stern
rules, so also does the art of politics. At a juncture
where no accommodation is possible between the
two, the politician may be faced by these alterna-
tives :— 4 Shall I break the rules of my art in
£ order to save my private honour ? or shall I break
‘the rules of my conscience in order to fulfil my
‘ public trust ? *
The British blend of representative with party
government leaves a politician no choice but to use his
best endeavours to ruin his opponents. This is the
plain truth; though there are infinite differences of


opinion as to the particular methods he is entitled to
use on any given occasion. Broadly speaking there
seem to be no limits set to attacks upon the public con-
duct of opponents, except when the country is in
actual danger of invasion, or of civil war, or of some
other stupendous calamity. On the other hand, the
rules which profess to restrain attacks upon their
private conduct are of a bewildering nicety and so in-
geniously contrived that practically anything may be
said against an enemy which has a reasonable chance of
being believed, providing only that the proper persons
are put forward to say it.
It is uncertain whether, during the past fifty years,
there has been a tightening or a slackening of the rules
that are supposed to regulate attacks on private conduct.
Odium has a way of shifting to new objects, and
various blemishes that formerly excited prejudice are
now no longer worth dragging to light in the hope of
putting an enemy to shame. It is for this reason per-
haps, rather than from any growth of chivalry, that the
vices of gambling and inebriety excite less unfavour-
able comment than they once did, and that we hear less
than we used to do about candidates for Parliament
being Roman Catholics, or Jews, or freethinkers, or
atheists. Yet it is not so many years since several people
were harried much beyond their deserts, because they
had happened to engage in a few indiscreet specula-
tions; since others were pursued without either justice
or mercy, because, long before they took office, they had
made some trivial investments which it was pretended
must afterwards have influenced them corruptly in the
discharge of their ministerial functions ; since others
again were ruined because they had been taken in
adultery.


When charges are brought against an opponent’s
private character, the leaders and the more respectable
members of the party that stands to gain by the scandal
are usually found looking the other way or up into the
clouds. And we are sometimes told semi-officially that
such men as these would not stoop to pick up missiles
from the gutter. But they always seem to have friends
whose loins are suppler. The party press, inspired no
doubt by a sense of duty, but also by hopes of a wider
circulation, abounds in verbatim reports and illuminat-
ing paragraphs. It fills its columns with the censorious
hayings of a class of persons whom the Americans call
4 sin-hounds.’ In normal times these denunciations are
bad copy —being directed against a general depravity;
but they acquire the value of large type and prominent
positions when their object is some illustrious scape-
goat. The fastidious politician may with safety leave
his erring enemy to the mercies of a pack that can do
its hunting without horn or holloa.
The moralist will judge a politician as he judges
other men, insisting that the question of salvation or
damnation is determined by a code of universal laws.
The historian, on the other hand, will make many
allowances for those who are engaged in the endless
adventure of governing men. He will not attempt to
tabulate a special code appropriate to this profession;
but will content himself, so far as morals are con-
cerned, with the general statements, that the greatest
virtue a politician can possess is patriotism, and that
we must judge his patriotism, not on scattered
episodes, but on the whole tenour of his career.


I X.-A digression on several words that most people
use reluctantly.
I fancy there are few writers who do not regard the
word 4 patriot ’ as a stumbling-block. It has an unmelo-
dious sound and a form that, if not exactly pompous,
has a kind of buckram stiffness. Moreover, some of
its associations have been blown upon ever since Dr.
Johnson defined it as the last refuge of a scoundrel.
It carries with it a suggestion of unnecessary noise and
vaunting, and of defiance hurled broadcast from a
place of safety. Custom has tended to restrict its use
to occasions when a country’s competitions or conflicts
with other countries are under discussion; so much
so, that the newspapers would hardly describe a man
who devoted his life to reducing infant mortality as
a patriot, which he certainly is, but as a humanitarian,
which is an even uglier word and bears quite as doubtful
a reputation.
4 Patriotism ’ and 4 patriotic,’ on the other hand, are
words that no writer on politics can do without, much
as he may sometimes wish that others could be found
which would convey the purity of his idea without the
dross. But there are no others that lie ready to his hand.
4 Love of one’s own country ’ is a clumsy phrase, and it
lacks a corresponding adjective. Nor is it adequate;
for it does not call up the idea of an enterprising
principle, but of a passive state.
In nations meekness is not a virtue, but a con-
temptible and very dangerous vice. There are many
occasions when patriotism may without reproach hold
its head high and speak sternly to the outside world.
But patriotism will speak quite as potently, though in


different tones, when it is concerned, as Walpole’s
was, with the internal peace, order and prosperity of
the country.
Perfect patriotism is very rare, and no one would
pretend that Walpole was immaculate. He avoided,
however, the commonest fault of all, which is to
remind other people of their duty while neglecting
one’s own. But though he freely gave himself to
England, he did not choose, or did not dare, to call
for sacrifices from the English people. Under his ad-
ministration national patriotism grew soft and flabby
for want of exercise. We expect more from a leader
than that he should merely give : true patriotism, as
both the Pitts knew well, will never be afraid to ask.
Patriotism is not a cosmopolitan principle, for it
sets the moral and material good of a particular nation
above every other aim. It practises and calls for self-
sacrifice. It offers and demands, when there is need, an
unlimited devotion of effort, property and life. It
regards its own country very much as bees, wasps and
ants regard their respective hives, nests and heaps. In
mankind, however, the altruistic propensity is rare
enough to be counted as a virtue; whereas, among
these insects, it is so universal as to exclude the notion
of freewill; and for that reason we call it an instinct,
meaning nothing by the term but that we can find no
explanation for its prevalence.
Patriotism puts well-being before wealth, security
before both, and sovereign independence over all. It
does not regard national glory with indifference, or
with feelings of shame or disgust, as something
meretricious, but with frank delight, as a possession
of great price. But it places authority and respect in
the counsels of the world far beyond glory. At this


point, however, serious controversy begins; a contro-
versy that runs through the whole history of politics.
For while there are some who hold that the life and
sovereign independence of the nation are the supreme
and ultimate considerations, there are others who
maintain, with an austerer piety, that ruin is not too
high a price to pay for saving the national honour.
‘ Patriotism * and ‘patriotic’ cannot be avoided;
for there are no synonyms, and few circumlocutions
that will serve. But most writers seem to shy at the
word ‘patriot’ except when they wish to pay an
equivocal compliment to people of the brigand type
who abound in Eastern Europe. If a man is rash
enough to proclaim himself a patriot he falls at once
under suspicion : it should be enough to say, ‘ I am
an Englishman.’
And this leads us to another difficulty of nomen-
clature : he could not possibly say ‘ I am a Briton.’
The word ‘ Briton ’ is intolerable. The man who
can unshamefacedly call himself by such a name will
not flinch at proclaiming himself a patriot. Honest
people who, to a fine and rousing tune, sing of them-
selves lustily as Britons who ‘ never will be slaves,’
could hardly speak the words without discomfort, or
turn the verses into prose without a blush. Even the
most uncompromising Scot will resort, as a rule, to
subterfuges rather than use this absurd generic term.
On the other hand, the adjective ‘ British,’ after a
long struggle, is now so well established that in various
connections we use it in preference to any other. For
example, we speak naturally of the British Army and the
British Empire, and in using this adjective the inten-
tion—of most of us, at any rate —is respectful. We


speak no less naturally of the British Public and the
British Matron ; but here the adjective has a quizzical
flavour. From this difference we may perhaps con-
clude that the tradition of the word 4 British ’ is not
yet so permeated with reverence as to make a jocular
use of it appear offensive. 1
The word 4 Britain ’ we tolerate as a convenient term
of denotation; but it lacks both bouquet and after-
taste. One can love or hate England, but not so
easily Britain. It was England and not Britain that the
Germans prayed God to 4 strafe.’ Let us be candid :
neither 4 Britain ’ nor 4 British ’ has any magic in
it. Their thin sound is without power to touch our
imagination through the ear; while their tradition
is too recent to have wound itself round our hearts.
4 England ’ and 4 Scotland,’ on the other hand, are
words of great beauty, though the first is the more
melodious of the two. The traditions of both are
rich and potent; the growths, not of a few centuries,
but of more than a thousand years. They are words
that can stand alone in oratory or writing, and produce
their effect without an attendant clause. Not so,
4 Britain.’
Since the time when King James the Sixth incor-
porated South Britain with his ancestral dominions.
1 In North Britain we have our own difficulties. ‘ Scotland ’is a noble
word ; but we can never agree among ourselves what is the appropriate
adjective ; and none is entirely satisfactory. ‘ Scotch ’, though it has Sir
Walter’s great authority behind it, is repellent to most ears ; ‘ Scots ’ is
correct but archaic, suitable in certain connections (Scots Guards'), but not
for general use ; ‘ Scottish ’ is also suitable in certain connections (The
Scottish Historical Society), but much too genteel for common conversation.
Then again a man does not willingly, I think, describe himself as a
‘ Scotchman ’ ; or (unless he is taking a very serious view of himself) as a
‘ Scotsman ’ 5 and when he calls himself a * Scot ’ there will be something
of a twinkle in his eye. My own preference is for the last of the three.


there has been a growing tendency on both sides of
the Border to let the part —the larger part —stand for
the whole, and to speak of ‘ England * and ‘ English/
when perhaps it would be less incorrect, geographic-
ally and ethnologically, to say ‘ Britain ’ and ‘ British/
But neither would ‘Britain * and ‘British* be altogether
correct; for there is another and an equally ancient
Britain in northern France. And, moreover, a great
deal of Scotland as well as England is not truly British,
if by this we mean either Celtic or Pictish. Perfect
accuracy is obviously unattainable.
As Britain is a poor word, and as there is no pre-
cedent that I know of for using Scotland to include
the whole island, I see no good reason for fight-
ing against a tendency to which even the greatest
Scottish writers have yielded. Nine times out of ten
the words ‘ England * and ‘ English * come more
gratefully to my tongue than ‘ Britain * and ‘ British.*
How much the mere beauty of sound is concerned
in this discussion may be seen if we consider what
would have happened had the great Anglo-Saxon
revival carried all before it. That movement was in
full swing in the ’seventies of last century, and I can
well remember that people who aimed at speaking
more correctly than their neighbours affected a pro-
nunciation of ‘ England * and ‘ English * in which the
‘e* was shortened as in ‘egg* and ‘Edinburgh.*
Had this custom been generally adopted it must have
settled the whole business; for nobody would wish to
dethrone ‘ Britain * in order to make ‘ England’ queen.
It is not so much a matter of a particular affection
as of a common allegiance. If nomenclature were
determined by love alone, many who live north of
Tweed and Solway might choose to call themselves


by another name than * Scots.’ To these, a few square
miles of soil to which they are attached by right of
birth or kindly nurture —as it may be, Moidart, or the
Isle of Skye, or Jed Forest, with its four sweet-sounding
rivers that come down through the hills—are dearer
than the whole kingdom of Robert the Bruce.
The notion that a subordination, or any abate-
ment of national pretensions, is implied in the use of
4 England ’ or 4 English * to denote the great incor-
porating Union and the things appertaining thereto,
must provoke a smile on the face of anyone who
knows his fellow-countrymen on both sides of the
Border. There are few Scotsmen, I imagine, who love
the Union—by whatever name they may choose to
call it—so well as they love Scotland; but there are
many of us to whom the word 4 England ’ conveys
the idea of that Union, and of the loyalty that is due
to it, as clearly as the word 4 Britain,’ but with a
richer harmony and a nobler tradition.
X. —On Idols and Ideals .
The politician has to take account of two other
forces besides Morals—ldols and Ideals.
Ideals, if they survive the high mortality of youth
and adolescence —which few of them do— turn, like tad-
poles, into a different shape as they approach maturity.
An ideal, by the time it is full grown, has become an idol;
and in this new form, though it makes less stir in the
world, it often wields tremendous power. If its con-
stitution be robust it may exact a reverent obedience,
not only in its vigorous manhood, in its common-
sense meridian, and in its hale and hearty old age, but


also very often in its dotage, and even in the mummied
state. An idol, before it reaches senility, may have
compelled mankind to worship at its shrine for a
thousand years; but an ideal, even when it appeals
to some prevalent and eager longing, will rarely out-
last a single generation.
An ideal very rarely becomes a constructive force
until it has grown into an idol. However lofty or
amiable the motives may have been that gave it birth,
its course is usually strewn with misery and wreckage.
In certain ailments it is necessary to inflame the tissues
and cause a suppuration before attempting to heal the
sore. An ideal may be compared to one of these pro-
vocative agents; an idol, to the healing ointment that
is afterwards applied.
An ideal is essentially a destructive force, and its
constant danger is that it may injure, or even kill, the
patient by destroying too much. An idol produces the
opposite danger by preserving too much. Stuff that
would be better away accumulates, decays and poisons
the system.
At the beginning of its course an ideal is always the
assailant of some existing set of idols, which it aims at
pulling down and replacing with something better.
Even ideals that are inspired by the love of humanity
are merciless, and cruelty is one of their commonest
accompaniments. Despite their high professions, they
are lacking in tolerance and charity, and are often
tinged with madness —in their origins, with madness
of the study—always, if they have a great vogue,
with madness of the mob. The best ideals are those
whose evolution has produced the largest number
of beneficent and lasting idols.
Idols are rarely harmful until they have reached


old age, and even then they are not actively or enter-
prisingly harmful. Yet we can never make quite
certain of their impotence; for even when they are so
quiescent as to seem almost lifeless, they have a
capacity for becoming suddenly and violently in-
flamed by casual friction; as the bite of some in-
significant insect will occasionally flare up into an
erysipelas. An astute politician will never meddle
with an idol if he can help it.
Neither idols nor ideals put much strain upon the
reasoning faculties of their votaries. They both issue
simple, categorical mandates that are accepted without
question and without proof.
An ideal is a revelation that men, if they are in a
mood of sympathy or excitement, will accept as being
self-evident. Indeed when once it has taken hold of
them, they are puzzled to understand why they had not
already discovered for themselves so manifest a truth.
But in thinking that they apprehend it through their
reason or by their own observation they deceive them-
selves ; for in most cases they are only under the
influence of a revivalist emotion. The method of pro-
pagating an ideal is by rhetoric and declamation, or
merely by exclamations persistently repeated.
The worshippers of an idol, on the other hand,
rarely deceive themselves with the belief that their
reason has had anything to do with their faith. They
accept authority frankly and treat tradition with respect.
Their forefathers worshipped the same idol, and doubt-
less had taken pains beforehand to ascertain that it
was worthy of belief. Its high-priests are ready at a
moment’s notice to produce a thousand instances for
proof that, in the past, fidelity to this particular idol
has ensured virtue, happiness and great material benefits,


and that infidelity has always been punished with the
most horrible disasters. Why then should the idol-
aters submit to a disturbance of a worship with which
they are perfectly content ? Why should they tolerate
an attack upon their own tranquillity in order to
make sport for contumacious schismatics ? The final
results of all these efforts—such is their conclusion—
can only be to lead them back, after much suffering, to
the point at which their forefathers set out.
XL.— ldols and Ideals are not always derived from
Morals.
It would be a mistake to suppose that all ideals and
all idols have their origin in morals. Not infrequently
they are derived from some science or pseudo-science.
Economics has produced Laisser Faire and Free Trade
on the one hand. State Control and Protection on
the other. Marxism, or Bolshevism, founds itself on
Sociology. It is to Eugenics that we owe the slogan
of * a White Australia/ the ritual of Ellis Island and
the doctrine of Ethnological Self - Determination.
Some idols and ideals are simple formulas for
securing a great practical benefit or for exorcising a
brooding terror. Peace Pacts, for example. Leagues
of Nations and Universal Military Training spring
from a desire for security and a fear of war. Others
again, like Rousseau’s dreams of a State of Nature
and of a Social Contract, are little more than the
highly infectious illusions of a poet; our imagination
is captivated by their beauty; we believe in them as
we do in Turner’s landscapes. The consummate artist
uses morality as one of many tints that he combines
to make his masterpiece.


The greater number, however, both of ideals and of
idols have their origin in morals. A certain class of
ideals may be described as morals in eruption, a cer-
tain class of idols as morals in petrifaction. Morality
is soberer than idealism, more self-conscious than
idolatry.
Despite the fact that a large number of idols and
ideals are not derived from morals, there is probably
no idol and no ideal whose votaries are not more
ready to uphold it on moral grounds than on any
others. The argument from utility plays a subordinate
part; it does not inspire the orator with an equal
eloquence, nor does it to the same extent excite his
audience to enthusiasm.
XII. —How a politician will use Idols and Ideals for
helping him to gain power and keep it.
No politician can hope to prosper unless he has a
weather-sense that warns him in good time what to
expect from each of these forces. Though neither the
one nor the other is in any way concerned with the
principles of his art, though both are merely external
phenomena that at one time he will have cause to
curse, at another to bless, it is an important part of his
business to keep them under constant observation. An
ideal which appears to be attracting an unusual degree
of popular sympathy, or an idol whose worshippers
have taken alarm, may threaten him with disaster or;
on the other hand, they may provide him with an op-
portunity for overwhelming his opponents and raising
himself to power on a wave of enthusiasm, prejudice
or panic. In much the same way it was an important


part of the business of the master of one of the old
sailing-ships to watch the sky and the sea, and to use
both winds and currents for bringing him safe into
harbour, or, if the elements were wholly adverse, for
enabling him at least to escape shipwreck.
The politician will almost certainly fail who devotes
his energies either to the discovery of ideals or to the
installation of idols. These are matters for prophets
in the one case and for high-priests in the other.
But if the politician feels strongly or sees clearly that
professions of devotion to a certain ideal or idol are
likely to serve his purpose, he will not be acting con-
trary to the principles of his art in echoing the prophetic
phrases or in prostrating himself devoutly in the
temple.
It is, however, a moot question how far it is
advantageous for him to be a true believer. The
answer will not be the same in every case. Broadly
speaking, his action is more likely to be effective if
he has an unshaken faith in the idol he is defending
than if he is a sceptic. But it is very dangerous for him
to believe whole-heartedly in any ideal. He may pro-
fess as strong a sympathy as he pleases for its declared
objective or ultimate goal; but this is as far as he
can safely go. He is no true politician if he allows his
judgement to be subjugated by the creeds and dogmas
of fanatics who, when they gain power, are ready to
assassinate with a puerile and remorseless logic, first
their opponents, and afterwards the ideal itself which
they have undertaken to serve. Moreover, idealism
cannot support itself without enthusiasm, which is a
force no less destructive and incalculable than logic;
for, like wine, it puts the judgement in a heat. The
politician who desires to advance his own fortunes
VOL. i e


through the success of the cause he has espoused,
should keep his head cool.
The brief period of idealistic exhilaration, when
old idols are thrown crashing from their pedestals, is
followed surely by a reaction, during which disappoint-
ment works strongly and suspicions are rife. The early
leaders are liable to lose their prestige in a tumult of
reproaches. There is confusion, doubt, discontent,
and often the whole movement lies breathless and
exhausted at the mercy of any able and audacious
reactionary. The politician will act wisely if, at the be-
ginning, he gladly suffers his own importance to be
eclipsed by the brilliancy of ephemeral iconoclasts.
For these men soon begin to blunder, to distrust one
another, and to be distrusted by their followers.
When they have fallen into discredit the politician
will find his opportunity in rallying the mutinous and
broken ranks, in reviving their courage with common
sense, in staving off defeat, and possibly in securing
and consolidating some considerable portion of the
previous gains.
XIII. —How most of the Idols and Ideals in every
age have had a previous existence, and what
contradictions there are among them .
If we choose instances of idols and ideals at random
and disinterestedly, from a month’s reading of the
newspapers, it will be hard to discover any that have
not already played a part in human affairs. Con-
temporary books, magazines and newspapers teem
with notions that are called new ; but few or none of
them are more than old modes revived by ingenious
but uncreative speculatists. When by and by Paris


costumiers decide to reintroduce the crinoline it will
assuredly be advertised as the latest novelty, though
it has been in and out of fashion for more centuries
than one can count.
When we consider the immense and sudden
shrinkage of the world that speed of travel and
communications has brought about, we ought to be
surprised rather by the rarity of new idols and ideals
than by their multitude. During the lifetime of many
of us the world has shrivelled and puckered like a
child’s balloon slowly deflating, so that now we find
ourselves cheek-by-jowl with peoples and regions that
fifty years ago were regarded as half mythical. And
not only do we now see strange faces at close quarters,
but we are beginning to have confidence that some day
we may be able to read the hearts that belong to them.
A change so momentous ought, we feel, to. have
produced already an amazing crop of new political
notions. And so, we are often assured, it has done ;
but is this true ?
There is hardly a proverb that has not figured for
ages past in every language; and there is hardly one
of them all that is not flatly contradicted by some
other proverb. A casual pairing of modern idols or
ideals produces somewhat the same effect upon the
mind as Pantagruel’s famous conversation with Pan-
urge on the subject of marriage. The student of
politics will not make a beginning till he has realised
that in this art there are antinomies everywhere, and
that it is no shame to a politician, or to the man who
writes about him, if the opinions he utters are often
in conflict one with another. The politician or the
writer who succeeds in proving his life-long con-
sistency is less an object of admiration than of derision.


We know that such a one cannot have penetrated
beyond the vestibule, and therefore cannot have
arrived at any truth worth telling.
I would not presume to say which of the items in
the following list are false and which are true; or
which of them are idols and which ideals. They will
be regarded differently in different countries, and
by different people in the same country. Very often
they will be regarded differently by the same man at
different periods of his life. And not so rarely as one
might think, a pair of these opposites may be believed
in quite honestly by the same man at one and the same
time. But although there has been and will doubtless
continue to be endless debate as to the truth of each
one of these opinions, and as to whether it ought to be
looked on as an ideal or as an idol, there will be general
agreement among most readers of history that hardly
one of them is altogether new:—
That the goal of political endeavour is a state in
which there will be no rich and no poor:—That the
division of mankind into rich and poor is a divine
institution, or a law of nature as inevitable as gravi-
tation.
That all wealth should belong to the state: —That
the state is a muddler that cannot create wealth, and
a spendthrift that cannot save it; so that, if all wealth
were taken by the state there would soon be a universal
impoverishment.
That religion is the buckler of the poor: —That
religion is one of the chief weapons of the oppressor.
That minorities must go to the wall; —That only
minorities are fit to rule.
That family life and friendship are the foundations
of human society;—That family life and friendship


are odious ties that prevent a man from realising
his highest nature in the service of humanity.
That vast confederate unions are the surest hope of
world-peace and of a rapid moral and material develop-
ment :—That there should be as many free, sovereign
and independent nations as there are branches, or even
twigs, of the human race ; and that when ethnologists
or poets have discovered a shade of difference between
two sections of a nation, it is contrary to freedom and
the principles of self-determination for the smaller to
remain united with the larger.
That law should supersede physical force in inter-
national disputes : —That a law which does not rest
on physical force is an impossibility.
That in wars between nations both are usually in
the wrong, though in popular rebellions right is
almost always on the side of the rebels : —That of all
kinds of war civil war is the most detestable and
hardly ever to be justified; but that when two
nations go to war it often happens that both are in
the right.
That war is a hideous form of insanity and that pre-
parations for defence do but increase the danger of an
outbreak : —That a nation which is not at all times
ready and willing to fight for its life will assuredly lose
its life and its soul too.
That a democracy is distinguished from an oli-
garchy or a despotism by this fact, among others,
that it cannot be founded securely except upon a basis
of universal military training ; that universal military
training will raise the moral tone and improve the
physical condition of the people ; will safeguard the
state, not only against foreign attack, but also against
the conspiracies of a would-be tyrant, or of an


anarchic or reactionary minority; and will tend to dis-
courage wars of vanity and aggression, owing to the
concern most men have for their own skins ; —That
standing armies and every form of militia are an
abomination; that military training and discipline
debauch the morals and brutalise the character of a
nation; are a provocation rather than a deterrent to
potential enemies ; are a ready-made weapon in the
hands of conspirators; and, owing to the natural
pugnacity and over-confidence of mankind, are less
likely to diminish than to increase wars of vanity and
aggression.
That capital punishment is a crime against human
nature: —That everyone who opposes or obstructs a
popular revolution should suffer the death penalty.
That the intellectual and the benevolent have too
little power in government, the cunning and the greedy
too much: —That theorists of exceptional intelligence,
and sentimentalists possessed by a passionate faith,
cause more suffering in the world (when they happen to
engross power) than is caused by able and unscrupulous
men seeking their own interests.
That justice should be tempered with mercy;—That
justice tempered with mercy is inhumanity.
That there is no place for sentiment in government:
—That all government is founded upon sentiment.
That women should take part in business and public
affairs on a perfect equality with men:—That woman’s
sphere is the home or, failing that, a nunnery.
That by the Law of Nature all men are born equal:
—That by the Law of Nature men are endowed from
their birth with an infinite variety of faculties that
produce, without any aid from human institutions, an
infinite variety of inferiority and superiority; and that,


arrange things how you will, those who are superior
will get more of their own way than those who are
inferior.
That by the Law of Nature all men are bom free: —
That no man was ever born free, or in any form of
human society ever became free at any period of his
life, with the possible exception of Robinson Crusoe
on his desert island until Man Friday’s arrival, on
which day his freedom was curtailed.
That no state is securely founded until every adult
has a vote for the choice of his rulers:—That when
every adult has a vote there will be such confusion and
inconstancy that a dictatorship will be the only way of
escape from anarchy—a dictatorship of the proletariat,
a dictatorship of virtue and goodwill, or a dictatorship
of reaction.
It is far from my purpose to discuss the intrinsic worth
of these idols and ideals, or to determine which of
them are in fact new-made and which merely furbished
up. The art of politics is not concerned directly with
their truth or falseness, with their novelty or antiquity,
but merely with the prevalence of one or other of them
at a given time. Most books on politics are written to
do good: this one has a much humbler aim—merely to
show how certain things happened during a compara-
tively short era with which the name of Walpole is
associated. The labour that aims at placing a true
moral and intellectual value upon prevalent idols and
ideals is obviously on a much higher plane than the
present endeavour, which only aims at understanding
how politicians have used idols and ideals in order to
gain power, to keep it, and to govern.


XIV. —On the rarity of Ideals during the age of
Walpole .
A remarkable thing about the Walpolean age is
that although there were then many idols there were
hardly any ideals. Various ideals dear to the hearts
of Revolutionary Whigs and of High Church Tories
had expired, owing to a lack of vital force; while
those that survived were now middle-aged and had
become idols in the course of nature.
In all this period the only man who begot a political
ideal of any importance was Bolingbroke. To-day it
looks rather tawdry and impracticable, but no tawdrier
or more impracticable than ideals are apt to look when
they have been out of fashion for a couple of centuries.
Bolingbroke, so long as he lived, was always a politician,
and ideals which owe their paternity to politicians are
rarely disconnected from personal ambition.
Bolingbroke’s notion of a Patriot King, who should
freely choose his ministers from both parties, and whose
ministers should be responsible to himself alone—not
to any chief or cabinet —was designed to influence
opinion in a way that would have led to its author
being called on to take a high place in Government.
The Patriot King was a final but fruitless attempt to
win his way back to power through the favour of
the heir-apparent; George the Second having made
it quite clear that his distrust of Bolingbroke was
ineradicable.
Bolingbroke’s ideal had a strange history. Whether
it might have made a permanent impression upon the
waxen resolution of Frederick, Prince of Wales, we
have no means of knowing; but as Frederick died
nine years before his father, this question is not


worth considering. The book was at first circulated
privately, which possibly had something to do with
its immediate fame. The most discriminating judges
were at a loss for words that would express their
admiration. Lord Chesterfield confessed that till he
read The Tatriot King he ‘ did not know all the extent
and powers of the English language/ But though
the great world rang with applause, it went its usual
way, showing not the slightest disposition to turn
aside and follow where the glittering ideal beckoned.
An exception, however, was the young prince
who became heir to the throne after his father’s death
in 1751. The future George the Third had a whole-
some suspicion of fine writing ; but he liked the ideal
itself very well, when once it had been introduced to
his slow but retentive mind by his tutor, Lord Bute.
What could be better or nobler, or more concordant
with the principles of the Glorious Revolution, than
a patriot king, governing without parties through
ministers of his own choosing ? The new Prince of
Wales, therefore, accepted the ideal wholeheartedly;
set himself, when he became King, to realise it (Boling-
broke being by that time dead); did in fact succeed
in realising it pretty thoroughly; but being deficient
in sagacity and judgement of men—though not in
courage —handled it without discretion; and as a
consequence, lost the American colonies a generation
or two earlier than they would have been lost in any
case. With the American colonies he lost also the
dream of being a patriot king, and sank into a limited
monarch, with young Mr. Pitt as the actual ruler of
the nation.


XV. — Concerning the part played by politicians in
the recent Russian revolution.
My object in this chapter and the two that follow
is to show by a modern instance the extent —the
limited but important extent —to which political
craftsmanship is concerned in upheavals of extreme
violence.
In the years of preparation for a revolution, and
afterwards, so soon as order of some kind has been
restored, politicians are always busy; nor is it often
that the obscurity of either of these periods is dense
enough to resist the searchlights of history. But it is
different at the actual crisis of a revolution; for the
current of events is then such wild and turbid water
as to make it impossible either for us, the observers,
or for the swimmers themselves to be certain how
many of their acts are purposeful, how many purely
undeliberate. If afterwards any of them presumes to
set forth a collected and consistent story we are safe
in treating it as unworthy of belief. During this
period of confusion the craftsmanship of the politician
is out of action; for things are then directed less by
self-conscious human agency than by blindfold and
savage forces.
The remoteness of Russia from our own con-
tentions should in itself be helpful to a candid in-
vestigator, were it not that two serious disadvantages
are produced by this remoteness. The first of these
arises from the fact that Russia has never been in-
corporated either spiritually or politically in the Euro-
pean system; and for this reason it is impossible for
us to see things as a Russian sees them. Most of


us apprehend the literature, thought and institutions
of Russia dimly, admiring and hating furiously, but
always with a suspicion lurking in our minds that
what we hate may sometimes only be a windmill, and
Dulcinea, whom we adore, only a homely featured
wench. The second disadvantage is that we have to
depend on hearsay, and can so little trust the diatribes,
the vindications and, above all, the tourists’ tales that
we have listened to in recent years.
The government that existed in Russia up to
March 1917 was one whose circulation had long been
clogged; that governed incompetently and without
vigour ; that governed irresolutely, giving and taking
back again ; that struck out blindly ; that fled from
shadows ; that within a dozen years had suffered a
series of gigantic military disasters in east and west;
that at the end of all let the people of its capital go
with empty bellies, and this through blundering and
not from dearth; that toppled of its own weight,
with hardly a push to send it over—like a statue whose
base has crumbled; that when it fell was at once
obliterated.
Anarchy was not slow in entering into its inherit-
ance; and since human society abhors anarchy as
nature abhors a vacuum, the discovery of a way to
order speedily became the chief concern. Liberalism
tried its hand: it failed, as it always has failed in like
circumstances. 4 White ’ champions of a restoration
also tried and failed. Then order of a strange and
unfamiliar kind began to emerge slowly under the
pressure of other forces, under the guidance of a
different sort of men.
The disturbance that followed the downfall of the
Romanov dynasty was due mainly to a grand attack


of new ideals 1 upon the old Russian system, enfeebled
as it then was by a long and desperate war. Theories
that pretend to account for the whole series of events
by a paroxysm of pure savagery, or by the working
of some reasonable principle like greed or revenge,
are not now in credit. Savagery, greed and revenge
no doubt played their important parts, as they do in
most human convulsions; but they were merely ac-
companiments and not the causes of the revolution.
The new ideals were acclaimed with enthusiasm
only by a minority of the town-dwelling population,
the majority of whom were in a maze and lacked
will-power to resist. The peasants, who numbered
four-fifths of the nation, neither acclaimed nor even
understood these new ideals. The excitement that the
revolution caused among this hugely predominant class
had not so much to do with ideals of any kind as with
certain material benefits which it accepted with a lively
satisfaction. The peasants were delighted to have
their tenancies turned into freeholds, and the private
demesnes of their landlords divided up among them.
Being persuaded by the Bolsheviks that this desirable
reformation would be arrived at more rapidly if their
landlords were out of the way, they proceeded in
many cases to butcher them.
The present enquiry does not seek to determine
whether the revolutionary ideals were morally right,
economically sound or politically possible, but only
to discover how politicians used them to produce a
state of frantic hopefulness that so admirably served
their own ambitions.
The politicians concerned in these events were no
startling new variety of their species. The counterparts
1 ‘New’ that is, in Russian experience; not necessarily ‘new’ in history.


of some of them are to be found in France and Italy
between 1450 and 15 30, of others in the French revolu-
tion. Their prime concern was to gain power, to keep
it and to govern. This is not to deny that they had
their intellectual and sentimental preferences for certain
ideals and for certain idols, or that they were moved—
in some cases very strongly—by the same aspirations
that moved the unsophisticated multitude—by ideas of
justice and humanity, by the desire to depress the proud
and exalt the lowly, by thoughts of retribution and
private revenge ; and also to a large extent by hopes of
material gain. But their main purpose was ambition,
and under this impulse they have acted throughout
according to the rules:—fooling and blindfolding the
people; modifying and reversing their policies in
order to retain popularity; quarrelling among them-
selves for pre-eminence; getting rid of their rivals
without scruple when opportunity offered ; behaving
in short as politicians have always behaved since
political society was first instituted. And as often
happens, the prophets and the high-priests, the pure
idealists and the zealous idolaters, have not wholly
escaped the contagion of this example. Many of them,
as time went on, have seemed to temper their enthusi-
asm or fanaticism with political arts. Those whose
constancy was above proof have been gradually con-
signed to less illustrious employments.
XVI. —Lenin as Opposition leader . 1
Our view of Lenin is obscured by the mystery
of character that has screened so many personages
1 Lenin, 1870-1924. Exile in Siberia, 1897-1900. Exile abroad,
1900-1905. Back in Russia, Nov. 1905-Dec. 1907. Abroad again,


in history from their familiars as well as from the
world. Very little of our information about him seems
to bear the hall-mark of truth. There are so many con-
tradictory accounts that all we can do is to choose the
likeliest and be certain that our choice must often be
wrong. Apparently his seriousness of purpose never
relaxed, though occasionally it was lit by twinklings of
humour. He was afraid of no man. Nor was he afraid
of any deed. But he disliked the sight of bloodshed;
and providing a sufficient number of inconvenient
people were put out of the way, he grudged not
to another the glory of their killing. Without any
doubt his bidding was done obediently, humbly and
almost without question by idealists whose motives
were wholly disinterested, by idolaters on the watch
for heresy, by Jews and other persons who were his
superiors in intellect, by ignorant, lawless, passion-
ate men in a high frenzy of excitement, by life-long
revolutionaries like himself, and even by criminals of
all sorts newly released from the prisons of Russia or
repatriated from the capitals of Europe and America.
To a student of the art, as distinguished from the
science, of politics, Lenin’s mastery of Russia is the
chief riddle, and the intrinsic worth or worthlessness
of his ideals and idols is by comparison a trifling matter.
From the beginning of the century he was a
leader of Opposition. During the whole of this
1907-1917. The First Revolution, March 19x7. Return to Russia,
April 1917. Opposes Socialist-Liberal government and goes into hiding,
Aug.-Oct. 1917. The Second Revolution, Nov. 1917. Thenceforward
Lenin is at the head of affairs. First stroke of paralysis, spring 1922.
Recovery, autumn 1922. Second stroke, autumn 1923. Died Jan. 1924.
Reckoning the period of his Siberian exile, he spent nineteen years of
his life out of Russia. He had six years of supreme power. He died
when he was fifty-four.


pre-revolution period he was engaged in creating,
inspiring, purging, compacting and organising a
party of his own within the large but discordant
agglomeration that aimed at constitutional change of
one kind or another. Being in opposition, not to a
parliamentary cabinet, but to an autocracy, his methods
were not debates and elections but conspiracy and
physical force. This choice was determined for him by
circumstances. He opposed violence to violence, his
own plots to those of the secret police. Only physical
force was capable of turning out the existing govern-
ment. There were no voters to canvass ; nor did the
imperial ministers pay any heed to public opinion unless
it assumed the form of terrorism or civil war. When
they were seized by panic, as happened often, they
never hesitated to use extreme measures against the
Opposition. Reformers of the right wing as well as
of the left were tricked and trapped by the police;
were exiled, imprisoned or executed. Peaceable crowds
were shot down on suspicion, or merely in order
to hold the realm in awe. Such was the way of
politics in Russia. Lenin at this stage was no inno-
vator ; he created no precedent; he used fraud and
violence because no other methods were available.
The government had its spies and decoys ; it set
snares for its political opponents. Lenin used counter-
spies and counter-plots, and spread his network of
secret societies and propaganda through all the urban
communities of western Russia.
In November 1905, after five years of exile abroad,
Lenin returned to Russia. The war with Japan had
produced disasters and humiliation. Revolution was
stirring. In October there had been a general strike,
followed within a few days by an imperial decree that


promised constitutional reform. But as usual the
Emperor listened to too many counsellors and was
swayed first by one, then by another. There was
unlooked-for delay, then shufflings and evasion, and
discontent came once more to the boiling-point. The
revolutionaries had counted on the assistance of the
army; but the army remained loyal to the Crown.
A widespread rebellion had been planned; but nothing
occurred save a rising at Moscow which was quickly
suppressed. During the following two years there
were swayings to and fro; more promises; more
delays, shufflings and evasions. First one Duma and
then another, after a vast deal of fine unpractical talk,
passed into dissolution. All this time it was the
aristocrats and the middle class who played before the
Russian people and an admiring world the chief part
as would-be liberators. Reaction soon reappeared, as
ruthless and as blundering as ever. The Liberal noble-
men and bourgeoisie were reduced to impotence and
absurdity. The movement, which had received the
bouquets and blessings of enlightened foreigners,
ended in a fiasco. In December 1907 Lenin went
again into exile.
It now seemed to Lenin and his friends that his
prophecies had been proved true by events. Liberal-
ism was useless as an ally. Compromise of any kind
would only weaken faith and vigour. There could be
no hope of victory until a party had been created
which would unanimously accept and confidently ad-
here to a policy so simple that it could be understood
by simple people, so indivisible a unit that schism
could discover no joint or crevice to work in.
For ten years longer Lenin laboured in exile. He
was poor and could draw but little from any party fund.


He could communicate with his friends at home only
by channels underground, and was obliged to preach
his gospel through other men’s mouths. His fellow-
exiles, as well as the revolutionaries in Russia, were at
sixes and sevens. There was a multitude of leaders
whose minds were filled with suspicions, jealousies
and cobwebs. There were almost as many policies as
there were leaders.
Lenin, like Cromwell, set to work to make a New
Model Army—the Bolshevik party. The most import-
ant consideration was not numbers, but that it should
surpass all other sections in discipline and strength of
purpose.
There was no place for toleration in this Bolshevik
party. The breath of its life was hatred —hatred for
the monarchy, the bureaucracy, the aristocracy; even
for democracy, since under that designation came the
middle classes, the traders and men who followed pro-
fessions. It was justifiable to deceive any one of these
enemies with a pretended alliance in order to destroy
the others; but it would have been treason to the
cause to spare the ally when the rest had perished and
its help was no longer needed. An irrevocable com-
promise with any of the existing parties would have
reduced the Marxian ideal to an impotent nullity.
Bolshevism could find no sustenance in the pap of
Liberalism.
There was always pressure from the weaker brethren
to yield on this point or on that, in order to gain new
adherents or to win sympathy from the world at large.
But of what use were adherents who would not go to
all lengths, and of what practical benefit had the gener-
ously overflowing sympathy of the world at large ever
been to Russian patriots in the past ? Nor was there
VOL. i f


any place in the new party programme for the high-
flown sentiments of humanitarian idealists; for it was
hatred and not love that would bring the revolution to
victory. To listen to these people would destroy the
fighting spirit as surely as to incorporate their vague
phrases in the party policy would lead to endless dispute.
But the terrorists were the most mischievous of all;
for they were as devoid of common sense as of fear;
their minds were incapable of grasping a policy; they
looked no further than the ends of their revolvers,
and trusted blindly in the efficacy of sporadic and un-
coordinated outrages for bringing about a state of
panic, confusion and anarchy in which the imperial
system might obligingly consent to disappear. The
effect of their futile outrages was to keep the govern-
ment on the alert, and thereby greatly to increase the
perils of that underground organisation which was
burrowing in every direction under Lenin’s daemonic
impulse and unrelaxing control.
In this part of his career, which was concerned
solely with gaining power, Lenin fooled each of the
other parties in turn, disarmed its hostility, used its
foolish enthusiasm to serve his own purposes and
gave in return, when the day of reckoning came, only
a dagger in the back.
Lenin wrote during these twenty years of prepara-
tion innumerable treatises, pamphlets, memoranda, in-
structions and private letters. These writings appear
to have been directed to two distinct objects ; the
first, to explain his plan of campaign to the officers
he trusted ; the second, to encourage and exhort his
troops.
It is clear that the first came far easier to him
than the second. He had a remarkable talent for


strategy and tactics. He was a great craftsman in
revolutionary warfare and preparations for warfare.
His supple mind, intent on victory at whatever cost,
followed the changing circumstances and adapted its
plans to meet them. He was indifferent to the charge of
inconsistency, reversals of policy, discarded principles.
In the pre-revolution period his opportunism wore a
decent disguise; but when the battle began he took
no trouble to conceal it. Opportunism and audacity
were the secrets of the final success.
His talents as an evangelist are on a lower plane.
He took infinite pains. His labours were unceasing,
and they had a certain practical quality that made them
effective for their immediate purpose; but he lacked
the inspiration of a heaven-born missionary. He wrote
for the enlightenment of his fellow-countrymen as an
organiser and a propagandist, not as a seer, a prophet
or a philosopher. The politician who succeeds is
never a maker of philosophies, and very rarely a pro-
jector of constitutions and systems of law. His notions
are usually unoriginal, crude, rough-and-ready. He
borrows or snatches from other men anything that
seems likely to serve his purpose.
After the fiasco of 1905-1907 it seemed to most
people that Lenin’s opportunity would never come
again.
But the Liberal-Socialist revolution of March 1917
succeeded, and Lenin, by the good offices of Germany,
returned to Petrograd in April. He threw himself at
once into opposition against the provisional Govern-
ment. Though he had a weak adversary, his life was
in danger; for some months he disappeared and lay
in hiding; but in the last days of October he emerged
and made a second revolution. He had great good


luck. When the confusion cleared, his enemies were
all in flight. From that day until his death, a little
more than six years later, he was as much the autocrat
of Russia as any of its Emperors or Empresses had
ever been.
XVII. —Lenin as head of Government .
Lenin’s leadership of Opposition had been remark-
ably successful. His career as head of government was
not so fortunate.
He had succeeded in creating a formidable party
and in leading it to victory. He had succeeded in
propaganda and conspiracy, and in dominating by his
dialectic skill every conference and every conversation
in which he had ever taken part. He had succeeded
in gaining power, and he succeeded in keeping
his power till he died. That he possessed a great
capacity for doing these things is beyond question.
But for the higher departments of government —for
government in so far as it consists in policy, ad-
ministration and construction —he showed no capacity
whatever. If we are to judge Lenin as we would
any other politician, we should not consider it pre-
sumptuous or flippant to say of him that his failure
(which dates from the day when he became autocrat)
was due to his insensitiveness to the workings of
human nature, to the emptiness of more than half his
mind, to what in plain language we call incompetence.
His difficulties were great. It is true that time was
against him. The years between his seizure of power
and his first paralytic stroke were barely four and a
half; to his final breakdown they were less than six.
The greatest politician that ever lived could not have


repaired the damage that Russian industry had suffered
by war and revolution, still less could he have trans-
formed a capitalist into a communist system, in so
short a space of time. It would be absurd to blame
Lenin for not having done the impossible. It would
have been enough had he made a true beginning,
however humble, towards social reconstruction. But
though he issued endless manifestos, exhortations and
instructions, though he made many changes of prin-
ciple as well as detail in his plans, the national re-
sources, when he died, were still wasting unchecked;
production and exchange were still in the stranglehold
of hand-to-mouth expedients; the new forces that
were to turn Russia into the land of promise were
still chained up. Against this failure may be set the
solitary fact that he bequeathed to his successors a
realm in which government was powerful and civil
war had ceased.
After Lenin had gained power his first business was
to make himself secure. No politician has ever yet
been able to rule his country, nor has any country ever
yet been able to face the world, upon the principles of
the Sermon on the Mount. Not a great many of the
things that were Caesar’s at the beginning of the
Christian era have changed their allegiance in the inter-
vening centuries. Killing is often needed to put an end
to anarchy. Under some conditions and with some
races, killing, even on a great scale, may occasionally
be the only way to a lasting settlement. But the man
who uses this desperate method, except from sheer
necessity, is apt to make himself a monster to his
fellow-men and a laughing-stock to the gods.
Caesar Borgia slew his thousands, the Terror its


tens of thousands, Lenin his hundreds of thousands. 1
In each case the motive was the same—to keep power
that had been gained and to gain still more power.
Caesar Borgia failed. The Terror and Lenin succeeded
—after a fashion. It is by no means clear, however,
that the achievements of the Russian Dictator were
on a grand enough scale to justify so much destruction
of human life ; or that a politician of fertile capacity
—a politician who had been something more than
merely a successful director of conspiracies and
massacres—could not have attained security more
surely and at a far lower cost.
No politician of high self-confidence will push re-
strictions on freedom further than security requires.
Lenin and his terror-stricken counsellors threw this
sagacious maxim to the winds. They imposed restric-
tions, and more restrictions, and ever more restrictions.
No one was free to publish his opinions, or to speak
in public, or even to talk with a friend in his own
miserable bed-sitting-room. Everywhere there was
censorship and espionage. Freedom was not a thriv-
ing plant under the Imperial dispensation; but under
the Dictatorship it ceased to exist. An ancient regime
may continue to live and function in stuffy chambers ;
1 Strictly speaking the statement should be ‘ millions ’ instead of
‘ hundreds of thousands.’ The following passage from Professor Sarolea’s
Impressions of Soviet Russia (pp. 81-82) is probably familiar to many readers :
‘ A Russian statistical investigation estimates that the Dictator killed 28
‘bishops, 12x9 priests, 6000 professors and teachers, 9000 doctors, 54,000
‘officers, 260,000 soldiers, 70,000 policemen, 12,950 landowners, 355,250
‘intellectuals and professional men, 193,290 workers, 815,000 peasants.’
That is, about 1,750,000 were executed or massacred. In addition, the same
writer seems to be of the opinion that some 18,000,000 died of famine—a
famine that Lenin had it in his power greatly to mitigate, if not altogether
to prevent, but which he deliberately allowed to rage. The diminution of
the Russian population during the period of his dictatorship would therefore
appear to have been about 12 J per cent.


but a new adventure needs fresh air. By excluding
freedom, Lenin stifled or disheartened the very people
whose hopeful initiative should have been his chief
support in building the ideal state.
Lenin’s gift of leadership is beyond question:
men followed him eagerly to the attack, confident
in victory. Yet it seems as if he had not possessed
the complementary gift, so invaluable to a recon-
structor of society —the gift of raising the natural
vigour of his followers by sympathy and encourage-
ment. We saw no evidences during Lenin’s reign of
a steady brightening glow of practical endeavour.
It was a sombre period lit by occasional flares.
There was enthusiasm of a kind —parades of the
Red army, festivals of remembrance, half-wits howling
in processions, desecration of idols according to plan;
but the general impression left on our minds is, that
during those years, nobody in Russia was doing an
honest day’s work cheerfully—the thing of all others
most necessary for salvation. The proletarians of the
towns were lazy, incredulous and indifferent; even
the half million Bolshevists hung back; while the
peasants, in spite of all Lenin’s intrigues to divide
them, were pulling solidly against him all the time.
Revolution succeeds by extremism; but a settle-
ment requires moderation. To use conciliation before
victory has been won is usually waste of effort; but
without it, no victory, except one that aims solely at
extermination, can be made complete. One of the
few things we know for certain about Lenin’s career is
that his victory was never made complete. He gained
power ; he kept power ; he governed, in the sense that


he put an end to all resistance ; but he failed in drawing
forth any general and effective sympathy for his policy—
if policy it may be called—of reconstruction. His
enemies never became his helpers. His concessions
and surrenders sometimes bought off a dangerous op-
position, but as they were never accompanied by any
proofs of kindliness or trust, they made him no friends.
There is something very fertilising about conciliation
when it comes from the heart heartily; but this
method seems to have been utterly repugnant to
Lenin’s nature.
The most indulgent critic would hardly look on
Lenin as a pattern husband or steward of the estate.
When it came to dealing with the national resources
he was all at sea. Factories, warehouses, shops, banks,
mines, railways, the professions of medicine and science
—all those things that a reconstructive statesman
would have been most concerned to preserve and
cherish—were allowed forthwith to fall into decrepi-
tude. And we cannot see that, beyond pouring out
manifestos to say they must arise again and flourish,
he attempted anything to stay the dissolution. He
presents the appearance of a witch-doctor muttering
incantations against an earthquake. His troubles
and his failure were due largely to his ignorance
of common things and of the motives that move
common men. He had little first-hand knowledge of
the working world, but saw it as a set of symbols.
If, while he lived in London as an exile, he had spent
less time in reading books at the British Museum,
and had given a few years to working with all his
might in some industrial undertaking —better still, if
he had set himself up with a coster’s barrow and sold
fruit and knick-knacks in the Old Kent Road—he


would have been much better fitted to deal with the
problems that confronted him when he became auto-
crat of All the Russias. His predecessor, Peter the
Great, went a wiser way about his schooling, in the
shipyards of Amsterdam and Deptford.
Like many another leader of Opposition, Lenin
came to power encumbered by a programme, the
greater part of which conflicted with the facts of life.
Many of the items in it were only lures that he had
thrown to catch the fancy of the multitude; and
these, without a pang, he could explain away, or could
find excuses for postponing to a more propitious
season. But there were other items in it that lay very
near his heart. During his exile he had dreamed dreams
and seen visions, and in some of these he still believed,
even after he had become head of government. He
would have grudged no sacrifice to make them come
true, except the sacrifice of power. It is a proof of his
suppleness of character that he chose to keep his
power, although it cost him the abandonment of nearly
all his projects.
What Lenin did as head of government differed ex-
ceedingly from his former programme; sometimes, and
upon most important matters, to the point of flat con-
tradiction. The fundamental theory of the revolution
had been the total abolition of private property. Yet he
did not shrink from making over all the farm-lands of
Russia to be owned by the peasants; though these farm-
lands were the greatest national asset —far greater than
all the other national assets put together. On the other
hand, as the peasants formed four-fifths of the population
it was essential to keep them in good humour. Capital-
ists had been rooted out; but he was obliged to tempt


new capitalists to come to his assistance. Trade had
been forbidden; but the ban was withdrawn after a
serious mutiny. The cargo that he jettisoned would
make a long list. But while we may possibly admire
the resolute way in which he made concessions, we
feel that he never got full value for them. They did
no more than turn danger aside for the moment.
They never gained him either confidence or gratitude.
A consummate politician would surely have driven
a more generous bargain and earned a double profit.
The most effective agents in a revolution are seldom
of much use to their leader after the revolution has been
achieved. They are importunate in seeking offices for
which they are unfit. They are too much used to
desperate intrigues to make comfortable bedfellows.
When the revolutionary leader has blossomed into an
autocrat he must often wish that he could bring to life
again many of those whom he has killed, and fill their
opened graves with many of those who are still alive.
The chief Bolsheviks showed more energy and were
less restrained by scruples and conventions than the men
who served the Emperor or acted with Kerensky. Their
abilities, however, were restricted to a narrow sphere.
Where they most conspicuously failed was in organising
anything that lay beyond the circle of their specialised
activities. Putting aside two or three industrious
officials who could write dispatches, and Trotsky,
whose achievements in army organisation are still a
matter of dispute, no one, up to the time of Lenin’s
death, had given proofs of administrative, still less of
constructive, capacity. On the other hand, in political
intrigue, conspiracy, espionage and propaganda they
had much success. They had made the revolution, and
they exterminated all opposition. They created a force


of secret police that is said to be considerably more
numerous than the British army. They were skilful in
spreading false or distorted news that would serve
their own purposes. They could incite mobs to whole-
sale massacres of the upper and middle classes. They
sowed discontent, and stirred up strikes and risings in
foreign countries. These no doubt were all very im-
portant aids to their policy. But though they were able
to make such a large variety of mischief, they could not
make, or cause to be made, simple necessary things,
like bread, or cloth, or ploughshares; and it was of
these things that Russia, from 1917 onwards, has stood
most in need.
Lenin piqued himself on being a constructive states-
man. Production and distribution were the things that
Communism had boasted it would do better than any-
one had ever done them in the world before; but
these, of all others, were the things that Lenin and his
expert staff of conspirators and publicity-agents showed
themselves least fit to undertake. Their skill and energy
had provided an exceptionally favourable opportunity
for putting their theories into practice ; but they could
make nothing of their opportunity when they had it.
A universal confiscation gave them the whole installa-
tion of Russian industry for nothing, so that they had
no overhead charges for interest on capital, or for rent.
The burden of taxation was relieved by the repudiation
of the national debt. There were workmen in abund-
ance, hungry and clamouring for employment. In spite
of all these advantages, production dwindled and dis-
tribution became more and more congested as the
months went by.
One reason for this lamentable state of affairs was
that so many managers of industry had been killed, or


driven away, or rendered impotent by being de-
prived of their authority. Another reason was, that
the revolutionaries who succeeded to their posts were
not only ignorant of business methods, but seemed
incapable of applying themselves in a practical spirit
to the solution of an unfamiliar problem.
When industry was seen to be coming to a
standstill, the Bolshevik leaders sought a remedy in
academic surveys, appreciations and reports; in a
multitude of neatly displayed statistics, curves, charts
and diagrams ; in a snowstorm of forms and permits
that had to be filled up, signed and countersigned.
Every man of strong business sense knows that these
are dangerous aids to efficiency. He realises that they
possess no life-giving properties; that they are use-
ful only as checks on rash initiative; that even as
checks they must be used with extreme caution; and
that to follow them out in practice to their logical
conclusions is usually fatal. For the amateur, on the
contrary, they have a malign fascination. He delights
in their clear and graphic simplifications ; he plays
with them absorbedly as a child plays with toys ; while
bankruptcy approaches with a stealthy tread.
Finding that this remedy made things worse instead
of better, that workmen idled, that machinery fell to
pieces and organisations crumbled, that goods were
not delivered, and that cheating was rampant every-
where, the Bolshevik leaders sought to mend matters
by appointing a horde of officials and inspectors. But
as these persons had no previous experience to guide
them, the industries they were supposed to supervise
reaped no benefit from their services. As a rule their
sole recommendation was that they professed to be
ardent revolutionaries. It was politic to provide for


them in order to keep them out of mischief. They
were greedy, importunate and in many cases corrupt.
They wanted jobs in which they were not likely to be
overworked. They soon numbered several millions
in the public offices and industries ; and it would be
hard to say whether their meddlesomeness or their
inertia was the greater evil.
We expect a politician of the first flight to choose
assistants who are fit for their jobs, and whose capacities
will supplement his own deficiencies. Lenin does not
seem to have possessed this gift. The poor quality of
the material at his disposal cannot have been the sole
reason for the fiasco of reconstruction. We feel that,
from the same material, a more capable leader could
probably have made an adequate selection. Compared
with the average of western Europe, the administrators
whom he appointed and tolerated in the years imme-
diately following the revolution strike us as having
been a puny breed. Their ignorance was not the chief
difficulty ; for with industry and goodwill, time might
have mended this fault. But their lack of natural
shrewdness seems to have been incurable, and their
ingenious cunning was no effective substitute. Their
characters produced but little impact on events. The
work of reconstruction needed more weight and force
than they possessed to make it prosper; and it needed
most of all a steady sense of direction in those re-
sponsible for its guidance.
The constructive work of a politician must be
judged by its stability. So far as we can see, the insti-
tutions that Lenin set up usually had a natural tendency
to fall down. There was nearly always something
wrong with their foundations, or their structure, or


their balance. A mob of angry peasants could knock
over one of his laborious expedients with their hay-
forks ; or a band of lazy town-workmen, leaning up
against it, would bring it flopping to the ground ; and
not infrequently it would fall of itself, having no
inherent strength or equilibrium. A reasonable ex-
planation of this defect is, that Lenin’s knowledge
of statecraft and economics was drawn exclusively
from books. His only practical experience was in
the art of conspiracy. For gaining power this was
enough. For holding power his determination and
ever-wakeful opportunism were enough. But for using
his power to realise either his former ideals or the
more recent schemes of reconstruction that circum-
stances had forced him to clutch at, something more
was needed; and this something he had not from
nature, and apparently could not acquire.
It may be that in Paradise we shall see our great men
stripped, and be able at a glance to determine the order
of their prevalence ; but in this world it is impossible
for contemporaries, and hard even for historians writing
many years later, to dispel the glamour of adventitious
circumstances. Lenin was associated with a series of
very startling and unusual events, and for this reason,
if for no other, we cannot measure him faithfully
against politicians who worked under more normal
conditions.
We know, however, that those whom Lenin over-
came were not antagonists of heavy calibre. He was
never pitted against any politician of first-class, or
even of good second-class, capacity. The ministers of
the old regime, whom the revolution rode rough-
shod over, were little more than the deferential clerks
of an irresolute master. For the Emperor’s raorbid


conscience never ceased reminding him that his duty
as God’s vicegerent was to keep all power in his
own hands, and to distrust his servants in proportion
as they showed alacrity in accepting responsible em-
ployments. Throughout the whole of his unhappy
reign, ability was suspect and all conspicuous merit was
jealously excluded ; even loyalty was slighted, and no
man of a frank and fearless nature could hope for the
imperial favour. The residuum of diffident and ham-
strung functionaries was powerless to cope with serious
tumults. They allowed themselves to be supplanted,
almost without a struggle, by Kerensky and his as-
sociate dreamers; while these in turn soon learned
that a whirl of eloquent words is no protection against
a resolute butchery. But the triumphant Bolsheviks
were superior in no quality save energy to the func-
tionaries and dreamers they superseded.
Lenin towered above his fellow-countrymen—
functionaries, dreamers and Bolsheviks alike. His
pre-eminence is an interesting phenomenon, though
it is far from proving him a colossus who over-
topped the human species. A geographer, reckoning
by square-mileage, may confound Russia with Brob-
dingnag; but an ordinary observer, noting the mean
stature of the men who stood, or might have stood, in
Lenin’s way, is perhaps more likely to conclude that
all his feats, so loudly advertised, were done in Lilliput.
XVIII.— How all the benefits of a revolution are
likely to be lost if the politicians fail to gain the
upper hand in time.
It is more than six years since Lenin died ; but the
great Russian flats are still obscured by a layer of


ground-fog. We can see but little of whatsoever
internal struggle may be going on there, and can hear
only a babel of muffled voices and uncertain meanings.
It need not, however, be assumed that Russia is
therefore approaching some fresh calamity. Had her
weather been tempestuous we should for certain have
heard loud shoutings and caught occasional clear
glimpses through the rack. It is of course conceiv-
able that some vast convulsive project is being shaped
by supermen in darkness and in silence. But on the
whole it seems more likely that politics in Russia is
merely following the ordinary course of nature; that
the politicians—idealism and idolatry being somewhat
out of breath—have taken charge of the situation ; that
these politicians are no larger than life-size ; and that
their commonplace ambitions, their intense personal
rivalries, are working beneficently, like a yeast or
ferment, which in due time will produce a tolerable
vintage.
During the revolutionary period an astute politi-
cian will never attempt to put out the blaze. On the
contrary, it may profit him to be seen busily pitching
fuel on the bonfire. His speech and action at this stage
must not be taken as showing his true mind, but only as
flourishes—the more astonishing the better; the more
seemingly novel and unprecedented the better. If he
shows sympathy with the prevalent mood he may gain
power; while if he tries to withstand it he will be
swept away. And at the height of a revolution the
prevalent mood is to look upon the past as utterly bad.
The very fact that a deed or a phrase shows disrespect
for the past is enough in itself to earn a favourable
acclamation.
Sooner or later this exaltation passes and the preva


lent mood insensibly changes. People discover gradu-
ally and without a shock that they are still living in
the world they were born in; they begin by little and
little to resume many of their former habits, to think
their old thoughts, to scoff and gird at innovations,
even to complain because old grievances have been
done away that had served so many previous genera-
tions as excuse for grumbling. Novelty is no longer a
recommendation but a reproach. Changes and reforms
are more acceptable if they can be dressed up in a
familiar appearance. New institutions have a better
chance of maintaining themselves if they are built
against old ones that have stood four-square for
centuries. New ideas gain admission to the popular
mind more easily if they are twisted artfully into the
strands of old traditions ; and if a new loyalty or
affection is to capture hearts, it must succeed in person-
ating some familiar sentiment.
At this stage the politician is obliged to occupy
himself with smoothing away the hard, rough edge
of novelty wherever it chafes the popular skin. At
the same time he must save his own face. He will
attempt this by a reverent display of images, by carv-
ing revolutionary maxims on walls and monuments,
by hurling at the outside world the old, braggart
defiances that have by this time dwindled to conven-
tions of low vitality. But it would be quite contrary to
his intention were this show and shouting to lead to
any serious disturbances; for the sole purpose of it all
is speciously to advertise his own consistency.
Post-revolutionary politicians are the salvage-men
of a revolution. Unless their commonplace ambitions
can find employment, everything is likely to be lost.
And the reason why revolutions that have failed are
VOL. I G


so many times more numerous than those that have
succeeded is, that the fanatics and theorists are apt to
keep the upper hand until they have brought everything
to ruin by their pedantic obstinacy and contempt for
custom. But when the politicians gain the upper hand
in time, they usually turn their power to good account.
Let them not expect, however, to receive from their
fellow-countrymen any loud demonstrations of grati-
tude ; for their popular reward is never an ovation, but
merely a contented muttering:— ‘ Things after all are
c not so bad as they might have been; we are still allowed
‘to go our old ways; on the whole, perhaps, we are less
‘ uncomfortable than we were before.’ This, which is
the crowning triumph of a revolution, appears but a
modest conclusion in contrast with the first blare of
hopes and promises. And looking back from no long
distance the beneficiaries are apt to wonder, often
unreasonably and forgetfully, if the patches of fresh
masonry which appear so few and so small against
the vast greyness of the ancient fabric are really worth
all the suffering and sacrifices that were required to
build them.
Every politician learns before he is out of his
nonage that it is impossible to cut sheer across a
nation’s history and start afresh from a clean edge.
This would be like ringing a fruit tree and expecting it
to go on bearing a crop. For the history of a nation
is the sap of its life, and death is certain if the flow is
stopped. Destruction in this form has occasionally
followed some barbaric conquest, when flourishing
peoples have become as dead wood, rotting and
crumbling into a fine powder of exiles, outlaws and
slaves. But no internal convulsion that I know of
has ever carried ruin quite so far. The fanatics and


theorists have always been held back by the horse-
sense of common men before they had ringed the
bark the whole way round. It is the impracticable
ideals that perish, and with them, too often, much of
the good that the revolution might have achieved.
But the nation itself survives.
When people are no longer in a fever of excitement,
but are settling down into their old workaday and holi-
day humours, the busiest, noisiest crowd of theorists
and fanatics is overmatched. For in their presump-
tuous self-confidence they have declared war upon too
many and too strong antagonists. They would cut off
history and tradition with a pair of shears; would
do away age-old loyalties and affections; would knock
religion on the head; and in their folly would defy even
common custom, which of all adversaries is the burliest
wrestler. And the substitutes they endeavour to set up
are known at once for what they are—for men of straw,
for forms without strength and shapes without life. A
brand-new political system with edicts to match it, and
executions on a grand scale to enforce the edicts, and
zealous schoolmasters to mint young minds in some
approved button-mould, has but a poor chance with
the forces it has so rashly challenged. For though we
plume ourselves on the freedom of our wills, we are
less ourselves than we are our ancestors. Their blood
beats in our arteries, and our thoughts have to fit
themselves as best they can into brain-cells that are
part of our inheritance. This is a mortmain that no
dictatorship can do away. Looking back no further
than our great-great-grandparents, each of us has
had thirty progenitors—an invincible preponderance—
whose dead hands in loving-kindness hold us back
from self-destruction.


Consciously or unconsciously every full - grown
politician accepts this law of continuity. If, since
Lenin’s death, there has been a dearth of politicians
in Russia—if idealists and theorists, with no better
assistants than propagandists and clerks, have had it
all their own way—failure and yet another period of
anarchy would seem to be inevitable. If on the other
hand, the politicians have, in recent years, been busily
engaged on salvage work, we may hope for better
things. Sooner or later the clash of their ambitions is
likely to produce a system of settled government suited
to the character and traditions of the Russian people,
and capable of satisfying its most urgent needs. It
would be fruitless to speculate as to the precise
form this system will ultimately assume; but it is
reasonable to suppose that it will bear no resemblance
to democracy of any kind, and that it will finally emerge
as some more or less normal type of Asiatic despotism,
tempered perhaps by the ancient institution of village
communities. Revolutionary ideals, aged prematurely
into respectable idols, may continue notwithstanding
to receive lip-service and to be treated reverently on
ceremonial occasions; there may still be pilgrim-
ages to Lenin’s tomb; but the grades of society (with
their various degrees of authority, consideration and
well-being) will be determined, as of old, by the form
of government which is ultimately adopted. The prin-
ciple that those who have power will use it to make
life as comfortable as possible for themselves and for
the privileged order—necessarily a small minority—to
which they belong, is likely to hold good in Russia in
the future, as it has held good everywhere in the past.
Sir Charles Dilke, who had probably a truer
understanding of foreign nations than any politician


of his time, astonished a friend many years ago by the
remark that no one then alive would live to see a
change in the system of Russian government. The
friend objected that a revolution was surely possible.
‘ Not only possible, but very probable/ was the
answer. ‘ There may be more than one revolution in
‘ our time. None of them, however, will change the
* system of Russian government, but will only replace one
‘ despotism by another. ’ 1 Has he been proved wrong by
recent events ? The present Russian government rests,
like its predecessor, on a vast organisation of spies and
secret police, on a huge army raised by conscription, on
a civil service far more numerous and incompetent,
but no less corrupt, than the bureaucracy that served
the Empire. The popular voice counts certainly for no
more, and probably for a good deal less, than it did
before the revolution. If Russians will submit to no
form of government but this, we can hardly blame the
politicians who indulge them in it.
The men who are at present governing Russia will
be wanting in patriotism as well as shrewdness if they
hold themselves bound by the strict canons of the
Communist Fathers. No abandonment of principle they
may make can be more flagrant than Lenin’s accept-
ance of private property in land. A wise politician—
situated, as these men are, precariously, on uncertain
and rapidly shifting foundations—must needs watch
the public taste and be prepared to change his slogans,
his clothes and even his title as often as there is any-
thing to be gained by it. Frieze is not the only
wear: a ruler who takes his business seriously will
1 I cannot give my authority for this conversation : I had it originally
by hearsay, and think that afterwards I read it in some book. It has been
in my mind for something like thirty years.


not shy at a rich uniform or a robe of state if either
of these habits would strike the public eye more favour-
ably than common attire. If elf-locks are no longer
venerated, let him appear anointed, sleek and crowned.
And what a foolish whimsy it would be to insist on
being called Dictator of the Proletariat, or by some
other pompous title, if the simpler one of Czar or
Little Father would please the people better !
XIX. — How little the Art of Politics has changed in
two thousand years.
It is frequently assumed that since the American
War of Independence the art of politics has undergone
a drastic purification, and many people, on both sides
of the Atlantic, have attributed this supposed amend-
ment, in no small measure, to the influences—direct
and indirect —of the American example. But changes
in fashion are very apt to be mistaken for a change
of heart. The conventions that one country or
another may adopt at a given time for restraining the
ferocity and unscrupulousness of political warfare
are not to be relied on as security against a sudden
relapse, under strong temptation, into methods of
barbarism, nor as indications that the fundamental
objects and motives of the struggle have become any
nobler or more humane than they used to be. An
observer who takes a far-and-wide survey of the
world at the present time may well doubt if this
belief in the essential betterment of public life rests
on anything more substantial than a pious legend.
The scene presented by the Russian revolution
and by Lenin’s subsequent dictatorship is in itself
enough to prove that betterment is not world-wide.


The jargon of modem idealism fails to persuade us
that the methods used so recently in Russia were any
less savage or less purposeful than those others—
the special reproach of the Renaissance —which we
were brought up to look on with so much horror.
The century of Louis the Eleventh, of Commines,
of the Borgias, the Medici, Pope Julius the Second
and Machiavelli shows a scene that in many of its
aspects appears extremely different from our own.
But the predominant aim of politicians then, as now,
was to rid themselves of their opponents, to gain
power and to keep it. Though our politicians use
less lethal methods, their objects are still the same.
Killing was then one of the recognised ways of getting
rid of a dangerous rival, just as attacks on his public
and private honour are to-day. But there was prob-
ably no more malice and hatred among the rivals
then than there is now. Caesar Borgia murdered
his treacherous confederates, just as Giovanpagolo
murdered his nephews and kinsmen, just as Lenin
murdered the Imperial Family and the middle-classes,
not from hatred or revenge, but simply because he
found them in his way.
Men who are engaged in public life must neces-
sarily aim at reducing opposition to a minimum,
and one of the most obvious means to that end
is by misrepresenting, discrediting or ruining their
opponents. It has been said—no doubt with some
exaggeration—that the greatest politicians have
neither morals nor malice in their composition. They
make the most outrageous charges against one another,
and they fully intend that the public shall believe
these charges. But as they do not themselves believe
them, they find it very difficult to hate one another


cordially and everlastingly, as high-minded country-
gentlemen so often do who have quarrelled over a
boundary fence. The hatreds of political opponents,
like their occasional ebullitions of bonhomie, are
shallow-rooted plants. 1
There have been many ebbs and flows since the
histories we possess began to be written. As we look
back, it is not always the times that are nearest our
own that are likest our own. We have certainly more
in common with the middle of the eighteenth century
than we have with the beginning of the sixteenth;
but a much earlier epoch is nearer to us than either
of these. The sayings, and doings, and characters
of Stanhope, Sunderland, Walpole, Bolingbroke,
Townshend, Carteret, Pulteney, Wyndham, George
the Second and Queen Caroline are a trifle old-
fashioned and formal, but they are not so different
from what we see around us to-day, or can at least
remember, as to cause us much surprise. On the
other hand, the sayings, and doings, and characters
of Pericles, Nicias, Cleon, Alcibiades and Athenagoras
the Syracusan produce in us, by reason of their fami-
liarity, an emotion that is much more poignant than
surprise : as fear comes upon a man, and trembling,
who meets himself face to face in a dream. Those
ancient Greeks are our coevals ; they talk, and laugh,
and scold as we do ; vex themselves with the same
problems; buoy themselves on the same hopes;
whereas our fellow-countrymen the public char-
acters who lived and flourished during the first half
1 I can think of only two pre-eminent politicians In my own lifetime who
really did hate one another ‘ cordially and everlastingly ’; and as to one of
the pair I have my doubts : he may not have hated, but only have enjoyed
being hated.


of the eighteenth century —belong to a generation
that, according to our present notions, is antiquated
and at the same time immature. They talk to us,
as ancestors should talk, in slightly stilted language.
It seems as if their minds have not yet opened fully,
as if their political ideas are still in the blade. What,
for example, do those Georgians know about demo-
cracy ? and what is there of this subject that Athena-
goras, Cleon and Pericles do not know ? And when
we compare Athens of the fifth century before Christ
with our own times, we cannot discover that poli-
ticians have increased since then in stature; or have
changed their methods in anything essential; or that
their characters have grown more virtuous; or that
Democracy has undergone a transformation. In a
broad view, the art of politics seems neither to have
gained nor lost in all these years.
It is not one of the objects of this book to make
out a list of rules and exceptions for the guidance of
politicians, but only to examine a few examples of the
dilemmas that are apt to confront them. Such a
discussion does not always lead to comforting con-
clusions. It is satisfactory to be able to show that if a
certain statesman, in dealing with a certain emergency,
had acted with less perfidy or inhumanity, or had been
somewhat honester or more generous, his adventure
would have prospered better than it did. But it is
not equally consoling to find, as we sometimes do,
that if, at the critical moment, he had been more
unscrupulous or more violent, or had merely had the
sense to wear a mask of deceit, he might have achieved
some wise and patriotic purpose, instead of ruining
himself and allowing grave injury to befall his country.


XX.—In praise of Politicians.
This chapter is not concerned with ancient times
or foreign nations, but only with those modern
politicians who, since the accession of James the First,
in 1605, have pursued their vocation in the Parliament
of Westminster. Until 1707 these politicians were all
Englishmen. After the Act of Union in that year
there was an admixture of Scots ; and in 1800 there
was an admixture of Irishmen due to a similar cause.
Although the English have always remained in a great
majority, the mingling of races has no doubt produced
a considerable effect upon the evolution of our political
character; but the changes that from time to time
occurred in the dominant purpose have probably
counted for a great deal more.
From the arrival of the Stewarts until the adminis-
tration of the younger Pitt in 1784, the dominant
purpose was to take power away from the Crown, and
to keep a jealous watch lest the Crown should regain,
by open encroachment or by a side-wind, any part
of what it had lost: in this struggle the aristocracy
played the chief part. From the French Revolution
in 1789 to the Reform Acts of 1884 and 1885 the
dominant purpose was to take power away from the
aristocracy: in this struggle the middle-classes played
the chief part. Thenceforward the dominant purpose
has been to take power away from the middle-classes;
and in this struggle the trade unions have played the
chief part.
It is remarkable with how little violence and friction
these great changes have been brought about; and
it is not less remarkable that throughout this period
of more than three centuries our country has, on the


whole, been kept admirably supplied with Parliament
men who were capable of doing the work required of
them. The comparatively smooth current of events,
and the ease with which politicians have adapted them-
selves to new conditions, may be due to some virtue
inherent in our institutions or in our national genius;
or again to pure chance, or (as many have thought) to the
special favour of Providence. But whatever the cause
may be, we cannot look back upon our history with-
out having it borne in upon us, how often those who
succeeded in gaining power and keeping it were fitted
by their peculiar temperaments and capacities for deal-
ing with the special needs and conditions of their
respective epochs.
Walpole is one of the most conspicuous examples
of the man who came at the right time. And he is
interesting for the further reason, that he is the
archetype of the normal politician who forces his way
into the highest positions. His virtues and his defects
are alike characteristic of the craft he followed. He had
a strong, clear, practical judgement. He was valiant
and steadfast. His crowning merit was faithfulness to
the King he served and to his country. Neither fears
nor temptations could ever shake his fidelity. At the
same time, it would be senseless to deny that he was
a self-seeker, an opportunist, and a man without any
tincture of book-learning or philosophy. To judge
him fairly we must consider his career as a whole,
allowing most weight to what he did during the
twenty years of his administration. There are few
English ministers who rank so high, and none that I
would put above him.
Politicians are like the pedants in Montaigne’s


essay ; no one has a good word to say for them.
Even ordinary people like ourselves find it impossible
to rid our minds of the delusion that 4 in essentials ’
(as we would put it) we are better men than these
noisy, limelight-loving busybodies. And as we read
our newspapers, we are encouraged in the comfortable
belief, that our own moral and intellectual superiority,
though we wear it modestly, is never for a moment
in danger of being overlooked by Almighty God.
And yet our self-complacency may sometimes re-
ceive a shock when we find ourselves in company with
a member of parliament; a still ruder one if he
happens to be a minister or an ex-minister. We
treat him instinctively with a certain deference. In
vain do we remind ourselves that there must certainly
be several hundred clever journalists in England who
know much more about public affairs than he does.
We may wish that one of these were present to put
him in his place. But when our wish is granted, the
hoped-for result does not always follow. For the
dialectic of the journalist in conversation with a prac-
tical politician is apt to lose much of the confidence
and energy of judgement that we had so much
admired in his leading articles.
The notion that politics is all a cheat and that
politicians are no better than welshers has subsisted
ever since the beginning. Raleigh’s early malediction
is not lacking in vigour :
Tell men of high condition
That manage the Estate,
Their purpose is ambition.
Their practice only hate :
And if they once reply.
Then give them all the lie.


Raleigh was himself a politician—a politician whose
career when he wrote was ending in calamity.
Nearly two hundred years later Adam Smith wrote
less violently, but even more contemptuously, of 4 that
4 insidious and crafty animal, vulgarly called a statesman
4 or politician, whose councils are directed by the
4 momentary fluctuations of affairs/ Adam Smith was
no politician, but one of the serenest and most kindly
spirits that ever practised philosophy and took delight
in the society of their fellow-men. Moreover, he
enjoyed the confidence of Mr. Pitt and the friendship
of Mr. Burke. It would be hard to find any character
in literature who was more immune from the gnawings
of envy and a sense of personal grievance.
Many of us, carried away at one time and another
by hero-worship or partisanship, have attempted to
discriminate between politicians and statesmen; that
is, between the 4 insidious and crafty animal * and the
disinterested public servant. But Adam Smith, being
an accurate observer, refused to draw this false dis-
tinction. Any representative list of the most illustrious
British statesmen would surely include the names of
Bolingbroke, Walpole, Chatham, William Pitt the
younger, Charles James Fox, Castlereagh, /Peel, Dis-
raeli, Gladstone. And the same names would figure
for certain in any representative list of our most artful
and indefatigable politicians. Adam Smith was in
error, not in confounding the one with the other, but
only in his too wholesale condemnation of both. Even
the serenest philosopher may be forgiven an occasional
outburst of vivacity.
The stream of detraction which ran through the
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries is
not dried up in the twentieth. It is not only we


ordinary people who are given to girding at politicians:
our betters are even more emphatic, and of course
give much better reasons than we can to support
their unfavourable opinions. A politician may dis-
regard the random, incoherent censures of the common
herd; but it is a different matter when high-brows
prove their case against him with a wealth of instances
and a withering scorn. According to these critics he
lacks natural intelligence as well as education ; he has
no foresight, no constancy of purpose beyond the
pursuit of his own advantage ; he is not only ignorant
of first principles, but indifferent to every kind of prin-
ciple ; he picks up the first expedient his eye lights
on, and when it fails him, picks up another a few
days later which is in direct antagonism to the first.
Moralists, idealists and humanitarians are equally
severe. They hold converse with the politician from
necessity, but rarely from choice. Their attitude is
one of cold suspicion. They are shocked by his
unveracity, by the deadness of his soul to all the
higher emotions. Obviously he cares for nothing in
the world except the grinding of his own axe. He
is never more than a lip-servant of sacred causes, and
then only when they happen to be in fashion.
The antipathy that soldiers, sailors and country-
gentlemen show for the politician is rooted in their
conviction that no one who talks so much, and
obviously knows so little, about the conduct of war
and the management of land can possibly understand
any department whatsoever of public affairs.
The great army of company directors and others of
a certain age, whom newspapers describe as ‘ captains
of industry,’ condemn him for his lack of practical
ability, initiative, push-and-go; they suspect him of


being a lazy fellow who likes to draw a salary for
doing next to nothing.
Jingos denounce him as a traitor if he is not for ever
plucking foreign nations by the beard. Pacifists, on
the other hand, consider him to be the chief cause of
war by reason, sometimes of his timid opportunism,
at others of his truculence; the compromises he agrees
to in order to curry favour with public opinion are
fatal to peace; he is the puppet of military cliques,
and shares all the passions and panics that degrade
the mob.
The magnates of the popular press, secure behind
their private telephone entanglements, sneer at his
want of courage; and the man-of-the-world—most
ingenuous of dotterels —takes up the same tale from
his club armchair.
What humbug it is, for the most part! And what
a welter should we be in, if the politicians, taking
these lectures to heart, were to hand over the manage-
ment of public affairs to their critics !
It is true that the politician, in his professional
character, does not always, or even very often, con-
form to the most approved pattern of private con-
duct. Instances of this divergence have already been
given, and others will be found in the chapters that
follow. He diverges, however, not because he is a
less honest fellow than his critics, not because he
wishes to diverge, but simply because he must. And
in justice to him, and also to ourselves whose servant
he is, we should not lay the whole blame on his
shoulders, or on our own peculiar system of govern-
ment, but on the unchangeable conditions of the art
of governing men.


The way of a nation at every stage of its existence
is determined by a parallelogram of forces. At the
one pair of opposite angles the pull is between the
dread of change and the hope that change will make
things better. At the other pair, the pull is between
the rivalries and ambitions of individual men. In the
youngest and simplest type of state, as in the oldest
and most sophisticated, these four opposing forces are
always at work. In some kinds of arbitrary govern-
ment they work behind a screen; in our own kind
anyone who cares to look may watch them. In
different cases the relative potency of these forces varies
by many degrees, and they ally themselves with other
forces that are occasionally stronger than themselves ;
but they always keep their stations at the four angles,
pulling with all their might. Sometimes the struggle
is graced by a temperate decency; but more often it
is rough and ruthless. Internal antagonisms are the
heart-beats of a nation’s life, and when these antago-
nisms cease its history is ended. A nation
Where none was for a party.
But all were for the State,
would be no more, upon the most favourable
computation, than an impotent babel of virtuous
voices.
The politician is never his own master, as men are
who seek their fortune in private adventures. The
most complete victory does not make him the pos-
sessor, but only the custodian, of that strange monster
which he calls his country. His first duty is to keep
his charge in health and, if possible, in good humour.
He loves his monster, and this love, which assumes
many odd forms, is what we mean by patriotism. Of


the motives that urge him on, self-interest (in the
pecuniary sense) is usually one of the slightest. He
values success more for its own sake than for any
material benefits it may bring him. Nor is he ever
content with a merely casual or blundering success ;
for the darling pride of his heart is to win openly by
virtue of his craftsmanship.
The man who makes his career in business is not
upon the same footing. As a rule he prefers to keep
his cleverness a secret. And moreover, he may forgo
advantages and behave generously without anyone but
himself being the loser by it. Indeed, a private person
who never yielded to these kindly impulses would be
regarded as an unpleasing exception to the normal
order of humanity. But when a politician yields a
point of vantage or gives quarter to his opponents,
his generosity is apt to be largely at some one else’s
expense. Having once entered politics he cannot do
what he likes even with his own career; for it is
dedicated to his country and to his party. His only
safe rule is ‘ the rigour of the game.’
It is as much a politician’s business as it is a jockey’s
to keep in the saddle. He must not baulk at self-
flattery when he speaks of his own achievements, and
if he is to get the better of his opponents, he must
paint them blacker than nature made them. He
must ‘ fool most of the people for some of the time,’
not so much in order to bring them to a wise and
honourable decision —this, more often than not, can
best be done truthfully—as to keep them to it when
inertia overtakes or temptations beset them. In deal-
ing with foreign nations not even the frankest and
friendliest foreign minister will throw open all the
cupboard doors; for in every chancery there are
VOL. I H


skeletons and secrets whose rash disclosure to the
world might work untold mischief.
Without bringing all the Christian virtues into this
discussion, it is enough to say that a positive and
strict veracity is impossible for the politician. For
truthfulness even forbids you to allow the person
you are dealing with to deceive himself. Though you
have had no hand in his self-deception you must set
him right. You must set him right if he should in-
cline to think you a better man than you really are,
or to think your opponents worse men than they really
are. You must set your fellow-countrymen right if
they underestimate the sacrifices that will be required
of them in order to carry through some measure, or
fulfil some undertaking, to which they are committed.
You must set a foreign nation right, if it is about to
enter into some admirable international agreement in
the hope of benefits greater than it can ever receive.
A positive and strict veracity forbids not only simula-
tion and dissimulation, calumnies and perversions,
but mental reservations, concealment of influential
facts, and exaggeration of every kind.
It has never yet been decided (for it is impossible
to decide) how far a politician may stretch, and when
he may break, the rules of private morality. A great
deal —indeed almost everything—depends on the cir-
cumstances of each particular case and on his own
special capacity for controlling them. If he can, and
does, control them, so as to benefit his country, much
will be forgiven him. But as there is no code to
guide him, it follows that he is often tempted to
plead necessity when there is no real necessity; and
as he himself is the only tribunal that can decide the
question, he finds himself in the perilous position of a


judge-advocate. Yet it is not the greatest characters,
as a rule, but the little frightened ones, that most freely
help themselves to dispensations.
It is this uncertainty, with its various consequences,
that makes politics the most hazardous of all manly
professions. If there is not another in which a man
can hope to do so much good to his fellow-creatures,
neither is there any in which, by a cowardly act or by
a mere loss of nerve, he may do such widespread
harm. Nor is there another in which he may so easily
lose his own soul. But danger is the inseparable com-
panion of honour. The greatest deeds in history were
not done by people who thought of safety first. It is
possible to be too much concerned even with one’s
own salvation. There will not be much hope left for
humanity when men are no longer willing to risk their
immortal as well as their mortal parts. With all the
temptations, dangers and degradations that beset it,
politics is still, I think, the noblest career that any man
can choose.
It is surely a sufficient patent of nobility that the
lure of politics has kept England well supplied for
some two hundred years with politicians whom it was
not impossible to honour and obey. The essential
virtues that a politician must possess in order to be
worthy of our honour and obedience are not so very
different from those that an ordinary man must possess
in order to make a good husband. They are not
necessarily of a showy or romantic sort. Other con-
siderations are infinitely more important. A politician
will never pass the test whose intellect and imagina-
tion are more than servants to his common sense.
One whose temper is beyond control is not only
intolerable, but very dangerous. Mastery a politician


must have; but without goodwill and human-kindness
it is merely a goose-step that will carry him nowhere.
It does not make for good government any more
than for domestic happiness to live in an atmosphere
of emotional exaltation. We refuse our heartiest con-
fidence to a politician who abounds in pathetics, and
heroics, and other high-flown sentiments. Nor do we
require that he should possess the priceless gift of
moving the deeps of the human heart with words that
go on echoing through the ages. We judge him by
standards that are not less severe, though they are
homelier. If he has been a good husband of the state,
he has the best of all rights to be called ‘ noble ’.
In this matter, Robert Walpole need give place to
no one. He was as matter-of-fact an Englishman as
ever drank October ale ; not at all subject to emotional
exaltation; an abhorrer of high-flown sentiments ;
and even under the severest pressure that his strong
feelings were capable of exerting, never rising to im-
mortal eloquence. He has left no reverberating legacy
of noble words, but —at least as good a thing —an
example of most faithful husbandry. Nor, I think, is
it too much to say that a large proportion of British
politicians, from the beginning of the eighteenth
century to the present day—though most of them
were lighter coins than Walpole—were minted in the
same die.
It must be placed to the politician’s credit that he
takes our contumelious treatment of him in such good
part, with so little whining and loss of temper. He
has a good case against us, if he cared to press it,
inasmuch as we insist upon regarding him as part of
a public show got up for our entertainment, and look


on —hissing or applauding—while he is baited in the
House of Commons, on the platform, and in the Press.
This sport has been so long customary that we are
callous to its cruelty. The contemporaries of a poli-
tician are apt to value him less for the useful services
he does them than for the skill and sturdiness of his
fighting. He rarely gets a just appraisement until
historians come to deal with him long after he is
dead. In order to keep his popularity he must stand
torture as stoically as a Red Indian or a Chinaman;
if he is seen to flinch, it is all up with him. And he
has even worse things to bear than these personal
assaults and batteries. For the average politician,
though he thinks a great deal about his own career,
is by nature a constructive animal. He has a craving
—often an insatiable craving—to be making some-
thing. No sooner is he in office than he becomes
engrossed in shaping policies, in legislation, and in
administrative acts. It is through this passion that he
is most vulnerable. For it takes a man of singular
fortitude to watch with composure, on his outgoing
from office, the foundations that he has dug with
so much pain and labour left to silt up ; or worse
still, his all-but-finished building let go to rack and
ruin for want of the little effort, the few slates and
timbers, that would have made it weather-proof and
habitable.
Looking back over no long period in our own lives,
even we, who are not politicians, will sometimes regret
the melancholy public waste that has been wrought
by the hurrying and scurrying ignorance, or by the
reckless mischief, of incoming ministers. But our
feelings cannot have the same poignancy as those of
the master-builder who sees his work destroyed. No


one, who from the wings of the political stage has
closely watched the actors in this tragi-comedy making
their hopeful entrances and gallant exits, can have
failed to learn that lovers have no monopoly of broken
hearts.
Lamentations are sometimes heard —especially from
people of great possessions—that British politics is now
a more mercenary profession than it used to be. Our
present system, where members of Parliament are paid
the modest salary of a not very senior bank-clerk, is
compared unfavourably with the purity of the past
when rich men served for nothing. It is hinted that
the sweet taste of four hundred a year is a lure of
Mammon to debauch the virtue of our legislators.
But the evidence in support of this theory is uncon-
vincing. The present system has been at work for
twenty years, and there are no signs of a spreading
corruption.
On the other hand it cannot be denied that a
frank venality prevailed during the greater part of
the eighteenth century. Many politicians and their
hangers-on lived very comfortably in those days at
the public charge. Some of them, though not a large
number, built up handsome fortunes. Henry Fox, from
being a ruined gambler, became a millionaire. But
during the administration of William Pitt the younger,
this evil was much abated; and by 1832, when the
power of the Puritan middle-classes began to make
itself felt, little remained save some trifling jobbery and
a certain amount of nepotism that did nobody much
harm. During the remainder of the nineteenth century
there was a systematic cleansing, a sort of spring-
cleaning in which no dark and dusty corner seemed


to escape the watchful eye and übiquitous besom of
the Radical reformer. The precedent that was made
then has been followed ever since, and its austere
restrictions still remain in force.
In Britain politics is not a road that leads to fortune.
There is hardly a sinecure left to pension off a minister
who has earned his rest. No man of ability, desiring
riches, could possibly take his talents to a worse market.
It is true that we are not like the early Romans and
Machiavelli, who thought it dangerous to allow rich
citizens to engage in politics, fearing that they would
use their wealth to deprive the nation of its liberties.
We have no objections to a politician being a man of
fortune ; but we have an exceedingly strong prejudice
against all whom we suspect of seeking to make their
fortunes directly or indirectly out of politics. Nor
does public opinion think too kindly of those who,
having made their way into the front rank of politics,
abandon that career for money-making. For all our
gibes and jeers, we pay the politician an unconscious
homage in assuming that, as a matter of course, he
will make a renunciation which we ourselves would
never dream of practising. He must abjure the pursuit
of wealth, and dedicate himself, once and for all, to the
service of his country. If he succeeds, the only reward
he will receive at our hands is honour; and in the more
probable event of failure he must seek consolation in
his own heart.
We shall do the politician an injustice if we take
too seriously the heroics and pathetics with which he
is so apt to decorate and conclude his speeches. These
for the most part are only common form, tags which
everybody uses, because the audience is supposed to


relish them. It would be harsh to judge him a hypocrite
on sentiments so undeliberate. The true temperature
of his benevolence cannot be deduced from his rhetoric,
which is for the most part meaningless and empty;
but it may be gauged with some approach to accuracy
from his acts, and by noting the things he does or
tries to do, prevents or tries to prevent.
By nature he is probably no poorer and no richer
than the rest of us in kindly warmth and desire to alle-
viate suffering; but the conditions of his calling place
him at a manifest advantage. For the soil of politics
is peculiarly congenial to the growth and burgeoning
of an understanding sympathy with one’s fellow-
creatures. By force of circumstances the politician
mixes, fights and fraternises with all sorts and condi-
tions of men. He cannot listen day after day to his
opponents without shaking off much of his original
narrow-mindedness. On his first arrival at West-
minster he may be shocked and astounded to hear
men asseverating doctrines that strike at the very roots
of his philosophy. And he is also taken aback because
it is evident that the House of Commons does not
regard such speakers as either lunatics or criminals.
But it is not long before he begins to realise that
even the most outrageous of them are often sincere
and sometimes right. If you would know whether a
man is true or false, it is a great help to be placed where
you can watch his eyes and listen to the tones of his
voice. The politician has the good fortune to meet
people face to face whose opinions he abhors, to be
buffeted by them, to give as good as he gets and note
how they take it. This method draws a great deal
of the venom out of controversy.
The critics of the politician are less fortunately


placed. The severest of them live too much in worlds
of their own ; in sympathetic cliques ; among admir-
ing disciples or docile subordinates ; out of the vulgar
hufly-burly. They do not encounter humanly in the
flesh, but inhumanly upon paper. From their writing-
desks they issue rescripts and fulminations against
unseen antagonists —unseen and therefore unknown ;
and we may often doubt if the things and persons they
hate—or think they hate —so furiously have any actual
existence. Their sins of uncharity are perhaps venial,
since they are committed for the most part against
phantasms.
If the critics came down into the mellay they might
lose some of their authority, but they would surely
gain in sympathy and judgement. It might be for
their souls’ good, and also ultimately for the advantage
of the causes they champion so disinterestedly, if they
took more part in the rough-and-tumble. For it is
unreasonable to suppose that any section of these
critics —least of all the idealists, the humanitarians,
the pacifists and the magnates of the popular press—
are at all lacking in natural benevolence : it is only
that their humanity has been stunted by being grown
in too small flower-pots. Were they released from
their confinement, and planted out to take their chance
in a free soil, from which the sourriess is carried off
by natural drainage, their virtues would probably
flourish with as lively a vigour as do those of any
politician.
If cynicism means a habitual wariness in accepting
new promises and projects at their face value, or if
it means a more than ordinary quickness in detecting
windy nonsense masquerading as philanthropy, then
every hard-bitten politician is certainly a cynic. Or


if cynicism means knowing things for shams and yet
doing lip-service to them, party politics is its great
breeding-ground. But surely a man may be suspicious
and sharp-sighted, surely he may also be convention-
ally polite to impostures, without deserving to be
called a cynic. The true test of cynicism is whether
or not he believes with his whole heart in something
which (to him at any rate) is not a sham; whether he
has fire in his belly and a living faith, or, on the con-
trary, has abandoned himself to a sneering lassitude.
A man who is really in earnest about doing anything
will find it rather hard to be a cynic. And if it be one
of the conditions of his being allowed to get on with
his work that he should bow in the house of Rimmon,
let him bow by all means. He will be judged rightly,
sooner or later, by the worthiness of his object, by the
spirit in which he pursues it, and by the work he
leaves behind him.
Politics unfortunately abounds in shams that must
be treated reverentially by every politician who would
succeed. If you are the sort of man whose stomach
revolts against treating shams reverentially, you will
be well advised to stay out of politics altogether and
set up as a prophet: your prophecies may perhaps
sow good seed for some future harvest. But as a
politician you would be impotent. For at any given
time the bulk of your fellow-countrymen believe
firmly and devoutly, not only in various things that
are worthy of belief, but also in illusions of one kind
or another; and they will never submit to have their
affairs managed for them by anyone who appears not
to share in their credulity. If you insist on putting
out your tongue at idols and ideals that happen to be
in fashion, you will find it hopeless to obtain employ


ment. A wise politician will never grudge a genu-
flexion or a rapture if it is expected of him by the
prevalent opinion.
For some time past, criticism has beaten unmerci-
fully on politicians. With a flagrant disregard of
justice we are disposed to lay the blame for all our
troubles upon the supposed incompetence of a single
profession. The perturbations set up by the recent
war are still quivering, and the peoples of Europe
are occupied mainly and disproportionately with
memories of ruin, misery, blundering and confusion.
And this is as it should be ; for the Horrible is a
much less enduring memory with posterity than the
Heroic. It is not unlikely that our grandchildren
and great-grandchildren fifty years hence will be occu-
pied mainly and disproportionately with admiration
for the courage and endurance of their ancestors, with
wonder at their efforts and achievements. Conse-
quently if we would protect those who come after
us against themselves, and save them from suffer-
ings such as we endured—or even worse—the time
to attempt it is now, before the agony of so many
great and gallant nations is forgotten. It is not our
business, but the historian’s, to take a truly propor-
tioned view of good and evil. We are caught up in
a wholesome, though painful, reaction, and we need
not fear at present that it will carry us too far, except
at a single point.
The danger lies in ignoring- the Old Adam that
survives in every nation under the sun; in slurring
over the guilt of prophets and pedagogues, of jour-
nalists hunting for sensations, and soldiers whom a
professional fanaticism had driven out of their wits.


As a consequence of this there has been a tendency to
heap far more than a fair share of the discredit for
what has lately happened upon politicians and the
methods that their art employed. The injustice is
less worth considering than the injury we are likely
to inflict upon ourselves if we impair or destroy the
usefulness of servants whom we cannot do without.
Moreover, we may easily go wrong by treating long-
accepted methods with impatience and contempt. The
ambition of tyrants and imperialists had very little to
do with the origins of most of them. The main pur-
pose for which they were devised was to prevent a
breach of the peace. They encouraged a deliberate
procedure which did not lend itself, as newspaper
and platform diplomacy so often does, to thoughtless
provocation. And they conformed to the sound, but
homely, principle that every nation understands its
own affairs a great deal better than it understands
those of its neighbours.
Methods that experience and necessity have evolved
by slow degrees are bound to be complicated and
cumbrous ; but the patient work of many centuries is
worth weighing carefully against any brand-new
system that has been generated by the heat and pres-
sure of a few years. In a changing world amendment
is always needed; but anything in the nature of a
wholesale substitution would seem to be an act of
suicide. The conventions may often seem absurd;
but even these require to be treated tenderly ; for real
safeguards sometimes lie concealed within the most
preposterous formulas. At the present time we are
too apt to be impatient with the tardy ways of chan-
ceries, to regard pleas for a full inquiry as obstruction,
and even to set common sense aside, lest it should


chill what seems to be a hopeful fervour. But we
may easily trip in our impetuous pursuit of world-
peace and plunge headlong into the very pit we would
avoid. To enter into alliance with revivalist emotions
is the way to perdition. The elaborate courtesies of
the old school are sometimes disingenuous, but they
are less dangerous than the blunt truthfulness of the
well-meaning amateur. A strong statement usually
fails of its intended effect when it is couched in strong
language. A bungled dispatch, a brusque phrase, a
single rude or ambiguous word, may easily set two
nations aflame. Nor is speed, as a rule, the chief
desideratum : it is better that nations should yawn
in the long intervals of a negotiation than that they
should yield to the impulse of sending one another
smart answers by return of post.
For all these reasons it is dangerous to strip the
ancient system of the reverence that is due to it:
as yet there is no other that would not prove a
laughing-stock in its place. And though we may
abuse politicians as much as we please in their indi-
vidual capacities, it is foolish to dishonour their pro-
fession. For politicians are an essential part of the
ancient system. They stand the racket, and are paid
in fame or notoriety. Most of the blows fall on their
heads, and when a sacrifice is required to appease any
of the popular deities it is their privilege to offer up
one of their own number.
The fact that we are so much bewildered and be-
devilled at the present time, instead of moving us to
sympathy for the politician, makes us all the angrier
with him. If we saw our way clearly, we should
probably be less censorious. We resent his being


less flurried, less puzzled, than we are ; and we there-
fore conclude that he must be a shallow creature,
without sense enough to be aware of danger. For
many of us have convinced ourselves that the old
world is coming to an end; and while some appear
to think that civilisation will be quenched utterly in
the darkness of barbarism, others are hopeful that,
from the fuliginous bonfire of antique systems, a new
and more radiant order will arise.
These high-wrought fancies leave the average
politician untouched. He would agree that the light
is bad; but he cannot understand why this should
set us wondering whether we are watching a sunset
or waiting for the dawn. He sees no mysterious
glimmerings in any part of the horizon. He is a
commonplace fellow who goes by his watch, and his
watch tells him it is broad day. The darkness is
nothing more than an overhead autumnal fog, which
will clear away when the wind rises. The obscurity
interferes to some extent with his work ; but he does
not make it an excuse for idling or despondency.
When people talk to him about an impending doom
he is uninterested and incredulous. It is perhaps one
of his defects to place too much confidence in familiar
custom. Left entirely to himself, he has been known
to carry on his business as usual, until the falling skies
caught him unawares and crushed him. He is little
troubled with nightmares. His eyes are not fixed
on the millennium nor yet precisely on the end of his
own nose, but somewhere between the two. He
deals with things as they occur, and prides himself
on not thinking of them too far ahead. We abuse
him : he expects this, and does not complain. Indeed,
like a donkey that is accustomed to being beaten


behind, he might stand stock-still from sheer astonish-
ment were the abuse suddenly to cease.
If we eventually escape from our present per-
plexities, it will not be because theorists have dis-
covered some fine new principle of salvation; or
because newspapers have scolded and pointed angry
fingers at this one or that; or because we, their
readers, have become excited and have demanded that
4 something must be done/ It will be because these
decent, hard-working, cheerful, valiant, knock-about
politicians, whose mysterious business it is to manage
our affairs by breaking one anothers’ heads, shall have
carried on with their work as if nothing extraordinary
was happening—just as Walpole did even in the worst
of times—and shall have 4 jumbled something ’ out
of their contentions that will be of advantage to their
country. The notion that we can save ourselves
without their help is an illusion; for politics is not
one of those crafts that can be learned by the light of
nature without an apprenticeship.




BOOK TWO
FROM THE FLIGHT OF JAMES II.
TO THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE I.
(1688-1714)
YOL. I
I




I. —Of the parts played by Whigs and Tories in the
'glorious ’ devolution (1688-1689).
Often at their beginning wars and revolutions seem
to purify and exalt the spirits of those who under-
take them; but with the effluxion of time there is a
churning up of so much unwholesome sediment that
public life becomes fouler than it was at first. The
earnestness and fidelity which had inspired so many
Royalists as well as Puritans found no counterparts,
but only mockery, among those intriguers who
contended together from the beginning of Charles
the Second’s reign to the end of Anne’s. Faith no
longer sustained them. Their hopes, except of per-
sonal advantage, had faded; while their bewildered
followers had come to doubt if the ideals of the
previous generation could have been anything better
than the idols of a fraudulent priesthood. Between
1660 and 1714 a politician who was looking for his
way might occasionally begin by questioning his
conscience, but he would assuredly end by waiting
on events.
The rebellion that brought about the deposition
of James the Second was a very different matter from
the earlier struggle that had ended in setting up
the Commonwealth. For one thing, the Whigs and
Tories of 1688 were not true spiritual descendants
of the Puritans and Royalists, but an illegitimate
progeny who were content to bear new-fangled and
opprobrious nicknames in token of their bastardising. 1
1 The names Whig and Tory came into vogue about 1680. ‘These
‘foolish terms of reproach,’ Hume calls them. ‘We have played the Fool
‘with throwing Whig and Tory at one another, as Boys do Snowballs.’
—Halifax, Character of a Trimmer.


They were not fighting men, but politicians of a
more modern type, whose leaders had learned how to
bring on and handle a popular agitation, and aimed
at office as the prize of their adroitness.
There was also another difference of some import-
ance. The Puritan revolution had compassed the
King’s ruin by defeating the Royalist armies. In
England, in 1688, Whigs and Tories never came to
blows. There would have been no sense in fighting
one another, seeing that, at the critical period, they
were ranged upon the same side. The Revolution,
in point of fact, was brought about mainly by the
Tories, acting under the astute management and
direction of a comparatively small number of ex-
ceedingly clear-headed Whigs. It was the headlong
action and defection of the Tories which lost James
the Second his throne. If they had stood by the
King, and if William of Orange had depended
solely upon Whig support, there can be little
doubt that his invasion would have suffered, at the
hands of Marlborough, the same fate that had be-
fallen Monmouth’s ill-starred rebellion a few years
earlier.
The two chief pillars of the Tory faith were
Monarchy and the Church of England. Tory theo-
logians had proved to their own satisfaction that
the Anglican establishment was a bulwark, alike
against Romish superstition and the heresies of
Calvin. Tory philosophers had shown no less plaus-
ibly that the authority of the crown and the strength
of the state were indissolubly bound up together.
They argued that in so far as Royalty was stripped of
its powers the state would be a loser, for the executive
would be enfeebled inevitably and irrecoverably, and


sooner or later, anarchy would claim the misguided
nation for its victim. 1
What to the theologians and philosophers were
principles maintainable by reason, appeared in a some-
what different light to the simpler minds of the
majority. The feeling of the Tories for Church and
King had little to do with arguments ; it was much
more the result of instinct and tradition. They loved,
as well they might, the services of their Church. Their
consciences rejected with horror the proposal to
exchange the immemorial institution of episcopacy
for a modern innovation. But if they abhorred Dis-
sent they had an equal aversion from Rome. And
although most of them would probably have repudi-
ated the doctrine of Divine Right in its crudest form,
they were strongly opposed to any tampering with the
legitimate order of succession. Good had rarely come
of such doings in the past. That drastic remedy for
oppression had usually brought misfortunes in its train
which were far worse than the original disease.
For some time, however, before the landing of
William of Orange, the Tory rank and file had been
violently moved by anger and fear. One of their
pillars—the Church of England—was clearly in a
1 The great prosperity of the British Empire and the United States for
more than two centuries after 1688 has been generally accepted by British
and American writers as a sufficient refutation of this doctrine. But out-
side these two states the refutation has never been universally admitted. The
vicissitudes and failures of democracy, after 1848, both in Europe and South
America—the apparent success of Bismarck’s policy of personal kingship
in developing the national resources and in bringing about union and
security—the almost insuperable difficulties under the democratic system
of carrying great administrative reforms unemasculated, and of providing
for the defence and government of a country without waste and corruption
—these and other considerations gradually revived the credit of the older
theories among continental thinkers, even among those who had originally
belonged to what used to be called the ‘ liberal ’ school.


position of the gravest peril. They hastened accord-
ingly to its support, without pausing to consider
what might be the final consequences of their zealous
interference. When they had succeeded in securing
the safety of their church, they were dismayed by the
discovery that, in doing so, they had lost their king.
They had meant only to insist upon sureties for his
future good conduct; but now he had absconded and
a receiver was administering the estate. They had
pressed things too far. They began to talk about a
regency, but it was too late for any accommodation.
The panic of James, the firmness of William, the
sagacity of the Whig leaders, and the not unnatural
apprehensiveness of those Tory magnates who had
taken part in the rebellion, were obstacles that the
belated repentance of the bulk of the party was power-
less to remove. Not a few of those priests who, a
few months earlier, had been the special objects of
royal persecution, gave up their livings and appoint-
ments sooner than take the oath of allegiance to their
deliverer. It has been no uncommon thing for the
rulers of states to single out for provocation those
very orders and classes which were their natural
supporters ; but surely there is no more remarkable
instance of this form of perversity in the whole of
history than the action of James the Second in
setting the Tory party against him by his attacks on
the Church of England.
The Whigs also had their theologians and philo-
sophers ; but the leaders of this party were neither
enthusiasts nor theorists. They were men of a
severely practical turn of mind, whose determination
to achieve certain definite political ends was influenced
to a much greater extent by their reverence for legal


forms than by their admiration of general principles.
They realised the dangers of constitution-making, and
how easily the whole foundations of the state might
be loosened, if the work of pulling down and recon-
structing were undertaken without the most careful
shoring-up and underpinning. They were concerned
to make a precedent that should bar the door against
future revolutions ; not one that restless and factious
men could pretend was merely the first instalment of
a reformation.
That they were actuated largely by personal
motives does not detract from the merit of their
achievement. They were ambitious, and they judged
wisely of their own capacities. They realised that in
settled conditions they might aspire to the highest
positions, but that, in a period of revolution and
counter-revolution, it would be the soldiers and not
the politicians who would play the most important
parts. The result of their efforts was a very remark-
able success. For nearly a century and a half the
framework of the constitution remained unshaken by
internal tumults, by foreign wars, and by ferments of
opinion that spared no other nation in Europe.
The Whig leaders were not knights - errant, but
politicians ; and they were politicians in an age when
the trade of politics was at its dirtiest. Their morals
were no higher, their principles were no firmer, their
practice was no cleaner than those of their Tory rivals
at the courts of the second Charles and the second
James. But on the whole, their abilities were of a
heavier calibre; and what mattered more than all
the rest was the fact that as the short and unhappy
reign of James approached its crisis they showed
themselves possessed by a steadfastness of purpose


that had been singularly lacking in their intrigues
during the preceding five-and-twenty years. In a
modern view most of them were great rascals. There
was never a viler invention than the fable of the
Popish Plot, and hardly ever in England such a
gust of terror-stricken ferocity as that which arose
from the perjuries of Oates and his confederates.
Yet this murderous persecution was set on foot, and
was continued for nearly two years, under the direct
patronage and encouragement of the Whigs and the
most eminent of their leaders. Somers himself, who
has been depicted as a paragon of all the public
virtues, was not above taking hush-money from Queen
Anne. Others besides Somers had their price. Their
fame is due, not to the integrity of their characters or
to the general tenour of their careers, but to this—
that, when their great opportunity offered, they acted
promptly, courageously and with good judgement
so as to bring victory to the cause they favoured.
Subsequent generations, down to the present time,
have assumed that the ending of the Stewart
dynasty was the salvation of British freedom, and
have not been grudging of their gratitude to those
revolutionary spirits who played the chief part in
securing it.
The Whig leaders aimed at reducing and defining
the powers of the sovereign. They were determined
to exclude Roman Catholics in perpetuity from the
throne. Nor were they prepared ever again to trust
a Stewart king, no matter what religion he might
profess ; for had they not been fooled already by
Charles the Second, whose Protestantism was merely a
pretence ? None the less, their course of action was
in no sense directed by religious zeal, which they


regarded with contempt (but also with considerable
anxiety) as a kind of fever or distemper of the mind,
capable of working great destruction, if ever it should
break out in epidemic form. Certainly they had no
wish to exalt the Dissenters or to persecute the Papists
for conscience’ sake; but for political reasons they
must take certain securities from both in order to
safeguard the constitution. On the whole they were
not ill-disposed towards the Church of England,
which they assumed, somewhat too hastily, to have
outgrown its liability to attacks of fervour, and which,
under considerate handling, they believed might prove
useful by reason of its conservative tendencies.
The spirit of scepticism had made considerable way
among the Whig leaders. They were not greatly
interested in matters of faith, but only in questions
of civil and political liberty. They looked upon
priestly interference in affairs of state as a menace
to freedom. The regimen of Laud and his High
Churchmen had been intolerable; but not more so
than the oppressions of Cromwell and his Puritans, or
of James the Second and his Jesuits. At the present
juncture danger seemed to threaten chiefly from the
Roman quarter. Recent encroachments had filled
the Whig party with the dread of alien influences
and a divided allegiance. Theocracy was a form of
government fit only for savages. The aim of sound
statesmanship was a monarch who would submit to
be guided by an oligarchy drawn from the great
families and the great lawyers of England.
The Whig leaders nevertheless were in a grave
quandary. They saw clearly enough that force was
the only remedy against the usurpations of James the
Second ; but it was equally clear to them that Whig


Churchmen and Whig Dissenters were not in a mood
for hearty co-operation, still less for risking life and
liberty in a military adventure. Many of the Whig
Anglicans showed but a lukewarm devotion to their
Church. The Dissenters were sulky and suspicious;
disappointment and contemptuous usage had curdled
their former zeal into a settled rancour. If the King
was engaged in oppressing the Church of England and
in persecuting its bishops, this quarrel was none of
their business. Although they were ready enough to
condemn the King, they had no reason to be friends
with the Church of England, and they disapproved of
bishops on principle. Why then should they take
sides with the Anglican against the Romish idolaters ?
Why should they incur the penalties of rebellion in a
cause that left them cold ? It was barely three years
since Kirke had cut to pieces the adherents of Mon-
mouth at Sedgemoor, and since the horrors of Jeffreys’
‘ bloody assize ’ had showed what came of taking up
arms against the King.
For eight-and-twenty long years the Church of
England had been engaged in paying off old scores
that dated from the oppressions of Cromwell and
his co-religionists. Since the Restoration (of evil
memory !) had transferred the powers of persecution
from Puritans to Episcopalians, the voice of Dissent
had been all for toleration. Now, at last, the non-
conforming sects had received from a popish king
an offer of freedom to worship as they pleased.
It is true that the recent Declarations of Indulgence
fell far short of their furthest desires, for they
were still left without power to persecute their
fellow-countrymen of other faiths. It was also a
bitter reflection that Papists were to be sharers in the


boon of toleration. On the other hand, they could
derive a sentimental consolation as they watched the
wry faces of the Anglicans whose claws were being
pared to the quick. And if they could not blind them-
selves to the fact that the new charter of their religious
liberty was a flagrant and arbitrary violation of the
English constitution, that it marked a dangerous re-
crudescence of royal tyranny, still why should they,
for the sake of a theoretical grievance, take up arms
in order to reject a material benefit ? When tyranny
inflicts an injury, the fact that the means employed
have been illegal adds a stinging provocation; but
when a boon is granted, those who enjoy the benefit
are very liable to forget that their relief was wrought
by means of an outrage on the constitution. 1
In the present emergency it was essential to the
Whig leaders that some considerable body of earnest
men should be brought to the boiling-point and kept
there till the crisis was past. If the mass of the Whig
party remained discouragingly cool, could not some-
thing be done with the simple-minded Tories whose
experience of oppression had already raised their in-
dignation to the required temperature ? And so there
came about this somewhat paradoxical result, that the
‘glorious’ revolution of 1688 was mainly the work
of Tory hands and Whig brains.
After the event, however, each party was affected
with a kind of penitence. The Whigs regretted that
they had not done the whole thing themselves
and became eager to appropriate the sole credit for
the destruction of tyranny. The Tories, on the
other hand, were not long in coming to regard it
1 Halifax’s Letter to a Dissenter is a confession how much need there
was for jogging the Puritan memory.


as a blot on their escutcheon that they had been
instrumental in the ruin of their anointed king.
Popular opinion has adopted the after - thoughts of
the two parties that were concerned in the consti-
tutional change ; and there is a measure of rough and
ready justice in this conclusion; for the complicity of
the Tories was to a large extent blind, involuntary and
accidental, while to the Whig leaders undoubtedly
belongs the whole glory of the project and of its
successful carrying out.
After the accession of William and Mary the
principles of the more ambitious Tories were gradu-
ally forgotten in the pursuit of office. The humbler
members of the party, however, remained for the
most part under a cloud of self-reproach and per-
plexity. Their consciences were uneasy. The memory
that they had been fooled was very wounding to their
self-esteem. With the possible exception of Danby,
there was not a single great and steadfast character
round whom they could rally. It was not until the
next reign that Bolingbroke appeared upon the scene;
nor, when he came, was he altogether such a leader
as the occasion required.
II. —How the English revolution ruined the European
projects of Louis XIV. (1689-1709).
Louis the Fourteenth reigned for seventy-two years
and ruled for fifty-four. He was a boy of six when
he succeeded to the throne of France. He was not yet
four-and-twenty when, on the death of Mazarin, he
took the government into his own hands. The epoch
of his autocracy coincides, almost to a twelvemonth.


with the period covered by the reigns of the last four
sovereigns of the House of Stewart. 1 The purpose
from which he never swerved until his life was nearly
ended, which even then he never wholly abandoned,
was to make himself suzerain or arbiter of Europe.
From the restoration of the Stewarts to the flight
of James the Second—a span of nearly thirty years—
the English court continued to regard the progress of
French ambitions with composure and even with com-
placency. Charles the Second’s chief concerns were to
keep his head upon his shoulders and his crown upon
his head. From the beginning he was a pensionary
king. Although the European policy of Louis was a
menace to British safety, French subsidies were a means
of soothing the discontents of British taxpayers. When,
as occasionally happened, the force of public opinion in
England or the pressure of some powerful clique of
politicians proved too strong to be resisted, ostensible
alliances were entered into with the Dutch and an
illusion of war with France was solemnly conjured up.
But the intimacy of the Bourbon and Stewart kings
was hardly ruffled by these collusive actions. The
current of reciprocal favours—of money paid and
services received—went on flowing as before between
Versailles and London, the only difference being, that,
from time to time, it ran in channels underground.
Charles’s subjects might cry out against the aggrandise-
ment of France, but he himself was quite prepared to
take his wages and look the other way. The game he
played was not a great one, but, when he had time
1 Louis XIV. (1638-1715) was eight years younger than his first cousin,
Charles 11. He succeeded to the throne in 1643 and assumed the royal
power in 1661. The reigns of Charles 11., James 11., William and Mary,
and Anne extended from 1660 to 1714.


and energy to spare from his diversions, he played
it very cleverly.
Although Charles was frequently the puppet of
Louis, he was rarely the dupe. The ‘ Merry Monarch ’
was much too sharp-sighted to be deceived by the
flatteries and sophisms of a polite diplomacy, and even
his unfortunate successor, whose vision of human
affairs suffered from chronic obscurity and occasional
eclipse, was at least dimly conscious of the national
dishonour.
The revolution produced a complete change in the
relations of France and Britain. On the accession of
William and Mary, Louis espoused the cause of the
exiled king, and England at once threw in her lot with
the Allies. Thenceforward, for more than twenty
years, her diplomacy and, when necessary, her arms
were employed in support of Holland, of Austria,
and of those German states which had adhered to the
Emperor in defence of their independence.
So far as England was concerned, this policy
sprang neither from hatred of France nor from any
enthusiasm for our allies. It was dictated solely by
considerations of national security. More fortunate
than the Germans, our people had not experi-
enced the barbarities of a French invasion; while,
on the other hand, they might complain, with some
justice, of the laggard co-operation of Austrian
generals, and of the self-seeking and pedantic ob-
struction of Dutch deputies. But as Louis had
claimed the right to say what king should wear the
crown of Edward the Confessor, there was an obvious
danger in allowing him to become master of Europe.
It was believed that, if the resources of the whole
continent were suffered to come under the direction


of a single will, such a disturbance of the balance of
power must inevitably result in the ruin of England.
Nor was this the view of England alone, or of
one political party, or of a single sovereign. After
the death of William of Orange it remained unchal-
lenged during the greater part of the reign of Anne ;
it was approved both by Tory and by Whig adminis-
trations ; and, after the union of the Scottish with
the English parliament, British policy continued on
the same course. If it was not always pursued with
the highest degree of energy and foresight, it is
entitled at least to the credit of consistency, and in the
end, under the leadership of Marlborough, it was
crowned with triumphant success.
In the pageantry of kingship, Louis the Fourteenth
stands out as the supreme and unapproachable artist.
No other monarch of modern times has ever possessed
the grand manner in such perfection, or known so
well how to gild his egotism with the appearance of
magnanimity. But he was a victor in whom heroism
had no part. His strength lay in persistency of pur-
pose, in disregard for human suffering, and in a rare
gift of selection that enabled him, so long as his
faculties remained unimpaired, to choose men who
would serve him with glory in the field, with energy
and with judgement in the cabinet.
For many years his policy carried everything
before it. His diplomacy was vigorous and astute,
his arms invincible, and it seemed as if nothing could
avert the final submission of Europe. But with the
revolution in England a change came over the scene,
and the vast project of Louis for the aggrandise-
ment of France was brought gradually to a pause.
Although, upon the whole, the fortunes of war


continued favourable to him for some time longer,
his efforts could make no headway against the iron
resolution with which William the Third endured
defeat. In the end they fell in ruins before the
victories of Marlborough.
In statecraft also these two men proved themselves
a match for the French king; and without statecraft
of the highest quality, military success must have
remained beyond the reach even of Marlborough’s
genius. The final result will appear all the more
remarkable when it is remembered for how long
a period the allies were confronted by the unity
of a despotic will. While their adversary was able
to direct every operation of war and policy to a
single purpose, they themselves, from first to last,
were hampered by all the evils that arise from a
divided command, from the competition of national
interests, from the mutual distrust of cabinets, from
the clash of personal jealousies, and, in the case of
Holland and of Britain, from the combinations and
intrigues that are inseparable from party govern-
ment.
For some time before Marlborough ceased to
command the allied forces in Flanders it was clear to
Louis that he had lost the game. The question then
became, how he might evade the penalties of failure,
how he might still outwit those enemies on whom
he had inflicted immeasurable injuries and whose
hearts were disinclined to mercy. In negotiation he
still enjoyed the advantage that attaches to a single
power when it is pitted against a confederacy of
diverse wills. His treasure was not yet wholly ex-
hausted ; his emissaries were active and übiquitous;
it might be less costly to bribe a favourite than to


surrender a province. But all this would have availed
him little, had there been no reversal of British
policy.
Louis was saved by one of those capricious changes
to which representative government is peculiarly
subject so soon as the dread of an immediate danger
has passed away. The sobriety of political partisans
is an uneasy virtue that rarely outlasts the crisis
of their country’s malady. At the first signs of
convalescence they hasten to absolve themselves
from their irksome vows of mutual forbearance.
The old craving for office and revenge, for faction
and intrigue, returns upon them with an irresistible
relish whetted by the hunger of an enforced abstinence.
III. —Concerning the remarkable effects of a Sermon
(1709-1710).
After the enforced resignations of Harley 1 and
Bolingbroke 2 early in the year 1708, the government
VOL. I
K
1 Robert Harley (1661—1724) entered parliament shortly after the
flight of James 11. He was a moderate Tory, but succeeded, during the
greater part of his career, in keeping on terms with the Whigs. He became
Speaker of the House of Commons in 1701, and secretary-of-state in 1704.
With the assistance of a woman of the bedchamber to whom he was related
(Abigail Hill, afterwards Mrs. Masham), he sought to influence the Queen
against his colleagues. This led to his dismissal in 1708. He became
Chancellor of the Exchequer and head of the government in 1710. In
171 1 he was appointed Lord Treasurer and created earl of Oxford. As
he is better known in history by his original name than by his peerage title,
he is referred to in these pages always as ‘ Harley.’
2 Henry St. John (1678—1751) entered parliament in 1701, supported
Harley and the Tory party, and owed his appointment as Secretary-at-War
to the favourable notice of Marlborough. He was dismissed, along with
Harley and for the same cause, in 1708, returning to office with his chief as
secretary-of-state in 1710. He was created Viscount Bolingbroke in 1712,
and as it is by this name that he is best known in history, he is thus referred
to in these pages.


of Godolphin 1 became predominantly Whig. On
the whole, throughout a long period of office, its
policy both abroad and at home had been brilliantly
successful. As often happens, daring and sagacity
had been attended by a run of luck. Marlborough was
the soul of the administration as well as commander
in the field. If he could have overcome the jealous
timidity of the Dutch, it seems at least possible that, in
the autumn of 1708, he would have led his victorious
troops to Paris. But despite their great achievements,
ministers were well aware, by the winter of 1709, that
they were no longer upheld by any fervour of popular
sympathy. Their staunchest supporters were found
among the moneyed interest, whose approval was
to be attributed less to its enthusiasm for political
principles than to a severely practical regard for its
own prosperity. At this epoch personal interest was
rapidly becoming the touchstone that every class
applied to the political situation. After years of vic-
tory, military glory had lost its early lustre. The
original motive of the war was wellnigh forgotten.
On the other hand, the charges of the war kept mount-
ing up, and the unpleasant consequences of increased
expenditure were present to every mind. The country
gentlemen were in the worst of humours, and com-
plained bitterly of the land tax. The poor complained
no less bitterly of the press-gang; employment was
1 Sidney Godolphin (1645-1712) was page-of-honour to Charles 11.,
and, having made himself useful through his business and financial abilities,
rose to be secretary-of-state and was created a peer in 1684. He was one of
the Tories who stood by James 11. to the last. He held high office under
William and Mary, which did not however prevent him from engaging in
treasonable correspondence with the exiled court at St. Germain. Under
Anne he was nominal head of the government from 1702 to 1710 ; but he
was by nature a subordinate character, took his orders in the main from
Marlborough, and came to rely more and more on the support of the Whigs.




very hard to obtain; it was ill-paid; and owing to a
succession of bad harvests, wheat was at famine prices.
Thousands of unhappy fugitives from French devasta-
tions in the Palatinate, and from the persecution of
their own Catholic rulers, flocked in upon an already
overcrowded labour market, and had to be kept
from starvation at the taxpayers’ expense. And what
seemed even worse in the eyes of the clergy was the
fact that these miserable refugees recruited the ranks
of nonconformity. With the habitual readiness of a
priesthood to entertain uncharitable suspicions, the
High Church party gave out, and possibly in some
instances believed, that this immigration was part of
a dark plot contrived by the Whigs to undermine the
Anglican foundation. Already, in the eyes of many
fanatics, this fell work had made considerable pro-
gress owing to the relaxation of the ordinances against
dissenters and to the appointment of Low Church
bishops.
While things were in this condition the country
was visited by one of those outbreaks of excite-
ment which, in their brief but impetuous courses,
sweep everything to right and left before them. In
its nature it resembled a sudden hurricane deranging
the accustomed order of the seasons ; for it had
nothing whatsoever to do with the settled interests
and permanent sentiments of the nation.
An insolent and very vain priest preached an
abusive sermon before the city fathers. 1 His themes
were high Tory doctrines, the impiety of the ‘glori-
ous’ revolution, and the peculiar wickedness of Her
Majesty’s ministers. The sensitiveness of Godolphin
indulged the offender with the glories of a state
1 sth November 1709.


prosecution and with a most remunerative martyr-
dom. Cheering mobs accompanied Sacheverell daily
to his trial, and the Queen herself appeared at West-
minster Hall as if to show him countenance. His
sentence was equivalent to an acquittal. Wherever
he travelled —and he was not one who shrank from
publicity—his journey was a triumphal progress. 1
The Queen became bolder as she perceived the trend
of popular opinion. She had no love for her ministers,
and was eager to avail herself of the first favourable
opportunity for being rid of them.
The crash was not long delayed. In the following
August the Tory leaders, with the aid of an aspiring
woman of the bedchamber, 2 at last succeeded in
procuring the dismissal of the Whig administration.
Harley became head of the new cabinet, with
Bolingbroke as chief secretary-of-state. In Sep-
tember ministers took advantage of the continuance
of their opponents’ unpopularity, appealed to the
country and were secured in power by an overwhelm-
ing majority. By the end of the following January
the purge was complete. The duchess of Marl-
borough was dismissed from her appointments, and
hardly a Whig remained in office. Some two years
later secret and benevolent negotiations were opened
1 An admirer presented him to a comfortable living, and, immediately
on the expiry of his sentence —three years’ suspension from preaching—
the Queen appointed him to one of the richest of the London benefices.
2 Abigail Hill (16 .>-1734), being left penniless on her father’s bank-
ruptcy, was befriended by her cousin, the duchess of Marlborough, who,
somewhere about 1704, procured for her the appointment of bedchamber
woman to Queen Anne. Abigail Hill lost no time in seeking to supplant
her patroness in the Queen’s favour. In 1707 she married Samuel Masham,
groom of the bedchamber to the Prince Consort. She was the chief channel
for her kinsman Harley’s intrigues against Marlborough and Godolphin.
Her husband was created Lord Masham in 17 11.


with the Pretender for overturning the Act of Settle-
ment, and with the French king for a peace in con-
formity with his interests.
IV. — How the duke of Marlborough was dismissed
and disgraced (1711).
Notwithstanding the overthrow of his friends and
the disgrace of his wife, Marlborough allowed himself
to be persuaded by the new administration to retain
his command for yet another year. 1 His operations
during this campaign, though not spectacular, were
entirely successful. He again outmanoeuvred the
French commander, took Bouchain, and improved the
military position of the allies.
In Holland, on his way to England in the autumn,
he learned two things that can hardly have caused
him much surprise: the first, that the British
government, on its own account and without the
consent of its allies, had opened negotiations for
peace with France; the second, that his enemies at
home, having no longer any occasion for his ser-
vices, had already made him the object of a political
persecution.
Marlborough landed in England in November,
and by the last day of the year his ruin was complete.
He was stripped of all his offices and pursued with
charges of peculation, as empty of true substance and
as much tainted with malice as those others upon
which, a few months later, Robert Walpole was
sent to the Tower. The mood of a political party
after victory at the polls is rarely edifying; but in
1 1711. Harley seems to have been anxious to retain him, Bolingbroke
to provoke him to resignation.


the days when a majority in the House of Commons
not only conducted the prosecution but voted judge-
ment upon the accused, the passions of the parlia-
mentary mob were apt to plunge them deeper in
indecency than any individual member would have
ventured in his private capacity.
Marlborough, moreover, had other enemies besides
the noisy partisans at St. Stephen’s. To the new
ministers he was an object of terror, whose utter
destruction seemed essential to their own safety.
Not many months before the change of government,
he had put forward a strange and unprecedented
request that he might be made captain-general of
the forces for life. Mrs. Masham and her friends
being at the Queen’s ear his petition was refused.
The Tory leaders affected to believe (and may be
forgiven if they did actually believe) that this appoint-
ment would have been the last step but one to the
declaration of a military protectorate on the Crom-
wellian pattern.
At that time Marlborough was the most com-
manding figure in the whole western world. In an
age of great soldiers he towered head and shoulders
above the rest. His predominance was almost as
indisputable in diplomacy as in war. There was
hardly a king in Christendom, whether friend or
enemy, who at one time or another had not found
occasion to appeal for his good offices. Those who
had stolen his power away were wise to make quite
certain of his ruin; for behind his modest bearing
and gentle urbanity there lay a daemonic force and
the prestige of unbroken success.
The Queen was also to be counted as an enemy.
Since her accession she had always been in the same


hands, and she considered, not without reason, that
they had used her roughly. It is true that, during
those eight years, the administration had completely
changed its party colour. To begin with, it had been
of the full Tory complexion; then it turned into a
coalition; finally it became almost pure Whig. But
what had never varied, from first to last, was the
predominance of Marlborough’s persuasive and invin-
cible will. In actual fact he had been the head of
government ever since she ascended the throne. The
members of the cabinet—Godolphin and the rest —
were his ministers much more than they were hers ;
they were the channel through which she received the
instructions of an absentee sovereign, rather than
servants through whom she issued orders to her
captain - general. The whisperers of her private
councils did not fail in pointing out that, in the most
favourable view, she was nothing better than a regent,
and in reality little more than a figure-head.
Unfortunately for himself, Marlborough could
not be in two places at once. He was an excellent
correspondent; but letters were a poor substitute
in the case of one whose most powerful weapon was
the subtle influence of personal contact. His cam-
paigning kept him in the Low Countries for the greater
part of each year, and he was forced to leave the
management of the political department at home to
colleagues whose timidity too often caused them to
take refuge in bluster and whose dullness of sympathy
led them into constant failures in tact. On the
personal side he relied upon his wife, whose force
of character would have fitted her for any enterprise,
but whose faults of temper and judgement were only
too apt to throw away every advantage. The Queen


had grievances without end against ministers who had
trampled on her feelings and against a duchess who
had held her in an intolerable bondage. 1 It is probable
that she had come to regard Marlborough with even
greater bitterness because he was the husband of the
duchess than because he had been the head and front
of the offending administration.
Anne was a kindly woman, infirm of judgement,
still more infirm of purpose. The fact that she
was obstinate put an additional weapon into the
hands of an insinuating favourite. Mrs. Masham
could not forgive her cousin, the duchess of Marl-
borough, for having introduced her to royal favour.
She had all the vindictiveness, as well as all
the ingenuity, of the handmaid who is heir to her
mistress. Her schemes had prospered and she had at
last arrived at power on the ruin of her patroness.
Harley, from his timidity, would rather rid himself of
an enemy by secret ways than openly. He was glad
if he could shuffle off responsibility for all the petty
humiliations that were inflicted upon Marlborough,
1 Sarah Jennings (1660-1744) was one of the numerous children of
a Hertfordshire squire, Richard Jennings of Sandridge, near St. Albans.
She and her sister Frances (first married to Count Hamilton and afterwards
to the duke of Tyrconnel) went to the court of Charles 11. as maids-of-
honour. In 1676 she became attached to the service of the Princess Anne,
second daughter of the duke of York, afterwards James 11. In 1678 she
married Colonel John Churchill, who was then in his twenty-ninth year.
She soon gained complete control over the weak mind of her mistress, whom
she continued to rule—at first by affection, but more and more, as time went
on, by tears and violence—for upwards of thirty years. The likenesses in
the National Portrait Gallery show the duchess as a fair, slight, deter-
mined-looking little lady with a tip-tilted nose ; the duke as a high-coloured
and somewhat fleshy gentleman, without a trace of subtlety in his strong
good-humoured countenance. Despite the violence of her temper and her
implacable disposition, Duchess Sarah appears to have preserved great
powers of attraction up to the end of her long life.


and which were deliberately calculated to drive him
for ever from the scene, on the plea that they were
Her Majesty’s personal instructions. But these in-
structions were inspired, none the less, by the assiduous
Mrs. Masham, and Mrs. Masham had ever a receptive
ear for the hints of her kinsman Robert Harley.
The spectacle of a great man, be he bad or good,
delivered over to be tormented by a swarm of mean
persecutors is always odious. The faults of Marl-
borough are on a scale with his greatness ; they are
as scarlet and cannot be hid. But throughout the
whole of his career (which at this point, for all
practical purposes, came to an end) this at least
is clear—that notwithstanding his faults, notwith-
standing all his schemings and contrivings, he was
preserved in some miraculous way—by the favour of
Providence, or by some instinct stronger than his own
forces to control it—from any action that worked
injury to his country. We are more concerned with
the things he actually did than with those others
that he did not do but is only charged with having
plotted. From first to last his motives are shrouded
in a defensive haze of insincerity. We can never hope
so thoroughly to unravel the secrets of his impene-
trable mind as to warrant us in assuming that even his
greatest actions sprang from disinterested patriotism;
but still less should we be justified in pronouncing
a confident judgement upon the baseness of his
unfulfilled intentions.
Be his premeditations what they may have been,
the actual achievements of Marlborough, in a period
of uncommon peril, are interwoven like a thread of
gold in the fabric of our history. We cannot cancel
the debt we owe him for our freedom and security.


and we claim his glory as part of our heritage. In
Winchester Cathedral, at the feet of the recumbent
effigy of William of Wykeham, is seated a row of tiny
monkish figures that contrast with the calm statue
of the sleeper no less by the vivacity of their gestures
than by their Lilliputian scale. So in the mirror of
imagination we seem to see depicted at the feet of
Marlborough a group of fretful pigmies, the great
Bolingbroke himself appearing no larger than a
mammet.
Some months after Marlborough was removed
from the command of the allied armies, the duke of
Ormonde (with instructions to engage in nothing
but make-believe) was sent out to replace him. 1
The troops murmured at the change. They were
attached to their old leader not merely because he
had led them to victory; his remarkable capacity
for the business side of war had earned him a degree
of confidence which was given to none of his con-
temporaries ; but apart from all this, the gentler
aspect of his strange nature had completely won the
hearts of his soldiers. However it might be in his
dealings with others, with them the sweetness of his
temper covered no duplicity. His consideration for
them upon the march, in camp, in hospital or winter
quarters, in sickness and in health, appeared no less
wonderful, in contrast with the practice of those times,
than the swiftness of his movements, the magic of his
combinations, or the serenity of his genius in battle.
And when the battle was won, the first thought of ‘ the
old corporal ’ was for the wounded.
He was very chivalrous to women, very courteous
to his enemies, very merciful to his prisoners. In
1 Ormonde arrived in Flanders in April 1712.


an age when the most civilised nation in Europe set a
dangerous precedent of cruelty and rapine, he refused
to tolerate outrage, and only under the sternest mili-
tary necessity could he ever be brought to consent to
the devastation of conquered territory.
The armies of Oliver Cromwell were volunteers ;
they boasted, not without warrant, of a stricter virtue
than the average ; but, none the less, it has always been
accounted a great glory to their leader that, even in
the bitterness of civil war, their conduct should
so rarely have sullied their professions. The armies
of Marlborough were very different. A minority only
were professional soldiers, and these made no pre-
tensions to a delicate morality. The remainder were
recruited by the press-gang, by hunger, or from
prisons. Out of such unpromising materials it was
his business to make an army capable of defeating the
greatest and most self-confident of military powers.
That he succeeded, not only in this, but also in stamp-
ing the impress of his own patience and humanity
upon those rough legionaries, must be set to his
credit in the long and dubious account, which, after
more than two centuries of discussion, still awaits the
final audit of history.
V. —How the Tory government proceeded to negotiate
for peace with Louis XIV. (1711-1713).
Countries that have gone through a long war in
partnership rarely come out of it as warm friends as
they were at the beginning. After efforts of this
sort human nature occasionally finds it a good deal
easier to forgive its enemies than to cherish its
allies.


There are no two nations in the world which
fight, or take decisions, or talk, or eat, or wash them-
selves upon precisely the same principles. Their codes
of military honour are different, and each suspects
poltroonery in any deviation from its own accepted
pattern. The Red army, after losing one man in ten,
retires, but comes back next day and retakes the lost
position. The Blue army stands fast until seven men
out of every ten are casualties, and knows, that if at
last it be forced to retreat, it can never hope to return.
Although each of these methods of fighting has great
victories to its credit, the Blue army thinks it sheer
cowardice to fall back so long as it is humanly possible
to hold on; while the Red army is equally certain
that cowardice consists in abandoning a position
for good and all. It is the same with undertakings
and agreements between governments. Accusations of
betrayal are bandied about very freely. Causes of
offence, that in reality arise out of the peculiar work-
ing of political constitutions, are attributed to the
bad faith of generals and statesmen. And the Tower
of Babel stands like a block-house in the pass that
leadeth to understanding. Ostensible synonyms have
an awkward trick of concealing vital distinctions.
It is by no means so simple a matter as it seems to
translate one language into another; and, moreover,
the interpreter will have left his work but half done
unless at the same time he has succeeded in bringing
national temperaments to some kind of common
denominator. And even if all these high matters
be adjusted, we are still in trouble owing to the fact
that there is probably no race of men upon the face
of the earth which, at close quarters, does not regard
the personal habits of every other race as disgusting.


This state of irritation between allies, which usually
follows as the aftermath of a great war, is only a pass-
ing mood. It is the business of a patriotic statesman
to foresee and curb its excesses; but the path of his
duty is beset with difficulties, and he may readily lose
his popularity in keeping to it. The opposite course
is easy and, to certain natures, irresistible. The temp-
tation of the opportunist is to make himself the
spokesman of the prevailing discontent and to turn
it to his own account.
It is no reproach to Bolingbroke that he made
peace, for peace was a matter of grave urgency. Nor
is it a fair accusation that, owing to his ulterior
objects, the material interests of Britain were lost
sight of in the negotiations. It was not necessary,
however, for Britain to have betrayed her allies in
order to obtain peace. A more advantageous and a
speedier settlement would probably have resulted
from a loyal and vigorous prosecution of the cam-
paign. The true charge against Bolingbroke is that
he was altogether indifferent to the honour of Britain,
and that he debauched public opinion for his own
purposes.
The fact that Britain had many grievances against its
allies—against the Germans for repeated failures to
fulfil their engagements —against the selfish and dila-
tory proceedings of the Dutch—all these were no
vindication of the policy that Bolingbroke succeeded
in imposing on his country. His instinct, however,
told him truly that for the time being the nation was
not in the mood for looking a gift-horse in the mouth.
He knew that his fellow-countrymen would submit
to walk blindfold, providing they were led towards
peace; for they were altogether weary of the war.


and they were likewise thoroughly out of temper
with their associates. Bolingbroke was an opportunist
of genius, and he earned the reward which that
dubious profession occasionally bestows upon its
most brilliant practitioners a temporary success
and a lasting obloquy.
There is nothing out of the common in the readiness
with which the British people has sometimes allowed
itself to be cajoled by politicians into neglect or evasion
of its debts of honour; for the practice of all other
nations is the same. Not one of them has a better
record than our own, while several have an incompar-
ably worse one. It is remarkable, however, that there
should be such a striking contrast between the sanctity
with which individual Englishmen regard their private
obligations and the levity with which the nation they
belong to occasionally treats its public promises. When
danger threatens, promises of mutual help are ex-
changed, amid popular acclamation, with foreign
governments, rebel provinces, oppressed religions,
friendly tribes, even with sects or sections of our
own nationals. By and by we may come round to the
view that peace on advantageous terms is the greatest
of British interests; and we are apt, thereupon, to con-
clude that peace at any price must be the true interest of
our allies and helpers. We are now as lavish of good
advice as formerly we were of promises. Let our
good friends realise the overwhelming force of moral
fervour which impels the British people to put an end
to the horrors of war; let them look the facts of life
fairly in the face; let them consider things in their true
proportions, and make what terms they can, each with
his own peculiar enemy. But let it be clearly under-
stood that they may still rely confidently on our


friendship. We will put in a good word for them
at the right season, that is, after we have setded our
own much more important business satisfactorily.
And as our good word has a way of not being spoken
until we have shaken hands upon our own bargain
with our late antagonists—as it is only a kind of
afterthought or pious hope, uttered rather per-
functorily, while we are gathering up our papers
and fiddling with the keys of our dispatch-boxes—
our newly placated enemies have rarely any reason
to reproach us with importunacy, though it occasion-
ally happens that our former comrades derive but
little benefit from our intercessions.
Bolingbroke was not the first politician —nor the
last, by a long way—to take advantage of this mood
of apathy ; but the chapter of betrayals, which is one
of the least edifying in our history, contains no uglier
incident than the abandonment of the Catalonians
to the vengeance of Spain. Nor is there any worse
blot upon the national honour than the baseness that
Tory ministers were guilty of during the campaign
of 1712. In April the duke of Ormonde was sent out
as captain-general. By Bolingbroke’s secret instruc-
tions the war was allowed to languish, and the enemy
commanders were privately warned of intended attacks
by our allies. In May, behind the backs of the allies,
a separate truce was arranged with France, and shortly
after midsummer our shamefaced troops withdrew
from their positions.
Ormonde was precisely that type of soldier whom
politicians, when they are engaged in a certain kind
of dirty work, will always find convenient for their
purposes. He was a man of unblemished character,
but something of a simpleton. His sense of honour


was very keen, but so restricted that it caused him
to regard the whole duty of a soldier as consisting
in personal bravery and unquestioning obedience to
orders. He was an incapable commander, and he
was also entirely ignorant of the diplomatic situation.
The British forces had endured the toils and
sufferings of war for many years, and had stronger
reasons than any section of their fellow-countrymen
for desiring peace. But with a victorious army
honour is apt to be the prevalent consideration.
They learned of their recall, not as Bolingbroke
had anticipated they would, with joy and acclama-
tions, but sullenly, with curses and groans. They
marched past the silent ranks of their Dutch and
German comrades with none of the elation of con-
scripts who have earned their release, but rather with
the dejected air of deserters who are being sent to
execution. They mutinied and were only reduced to
obedience by the severest measures. On their way
to the port of embarkation they found the gates of
all the Flemish cities shut contemptuously in their
faces, save those of Bruges and Ghent, where there
happened to be British garrisons. Even the bloody
field of Malplaquet 1 was forgotten in the present
disgrace, and of the precedent treachery on the part
of their own government they had as yet no more
than a suspicion.
1 The ‘ very murdering ’ battle of Malplaquet, as Marlborough called
it, was fought on the nth of September 1709. It was the last, and also the
least complete, of his great victories. The numbers engaged were about
90.000 on each side. The losses of the allies were much greater than those
of their defeated enemies. The French estimates put these numbers as
30.000 against 6000, while our own estimates put them at 20,000 against
16,000. Marshal Villars retreated in good order, and it was impossible
to follow in pursuit.


In Flanders the allies, left to bear the full brunt,
were defeated; and not a few of those fortresses
that had been taken at so great cost fell into the
hands of the French. The war in Spain, pursued
without faith, energy or discretion, had already ended
in disaster. It was under these unfavourable auspices
that negotiations for a general peace dragged out their
slow course at Utrecht.
Where antagonists are bound by no truce, it is a
dangerous plan for either of them to reduce his efforts
in the field while negotiations are proceeding. If he
has the requisite strength it is much wiser to redouble
the vigour of his attack. But there is a certain weak-
kneed kind of bargainer, who is for ever obsessed
with the fear of wounding the feelings of those with
whom he is negotiating. He thinks to soften his
opponents’ hearts by abstaining from any action—
such as winning a victory or taking a town —which
would be hurtful to them and beneficial to himself.
There is also another kind of bargainer who sacrifices his
natural advantages through an inability to conceal his
eagerness. Such a one will put up the price against
himself by letting it be seen how much his heart is set on
obtaining his particular object, and, at the same time,
he will depreciate the value of the currency he pro-
poses to pay in, by showing how lightly he regards
those points which he is prepared to concede.
Bolingbroke’s diplomacy suffered from both these
faults. He was too much of an egotist ever to be
able to view the situation either through the eyes of his
adversary or through those of his allies. Although
he made great play with the weapons of simulation
and dissimulation, he handled them without mastery,
VOL. i L


in a rather theatrical fashion, and his bargaining was
spoiled by the ardour of his fancy. The French, who
troubled themselves very little about the wounded
feelings of other people, pushed forward vigorously
as the efforts of the British gradually slackened and
ceased; so that, as the negotiations spread them-
selves over month after month, Louis the Fourteenth
found his diplomatic position ever more strongly
buttressed by his military advantages.
It was in January 1712 that representatives of
the great European powers met at Utrecht, and in
April of the following year, after fifteen months of
haggling and intrigue, the necessary signatures were
attached to a treaty of peace.
The carrying out, if not the conception, of this
treaty was the work of Bolingbroke. He allowed
himself no rest. He digged in London and he
delved at Versailles. Execrated from first to last
by the Opposition, often unaided and at times
obstructed by his fellow-ministers, he urged forward
and guided the negotiations with the whole force of
his indefatigable spirit. The credit of the achieve-
ment was his, whatever may be thought of the
means he employed or of the value that resulted.
So far as Britain and Holland were concerned, the
peace of Utrecht put an end to the European
war 1 ; but it could not stem the torrent of Whig
denunciation.
Bolingbroke was superior to all his colleagues, at
least in one quality, for as a rule he knew quite clearly
what he meant to do. At this particular juncture he
was determined to free the country from the entangle-
1 The war, as between Austria and France, did not end until nearly a year
later (peace of Rastadt, March 1714).


merits of the Austrian and Dutch alliances, and to
make peace. So far the cabinet was with him, and
it seems fairly certain that the country, broadly
speaking, was of the same mind. But with Boling-
broke himself the attainment of these objects was
only a means to a much greater end. He desired,
on the Queen’s death, to restore the Stewarts under
guarantees (which he never succeeded in obtaining)
for the security of Protestant worship. He was most
anxious at this period to ingratiate himself with the
prince whom he hoped to be the means of placing
on the British throne. When the time for action
came, the success of his policy must depend to a
large extent upon the goodwill of Louis the Four-
teenth. The Pretender, like his father before him,
was supported by the munificence of the French king.
Bolingbroke therefore saw the surest way to his goal
in considering with tenderness the interests of this
foreign benefactor. Taking all these considerations
into account, it is hardly to be wondered at if his
diplomacy proved more formidable to his allies than
to the enemy.
The Whig party agreed in condemning the congress
of Utrecht, in crying shame upon the laggard fashion
in which the war was suffered to collapse while
negotiations were proceeding, and in loading the
government with reproaches when the terms of the
treaty were at last made known.
The Whigs contended that it was no time to go
out seeking peace; that the proper course was to
continue the war with unabated vigour, leaving it to
the French to sue for mercy when at last they had been
beaten to their knees. But the opportunity for a
knock-out blow had passed, and the Whigs knew full


well, that though both sides were in sore straits,
the resources of the allies were too far exhausted,
and those of the enemy too well husbanded, for such
an attempt to offer any prospect of success. Nor
were they on firmer ground when they denounced
the results of the agreement as ruinous to British
interests ; for, so far as the United Kingdom alone
was concerned, peace would have been acceptable
upon conditions less favourable than those that were
actually obtained.
The Whigs, however, had ample justification for
their attacks, though, considering their own record
in the matter, it required some effrontery to make
them. The treaty was in some ways a shameful
achievement, notwithstanding the benefits it promised,
and Bolingbroke may justly bear the odium of the
negotiations that produced it. But these negotia-
tions ought never to have come within his province.
An odium, almost as great, though of a different
character, should rest upon his Whig predecessors.
Had the government of Marlborough and Godolphin
played the part of statesmen, peace would have
been secured upon honourable and triumphant
terms before ever the Tories came into office.
In 1708, after the battle of Oudenarde and the
submission of Flanders, and again during the early
part of 1710, Louis had been prepared to accept
peace upon conditions very favourable to the allies.
Disasters had accumulated upon him, his power had
sunk to its lowest ebb, and there were no signs of
hope in any quarter. Where struggles have been
fierce and prolonged, whether in warfare, party
politics, trade or litigation, there usually comes a
time when the more prosperous party will be wise to


settle with his adversaries ; for unsuspected dangers
lurk behind the most smiling appearances. Every
epoch in history shows us disasters that have arisen
from the neglect of this maxim, but none is more
often overlooked in the excitement of success.
The peace negotiations at Gertruydenberg (1710)
had broken down over the fatuously brutal demand
of the allies that Louis the Fourteenth should himself,
with his own armies, turn his grandson off the throne
of Spain. Poetic justice might have required this
humiliation, for, in procuring the Spanish crown for
that grandson, Louis had been guilty of a gross breach
of faith. But high politics and poetic justice are
the rules of two widely different worlds. Short of
taking up arms himself against Philip the Fifth, the
French king, at that time, had been ready to agree
to everything that was asked of him. He had been
prepared to acknowledge the Austrian candidate as
the rightful sovereign of Spain, and he had even
offered to pay a monthly subsidy to defray his
enemies’ costs in making war upon his own flesh and
blood.
The Whigs and the allies —whether from too great
greed, or from personal ambitions, or from mere
pedantry and an attachment to impossible formulas —
had missed the tide. They would not settle when
they might, and the tide turned.
Two years later, when the congress of Utrecht
assembled, Bolingbroke found himself in a less
favourable position. As time went on his plight was
turned from bad to worse mainly by his own course
of conduct. He was no match for the French king,
who profited not only by the changed conditions, but
also, to the full, by those military advantages that


were offered to him so obligingly by the British
government at the expense of its allies. Louis knew,
moreover, from his emissaries that the ministers of
Queen Anne regarded an early peace as essential to
their personal safety.
VI. How the Tory government was weakened by
the dissensions of Harley and Bolingbroke
(1710-1714).
The sweeping victory of the Tory party at the
general election of 1710 had secured the government
against every form of attack in the House of Commons.
By a bold abuse of the royal prerogative new peers
were created in sufficient numbers to discourage the
threatened resistance of the Lords. But the absence
of an effective opposition produced its usual result,
and the rivalry of Harley and Bolingbroke soon gave
rise to serious dissensions.
The temperaments of the Lord Treasurer and the
Secretary-of-State were as unlike as fog and flame.
Harley was indolent, timid, and an opportunist—
irresolute even in his opportunism. He was a con-
fused speaker, had no clear views, would make no
plans for the future. He paid his court by turns in
Hanover and at St. Germain; but he could never
come to a final decision between the Protestant
Succession and the restoration of the Stewarts.
Except in his opportunism, Bolingbroke contrasted
at all points with his chief. He was bold and impetu-
ous ; his tenacity might waver, but his energy never
flagged; and in spite of his addiction to pleasure,
he was capable of long bouts of the most strenuous


industry. He was the greatest orator of his age,
but beyond this he exercised the indefinable quality
of personal predominance that is so rarely found in
conjunction with eloquence.
The characters of these two men were in no sense
complementary, which might have made for union;
they were utterly opposed. Each was engrossed by
his personal ambition, and each, with good reason,
suspected the other of treachery. The four years of
Tory government were years of bickering. 1 There
could be no hope of harmony in a cabinet that was
distracted by the machinations of two such discordant
spirits. Harley was not master in his own house,
nor had Bolingbroke a free hand in the conduct of
foreign policy.
Gradually, as months went by, the Opposition
orators who denounced the treaty of Utrecht were
listened to with increasing attention. Their pre-
sentation of the case contained some legendary
features and much exaggeration. The Whigs them-
selves figured as the true patriots, whose sole concern
had been for the honour and interests of Britain ;
the Tories as perfidious monsters who had betrayed
every one except the Queen’s enemies. The public
conversion might perhaps have proceeded even more
rapidly if the Whigs had trusted to the forces of human
nature, and had been content to place a somewhat
lighter strain upon the credulity of the nation. For
their anxiety to whitewash their own reputations
kept suspicion against them alive, and weakened to
some extent the effect of their denunciations.
There was no novelty in the situation itself, while
1 August lyio-August 1714.


the theme proper to the occasion is older than party
government. Peace has its disappointments as well
as war, so soon as actual results come to be compared
with the promises of politicians. Blessings had not
flowed so quickly, nor in so bountiful a measure,
as people had been led to expect. Many persons who
in 1713 had welcomed the treaty with enthusiasm
were ready in 1714 to accept as a true likeness the
picture that the Opposition was busily engaged in
painting of its deformities. It was not long before
the most unfavourable presentment passed into cur-
rency. It was picturesque and consistent; unfair,
but not altogether untrue. Submission to a defeated
enemy the abandonment of the fruits of Marl-
borough’s victories the treacherous desertion of
allies the sacrifice of the Catalonian peasantry to
the vengeance of Spain these were accusations
that wounded the pride and lay heavy upon the
conscience of the nation. People were easily per-
suaded, when it was too late, that peace had been
bought at the price of public dishonour and private
corruption. It was a mortifying thought that Louis
the Fourteenth should have escaped a just retribution ;
that he should have regained by a diplomatic success
nearly everything that he had lost through the failure
of his arms ; to crown all, that his grandson, despite
all the efforts of the allies to get rid of him, should
remain firmly seated on the throne of Spain. The
war had been waged to abate the power of the
Bourbons, yet the Bourbons still reigned over Western
Europe from the Straits of Dover to the Straits of
Gibraltar.
The Tory party, however, listened with less dismay


to this storm outside than to its own internal rumblings.
Private members, for the most part, were reluctant
to engage with either leader. For this reason the
dissensions of Harley and Bolingbroke produced
no very serious cleavage among the rank and file,
but served rather to huddle them together, like
sheep, in a union of mistrust. For neither of these
ministers commanded that unreasoning affection and
absolute confidence which are the hall-marks of
consummate leadership. People were inclined to
look on both men critically. Some were more
perturbed by the deficiencies of the Lord Treasurer.
He was supine, and seemed to hesitate at a time when
every one could see that a storm was gathering.
Others again looked with more suspicion on the
Secretary-of-State. His brilliancy cast doubts upon
his judgement. His rise had been too easy; he was
too masterful, too swift for safety. Already he seemed
to alarm some natural instinct that warns mankind
against an unreliable protector. The question, there-
fore, was not which of these two rivals deserved to be
rewarded with the highest post, but which of them
might be likely to show himself the less dangerous
pilot in a very ticklish bit of navigation. Harley
was the sort of man who would drift past opportunity
on the tide; while Bolingbroke might be apt to run
his boat upon the rocks without waiting for a landing-
place. On the whole, however, the general disposition
appeared to be in favour of Bolingbroke, who had
this to recommend him, that he was obviously in a
run of luck.
The Tory party was very much in the dark as to
matters of high policy, nor was it by any means
unwilling to be left in that condition. Where know-


ledge might be dangerous, the ordinary politician had
no desire to be taken fully into confidence. It was
no mystery, however, that, owing to the Queen’s
ill-health, the question of the succession had become
urgent. Was the Act of Settlement to stand, or were
the Stewarts to be restored ?
While most Tories would probably have acknow-
ledged in their hearts a sentimental preference for
James the Third as against the Electress Sophia of
Hanover and her son, the majority were unable to
believe that an attempt to overturn the Protestant
Succession would have any reasonable chance of
success. After a revolution that had been followed
by a quarter of a century of foreign wars the country
was longing for peace and quietness. The spirit of
conservatism was everywhere in the ascendant. When
the Queen died her place must of course be filled;
but let it be filled by that claimant whose accession
would cause the least disturbance. Most Tories,
like most other people, were inclined to think that
there would be an avoidance of trouble in taking
their king from Hanover as the law prescribed.
There had been no opportunity as yet for leading
them to think otherwise. If Bolingbroke had been
free to carry on the education of his party in his own
way, it is not improbable that the Tories might,
during the past four years, have been brought round
to the view, that the restoration of the Stewarts
would be a less hazardous and revolutionary proceed-
ing than the introduction of a German prince, who
had not troubled himself to learn a word of the
English language, and who had hitherto appeared to
be entirely indifferent to the interests and sentiments
of his future subjects.


By those who looked to politics for their living the
question of the succession was regarded in a some-
what different light. With the professional politicians
of the Tory party the choice of a monarch was not
so much a matter of principle as of personal interest.
The supreme consideration was, that whatever king
might sit upon the throne, he should feel his elevation
to be due to themselves, and that he should requite
their services in the customary fashion. The im-
portant thing, therefore, was to discover the likeliest
winner, and to take the necessary steps for securing his
victory and his favour. But this was the cabinet’s
business. The less underlings and subordinates
meddled in the matter, the safer their necks would
be in the event of failure. The trouble, however,
was, that the chief ministers were obviously not
attending to their duties. The leaders were at logger-
heads, and the greater part of their energy was taken
up in intriguing one against the other. A pro-
phetic instinct warned the Tory party of approaching
disaster.
Mrs. Masham was the pivot of rival intrigues.
She was flattered by her kinsman, but she was bribed
by his adversary. In the end she was taken with the
heavier bait.
Some fifteen months after the peace of Utrecht
—on the 27th of July 1714 —Queen Anne, the sixth
and last of the Stewart sovereigns of England, had
the shock of listening to an altercation between her
Lord Treasurer and her Secretary-of-State which
lasted until two o’clock on the following morning.
Before the council broke up, Harley had been dis-
missed, and Bolingbroke was designated his successor.


But within a few hours the Queen was reported ill,
and four days later she died of an apoplexy.
The difficulties of this surprising situation might
well have defeated a man of cooler judgement and
firmer courage than Bolingbroke. Was there, in fact,
any move that could have saved him from check-
mate ? To begin with, he was only minister-desig-
nate ; he had never been formally confirmed in his
new office, an omission that did him some prejudice
before the end. His darling project was to bring in
the Pretender on the demise of the Queen; but the
emergency had arisen and nothing was in readiness.
There had been no time as yet to familiarise the
country, or the Tory party, or even his own particular
friends with the not unattractive prospect of escape
from the Hanoverian dynasty. And James Stewart
had, so far, refused categorically to change his
religion or even to give any satisfactory guarantees
for the security of the Protestant religion. Harley’s
disgrace rankled in the bosoms of his many friends.
For the time being, the vigour of the whole party
was reduced below normal, being affected by the
recent schism in much the same way as the human
body is affected by a surgical operation. It was
beyond reason to expect that wounded feelings could
be healed and co-operation restored in little more
than half a week. And there was this further diffi-
culty, that measures which appeared to be essential
supposing the Queen’s illness were to take a fatal turn,
might very likely bring about the dismissal of the
whole cabinet if she recovered.
The simplest explanation is probably the best,
that Bolingbroke had not a notion what to do; and
certainly, having regard to the game he had been


playing, this is hardly to be wondered at. He faltered ;
made overtures of a vague sort to the Opposition;
asked Walpole and some others to dinner, but when
they arrived had nothing to propose.
The Whig leaders were on the alert; they forced
their way into the Privy Council; the dying Queen
was induced to place the Lord Treasurer’s staff in the
hands of the duke of Shrewsbury; and so soon as she
had breathed her last, the heralds proclaimed King
George the First in due form.
A few days earlier Bolingbroke had reached the
summit of his ambition. He was now swept from
power, before he had had time even to form his
cabinet. “ Harley was removed on Tuesday,” he
wrote to Swift: “ the Queen died on Sunday ! What
* a world is this, and how does fortune banter us ! ”
The French envoy, by his own account, was assured
by Bolingbroke that six weeks of power would have
enabled him to bring about a second Restoration.
We may believe that this boast was made, and that
it was made in good faith; for it is in keeping
with Bolingbroke’s habit of rash miscalculation. We
cannot believe, however, in the possibility of its
fulfilment. For some time past the Whigs had
been aware of the danger that was threatening the
Protestant Succession. They had watched the cashier-
ing of loyal officers and the appointment of Jacobites
in their place. Their leaders had already taken various
precautions. A formidable organisation had been
created under General Stanhope, who was a soldier
as well as a statesman of first-rate abilities, and supplies
of arms were ready for a counter-stroke.


VII. — How, owing to the want of a leader with a clear
policy, the Tory party failed to take advantage of
its opportunities, either in Opposition or in office
(1708-1714).
In judging Bolingbroke and his contemporaries,
we have to remember that they lived in an age of plots
and restorations, exiles and executions. Conspiracies
and treacheries are hatched out of one and the same
clutch. None of the prominent public characters, as
they looked forward to a new reign, could ever be
quite certain of retaining their employments, their
fortunes, or even their heads. It is in human nature
to consider the future, and while things remain in
so unsettled a condition, statesmen who are not mere
visionaries will find their advantage in policies of
insurance and re-insurance.
To Cromwell’s legislature, which presented its
Humble Petition and Advice, 1 that covenant doubt-
less appeared as final and obligatory (and all attempts
to overturn it as traitorous) as did the Act of Settle-
ment 2 to the parliament of William the Third that
placed it on the statute-book. But the earlier of these
two undertakings had been broken without exciting
the abhorrence of mankind; why then should the
later engagement be regarded as possessing a superior
sanctity ? When the Restoration ended the Cromwel-
lian tyranny, the whole nation shouted for joy. Would
there be less rejoicing if a second Restoration were to
bar the door against a German usurpation ?
The Tories in the reign of Anne were strong in
numbers and in the spirit of discontent. The power-
1 1^57-
* 1701.


ful organisation of the Church of England was at their
command. The sympathies of the Queen herself were
with them. At one time and another the wind of
popularity blew strongly in their favour. But these
advantages availed them little, because they never had
any clear idea where they were going to. Having
no leader, their policy upon the main issue—the
succession to the crown—was never settled and
declared.
The brilliancy of Bolingbroke’s genius could not
make up for his incapacity to see things simply and in
their true proportions. He was wanting also in the
qualities of a man of business —in patience, tenacity
and common sense. Nor was he one of those polar
characters who draw mankind to them in the mass.
A successful party leader must be free from doubts and
hesitations as to the line he means to follow. He may
not always decide to go the way which his own judge-
ment would select; but, at least, he must possess the
gift of divining the direction in which his followers
will most readily consent to travel. And, having
fixed upon his goal, he must keep moving always
towards it. It was for want of such a leader that the
Tories came to ruin.
When a party finds itself in a predicament of this
sort, it is easily persuaded into neglecting the chief
business, in order to engage in little opportunist raids
and sallies which, even if successful, can never lead to
any permanent advantage. At the beginning—after
the coronation of William and Mary —it had seemed
altogether hopeless to undo the Revolution by an im-
mediate counter-stroke. The wisdom of this con-
clusion cannot be challenged. But at a later date the
Tories were persuaded to acquiesce in more dubious


pretexts for inaction and delay. After all, they argued,
was not William the husband of a Stewart queen ?
And did not another daughter of James the Second
stand next in order of succession ? A not too
fastidious loyalty might surely find excuses for allegi-
ance in the fact that the royal line was still unbroken.
When Anne drew near her end, it would be time
enough to begin thinking seriously of the future; but
to meddle prematurely in a matter of so much delicacy
might be construed as an act of disrespect towards
the reigning sovereign.
When Queen Anne died, a Tory government had
been in office for four years, and more than a quarter
of a century had passed since William landed at
Torbay; but up to the last moment, no decision
had been taken upon the vital issue, whether or not
the Act of Settlement should be allowed to stand,
whether the next king to be crowned at Westminster
should be George the First or James the Third. It
seems not unlikely that the Tories would have had
the greater part of the nation behind them had they
declared betimes and boldly against the pretensions of a
German sovereign and in favour of the exiled Stewarts.
But though the Whigs may have been in a minority,
they had leaders who knew their own minds. The
Tories, who had no such leaders, had been wander-
ing round for years in circles of irrelevant effort, until
they had come to be almost as much distrusted at
St. Germain as they were in Hanover.
The activities of the Tory party during the second
half of Queen Anne’s reign make a strange record of
random endeavour. The historian looks in vain for
any dominant purpose, for any thread of consistency
in their various enterprises. They blew hot and cold.


and seemed to have lost their self-respect in a general
bewilderment and crumbling down of principles.
While they remained in opposition the Tories
entered into secret correspondence with the Queen’s
enemies, bewailed the successes of her arms, and did
their utmost, by their intrigues and propaganda, to
destroy the national energy and to sow suspicion at
court, in parliament and among the people. They
opposed, even at the crisis of the great war, any form
of compulsory service that would have superseded
the odious injustice of the press-gang, and fallen
with something like equality upon the general com-
munity. They sought, by obstructing the Mutiny Bill
and by other acts and incitements, to break down
the discipline of the army. During the campaigns of
Marlborough they were never tired of depreciating
his military and his diplomatic capacity, belittling his
victories, calumniating his humanity, aspersing his
courage. They gave comfort to a party in Ireland
which aimed at separation.
When at last the Tories came into power, they
showed their reverence for the constitution by swamp-
ing the House of Lords with new creations, in order
to overcome its opposition to those negotiations with
France that have been already considered. They
professed an ambiguous approval of the Protestant
Succession and at the same time a dubious attachment
to the exiled Stewarts. Under the leadership of
Bolingbroke, a rakish free-thinker, they posed noisily
as the champions of the Church of England, and
showed themselves zealous oppressors of Dissent.
They aimed at abolishing the Navigation Acts and
uprooting the Protective system, in order that they
might depress the monied interest that supported
VOL. i m


the Whigs, and thereby restore the influence of
the country gentlemen whom they regarded as their
own mainstay. When they had brought about Marl-
borough’s downfall, they heaped insults on him and
pursued him with charges of peculation that were
put forward insincerely ; for those things which they
alleged against him as corruption were merely the
perquisites of his office, according to the system
prevailing at that time. The system itself they did
not proceed to change or abolish, although their
victory gave them power to do so ; on the contrary,
they maintained it unaltered for the enrichment of
their own adherents. They professed the most high-
flown sentiments, enjoyed the fruits of a flagrant
corruption, and advanced the project of a Stewart
restoration by not one single hairsbreadth. Posterity
may be grateful to these busy politicians for their
failure, but it will not withhold its contempt for the
manner in which they threw their game away.
Note. —We may look for agreement between the various
sects of Christendom almost as soon as for an accepted ver-
dict on the career and character of Bolingbroke. In this pre-
liminary chapter more has not been attempted than to offer a
rough sketch of his character as a young man, and of the earlier
and more famous period of his career. Mr. Whibley’s sym-
pathetic appreciation (Political Portraits, Second Series) may
wisely be taken as a corrective to the unfavourable view pre-
sented here. But to the present writer Mr. Whibley’s brilliant
study of a patriot minister seems to fit the character of Boling-
broke almost as uneasily as Bolingbroke’s description of a
‘ Patriot King ’ fitted the character of Frederick, Prince of
Wales. For a condensed statement of the hostile view the
reader may consult The Political History of England (vol, ix.
caps 9 to 12) by Mr. I. S. Leadam, who roundly accuses Boling-
broke of numerous acts of perfidy to the allies ; of provocations
and false representations intended to force them to denounce


the alliance ; of going behind the backs of his colleagues ; of
imposition on the Queen in the matter of the Spanish treaty;
of personal corruption in collusion with Lady Masham and
his friend Moore, an undeniable crook ; of vindictiveness to
his opponents ; and of timidity where his own safety was con-
cerned. Compare also Lord Stanhope’s History , vol. i. cap. 1;
and the appendix to vol. i. I take this opportunity of making
a general acknowledgement of my debt to Lord Stanhope, whose
work, from first to last, has helped me more than that of any
other authority.




BOOK THREE
STANHOPE AND SUNDERLAND
(1714-1721)




I. —How George I. left Hanover reluctantly and came
to England with misgivings (1714).
In 1714, when it came to a decision, George Lewis, 1
Elector of Hanover, was of two minds about accepting
the British crown. It was no doubt a fine thing to be
turned on a sudden into a great sovereign, the equal in
rank, the superior in fortune, of his own Emperor,
1 George Lewis of Brunswick, who became Elector of Hanover in 1698
and King of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1714, was a great-grandson
of James the First. His grandmother, Elisabeth Stewart, wife of the Prince
Palatine, was sister to Charles the First. His mother, the princess Sophia,
was first cousin to Charles the Second and James the Second. He himself
was second cousin to the queens Mary and Anne.
The princess Sophia was the youngest of a large family, but, unlike her
brothers and sisters, she remained a member of the Reformed religion, and
was married in 1658 to Ernest Augustus, a Protestant prince of the House
of Brunswick, who shortly afterwards became bishop of Osnabriick, and
in 1679 succeeded to the principality of Hanover.
Queen Mary, wife of William the Third, having died childless in 1694,
and the last of the princess Anne’s children in 1700, the succession to the
British crown was settled in the following year by act of parliament upon
Sophia and her descendants. When Queen Anne died there were more
than fifty persons then living who, by descent, had a better title than the
Brunswick line to the sovereignty of the United Kingdom, but as Roman
Catholics their claims were statute-barred.
George Lewis was born in March 1660, a few weeks before the restoration
of Charles the Second. Shortly after attaining his majority he secured
his ultimate succession to the Brunswick duchy of Zell by marrying his
cousin Sophia Dorothea, only child of the reigning duke. By her George
Lewis had a son, George Augustus (afterwards George the Second), and a
daughter, Sophia Dorothea, who married Frederick William of Prussia
and became the mother of Frederick the Great.
After twelve years of married life, George Lewis repudiated his consort
on account of her alleged, but unproven, misconduct with Count von
Konigsmarck, a Swedish adventurer. This scandal came to a head while
the prince was absent from Hanover; but his father, Ernest Augustus,
vindicated the family honour by having von Konigsmarck strangled
forthwith. The body was buried secretly under the floor of an apartment
in the palace of Herrenhausen. The unfortunate lady remained a prisoner
for the rest of her life, which ended only a few months before that of her
husband.


whose supercilious and grudging favours had been
bought with so much deference, assiduity and com-
plaisance, with so much hard and sturdy service, by
two generations of the House of Brunswick. But, on
the other hand, like most men who have worked hard
to better their fortunes, George enjoyed with a much
keener relish those things which had been won slowly,
by his father’s efforts and his own, than the prospect of
a more splendid inheritance that had fallen to him by
a series of accidents.
For more than sixty years the princes of Hanover
had been doing very well for themselves in Germany.
Gradually, by virtue of their family treaties and
arrangements, by their contracts of marriage and their
self-denying ordinances of celibacy, the parcelled
territories of their House had been reunited under a
single sway. This modest aggrandisement had all
come about during George Lewis’s own lifetime. As
heir-apparent, and afterwards as reigning duke, he had
watched the Hanoverian dominions joining themselves
together, like lakes and pools when the floods are out,
spreading across the plains which lie between the
rivers Ems and Elbe, encroaching upon the inter-
mediate basin of the Weser, stretching out to the
shores of the North Sea, pressing against Oldenburg,
and threatening before long to overflow the coveted
duchies of Bremen and Werden.
This expansion of territory had been accompanied by
a corresponding increase in the ducal dignity and
importance. Ernest Augustus, the father of George
Lewis, was a rough fellow, but one who always knew
very well what he wanted. He did what it behoved
him to do in support of the Empire, and he was
ever busy and importunate in claiming his reward.


Hanoverian troops fought for the Habsburg emperor
against the Turks and against Louis the Fourteenth.
George Lewis was only fifteen when he was sent to
the wars. His courage was conspicuous, and he soon
proved himself a capable commander. Such services
as these deserved a recompense. Ernest Augustus
reached the first object of his ambition in 1692 when
he was nominated by the Emperor to serve for life as
an Elector. He lived for another six years to enjoy
his new dignity and the envy of his rivals.
George Lewis was given electoral rank within a
year of his accession. On the death of his father-in-
law in 1705, his military strength was doubled and his
political importance greatly increased by the inherit-
ance of Zell. In due course his son and heir, George
Augustus, 1 a dapper little gentleman, went forth to
fight for the Emperor, and covered himself with
glory at the battle of Oudenarde. In the same year
Hanover was formally raised to the position of
a hereditary electorate. The dish of triumph was
pleasantly seasoned with the angry protests of the
Electoral College, whose members were jealous of
any addition to their number, and also with the
envious complainings of those who still sighed in
vain for the coveted honour. Two years later George
Lewis was created hereditary Arch - Treasurer of the
Empire. Kingship, the penultimate goal of a German
prince’s ambition, was now distant but a single stage. 2
His neighbour of Brandenburg had shown only a few
years earlier (1701) how easily a powerful Elector might
put a crown upon his head, without waiting for the
permission of any one. And who would venture to
1 Afterwards George 11.
2 Hanover was not in fact raised into a kingdom until 1814, a century later.


compare the strategic, political or economic possi-
bilities of the Prussian waste, stretching eastward to the
swamps and snows of Muscovy, with that of the fertile
rolling country that lay westward between Hanover
and the North Sea, and was opened to the commerce
of the world by the navigable estuaries of three
great rivers ? Surely the fortunes of the House of
Brunswick were in prosperous case; nor could any
man be certain that at some future election a king of
Hanover might not be chosen to fill the Imperial
throne.
Despite his few drops of Stewart blood George
Lewis was a German without alloy. The incense
that savoured most sweetly in his nostrils was the
admiration and the envy of his fellow-Germans. To
extend the confines of his state, to gain new subjects,
to increase their prosperity and his own revenues, to
become one of the leading princes of the Empire—
these were his dearest ambitions. But he preferred to
move at a sober pace ; took a sedate pleasure in climb-
ing the ladder of greatness step by step ; and even if
he could have swung himself or vaulted upwards like
an acrobat, he would have scorned a method of uprising
so inconsonant with his notions of regal dignity. He
could not altogether ignore the existence of the world
that lay outside the sacred German circle—a world
of novel expedients and mushroom fortunes—but he
looked on it with unfriendly and distrustful eyes. The
outer nations—Turks, French, Dutch, English and
the rest —were only worthy of serious consideration in
so far is their enmity might become a danger or their
alliance a support to the Holy Roman Empire.
Sophia, the Electress - dowager, survived her
husband, Ernest Augustus, for sixteen years. She may


well have marvelled at her son’s phlegmatic unconcern
about the British succession. He might indeed have
been a changeling, so little did he inherit from her of
looks, tastes or character. In her beauty, her lively and
gracious manners, her keen intelligence, her knowledge
of the languages and affairs of European nations, above
all in her love of England and interest in its customs
and traditions, she offered a striking contrast to the
heavy and unattractive person, the unengaging address,
the sparse accomplishments and the apparent indifference
of George Lewis to the glorious destiny that awaited
him. The high and ancient lineage of the Guelphs
counted to her for little in comparison with her Stewart
ancestry. After the revolution of 1688 her sympathies
were with the exiled king. After the death of James
the Second she corresponded freely with her young
cousin the Pretender, and pity for his misfortunes kept
her for some years a Jacobite. When the Act of
Settlement was under consideration, she is said to have
begged King William to leave her and her family out of
the succession. But as she neared her end, she prayed,
with a romantic and pardonable ambition, that her life
might be lengthened, if only for a single day, in order
that she might die Queen of England and be buried at
Westminster —‘ in my own country.’ 1
Westminster Abbey meant nothing to George
Lewis. His own tranquil little capital—in shape like
a large cocked-hat, folded and laid flat on its side
across the river Leine—was more to him than all the
cities of the earth. If he could properly be said to love
anything (not being a man of very ardent emotions)
that thing was Hanover with its surroundings:—the
1 The Electress-dowager died Bth June 1714 —only eight weeks before
Queen Anne.


mediaeval town of narrow, curving, crowded streets ;
the recent and much-admired additions in the French
taste; the fine new palace of Herrenhausen, at a short
drive’s distance, with its formal gardens, glades,
fountains, statues, vistas, avenues and parks. Here he
reigned and ruled, unaccountable to any parliament,
unlimited by any constitution that he could not
change at will; a grand monarch in miniature, fully
appointed. Here he had his Old Palace where the
privy council met, his Colleges of Government, his
Courts of Justice, his Mint, his Royal Library, his
Printing House, Arsenal, military Riding Academy
(the finest in all Germany), Parade Ground, Pump
Room, Guildhall, churches of various denominations
and a synagogue for the Jews. And encircling this
small city (considerably less populous than Windsor is
to-day) there were walls with cannon mounted on
them ; stone-works, earth-works and water-works ;
bastions, ramparts and strategic canals ; all the para-
phernalia of scientific defence. In these things he
took as much delight as Captain Shandy did in the
systems of fortification, hardly less impregnable, which
he constructed on his bowling-green with the assist-
ance of Corporal Trim.
George, however, had an army which, though it
was of no great size and almost as formal as his
parterres and flower-beds, was still no plaything, but
staunch and gallant when it came to push of pike or
bayonet. He had also not far short of a million
subjects who were thrifty and, upon the whole, thriv-
ing.l For, unlike most of those despotic princelings
1 The population of Hanover in 1714 was well under 1,000,000, while
that of the United Kingdom was somewhat under 8,500,000. Scotland, the
least populous of the Three Kingdoms, was a little over x,000,000.


who flourished during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, he continued to enjoy both show and sub-
stance of royalty without embarrassing his revenues or
overtaxing his realm. He was a model of punctual
economy, not only in the ordering of his civil and
military establishments, but also in the regulation of
his personal expenditure. On Saturday evenings he
examined and paid his household bills. His officers of
ceremony, of state and of the army, his courtiers and
his dames, his men of learning and his servants, were
content with wages and occasional gifts which would
certainly not be considered adequate by the staff of a
small country bank in England or Scotland at the
present day. His mistresses, though numerous, cost
him very little by the year: not more than a hundred or
two pounds apiece, with, of course, their board and
lodging, and small Court appointments for their
husbands or brothers. Whatever his faults may have
been, the Elector of Hanover was no oppressor, no
spendthrift. Nor was he in any sense a miser, like his
son who came after him. This at least may be placed
to his credit —in that country where he was his own
master and his people’s, where he was seen closely
and best understood, he enjoyed a high degree of
respect and popularity. Neither the ignorant and
grinning insolence of a London mob nor the sneers
and epigrams of smart society are worth much as
evidence against the character of a foreign prince
who is brought into England as consort or king.
Hanover had found a caste system appropriate to
its needs. Everything there was on a petty scale, but
most things worked smoothly. The internal economy
of the electorate was at peace. There were no power-
ful nobles or angry factions who led their sovereign a


troubled existence, begging of him and bullying him
by turns. The bickering and jealousy of courtiers
produced occasionally some mild disturbance, but the
Elector had only to signify his favour or displeasure
and the contest ended. From this vale of Avalon
George Lewis was called away to rule over the most
turbulent and discontented people in civilised Europe.
The little that he had seen of Britain was not encourag-
ing. What he had heard of it at second-hand was even
less so. Its inhabitants were not orderly and docile,
like the Hanoverians, but for ever chafing and encroach-
ing. There was no end to the wrangling of political
cliques, who would admit no peace-maker—not even
the King. The nobles were rich, rapacious and
corrupt; but it was necessary to buy their support,
and a thrifty German was staggered by the price.
It shocked the business sense of George Lewis that
persons who aspired to fill the great offices of state had
received no regular education to fit them for the various
employments which they sought. They were not
trained professionals as in Hanover—omniscient,
industrious and obedient —but a predatory caste of
partisans, self-interested adventurers—idle, ignorant
and unscrupulous—who scrimmaged for the King’s
confidence without the smallest regard for his security
or peace of mind. The spirit which had sent Charles
the First to the scaffold and James the Second into
exile was not dead. It had inspired the eloquence of
political writers to formulate a set of doctrines by no
means comforting to kings. When George Lewis
accepted the British crown, he consoled himself with
the reflection that he had perhaps less to fear than
another; for, as he remarked grimly, 4 the king-
killers are all on my side.’


When a well-to-do middle-aged gentleman learns
that he has come into an inheritance in some foreign
land, he will usually experience a glow of satisfaction.
But when he sits down to consider how troublesome
the administration of his new possession is likely to
prove; how it will oblige him to turn out of his com-
fortable home; nay more, that in order to establish
his title he may find himself involved in litigation
that may bring him to bankruptcy in the end—as he
meditates upon these things in a cool hour, his second
thoughts are apt to be less cheerful than his first. On
one point the mind of George Lewis was firmly made
up —come what might, he would not be dragged into
a lawsuit. In other words, he would never go to war
to make good his pretensions to the British crown.
He was neither a William the Conqueror nor a William
of Orange. His stolid ambition had no more affinity
with the fierce ardour of the one than it had with the
cold and inflexible policy of the other, whose eyes
never lifted for a moment from the game that was
playing on the chess-board of Europe. Had there
been any strong popular demonstration in England
against the Hanoverian succession—had Bolingbroke
had longer time, or better luck, or a stouter heart—the
Elector would have remained quietly in Hanover and
left the Whigs and Tories to fight it out among them-
selves. In that event it is hardly likely that the
British crown would ever have passed to the Brunswick
line.
The movements of George Lewis, on hearing of
his cousin’s death, were deliberate. He made no
indecent haste. It was more than six weeks after his
accession before he landed in England.
For some years past he had taken reasonable—but


no more than reasonable—precautions to safeguard his
interests. He had kept an agent in London with
instructions how to act in certain eventualities. His
relations had been reserved and circumspect, alike
with the Tory government and with the Whig
opposition. He had rigorously abstained from any-
thing which could be construed as interference in
British affairs. His friendliness towards the Whigs, his
distrust of the Tories —supposing him to have enter-
tained such feelings—had been kept strictly within
bounds. He had seemed to seek no confidences and
had shown no favours. The Whigs were far more
eager to bring him into England than he himself was
to come there.
But when the King’s agent in London made public
his instructions, it was clear that the Tory adminis-
tration was at an end. Its supporters in both Houses
were quick to change their allegiance. Bolingbroke
was dismissed at the end of August with strong marks
of 'disfavour. Through the ensuing reign and the
next —a period of nearly fifty years—the Whig families
held a monopoly of power.
II.- Concerning the chief ministers in the first
administration of George I. (1714-1721).
Although Marlborough, until his death in 1722,
had the honour of being included in every cabinet, his
vigour had failed and he was distrusted by the King.
The restoration of his honours was unaccompanied by
any real influence, so that in the new reign he hardly
counted for more than a figure of state.
The ministers who, in fluctuating measure, pos


sessed most power during the six critical years that
followed the accession of George the First were
Viscount Townshend, General Stanhope, Robert Wal-
pole and the Earl of Sunderland.
According to modern notions the country was
in somewhat youthful hands. The King, when he
arrived in England, was still in vigorous middle-age ;
Walpole, the youngest of his chief advisers, was only
thirty-eight, and Stanhope, the eldest, no more than
forty-one.
The hardest and most urgent business of the new
ministers was to make the throne secure for an alien
and unacceptable dynasty. As a means to this end it
was essential to keep the European peace. Changed
conditions had spun the wheel of policy in a half-
circle. The rank and file of the Whig party, who had
so recently been encouraged by their leaders to shout
themselves hoarse against the treaty of Utrecht and
the suggestion of a French alliance, were a good deal
puzzled to find themselves now engaged in upholding
the one and in running after the other.
Although there were no prime ministers in those
days, there was usually one member of the cabinet
whose will predominated. To begin with, it was
Townshend 1 who exercised the chief influence. His
honesty stood above reproach; but his natural in-
telligence was not of a high order, his judgement
was bad, and his vision of the European situation
remained always obscure.
VOL. I
N
1 Charles, 2nd Viscount Townshend (1674—1738), was employed on
various diplomatic missions by the Godolphin administration. His most
important negotiation was not carried through with conspicuous success.
He shared the misfortunes of the Whigs after the change of government
in 1710, married Walpole’s sister in 1713, and at the accession of George I.
in 1714 became secretary-of-state for the Northern department. *


The honest gentleman of middling wits who con-
ceives himself to be a Machiavelli is not an unknown
figure in public life. Townshend comes under this
description. He seems never to have had the smallest
suspicion of his own deficiencies; but showed a
great contempt for knaves and adventurers, and was
in consequence outwitted by them. Credulous, hasty
and downright, he valued himself nevertheless upon
his subtlety, and sought to contrive the most elaborate
combinations and to travel by the most circuitous
paths. Although his energy was unquestionable, his
work was usually in arrears. In spite of everything,
however, his robust faith in himself, the confidence
which his uprightness inspired in others, and his
relationship with Walpole, whose sister he had
married, gave him a prominence to which the medio-
crity of his talents would never have entitled him.
Stanhope 1 was neither a good party-leader nor
a sagacious parliamentarian, and he abhorred every-
thing that had to do with the national accounts. He
showed a choleric temper in debate, and remained,
until the last hours of his life, the easy victim of
opponents who sought to ruffle his composure by
reflections on his honour. He was a brave and able
soldier with victories to his credit. He succeeded
much better in diplomacy than with the House of
1 James, ist Earl Stanhope (1673—1721), was a grandson of the Ist Earl
of Chesterfield. To begin with, his energies were mainly occupied in the
Spanish Wars, where he won high distinction. In 1710, however, he was
defeated and taken prisoner by Vendome. Although a soldier by profession
he had a seat in Parliament, and for the last four years of Queen Anne’s
reign he was recognised as one of the Whig leaders. At the accession of
George I. he became secretary-of-state for the Southern department, which
post he held until his death, except for an interval in 1717 when he was
First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer. He was
raised to the peerage in 1717.




Commons; and the reason of his success is the measure
of his contrast with Townshend. For, unlike his
colleague. Stanhope had an intuitive perception of the
workings of other people’s minds; he took infinite
pains to make himself master of his subject, and at the
council-table he was usually as patient and courteous
as on the floor of the House of Commons he was the
reverse.
There is no special mystery attaching to negotia-
tions between governments. They proceed upon the
same fundamental principles that affect other busi-
ness dealings where the object is to reconcile a
conflict of interests. A plain man, of good natural
judgement, need not fear the issue if he will be content
to avoid subtlety and to rely upon his own firmness
of purpose against the over-refinements of knaves,
jugglers and technical experts. Such a one was Stan-
hope. As secretary-of-state, in charge of foreign
affairs, he was happy and successful; but when pro-
moted to be First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor
of the Exchequer he had no peace, and begged in
the following year to be restored to his old position.
He was a man of the world, of perfect integrity both
in his political conduct and in all pecuniary concerns.
His private life was not distinguished for its strictness.
In his earlier days he had been on intimate terms with
the duke of Orleans and his familiar, the Abbe
Dubois, which, if not a certificate of virtue, had
certain advantages when the time came for negotiat-
ing a French alliance. If Stanhope was no puritan,
at least he was a faithful servant of his country.
At the accession of George the First, and for many
years after, the importance of a minister was deter-
mined much more by the King’s favour than by the


voice of parliament or of the people. Walpole 1 did
not enjoy the confidence of his sovereign from the
beginning, but only conquered it by slow degrees—
gaining at first—then losing in a few months more
than he had won in as many years—arriving at his
object in the end upon a wave of singular good luck.
For the delay of his fortunes his own factious and
unpatriotic conduct must bear more blame than the
royal prejudice. The trouble with him was that he
must always be first; there was no trusting him in
any other capacity. As a subordinate, or as the col-
league of equals, his spirit knew no peace, nor would
it leave in peace those under whom or with whom he
served. He was incomparably the best parliamentarian
of his time. He had a firmer grasp of the principles
of national finance than any other politician. His
abilities must have brought strength to any govern-
ment had it not been for his character, which made it
quite as dangerous to have him in the cabinet as it was
to leave him in opposition.
Sunderland, 2 the unamiable son of an untrustworthy
father, was the second of his name to play an important
1 Robert Walpole, afterwards K.C.8., K.G., and ist Earl of Orford
(1676-1745), was the third son of a Norfolk squire, Robert Walpole of
Houghton. He was intended for the Church, but, in 1698, on becoming heir
to the estate —to which he succeeded two years later—he determined on a
political career. By 1703 he was one of the leading members of the Whig
party. After the formation of the Harley-Bolingbroke administration he
was pursued with special rancour, and in 1712 was expelled from the House
of Commons and imprisoned on a trumped-up charge. On the accession
of George I. he became Paymaster of the Forces and afterwards Chancellor
of the Exchequer.
2 Charles Spencer, 3rd Earl of Sunderland (1674—1722), married Marl-
borough’s younger daughter. After a diplomatic mission to Vienna in 1705
he became secretary-of-state in Godolphin’s administration. He was the
first of the Whig ministers to be dismissed by Queen Anne in 17x0. At
the accession of George I. he was disappointed at receiving only the minor
office of Lord Privy Seal.


role in public affairs. Almost the only thing which
can heartily be set down to his credit is that he
loved books and collected a wonderful library. He
was that not unfamiliar type of cross-grained aristo-
crat, who affects republican fashions and an ostenta-
tious contempt for titles, not because he believes in
the equality of mankind, or because he desires to raise
those of humbler station to his own level, but merely
for the reason that he cannot tolerate the existence of
any superiority to himself. Sunderland’s ideal was
a Venetian council, the members of which, though
nominally equal, should bow down to his authority.
His abilities, however, though considerable, were
quite inadequate to support such pretensions. He
was no daemonic force, like Walpole, but only a
fruitless intriguer, who upset governments and made
a great deal of mischief in the world, without ever
being able to bring much grist to his own mill.
His stratagems were too often successful; yet his
own career was something of a failure, clouded in its
later years with disgrace. When his efforts with the
King brought about the dismissal and resignation of
his rivals, the only profit to himself was the humiliation
of people whom he envied. His own achievements
are not numbered among the splendours of British
statesmanship. Yet his self-complacency—if we may
use this term of so fretful and ill-natured a man —
was such that, even to the outcast end of his life, he
believed no ministry could be stable which lacked his
support. The greatest danger which arose from
his perpetual interferences was due to the fact that
he never lost the King’s ear.


III. —How Bolingbroke fled to France and was
attainted of treason (1715).
In the month that intervened between the death of
Anne and the dismissal of her ministers, Bolingbroke
had enough time for the destruction or removal of
any papers that might compromise his character
in the eyes of the new dynasty. He hastened to
swear allegiance, and seems at the beginning to have
entertained a hope that King George might reinstate
him in office. Even after this illusion was dispelled,
he bore himself for some considerable time as one
who regards the future with equanimity. But early
in the following year 1 the papers of two men who
had enjoyed his closest confidence were seized by
government. Lord Strafford had been one of the
British representatives at the congress of Utrecht.
Matthew Prior had managed negotiations in Paris,
where he remained in charge of British interests
for some months after the Queen’s death. When
Lord Stair succeeded him as envoy and took over
the archives, there arose a sudden rumour that Prior
had decided to tell all he knew. The story was
false; but various occurrences gave colour to it,
and Bolingbroke appears to have believed that his
private confidences with a subordinate would shortly
be at the disposal of his enemies. The French
ambassador in London reported him as being much
perturbed, and as talking rather wildly of prisons and
axes.
On the twenty-second of March 1715 Bolingbroke
made his last speech in the House of Lords. It was a
1 January 1715.


bold defence of his foreign policy against a minis-
terial resolution that censured it by implication. His
amendment was defeated. The majority of two to
one against him included many peers who had been
obsequious supporters of the late administration in
the days of its prosperity, but who were now in a hurry
to ingratiate themselves by a public condemnation of
its acts. While this debate was proceeding, worse
things were happening in the Commons. Amidst fierce
expressions of approval, ministers announced that
an enquiry would be held forthwith into the conduct
of their predecessors. Two matters would receive
special consideration: —Had the British captain-general
(the duke of Ormonde) received secret instructions to
concert measures with the enemy commander-in-chief
(Marshal Villars) behind the backs of our allies and
while war was still in progress ? —On what grounds
had the Pretender claimed in a recently issued manifesto
that for some time prior to Queen Anne’s death he
had had reason to count upon her goodwill ?—A few
days later the whole town became aware that Prior,
newly returned from Paris, had dined with the leading
members of government in apparent amity, and had
been afterwards examined by a committee of the Privy
Council. On the twenty-eighth of the same month
Bolingbroke crossed the channel, disguised as courier
to the French official messenger.
Harley has not been overpraised because he stayed
to face his trial; but Bolingbroke’s danger was much
greater than Harley’s. He was hated by the Whigs
as no other Tory at that time was hated. Against
Harley the evidence of treason was nil: he had
kept his own secrets with commendable discretion.
The nature of his younger colleague was less guarded.


Harley, as the head of government, could be held
responsible for the terms of the Utrecht treaty, and
generally for the policy which led up to it; but it
was notorious that, for some time past, the two
ministers had been on bad terms, that Bolingbroke
had been pulling away from his chief and seeking to
play an independent part. He had kept the negotia-
tions in his own hands so far as he was able to do
so. Ormonde’s instructions to act treacherously to
the allies had been given to him in secrecy by
Bolingbroke, none of whose fellow - ministers had
been taken into confidence. The secretary -of - state
had deliberately kept his colleagues, including Harley,
in the dark, and now they were quick to realise
that present advantages could be drawn from the
treatment they had so much resented in the past.
If there should be a series of impeachments it was
more than likely that Bolingbroke might find himself
the scapegoat of the Tory party.
Not only Bolingbroke’s departure, but the haste
and manner of it, did him much harm which a more
considerate course of action would have avoided.
He fled precipitately at an angry growl, on a vague
threat, before he was actually accused of anything.
As yet it had not even been decided to impeach him.
The House of Commons committee had hardly begun
its preliminary enquiry; and many weeks had yet to
pass before its report was laid before Parliament;
many more weeks before the charges against him were
formulated in a bill of attainder. It is hard to say for
certain whether his blunder was a temporary aberra-
tion—a mere error of judgement —or one of those
illuminating disasters which discover at a flash some
fatal, but hitherto unsuspected, weakness in a man’s


character. The excuses he offered at the time do
not carry conviction. His statement that the neces-
sity of concerting his defence with Harley, whom
he hated, would have caused him too much disgust,
seems petulant; and although he said truly enough
that he would have no chance of a fair trial before a
hostile House of Lords, there was a higher court to
which his appeal would certainly be carried. Public
opinion had little sympathy with his accusers, and
would not have tolerated a judgement of the Peers
which was flagrantly unjust.
Had Bolingbroke stayed to face his accusers, it
is not beyond belief that he might have been borne
out of danger on a wave of popularity much less
unreasoning than that which, six years earlier, had
carried Sacheverell in triumph. He had the advantage
of his enemies at several points. Sympathy would
have been felt for one who was set upon by a host
of enemies. The facts against him which the managers
of the impeachment laid in due course before the
House of Lords (and it may be presumed that they
kept nothing back), would have seemed very thin and
unconvincing, not only to the mob, but to most fair-
minded men, had not his flight created a presumption
of treason. 1
Where the evidence against Bolingbroke was
strongest, public interest was weakest. People were
sick of hearing about the treaty of Utrecht. It had
1 Although Bolingbroke had certainly been engaged in treasonable
correspondence with the Jacobites, his enemies were unable to find any
direct proofs of it. The Stuart Papers were not disclosed until long after
Bolingbroke was dead and buried. From his letter— Of the State of Parties
at the Accession of King George the First —which was written towards the
end of his life, we may conclude that he had then no expectation of any
further evidence against him ever appearing.


become a party cry of tiresome antiquity. For several
years past, judgements of the most violent character
had been delivered against its authors in a legion
of Whig pamphlets and speeches. And it was now
solemnly suggested that it would be possible to hold
a calm and judicial enquiry under Whig auspices, and
before a tribunal packed with a Whig majority ! The
effrontery and disingenuousness of this suggestion
were too obvious to escape derision.
Bolingbroke was better equipped than his prose-
cutors. His retentive memory held the whole inner
history of the negotiations. No one had seen the
contents of his wallet, or could guess what surprises
it might contain. Moreover, he had many devoted
friends among men of letters, as well as among the
younger politicians, who were prepared to take up
his cause with enthusiasm. The most formidable
English writer who ever wielded his pen in political
controversy was bound to him by the closest ties of
hero-worship and affection: Swift would have been
the most serviceable of all allies, for he had already
written two famous pamphlets in defence of the treaty,
and knew every twist and turn the arguments of the
prosecution were likely to take.
But Bolingbroke’s greatest superiority over his
accusers and judges lay in his own powers. He
was a consummate debater; the greatest orator
before Chatham; and his written statements possessed
for his contemporaries an unmatched grandeur and
persuasiveness. The only thing that really mattered
to him was the verdict of public opinion. He might
safely have brushed details and technicalities aside and
insisted on bringing under survey the whole con-
ception and sweep of his policy. He had a good case


for a popular jury.—From the moment of his appoint-
ment as secretary-of-state the master-motive of his
policy had been peace; and by 1711 peace had become
the greatest of national interests. The country was
longing for peace, out of which it had been cheated
by a criminal conspiracy of Whigs, who had continued
to make war, to pour out blood and treasure, with no
higher aim than to keep themselves in office. Britain
had been used as a cat’s paw for the selfish and revenge-
ful purposes of her allies, who rarely acted up to their
engagements, and who left her to bear the brunt of
the fighting and the chief burden of expense. The
population of Britain was less than half that of France,
and yet, when Marlborough had beaten the French
armies soundly in Flanders, the Emperor was still
whining because, forsooth, after his own incompet-
ence had thrown away every advantage, we refused to
continue in Spain a struggle which he himself had all
but abandoned. Was it a British interest that Spain
should be conquered for the Emperor ? If there was
danger to the balance of power in the fact that one
prince of the House of Bourbon sat on the throne of
France and another on the throne of Spain, surely
there would have been even greater danger in allow-
ing a sovereign of the House of Habsburg to add the
Spanish crown to the Imperial diadem.
Bolingbroke would have been justified in claiming
that, from first to last, his dominating purpose had
been to escape from this ruinous and humiliating
servitude; to break away, before it was too late, from
allies who were rather glad than sorry to see Britain
bled white on their behalf. It had been a matter of
extreme urgency to bring to an end this murdering,
expensive and unprofitable war. There had been no


time to boggle over the forms of diplomacy or the
nice interpretation of treaty obligations. The situa-
tion of affairs, as they stood at that critical juncture,
must be regarded as a whole, and if, on some rare
occasions, the late administration had been led reluc-
tantly into paying back the allies in their own coin—
into methods that perhaps were more in accordance
with the standards of a German or a Dutchman than
with those of an English gentleman—was it to be
wondered at ? Was there indeed any other way of
bringing things to an issue ? Was it fair or reason-
able to fasten upon minor incidents of this sort and
to ignore the main consideration ? What had been
the object of all Bolingbroke’s efforts ? Peace. And
what result had his efforts produced ? Peace. As
the minister who had been responsible for foreign
affairs let him be judged on that.
In the eyes of the nation, the Whigs deserved no
quarter. They were the aggressors, the persecutors.
Few people would have been either shocked or sorry
to see them well trounced. Prejudice would have
worked against them with the mob, and Bolingbroke’s
word, that the motive of the prosecution was male-
volence, and that it was tainted with hypocrisy, would
have been believed. For already, within a twelve-
month, the government had shown that it was fully
alive to the benefits which had been won by the
firmness and patience of its predecessor—peace, com-
mercial privileges of high value, and security against
the ancient menace of Dunkirk, whose fortifications
the French king had undertaken to demolish. The
new ministers were eager to uphold the treaty of
Utrecht, but manifestly they were still more eager to
ruin those who had made it.


Despite the strength and plausibility of Boling-
broke’s case, it is not inconceivable that the House of
Lords would have brought him in guilty on every
article of the impeachment. What matter if it had ?
His condemnation would have been recognised for
the work of a partisan majority composed largely of
shameless or shamefaced noblemen, turncoats who
had supported the late government at every stage of
its proceedings. A hostile judgement given by such
a tribunal would have excited more scorn than awe,
more laughter than respect. That it would have dared
to pronounce the sentence of death appears altogether
incredible; that it would even have proceeded to such
severities as a long term of imprisonment or depriva-
tion of honours, most unlikely. Not from magna-
nimity but from nervousness it would probably have
been content, as in the case of Sacheverell, with some
merely formal censure that would have turned its
victim into a hero and a martyr.
Bolingbroke reached Paris early in April. Shortly
after his arrival he called on Stair, the British
ambassador, to whom he made fervent protestations
of his loyalty to King George. He also wrote to
Stanhope in the same strain. But apparently he felt
that it would be wise to effect a policy of reinsurance;
for before the end of the month he had an interview
with the duke of Berwick, to whom he professed his
devoted attachment to the Pretender. By Berwick’s
account Bolingbroke had good hopes that the project
of his impeachment would be abandoned, and that
he would be suffered to return to England, where he
could serve Jacobite interests better than in exile. He
was careful, however—having a respect for Stair’s


remarkably efficient system of espionage—to avoid a
meeting with the Pretender himself.
During April and May the opinion gained ground
steadily, especially in Jacobite and Tory circles, that
the secret enquiry, like so many other undertakings
of the same sort, would shortly end in smoke. But
this illusion was dispelled on the 9th of June, when
Walpole, as chairman of the committee, presented its
report. This was an able and emphatic document,
and at every point the conclusions were hostile to the
late administration. To a cool reader, however, there
were various indications that no substantial evidence
of treason had been brought to light.
Next day Walpole carried a resolution for the im-
peachment of Bolingbroke. The decision to proceed
in like manner against Harley, Strafford and Ormonde
was not long delayed. This show of sternness was
designed to strike terror into the Tory leaders; for the
Government desired few things more ardently than
that they should follow Bolingbroke’s example by
fleeing the country. The chief ministers knew only
too well that many links in the chain of evidence were
dangerously weak. They dreaded the possibility of
popular excitement, against which even the most
docile parliamentary majority is but a poor protection.
Bolingbroke, by acting as his enemies wished him to
act, had relieved them of a load of anxiety. Harley’s
obstinacy in remaining caused them much annoyance
at the time, and much embarrassment and unpopularity
before they were done with him. They would have
liked to see a general exodus of their opponents,
and despite much talk of condign punishment, they
assuredly would not have stirred a finger to prevent
the escape of any political opponent whom they


could have succeeded in frightening into voluntary-
exile.
The threatened prosecution of the Tory leaders
was thoroughly unpopular. By a stroke of great good
luck the country had secured a new sovereign without
having had recourse to civil war. But though George
the First might figure on the coinage as king by the
grace of God, he wore his crown neither by divine
right nor by right of birth. In the eyes of his people
it behoved him, as a newcomer, to take the earliest
opportunity of showing that his throne was the seat
of mercy. Let him begin his reign in a spirit of
moderation and oblivion. Let him call off his excited
pack of Whig politicians, who were bent on serving
their party ends by a proscription, and indulging
their private animosities by vindictive persecutions.
If, indeed, the Tory leaders had ever been foolish
enough to entertain the idea of a Stewart restoration,
their machinations had come to nothing and their
hopes were now utterly confounded. What patriotic
purpose could possibly be served by a hunt after
treason ? The demand for an inquisition proceeded,
not from the nation, but from a knot of office-seekers.
Why should the general peace be disturbed by the
action of a small, a greedy and a revengeful minority ?
Discontent had been growing steadily in England
for six months past, and in Scotland things were worse
rather than better. Except among Whig politicians
the King’s accession had stirred no deeper feelings
than the interest which commonly attaches to a
novelty. Indifference soon turned to disfavour as
people came to realise how complete a foreigner he
was. The uncomeliness of his German mistresses
outraged the public taste. The meddlesomeness of


his German courtiers offended the governing caste.
The greed of courtiers and mistresses alike was a
scandal that could not be hid. The ministry was
blamed for things that it had no power to prevent
nor any wish to encourage. The flight of Bolingbroke
had damaged himself and his party without checking
in any degree the descent of the administration into
unpopularity. Public dissatisfaction increased when
it was decided to proceed with the impeachments ;
for Ormonde was a hero with the mob, and Harley
a veteran whose bearing since he fell had won respect.
Exaggerated reports of the state of feeling in
Britain easily persuaded the exiled Jacobites that the
time was now ripe for violent measures. It was harder
to convince the ministers of Louis the Fourteenth,
who had been used for many years to these sudden
frothings-up of optimism ; but even they were misled
at last by confirmatory reports from their embassy in
London.
Bolingbroke was no shrewder than the rest. With
all his knowledge of his fellow-countrymen he mis-
took a mere fit of discontent and ill-humour for a
readiness to rise in rebellion. He decided to stake his
career on what was only an illusion. In the middle of
July he took service with the Pretender, was raised to
an earldom and created secretary-of-state. Even his
flight had not been so bad a mistake as his acceptance
of these favours. 1
1 In a letter written to Wyndham some years afterwards he represents
himself as having been goaded into inconsiderate action by the sting of his
attainder. But he was not then attainted. It is useful to keep certain dates
in mind : The appointment of a Secret Committee of Enquiry by the
Commons—March 22 ; Bolingbroke’s flight —March 28 ; interviews with
Stair and Berwick—April ; report of the Secret Committee presented and
impeachment ordered—June 9 ; became secretary-of-state to the Pretender—


Bolingbroke’s flight and junction with the Pretender
removed every serious obstacle from the path of his
enemies, and proved what they had as yet no evidence
to support —his treason. His friends and admirers
were paralysed and stricken dumb. It was idle now
to talk of persecution. The case went against him
by his own default. By Tories as well as Whigs, by
fair-minded men as well as by the mob, his secret
departure and subsequent proceedings were taken as
proofs, not only of his guilt, but of his cowardice.
The course he followed must, in any case, have ruined
him for many years to come : that it ruined him for
ever was due to the inclement vigilance of Walpole.
TV.—How Bolingbroke served the Pretender for nine
months and was then dismissed (1715-1716).
Hardly had Bolingbroke begun to exercise his
ministerial functions under the Pretender than the
Jacobites, both at home and abroad, were thrown
into consternation by the news of Ormonde’s flight.
The role for which they had cast this debonair litde
nobleman was that of vicegerent. He was expected
to stay in England, to keep a great state, to be
courted by the nobility and gentry, to be followed
by cheering crowds when he drove abroad, and
generally to serve as a rallying point for all men
who were already, or might shortly become, well-
VOL. I
o
mid-July ; exhibition of articles of impeachment in bill of attainder—August
8 ; bill passed and became an Act—August 18. The Act of Attainder
contained a provision that it should not become operative till the 18th
September, in order that Bolingbroke might have the opportunity of
surrendering within that period to stand his trial. The provision was of
course meaningless, because Bolingbroke had convicted himself of treason
when he took service under the Pretender.


affected to the Stewart cause. So strong was the
belief in his powers of attraction that to many of
the faithful it would have occasioned no surprise if
George the First and his adherents, disheartened by
the superior effulgence of a rival court, had taken ship
in a panic and returned to Hanover. In the idle
dreams of James and his courtiers Ormonde figured
not merely as a popular hero, but as a statesman and
a soldier of shining capacities. His sudden flight was
wholly inexplicable upon their preconception of his
character and their reading of the situation. It gave
a rude shock to their confidence, and by reason of its
reactions on the attitude of the French government
it was also an incalculable disaster to their cause. But
to Bolingbroke this desertion can hardly have come
as a surprise. He at least knew Ormonde for what
he really was —an incompetent soldier without a
tincture of statesmanship ; a feather-headed conspir-
ator, as inconsiderate in his eagerness for impracticable
adventures as in his abandonment of them at the
slightest discouragement; pathetically constant, in a
dignified, passive kind of way, to certain principles
and personal loyalties; in manners, a great gende-
man ; in intentions, honourable ; but a man whose
mind was thrown into confusion by every emergency,
so that for purposes of leadership he was as dangerous
as one who has lost his sense of direction in a fog. It
is characteristic of his unfitness for responsibility that
he left in a panic, without warning his confederates of
his intention and without giving them any guidance
for their own actions or safety.
The stuff of Jacobitism was speedily tested by the
rising of 1715 and proved to be entirely rotten. At
first the prospects of this rebellion seemed not alto


gether unfavourable. The Scottish Jacobites were in
earnest, and when, in September, the Earl of Mar set
up the Stewart standard, they joined him in numbers
that fell little short of the total force of regulars at
that time available for garrisoning the whole length
and breadth of Britain. South of the Tweed, how-
ever, the Tory party was divided into two sections,
the respective numbers of which it is hard to con-
jecture. One of these sections favoured the Protestant
Succession, and for this reason, though without
enthusiasm, was prepared to endure a foreigner as
king. The other section was professedly for James
the Third. But these English Jacobites were by no
means eager to proceed beyond assurances of sympathy
given under the seal of secrecy. They refused abso-
lutely to stir until a French army should have made
good its landing. In this particular, if in little else,
they kept their word. They thought so poorly of
their cause, so meanly of themselves and of their
fellow-countrymen, that the notion of putting a
British king upon the British throne by means of
British valour appalled them by its boldness. Pos-
sibly they were to some extent bewitched by the
precedent of William’s Dutch invasion, but their chief
concerns were their own ease and safety.
Only a few days before Mar raised his standard
among the hills of Aberdeenshire, Louis the Four-
teenth ended his long reign. To no one did the news
of his death bring greater relief than to the English
Jacobites ; for it destroyed all hopes of military aid
from France, and consequently absolved them from
their conditional obligation of support. There was a
rising of Catholics in the northern counties ; but the
influential families stood aloof, and the surrender at


Preston, in November, put an end to a feeble and
ill-concerted business.
In Scotland there was no lack of numbers, of
ardour, or of noble leaders ; but Mar himself was
ignorant, dilatory, and an egotist. In less than three
months the enterprise was ruined, not so much by
the efforts of his antagonist as by his own mishandling.
It needed only the gentle despondency of James, who
arrived in January and departed a few weeks later, to
quench the last embers of the rebellion.
The cause was not likely to prosper whose most
notable leaders insisted on running away. 11l luck,
mismanagement, and miscalculation, each had its
share in the disastrous conclusion. On the death of
Louis the Fourteenth, Jacobitism became merely a
pawn in French policy. The Highland rebellion was
but a series of lost opportunities from first to last.
Ormonde’s vain sailings backwards and forwards
failed utterly to effect a rising in the west of England.
By the end of January 1716, all was over and James
once more an exile in France. He had won nothing
by his venture for the British crown but a reputation
for clemency which is of doubtful advantage to a
pretender. His coming had been belated, his presence
an encumbrance, his departure inglorious. His ex-
periences had taught him no wisdom. On his return
to France his first act was to dismiss the only able
man who served him.
Bolingbroke’s own pen has described the strange
situation in which he found himself on becoming rebel
secretary-of-state. 1 He who had swayed the councils
of a great empire had then to endure, with so much
patience as he might, all the rubs and mortifications
1 Letter to Sir W, Wyndham.


of a petty court, the obstruction of fanatical priests,
the insolence of Irish adventurers, the eternal meddling
of female marplots whose political thinking was as
loose as their morals, and—harder than all the rest —
the futilities of a young and unenlightened prince,
whose word was as little to be relied on as his judge-
ment, and whose lack of high spirits might have dis-
heartened a company of paladins. James was curtained
off from the world of men by his soft, incurious and
unobservant nature that a cloistered education had
darkened to high gravel-blindness. Having come to
man’s estate he found himself encircled by courtiers
and counsellors whose characters he could not read.
Many of them were knaves, and most of them were
nearly as incapable as himself of telling reality from
illusion. He is a figure of inept and pathetic dignity,
too lack-lustre for a leader, too disinterested for an
adventurer. At heart he was less concerned to recover
his ancestral crown than to win back the Three King-
doms to the Catholic faith. But alas I the temporal
conquest must come first, and it could only be achieved
through the agency of soldiers and politicians who had
little or no sympathy with his spiritual aims. With
such men he must dissimulate; when necessary he
must not shrink from deception. And so it came
about that, while he confided in his priestly advisers
and babbled to his mistresses, he concealed his true
intentions from those who could hope to serve him
effectively only if they knew his inmost thoughts.
Incontinence may be blamed for his indiscretion, but
it was piety that taught him to be perfidious.
It was no fault of Bolingbroke’s that the rebellion
of 1715 had been undertaken; for the decision had
been made before he was appointed minister. Nor


was it through his fault that it miscarried; for he spared
no efforts and overcame great difficulties to keep it
supplied. Nevertheless, he was reproached both with
the project and its failure. An accusation of a still
graver sort was industriously spread and generally
believed among the Jacobites: his treachery was alleged
as the cause of his dismissal. There was not a shadow
of truth in this injurious rumour, but his graceless
master took no steps to contradict it.
The dismissal was in fact due to various causes, none
of which cast any discredit upon Bolingbroke. He had
been a frank counsellor from the beginning. He had
warned the Pretender against the hopelessness of a
Scottish rising, unless it were supported by a serious
effort on the part of the English Tories. He had insisted
that there would be no rebellion in England, unless
the clearest assurances were given that the Protestant
establishments in the Three Kingdoms would be upheld.
What more natural than for such a one as James to
attribute his own humiliating failure to the man whose
advice he had disliked and disregarded ? Bolingbroke
had spoken good sense, and it is therefore not surprising
that he had Ormonde, the priests, the Irish adven-
turers and the intriguing women all against him. The
close circle of zealots which surrounded the Pretender
was determined that the affairs of one who aspired to
be a Catholic king should not remain any longer in the
hands of a statesman who at heart might be nothing
worse than an infidel, but who openly professed him-
self a Protestant. The only character of distinction
among the exiles was James’s bastard brother. 1 The
duke of Berwick’s appeals that the secretary-of-state
1 The duke of Berwick (1670-1734) was the son of James 11. and
Arabella Churchill, sister of the Duke of Marlborough. He had a brilliant
career in the French army and was at this time a Marshal de France.


should be continued in his employment, that he
should be trusted fully, that he should be given, what
had hitherto been withheld—powers adequate to his
position —were ignored. His protests against the folly
of dismissing Bolingbroke, the madness of insulting
him, were all in vain.
Berwick’s support at this juncture is a better
certificate of character than a round-robin would have
been had it been signed by all the Jacobites then in
France. But though the motives and meannesses of
Bolingbroke’s enemies are sufficiently clear, it is im-
possible to feel sure that, among the ignorant and
unreasoning Jacobites, the same blind instinct was
not at work that had caused the rank and file of
Tory partisans to hang back, even when his fortunes
were at their brightest, and to refuse him full allegiance
as their leader.
If Bolingbroke could have disregarded the insult,
he might well have congratulated himself when, after
barely nine months of make-believe administration, a
discourteous message put an end to his servitude.
Now, however, he was not merely an exile, but an
outcast from among his fellow exiles. On the other
hand, the Pretender and his court were by this time
outcasts from France, and those Jacobites who re-
mained behind, though numerous, were not of great
account. Bolingbroke was welcomed by French
society as an old acquaintance. He had made a
dazzling figure in Paris only a few years earlier, during
the negotiations for peace. If his diplomacy that
produced the treaty of Utrecht had not been an
unmixed success, the nation that now offered him
hospitality had gained by his failures. His wit, charm
and gallantry had never been in question. He was still


young, good-looking, full of life. He was equally at
his ease with the most brilliant men of letters and the
most exquisite fine ladies. The great world could
hardly be expected to forgo the entertainment of his
company merely because he had been banned by a
colony of foreigners whom nobody cared to know.
Enthusiasm for the Stewart cause had been of
brief duration in Parisian circles, and it was now a
very ancient memory . The Jacobites had long been
out of the fashion, and on the death of Louis the
Fourteenth they fell completely out of court favour.
For nearly thirty years their importunacy had been an
embarrassment to the government, even when their
plottings were serviceable to its policy. Now that
France and England were drawing together, the
plottings had become an even greater embarrassment
than the importunacy.
The great world, which was unaffected by these
grave considerations of state, looked on the exiles
in a somewhat different light. It had never taken
much pleasure in their society. A good many of
them were disreputable, apt to get tipsy and given
to brawling. Others again were gloomy and
fanatical. In mere decency, such people must be
refused admittance to the gay and brightly-coloured
pageant whose spirit left them untouched, whose
elegant and restrained conventions they were quite
incapable of understanding. In short, these Jacobites
were not amusing ; their form was bad, and they had
the great fault of being out-at-elbows. What such
people thought of Bolingbroke was therefore a matter
of indifference to the great world. Had he come to
Paris as a complete stranger his personal qualities
would have served him as a sufficient passport.


Without chilling his welcome or neglecting his
opportunities, Bolingbroke betook himself —as he
told his friends with some characteristic flourishes—
to the study of history and philosophy, and to the
improvement of his mind. He endeavoured, as a
wise man should, to turn his leisure to account, and
professed to find greater happiness in his seclusion
than he had ever found in the rough-and-tumble of
politics. By and by he married in second nuptials a
French lady of good family and an ample fortune.
Somewhat later he gained a large sum by speculation.
But he was too young to put aside ambition. What-
ever he might write home to his friends, he was not
really happy in France. Despite his popularity in
general society, he was unfavourably regarded by
those with whom he was most anxious to stand
well —by the Regent and his chief minister, whose
chief concern was now the maintenance of good
relations with King George. Though Bolingbroke
might be apt to lose his head in emergencies of a
certain sort, there was a vigour and dauntlessness in
his character which drove him on to attempt recovery.
Within six months of his dismissal by the Pretender
he was again in negotiation with the British am-
bassador in Paris. Even at that early date he had
determined to obtain his pardon, to return to his
native country, to have the act of his attainder re-
pealed and to enter once more into the great game
of politics to which his genius called him.


V. — How the old Tory and Whig parties lost their
distinguishing marks after the failure of the
rebellion (1715-1720).
The benefits of peace had not done away the odium
that the treaty of Utrecht had fixed upon the Tory
leaders. The fiasco of the rebellion now overwhelmed,
not only the Jacobite section, but the whole party,
in an outburst of anger and derision. In the years
that followed the accession of George the First, the
old Toryism died of royal disfavour and popular con-
tempt. The flight of its leaders, the futility of its
intrigues, the insincerity of its professions, covered
it with disgrace. The manner of its ending was
unedifying—a medley of ill-temper and affectation.
The defeated party was foolish enough at first to
play into the hands of the Whigs, who seized eagerly
the opportunity that offered itself of tarring the
whole body of their opponents with the Jacobite
brush. The Tories were ready enough to curse the
Hanoverian dynasty, for discredit had put, them in
a bad humour. They were ready to drink toasts of
every kind, and c the king over the water ’ was as
good an excuse for conviviality as any other. And
many of them were ready to welcome in their houses
—when it could be done without too much risk—
emissaries who brought the latest gossip from the
melancholy court at St. Germain, who came in-
geniously disguised, and departed at cock-crow in a
cloud of mystery. But with all their plottings,
bumpers and imprecations, the Tories could not
restore the wasted vigour of their system. Their


activities were mainly make-believe —a childish game
played by tired and angry children. 1
It is true that in Scotland the case was different.
There, until a whole new generation had grown up
and passed away, loyalty to the Stewart dynasty con-
tinued as a living faith. Men made promises which
they kept, and plans which they attempted to carry
out. They freely sacrificed their lives and fortunes,
acted with energy, suffered prolonged hardships and
showed a great fortitude in adversity. But the
Scottish Jacobites had hardly more than a nominal
connection with the English Tory party, which dis-
trusted them as allies, deprecating, as cautious poli-
ticians must, an enthusiasm which insisted upon
carrying principles into action.
During the same period, or somewhat later, the
old Whig party died of a surfeit a surfeit of
power, offices, sinecures and the royal favour. The
main strength of the Opposition as well as of the
ministry consisted of Whigs. Whigs provided the
government, and Whigs were also ready to provide
any alternative government that might be required.
They engrossed everything; and, as a matter of course,
they soon fell to quarrelling among themselves as
bitterly and as factiously as they had ever quarrelled
with their former opponents.
After the failure of the ’Fifteen, Jacobitism ceased
to be a vital factor in English public life. South of
the Tweed and the Solway, the title was assumed
voluntarily only by a few fanatics and fantastics.
1 * Thus,’ says Bolingbroke, ‘ they continue steady to engagements
‘ which most of them wish in their hearts they had never taken ; and suffer
‘ for principles, in support of which not one of them would venture further
‘than talking the treason that claret inspires ’ (Patriot King).


whose intentions were hardly more serious than those
which, in later times, moved young men to enrol
themselves in the White Rose League. The word
Jacobite was employed chiefly as a term of abuse by
enemies of the Tory tradition, in order to create a pre-
judice among the vulgar—very much as people of a
certain way of thinking continued to be denounced as
Pro-Boers long after the Peace of Vereeniging.
There was an increasing difficulty, as years went
by, in recognising any clear distinction between
the principles of a Tory and those of a Whig. The
counter-cries of liberty and authority might be uttered,
but they were uttered without faith or fervour on
either side. From time to time there was a Tory
pother against standing armies, or a Whig pother
about abuse of the royal prerogative; but the issue
of the succession being as dead as Queen Anne, there
remained no obvious dividing-line between the old
parties. Indeed it seemed as if the Church itself had
entered on a period of toleration or indifference.
It is remarkable that the motive which most often
leads to the formation of parties was then in abeyance—
the division between those who regard change as the
sovereign recipe for human ills, and those others who
oppose every change lest the world should become
even worse than it already is. Nobody wanted change
of any kind. No section of politicians was concerned
to widen the franchise, to abolish pocket - boroughs,
or to amend the constitution. The reforming spirit
was sound asleep.
Any endeavour to trace the ancestry of our modern
parties in the combats that agitated the parliaments
of George the First, would only be a waste of in-
genuity. From a few years after the accession of the


House of Hanover until the eighteenth century was
drawing to a close, the names of Whig and Tory
are of little value for discriminating the currents of
political opinion. During the greater part of that
period, the contest was for office, not for doctrines;
and even in those few cases where a principle was
involved, the cleavage, as a rule, cut across the nomi-
nal party divisions. It is not easy to discover that,
between 1720 and 1790, any influence or motive,
stronger than family tradition or a supposed personal
interest, led people to describe themselves by the one
title rather than by the other. But, as Bolingbroke has
told us, ‘ the names and, with the names, the animosity
of parties may be kept up when the causes that
formed them subsist no longer.’
For the time being the Tories were down and out,
and the Whigs might quarrel among themselves to
their heart’s content. In the autumn of 1716, while
the King was in Hanover with Stanhope in attend-
ance, Sunderland arrived self-invited upon the scene.
Foreign affairs were then at a critical juncture. The
terms of an alliance with France had been agreed
between Stanhope and the French minister, and the
King, with good reason, was desirous that the treaty
should be signed forthwith. But the Dutch, as usual,
were procrastinating. In these circumstances the King
and Stanhope were for completing the matter forth-
with as between France and Britain, leaving Holland
to come into the arrangement later.
Townshend was not in principle opposed to this
procedure, but various circumstances —among them
his own neglect of correspondence—conspired to
make it appear as if the ministers who remained in


England were raising up obstacles in order to spin out
the negotiations. Consequently a misunderstanding
arose that was fomented, not only by the Hanoverian
favourites, but also by Sunderland, whose ambition
might be served by a schism among the Whig leaders.
The trouble was increased by reports from London.
There was no reality behind these rumours, but only
malice and mendacity. They were enough, however,
to work upon the jealousy of the King, and Townshend
was dismissed.
A few weeks later the misunderstanding was to
some extent cleared up ; but its traces remained, like
an erasure in a ledger, disfiguring the texture of the
page. Townshend, as a consolation, received the
viceroyalty of Ireland ; but his power as a minister was
gone. The firm now became Stanhope, Sunderland
and Walpole.
Such a patched-up arrangement could never hold
together. Townshend nursed his grievance. Walpole,
whose sympathies were with his brother-in-law, grew
more and more unsuited to a subordinate position.
In the spring of the following year (1717) these two
joined in an intrigue to overturn the ministry in which
they both held office. Townshend, who appeared
to be the prime mover in this conspiracy, was again
dismissed from office. Walpole, who had gained con-
siderably of late in the King’s favour, was entreated to
remain. He insisted, notwithstanding, on resigning,
and took with him several of his friends. The firm’s
title now became Stanhope and Sunderland, and so it
remained for three years longer. 1
1 The ‘Whig Schism ’ dealt with more fully in Vol. 11.


VI. —How the duke of Orleans became regent of
France on the death of Fonts XIV., and how
the policy of cardinal Dubois led to a good
understanding with England (1715-1723).
For some considerable time after the accession of
George the First, Europe continued to be disturbed
by intrigues and suspicions, by wars and rumours of
wars ; but the effects of a struggle that had lasted
for over forty years were exhaustion and a widespread
longing for peace.
Within a short space three men, whose restless
ambitions made peace impossible, all passed from
the scene which they had so much troubled. The
first of these was Louis the Fourteenth, who survived
Queen Anne by little more than a twelvemonth.
The others were Alberoni, prime minister of Spain,
and Charles the Twelfth, king of Sweden.
When Louis died he was in the seventy-eighth year
of his age and in the seventy-third of his reign.
He had been autocrat of France for more than half
a century. During that time all the main acts of
policy had been shaped in his brain and executed by
the force of his will. If he had been a benevolent
king, whose chief concerns were peace and the grati-
tude of prospering millions, fifty years would still
seem an immense period for a mere human being to
have supported the strain of his despotic charge. The
marvel appears greater when it is remembered that the
constant preoccupation of Louis was not tranquil-
lity, but disturbance, adventure and aggrandisement.


Moreover, his policy had the signal misfortune to
meet with much success at the beginning, after which
it was brought gradually to a pause and ended in
ruin. Possibly there is less to wonder at in the fact
that his realm was able to endure the sufferings and
disappointments of his rule, than that his own human
frame and spirit should have held together into old
age. By a strange coincidence the crown of France
now passed, for the third time in succession, to a
child. 1
The reign of Louis the Fifteenth opened under
auspices which, though depressing, were less over-
cast by storms than those which had marked the
accession of the great-grandfather to whom he suc-
ceeded. The vicissitudes of the monarchy during the
former regency of the Queen-mother, with Mazarin
as her lover and her minister, found no parallel in the
conditions with which the regent duke of Orleans
and the Abbe Dubois were now called upon to deal.
The objects of French policy had not been attained;
the fruit of innumerable victories was merely defeat;
the land was stricken with poverty ; but the Bourbon
dynasty, and with it, national unity, appeared to be
firmly established.
Nothing—not even the treaty of Utrecht —had
been able to buy off the enmity that Louis the
Fourteenth bore to Britain. While he lived, the
Pretender and his courtiers continued to believe that
their cause would be supported, not merely by secret
provisions, but by active intervention. When Louis
died, however, it became clear at once to those few
persons of sagacity who shared in the Jacobite
1 Louis XIII. succeeded when he was nine, Louis XIV. and Louis
XV. when they were only five years of age.




councils that the demise of the French king was the
deathblow to their hopes.
It is true that the Regent 1 was by no means averse
from anything that would embarrass the Hanoverian
succession. He would gladly have seen the British
kingdoms distracted by civil war, for he might
expect to draw advantage from such a situation. But
though he was well pleased when Scotland rose in
rebellion during the autumn of 1715, he was firmly
determined not to risk the fortunes of France in
the adventure. He would neither countenance the
undertaking nor provide it with the necessary sup-
plies ; still less was he prepared to hazard an ex-
peditionary force, and without this assistance the
leaders of the English Jacobites refused to stir.
After the utter failure of the Stewart rising, he was
not slow in recasting his general policy towards
Britain.
The character of the Regent does not rank high
in history. It is impossible, however, to impugn his
loyalty to the boy whose fragile life stood between
him and the throne. In his own way, he was faithful
to the realm entrusted to his charge, and showed
a shrewd appreciation of its most urgent needs.
But the chief concern of the duke, as a man of
pleasure, was a life of quiet magnificence and assiduous
debauchery. To these ends he devoted the greater
part of his time and of his not inconsiderable talents ;
while the Abbe Dubois 2 —who in the course of a
few years became in turn Councillor, Secretary-of-
State, Archbishop of Cambrai, Cardinal and Prime
VOL. I
P
1 Philippe, Due d’Orleans (1674-1723), was a nephew of Louis XIV.
He held the regency from 17x5 until his death in 1723.
2 Guillaume Dubois (1656-1723).


Minister of France served his patron with an
equal alacrity in public affairs and in his private
diversions.
Dubois was the son of a village apothecary. From
humble and even menial employments he had risen
by hard stages to be in name the tutor and in fact the
Chiffinch 1 of the future Regent. His book-learning
was not profound ; but he could read the minds of his
fellow - creatures as a scholar reads his pages —at a
glance. Unscrupulous and shrewd, with an enviable
facility for arriving at his ends in the shortest possible
time and with the least possible friction, he showed
an equal skill and inventiveness in ordering a dinner,
in arranging a ballet, in planning an orgy, and in
regulating the household of his royal pupil. More-
over, his sagacity and address appeared greater rather
than less, when it came to piloting his prince through
those shoals of court intrigue that beset the course
of him who stands in close succession to a throne.
Dubois was a wit, and he was also that thing which
royal personages, in common with the rest of the
world, usually love much better than a wit—he was
a wag and a jovial companion. Sixty years of life had
in no degree restricted his tolerance, nor had they
quenched either his thirst for pleasure or his capacity
for work.
Having proved the qualities of Dubois as a pimp,
his master appointed him to the charge of foreign
affairs. The Regent might easily have made a more
reputable and a much worse choice : indeed, for the
interests both of France and of Europe, he could
hardly, at that particular time, have made a better one.
1 William Chiffinch (1602-1688), page of the bedchamber and keeper
of the closet to Charles 11.


For the Abbe showed himself as dexterous and inde-
fatigable in diplomacy as in his previous employments,
and displayed the same skill as formerly in leading
men and things along the way in which he desired
them to travel. He was a great rascal; but, in his
own way, he was also a great artist. And when
artistry and rascality are pitted together in a strong
nature —whether the nature be that of a poet, or a
painter, or a soldier, or a man of science—it is artistry
that most often wins. Though Dubois was by no
means averse from accepting presents and pensions
from the British government, his dominant instincts
were those of a patriotic statesman. The fact that his
country was exhausted and stood in need of rest
came before every other consideration. With this
end in view he cultivated the friendship of Britain,
the recent enemy, and played a leading part in making
various agreements and alliances that for a consider-
able period were able to prevent a renewal of the
European conflagration.
VII. —Why the treaty of Utrecht was regarded
favourably by France, Holland and Britain,
but unfavourably by Spain and the Emperor.
France, Holland and Britain were at one in desiring
to uphold the treaty of Utrecht. The aim of Stan-
hope’s policy was to come as speedily as possible
to an understanding with Dubois, and to bring the
slow-moving Dutch into a triple alliance that should
secure the interests of the three countries.
From the point of view of France, the treaty of
Utrecht was a far more favourable arrangement than


the calamitous issue of the war could justify. Louis
the Fourteenth had shown even higher qualities of
statecraft in his ending of the struggle than in the
conception and conduct of it; for at least he saved
his people from the worst effects of the terrible
reaction that follows inevitably when a nation has
clutched at supreme power and missed its aim.
The Regent, moreover, had a strong personal
motive for upholding the compact. The health of
the child-king was precarious, and in the event of the
death of Louis the Fifteenth, not the duke of Orleans,
but Philip of Spain, was heir by strict descent to the
throne of France. It is true that Philip had solemnly
renounced his claims ; but there were recent examples
of the breach of undertakings no less solemn under
the stress of strong temptation. The kingdom of
France was a greater prize than that of Spain, nor was
it beyond possibility that the union of the two realms
under one monarch might appeal to the popular
imagination on both sides of the Pyrenees. The
treaty of Utrecht had confirmed the settlement of the
French crown in favour of the Regent, and the interest
of Britain and of Holland in maintaining the balance
of power inclined them to an alliance that would
support his cause.
From the point of view of Britain, the recent
treaty had the immense advantage that it promised
peace. On the material side its terms were favourable
to British interests. It would have been as futile as
impolitic to repudiate the agreement in order to
wipe out certain stains that rested on the national
honour; for those stains were indelible, or at any
rate they could not be removed by any such process
of erasure.


Like the Regent, British statesmen had a second
motive hardly less urgent than the first. They were
not fully satisfied with Louis the Fourteenth’s formal
recognition of George the First, but sought to
draw the French government by motives of self-
interest to the support of the Hanoverian dynasty.
For many years past France had never ceased to
be the workshop of Jacobite plots, the refuge of
rebels, the dangerously adjacent jumping-off-place of
Stewart expeditions. It was highly desirable that the
exiled court of the Pretender should be deprived
of the asylum it had enjoyed in France ever since
1688.
For various reasons the Dutch were also anxious
that the peace of Utrecht should stand. To the minds
of these businesslike traders it seemed clear that
although the terms of the treaty fell far below their
hopes, any renewal of hostilities in which they might
find themselves involved would be likely to bring
them more evils than even the completest victory
could cure. They were a stubborn, but not a proud
people. In contrast with their French neighbours
they seemed singularly insensitive to the stings of the
gadfly, glory. Like sensible men who have attained
a reasonable measure of security, they thought a great
deal about extending their commerce and very little
about improving their strategic position.
On the other hand, two great powers —Austria and
Spain—had their own reasons for wishing ill to the
settlement. The Emperor 1 would gladly have seen
it wrecked, if only because it denied his title to the
1 Charles VI. (1685—1740) was the second son of the Emperor Leopold I.
On the death of his elder brother, Joseph 1., in 1711 he succeeded to the
Austrian and Hungarian inheritances and was elected emperor.


Spanish throne. Philip the Fifth 1 of Spain was no
less anxious to be rid of it, because, among other
injuries and humiliations, it had robbed him of his
patrimony in the Low Countries, and also of Naples,
Milan and Sardinia, in order to enlarge the circle
of the Empire. But since the discontents of these
two sovereigns were so conflicting, the fact that
they agreed merely in hating the treaty seemed un-
likely to lead them into alliance.
At the accession of George the First, the Emperor
was in his thirtieth year, the King of Spain some two
years older. Nature had not endowed either of these
monarchs richly with the qualities of a ruler. Had
they been mere country gentlemen, it is not improb-
able that their estates would have been moderately
well managed upon old-fashioned lines. Charles
would have inspired the greater awe by reason of his
pompous reserve; Philip the greater affection, from
his consideration for the happiness of his tenantry.
The Emperor had a good digestion, enjoyed
excellent health, was devoted to the chase, bore himself
on all occasions with an official dignity, and showed
a remarkable persistency in pursuing his ends by
means which were altogether unfit for securing them.
He was dull as well as obstinate. It was not selfish-
ness so much as mere lack of intelligence that had
turned him into an egotist, as perfect after his
own fashion as Louis the Fourteenth himself. Some
impediment of the mind prevented him from ever
1 Philip V. (1683-1-746) was the grandson of Louis XIV. He became
King of Spain under the will of Charles 11. of Spain in 1700. He abdicated
in favour of his son in 1724, but on his son’s death seven months later he
resumed the crown. For many years before his death he was a victim of
melancholia.


understanding that his allies might have other objects
in view besides that of underpinning the shaky
successor of the Caesars. When he was seeking the
Spanish throne, British blood, treasure and military
talent had been his main supports ; but he made it
a great grievance when the government of Queen
Anne refused to continue the struggle on his behalf,
after he himself had all but deserted it, or to go on
with the war in the Peninsula which he had already
lost entirely through his own fault.
At other points his complaints might, at first
sight, appear less absurd. It was not the Spaniards,
but the French, whom he regarded with the fiercest
hatred. As a result of the treaty of Utrecht he had
been driven, in the following year, to make peace
with France on terms that bitterly disappointed his
hopes. In his view, the fruits of victory remained
with the vanquished. After a war of forty years, in
which the enemies of Austria had been worsted, he
was forced nevertheless to submit to the weakening
of his frontiers on the Rhine, while a German-speaking
province was still left in the hands of the French
despoilers. For all this, however, he had to thank
himself more than any other. He might have
gathered the fruits of victory four years earlier
when they were ripe. It was his own vindictive
obstinacy that had urged him to wait till they were
won back by his rival.
In 1700, when Philip the Fifth was called to the
throne of Spain, he was only seventeen. During
the fourteen years that followed he had less experi-
ence of good fortune than of bad. He was twice
driven out of his capital. In the end, however, he


succeeded in expelling the allies from the Peninsula.
Unfortunately for himself he counted only as a pawn
in the desperate game that engaged his grandfather’s
ruthless ambition. In 1710 Louis the Fourteenth
offered not only to abandon his grandson’s cause,
but to pay a subsidy to the allies in order that they
might wage war against him. What Louis would
not do was to use French troops to deprive that
grandson of his kingdom. We may wonder which
was the stranger phenomenon—the point of honour
at which Louis stuck, or the madness of the Em-
peror and his allies which led them to refuse so
profitable a proposal.
When it came to making peace Philip managed to
keep his crown. At the same time he was forced to
part, not only with his territories in Italy and the Low
Countries, which were allotted to the Emperor, but
also with Sicily to Savoy, with Gibraltar and Minorca
to Britain.
A prince who is fighting for his succession may
possess qualities more useful than gentleness and piety.
During those early years the courage and constancy
of Philip were put to the proof and certainly were not
found wanting; he took the field with ibis armies,
and, even when things were at their worst and coun-
sellors most despondent, he refused to give up the
struggle. But virtue, not ambition, was the force
that moved him. His courage was of the kind that
can endure, but lacks energy and enterprise. His
constancy did not spring from hope or ardour, but
from his sense of duty and honour. He had a
horror rather than a love of power; but he would
not abandon a people that had loyally accepted him
as its king, and begged that it might not be left to


the tender mercies of invaders, or to the neglect
of an absentee sovereign. His store of vitality ran
too low to carry him through the troubles in which
his lot was cast. Although both his mind and body
were lacking in robustness, he was neither a half-
wit nor an invalid by nature. His real tragedy
began after the war was ended. Gradually, under
the oppression of wills much stronger than his own,
his gentleness ceased to make resistance, and there-
upon conscience began to upbraid his weakness. Piety
turned to superstition; afterwards to melancholy and
unworthy terrors. In vain did he seek relief in abdi-
cation ; for his successor died within the year, and his
unwilling hands were forced once more to grasp the
sceptre. To his wearied eyes kingship was nothing
but a grey, angry, unappeasable sea of troubles ; the
farther shore, which he prayed that he might reach
quickly, was death. His prayer remained unanswered
for more than thirty miserable years.
It was said of this king that he was made to be
governed, and that he was in fact governed all his life.
At first he was governed by his grandfather; then by the
formidable Princesse des Ursins 1 ; by his confessors ;
by his ministers, Alberoni and Ripperda; but most
absolutely by his second wife, Elisabeth Farnese. 2 This
young woman, whom he married in 1714, was pre-
occupied from the first with schemes for providing
kingdoms and principalities for her prospective pro-
geny. The territories that appeared most suitable for
1 Anne Marie, Princesse des Ursins (1645-1722), was chosen by Louis
XIV. to sustain French interests at the Spanish court after the accession
and first marriage of Philip V. Her power over the first Queen was very
great, but was not always used in accordance with the views of Louis.
* Elisabeth Farnese (1692-1766) was the niece of the Grand Duke of
Parma.


her purpose were the Italian appanages of Spain that
the treaty of Utrecht had made over to the Emperor.
Unfortunately she found in Alberoni a minister who
was prepared to risk everything to achieve her ends.
VIII. —How Alberoni rose to be prime minister of
Spain and a cardinal, and how his efforts to
carry out the Queen's policy ended in disaster
(1714-1719).
Alberoni’s career bore considerable resemblance
to that of his French antagonist, with this difference,
that in addition to his other disadvantages, he was
an alien in the country he governed. His birth
was even humbler than that of Dubois, his father
having been a vine-dresser of Piacenza in the Duchy
of Parma, and he himself a verger before he was
admitted to be a priest. To his various early
patrons in Church and State he had commended
himself as a merry-andrew, and by an unfastidious
alacrity in dubious employments. He rose in fact
very much as Dubois had risen, and, if Saint-Simon
is to be believed, he won the heart of Vendome, 1
the French invader of Italy, by an act in which the
grossest buffoonery was mingled with obsequious
adoration.
The patronage of Vendome was the turn in
Alberoni’s affairs which led to fortune. The military
genius of the Duke was of that incalculable sort in
which bursts of energy alternate with longer periods
1 The Due de Vendome (1654-1712) was a great-grandson of Henry of
Navarre by Gabrielle d’Estrees. One of the greatest soldiers of his age,
he was defeated by Marlborough at Oudenarde (1708), but victorious over
the allies in Spain (1710-1712). He died of a prodigious surfeit.


of indolence. His pride, the coarseness of his appe-
tites, the disgustingness of his person, and his complete
indifference to the good or bad opinion of his fellow-
men had raised up a host of enemies against him. He
had few friends, but only parasites who tolerated his
humours for the sake of their wages. Alberoni
could have made himself an able servant to almost any
master ; to such a one he soon became indispensable.
His pleasantries enlivened the debauch; his humility
shrank from no tribute that was demanded of him;
his industry, his suppleness, his penetration smoothed
the face of the roughest affairs. And above all, no
insults, or even injuries, could shake his fidelity, for
his fidelity was bound up with his ambition.
Vendome took Alberoni with him to France and
afterwards to Spain. After the duke’s death in 1712,
his astute secretary was not long in establishing himself
at Madrid as the agent of the duke of Parma, in whose
territories he had first seen the light. In February
1714 the Queen of Spain died. Philip the Fifth could
not endure domestic solitude, and, unlike most of his
race, he found no consolation in mistresses. Alberoni
was not the man to neglect so favourable an oppor-
tunity for advancing his own interests and those of his
employer, whose niece, Elisabeth, was accordingly
made a bride before the year was out. Following the
instincts of his gentle nature, the King only too gladly
surrendered his judgement to the masterful will of
his consort. The Princesse des Ursins was banished,
French influence lost its hold, and within a few months,
Alberoni, through his influence with the Queen,
became in fact the ruler of Spain.
It was an age of adventurers. Alberoni’s career,
so far, reads like a fairy tale, and it had not yet reached


its zenith. He was a mountebank priest, a shameless
fellow, an eater of toads—what you like ! but he was
no impostor, for his talents in the government of
men were nearly equal to his ambition. ‘ Give me/
he said, ‘ but four years of peace, and I will make of
* Spain the first power in Europe/
The success of his administration was little short
of a miracle. The national resources, the colonial
wealth and the spirit of the Spanish people were all
turned to account. He breathed life and hope into
the decadent monarchy. Corruption and futility in
the public service gave way to honesty and efficiency.
Commerce, shipping and agriculture began to flourish
under his encouragement. The arsenals were filled;
all day long hammers clanged in the dockyards ; the
army and the navy were disciplined and well provided ;
and the Spaniards, who had always carried their
heads high even in adversity, recovered confidence
in their destiny. The grandiose schemes of Alberoni
touched the popular imagination, and, for a generation
after his fall, he was still spoken of with honour
by the people.
The period that Alberoni predicted for national
recovery was all too short. That he would restore
the fortunes of Spain in four years was probably
a boast; that he could do so in little more than half
that time was obviously impossible. And yet the
measure allowed him was under three years. It is
just conceivable that a supreme statesman might have
contrived to hold by his time-table, but in the circum-
stances he would have found it a singularly difficult
task.
For the aim of Alberoni’s policy was to confirm his
own power, and this required that he should retain the


favour of his royal mistress. To keep well with the
Queen he must drive the Habsburgs out of Italy; but
in order that the Habsburgs should be driven out, it
was necessary to set the treaty of Utrecht at defiance.
The chief obstacles in Alberoni’s way were the diplo-
macy of Stanhope and Dubois, the general desire for
peace, and the disorganisation of the Spanish adminis-
tration.
In January 1717 the announcement of the Triple
Alliance between France, Holland and Britain aroused
the Queen’s resentment. If the treaty of Utrecht was
to be upheld, the Austrian position in Italy would
be maintained, and all Elisabeth’s projects for the
future establishment of her infant son and prospective
issue must vanish into thin air.
Elisabeth Farnese was not nicknamed ‘the terma-
gant ’in irony. She was not one of those women, like
Elizabeth of England or Catherine di Medici, who have
the deadly art to bide their time. It was hard enough
work restraining her impetuosity for a matter of six
months : to have held her for three years might have
broken the arms of Hercules. Moreover, the dull-
witted Emperor chose this occasion for offering various
provocations that drove her almost to frenzy. He
hated the Triple Alliance as much as she did, although
one of its main objects was to secure him in possession
of his ill-gotten gains. He was not a very rational
monarch, and when he felt a call of nature to relieve
his spleen, cared little in what quarter he gave offence.
Alberoni was the worst sufferer from the agita-
tions of these two disordered royalties. His hand
was forced, and his plans miscarried.
In the following summer 1 he became, in title as
1 July 1717.


well as fact, chief minister of Spain. At the same
time he received a Cardinal’s hat. A few weeks
later, 1 without any declaration of war, he struck
suddenly and blindly at Austria, and made an easy,
worthless and unwholesome conquest of Sardinia.
There was little gained in prestige; there were
great losses from sickness, and, as the treaty of
Utrecht was threatened by his action, the whole
diplomatic influence of the Triple Alliance was
thrown into the scale against him. He was swift to
retaliate by attempting the formation of a Northern
League. With this object he worked hard to recon-
cile Russia and Sweden, in order to launch a Jacobite
invasion of Britain.
The outraged Emperor proclaimed his wrongs to
every capital in Europe. Was he not engaged in
fighting the battle of Christendom against the Turks
when this dastard blow was struck in his back ?
Pride and dudgeon, however, still prevented him from
adhering to the only combination that was prepared
to render him assistance. It was not until the middle
of the following year 2 that rumours of mighty
and mysterious preparations in Spanish seaports so
wrought upon his fears as to bring him to a reluctant
consent. In July, by the accession of Austria, the
Triple Alliance became Quadruple; and none too
soon, for in the same month the fleets of Philip the
Fifth conveyed a powerful army into Sicily.
The luck of Spain has seldom lain in armadas.
The island was conquered, but the great navy was
destroyed by Admiral Byng at Cape Passaro. The
seas were closed against the Spaniards by British
ships of war. The Imperialists poured in reinforce-
1 August 1717.
2 1718.


ments, and, before many months had passed, the
victorious invaders were themselves in turn besieged.
By the beginning of 1719 the audacious project
of a Northern League was ruined, for Sweden was
again at war with Russia. But Alberoni was appar-
ently undaunted by adversity. The hopeless struggle
continued for nearly a twelvemonth longer. In June
he determined to attempt the invasion of Scotland.
He sent forth a second armada, but a Biscayan
tempest shattered it beyond repair. In autumn the
Spaniards were driven out of Sicily. In December
the allies offered peace; but they demanded as one
of their conditions that Alberoni should be dismissed.
The lack-lustre King and his distracted consort
accepted these ignominious terms. The Cardinal
was suddenly deprived of all his offices and ordered
into exile. Those whom he had served acted doubt-
less with prudence in denying to the magician the
courtesy of a farewell interview.
IX. —How Alberoni before his fall had brought about
the intervention of Sweden, and how this also
ended in disaster (1715-1718).
Alberoni, like other magicians, had spells that
seemed able to quicken the spirits of the departed.
Forgotten champions came forth at his bidding.
In the last year of the previous century the world
had been dazzled by the military exploits of a boy
of eighteen. When events in the Low Countries were
not too exciting, men had found time to marvel and
applaud, as the youthful hero continued, for nine
years longer, to scatter his enemies before him on the


shores of the Baltic and in the plains of Middle Europe.
But, about the time when Dr. Sacheverell may have
been beginning to ponder the heads of his famous
sermon, there had come tidings of defeat. The
hitherto invincible youth had fled southwards, had
sought sanctuary with the Turks and been received
into captivity. The glory that had flamed so brightly
was quenched. It had been a phenomenon of the
same nature as those Northern Streamers, whose shafts
of light traverse the sky, whose charging squadrons
glow first in one quarter of the heavens, then in
another, until suddenly, without warning or apparent
cause, the ardour fails, the brightness fades into an
after-glow, into a pallor, which outshines no longer,
nor even veils, the changeless starlight.
The fatal battle of Pultowa had been fought in
1709. In midwinter 1715, at the Siege of Stralsund
in Pomerania, the combatants were startled by an
apparition. They had almost forgotten that Charles
the Twelfth of Sweden was still alive.
Charles 1 had succeeded to his throne at the age
of fifteen, and his royal neighbours had been touched
by the spectacle of his inexperienced youth. Within
three years of his accession the great Peter of
Russia, Frederick of Denmark, and Augustus, King of
Saxony and Poland, banded themselves together to
despoil him of his inheritance. Charles forestalled
their attack. The British navy covered his crossing.
The Danes were beaten to their knees and forced to
sue for peace. Shortly afterwards the Russian army
was destroyed, the victors having odds of six to
one against them. Warsaw was occupied, Saxony
1 Charles XII. (1682-1718) succeeded to the throne of Sweden on his
father’s death in 1697.


invaded, and, before the end of 1704 —the year of
Blenheim—Augustus submitted to a humiliating treaty,
whereby he renounced the Russian alliance and the
crown of Poland. Three years later Peter the Great
was again defeated and narrowly escaped capture.
And once more Charles struck at the colossus and
secured yet another victory. Then he turned south
into the Ukraine and his luck deserted him. The
Cossacks played him false. With half the breadth
of Europe separating him from his kingdom, and
half his soldiers dead from cold and privation, he
again ventured to attack the Russian hordes. His
army was annihilated and he threw himself on the
mercy of the Turks.
Charles the Twelfth was only twenty-seven at the
battle of Pultowa, and this was his first reverse.
But it seemed as if all his resources of energy and
self-confidence had been used up by this single failure.
Whom the gods love they do not afflict with unbroken
success in early years. Until now there had been no
occasion for him to learn how misfortune should be
met. His character had been through the furnace,
but not on the forge. When tried by adversity, it
was found wanting in those superlative qualities of
head and heart which fortify a man to play his best
in a losing game. His temper became sullen. During
the next six years he lay like one whom an attack of
fever has left prostrate and who will not put out
an effort towards recovery. His position with the
Turks was equivocal: sometimes he appeared to be
their prisoner, at others their ally.
Charles returned to Sweden a few months after
the death of Louis the Fourteenth; but thenceforth,
for the few remaining years of his life, the victorious
VOL. I Q


captain was of little more account than an adventurer
whose nerve is shaken and whose luck has turned.
His restless activities that disturbed the peace of
Europe were but a desperate and tragic gamble
in which he showed more valour than fortitude,
more craft than judgement, more rage than policy.
A man in this state of mind is apt to become the
too] of others whose heads are cooler than his own.
Charles hated George the First, not altogether without
reason ; but when, in 1717, he planned an invasion of
Scotland and the restoration of the Stewarts, he was
playing not his own game but Alberoni’s. This
project was disclosed prematurely and came to nothing,
while the more grandiose scheme for the formation of
a Northern League as a counterpoise to the Triple
Alliance met with no better success.
In the following year Peter the Great drove a
shrewder bargain than the Spanish cardinal had done.
The Czar was well content to accept the cession of
Finland as the price of his neutrality, while the ruined
gamester set out to conquer Norway. The bargain
turned out even better for the Russian than he had
hoped; for, only a few months later, Charles fell with
a bullet through his heart, leaving behind him a
kingdom in ruins.
Besides Finland, there were other Swedish posses-
sions on the Baltic that Peter had long coveted.
No more favourable opportunity than the present
could have offered itself to his predatory ambitions.
The gain of this northern booty might easily console
him for his Turkish reverses and for the postponement
of his southern projects. Now was the time to launch
a fresh attack on Sweden. The leagues and combina-
tions dear to western statesmen were nothing to him.


save as they might serve or obstruct the growth of
his own power. He could look on unmoved at the
embarrassments of Alberoni, who at the death of
Charles the Twelfth was still engaged in a hopeless
struggle to maintain his footing in Sicily.
By the deaths of Louis the Fourteenth and Charles
the Twelfth, and by the ruin of Alberoni, the prospects
of peace in Western Europe were much improved.
War between Russia and Sweden contained certain
possibilities of danger, but the hopes of extinguishing
this struggle by diplomatic pressure were not ill-
founded. It is unlikely, however, that the gravest perils
now remaining were clearly foreseen at this time by any
statesman. The ambitions of the Spanish Queen and
of the Habsburg Emperor still survived. The mind
of each was possessed by a fixed idea, and these ideas
were irreconcilable. It was not long before the furious
resolution of the Termagant and the undiscerning
obstinacy of Charles the Sixth produced a new and
surprising crop of troubles for their unfortunate
neighbours.
X. — Concerning the characters of Alberoni and Duhois.
Even in the disastrous ending of his political
career, Alberoni does not produce the impression of
a man stricken with despair or harassed by anxiety,
but rather of one who took an artistic delight in the
activity of his own spirit. After all, even if he failed
utterly, might he not find consolation in the thought
that the vine-dresser’s son of Piacenza was leading
Europe such a dance ? He had something of the


Roman genius for doing things thoroughly, and
many of the gifts, as well as vices, of the Renaissance
Italians. His agents were übiquitous. His finger
was in every pie. His audacity would have thrown
the thunderbolts back at Olympus. He disregarded
the injunctions of the Pope, and yet the Spanish
people stood by him. He plotted with the duke and
duchess of Maine against the Regent Orleans, and
stirred up the French Protestants against their
government. He plotted with the Pretender and the
British Opposition, and stirred up the English
Catholics against King George. But he could not
succeed, for the time allowed him was too short,
and the odds against him were too heavy. 111-
fortune, however, was not the sole cause of his
failure.
It was at the beginning of his military adventures
that the defects of Alberoni’s character first became
glaring. We have a feeling, not so much that he
miscalculated, as that at times he did not calculate
at all; that he shut his eyes and trusted in luck to bring
him through the approaching collision without a
broken neck. Not that he was found wanting in
energy after the collision occurred. No one could
have sprung more quickly to his feet. He was
bold and crafty; but, though his courage held, his
judgement failed him. He made far too much
flourish with his weapons. He was a consummate
actor; but he grew to be so fond of acting that
he would occasionally play a part with admirable
verve, although he had nothing to gain by it. Some-
times he would astonish an ambassador by playing
several different parts during a single interview. He
was a brilliant intriguer; but he might have had


better success had he been content to intrigue only
when there was a purpose to be served. At the crisis
of his fate he found himself entangled quite as much in
difficulties of his own invention as in those which his
enemies had contrived. It seemed as if he often prac-
tised deception and concealment merely for the fun of
the thing. It is not surprising, therefore, that his worst
failures were in negotiation; for he overlooked the
advantage of so keeping his account with the world
that he had a reasonable balance of its confidence
standing at all times to his credit.
At the end of 1719, when Alberoni fell, Dubois,
although considerably the older of the two, had not
yet reached the very summit of his career 1 ; but, sure-
footed as a mule, he was picking his upward way
safely over the stony places, with the burden of state
upon his back. Ever since the death of Louis the
Fourteenth, he had been steadily tightening his con-
trol of French policy. He already possessed greater
power than any of his rivals; but it was not until
1720 that the Regent, to the scandal of the priesthood,
appointed him Archbishop of Cambrai, and it was
not until 1721 that he was made a cardinal. In the
following year he received at length the title of prime
minister. He was then, however, almost at the end
of his tether. For some years his health had been
failing. He died twelve months later at the age of
sixty-seven.
1 Alberoni (1664-1752) and Dubois (1656-1723). —Alberoni began to
have political power immediately after the second marriage of Philip V.,
which occurred in September 1714. He was then in his fifty-first year.
He fell in December 1719, so that he had a course of five years and three
months. Dubois began to have political power immediately after the death
of Louis XIV., which occurred in September 1715. He was then in his
sixtieth year. He died in August 1723, so that he had a course of eight years.


Alberoni was only fifty-five when he went into
banishment. His foresight had already provided the
means of making exile endurable. He settled himself
in Italy, and lived there in affluence and good health
until he was nearly ninety. At times he enjoyed
high favour at the Vatican. In 1724 he received ten
votes at the election of a pope.
Were the grave gods in a facetious mood when they
gave charge of two great nations, during the same
short spell of years, to two such characters as Alberoni
and Dubois ? Or was it some prank of Mercury’s
while the others slept ? For even had the interests of
France and Spain been identical—which they were not
—or capable of being brought into harmony—which
perhaps they were—the countries must surely have
drifted into antagonism under leaders who, though
they may only have affected to despise one another,
hated one another certainly without any affectation.
These ministers were indeed too much alike to do
otherwise than hate. Both were of mean extraction,
graspers and hoarders of money, loose-livers, scoffers
at religion, priests who brought discredit upon the
priestly calling. A duke may tolerate the illustrious
rivalry of a duke more easily than a rogue who
has succeeded will tolerate another rogue’s success.
Each of these cardinals regarded the other as a
charlatan, clothed by the caprice of royal favouritism
in a casual, unapprenticed, upstart authority. To
Alberoni it seemed shameful that the destinies of
France should be entrusted to the Regent’s pimp;
while Dubois was scandalised that Spain, as he falsely
pretended, was governed by the Queen’s Italian lover.
There was no physical resemblance between the
two men, except that both were short of stature.


Dubois was as lean as the proverbial rake. He wore
a large fair wig over his washed-out face. He was
meagre and mean-looking ; had a long sharp nose and
an air of deceit. ‘As false as a young fox/ said the
old duchess of Orleans, who detested him. The
duke of Saint-Simon, who detested him still more,
said that he had the look of a polecat. The image
that contemporary accounts call up is that of some
small, questing, curious beast, whose restless eyes
overlooked no vice or foible of human nature that
might conceivably be turned, at some future day, to
useful account. In an honester age Dubois’ perspi-
cacity might have served him less profitably; for it
was of the kind that blinks in the daylight, though
it sees steadily in the mirk. He was by no means
lacking in attractiveness of manner. Even his con-
temners are forced to concede the charm of his
vivacity. His talk was brilliant and amusing, though
it lacked dignity and tended to buffoonery. He was
witty, well informed and mightily intelligent. Saint-
Simon admits that his company would have been
delightful if only he had not distilled a vapour of
perfidy through every pore. Persons like the Regent,
whose nostrils were less sensitive to the aromas of
human corruption, undoubtedly found pleasure in his
society and wisdom in his counsels.
Alberoni, though a little man, was monstrous. He
had an enormous head, a vast swarthy face, tightly
drawn lips, a flattened nose with a bulbous end to it.
His shape was spherical. His appearance and rolling
gait suggested an overladen bum-boat when there is a
swell in the roadstead. He belonged to the gargoyle
family; but he might also have claimed kinship with
the Titans. For when he spoke earnestly, out of the


fire and fullness of his heart, to command, to overcome,
to persuade, encourage or stir men to endeavour, no
one in the company remembered how clumsy he was,
how ill-favoured and grotesque. There was inspira-
tion in his eyes, authority in his tone and bearing,
magic in the melody and compass of his voice. He
had come to be chief minister, dispenser of penalties
and favours ; but his power over men, the awe in
which he was held, owed less to the fact of his success
than to some quality in himself which defies analysis.
He dominated as he had risen, not so much by reason
of what he had done or could do, but simply by reason
of what he was.
Dubois, on the other hand, never fell a prey to
any emotion that had the power to transfigure him.
He remained always the same—the questing polecat,
the false young fox. People became uncomfortable
when he looked at them innocently and began to
stammer; for every one knew that he had his stammer
under perfect control. His wit could wound; nor
was the substance of his conversation always pleasant
to his hearers. For he could put his enemies in the
Bastille and turn the keys on them. He could deprive
them of their dignities, strip them of their livings, or
reduce their promising careers of ambition to a heap
of cinders. None the less, the feeling that Dubois
inspired was not awe, but only fear—fear unmixed
with any particle of admiration or respect. He
could not quell by a glance or prevail by his tones.
He was not formidable in himself; naked he was
nothing; he must have his weapons by him—his
net and trident—before any one would stand down
to make way for him. Even at the height of his
authority he never altogether ceased to be a butt; and


when great noblemen and dames were pleased to
make a mock of him, courtiers would smile, though
they might turn away to hide their smiles.
Such a one as this could not fire men with noble
ambition, or send them forth to undertake great deeds.
He possessed no gift of leadership. He was not a
captain, but a pilot, who was reluctantly permitted
to come aboard in order that he might perform
certain functions that the occasion required. The
weather was dirty, the channel was full of dangers,
and Dubois was certainly a very skilful steersman,
who knew all the currents and could thread his way
among the reefs and shoals. But the crew did not
regard him as one of themselves. No one sought his
friendship in the spirit of friendliness. He had no
honour among the ship’s company. Nevertheless
Dubois was a pilot who took his vessel safely into
port; while Alberoni was a sea-going captain, an
audacious navigator, who ran his galleon on the rocks.
X I.—Of the consequences that flowed from the policy
of Stanhope and Dubois, and of the scant justice
these statesmen have received from their fellow-
countrymen.
Although Louis the Fourteenth upon his death-
bed kept repeating that the treaty of Utrecht was a
priceless advantage to France which must be safe-
guarded at all costs, it may be doubted if he clearly
foresaw the means necessary to this end—still more
if he could ever have brought himself to adopt them.
His people were in much the same predicament.
The sympathies of French society were bound fast


in the old traditions. Among statesmen, churchmen,
soldiers and nobility the more numerous opinion
would undoubtedly have approved a cordial agree-
ment with Spain, whose king was a Catholic and a
Bourbon, as much as it disliked an alliance with
Britain, the recent and victorious enemy. It was said
at Versailles that the French and English peoples
desired to remain enemies, but were frustrated by
their rulers who had determined to become friends ;
that the French and Spanish peoples, on the other
hand, would readily have made friends, if only they
could have done away the opposition between the
aims of the Regent and the Termagant, and the per-
sonal dislike that existed between the two cardinals.
The unpopularity of Dubois with his fellow-country-
men was not due solely to his vices, but quite as
much to the trend of his policy.
The close understanding with Britain that Dubois
succeeded in establishing was continued by Walpole
and Fleury. On the whole, the two countries re-
mained on fairly good terms for nearly a generation.
But previously, for an even longer period, they had
been at war, and the bitterness of this memory was
not easily forgotten. There were people on both sides
of the Channel who regarded friendly co-operation
between these two neighbours as a defiance of the
laws of nature. Whom the gods had sundered let no
man impiously seek to join together. The principle
of self-preservation was held to imply that the first
duty of each nation was to prevent the other from
regaining its strength.
In 1715, at the death of Louis the Fourteenth,
Britain was sorely in need of rest; but France had
almost reached the point of exhaustion. By a miracle


of statesmanship the two rivals were prevented from
flying at one another’s throats for a period of five-
and-twenty years. During this period the economic
strength of both reached a higher point than ever
before.
After 1740, however, for nearly three-quarters of
a century, the relations of France and Britain were
never free from jealousy, and only during rare and
short intervals were the two countries ever actually
at peace. Not infrequently they were locked in a
death-grapple. As a consequence, French historians
who wrote during this later epoch have perhaps done
less than justice to the services of Dubois. They were
indignant that his policy should have allowed the hated
rival to gain so much strength, ignoring the fact that
on no other terms could France have recovered from
the wastage of a forty years’ war.
The case of Stanhope is somewhat different. In
an age when few politicians were either honest or
patriotic, he stood beyond reproach. Although he
had a wide and brilliant range of accomplishments,
his views with regard to the special needs of his time
were simple and for the most part sound. He never
failed for want of energy and perseverance, and he
succeeded at last in realising all the main objects of
his continental policy. It is right that he should be
judged upon his conduct of foreign affairs, for it
was the department that engrossed his attention. His
period of achievement was short. The Triple Alliance
was negotiated during the autumn of 1716 and was
signed in the following January. The Quadruple
Alliance, which crowned his efforts with success, came
into existence in August 1718. By the end of 1719


the war that had threatened to involve the whole
of Europe was brought to an end. The treaty of
Utrecht remained in force. The Pretender was obliged
to withdraw his court to Rome. The Hanoverian
dynasty had gained greatly in security and was now
acknowledged by all the great powers. Good re-
lations were established with France upon the accord
of the rulers of these two countries, and upon the
understanding that subsisted between their respective
ministers. These were useful works, and they laid
the foundations upon which the long administra-
tion of Walpole was about to build up the national
prosperity.
But just as Dubois has received less than his due
from French historians, so British historians, though
for entirely different reasons, have hardly rated
Stanhope so high as he deserves. His reputation has
been clouded by his association with Sunderland, who
was one of the most unpopular characters of his time.
But it is exceedingly doubtful if Stanhope should be
held in any degree blameworthy for the Whig schism
of which Sunderland and the German Bothmer were
the prime contrivers. Stanhope’s responsibility for
the South Sea Bubble did not go beyond the fact that
he was a member of the government which, without
evil intentions, but with inexcusable folly, entered
into relations with a fraudulent company. The matter
did not come within the scope of his department; he
took no bribes or favours; nor did he even speculate
in the stocks as Walpole did. But Stanhope was un-
doubtedly responsible, more than any other man, for
one conspicuous blunder. He must bear the chief
blame for the introduction of the Peerage Bill, as
Walpole undoubtedly deserves the chief praise for its


defeat. Stanhope’s aim, however, was entirely honour-
able. He desired to guard against a repetition of
the felon blow the Tories had struck against the
constitution in 1714. There was some reason to fear
that, in the event of the King’s death, the Prince of
Wales, who professed a violent disapproval of all his
father’s acts, might secure a subservient House of
Commons, and proceed to destroy the works of his
predecessor, unless there should be an independent
House of Lords to resist him. Stanhope’s object was
to prevent the House of Lords from being again
swamped by new creations, and the means he
proposed was to fix for ever the numbers of that
assembly. Had this measure passed, the country
might possibly have been secured against a form of
danger that has never in fact occurred; but the
character of the British constitution would have been
changed.
XII. —How Walpole and Townshend tired of opposi-
tion and accepted subordinate offices (1717-1720).
Walpole had no share in the achievements of Stan-
hope and Dubois. He certainly did not foresee how
important a bearing they were to have upon his
own future. Until considerably later, he took but
little interest in foreign affairs, except when they
offered him an opportunity for embarrassing the
government. It was not until his own adminis-
tration had been in existence for more than four
years that he began seriously to concern himself
with this department, and it was not until nearly
half his course was run that he took the control


of it into his own hands. While Stanhope and
Sunderland remained in power, Walpole’s activities
were concentrated mainly upon domestic matters. His
reputation rested upon the excellence of his business
judgement. He knew more about the management of
land than most country gentlemen, and more about
trade and money than most of the City magnates.
From the spring of 1717 to the spring of 1720, he was
the leader of a heterogeneous opposition in which
there was but one point of general agreement —the
need for pulling down the government. He was the
most powerful and the most merciless critic whom
his former colleagues had to face.
The conduct of Walpole during this period is one
of the chief blots on his fame. He cannot be excused
on the ground of youth, for he was more than forty ;
nor on the ground of inexperience, for he had known
the responsibilities of office for nearly ten years past.
When the Tories under Bolingbroke and Harley were
fighting for power they had not shown less concern
than he now did for the national interest. If Walpole’s
eloquence was less moving than that of Bolingbroke,
his shrewdness and his great fund of practical know-
ledge made him an equally formidable opponent.
His practice for those three years was pure faction.
He cared nothing about the dangers he might bring
upon the new dynasty to which he professed allegiance.
He took part with the Jacobites, the Tories and the
Adullamite Whigs in opposition to every govern-
ment measure whether it were bad or good. He
fought against the repeal of the Schism Act that
inflicted great hardships on Dissenters, as strenuously
as he had denounced this odious measure a few
years earlier when it was passed by the Tories. He




was zealous for reducing the small standing army at
a time when, as no one knew better than he did, the
peace of Europe and the safety of Britain depended
upon military strength as a backing to diplomacy.
He became a demagogue, and endeavoured to prevent
the annual renewal of the Mutiny Act, although he had
himself been secretary-at-war and was well aware
that the discipline of the troops depended upon the
re-enactment of that measure. He acted as one bent
solely on mischief and utterly regardless of the con-
sequences.
As a matter of fact he was solely bent, not on mis-
chief, but on obtaining supreme power, and, like others
before his time and since, he cared little how he might
arrive at it. Like others also, who have believed in
their own superlative capacity for government, he may
have soothed his conscience with the sophistry that
all the evils he wrought during the contest would
vanish when the affairs of the nation should come
under his management. Many of those evils did in
fact vanish, but the precedent, which was perhaps the
greatest evil of them all, remained. Walpole’s action
during this period is the classic instance how deeply
a statesman may plunge, with his eyes wide open,
into dishonest opposition. He had already given
proofs both of his patriotism and his judgement; but
when rivals were in power, jealousy became the master
passion of his mind. Among politicians his case is not
an uncommon one. The abuse and misrepresentation
which he flung about so freely in his fortieth year were
repaid to him with compound interest in his sixtieth.
But in spite of all Walpole’s attacks, the govern-
ment stood firm. The greatest parliamentarian of the
day was discredited by his own reckless inconsistency.


and by the character of the incongruous rabble that
accepted his leadership. Exclusion from power had
no charms for him. In the spring of 1720, after a
particularly vigorous attack upon ministers for their
support of the South Sea Company—now in the
heyday of its fortunes—he and Townshend acknow-
ledged their defeat and sued for office.
The brothers-in-law returned neither as victors
dictating their own terms, nor as prodigals whose
repentance was beyond suspicion. They were not
fully reinstated because they were not fully trusted.
It seemed possible, however, that, having paid the
penalties of rebellion, they might now be in a mood
to render useful services. In any case their mere
silence would be worth the price of two offices of
secondary importance; for their opposition, though
unsuccessful, had been irksome. Townshend re-
ceived the Lord Presidency, Walpole the Paymastership
of the Forces. But they rejoined the business only as
junior partners, and the name of the firm continued to
be ‘ Stanhope and Sunderland ’ as before.
X III.—Concerning the bursting of two bubbles (1720).
For some time before Walpole rejoined the govern-
ment in the spring of 1720 both France and England
had been the victims of enchantment. In Paris,
during the preceding January, stock of the Mississippi
company had been dealt in freely at thirty-six times
its nominal value. In London, during the following
August, the hundred pound shares of the South Sea
Company found ready buyers at a thousand. Within
the orbits of these two financial influences hardly any


one stood out of the gamble who had money to
invest or property he could sell or pawn.
The magician who had bedevilled France with a
gleaming illusion was John Law of Lauriston, a Scots
adventurer of genius; A fop, a spendthrift, a serious
economist and a professional gambler, he had exercised
his talents with varying degrees of success in most of
the capital cities of Europe. Occasionally, when his
play was too fortunate, he had been asked by the
municipal authorities to withdraw himself beyond
their frontiers. He was reputed, notwithstanding,
to have done exceedingly well for himself. In Paris
his sanguine address secured the ear of the Regent.
Law commenced operations as a banker in 1716.
Gradually, as his schemes prospered, they expanded,
till two years later he offered to take over the greater
portion of the enormous public debt. All he asked
for in return were a few financial privileges and trading
concessions, together with authority to make certain
much-needed reforms in the levy and collection of
taxes. He predicted confidently that, if these condi-
tions were granted (and the grant could surely injure
no man) his famous System would not only earn
fabulous dividends for the shareholders, but would
revive the gasping prosperity of the land. He was
no mere quack. Many of his ideas were sound, and
competent critics have maintained that, upon the
whole, France gained a good deal more than she lost
by his activities.
The Gallic temperament excels in quickness of
fancy and clearness of logic, but is too apt to overlook
the need for accurate and patient observation at the
outset. When French enterprises end in disappoint-
ment it is rarely due to poverty of imagination, to
VOL. 1 R


error in the argument, or to any lack of energy in the
carrying of them out. The common cause of failure
is that too little care has been taken beforehand in
arriving at a true knowledge of the facts.
For a considerable period, Law and his stocks
soared ever higher and higher. Under his directions
great improvements were made in the national
finances and in the whole system of taxation. The
general recovery which he had promised began to
show itself. Royal personages and ministers of state,
marshals and prelates, men and women of every rank
and vocation paid court to the son of the Edinburgh
goldsmith, imploring his good offices to procure for
them allotments of the new issues that followed one
another in a swift succession. In his prosperity Law
comported himself less like an earthly king than like
one of the immortal gods. Serenity dwelt upon his
brow. He was ruthless, but rarely insolent. The
British representative. Lord Stair a fellow - Scot
had the misfortune to offend him, whereupon the
secretary-of-state, scenting the possibility of danger to
the alliance, at once recalled the ambassador.
In February 1720 something untoward happened.
The System no longer continued to circle in calm
dignity upon an upward flight. The pilot—it might
be only for the moment —seemed to have lost control.
By and by there was a downward movement, the
reason for which was not at first clearly understood
by the spectators. Before long, however, it became
known that this unsteadiness was due to the prudence
of certain gamblers who desired to convert their paper
profits into more solid possessions. High-handed
measures were taken at once to curb the evil; but to
no purpose. The machine began to descend with


horrifying swiftness. In May (about the time when
Walpole joined the British ministry) there was a panic
in Paris. After a succession of desperate plunges
during the months that followed, the great System
crashed. In December John Law of Lauriston was
once again compelled, as in his earlier days, to betake
himself across the frontier. His whole fortune was
invested in France, which is evidence that the magician
had come to believe in his own witchcraft. But
neither his faith nor his losses could extenuate his
crime in the eyes of thousands of ruined speculators.
His life was safer in Brussels than in Paris. His estates
were confiscated and his glory passed.
The South Sea act came into force early in April, a
few weeks before Law encountered his first serious
difficulties. In England the mania continued to in-
crease in violence all through the summer, despite the
ominous course that events were taking in France.
It was not until the beginning of September that the
reaction set in. By the end of that month people
who had given a thousand pounds for their shares in
July and August found it none too easy to sell them
for three hundred. By the beginning of December,
when Parliament met, the stock stood at little
over par.
In comparison with the glittering project of Law,
our own South Sea Bubble appears a dull and sordid
affair. The knaves and numskulls, whom history has
held responsible for it, might almost be acquitted on
the ground that they had so little notion of what they
were after. They were without vision, and moved
about like figures in a fog, encouraging one another
with cheerful catchwords and dropping bribes into


every outstretched hand. They had taken even less
care about their foundations than the French had
shown in the Mississippi matter. As for imagination,
as for logic, they had neither of these. To shout
upon a rising market was as far as their energy and
confidence could carry them. When trouble began,
they had no idea how to meet it. They showed
no resourcefulness, no courage. Some hid them-
selves abroad, others were dumbfounded, and the
rest quavered.
There are many episodes in the history of the great
city of London which redound to its credit both in
good and in evil fortune ; but this assuredly was not
one of them. Vanished were the shrewdness and pluck
that have ever been the boasts of that proud society.
Had not its members been cozened in the mass by
c flat - catchers ’ and their own greed ? It is possible
that in Lombard Street the smart of humiliation
was even harder to bear than the actual loss. For
there, at any rate, every one knew that the South
Sea directors had incurred odium, as they had enjoyed
popularity, by a mere accident; that the honour
of the whole moneyed interest was involved; that
the Bank of England itself had coveted the con-
cessions and would willingly, a few months earlier,
have stood in the shoes of its aspiring rival; that it
had lost the bargain only because it put in a some-
what lower bid, and that its present safety was due,
not to sagacity, but to a fortunate lack of spirit.
The true inner history of these occurrences has
never been laid bare. The technical complexity of the
subject is baffling to the enquirer. Many of the most
important records were contained in books of account,
and upon occasions such as this, books of account are


apt to disappear. There is a further difficulty arising
from the nature of transactions which were conducted
to a large extent at interviews between public servants,
who knew very little about the novel art of company-
promoting, and private adventurers, whose thoughts
were occupied, not so much with the actual substance
of their bargain, as with the possibility of tricking it
out to catch the favouring eye of the public. The
purport of conversations of this kind may easily be
misunderstood or misrepresented, forgotten or denied.
It would therefore be rash to pronounce a confident
opinion upon the iniquity or innocence of the various
statesmen who were involved.
Whatever may have been the case with individual
ministers, both the French and English governments
seem to have acted from the beginning with honest
intentions. Their chief concern was to reduce those
enormous debts that years of war had piled upon the
shoulders of the taxpayers. They were in a mood to
welcome the overtures of ingenious projectors, who
offered to show them a royal road out of their diffi-
culties by taking over the national liabilities in return
for certain exclusive privileges that neither country
seemed likely to lose much by granting.
At the present day the simplest investor or the
most junior Treasury clerk would be suspicious of such
over-generous promises; but in 1720 even less was
known than is known now of the mysterious laws
that control the currents of a nation’s prosperity.
Our own generation, as it glances backward and
downward into the eighteenth century, can of course
discern without difficulty the points at which an earlier
race of statesmen blundered off the highway and
fell among brakes and briars and morasses. Viewed


from our present altitude, the road of safety shows so
white and unmistakable in the foothills below us
that we find it hard to understand how men of intelli-
gence and probity could possibly have allowed their
steps to stray. The most facile explanation is cor-
ruption, or else a shameful ignorance.
Our amazement, however, will be lessened, our
censure may be tempered, if we pause to consider
a nearer past, or if we turn our gaze forward and
upward, where the as - yet - unbeaten track of the
twentieth century winds out of sight among mists
and mountain peaks. What lies immediately be-
hind us is only a trifle less obscure than what rises
up in front. We are not yet come high enough
to survey the last fifteen years in a flat projection.
We have travelled, as it were, by a forest path
very baffling to an ordinary man’s sense of direction;
by a steep ascent, at times darker than twilight,
with many a corkscrew turn and hairpin bend.
We can recall in a confused and broken memory
that we have come through a period of miscalcula-
tions without number and that, time and again, the
predictions of the wisest statesmen and economists
have been proved false by events that followed
shortly after. Our guides misled us, though they
were for the most part honest men who knew by rote
the maxims of their financial craft as it was practised
by the civilised world at the beginning of the year
1914. But new and undreamed-of conditions pro-
duced a universal derangement. Discredit fell upon
the most approved principles, and so many strange
heresies appeared to thrive, that mankind, panting
for a new heaven and a new earth, was not unwilling
to listen seriously to new guides, who vaunted the


efficacy of specifics hardly less fantastic than the
Mississippi Scheme and the South Sea Bubble. These
new guides were possibly as honest as the old ones,
but it was certainly no less dangerous to follow where
they beckoned. In doing so how often have we lost
our way and been obliged painfully to retrace our
steps ! And yet it is not unlikely that, a hundred years
hence, every political writer, every man of business,
every intelligent undergraduate will be able to discern
clearly the causes of our recent and present troubles.
The road to safety may then appear to them so obvious,
that our own failure to find and follow it will excite
not only their amazement but their suspicions. They
may find it as hard to believe that our faults were
nothing worse than the innocent blindness of inex-
perience, as we do to believe that the French and
English nations in the year 1720 were not criminal
lunatics, or as we do to acquit the statesmen of
those two countries of complicity in a series of
gigantic frauds.
There is little, on the other hand, that will strike a
modern reader as surprising in the conduct of the
projectors. Then, as now, their main concern was to
choose the most seductive lures to tempt the rising
fish, and it was a season when the gaudiest flies
proved the best killers. Then, as now, the too
ardent fishermen were often struck by the hooks
they cast for others, and becoming converts to an
inexplicable faith in their own frauds, suffered in the
end the same fate as their dupes. Two centuries have
produced but little change in the nature of the fraudu-
lent company-promoter. It is true that, in the reign
of George the First, these gentry practised corruption
upon a lavish scale among public servants, court


favourites and other influential persons, in order to
procure official countenance for their expanding pro-
jects. It is no less true that methods of this sort
would be impossible here, in Britain, at the present
time. The difference, however, is not in the moral
standards of the projectors, but in those of a particular
society. In countries, and they are many, where
bribes are still received gratefully, the financial bandit
remains as free-handed as he was at the beginning.
Without any doubt, there were swindlers both in
France and England at the time of the South Sea
Bubble; but the causes of calamity lay less with
them than in a prevalent distemper that afflicted the
human judgement in much the same way as a plague
afflicts the organs of the human body. Ever since
the Restoration there had been fits of gambling on
the Stock Exchange, and these attacks had seemed
to grow more frequent and more violent after the
Revolution.
We have become familiar with the course of a
pestilence. Its approach is heralded by vague rumours
and by news of local outbreaks. Then with sudden
violence, in the full vigour of the virus, it sweeps
across whole countries and continents. It dies down
as suddenly as it arose; and although it may recur at
frequent intervals, the appropriate treatment is better
understood, while the disease itself assumes a milder
form as the ravages of the microbe are checked by
some mysterious anti-toxin of its own creation. For
a similar devastation we have to await the coming of
a new bacillus.
In later outbreaks of the speculative mania the
ruined gamblers have usually retained enough sense to
curse their own greed and folly; but after the bursting


of the Mississippi Scheme and the South Sea Bubble, the
ravings of their disordered minds could find no other
objects than the knavery of projectors and the sup-
posed connivance of the two governments that had
shown them countenance. In England, even an ex-
treme prostration failed to restore the national sanity ;
indeed, for a considerable time after the disaster,
delirium seemed rather to grow more violent than
to die down. But the later frenzy was haunted by
a different order of hallucinations; credulous hopes
gave place to no less credulous suspicions, and the
greedy pursuit of gain was abandoned for a savage
hunt after victims. Parliament sank below the level
of Lombard Street, and those orators who called most
fiercely for blood received the loudest applause.
Much suffering to innocent persons is the inevitable
consequence of any violent disturbance of the financial
ant-heap; for the misery caused by events of this sort
is not confined to the participants. If a merchant
or a manufacturer speculates with his firm’s capital and
loses, the people whom he employs are deprived of
their means of livelihood, and the houses he deals
with are apt to be involved in his ruin. In this
sense the South Sea Bubble was a national calamity;
but its importance in economic history has been
exaggerated, owing partly to its novelty, partly to the
fact that it claimed so many illustrious victims, and
affected classes whose unaccustomed lamentations
startled the world to attention. The real damage in
a national sense was incomparably less than would
have been caused by a single campaign, or by the
failure of a harvest. Very little capital was actually
destroyed, although, without a doubt, the creation of
new capital was retarded by the decline of confidence


and credit. The transaction was in the nature of a
gamble. The money of one man passed into the
pockets of another. A number of noble lords and
fine ladies, of clergymen and members of Parliament,
together with a host of less distinguished persons,
lost everything they possessed. But Robert Walpole,
by buying early and selling at the top of the market,
made enough profit to encourage him to rebuild
Houghton and begin his fine collection of pictures.
Nor was his case at all an uncommon one.


BOOK FOUR
TOWNSHEND AND WALPOLE
(1721-1727)




I. —How Walpole became chief minister (1721).
For Walpole the South Sea Bubble was as fortunate
an event in a political as in a pecuniary sense. It
ruined his rivals and their power passed into his
hands. The cabinet could not stand against the
storm. Stanhope was one of the few men of property
who had refused to touch the accursed thing ; but
he was the chief figure in the government that had
struck the fatal bargain. He died in the following
February, at the early age of forty-seven, from excite-
ment caused by repelling a particularly gross aspersion
on his honour. Sunderland being deeply implicated
was forced to resign. Unlike several of his colleagues
he appears to have been less guilty than indiscreet;
but public opinion was in no mood to discriminate
nicely. He was saved from worse evils than loss
of office only through Walpole’s determination to
prevent further scandal.
The administration lay in ruins. The dynasty
itself was in danger owing to the known participa-
tion of the German mistresses and favourites in the
recent orgy of corruption. The general excitement, by
exaggerating the extent of the injury, was in a fair
way to realise its own forebodings. In these circum-
stances every one turned to Walpole, who enjoyed a
well-deserved reputation for financial judgement and
for common sense. The appearance and manner of
the man gave confidence. It was remembered how
vigorously he had opposed the South Sea bill in the
House of Commons, and how he had written an able
pamphlet to denounce it. People did not stop to
consider that, as he had joined the government a
few weeks later, he could hardly have believed in the


early fulfilment of his prophecies. They did not take
account of the fact that, while in opposition, his hostility
had been no index of his true opinions, and that he had
opposed with equal vigour and passion almost every
measure introduced by ministers whether he approved
of it or not. 1 Nor was it realised that he had made a
fortune in South Sea stock by speculating for the rise.
To an impartial mind this evidence of shrewdness
might perhaps have recommended him as a suitable
person for the present emergency ; but, if it had been
generally known, it might not have created an equally
favourable impression upon the indignant multitude.
Still, from any point of view, Walpole’s hands were
clean. If his conduct had fallen short of the highest
standards of delicacy, he certainly had taken no bribes,
had received no gifts of shares to buy off his attacks,
or to purchase his support or connivance. It is true
that he continued silent all through the summer, while
the stocks of which he was so large a holder went
soaring upwards; but it would be unfair to assume
that he was therefore muzzled by self-interest. The
South Sea bill was now an act, and nothing could
do away its evil consequences. Moreover he himself
was now a minister, and mere decency would have
held him back from open opposition to an enterprise
that enjoyed the patronage of his own government.
Although the main reason why people called out
for Walpole was their belief in his financial ability,
what must be most admired in the early days of his
administration was not the ingenuity of an expert
but the temper of a leader. His measures, from the
accountant’s standpoint, do not seem to have possessed
any very remarkable virtue or originality. His first
1 E.g. the repeal of the Schism Act (1719).




proposals had to be withdrawn as inadequate, and
those which he produced at a later date made their
appearance after the storm had abated. The storm,
in fact, was not one which could be dealt with simply
as a financial problem; for the evil had gone far
beyond the control of the Treasury. The greatest
technical skill could not give back his money to
Mr. A. without taking it out of Mr. B.’s pocket, and
any attempt of this sort would only have bred a
worse confusion. Walpole made no violent speeches,
no high-flown promises. He refused to join in the
hunt after vengeance, and discouraged persecution,
even of his old enemies, by all the means at his
disposal. He won; and he won, not so much on
his head for figures as on his four-square strength of
character, his moderation, his imperturbability, his
solid, good-tempered confidence in himself.
And so by March 1721, in the forty-sixth year of
his age, Walpole became master of the situation. The
old firm of ‘ Stanhope and Sunderland ’ had gone
into liquidation, and Walpole was thoroughly deter-
mined that the name of the new firm should not
remain ‘ Townshend and Walpole ’ longer than he could
help. In fact, though not in name, it was ‘ Walpole
and Townshend * from the beginning.
II. —Of the composition of Walpole's administration
(1721).
The Walpole administration is the longest in
British history. It held together for one-and-twenty
years. Its members, with but few exceptions, were
Whig noblemen of no historical importance. They
were chosen upon the usual principle ; that is to say,


because they happened to control a certain number
of votes in the House of Commons, and not for
any capacity they possessed for the conduct of public
affairs. A few names, however, are still remembered.
The secretaries -of - state were lords Townshend and
Carteret. The dukes of Argyll and Newcastle held
court appointments. The exclusion of William Pulteney
excited not a little surprise; for he had already won
a high position among parliamentary orators, and
what is more, he had stood firmly by Walpole from
the beginning, both in times of Tory persecution and
of Whig disfavour.
Until much later days the two secretaries-of-state
took their orders, not from the chief minister, but
from the King. According to constitutional practice
they were independent officers, and though in a sense
subordinate to the First Lord of the Treasury, such
power as he might have over them was through influ-
ence and not by authority. They were independent
also of one another. They reported directly to the
King and followed his instructions. Their power
was limited to suggestion. It was a most incon-
venient arrangement in reality as well as in theory;
for when both secretaries-of-state happened to be
able and masterful men, a succession of miracles
would have been necessary to keep them from
quarrelling. But more often than not, one of these
secretaries established a predominance, whereupon
the other, though in name his equal, became in fact
his clerk. When the predominant secretary was a
stronger man than the chief minister, the nominal
head of government was apt to sink into insignificance.
The secretaries-of-state had nothing to do with finance;
but between them they were responsible for every


thing else. Foreign affairs were apportioned on the
system that one dealt with the northern countries
of Europe and the other with the southern. The
southern secretary also looked after the colonies, the
northern after Scotland, and both had a right of inter-
ference in Ireland. They shared the duties of the
Home department, and each might issue orders to
the Admiralty and the War Office. If the northern
secretary were engaged in shaping an alliance with
the Emperor, his southern colleague might upset the
whole negotiation by intrigues at Paris. In short,
the functions of these two ministers overlapped at so
many points that it was almost impossible to secure
unity of purpose and concentration of national effort
unless one of them became a cipher. Like many
other English institutions, however, this strange
arrangement worked a good deal less badly in practice
than any political philosopher would have thought
possible. But it occasionally produced a serious crisis,
and one of these was now not far distant.
Townshend, secretary-of-state for the northern
department, was not only Walpole’s political ally, but
his brother-in-law and closest friend. There was this
difficulty, however, in their relations, that ‘ Walpole
‘ could not tolerate an equal nor Townshend a
‘ superior.’ The chief minister was determined that
the firm should be ‘ Walpole and Townshend.’ So
long as George the First lived, however, Walpole
was unable to assert his superiority as a matter of
right, and was obliged to rely wholly upon his own
greater powers of mind and character. Apart from
constitutional doctrines about the independence of
the secretaries-of-state—doctrines that Walpole took
little heed of in the heyday of his power—he dared
VOL. i s


not risk a quarrel with Townshend by interference
in his department. For it was through Townshend’s
influence with the King, and still more perhaps
through his influence with the principal mistress, that
the administration retained the royal favour, without
which it could not have carried on for a day.
The extent of Walpole’s power varied greatly
during his term of office, and it varied with the
different degrees of royal support which he received at
different times. When it was certain that he had his
sovereign behind him, the opposition might rage as
it liked, but he was sure of a House of Commons
majority. . . . For the first six years he was what he
had determined to be—the predominant partner. He
was powerful, but not all-powerful. He stood well
with the King, whose personal regard for Townshend
was invaluable, so long as the brothers-in-law con-
tinued to make common cause. . . . From the acces-
sion of George the Second to the death of Queen
Caroline, ten years later, Walpole had no rival in the
royal confidence. For that space of time he was in
fact what his enemies alleged him to be—sole minister,
with authority that might not unfairly be described
as autocratic. . . . During the five years that fol-
lowed, Walpole’s power was gradually undermined,
and was at last destroyed, not so much by the clamours
of the opposition or by the revolt of his colleagues, as
by the defection of the King. 1 The clamours might
possibly have been defied and the revolt would
probably never have gathered to a head, had the
King remained staunchly in agreement with his chief
minister.
1 First period— 1721 to 1727 ; second period— 1727 to 1737 ; third
period— 1737 to 1742.


III. —Of Walpole's aims and methods, and how he
dealt with his rivals and opponents (1721-1742).
It has always been the exception when a chief
minister at his first coming into office has had a clear
conception of the policy he intended to pursue. The
majority have merely been prepared to undertake the
King’s government. For the rest of it, they have
been content to wait on fortune and to solve, as best
they could, such problems as might come their way.
There are only a small number whose ministerial
courses could have been safely predicted from their
previous utterances or from the known bias of their
minds. Of these only the rarest exceptions have
succeeded in following the true bent of their genius.
For surprising accidents and sudden changes are the
rule of politics. It is not often that the circumstances
of the world will let a statesman have his head. The
situation into which he comes so confident of victory
may be transformed in a single revolution of the globe.
Thereupon all the schemes that he has framed so
carefully for the service of his country will vanish
hurriedly like ghosts at cock-crow. He will be forced
at once to devise a new plan fit for the occasion, and
he will be lucky if he produces one that does not
involve a sacrifice of his consistency.
Happily for his own fame Walpole falls into the
rarest of these categories. His nature being what it
was, his intentions were preordained. During the
greater part of his career the conditions were favour-
able. He was fortunate enough as well as skilful
enough to avoid every obstacle that might have tripped
him in his path.


His main public purpose was to make the Hano-
verian dynasty secure. It was as yet but seven years
old, and had done nothing to win the affection,
or even the respect, of the British people. It was
tolerated, not accepted. Its precarious tenure was
supported by no traditions, by no graces, by no shin-
ing virtues. Its chief source of strength was the
uninviting alternative presented by its Stewart rival.
The British people coldly agreed that George the First
and his posterity should reign over them, only because
there seemed to be no other means of avoiding some-
thing worse.
Like most great men of action, Walpole had a
simple as well as a very practical mind. His manner
of overcoming difficulties often suggests the way of
Columbus with the egg. Had he been given to
phrase-making, like one who followed him at no great
distance, he might have said to the King— ‘ Sir, I
can make your throne secure, and no one else can.’
And he judged the security of the dynasty to be bound
up with his own.
In his fierce determination to remain in power he
resembles nearly every statesman who has served his
country with distinction. Where he differs from most
others is in his constant vigilance and in the thorough-
ness of his methods for maintaining his position.
Sympathy and imagination were not large ingredients
in his composition; impulsiveness was altogether left
out. He was not one of those leaders who work
upon and through the emotions either of the masses
or of individual men. His character was in many
ways singularly well fitted to his particular task. The
emotional appeal, so necessary for bringing a nation
through the sharp crisis of a war, would have been an


unsuitable and most dangerous instrument of govern-
ment during twenty humdrum years of peace. Nor was
it a period in which there was much need for heroic
assertion of principles. Walpole had more faith in
administration than in measures. He would rather
temper oppression by a lax enforcement of the law,
than stir up some Sacheverell hornet’s nest in attempt-
ing to remove a grievance from the statute book. In
his view the time was never ripe for a reform that
might excite any strong section of popular opinion
against it. If a storm of unexpected violence broke
upon some government proposal, the cause of offence
would be withdrawn by its author as quietly as possible.
It has been made a reproach to Walpole by people
who lived in calmer times that his treatment, both
of opponents and of colleagues, was often harsh and
overbearing; within the law, but unjust. He was
probably as good-natured a minister as ever sat at
the head of a cabinet council; but he held very
firmly and consistently that there was no place for
chivalry in politics. Spite, cruelty, vindictiveness
had no part in his character; to people of slight
importance he showed a contemptuous forbearance;
but on the faintest suspicion of rivalry his great
jealousy of power made him implacable to his foes and
distrustful of his friends. If one of his enemies fell
into a ditch, Walpole would lay a beam on his
shoulders to prevent his uprising. Hard-worked
though he was, he would delegate nothing which,
being handsomely achieved, might cause the fame of
some colleague to glow too brightly. He would
allow no man the chance of growing into a rival, and
he had a prescience of such possibilities so acute as to
be almost morbid. His harshness occasionally caused


scandal or excited sympathy for his victims, which in
the end did more mischief to his government than
those injuries had done which he aimed at punishing.
The weapon of generosity, which some men have
used with success for turning enemies into friends,
was one that Walpole handled without confidence
or mastery. Since he aimed at making himself safe
against rivalry, what sense would there have been,
from his point of view, in conciliating and bringing
forward men of character and ambition, when he
could get the work of government well enough done
by persons whose mediocre abilities or damaged
reputations excluded every risk of competition ?
Walpole used bribery, as a matter of course, to keep
his followers to their allegiance; but he was neither the
first to use it for this purpose nor the last. Among
the succession of corrupting ministers who flourished
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, he
was not the most profuse, but he was incomparably the
shrewdest. He probably bought as much support for
a hundred pounds as George the Third, in later days,
succeeded in buying for a thousand. And although
Walpole paid his retainers well, so long as they gave
steady service, he was careful never to put a premium
upon opposition by buying off his enemies.
As a big diamond cuts to waste more than a little one,
so the character of a great statesman is usually flawed
with misdeeds, meannesses, and oppressions that even
the most honourable record of public services cannot
keep altogether out of sight. Walpole’s ministry would
have been impossible had he not kept his supporters at
heel, and his heel on the necks of his opponents. His
ways were rough and ready; but it is unlikely that he
looked back upon them in his old age with the least


compunction. He judged his own acts in the spirit
of Falstaff, calmly and indulgently: ‘ let them say
4 ’tis grossly done ; so it be fairly done, no matter.’
On coming into office Walpole had his hands full
of work. The financial panic showed few signs of
abatement, and the interests of the public revenue, as
well as those of the monied class, required that con-
fidence should be restored as speedily as possible.
The minister was still engaged in soothing the
nerves of angry speculators and in oiling the bearings
of his new-made government, when his attention was
engaged by a Jacobite plot, as impracticable as most
others of its kind, but somewhat more audacious.
The central figure in this conspiracy was Francis
Atterbury, 1 Bishop of Rochester, a man of amiable
character and warm affections, an eloquent and accom-
plished preacher, an able, turbulent and untrustworthy
priest. His offence was aggravated by the facts that
he had assisted at the King’s coronation and had
sworn the oath of allegiance. While he lay for many
months in the Tower awaiting trial his treatment was
harsh to the point of brutality. His prosecution,
according to modern notions, appears grossly unfair,
though it was in accordance with the practice of those
times. His guilt, however, was beyond all reasonable
doubt, and the sentence of exile, though in certain of
its provisions there was a tincture of cruelty, cannot
be deemed too severe. Walpole’s wisdom may be
questioned in allowing pity and a suggestion of
martyrdom to attach themselves to the fate of a rebel,
but not in making the case of a conspicuous offender
an example to discourage treason. The plot was
1 Francis Atterbury, 1662—1732.


broken up, and it was the last of any serious import-
ance which disturbed his term of office.
Thenceforth Walpole’s way of fighting Jacobitism
avoided notoriety so far as possible. He made no
attempt at conciliation; but prosecutions were rare
and punishments were never savage. He was con-
tent to know what was happening in the councils of
the Pretender, and his knowledge of the futilities, the
jealousies, the intrigues and the cross-purposes of
his enemies was his chief assurance. Sometimes his
agents would play off one conspirator against another ;
or would allow the victims to become aware that their
secrets had been discovered. By these means Walpole
fostered their mutual distrust and kept the peace,
without needing to do more than rattle, once in
a while, the bunch of prison keys that hung at
his belt. He was a master of the game of spies
and counterspies. He bribed the right people. He
tracked the Stewart emissaries, opened and occasion-
ally answered their letters, interpreted their ingenuous
ciphers, unravelled their foolish plots. It was not
merely that his intelligence department was im-
measurably superior, in everything save numbers, to
that of the Jacobites, but his shrewdness drew the
right conclusions from the information that reached
him, whereas the luckless James almost invariably did
the reverse. Gradually, as years went on, his attitude
became more and more passive; but his system of
espionage was never relaxed. If a serious emergency
should arise he knew exactly where to strike, whom
to lock up. It was said that, among the loudest
and least able of his persecutors towards the end of
his career, there were not a few against whom at any
moment he could have secured convictions of treason.


Yet, in spite of his contempt for Jacobitism,
Walpole never succeeded in stamping it out. To the
end of his days he continued to warn men against
it as a danger that was still smouldering, and would
assuredly burst into flame if ever Britain should
be at war with France. He judged wisely that
neither severities nor direct conciliation would get
rid of the evil; for to the kind of enthusiasts with
whom he was dealing, severities would have supplied
the tonic of persecution, while conciliation would
have been mistaken for timidity. But in another
aspect the persistence of Jacobitism was due to his
own course of conduct, and his course of conduct
was deliberate. His personal interests as a politician
prevailed over his obvious duty as a statesman.
When Walpole came into power the Tories,
though they were not a majority of the Opposition
in the House of Commons, formed the most influential
part of it. In Sir William Wyndham 1 they had a
leader of character and conspicuous abilities, who, after
the rebellion of 1715, had definitely renounced his
earlier Jacobite attachments. The Tories were not
divided from the Whigs by any essential principles, but
only by a difference in cockades. They scorned to
change their party name, which had come to most of
them by inheritance. But by far the larger number
desired an open and thorough reconciliation with the
new dynasty. The remainder, who were mainly persons
of an older generation, might have been deterred by pride
from showing themselves at court; but even these had
no longings for a Stewart restoration. Both sections
were heartily sick of the Old Pretender, and Charles
1 Sir William Wyndham, 1687—1740.


Edward was still a child in petticoats. 1 When they
were pestered by legitimist emissaries about their duty
to the exiled House, their feelings were very much
the same as those of an unwary gentleman, who, at one
time or another, has professed a general approval of
temperance, when he finds the enjoyment of his glass
of port disturbed by some officious fellow plucking
his sleeve and enquiring how he can reconcile the
indulgence with his conscience. The Tories had
become respectable, and asked to be allowed to
take part in public life like any other kind of men.
They desired to be accepted and treated as loyal,
which in fact they were just as much as the Whigs;
for even the Whigs could not pretend to regard
either George the First or George the Second with
any emotional fervour. Their so-called loyalty was
no more than a reasoned conviction that the interests
of the nation were safer in the hands of the Hano-
verians than they would be in any others. The
Tories had now come round to the same belief, only
they had travelled to it rather more slowly. Could
there be any doubt that a reconciliation between the
King and this still powerful political party was a
matter of the highest importance ? Supposing the
Tories to have been reluctant, true statesmanship
would surely have waived punctilio and set about
building a golden bridge. In fact, the Tories were
anything but reluctant. There was therefore no
need for finesse or persuasion. It would have been
enough to raise the toll-bar of exclusion, studded with
royal frowns and ministerial insolences, and to let
them come in of their own accord.
1 James 11. died in 1701. His son, the Old Pretender, was born in r6BB
and died in 1766. Charles Edward was born in 1720 and died in 1788.


A reconciliation of the Tory party with the dynasty
was not only desirable for its own sake, but also
because it must have proved fatal to Jacobitism. Had
the Tories been assured that they were to have fair
play, and that the scales of the King’s favour were
not to be weighted against them, they would soon
have become as contented as any other constitutional
opposition that is engaged in a struggle for power.
Being contented, they would gradually have absorbed,
long before the end of Walpole’s administration,
nearly every Jacobite outside the Highlands. But by
reason of their ill-treatment a morbid condition was
produced which might have been very favourable to
the ravages of the Jacobite bacillus. The chief and
most reasonable hope—which in the minds of James
and his advisers became an unreasonable and extrava-
gant hope—of fresh recruits, and of a passive if not
an active assistance from the Tories in the event of a
rebellion, was based almost entirely upon the sense
of grievance and injustice which was known to rankle
in that party.
A minister whose main concern was patriotism
would have found little difficulty in knitting the
Tories to the throne. Walpole did precisely the
reverse. He did not fear the public danger of
Jacobitism nearly so much as he feared lest the
Opposition might turn him out of office. As a
practical politician, his first object was to depress and
keep it weak. He was not the man to shrink from
casting odium on his opponents. In a parliamentary
sense the continuance of Jacobitism was actually an
advantage to him. He was never tired of descanting
upon its iniquities and upon the perils with which it
threatened the country. It was useful as a bogey to


frighten the King, Lords, Commons and People of
England. But it had no terrors for Walpole himself
so long as he could stay in power, keep friends with
France and direct the activities of his ever-vigilant
intelligence department. It was for purely party
reasons that he insisted from first to last on treating
the Tories as suspected traitors, as Jacobites in dis-
guise. For the time being they were in the ditch, and
he was prepared to use every means which would
prevent them from scrambling out. His accusations
were untrue, but there was no means of disproving
them. By dint of constant repetition they kept
prejudice and distrust alive. It was a course of
action by no means uncommon in political strife.
We may not think that it was worthy of so great a
man; but he pursued it with a purpose, and he
achieved his purpose: he remained in power for
more than twenty years.
IV. —Concerning the general lines of Walpole's policy;
how he aimed at fostering national prosperity ;
of his economies; and of the nature of the
work he undertook and carried through (1721-
1742).
The purpose of Walpole’s domestic policy was to
enforce the laws, to safeguard property, to lighten
taxation and to allow the industrial classes a free'
course for their vigour. His methods were broad-
minded and evenhanded. If he could not afford to
give his opponents fair play in the political field, he
would at least show them that their material interests
were as tenderly considered as those of any other


section of the community. He was not any more
anxious to create confidence and contentment among
men of business and the great nobles, whose sym-
pathies for the most part were with the Whigs, than
among the smaller landed gentry who formed the
backbone of the Tory party. He would convince all
owners of property that the security of their posses-
sions and their hopes of fruitful enterprise were
bound up with the Hanoverian dynasty and with his
own administration.
Walpole was all for appeasement except where
it might endanger his power, and in great measure
his efforts were successful. It might have been sup-
posed from the clamours in parliament and from
the vehemence of pamphleteers, that the Tory squires
were smarting under a sense of their wrongs and
becoming day by day more ripe for desperate
adventures ; but in point of fact they grew more
and more complacent as years went by, for they
saw that the values of land were rising, that their
rent-rolls were steadily increasing, and they realised
that they were enjoying a fair share of the marvellous
national prosperity. They might swear over their
cups, in their jolly English fashion, that the country
was going utterly to the dogs ; but they ate well,
slept well, and kept in good spirits notwithstanding.
In the year 1720 industrial affairs were not in a
satisfactory condition, apart altogether from the acci-
dental disturbance that had been caused by the South
Sea Bubble. Restrictions were too many, too onerous,
and often quite contrary to reason. There was no
lack of hope, of daring or of vigour in the trading
class ; but scope was so much narrowed that these
admirable business qualities were in some danger


of degenerating into contumacious discontent. The
landowners and farmers also considered themselves
ill-used, and their hearty co-operation was no less
important in a national sense than that of the
bankers, merchants and manufacturers. Under the
leadership of quacks or partisans the interests of town
and country might easily have appeared to clash ; but,
if only the facts could be rightly understood and
handled, the prosperity of the one class might be
made a buttress to the prosperity of the other. What
the occasion needed was a man of first-hand know-
ledge and first-rate brains—one whose experience was
wide enough and whose will was strong enough for
dealing with the economic situation as a whole. Such
men are among the very rarest products of politics,
and it is for want of them that under all forms of
government the towns have been so often set against
the countryside and the countryside against the towns.
It was a remarkable stroke of good fortune that the
emergency discovered in Walpole a statesman more
fitted than any other, then or since, to deal with this
double problem.
The burden of taxation was too heavy for safety.
A land tax of four shillings in the pound was a more
persuasive agent for the Pretender than the whole
tally of his emissaries who came over loaded with
mischief. Commerce was galled by imposts that
hindered prosperity by preventing expansion. In
recent times taxes had been levied on no clear prin-
ciple, but merely for the sake of revenue, and with
little regard for the effect they might produce on
trade. Duties upon the import of raw materials and
upon the export of manufactured goods discouraged


enterprise; nor had they any plausible excuse on
grounds of policy. Walpole was courageous enough
to face a present shrinking of revenue, having full
confidence that the Exchequer would shortly benefit,
far beyond its immediate loss, from the increase of
profit-bearing trade which must follow greater free-
dom. The North American Settlements were rapidly
becoming one of the most important markets for British
goods ; but their development was hampered by short-
sighted embargoes upon the export to foreign countries
of rice and other produce of their soil. Walpole relaxed
this ancient system, while retaining the restriction that
colonial produce must be carried in British bottoms.
The colonists were overjoyed and the home country
shared the benefit; for America immediately increased
its purchases of manufactured goods. Some years
later 1 Walpole would have extended his administrative
reforms by a readjustment of the duties of customs
and excise. He was defeated by one of those out-
breaks of popular unreason, of which he had already
seen two examples in the Sacheverell agitation and
the South Sea Bubble. This failure was the only
serious check he met with during the first nineteen
years of his administration.
As time went on, the opposition raged more and
more furiously ; but they did not succeed in making
any breach in his financial and commercial policy,
save in the solitary instance of the Excise bill. They
would have persuaded the nation that his method of
dealing with the South Sea Bubble was proof of his
personal dishonesty; that a great part of the revenue
was devoured by his corrupt and rapacious adherents ;
finally, that he was ruining the country. The accusation
1 1733-


of dishonesty was merely the baseless invention of
malice; the public revenue was administered by
him with a more admirable economy than had been
shown by any of his predecessors ; the country was
not ruined, for each succeeding year showed a new
record of prosperity. The condition of the mass of
the people was more satisfactory than it had ever been
before. But boons of this character come so gradually
that contemporaries are apt to receive them as a matter
of course and without enthusiasm. Walpole had not
been long dead, however, before the greatest of his
opponents reversed the solitary adverse verdict by ad-
mitting the soundness of the Excise bill. But Walpole
was unfortunate in his fuglemen, and it was not until
nearly a century of somewhat scanty appreciation had
passed away that his conduct of the Treasury began to
receive its due acknowledgement. 1 His opponents, on
the other hand have fared according to their deserts.
Within a few weeks of their triumph the memory of
their ingenuity, their wit and their invective was
blown away like dust off a crystal.
It will be generally admitted that in principle
freedom of trade is sound policy, up to the farthest
limits of national safety. Differences of opinion,
however, are apt to arise, so soon as the nature of
national safety comes to be examined in its military,
its economic, and its political aspects. As to the
requirements of military safety, there is a certainty of
disagreement in times of peace, and a likelihood of
disagreement even in times of war. Differences grow
wider when the question becomes one of economic
1 Cf. Sir Robert Peel’s correspondence with Stanhope (Lord Mahon)
December 1833, where Peel’s favourable view of Walpole obviously comes as
a surprise to the historian {Stanhope Miscellanies, pp. 66-8 o).


safety, of the security and development of industry, of
equal justice for every branch of trade and agriculture.
But the most acute controversies of all arise with
regard to political safety. For the nation may be
suddenly seized by a mood of unreason, as in the case
of Walpole’s Excise bill. Or it may be held fast by
some ancient tradition which, notwithstanding that
changed conditions have made it obsolete, has come
to be accepted blindly as an article of faith, as an idol
propitious to partisans who find their interest in
fighting reason with prejudice. Or else —which is
the commonest case of all —the sufferings of large
classes of the population may be attributed, with good
cause or none, to the absence of restrictions upon the
enterprise of others.
Walpole was for freeing trade by little and little.
He threw down no challenge to accepted principles,
uttered no threats against vested interests. The
greater freedom he gave to trade, the still greater
freedom he tried vainly to persuade his fellow-
countrymen to accept, were of a kind that could not
injure the national safety, but must necessarily give
it support. His own notions of the extent to which
freedom was desirable seldom outran the ideas of
his time. He appears to have had no misgivings
about the protectionist system he inherited and main-
tained ; nor as to the soundness of the Navigation
Acts that secured to Britain the monopoly of sea-
borne trade to her colonies and made her, save by
her own acts of grace, the sole market for the sale
of their produce and for the purchase of their sup-
plies. But with all his care and foresight, with all
his anxiety to conciliate popular sentiment, there
was one point at which Walpole found it impossible
VOL. i t


to escape collision with public opinion. As his
administration advanced in years discontent was
very artfully fomented, grew by degrees more and
more formidable, and in the end proved fatal to
his power. Then, as now, the most frequent causes
of quarrel between nations were jealousies and appre-
hensions with regard to their commercial interests.
These Walpole endeavoured to allay as best he
could. For opening new markets and for keeping
old ones he placed his faith in diplomacy, and shrank
from having recourse to arms, even when he was
confronted with a breach or an evasion of treaty
engagements on the part of foreign governments.
His failure to produce any substantial redress was a
constant theme of criticism for opposition orators
and pamphleteers. It may be doubted if he himself
ever reckoned upon winning at this game of passing
papers to and fro between the chanceries of Europe ;
but where the stakes were nothing higher than privi-
leges of trade with foreign countries and their colonial
possessions, he preferred, perhaps unwisely, a failure
in diplomacy to the hazards of war, or even to the
costs of victory.
No finance minister has ever been more deaf than
Walpole to the invocations of theorists. The national
exchequer was his daily business, which he managed
in very much the same way as if he had been a
well-to-do farmer, shopkeeper, manufacturer, or
merchant engaged on his own affairs. He was active,
bold and shrewd; at work early and late; admirable
in foresight, but never forgetting the supreme
importance of time; very shy of long views, for
his system, like that of a thriving tradesman, was
based on quick returns. If the obscurity of the


far future was impenetrable to his own eyes, was
it likely to be transparent and intelligible to those
officious persons of no practical experience who
occasionally plagued him with their advice? His
lot was cast in days when the mass of Englishmen
still believed in the Navigation Acts, and it is clear
that Walpole shared their belief. From pedantry, how-
ever, he was entirely free, and he did not regard the
principle of these laws as possessing such sanctity that
it might not be violated in special cases when the
general interest of Britain and her colonies demanded
an exception. ‘ Take care of the home market and
‘ the foreign markets will take care of themselves,’ was
still an adage that won respect. A statesman who
had proceeded upon any other assumption would have
been considered crazy. A free-trader in the modern
sense Walpole certainly was not; though, what he
might have been had he lived in more recent times —
in 1847, in 1903, or now —no wise man will pretend
to say. From what is known of the general bent of
his mind and policy different people will draw very
different conclusions. His early experiences of the
force of popular unreason inclined him to let sleep-
ing dogs lie. He had a horror of convulsions and
crusades. He would never disturb accepted principles,
but would get round obstacles of this sort as best
he could by prudent concessions to meet particular
needs or by cautiously relaxing the enforcement of
statutes. His distrust of people who would have taught
him out of history books how to govern England,
of philosophers and speculatists who would have led
the country by ingenious short-cuts into prosperity,
amounted almost to fanaticism. The only advice
he sought willingly and listened to with patience


was that of men who had prospered in their own
private undertakings; and he listened to them only for
so long as they were content to talk to him of such
matters as had fallen within their personal experiences.
It was his own business as chief minister to reconcile
the various interests of townsmen and countrymen,
and to see that the whole body of national industry
moved forward together upon a straight front.
Walpole was not one of those mean and dispiriting
economisers who imagine that a great business can be
made prosperous by cheese-paring ; by under-staffing
and by under-paying the staff; by paper savings that
destroy efficiency and cut off the sap of life at the
roots. The most important of all economies was
to get the work of the nation well done. He was
a master who kept the goodwill of his subordinates
and drew the best out of them that they could give.
Government contracts had always been a fruitful
field for public pillage. It had been customary to state
requirements at an exorbitant figure. Contractors had
been grossly overpaid, on the understanding that they
would share their illicit gains with departmental
underlings, or sometimes, as in the case of Boling-
broke, with members of the cabinet and their friends.
To check these inveterate evils Walpole introduced
new methods. When orders were found to be
beyond reason they were cut down; prices were
determined by market rates ; due performance by the
contractors was rigorously enforced; bribery, if not
completely extirpated, was greatly reduced. His
fundamental maxim was that the country must receive
value for its money.
The carrying out of this policy is one of Walpole’s


chief titles to fame. In the main he was successful,
but, being made of human clay, not wholly successful.
Hostile criticism has fastened upon two instances
where his economies were pressed too far, and upon
another where they did not go nearly far enough.—
He gave little or no assistance to men-of-letters. —He
reduced the fighting services beyond the margin of
safety, and what was worse, he neglected their con-
dition. —On the other hand, he made no effort to do
away the scandal of rich sinecures.
Literature has rarely been a generous nurse to her
most illustrious children. In the eighteenth century
it was perhaps even harder than it is to-day for the
best of them to keep from starving. Unless they
would abandon their vocation, help of some kind was
necessary for their subsistence. In most cases it
is more consistent with a writer’s self-respect to
receive some modest endowment from the State than
to attach himself to even the most considerate of
private patrons. It was not a matter that would
have involved great expenditure. Had the income of
the sinecures which Walpole bestowed upon his own
sons and relatives been divided up and applied to
the encouragement of meritorious authors, it would
probably have done all that was necessary. Small
pensions, or employments not incompatible with the
pursuit of letters, were the means that Walpole’s
predecessors, but especially the Tories, had used to
foster literature. Their action was not wholly dis-
interested, for they attached importance to the good-
will of the literary profession. Not only Bolingbroke
and Harley, but also Sunderland and Stanhope, had
bookish sympathies, whereas Walpole took no interest
whatsoever in such pursuits. All his reading was in


state papers, departmental reports and political pam-
phlets. But it is less remarkable that he should have
had no liking for literature, than that he should have
shown no discrimination between good writing and
bad. For his own speeches and memoranda show that
he was master of an admirable style, clear and forcible,
rich in illustration and irony, and by no means lacking
in a simple straightforward kind of eloquence. But
when it became a question of employing others to
write for him, his own excellences provided him with
no standard. He seemed to overlook the fact that if
his scribes would hit the mark of popular understand-
ing, the arrows of their argument must be feathered
straight and trimly. Any wretched scribbler fetched
from a tavern was good enough to serve him as a
pamphleteer. Such men served him badly, brought
discredit on his policy and were despised by their more
reputable brethren. In the final struggle the opposi-
tion had the sympathy of nearly every man-of-letters
in Britain and the active assistance of many. And
when the struggle was over and Walpole lay in his
grave at Houghton, his fame was neglected for nearly
a century by those whom his careless contempt had
taught to regard him as the enemy of their craft.
From the national point of view, however, Wal-
pole’s ill-treatment of the fighting services is a much
graver charge against him. When he declared war
on Spain in 1739 fatal delays occurred in finding ships
and men fit for service, notwithstanding that the out-
break of hostilities had been heralded by nearly two
years of steadily increasing friction. To repair its
neglect and want of foresight the government had
recourse to a variety of inequitable expedients, to
cruelties and breaches of faith that it is impossible to


excuse. 1 The case for Walpole is that his policy
was peace, and that peace —though in this the argu-
ment is clearly wrong —did not depend upon the
efficiency of the Navy and the Army. It is incon-
testable that he had kept the peace almost unbroken
for nineteen years, and would have kept it longer had
he not been forced by his fellow-countrymen into a
war that his own better judgement condemned. And
certainly he did no worse than Bolingbroke had
done after the treaty of Utrecht; nay, not near so
badly, for Bolingbroke, in addition to general reduc-
tions upon a drastic scale, had cashiered a large number
of true and capable officers in order that he might fill
their places with Jacobites ripe for a restoration. But
none of these answers has any real weight. Walpole
was steward of the estate, and in this instance he was
a bad steward.
Although he was a stern economiser, his economies
stopped short at the scandalous practice of granting
pensions on the Irish Establishment, and when sinecures
fell vacant it never entered his mind to suppress their
costly absurdity. Pensions and sinecures alike were
useful to him as rewards to be dangled before his
aristocratic supporters and led - captains, and in a
small way, as a means of providing for his own
family at the public charge. Walpole overspent his
large income and died in debt, but provision for his
children was not one of the causes of his embarrass-
ment. From a tender age his sons were entrusted to
the benevolence of the State, and such formal functions
as attached to their ridiculous offices were performed
by obscure clerks at a few hundreds a year, while the
principals drew as many thousands for doing nothing.
1 E.g. conscription of the Chelsea Pensioners.


Among Walpole’s contemporaries his action and
inaction in these matters provoked no sincere con-
demnation, but only occasional outbursts of envy. The
system he followed had been established from the
beginning of parliamentary government; it had grown
more extensive in each succeeding reign; and until
several generations after his death it was never seri-
ously challenged.
Walpole’s aims never changed from first to last,
nor did his constancy in pursuing them relax. He
never wavered in his determination to remain chief
minister, to grasp all the power he could and to keep
it firmly in his own hands. If he could succeed in
his determination to govern the country well and
thriftily, prosperity and contentment would follow;
the Protestant Succession, the Hanoverian dynasty, and
all the other fruits of the Revolution would be secured.
During these twenty years Walpole’s methods of con-
serving his own power and the national safety never
varied to any appreciable degree. His ever-watchful
agents continued to keep the Jacobites under observa-
tion. Regardless of truth, he continued to denounce
the Tories as potential rebels, as Jacobites in disguise.
His faithful followers in the Lords and Commons
continued to receive what were politely known as
‘gratifications.’ The voters who returned members
to Parliament, and the men who influenced those
voters, continued to receive bribes. His adversaries
continued to experience the utmost rigour of the
game. Members of his own party, whose characters
and ability might have fitted them to become his
rivals, continued to break away, or to be broken,
before they had reached the point of becoming


dangerous. There was much in Walpole’s methods
which modern opinion does not admire, but which it
has forgiven or forgotten in a general approval of his
aims, and out of respect for the courage and sagacity
which enabled him to achieve them.
His life’s work was even and of a piece ; his aims
were the warp and his methods the weft; it was not
a showy cloth, but a web of stout homespun. The
most exciting incidents of his career had often little
or nothing to do with the substance of the stuff
which came almost unnoticed from his loom. We see
Walpole as a man keeping his machinery going with
the right hand, and buffeting off his would -be
interrupters with the left. Had they given him peace
he might have shown a larger and a better output.
In this he differs from many of the greatest parlia-
mentary figures, the main work of whose lives has
consisted not in beneficent achievements, but in
oratory, in personal combats and in party manoeuvring.
A career like Walpole’s lacks brilliancy to the be-
holders. Its glory does not appear in the chronicles
of the time, but only after the course is run, un-
expectedly, like a royal sunset at the close of a grey
day. A great deal of his work can only have been
apppreciated at its proper worth by those public
servants who were concerned in carrying it out.
Much of it was uncontentious and uncontested. The
marvel is that a politician, whose power depended to
a large extent upon the veering interest of a popular
assembly, should have spent so much of his time
and energy on labours that brought him so little
advertisement. The innumerable details of adminis-
tration—dull, trivial, and sometimes sordid —by which
he built up and confirmed his policy would make


a very wearisome narrative, supposing any one were
found industrious enough to undertake it. The pan-
egyric upon this, the most glorious and enduring
side of Walpole’s achievements, does not need many
words.—For twenty years, without slackening energy,
without sinking of heart, and, for the most part,
without loss of temper, he kept resolutely at the
task which he had set himself, and neither the
troubled state of Europe nor the attacks of an
eloquent and factious opposition could force him
to lay it down.
The drama of Walpole’s administration is a different
matter. Like most dramas it has more to do with
his adventures than with his work. It shows a
very powerful and practical mind dominated by its
own clear conception of the national interest. It
shows a character, much beyond the ordinary stature
of mankind, engaged in the endless adventure of
governing men. The action of this drama is con-
cerned with the efforts of his enemies to thwart him,
to pull him down, to take his place. The same
theme has been the ever-recurring motive of the
political epic from the earliest records of society, from
the states of ancient Greece to the soviets of modern
Russia, and, as with the fairy-tales of childhood, age
and familiarity have never loosened its hold on human
interest.


V. —How Bolingbroke endeavoured to earn his pardon,
and of the delays that occurred in granting it
(1716-1723).
Within six months of his dismissal by the Pretender
Bolingbroke began to seek forgiveness from King
George. His overtures through the British ambas-
sador in Paris met with a favourable reception. The
memory of the recent rebellion was still fresh, and
Jacobitism bulked more formidably at that time
among the apprehensions of ministers than it did
some years later. Townshend, Stanhope and Wal-
pole agreed that negotiations should continue, and
Stair was instructed accordingly. That sagacious
diplomatist heartily approved of the decision, for he
saw clearly that the cause of James could receive no
deadlier blow than the desertion of Bolingbroke and
his open reconciliation with the Hanoverian dynasty.
Through Bolingbroke’s great influence with Wyndham
and other Tory leaders, that numerous though dis-
tracted party might be brought to a final breach with
the Stewarts and might be led gradually to transfer its
allegiance to their successors. Stair appears to have
mooted the idea of a treaty ; but there was shrewdness
as well as pride in Bolingbroke’s firm refusal. If
ministers believed his word such an arrangement was
needless; if they doubted, what security would it give
them ? A written promise of restoration might have
been something to Bolingbroke’s advantage ; but the
consideration for which it had been given must also
have been stated. A formal document that recorded
a bargain of this sort would have been a dangerous
weapon to put into the hands of his enemies. When


a man is changing his allegiance from honest motives,
he will be ashamed to stipulate for a reward. Town-
shend. Stanhope, Walpole and Stair all knew what
Bolingbroke wanted. Surely, he argued, their own
interest must lie in granting it; for he could do much
less as an exile in bringing about the conversion of the
Tory party than if he were restored to his position
as one of its leaders.
Leaving the question of recompense to the future
generosity of the government, Bolingbroke, with char-
acteristic energy, at once proceeded to implement
his promise. He acted impetuously according to his
nature ; but in truth he had no alternative. In a few
months he had given nearly all he had to give, without
receiving anything in return. His conduct, however,
was not wholly quixotic. Apart from his confidence
that a full pardon would ultimately be the reward of
his services, he was still hot with anger against the
Jacobites who had ill-used him, and was eager to
inflict on them such injury as he could, without
betrayal of their secrets. But it is fair to assume that
love of England and loyalty to the Tory party were
motives that strongly influenced his course of action.
The knowledge he had gained recently at close
quarters had convinced him that the restoration of
James was almost beyond the bounds of possibility,
and further, that if such a thing ever did occur, the
result would be a national disaster. It was therefore
the interest as well as the duty of a patriotic Opposition
in present circumstances to rally round the throne.
Though it was desirable that the weaning of the
Tories should proceed forthwith, it would have out-
raged the public sense of decency if one who had
been the chief minister of a formidable rebellion were


to be forgiven out of hand. Bolingbroke’s pardon
must therefore wait on times and seasons. So the
matter dragged on, at first from month to month, and
afterwards from year to year.
It was in September 1716 —little more than six
months after the failure of the ’Fifteen—that Boling-
broke wrote his first letter to Wyndham urging the
Tories to abandon Jacobitism. But before the end
of that year the Whig schism had begun, and by the
following April Townshend and Walpole were in
opposition. Stanhope and Sunderland, who now be-
came the heads of government, were in a position
to realise how far Bolingbroke’s efforts for the con-
version of the Tory party were bearing fruit; nor
were they unmindful of the hopes which, before the
schism, the cabinet had encouraged him to entertain.
They could not, however, disregard the use that
faction, armed with a confidential knowledge of their
intentions, might make of a proposal to reinstate the
most notorious rebel. Townshend indeed might de-
cline to fight with weapons of this sort, but it was
prudent to assume that Walpole would seize anything
that came to his hand.
The ambassador in Paris, as well as the chief
ministers in London, accepted in full confidence
Bolingbroke’s assurance that he had done forever
with Jacobitism and would henceforth use his best
endeavours to bring the Tories into the same mind.
Even Stair, who knew everything and who can hardly
have forgotten what happened in April 1715, 1 appears
to have kept his countenance, when Bolingbroke,
with admirable effrontery, held himself out as the kind
of man who ‘ never did anything by halves.’ The
1 See ante, p. 189.


chief security for his fidelity was his own interest; he
had much to hope for from the British government,
nothing from the Pretender. His condition, that his
relations with his former master were to remain a sealed
book, and that he would tell nothing of the Jacobites
which had come to his knowledge during, or through,
his connection with their cause, was taken as a matter
of course. No special credit is due to him for putting
this proviso in the forefront, for a betrayal would
have stamped him with infamy. Nor can his reticence
at this point have been a matter of much concern
to the government; for most of James’s futile pro-
jects had been blown sky-high in the general explosion,
and it seems improbable that many facts of importance
remained still unknown to the Foreign Office. What
ministers wanted from Bolingbroke was not secret
intelligence, for with that they were already excellently
served, but that he should openly give up the Pre-
tender and cause the Tory party to do the same. Not
being endowed with Walpole’s abnormal prescience of
rivalry, they were apparently not unwilling to grant
Bolingbroke’s petition; but they were moved solely
by public considerations and not at all by pity for
his misfortunes. They would have been inclined to
pardon him in order to cure a certain mischief, had
they been able to do so without setting up a worse
mischief than the one they sought to cure. Among
public considerations the safety of their own adminis-
tration naturally came first.
For three years 1 the administration of Stanhope
and Sunderland was the object of violent assaults.
The Whigs in opposition were led by Walpole, and
when he hunted ministers—whatever might be his
1 From the spring of 1717 to the spring of 1720.


pretext —the Tories and the Jacobites listened eagerly
for his holloa; for he had much greater skill than
their own leaders in showing them the kind of sport
they loved. He was in the heyday of his vigour;
in excellent spirits; indifferent what company he
kept; unscrupulous, self-confident, good-tempered,
dauntless, persistent and most disconcertingly able;
bent on destroying the government and avenging his
defeat; reckless of consequences if only he might
achieve that end. The dubious doctrine that the
chief duty of an opposition is to oppose may find
support in his example. He hunted ministers in much
the same spirit as he hunted foxes ; patriotism had as
little to do with the one pursuit as with the other.
His attacks failed, and the chief benefit to himself for
all this expenditure of energy was the constant exercise
of his faculties.
Occasionally of course Walpole hit on some
measure which deserved defeat. The Peerage Bill 1
was destroyed mainly through his admirable handling
of the situation. And while that matter was occu-
pying his attention, he bethought himself of the
secret negotiations with Bolingbroke, which had
been creeping along, ever since he left the govern-
ment, at the pace of a tortoise. Prejudice might help
his case, and faction knows no rules. He sounded a
loud alarum, leaving it to be inferred that the govern-
ment was holding parleys with an approved traitor,
the very crime for which Bolingbroke himself had
been attainted. It was a clever stroke, for at that
time there was no more unpopular name in England.
Almost the only people who believed in Bolingbroke
were the Tory leaders. The country squires were
1 Ante, p. 236.


still inclined to regard him as a brilliant will-o’-the-
wisp who had led their party to ruin. The Whigs
hated him with a peculiar fervour for the wrongs he
had done them during the last reign. The Jacobites
shunned him on the false accusation that he had
betrayed his master. Puritans were scandalised by
exaggerated stories of his profligacy ; while since his
fall, his old friends the clergy had begun to entertain
suspicions of his orthodoxy. The mass of quiet-
going citizens remembered that he had been secretary-
of-state to the Pretender at the time of the late re-
bellion, and judged him guilty of the crime of civil
war with all its accompaniments of increased taxation,
disturbance of trade and bloodshed. Even the mob
that had shouted for Sacheverell and afterwards for
Ormonde was more inclined to despise the man who
had run away from danger than to make a hero of
him. Ministers were wise enough to see that they
could do nothing against Walpole’s handling of such
a case, and that there would certainly be another
schism of the Whig party if a pardon were proposed.
They were not bound in honour to take any further
steps in the teeth of violent opposition.
When Walpole and Townshend rejoined the gov-
ernment in the spring of 1720 the matter was still
in abeyance. Bolingbroke bore himself meanwhile
with honour and dignity. At every point he had
acted up to the spirit of his professions to Stair;
he had betrayed none of the Pretender’s secrets, but
he had done his best, and with conspicuous success, to
win over the Tory party to King George.
The change of ministers in March 1721 was not
propitious to Bolingbroke’s hopes. The popular
mood was also unfavourable; for people had no


sooner begun to recover from their fury against the
South Sea directors than they were stirred to anger
by Bishop Atterbury and his fellow - conspirators.
Truly England was full enough of rogues and traitors
already without fetching back from exile another
bird of the same feather. So two years more passed
by during which Bolingbroke had sufficient self-
control to possess his soul in patience.
Bolingbroke craved two boons—as a rebel, the
King’s pardon ; as an attainted peer, the repeal of the
statute that excluded him from Parliament and de-
barred him from his inheritance. The first boon lay
within the competence of the King and Privy Council;
but there was no way to the second save by passing
a bill through both Houses. It is uncertain at what
stage of the proceedings Walpole came into them.
The question of pardon was less a matter for him
than for Townshend, whose position as secretary-of-
state made him the natural channel for correspondence
with Bolingbroke.
Townshend was not over-communicative, was ex-
tremely jealous of all encroachments on his special
sphere, and clung tenaciously to his idea that the
name of the firm was still 4 Townshend and Walpole.’
The whole administration hung on his influence with
the King, and this influence he could not hope to
preserve should he lose favour with the chief mistress.
The duchess of Kendal cannot be called a clever
woman, but she understood to a sixpence the market
value of her position. She was fond of flattery, still
more susceptible to bribes, and Bolingbroke used both
ways to engage her interest in his behalf. Every one
who wished to stand well with the King was obliged
VOL. i u


to offer her the same tribute. Bolingbroke paid her
out of his own pocket, whereas Townshend and
Walpole being in office drew upon the public purse.
There was no other difference than this between the
methods employed by the * outs ’ and the 4 ins ’ to
conciliate this pious and importunate lady; but as she
by no means underrated the resources of the British
exchequer, her tariff for keeping ministers in power
was much higher than for bringing a supplicant to
the steps of the throne.
It is improbable that Townshend was really averse
from granting the duchess’s request, so far as it had
reference to Bolingbroke’s pardon; for Townshend
was a very ordinary type of English gentleman,
irascible but placable, and he did not take at all kindly
to the role of holding a man down when he was
beaten. Nor was his duller imagination haunted by
those forebodings of future rivalry which occupied
so much of his brother-in-law’s attention.
On the other hand, the bent of Walpole’s char-
acter makes it unlikely that he would have been
favourable to any remission had there been a way of
avoiding it without giving umbrage to Townshend
and the duchess. The pardon, indeed, was not such
a great matter provided that the act of attainder re-
mained on the statute book. If Walpole were pressed
later on for a repeal, he would be well within his
rights in objecting; for the onus and the odium of
carrying such a bill through the House of Commons
would rest on his shoulders. And why indeed should
the new leaders undertake the irksome task of legisla-
tion, or risk the smallest fraction of their popularity,
in order to serve a former enemy, who, when himself
in power, had never shown them a shred of mercy ?


For the time being, therefore, Bolingbroke had to
content himself with the pardon. He was now free
to return to England, and he returned at once.
VI. —How at a meeting with Walpole Bolinghroke
made an offer of his services which was rejected
In June 1723, when Bishop Atterbury was set
ashore at Calais from the man-of-war that carried him
into exile, he learned that another exile lay in the
same town waiting for the English packet. It was
eight years since Bolingbroke had fled to France and
become a rebel. Having received the King’s pardon,
he was now on his way to London, with the intention
of throwing himself at his sovereign’s feet, and of
testifying his gratitude to the chief mistress for her
gracious intercession. He purposed also to offer his
thanks and services to Townshend, secretary-of-state,
to whose unprompted magnanimity, and that of
Walpole, he deemed it politic to impute the ending of
his banishment.
Bolingbroke understood perfectly well what manner
of man he had to deal with in Townshend, what
manner of woman in the duchess of Kendal. He
knew that his own quick intelligence, tact and readi-
ness of speech gave him an advantage over both; for
in Townshend there was a certain credulousness and
in the duchess a gross vanity. He might hope for
much and need fear nothing at a meeting with either
of them. The repentance and forgiveness of the rebel
were suitable themes for sentiment and eloquence of
the heart. He had good reasons for hoping that by
a show of frankness with the one and by flattery of


the other he might prepare the way for his next
advance.
As ill-luck would have it, when Bolingbroke
arrived in London the King had just left for Hanover
with Townshend and the duchess in attendance.
Walpole, however, was still in town, and courtesy
required that the returned exile should seek an inter-
view. His expectations can hardly have been rose-
coloured, since no one knew better than he did what
manner of man Walpole was. With the other two
Bolingbroke’s much swifter perceptions would have
given him the weather-gauge; but over the First
Lord of the Treasury he had no such superiority.
As one in high authority dealing with a penitent
and supplicant, Walpole held the advantage of
position and was not likely to lose it for want of
wits or from easy good-nature. Though he might
appear as uncouth and clumsy as the sea-lion in
Regent’s Park, his movements were not less swift
and unerring than those of that engaging animal.
He was not one who could be coaxed with
thanks, or compliments, or high-flown phrases. In
business he had no sentiment, vanity or credulous-
ness. When he chose that the air of a conference
should remain chilly, he was not to be turned from
his purpose even through his sense of humour. If a
petitioner had neither secured his favour beforehand
nor anything to offer when he came, he would go
empty away. Bolingbroke enjoyed no benefit of
goodwill, and unfortunately the most important
service which it lay within his power to render had
already been performed. But in weaning the Tories
from Jacobitism and in attempting to reconcile them
to King George he had served Stanhope and Sunder-


land. It was no part of Walpole’s policy to promote
a hearty reconciliation between the Crown and the
Tories; and he might argue, with some plausibility,
that the new government had already behaved very
handsomely in granting the pardon, as payment of a
debt due, not by itself, but by its predecessor. He
realised—no man more clearly—that Bolingbroke had
gone too far to turn back, and that he could not now
undo his work even if he were dissatisfied with the
reward.
It was therefore clear that Bolingbroke could have
nothing to threaten: had he anything to offer ? Only
a rather vague proposal that he would break up the
opposition by drawing the Tories gradually away from
the irreconcilable Jacobites and the factious Whigs,
who were their present companions, and by bringing
them over to support a national government under
the leadership of Walpole and Townshend. He also
uttered a warning that young Lord Carteret, secretary-
of-state for the Southern department, had already
been angling on his own account for the support
of Wyndham and the other Tory leaders. Walpole
brushed both the proposal and the warning aside.
If the cabinet were known or suspected to have
made any compact with Bolingbroke, they would be
ruined by the defection of the whole Whig party.
The literal accuracy of this somewhat brutal state-
ment may be doubted, but Walpole’s decision was
unalterable.
In addition to this ostensible reason for his refusal
Walpole had another, and perhaps a stronger one,
which did not figure in the discussion. Bolingbroke’s
offer covered a springe, and Walpole was too old and
too wary a bird to walk into it. If the Tories came in


to support the government, their leaders must be taken
into confidence and possibly, before long, into office.
In common decency the ban of Bolingbroke’s attainder
must then be removed and his name restored to the
roll of peers. To let Bolingbroke come again into
the House of Lords would be like bringing the wooden
horse into Troy. Then indeed he would be formid-
able, for he could choose his own pretext for defection,
his own moment for attack. There was no one in the
upper chamber who stood on the same level with him
as a parliamentary fighter. He would make himself
allies among the Whig malcontents, and might draw off
young noblemen of culture and ability—like Carteret
and Chesterfield —who were beginning to chafe under
Walpole’s middle-class domination. There was also
an obvious danger in the fact that Bolingbroke was
by nature a courtier. He had already won over the
chief mistress. If he were admitted to office, or even
to the position of an independent ally, he would very
soon gain the King’s ear and begin intriguing to
make himself chief minister. There could never be
a true union of hearts or even of interests between
two such ambitious men as Bolingbroke and Walpole.
There was no more real magnanimity in the courtly
phrases of the one than in the rough speech of the
other. Each of these politicians was playing his own
game, and the minister would have blundered badly
had he fallen in with his rival’s proposal. For the
sake of some temporary support, of which he stood
in no need, he would have incurred the certain danger
of a challenge to his power before many months had
passed away. Nor in the public interest was he
wrong to reject the offer, for the continuance of a
strong and united administration was a more important


object than the temporary conciliation of his most
distinguished adversary.
At that remarkable meeting Bolingbroke did not
gain a single inch. We may wish that some gossip,
lurking behind the curtain and looking through a
rent in it, had afterwards set down faithfully in his
memoirs what he saw and heard. On one side of the
table sat the very pattern of an aristocrat, on the other
a shrewd, unpolished, country gentleman. Boling-
broke was a figure of great but somewhat studied
dignity-—tall, dark, lean, aquiline and highly-strung.
Walpole offered a complete contrast in his bulky
and florid personage, in his smile of imperturbable
self-satisfaction, in his eyes which stood out from his
broad, good-humoured countenance like those of a
frog. These two men, still in the vigorous meridian
of life, who understood the workings of each others’
minds so well, had been schoolfellows at Eton not
so many years before. Bolingbroke, with his hand-
some face and grand manner, his easy scholarship—
which eclipsed the competition of more assiduous
students by its spontaneous brilliancy—was the school-
boy hero. Who so precocious as he in opinion, in
knowledge and love of books, in the wisdoms of those
alluring worlds of fashion, wit and pleasure which
were fabled to exist some twenty miles further down
the sacred valley of the Thames ? Walpole, the elder
by two years, was in all things different—a stout
fellow, considerable, not easily to be put down or
ruffled, indifferent to learning, uninterested in books
and not over - industrious in study or form. His
prospects were not brilliant, for he was only the
third son of a well-to-do Norfolk squire. When his
schooldays ended, he proceeded on his sober path to


Cambridge, there to fit himself (if such a thing might
be humanly possible) for admission to the Church
and a family living. Bolingbroke, more envied and
admired, flashed at once on London like an un-
hallowed meteor. But fortunately for Walpole, for
his country, and possibly also for the Church of
England, there shortly came a change of destiny.
By the deaths of his elder brothers and his father he
succeeded to the estates of Houghton, and in 1701, at
the age of twenty-five, brought himself into Parlia-
ment for one of his own boroughs. In the same
year, and as a supporter of the same government,
Bolingbroke took his seat in the House of Commons.
Walpole followed the family tradition in ranging
himself among the orthodox Whigs who supported
the coalition ministry of Marlborough, Godolphin
and Harley. Bolingbroke, on the other hand, though
he likewise was a Whig by descent, and had received
his early education at a dissenters’ school, attached
himself to the Tory wing of the alliance. For the
next thirteen years 1 the two men were opposed, first
as rivals for promotion, then as political antagonists,
and finally as deadly enemies. The tracks of their
careers crossed and recrossed. Each in turn out-
stripped the other and was overtaken. Each in
turn was victorious and vanquished, oppressor and
oppressed. Both rose at remarkably early ages to
positions of authority. Within three years 2 of his
coming into Parliament Walpole was highly thought
of among the Whigs, while Bolingbroke became
almost equally prominent among the Tories. Then
Bolingbroke shot ahead. He was only twenty-six
when, in 1704 —the year of Blenheim —he was
1 170 X—1714. 2 1703.


appointed upon the recommendation of Marlborough
to the important office of secretary-at-war. In 1705,
at the age of twenty-nine, Walpole became a member
of the Admiralty council. Three years later I —when
the Harley-Masham intrigue failed and the Tory
ministers were dismissed —he was promoted to
the post which his rival had vacated. Two years
more passed by, 2 the Whigs were turned out of
office and Bolingbroke became at once secretary-of-
state and the most brilliant figure in the ministry.
Under his eager direction Walpole was condemned
by a partisan majority in the Commons on a charge
of corruption, as false as it was trumpery, and im-
prisoned in the Tower for the remainder of the session.
Another four years, and George the First sat upon the
throne 3 ; the tables were turned ; Walpole as spokes-
man of the Whig Parliament sought to fix the charge
of high treason upon his enemy, and Bolingbroke fled.
When they first came into the world of politics,
Bolingbroke was already a distinguished figure in
London society. He was a scholar and a wit, a man
of fashion and of pleasure. Walpole in his own way
was a man of pleasure too, but his appetites were for
substantial fare. He was never the voluptuary of
shadows. It is not recorded of him, as of his rival,
that he polished couplets to the charms of his various
mistresses or crippled himself with disbursements on
their behalf. In early days Bolingbroke kept Miss
Gumley, the most expensive lady of her profession
in London. Walpole’s most famous mistress was
Miss Skerrit, who is said to have possessed an inde-
pendent fortune of thirty thousand pounds, and whom
he married immediately after the death of his first
1 1708. 2 1710. 3 17x4.


wife. Walpole was neither a scholar nor a wit; but
he had already a wide knowledge of men and things
and a perfect aplomb in all companies. As he ate
his beef and drank his beer after a day with the
hounds, he would scoff at men of fashion and men-
of-letters as coxcombs who differed only in the cut
of their coats. His speech never lost its tang of the
Norfolk accent. He had what Chesterfield described
as the tastes of a bumpkin; for he loved husbandry
and stock, the pursuit of the fox and the slaughter of
partridges. But he also loved pictures after a fashion,
and the building of great houses. In almost every
avocation except fox-hunting—possibly even in that—
Bolingbroke offered a complete contrast. When his
fancy turned in later days to agriculture he engaged a
painter to decorate the panels of his hall with bouquets
of hay-rakes and pitchforks. In their private circum-
stances there were certain odd similarities. Boling-
broke, like Walpole, was married twice, and each of
his wives brought him a fortune. Both men made
large sums by gambling on the stock exchange—
Bolingbroke in the Mississippi System and Walpole
in the South Sea Bubble.
The antagonism of Walpole and Bolingbroke
gradually took on the colour of an exclusive enmity,
which so firmly engaged the attention of spectators
that the prowess of other distinguished politicians
appeared irrelevant, and the energetic scufflings of the
ruck of office-seekers passed unheeded. By nature
both men were warm and exuberant, appreciative of
the personal qualities of enemies as well as friends,
capable of kindly intercourse even with those who
attacked them fiercely in the battle of politics. But
almost from the first they seem to have regarded one


another with a peculiar distrust. They used different
ways of fighting, and each feared, though he affected
to despise, the weapons of his adversary. In their
various encounters each was on his guard, not only
against his foe, but against his own feelings, lest, in
some imprudent sally of anger or good fellowship,
he might give the other an advantage. Even their
hatred was cold and grudging ; not wayward passion
or raging fury, but concentrated bitterness ; as if it
would have been doing such an enemy too much
honour to hate him heartily.
By 1714 the early winner had lost the race. Was
the contest to be renewed in 1723 ? There should
be no more racing if Walpole could help it; but he
was unable altogether to control events. What he
could do he did. When Bolingbroke came up to the
scratch he found himself loaded with a killing handicap.
We may lament, with our feet on the fender, the loss
of what might have been one of the most stirring
chapters in our parliamentary history; we may also
sympathise with Bolingbroke’s ill-luck and disap-
pointment ; but we need not therefore blame Walpole.
For him the only questions were—had he anything
to gain in public estimation by a magnanimous
gesture ? anything to lose by denial of his rival’s
petition ? The answers were emphatically in the
negative; for the country as a whole regarded Boling-
broke with distrust. After all, statecraft is not a
sport, but an undertaking on which the gravest issues
depend, and no man who takes this business seriously,
no man who is really worthy of the national con-
fidence, will ever give his enemy a fair field, if he has
the power to sow it with pitfalls.
Before their interview ended, Bolingbroke was


forced to acknowledge that Walpole must necessarily
be a better judge of the political situation in England
than one who had lived in exile for eight years. Cir-
cumstances, however, might change, and his own
services might have some share in changing them.
He professed a gratitude he did not feel. He would
regard himself henceforth as bound to the interests of
the brothers-in-law. Whether they should ultimately
choose to acknowledge him or not was their own
affair. He would shortly return to Paris, where his
many connections and his intimate knowledge of the
political currents would give him greater opportunities
for serving his benefactors, than in England where
he was by this time a comparative stranger.
Though Walpole remained cold and incredulous,
Bolingbroke was perfectly sincere, not indeed in his
professions of attachment, but in his undertaking to
work for his new friends. He could see that they
held the keys of power, and that there was no way
to the recovery of his lost position save through
their favour. He was anxious to follow the court
to Hanover, in order that he might express his
gratitude in the highest quarters. Townshend, how-
ever, refused to send him the necessary permission,
and there was no alternative but to return to Paris
and look for some way of proving his value. Fortune
now seemed to turn in Bolingbroke’s favour; for
he had to wait no longer than a few weeks for the
opportunity he desired.


VII. —Concerning the sudden rise of Lord Carteret ,
who won a great reputation in diplomacy, was
made secretary-of -state, and incurred the enmity
of his colleagues, Walpole and Townshend
(1721-1723).
Carteret came of a Cavalier stock distinguished for
its loyalty. The influences of his origin may have
coloured to some extent his views upon the relations
of the sovereign with parliament and the people ; but
at least there was no tincture of Jacobitism in his
composition. Amid the Tory intrigues that flourished
during the later years of Queen Anne, he showed
himself always a staunch supporter of the Protestant
Succession ; from first to last he held firmly to Whig
principles, and his fidelity to the house of Hanover
was as unquestionable as the fidelity of his ancestors
had been to the house of Stewart.
Carteret succeeded as a child to his father’s barony,
and took his seat in the House of Lords in 1711, so
soon as he came of age. Even before the accession of
George the First he had been recognised as a young
nobleman of brilliant promise. It was desirable with-
out delay to attach such men to the King’s interest,
and Carteret accordingly received a court appoint-
ment and other marks of royal favour. At the Whig
schism of 1717 he did not choose to follow the
fortunes of Townshend and Walpole, but continued
to hold office under their successors. Two years
later—being still under thirty years of age —he was
entrusted with a mission of exceptional difficulty and
importance.
After the death of Charles the Twelfth, the


enfeebled and distracted condition of Sweden had
stirred the cupidity of its neighbours. Peter the Great
was pushing his advantage by force of arms, while
neither Denmark nor Prussia was willing to forgo its
claim to a share in the spoil of the ruined kingdom.
The business of Carteret as British plenipotentiary was to
extinguish the hostilities and the hostile intentions that
still smouldered on the shores of the Baltic, delaying
and endangering the general pacification of Europe.
Carteret soon showed himself the possessor of a
most remarkable combination of qualities. He began
his mission auspiciously by winning the confidence of
the Swedes. He checked the Russian advance by a
movement of the British fleet. He forced the hand of
the king of Prussia, and finally overcame the reluctance
of the king of Denmark, largely by the charm and
frankness of his manners. He never ceased to regard
the situation as a whole. He refused to be discouraged
by disappointments which proceeded first from one
quarter and then from another, and threatened time
and again to bring down the whole fabric that his
previous efforts had built up. Firmness and sympathy
were his chief weapons. He judged soundly, and
what he uttered was so clear and forcible that his
meaning could admit of no misunderstanding. As
he never attempted cleverness or cunning, no man
feared to do business with him. Like the best of the
noble army of diplomatists throughout the ages, he
sowed trust and not distrust. Responsibility had no
terrors for him: on more than one occasion he risked
his career by going beyond his instructions. His
good sense, good humour, good manners and good
faith were largely responsible for the fortunate result.
He approached his task with the buoyant confidence




of youth; but he pursued it, through all its various
twists and turnings, with a patience and serenity that
would have done credit to Marlborough himself.
After an absence of eighteen months he achieved
his purpose and returned to England with a European
reputation. The political fortune-tellers of the day
only required to be assured of his industry and ambi-
tion in order to place him first among the rising
generation of statesmen. So long as Carteret engaged
in the political contest he was never found lacking
either in industry or ambition; and yet the prophets
were at fault. They counted on the development of
his powers, and never thought, at so early a stage, of
allowing for their decline. It is noteworthy that in
this, his first employment, his conduct was marked
by three virtues that posterity dissociates from his
name: never again in the whole course of his
career did Carteret pursue his objects upon the same
thoroughness of plan, with the same high seriousness,
or with the same constancy of purpose.
When he arrived in London shortly before
Christmas 1720, he found the nation clamouring for
Walpole’s return to power and for vengeance against
the South Sea directors. In the following March he
was made secretary-of-state for the Southern depart-
ment. For this promotion his thanks were due
neither to Walpole nor to Townshend, but to Sunder-
land, who, though the force of public opinion had
driven him from office, still enjoyed the confidence of
the King.
The circumstances of Carteret’s appointment were
enough in themselves to arouse the suspicions and
hostility of the chief minister. But beyond this the
personal qualities of the new secretary-of-state, his


masterful character, his recent success and present
popularity, marked him down for destruction. Upon
this point Townshend was wholly at one with his
brother-in-law, the First Lord of the Treasury. They
resented any intrusion upon the confidential privacy
of their family party. Their ideal colleague was one
who would sit contentedly in an ante-chamber and
write his dispatches from instructions that were
handed out to him through a half-opened door.
Townshend was not only whole-hearted in his deter-
mination to get rid of Carteret, he was clumsily and
indecently zealous. At this time he had no forebodings
of his own fate.
It seems a strange thing that although the Act of
Settlement was passed in 1701, when George Lewis of
Hanover was still under forty years of age, he should
never have troubled himself to learn the language of
his future subjects. And it seems equally strange
that an ambitious politician like Walpole should never
have troubled himself to learn either French or German.
Walpole’s omission is the more remarkable, because a
knowledge of French was then the prevailing fashion
among Englishmen of rank and education, especially
when they intended to follow a public career. Ignor-
ance of the language of diplomacy would necessarily be
an irksome handicap to any one whose functions were
likely to concern him with foreign affairs. George, as
indeed nearly every monarch and statesman of Europe,
spoke French fluently, and he seems to have assumed
—perhaps not unnaturally—that his English ministers
would possess the same rudimentary accomplishment.
The fact that schoolboy Latin was the only means of
communication between the King and his greatest
minister was not only a hindrance to business, but a


perpetual source of irritation and distrust. For the
First Lord of the Treasury was cut off from easy inter-
course with his sovereign, while his colleagues and
his rivals laboured under no such disadvantage. Even
Townshend became to some extent suspect because
he could talk French. Bolingbroke was still more
suspect because he could talk much better French.
But the accomplished Carteret was an object of the
darkest suspicion, not only to Walpole but to every-
body else, because he could converse fluently with the
King in German.
Carteret’s intellectual attainments were much above
those of his colleagues. He had been born a linguist
and a scholar. It was his delight to improve his
gifts. He had an easy mastery of the chief languages,
ancient and modern. Almost every subject attracted
his eager interest—poetry and romance, history and
philosophy, the principles of the civil law and the
genealogy of kings. He was an enjoying reader, and
his memory was as remarkable as his scholarship and
his understanding. No man was ever less of a pedant,
less checked in his high flow of spirits, less encumbered
in action or speech by reason of the vast extent of his
knowledge. Fie was one of the gayest, frankest and
most likeable of men; a much more agreeable coun-
sellor and companion to king or commoner than his
colleague the secretary -of - state for the Northern
department.
He won the sovereign’s favour partly by his
personal charm; partly, no doubt, because he was
willing to humour, up to a point and on minor issues,
the royal predilection for Hanover (though in this
matter the courtier-like complacency of his rivals was
quite equal to his own) ; partly because none of his
VOL. i x


colleagues could talk German ; but chiefly because the
King considered that he alone among ministers had
been properly educated for his profession. George
himself had been severely schooled from his earliest
youth in the intricacies of European policy, and he
considered a thorough knowledge of this department
to be the very elements of statesmanship. He thought
as an Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, as a con-
tinental, to whom the insular indifference of the
British cabinet was incomprehensible, except as the
result of a neglected upbringing. Neither Townshend
nor Walpole had more than an inkling of these
esoteric concerns. Carteret alone understood them
thoroughly. He alone could talk of foreign affairs
without showing a lamentable ignorance of the
dynastic jealousies and cupidities that were working
in the various courts and chanceries of Europe.
But with all his splendid endowments, Carteret lacked
the most important gift of all. He could make
himself liked, admired and, upon occasions, feared;
but he never succeeded in making himself indis-
pensable. He had none of Walpole’s genius for
digging himself in.
It took three years, however, to get rid of him;
for although he was an unwary tactician, he was a
sturdy fighter, and he had the King’s friendship to
support him. His friends alleged that he fell a victim
to the intrigues of Walpole and Townshend. The
defenders of Walpole and Townshend maintained
that Carteret provoked his own dismissal by his
intrigues against the chief minister and the other
secretary-of-state. And there is certainly a measure of
truth in both these statements.
That form of human activity which is known as


intrigue appears to be a phenomenon inseparable from
the adventure of governing men. The love of power
exercises a much more disturbing influence upon great
characters than the love of gold. There have been
only a few statesmen in the first rank whose records
are entirely clear of meannesses and disloyalties that
persons of a similar standing in the business world
would shrink from with disgust. The phases of intrigue
have varied with the conditions of each period and
with the forms of constitution prevailing in different
states ; but the nature of the importunate instinct
that moves men to disregard the ordinary code of
honour in order that they may rule over their fellow-
men has remained the same from the beginning.
Intrigue centres round the dispenser of power, whoever
he may be, and turns him into an object of adulation,
of complaisance, of propitiatory offerings. King Log
has rarely been heard complaining that his courtiers
were too fulsome; nor has Demos Stork showed
himself any less greedy of praise. If the Monarch has
been too apt to rate the wisdom and worth of ministers
by their alacrity in doing him personal services and by
their generosity in the matter of his civil list, the People
has always looked favourably upon those who were
prodigal of doles and donatives, and alert in transfer-
ring the burden of taxation from the many to the few.
If the chief end of political reform were to do away
insincerity and bad faith in public life, there would be
no eagerness to exchange a monarchy, where flatterers
are only a scandalous handful, for democracy, where
they are a multitude. And if economy in administra-
tion were the chief end of government, there can
be little doubt that the single potentate would occa-
sionally prove a cheaper institution than the many


headed one. For in each case it is necessary to reckon
with the jackals, whose appetite is as keen as the lion’s.
When it happens that the fate of cabinets is in the hands
of a prince, his mistresses and favourites will receive
the bribes and flattery of aspiring statesmen. When
ministers are made and unmade by popular acclamation,
newspaper proprietors, demagogues, mountebanks and
wirepullers of every sort and description will be wooed
with no less assiduity. Whosoever is supposed to have
the ear of the sovereign will discover before long that
his good word possesses a value in meal or malt, in
titles or vails.
In this matter it makes no difference whether
the dispenser of power is our sovereign lord the
King or the sovereign People. In the eighteenth
century, when a minister wished to trip up one of his
colleagues, a very usual method of procedure was to
undermine his rival’s credit with the monarch through
some court lady, whose vanity was touched by the
asking of her aid, whose malice saw the chance of
paying off some private scores, whose self-interest
was tempted with the prospect of a pension on the
Irish Establishment. In the twentieth century an
equally common way is by coming to an understanding
with some newsmonger in a big way of business,
who will thereupon devote the columns of his various
journals to ruining the rival’s reputation in the
eyes of the public. When intrigue is so common
an incident in the game, there is not much sense in
whining, or in harbouring resentment when one is
injured by it. In all ages politicians have reproached
their opponents with being intriguers; but the
practice is one from which the most virtuous of
them has rarely shrunk when the patriotic duty


of self-advancement has called for the sacrifice of his
nicety.
The views which the two secretaries -of - state
took of their positions and functions were identical:
Townshend as well as Carteret aimed at supremacy
in the conduct of foreign affairs, and neither would
submit to be subordinate to the other. By the
constitution they were equals, and, moreover, they
were not Walpole’s ministers but the King’s, to
whom they were directly and separately responsible.
In the matter of backing, Townshend had greatly the
advantage, for he and Walpole were as yet working
together in perfect harmony, and he could therefore
count upon the support of the more numerous and
influential section of the cabinet. Carteret had none
of the instincts of a good party manager. From first
to last he was a poor compacter of parliamentary
cliques and alliances. He had favourers in the ministry;
but they were comparatively few and of inferior
weight; a body of weak-kneed adherents who deserted
him at the pinch. His friends among the court people
were only a second choice. The semi-official appro-
priation of the King’s affections was at this time divided
—though unequally, as their titles imply—between the
duchess of Kendal and the countess of Darlington.
The dullness and greed of these two ladies stood on a
par; but the duchess had the inestimable advantage of a
superior bulk. Walpole with his accustomed shrewd-
ness had secured through Townshend the goodwill
of the fatter favourite, and Carteret had to make the
best he could of her less ample, though younger, rival.
Carteret was by nature precipitate, grandiose and
overbearing; but neither malice nor vanity can be


numbered among his faults. He was generous in his
judgements of other men; but assuredly it needed
not the promptings of envy to show him his
superiority to Townshend in knowledge of foreign
affairs and in quick intelligence. Nor need he be
accused of arrogance if he regarded himself as no less
capable than Walpole of directing the whole policy of
government. Walpole might be a great financier, a
most capable administrator in the home department;
but his acquaintance with the European situation was
even scantier than Townshend’s. To Carteret the
management of the British parliament and people
always seemed to be a municipal matter, subordinate
to the nobler occupation of 4 knocking the heads of
4 the kings of Europe together, and jumbling some-
-4 thing out of it that might be of service to his country/ 1
At the very worst his presumption was no more than
the pardonable over-confidence of youth. It led him,
however, to set too great a value on his own brilliant
qualities and on his recent achievements in high
diplomacy.
Carteret was not only young, but ardent and im-
petuous, which blinded him to the much weightier
ballast of Walpole’s character; his strength of will and
judgement; his constancy of purpose; his unremitting
vigilance; his understanding of the passions of common
men; and all those other unpretentious qualities that
lie, so to speak, under the water-line and out of
sight. Carteret was a much less experienced politician
than the First Lord of the Treasury; but he was
better born and also better educated in all such
matters as can be learned from books and travel.
Having the equipment of an expert in foreign affairs.
1 Carteret to Henry Fox.


he counted too confidently on Walpole’s handicap of
ignorance, and allowed too little for the illuminative
virtue of his rival’s common sense.
Yet it was no unworthy ambition which urged
Carteret to strive for predominance in the partnership
of government; nor did it imply any disloyalty. For
he owed nothing to Walpole; he was not Walpole’s
man; and Walpole was not prime minister, for no such
office then existed. Townshend himself would not
admit that the First Lord of the Treasury was the chief
or even the most important member of the cabinet.
According to the constitution, the King himself was
head of the administration. He was under no obliga-
tion to delegate his supreme functions to any of his
ministers, and, in fact, he had not done so. He was
free from time to time to give the greatest share of
his confidence to whomsoever he pleased, and he
was also free to diminish that share or to increase it
as he pleased. He was committed irrevocably to no
one. The loyalty of his ministers was due to himself
and not to one of their own number.
From the historian’s point of view Walpole’s
indisputable claim to the highest position rests on the
fact that he alone was strong enough to take and hold
it. He was immeasurably Carteret’s superior as party
manager, as head of government, as leader of men.
For all ordinary purposes his sense of reality was far
more alert. He knew that, for the time being, he
could humour and manage Townshend ; but he could
never hope to make Carteret content in playing second
fiddle. The acts of government would lack unity of
purpose and control so long as that young nobleman
continued to hold one of the chief positions. Walpole’s
first interest as a practical politician and as an ambitious


statesman —nay, his first duty as a patriotic minister—
was to secure the smooth working of his administra-
tion. Carteret, unfortunately for himself, was an ob-
stacle, and he must therefore be got rid of by any
means that offered itself.
It is seldom very difficult for a watchful adversary
to trip a man who walks head-in-air. Carteret was by
nature unwary, which is only another way of saying
that politics was not his true vocation. Moreover
in comparison with his rivals he was young and
inexperienced. When he became secretary-of-state
in 1721 he had never previously held cabinet office.
He was not much over thirty. Walpole was fourteen
years his senior; Townshend, sixteen. These men be-
longed to an older generation and knew all the moves
of the game. The methods which the brothers-in-law
used to get rid of their youthful rival were not those
which one gentleman would use against another in a
matter of private business. We cannot regard them
without a certain measure of disgust, and we must
lament the catastrophe which overtook so fine a spirit
as Carteret at the outset of his career; but that Walpole
was justified in his determination to be master in his
own house, and that he would have been guilty of
inexcusable folly had he consented to tolerate a divided
control and the continuing danger of rivalry, are
things beyond the region of reasonable doubt.
Since Carteret had to be got rid of, it was necessary
to find some plausible pretext. This was not an easy
matter; for there were no important differences of
opinion between his colleagues and himself, either as
to the general system of government or with regard to
the particular conduct of his own department. It is
true that he had inherited the liberal ideas of Stanhope


and Sunderland as to the desirability of attaching the
Tory party to the throne, and also that he was prepared
to contemplate the admission of its leaders to office at
no distant date. Those communications with Wyndham
and others which Bolingbroke, at his interview with
Walpole, had chosen to represent as a disloyal intrigue,
may be accounted for more charitably by Carteret’s
belief in the wisdom of conciliation. 1 The divergence
of views on this matter, however, had not as yet
reached the controversial stage. As regards foreign
affairs all three ministers were agreed that Stanhope’s
policy of European peace, based on an alliance with
France and on a good understanding with the regent
Orleans and cardinal Dubois, was the dominating
interest of Britain. From time to time, owing to
Carteret’s imaginative and impulsive disposition, there
were differences over minor matters ; but as the King,
in the end, nearly always favoured the more cautious
proposals of Townshend and Walpole, and as Carteret
invariably accepted the royal decisions with a good
grace, no opportunity for opening a breach could be
discovered in this direction.
Owing to the regrouping of the great powers after
the treaty of Utrecht, Paris, which fell within Carteret’s
department, had once more become the most important
diplomatic centre in Europe. The brothers-in-law
were jealous that so high a responsibility should be
entrusted to their rival. They were shrewd enough,
however, to realise that, if the influence of the Southern
secretary-of-state with the French government could
be undermined, his downfall must inevitably follow.
It might be hard to discredit Carteret at the court of
Versailles without jeopardy to British interests; but
1 Ante, p. 293.


this was a consideration that weighed lightly in the
scale against the personal ambitions of his rivals.
They accordingly engaged, with great forethought and
energy, on the work of pulling him down, and in
this undertaking they were favoured by the habitual
carelessness of their adversary as well as by a freakish
run of luck.
VIII. —How Carteret, having been tripped up over a
treaty of marriage, was forced to resign his
secretaryship-of-state and to accept the vice-
royalty of Ireland (1723-1724).
Shortly after taking office, Carteret, with the
King’s approval, had appointed Sir Luke Schaub to
the embassy at Paris. It was not a very wise nomina-
tion. Sir Luke was by birth a Swiss. His skill as a
linguist had led to his employment by the Foreign
Office. He had been private secretary to Stanhope,
and had served him as a confidential go-between with
Dubois, by whom he came to be very favourably
regarded. He was diligent, supple and obliging. His
private character does not seem to have been univers-
ally respected, but at least there was no question of
his fidelity. In accordance with tradition, the ambas-
sador to France should have been some Englishman
of distinction, rather than a foreigner who, from
obscure beginnings, had risen no higher than to the
mediocrity of a useful henchman. This sudden pro-
motion could only be defended on the grounds that,
after Stanhope’s death, Schaub possessed a more intimate
knowledge than any other man of the relations with
the French minister, and as a demonstration to the


Regent that it was Carteret’s intention to maintain the
continuity of his predecessor’s friendly policy. But it
is not surprising that many persons more disinterested
than Townshend and Walpole should have agreed
with them in regarding these justifications as inade-
quate, and the appointment as one that was injurious
to the national dignity.
While Carteret was occupied in knocking the
heads of kings and emperors together, his career was
suddenly cut short by a ridiculous misadventure. The
trouble arose out of a treaty for the marriage of lady
Darlington’s niece to the son of a French politician.
In order that the bridegroom should become worthy of
so honourable an alliance, lady Darlington considered
it essential that the marquis, his father, should be
raised to a dukedom. King George displayed so
much eagerness in supporting the petition of his
favourite countess and of her sister, Madame de Platen,
that Carteret, much to his annoyance, was obliged
to divert his attention from the congress of Cambrai,
in order to smooth the course for a pair of obscure
lovers. Ambassador Schaub was confident that his
influence with Dubois would soon procure the coveted
title. Dubois spoke fair words and reported the
matter to the Regent. The Regent, like Charles the
Second, was ready to make anybody happy, but
especially such persons as were in a position to make
his own life uncomfortable should they take offence.
King George, if he were thwarted, might raise diffi-
culties about the alliance. On the other hand, if the
French aristocracy took umbrage, the Regent’s lot
might become unbearable. The nobility were agreed
in regarding the proposal to turn the marquis into a
duke as an affront to their order ; but Dubois held out


hopes to Schaub that in time these prejudices would be
overcome. The letters of the ambassador translated
these hopes into certainties. Carteret, who always
stood by his subordinates, was for trusting implicitly
to Schaub. Townshend and Walpole cared nothing
about the dukedom, but they were determined that
their opponent should not increase his credit by obtain-
ing it. Their insinuations to the King, that the British
representative in Paris possessed neither the weight
nor the dexterity required for a negotiation of so much
delicacy and importance, were echoed by the duchess
of Kendal, whose only concern was to mortify lady
Darlington and to punish those persons who had
shown themselves over-zealous in her behalf.
While the issue still hung in the balance Dubois
died, and there was an end of the chief reason for
keeping Schaub at Paris. A good pretext for bringing
him away was shortly found in the dislike with which
he was regarded by the counsellor who now had
greatest influence with the Regent. But Schaub wrote
to London more hopefully than ever, and boasted that
his power was increased by the reshuffling of places.
He must indeed have had a thick skin and a dull
eye if he was really unconscious that the days of
his importance were over. Townshend, who, with
Carteret, had accompanied the court to Hanover, per-
suaded the King that it would be advantageous to send
Horatio Walpole, 1 a younger brother of the First Lord
of the Treasury, on a confidential mission to Paris.
Ostensibly he was to find out how Schaub stood with
the French court and to assist him in obtaining the
dukedom; but the real object of his going was to
1 I use the baptismal name throughout in order to distinguish him from
his nephew, Horace Walpole, man-of-fashion and man-of-letters.


procure sufficient evidence of the ambassador’s un-
fitness to justify his recall. Carteret’s behaviour on this
occasion was amazingly weak. He made no attempt to
parry the thrust at his own heart. His conduct is hardly
to be explained except by his fatal habit of regarding
everything with which he did not wish to be bothered
as a trifle. If he was unable openly to oppose the
demand for an enquiry into the question of Schaub’s
fitness, he might surely have insisted, seeing that France
belonged to his department, on choosing one of his
own friends for investigator. Stanhope, in like circum-
stances, would undoubtedly have gone to Paris himself.
Horatio Walpole arrived in Paris about the middle
of October. His capacity as a diplomatist was already
established. He was a loud, hearty fellow, with a
broad Norfolk accent; not over careful in the matter
of personal cleanliness; offensive at times to the
nostrils, as well as to the ears and eyes, of fastidious
persons; but he was a man of strong horse-sense,
a faithful public servant, and in force of character
far more than a match for the unfortunate am-
bassador to whose aid he had been dispatched.
Schaub’s position speedily became impossible. French
society smiled maliciously. It was diverting to have
two British ambassadors in Paris scandalously at
loggerheads. Horatio Walpole’s reports upon his
adversary’s want of credit, tact and capacity were
clear and vigorous; and they were probably pretty
near the truth. Schaub, moreover, had the mis-
fortune by one of his many blunders to place King
George in an awkward position. But the worse
things went with the poor man, the more he bluffed,
and Carteret was foolish enough to believe his hopeful
dispatches. Even the Regent’s death, which occurred


in December, was unable to shake this confidence.
The dukedom was ultimately refused; and Horatio
Walpole, by the hints he dropped to the French govern-
ment that the matter was not regarded too seriously by
the English court, had something to do with bringing
things to a head. Lady Darlington, the marquis and
the young couple were to some extent consoled by a
marriage settlement of ten thousand pounds which the
King provided out of his privy purse. Schaub was
recalled; Horatio Walpole was appointed in his place,
and in April 1724 Carteret resigned his secretaryship-
of-state.
There had been a good deal of underground work
on both sides, mining and counter-mining, and the
Walpoles had proved themselves to be much the abler
engineers. In spite of its triviality, the episode is
interesting, not only because it led to the fall of Carteret,
but from the part played in it by Bolingbroke. Horatio
Walpole despised and detested him, but was shrewd
enough to dissimulate ; for Bolingbroke’s knowledge
of the political currents in the French court and his
intimacy with several of the leading statesmen were too
valuable to be dispensed with. The important matter
was to make use of his assistance without giving or
promising anything in return; above all, without
allowing him to step an inch beyond the functions of
a mere intelligence agent and go-between. Boling-
broke showed himself zealous in the service of
Townshend and Walpole; but he was ever on the
watch to draw the negotiations into his own hands.
He was in fact much too eager, much too officious,
and thereby threw away, as his custom was, some of
his best cards. His play was every whit as bad as
Carteret’s, but undoubtedly he had a much harder


game. Horatio Walpole, though a coarse-grained
fellow, came off the winner, and as he reported
triumphantly to Townshend, he got everything Boling-
broke had to give at the price of a few courtesies.
Bolingbroke understood, clearly enough, the game
the three brothers-in-law were playing with Carteret,
but he did not discover until too late the game they
were playing with himself. He was not guilty of
any disloyalty in lending his assistance to the pulling
down of Carteret, for he owed no obligations to that
minister; but there is something ignominious in the
spectacle of one who had filled so great a part in public
affairs eagerly overreaching himself in order to do
the dirty work 1 of men who disliked and distrusted
him, and whose settled antagonism no services could
mitigate.
When Carteret was forced to resign his secretary-
ship - of-state he continued in office, at the urgent
request of the King, as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. At
this time George the First had a warmer attachment
to him than to any of his other ministers. As for
Walpole, if he must needs retain his dangerous
rival in the government, it was desirable to find
him a post that was empty of power and that
would withdraw him as far as possible from the royal
presence. The Irish viceroyalty fulfilled these con-
ditions. The King consoled himself with the reflection
that he would still be in touch with his favourite
minister for six months in the year, while Walpole
1 ‘ Dirty work ’ will hardly appear too strong an expression to any one
who has read Archdeacon Coxe’s panegyrical biographies of the two
Walpoles : viz. Memoirs of Sir Robert Walpole, Earl of Orford (cap. 24), and
Memoirs of Horatio, Lord Walpole (caps. 3 and 4). The chapters referred
to are inaccurate in various particulars ; but presumably the Archdeacon
has made the best case he could for Carteret’s rivals.


could take comfort in the thought that, for the other
six, his victim would be safely immured in Dublin.
It is somewhat less easy to understand the motives
that induced Carteret to accept this position of
empty dignity. For in politics it is usually wiser to
go out than go down; better to break defiantly
than meekly to accept a diminution. In these blood-
less contests rebellion pays much better as a rule than
surrender, and in case of failure the consequences of
the one are no worse than those of the other. But the
entreaties of kings are hard to refuse, especially when
they spring, as in this case, from sheer goodwill. It
is also likely that Carteret, who was never a very
accurate calculator, counted upon the vicissitudes of
politics turning before long to his advantage. If his
enemies fell into disfavour, what more likely than that
he would be called back to high office ? And in
order to keep open this road of return it was essential
that he should not forfeit the royal partiality by going
into opposition against the King’s government.
The main reason, however, for Carteret’s acceptance
of the viceroyalty may be found in the peculiarities of
a temperament which, though it brought much happi-
ness to its possessor, was undoubtedly a hindrance to
his ambition. The common rule that anger is the chief
distraction of judgement, did not apply in his case; his
inability to harbour resentment amounted to weakness
and deprived his character of a necessary stiffening.
His good-humour was inexhaustible. He swore he had
been very scurvily treated ; the Walpoles had won the
rubber ; still it was all in the rules of the game; he
laughed and bore no malice. His craving for glory
could never teach him to be shrewd, or circumspect,
or vigilant, or persevering. There were no limits to


his ambition, but it was of the kind that will only-
soar and despises to climb. He disregarded too con-
temptuously all the serviceable under-structures and
scaffoldings of politics. He would occasionally con-
descend to an intrigue when it promised to be exciting;
but the ever-watchful drudgery of party management
revolted his fastidious stomach. And further, his
ambition was of so exclusive a character as to prevent
the attainment of its own objects. For in reality he
was not at all desirous of governing the Three King-
doms, except as a means to directing the affairs of
Europe. If only he had been allowed to make the
foreign policy, it would have mattered little to him
what underling prime minister was entrusted with the
general administration. His aspirations were utterly
impracticable in normal times. Some prodigious inter-
national crisis would have been needed to give him
the position he aimed at. In the Irish backwater he
possibly was happier than he would have been in
higher employment. He was one of those whose
time never hangs heavy on their hands. The work of
his office was light, but he was too eager a scholar to be
idle, too much a lover of his fellow-creatures to become
a solitary brooding upon disappointment.
But however successfully Carteret might discharge
his duties as Lord-Lieutenant, he could hardly hope
to earn much credit thereby. For in those, as in later
days, the chief concern of Englishmen and Scotsmen
with regard to Ireland was that they might hear as
little of it as possible. In Dublin a reputation might
easily be lost, but could never be improved. A viceroy
who failed to keep the country quiet was damned
outright; while one who succeeded in the task reaped
his reward in being forgotten.
VOL. i y


Carteret was one of the latter sort. When he
landed in Dublin he found his old friend Swift busily
engaged in lashing the Irish nation to fury over their
grievances, real and imaginary, in the matter of
‘ Wood’s Halfpence.’ After the British government
had sufficiently protested that it would never yield an
inch to clamour, the trouble was at last compounded
in the usual way —by conceding the full demands of
an irrational and fantastic agitation. 1
Ireland was a strange place of exile for one whose
main concern had hitherto been the intrigues and ambi-
tions of European princes. Nothing, however, could
quench the eternal freshness of Carteret’s interest: if
he were cut off from the greater object, he would
always turn eagerly to the less. His natural industry
impelled him to work at anything he undertook. The
great qualities that marked his Swedish negotiation
had not altogether deserted him. He never sought
to give offence, but never shrank from a personal
encounter, even with the formidable dean of St.
Patrick’s. His wit and humour were of that sympathetic
kind that wins, not only the immediate contest, but
the hearts of opponents. His administration was an
unusual experience for Ireland, but the result was an
undoubted success. ‘ What the vengeance brought
you among us ? ’ wrote the ironic but friendly Swift.
1 The Irish had genuine cause for complaint in the matter of ‘ Wood’s
Halfpence ’ ; but this has sometimes been forgotten owing to the non-
sensical arguments and delirious exaggeration of the Draper's Letters.
Swift’s genius has embalmed so much absurdity in his advocacy that the
court of public opinion hardly thinks it necessary to call on the opposing
counsel to reply. Swift wrote as a demagogue—at first in a spirit of pure
mischief, with his tongue in his cheek ; afterwards more seriously and
credulously, as he gradually worked himself, as well as his readers, into a
passion. A short and clear account of the facts of the case will be found in
the Oxford Political History, vol. ix. p. 313 (I. S. Leadam).


‘ Get you back I Get you back ! Pray God send us
our boobies again ! *
IX. —How Bolingbroke, having failed to recover his
peerage rights, determined to engage in opposition
(1725).
Bolingbroke left no time for the memory of his
services to fade. His wife had occasion to visit
London shordy after Carteret’s resignation on a
matter of private business. A portion of her fortune
had been entrusted some years earlier to an English
banker, who now refused to give it up, on the ground
that she was the wife of an attainted person. But
another and a more important object of lady Boling-
broke’s journey was to procure the reversal of her
husband’s attainder as a reward for his recent exertions.
The envoy performed her task with tact and
energy. The good offices of the duchess of Kendal
were secured, as before, by flattery and a bribe, which
amounted on this occasion to ten thousand guineas.
Townshend, like an honest gentleman, made short
work of the banker’s quibbles, nor did the objections
to granting the latter part of the petition seem at first
to strike him as insurmountable. The King, whose
early impressions of lady Bolingbroke were favourable,
spoke graciously. The royal words were loose and
vague, but something not unlike a promise was given
—something that a less sanguine man than Boling-
broke might easily have taken to be one—that in the
next session of parliament a bill would be brought in
to repeal the act of attainder.
So soon as Walpole learned of these proceedings,
he was up in arms. Malice had little part in his


composition, but he was a realist in the art of politics.
He would never consent to unbind a man who might
use his freedom in becoming a rival. Walpole was a
shrewd judge of character, and he knew Bolingbroke
for his most dangerous enemy. Never should that
enemy be allowed to clamber into safety out of those
rough waters where he was struggling for his political
life ; rather, were it possible, the swimmer should be
held under the current till he drowned. This un-
alterable resolution sprang, not from vindictiveness,
but from a lively instinct of self-preservation.
The result was a crisis that looked at one time
as if it might break the government. Walpole re-
fused to pilot a repealing bill through the House of
Commons. Nay, he would oppose any such measure
with all his power. On the other hand, the King
considered that his own honour was engaged. The
duchess, who was by no means unwilling that Walpole
should realise her power, stood firmly to her under-
taking. Townshend, being uncommitted, sided with
his brother-in-law as a matter of policy, though he was
unable to see that the world would necessarily come to
an end were Bolingbroke reinstated in his full rights,
dignities and possessions. Clemency had been the usual
way of dealing with penitent and pardoned rebels ever
since the days of the Tudors. But Walpole persisted
in his refusal. The duchess openly threatened him
with ‘ dismission * and the King seemed to hint at it.
The First Lord of the Treasury, however, was more
than a match for them all. He had no idea either of
giving way or of being got out of the way. He
appeared to come into a more tractable mood. He
professed that his duty would certainly lead him to
obey the King’s wishes, if by doing so he saw any


prospect of winning over a majority of the House of
Commons. But he had not the faintest hope that the
Whig party could ever be brought to grant a full
restitution. If such a proposal were laid before
parliament the King’s government would be over-
whelmed. It would be the height of folly to endanger
the dynasty, after the fashion of James the Second, by
stirring up anger and discontent among its only warm
supporters. Surely a compromise was possible. Under
skilful management the Whig majority might be
brought to agree that Bolingbroke’s property should
be restored, that he should inherit his patrimony and
acquire land in England like any other citizen; but
they would insist that a subject who had broken his
oath of allegiance should not be readmitted to the
House of Lords. Townshend welcomed this solution
of the difficulty, and gradually the King allowed him-
self to be convinced. The duchess was displeased;
but she no doubt judged the matter by her own stand-
ards, and concluded that Bolingbroke, like a sensible
man, would attach less importance to the shadow
of political power than to the substance of his
landed estate. A bill on these lines was accordingly
brought in by the government in the following
year. 1 In spite of a few acrimonious expressions
it was carried without any difficulty. There is no
reason to suppose that a complete repeal of the act
of attainder would have provoked the opposition
that Walpole affected to dread; for it is rarely
possible to stir Englishmen to fury against a proposal
to commute a political sentence. In this matter it
was not the opinion of parliament, but the firmness
of the minister, that prevailed.
1 1725-


Even after this failure Bolingbroke had no thought
of giving up the struggle, but he abandoned all hope
of succeeding by direct petition. He was in his forty-
eighth year, a vigorous, a disappointed, but not a
broken man. He might possibly win by force what
he had been unable to reach by peaceful persuasion
and offers of alliance. But his position was one of
peculiar difficulty. He had really no weapon but his
wits. Parliament and the Court were the only spheres
in which, at that time, direct political pressure could be
exerted : he was entirely excluded from the first, and
also, for all practical purposes, from the second. The
power of the press was almost negligible, and pam-
phlets, though these afforded considerable diversion to
the educated classes, were not comparable in influence
to our modern newspapers. A politician who en-
gaged in agitation and spoke of his wrongs to public
meetings would have been damned by general consent
as a demagogue.
A further obstacle lay in the fact that the harsh-
ness with which Bolingbroke had been treated pro-
voked no outcry in any quarter. None of the
parliamentarians could expect any personal or party
advantage in denouncing his martyrdom. He was
detested by the Whigs, because he had joined the
Pretender, and by the Jacobites, because he had been
cast off from his service. He was suspect even
among the Tories, for they were inclined to impute
to his errors of judgement the chief blame for their
discredit under the new dynasty. He played a lone
hand; his grievance was his own affair; he had the
sympathy of a few intimate friends ; but the country
and the general mass of politicians were indifferent to
his fate. It was clear that he had lost all his former


prestige and popularity, and Walpole judged wisely
that his enemy could never hope to regain either,
so long as he was condemned to a private station.
Bolingbroke was well aware of the difficulties
of his situation, but he determined none the less
to attempt the overthrow of Walpole’s govern-
ment. His project was to combine the Tories and
discontented Whigs into a solid and harmonious
opposition, the strings of which he would pull from
outside the walls of parliament. But unfortunately
for him, the success of this plan depended less on
fertility in phrases and ideas, than on that personal
leadership which his attainder prevented him from
undertaking. In political warfare we are still in the
days of the paladins. From the earliest beginnings
of our parliamentary system no man has ever yet
succeeded in compacting a great party who was not
himself one of the stoutest fighters in the battle. The
presence and prowess of the captain must be visible,
day in, day out, to all his followers. One who chooses
to remain in an unseen position behind the fighting
line, or who, like Bolingbroke, is kept out of it by the
machinations of his enemies, will never succeed. The
pulling of wires, the manipulation of the press, the
writing of pamphlets, the exercise of private persua-
sion are all of them means, more or less essential, to
the making of a party ; but they will not suffice unless
there is something visible to make it round—something
in the nature of a hero, who forces public attention
to follow his actions, whose bearing touches the
imagination, whose sayings are heard and for a time
remembered.
Had Bolingbroke recovered his political privileges,
and had he been restored to his place in the House of


Lords, it does not seem improbable that his industry
and the excellence of his fighting would gradually have
done away the cloud of distrust that had risen from
the memory of his futile plottings, and from the
circumstances of his fall, flight and rebellion. And
the effect of this upon British politics might well have
been something more important and permanent than
his own rehabilitation. The struggle between him
and Walpole would have made the central spectacle
of parliament, and out of this antagonism there might
possibly have grown two clearly defined and firmly
compacted parties.
The most usual origin of parties is some vehement
difference in practical aims. Champions thereupon
stand forth on either side, and, before long, the
orators and philosophers announce their discovery of
underlying principles. It is true that during Walpole’s
administration, and for long after it was ended,
no such vehement difference existed. Disagreements
about foreign and domestic policy were sharp enough
at times, but they were shams. For although the
opposition leaders talked in vague and violent words,
they aimed at office for the sake of office, not in order
that they might reverse a policy or work a revolu-
tion. Even the immemorial dispute between those
who hoped to make things better by change, and those
others who believed that any change would only
make things worse, had become a languid debate.
For in that epoch no one really wanted change of
any sort, except a few Tories who would have liked,
for party reasons, to get rid of the Septennial Act,
and some half-hearted Jacobites who were favourable
in theory to a Stewart restoration. Nevertheless,
even in times of comparative indifference, there is


always the chance, or the danger, that parties will
arise from no substantial cause, but merely out of the
clash of human temperaments. If there are leaders
to encourage this conflict, men of opposing habits of
thought will attach themselves to the one dr to the
other, like crystals round a filament. The opposition
between Walpole and Bolingbroke was due to some-
thing more potent than rivalry and private animosity.
They viewed the wide plain of public affairs from
summits far apart; the lights and shadows fell
differently across their two prospects; they could
never have agreed as to the true proportions of any
event; and the opposition of their vigorous minds
corresponded with a permanent division in human
nature. Walpole wanted to get on quietly with his
work; Bolingbroke, to cut a great figure in the world.
The country’s prosperity was Walpole’s constant aim ;
while for Bolingbroke, who found his chief delight
in the drama of politics, grandeur was the prime
consideration.
During the struggle that ensued and continued
for ten years, Bolingbroke was freely charged with
many misdeeds; among them with ingratitude and
treachery to Walpole. There is no substance in
this accusation. It was not to Walpole that Boling-
broke owed his pardon. His proposals for an alliance
had been rejected. His services, nevertheless, had
been used in Paris, but without any intention of paying
for them. The partial repeal of his attainder —a
meagre reward —had been opposed by Walpole so long
as he dared. On the whole, Walpole had acted wisely,
but with extreme harshness. He was the sole obstacle
to Bolingbroke’s return to public life. Considerations
of gratitude and fidelity could not arise in such a case.


Had Bolingbroke succeeded in his attempt to
re-enter parliament the course of British history
would probably have been changed, not merely by the
division of politicians into two parties, but also by
a breach of continuity in Walpole’s administration.
One of the greatest benefits the country derived
from his long tenure of power came from the mere
length of it. As years passed, people came to regard
his government as a permanent institution. Feeling
secure, they engaged in enterprises that needed time
to bring them to fruition. The benefit of long govern-
ments, even when they are much less competent than
Walpole’s was, is often overlooked. It has been in
such periods, and not in a succession of quick changes
and dramatic achievements, that national prosperity
has made the greatest strides. Had Bolingbroke been
allowed to come again into public life, it seems likely
that his gifts of leadership, his eloquence, his skill in
court intrigue must have caused an interruption. His
rival administration might not have lasted many
months, but it would have unsettled people’s minds;
and the fear of it must have deflected Walpole’s
policy of peaceful development, owing to the need
of answering the taunts, and boasts, and promises of
his opponents.
X.— Concerning the Pelham connection (1724).
Carteret was succeeded as secretary-of-state by the
duke of Newcastle, whose brother, Henry Pelham,
obtained in the same year 1 the appointment of
secretary-at-war. Pelham was a new recruit, but
Newcastle had held office ever since the Whig schism.
1 172 4-


Also in the same year Philip Yorke (afterwards earl
of Hardwicke) was promoted to be attorney-general.
His rise had been very rapid. He had entered parlia-
ment in 1719 for one of Newcastle’s pocket-boroughs.
A twelvemonth later he became solicitor-general. He
remained a staunch adherent of the Pelhams from
first to last, enjoyed the confidence of both brothers,
acted as their counsellor-in-chief, and composed the
frequent differences that arose between them. At
this date Yorke was only thirty-four, Newcastle
thirty-one and Pelham twenty-nine.
In the eyes of Walpole and Townshend, Newcastle
was well fitted to hold the second secretaryship-of-
state by reason of his subservience, the unimportance
of his mind, and an extensive parliamentary interest,
which was due partly to the use he made of his
vast wealth, partly to other causes. After the Whig
schism, when he deserted Walpole and Townshend,
Sunderland made him Lord Chamberlain; but three
years later, his old friends being once more in office,
he rallied to their side and was allowed to retain his
post. They judged him with sufficient accuracy to
be a man who could be trusted to do his best for the
winning side.
Nature had made Newcastle for a butt. He was
always in a hurry and a flurry, talked an incredible deal
of nonsense, and seemed ignorant of the very alphabet
of statesmanship. Self-importance was the propensity
which drew him into politics; but he started with
a heavy handicap, for he feared responsibility and
shrank from taking decisions. The most preposter-
ous rumour or the emptiest threat would throw him
into a panic. He was startled by a sudden noise and


terrified if he caught cold in his head. Although
upon occasions he could sway the House of Lords to
his opinion, he was one of the most incoherent
speakers in that assembly. People with sharp tongues,
like young Horace Walpole, were never tired of
turning him into ridicule. Chesterfield says cautiously
that Newcastle’s abilities were above the popular
estimate of them. This is not extravagant praise,
and what follows is a more damning indictment in a
couple of pages than all the gibes that are contained
in Horace Walpole’s memoirs and correspondence.
But though the Duke might be a laughing-stock for
the wits and for some of his own colleagues, his
political importance was greater, and remained greater
for a longer period, than that of any other man who
served under Sir Robert Walpole. Many years later,
when Newcastle was the most abused and unpopular
character in England, when he was driven from office
and deprived for the time being of his great weapon
of patronage, he still contrived notwithstanding to keep
the allegiance of his followers. At the end of six
months he pulled the government down and re-
entered public life on his own modest terms : —he was
to be nominal head of the administration and to dis-
tribute all the patronage, but not to interfere in policy.
A career of this sort may lack dignity and greatness,
but a completely satisfying explanation of it is not to
be found in the mere fuss and profusion of a vain,
ignorant and timid fool.
The common cry against Newcastle’s incapacity
for the higher departments of statecraft ignores the
fact that he was remarkably well informed. Among
the qualifications most important in a foreign minister
is a gift for collecting together a vast variety of in


telligence—personal and political, trifling and grave—
with regard to the courts and chanceries of Europe.
Newcastle could hardly have been set on a pursuit
more congenial to his disposition. From the first he
engaged in it with infinite gusto ; and by degrees
—being marvellously industrious and insatiably in-
quisitive—he stored his memory with a strange jumble
of valuables, oddities and trumpery, in somewhat the
same way as a magpie carries off to its nest glittering
trinkets, beads, scissors and broken glass. For with
Newcastle, as with the magpie, ownership was an end
in itself. He enjoyed and was content with the feeling
that he possessed more information than any one else ;
but being almost incapable of action and decision in
great affairs, he rarely turned his knowledge to account.
Moreover, he guarded his store so jealously that it
was difficult for even the most masterful colleague to
enter and ransack it.
Newcastle’s surest title to fame is his proficiency
in an art that statesmen of the old school, like
Chesterfield, still affected to regard with suspicion
and contempt. For Newcastle was the forerunner
of the modern political ‘ boss.’ He was a great
primitive, unapproachable, in the simplicity and direct-
ness of his works, by the sophisticated smoothness
of later academicians. Like most innovators on
the grand scale he was free from self-consciousness.
He never dreamed that he was one of the first
masters of an art which before long would be
universally accepted as a condition of representative
government. He merely knew what he wanted; and he
invented and perfected the means by which he might
obtain it. His peculiar province was the manage-
ment of elections and the subsequent management


of those who had been elected. Ideas were nothing
to him; policy very little; efficiency of adminis-
tration never engaged his ambition. His simple
aim was to get as many men as possible returned
to parliament who would vote according to his
directions. He owned many pocket-boroughs, and
by blandishment and a free-handed expenditure he
gradually acquired a wide influence in other con-
stituencies. When his nominees were brought into
parliament he made it his constant business to keep
them firmly attached to their patron. They thronged
his levees. For men of all degrees and on every
business he had the same effusive professions; the
same confidential pressures of the hand; the same
negligences and affronts; the same sops and compli-
ments, scoldings and reproaches ; the same smiles,
bows, hugs, kisses and tears. His manners bore the
hall-mark of indignity. He took a childish delight
in being asked for favours, and had an amiable passion
for making his petitioners happy. He gave offices of
profit freely enough when he had any to give; and
when his stock of preferments ran short he gave
promises instead ; and this also pleased people, at any
rate at the beginning. He took endless trouble in
such matters, and cared not what trouble he caused to
others. Unlike any ordinary man he was delighted
to go a-begging for his clients to the First Lord of
the Treasury or to other colleagues who had offices
and honours in their gift. When his importunity
failed, as it often did, he would sometimes dip into
his own purse rather than his hangers-on should go
empty away. 1 He would serve any one who had
1 Chesterfield estimates that Newcastle left politics £400,000 poorer than
he was when he started on his career.


gained his goodwill, and the way to his goodwill was
to become an adherent of the Pelham connection.
He rejoiced in being toadied and in being thanked.
What he coveted was not the power to govern, but
the power to confer favours. But he gained power by
conferring favours, and he used his power to confer
more favours, and the more favours he conferred
the more power he got. It was an ever-widening
circle of modest ambition. All he really aimed at for
himself was to be regarded as a personage of the
highest consequence, one who must be consulted and
humoured upon all occasions ; but, as he had no clear
views on policy and no courage in great affairs, he was
always under the influence of some abler and bolder
spirit than his own.
He was not a man of quick intelligence or sym-
pathy. With the best intentions in the world he was
always offending people. When this occurred he
hastened to smear their wounds with the balm of
fulsomeness; and fulsomeness from a duke is a
sovereign remedy for many of the minor disappoint-
ments of life. Even people who inclined to regard
him as a buffoon were unable to forget his rank,
his riches, the benefices in his gift, the boroughs
he carried in his pocket, the posts his influence
might procure. So he went blundering on his way,
treading on the toes of others and bruising his own
shins. But he always went the same way, and at the
end of each year he could congratulate himself that
he had won over considerably more people than he
had offended.
There is no mystery about Newcastle’s character.
He belongs to a type by no means uncommon in
municipal affairs—valueless in counsel, but busy, good


humoured, insensible to rebuffs, impossible to put
down for longer than an afternoon. And like his
humbler prototypes who, after spending half their
lives in being laughed at and humiliated, reach at last
the summit of their ambitions in becoming mayors and
provosts, so Newcastle in the end had his reward in
being the nominal head of the most glorious adminis-
tration in British history.
His behaviour appeared so absurd, his ambition
so trifling and so guileless—his interferences in the
higher departments of politics were so infrequent in
early days, and so inconsequent—he was so easily
cowed and brought to heel by a peremptory word of
command—that Walpole seems to have regarded him,
almost to the end, in the light of a well-trained spaniel
who might always be trusted to bring in the game and
lay it at his master’s feet. It is a remarkable illustra-
tion of the vanity of human precautions that the chief
minister, ever watchful to prevent the rising up of
rivals, should have seen with complacency the growth
of Newcastle’s power. Walpole seems to have re-
garded it as a process which must always turn to his
own advantage and which could never be used to do
him hurt. But none of those men, whom he was so
well satisfied to be rid of during his twenty-two years
of office, had it in them to do him the same fatal
injury that was wrought by this apparently scattered-
brained nobleman. At the eleventh hour Walpole
discovered to his chagrin that Newcastle had grown
too powerful to be suppressed, and that the fate of
the administration lay in his trembling hands. It is
difficult to say at what particular time the Duke became
master of the situation; but it was somewhere
between the general elections of 1734 and 1741. Not


being a self-conscious man, he was probably slow to
recognise the extent of his own power; and being a
timid man, he shrank from putting it forth until he
could rely upon a backing from the highest quarters.
To anticipate: Newcastle’s reign began in 1743,
shordy after Walpole’s ended, and it lasted for a similar
period —twenty years. But the kinds of power which
these two men wielded are incomparable. Walpole
was a great minister-of-state, and he used his faculties
in governing the country. Newcastle was only a
great wire-puller, who could keep an administration
on its legs, or upset it, at his pleasure; a sedulous
collector of information which he was unable to turn
to any useful account. He was not unlike a king
who has raised and equipped a large army, but who
is himself entirely lacking in military skill. Newcastle
could do nothing with his formidable connection
unless he could find some person qualified to
command it. For eleven years 1 the administration
jogged along without serious misadventure under his
brother, who was sound, but lacking in genius.
After Henry Pelham’s death the duke determined to
be his own generalissimo. In a few months his
incompetence overwhelmed him in disasters. He
then called Henry Fox to his aid; but before long
this mercenary leader threw up his command. In a
lucky hour Pitt forced himself into the vacancy, with
results that carried Newcastle beyond his wildest
hopes.
In 1724, when Newcastle first became secretary-of-
state, his character was not fully developed. He passed
with the world at large for a well-meaning man
of excessive affability; and he had also earned a
VOL. I
z
1 1743-1754-


considerable reputation for industry, because he was
observed to be always in a bustle. When he broke his
promises, it was not usual, at this period of his career,
to charge him with perfidy, but rather to seek excuses
for him in the superabundance of his careless good-
nature.
If Newcastle was looked on as something of a
zany, Henry Pelham did not seem at all likely to
set the Thames on fire. They were in all respects
as unlike a pair of brothers as ever owned the
same parentage. The duke had one of those hand-
some, sheep-like countenances that appear so frequently
in eighteenth - century portraits, and may possibly
have inspired the ornamentation of the mantelpieces
that the Adam family set up in the houses of the
nobility. Pelham on the other hand was square-
faced and dark. His portrait discovers a shadowy
resemblance to Walpole ; the unconscious effort, as it
might be, of a solemn and admiring pupil to model
himself upon a master with whom he had hardly a
quality in common. It is Walpole with nothing of his
sanguine temperament, self-confidence and laughter.
Pelham was solid, stolid and courteous, by no means
wanting in self-control, nor altogether without a
quiet sense of humour under his grave and formal
bearing. 1 He was a capable administrator, who
understood his duties and performed them punctually
and, upon the whole, honourably. There was indeed
one quality which the brothers shared—timidity ; but
even here we find a contrast; for the timidity of
1 Bubb Dodington’s accounts of his various begging expeditions to
Pelham are unconscious testimonies. {The Diary o f the late George Bubb
Dodington, Baron of Melcombe Regis.)


Pelham sprang from over-caution, while that of New-
castle was the effect of panic.
It was to be expected that two such opposite
characters, even had they not been galled by the
fraternal tie, must sometimes get to loggerheads.
On these occasions, when the Pelhams were not on
speaking terms, the channel of their intercommunica-
tions and the composer of their disagreements was
Philip Yorke, who in 1737 became Lord Chancellor
Hardwicke.
As a judge, and as a reformer of the means to
justice, there is no greater name than Hardwicke’s in
the noble history of English jurisprudence ; but in the
department of politics he was more of a henchman
than a statesman. 1 In point of courage he stood
little, if anything, above his patrons ; but in force of
reasoning, and in his surpassing gift of orderly and
lucid statement, no contemporary could match him.
He spoke, not in the high dramatic fashion, not with
vehement gestures and in tones of thunder, but simply
and without exaggeration. He did not love the
brawling side of politics ; indeed he shrank from it
too anxiously ever to have won a foremost place
among parliamentary leaders. He was a man of
peace and persuasiveness. There was one provoca-
tion, however, which had power to transfigure him
into a fighter. If the traditions of English justice
were threatened with pollution, if impious hands
were laid upon his Ark of the Covenant that held
1 ‘ Lord Hardwicke was, perhaps, the greatest magistrate that this country
ever held ’ . . . but he ‘ valued himself more upon being a great Minister
of State, which he certainly was not, than upon being a great magistrate,
which he certainly was.’ Chesterfield’s Character of Hardwicke.
This was written after Hardwicke’s death.


the laws of England, he went forth to battle, even as
Gideon. 1
Up to 1724 Yorke’s career had been a miracle of
speed and smoothness. He was one of those who
seem never to jolt upon the roughnesses of the way.
His prosperity knew no check from the date of his
call to the Bar until he became Lord Chancellor at
the early age of forty-seven. He belongs to a notable
though uncommon type of English lawyer; for he
owed the swiftness of his rising almost as much to the
blandness of his manners as to his abilities and applica-
tion. He was the polite and industrious apprentice of
the allegory in whom the promises of the moralist
were fulfilled. With empty pockets and no influence
behind him, he found the world none the less—even
at his first entry into it—well aired for his reception,
and ready to bid him welcome. The judges were
propitiated by his good looks, his modest bearing, his
habitual respect and his perspicuous exposition. As
he rose, he showed a very laudable consideration for
his inferiors, and in particular for solicitors. He would
have kept friends with all mankind had it been possible.
When he gave offence, it was occasionally due to the
infinite pains he took to avoid it. To some of those
hard-bitten old practitioners whom he encountered
in the courts, his suavity was intolerable—an aggrava-
tion of his offence of too early and too easy success.
They grew as weary of listening to the compliments
that flowed upon him from the Bench as were the
ancients of being reminded of the justice of Aristides.
1 It was Hardwicke who played the leading part in defeating the Bill
for subornation of false witness against Walpole. He was not equally con-
siderate of the traditions of Scots justice, as was shown by the part he took in
the Porteous debates.


But young Mr. Yorke was not a penny the worse when
they flung down their papers in dudgeon and flounced
out of court.
For all his excellences, Philip Yorke was not the
man for leading a forlorn hope at the bar or in the
field of politics. He had always too much regard for
the odds. There was no element of the adventurer
or the Quixote in his composition. He was a good
friend, but kept even his friendship within bounds ;
and his behaviour at the impeachment of his earliest
patron, Lord Macclesfield, earns our respect more for
its correctitude than for its chivalry. The reproach
against him of avarice appears ill-founded. Noble-
men of his own day, who had inherited great fortunes,
were apt to fling about , this charge as freely as they
flung about their cash. They found, or professed to
find, a difference —invisible to ourselves —between that
quality in their own ancestors, which they revered
as prudence, and the good husbandry of their con-
temporary, which they sneered at as parsimony. A
professional man, who starts from nothing and is
afterwards saddled with a family and an earldom,
must needs be of a saving disposition if he would
have his grandeur safely buttressed. But Yorke was
no sleepless hoarder like Pulteney, nor ever mis-
used his position to increase his fortune. In an
age when corruption was the commonest accusation
against public men, he escaped all suspicion. In a
dissolute age, his private character passed without
blame. Bolingbroke and Stanhope were professed
rakes ; Chesterfield, a gallant upon set principles;
Walpole, a loose-liver; Pulteney and Hervey, in-
curable philanderers; Henry Pelham, a gambler;
Newcastle, a toper. Among people of his own time


Hardwicke is remarkable for his temperance in all
things, and also because, like the elder Pitt, he possessed
the fireside affections, and found his chief happiness in
the bosom of his own family.
XI.—How at the beginning of Walpole's administra-
tion the Opposition was composed of three
independent parties (1721-1725).
The official opposition by which Walpole was con-
fronted at the outset 1 consisted of a small and undis-
tinguished band of Jacobites under the leadership of
his old ally Shippen, and of the Tories, who were
shepherded by Wyndham.
Shippen was a sincere and unappeasable adherent
of the Stewarts. Though his abilities were consider-
able, his consistency and his unswerving devotion to
a cause that had an even lower vitality in Parlia-
ment than in the country prevented him from ever
becoming a formidable opponent. Moreover he did
not mean business. He knew that the triumph of
Jacobitism could never be brought about by con-
stitutional means ; and he had no intention of using
any others. His sincerity consisted in flaunting a
cockade which he knew to be unpopular. There is
a kind of man who finds a lifelong satisfaction in
shocking public opinion by professing on all occasions
some impossible loyalty. Such a one was Shippen,
and he was able to indulge his whim without the
smallest risk to his neck, because no one in authority
ever thought of taking his bravado seriously. His
tirades, indeed, were exceedingly useful to Walpole,
1 1721.


who treated him as kings in days of old used their
jesters, teasing him and petting him by turns. Again
and again Walpole would point the same moral:
4 There is no vice in honest Shippen ; but hear what
‘he says ! If the Tory party which sits silent would
4 speak its true mind, it would utter the same words.
4 There is little danger in the frank and courageous
4 foe; but beware of those men who profess loyalty to
4 King George, while treachery lurks in their hearts/
4 Honest’ Shippen was not altogether deaf to Walpole’s
insidious compliments, and the two were in complete
agreement that the Tory party should be flouted and
abused at every opportunity.
Wyndham was a man of first-rate parliamentary
ability. 1 Like Bolingbroke, his constant friend, coun-
sellor and correspondent, he had ceased to hanker
after a restoration and was genuinely anxious for
a reconciliation with the Hanoverian dynasty. He
fought, however, under two grave disadvantages.
The first of these was his admiration for Boling-
broke, which led him to regard himself as only a vice-
gerent. No parliamentary leader has much chance of
success who is for ever considering the opinion of an
absentee. We cannot doubt that Bolingbroke, had
he been in the House of Commons, or even in the
Lords, would have made a mightier leader of Opposi-
tion than Wyndham; but we may feel an equal
certainty that Wyndham would have played a bolder
and prompter game than he did if he had been free to
follow his own bent and had not been overshadowed
by a more powerful character. For in politics, as in
other walks of life, no two men will ever see their
opportunities in precisely the same light. If the man
1 William Wyndham (1687-1740). He was nine years junior to Bolingbroke.


who actually leads regards himself as bound to defer
at every turn to the supposed opinion of an outside
counsellor, the conduct of affairs must often be mis-
handled. And even if the actual leader be the less
able man of the two, he will do better by playing his
own game than he can ever hope to do by endeavour-
ing to play the game of the other. For what the
greater character might have ventured upon with
success may be wholly unsuited to the temperament
of the lesser ; and, moreover, the ideas of the absentee
can never be so thoroughly explained beforehand to
the deputy that he will be certain of finding himself
fully prepared for every emergency. In nearly every
respect such a relation between two persons will
prove hampering, and the more loyal the vicegerent
the heavier will be his handicap.
Wyndham’s second disadvantage was the ignorance
and the inveterate prejudices of the bulk of the party
that called him its leader. On these defects Walpole
played with consummate skill; for he understood far
better than any of his contemporaries the nature and
point of view of the country gentlemen. The squires
of those days, though in many cases of ancient
descent, were no part of the aristocracy. They were
solid, well-to-do, middle-class people who derived
their incomes from agricultural land. Very few of
them were in a big way of business, and they recog-
nised no more identity of interest with the great
landowning noblemen than is felt by small shop-
keepers in our own day with regard to the large
department stores. They were separated by a wide
gulf of jealousy, fashion and education from those
overweening rivals. As great a distance divided them,
on the one hand, from the enterprising traders and


merchants who congregated in the towns, and on
the other from the numerous class of clever adven-
turers who looked to make a living out of politics.
These three orders of men—noblemen, industrialists
and adventurers were highly obnoxious to the
unlettered country gentlemen of homelier breeding
and less nimble wits. The tradesmen they affected to
despise; they distrusted the politicians ; and they
hated the ‘ lords ’ with a most cordial detestation.
Like Squire Western, they were ill-disposed to the
Hanoverians very largely because the crown was
believed to be in league with the nobles. The Tories
were not received at court. The smart people were
nearly all of them Whigs. The House of Lords had
become a Whig preserve, where a Tory speech caused
nearly as much scandal as the report of a poacher’s
gun. The Tories were the uneducated, the slow-
witted, the inarticulate, the unfashionable party.
They had, notwithstanding, a very shrewd notion of
their own class interests, and they had also a vague,
but by no means unsound, sense of the national
advantage. But they had no spokesman. Wyndham,
the fine gentleman, the aristocrat, the man of culture,
was not really one of themselves. Bolingbroke was a
dark enigma, almost as much an object of suspicion
as the Whigs. By an odd stroke of irony the only
man who thoroughly understood them, and who could
state their point of view in their own plain language,
was the head of the government they abhorred. And
Walpole made the most of his advantage. He would
soothe them with a few quiet words, just when
their own leaders most desired to keep them at the
boiling-point; or he would goad them into a mad-
bull fit of blind rage, just when it was most needful


that they should comport themselves like reasonable
human beings. But the deadliest of all his devices was
to fill the official Opposition of Jacobites and Tories
with suspicions against the unofficial and fluctuating
Opposition of discontented Whigs.
Lord Waldegrave, who was an onlooker, has de-
scribed the Whig party, after the accession of the house
of Hanover, as an alliance of different clans, fighting
in the same cause, professing the same principles, but
influenced and guided by their different chieftains. 1 At
this period, however, they had no cause, for they had
won it; their principles, finding no serious challenger,
were in abeyance; and though they followed the
same pursuit (being all intent on office), it was one
that served rather to divide than to unite them.
For as no administration was sufficiently capacious
to provide for every chieftain an office that would
satisfy his self-importance, and for all his henchmen
posts that would enable them to live in comfort at
the public charge, it followed that the benches opposite
to ministers were never likely to lack Whig occupants.
From the beginning, the majority of the Opposition
consisted of Whigs. What these Adullamites required
was leadership, and this they never obtained; for
although Walpole supplied them with several orators —
outcasts from his own government —the malcontents
failed in finding any character who wholly gained their
confidence, or who deserved to gain it.
1 Memoirs, by James, second Earl Waldegrave, K.G., from 1754 to
1758, p. 20.


XII. —Concerning the defection of William Pulteney
( 1 7 2 5) .
The same year ia which Bolingbroke’s relief bill
passed through parliament William Pulteney, who held
office as Cofferer-of-the-Household, mutinied, spoke
against government and was dismissed. His grievance
was the promotion of Newcastle, instead of himself,
to be secretary-of-state after Carteret’s resignation.
It has been said of Pulteney that, although he was
a perspicuous speaker upon the most complicated
affairs, his parts were rather above business, and that
he was wholly incapable of conducting it for long
together with prudence and steadiness. 1 This is
perhaps only another way of saying that he was one
of those men, by no means uncommon in the history
of representative assemblies, who speak very much
above their abilities.
The institution of popular government seems to be
ever haunted by the superstition that a master of the
arts of oratory will also prove wise in counsel and
vigorous in action. The contrary is nearer the truth.
The highest qualities of eloquence and of statesman-
ship are rarely united in the same character. The
strength of Walpole’s speaking did not lie in its being
either an appeal to the emotions of his audience or an
expression of his own. Its force was the persuasive-
ness of common sense in the mouth of a supremely
courageous man. With Pulteney it was entirely
different. Friends and enemies were agreed that
he could fiddle harmonics on all the strings of the
human heart. He was * eloquent, entertaining, per-
-4 suasive, strong and pathetic as the occasion required.’
1 Chesterfield’s Character of Pulteney.


He was essentially an artist. And, like other artists,
the orator is subject to the excitement and vagaries
of his own temperament. In certain aspects, indeed,
oratory is the most hazardous of all artistic employ-
ments. For, of necessity, the orator must often speak
without forethought, and unlike the man of letters,
he is unable to profit by his afterthoughts. Insensibly
the anxiety of an eloquent speaker that his hearers
should admire his speech will tend to master his first
intention, that they should follow his opinion. Half
unconsciously he will adapt or whittle away his opinion
in order to win their applause; and he will often
choose opinions that suit his style of rhetoric, as a
woman chooses clothes becoming to her shape or
complexion. He is peculiarly liable to take infection
from the mood of his audience, and to become the
proselyte of those he would convert. The actor is
not immune from a similar infection, and will upon
occasions rant for the gallery or mince to pleasure
the stalls; but he has this advantage over the orator,
that he speaks by the book, and is delivered, not
of his own conceptions, but of those of the play-
wright. The matter of the drama is none of his
business, but only the manner of its rendering. The
orator, on the other hand, is responsible for every-
thing —for the matter as well as for the manner, and
also (although this he is sometimes eager enough to
shuffle out of) for the consequences. By the very
nature of his trade he is forced to work through the
medium of passion and prejudice. Even truth itself,
as he states it, becomes untrue ; for he must ever be
distorting its features and disguising its proportions.
Firm resolution, sound judgement, and those other
qualities on which statesmanship depends, are merely


so many impediments to his artistry. Not even the
greatest character can wholly escape this corrosive
influence acting over a long period ; and the character
of Pulteney was none of the greatest. Many years
later, at the supreme crisis of his career, he was stricken
with doubt, hesitation and infirmity of purpose.
Insincerity had eaten out the core of his being, leaving
nothing but a rind which could properly be called
Pulteney.
As a young man, he had been a Whig of the most
orthodox pattern. He had followed the fortunes of
Walpole at a time when they were none too bright,
and had stood faithfully by his leader in 1711 when
the Tories brought about his disgrace and sent him to
the Tower. At the accession of George the First,
Pulteney, being then in his thirty-first year, was re-
warded with an appointment of minor importance
in the administration of Townshend, Stanhope and
Walpole. 1 When his leaders quarrelled he refused to
remain in office under Stanhope and Sunderland.
But, on the triumphant recall of Walpole to power,
Pulteney received no office only the offer of a
peerage, which he declined with no concealment of
his disgust. It is not clear why he was passed over in
this way, any more than it is clear why, two years
later, he accepted an insignificant court appointment. 2
The rupture in 1725 was of his own contriving;
but certainly he cannot be blamed for refusing to
forgive the, appointment of Newcastle to the vacant
secretaryship-of-state. Newcastle, however, had two
advantages over Pulteney in Walpole’s eyes—he com-
manded a very large parliamentary interest, and he
1 Secretary-at-war, 1715-1717.
* Cofferer, 1723-1725.


had never shown any independence of character.
These may have been sufficient reasons for passing
over a man of ability, who was also a faithful supporter
of many years’ standing; but there is little room
for doubt that Pulteney was treated harshly, with
ingratitude and also most unwisely. Before many
months Walpole had reason to regret his decision;
but when at last he sought to make amends, it was
too late; for by that time his injured follower had
become irreconcilable.
Dismissal from office was a turning-point in
Pulteney’s career. Thenceforward it was war to the
knife between him and the chief minister. On the
spur of resentment he changed his habits and his whole
way of life. Hitherto he had been something of a
saunterer, and was freely accused of laziness. But
now he threw himself heart and soul into the business
of opposition. His journalism was as persistent and
nearly as brilliant as his oratory; his fertility in
pamphlets was conspicuous in an age which delighted
in that form of literature. The success of his attacks
may be inferred from the fact that, some years later,
by way of punishment, his name was struck off the
roll of privy councillors.
Not only Pulteney’s political conduct, but his
character as well, appears to have been affected by his
rupture with Walpole. He is described as having
been, in his early days, of an easy and sociable disposi-
tion. His temper was always hot and quick ; but he
had wit, gaiety and physical courage. His company
was greatly sought after. But the accounts of him in
later life are less pleasing, and, in the portrait of him by
Reynolds, 1 his eyes have that look of cold suspicion,
1 National Portrait Gallery.


which might be expected in one who had given him-
self over to avarice and a settled animosity. In the
day of his triumph, when the two chief purposes of
his life—a vast fortune and the ruin of his enemy—
were fully achieved, he seems to have had no friends
and to have been a friend to no one. 1
XIII. —How Bolingbroke, Pulteney and Wyndham
endeavoured to mite the Opposition; but how,
during sixteen years, all their efforts to dislodge
Walpole were unsuccessful (1726-1742).
There was a coming together of the discontented
Whigs immediately after Pulteney’s dismissal. He
lost no time in attacking the government. He spoke
often and he spoke very well; in mere oratory he
surpassed every one. And to begin with, he spoke
always as a Whig, as one who lamented the falling
away of ministers from the principles of the ‘ glorious ’
revolution.
Hitherto the Whig malcontents had only grumbled
fortuitously, assuming to speak in the character of
candid friends. Nor had they ever acted in concert,
1 There is a remarkable similarity between the expressions of Hervey and
Chesterfield with regard to Pulteney’s motives. ‘ Resentment,’ says Hervey,
‘ and eagerness to annoy first taught him application ; application gave him
‘ knowledge, but knowledge did not give him judgment, nor experience
‘ prudence.’ ‘ Resentment,’ says Chesterfield, ‘ made him engage in business.
‘ He had thought himself slighted by Sir Robert Walpole, to whom he publicly
‘ vowed, not only revenge, but utter destruction.’ There are other striking
points of resemblance between Chesterfield’s Character and Hervey’s
Memoirs (vol. i. pp. 8-12). Chesterfield’s Character was written twenty years
after Hervey’s death, and Hervey’s Memoirs were not published until three-
quarters of a century after Chesterfield was in his grave. As the two men
were on .bad terms it is improbable that Chesterfield was ever shown
Hervey’s manuscript either by the author or his family.


but as independent bands that went against the
government or with it, or stood aloof, obeying the
momentary whims and humours of their various
chieftains. 1 But, beyond this, they were in fact afraid
of the Treasury Bench, having no one among them
with sufficient talents, experience of affairs and self-
confidence to venture on a contest, without the
certainty of being turned into a laughing-stock for his
pains. In order that the dissentient Whigs might be
powerful in proportion to their numbers they required
a leader ; but a mere voice was enough to bring them
together. And now they had got Pulteney, who
spoke with an authority second only to that of the
chief minister and in tones of superiority to all the
rest.
Bolingbroke, who was burning to avenge his
wrongs and to return to political life, soon became
alive to the advantages that might be gained by a
combination between Pulteney’s Whigs and Wynd-
ham’s Tories. The fact that Pulteney was prevented
by his character and Wyndham by his circumstances
from ever becoming a formidable leader may have
seemed to smooth the path for Bolingbroke’s ambition.
It is not impossible that if he had been a member of
either House his plan might have succeeded to the
full extent of his hopes. For the old line of divi-
sion had faded out of sight. The Tories no longer
hankered after changing the dynasty, and the much-
talked-of principles of the e glorious ’ revolution were
either dead letters or had become the accepted
commonplaces of both parties. The main obstacle
to co-operation lay not in the facts so much as in
opinion—in suspicions and hostile attitudes of mind.
1 Ante, p. 346.


Under a leader of brilliant ability and sympathetic
insight this fog of mutual distrust might have blown
away. For the only difficulty of real substance was
how to reconcile the class interests and prejudices
of the Tory country gentlemen with those of the
Whig noblemen on the one hand, and of the trading
community, which consisted mainly of Whigs, on the
other. Surely a problem of this sort was not beyond
the arts of a consummate politician.
As on former occasions, Bolingbroke underrated
the task which lay before him. Although he seems
to have had little difficulty in bringing over Pulteney,
Wyndham and a certain number of their more promi-
nent supporters to his views, the sentiments of the
rank and file continued to counterwork his schemes
from first to last. The difference between Whigs
and Tories was to a large extent a social cleavage,
and chasms of this sort are very hard to bridge. The
aristocratic section of the Whigs (in whom lay the
chief power) looked down upon the squires as people
of no fashion, lacking both wit and polish ; while the
mercantile section, which in recent years had grown
very bold and venturesome, regarded the mass of
small landowners as boobies, who knew nothing
of the world that lay outside their own hedge-
rows, and who gave themselves intolerable airs of
superiority towards men of keener intelligence and
better standing with their bankers. There was a still
more formidable difficulty in the fact that, although
Pulteney’s Whigs had a grievance against Walpole
and some of his associates, their personal relations
with the Whigs who continued to support the
government were still close and friendly. A coali-
tion ministry of Whigs and Tories was not an idea
VOL. i z A


that appealed to the malcontents. Their real but
unavowed aim was to detach a sufficient number of
those clans whose support kept Walpole in office
to enable a purely Whig administration to be formed
without him.
The Whigs and Tories of the Opposition were never
welded together, but, at the best, were only soldered.
It is true that their mutual hostility became less notice-
able as one session succeeded another and as Walpole’s
increasing power drew on him, more and more, the
envy and hatred of his adversaries. Indeed, in the
last stage of the struggle, 1 co-operation seemed to be
working without a hitch. But it only needed the
dissolvent of victory to dissipate this illusion in a few
days. When Walpole was at last overthrown and a
new administration came into existence, the hopes of
the Whigs and the suspicions of the Tories were fully
realised; for the new administration was nearly as
Whiggish as the old one had been.
At the end of 1726, however, the outward semblance
of an alliance had been produced. Pulteney and
Wyndham spoke and acted together in the House of
Commons and endeavoured, with some appearance
of success, to assuage the mutual antipathies of their
respective followers. Shippen and his Jacobites con-
tinued to assert a complete and ostentatious inde-
pendence, and no serious effort was made to bring
them into the combination. Had they come in,
they would have brought but little advantage to the
alliance either in numbers or ability. The greatest
service they could have rendered would have been
to hold their tongues; but from persons, like
4 honest ’ Shippen, whose vanity delighted in causing
1 1738-1742-


scandal, silence was the last sacrifice that could be
looked for. His indiscretions continued as before
to bring a certain amount of grist to the govern-
ment mill.
The historical sequence has already been broken,
in order to give a general forecast of the whole
course of Walpole’s administration from 1721 to 1742. 1
It may be convenient at this stage to attempt some-
thing of the same kind with regard to the activities
of the famous Opposition, by which he was con-
fronted and harassed during the last sixteen of those
years. It may be said generally, that the managers
of this Opposition let slip very few opportunities for
attack; that they showed great energy; that they
encouraged every popular delusion and caprice that
might serve their purpose of throwing odium on the
government; that they made no grievous mistakes
in policy. Nevertheless, they won but little respect,
and their belated triumph was only a bubble. Their
failure was due mainly to the fundamental insincerity
of their coalition; to a want of concord and, still
more, to a want of character, among their leaders.
In December 1726 it was decided to start a news-
paper in the interests of the Opposition. In ability
The Craftsman was far superior to any of its con-
temporaries. So much might have been expected,
seeing that Bolingbroke and Pulteney, two of the
most brilliant writers in England, were its constant
contributors and inspirers. But, like most journals
that deal mainly in abuse, The Craftsman had more
success in annoying than in persuading. It was able
to make the government wince, but it failed in the
1 Pp. 259-282.


much more important matter of fostering a loving
confidence between Pulteney’s Whigs and Wyndham’s
Tories.
The leaders of Opposition never tired of accusing
ministers of a servile compliance with the Hanoverian
predilections of the first two Georges. Occasionally
there was some reason for their charges, but more
often the grounds were only specious. Occasion-
ally, upon matters of the highest importance, their
accusations were entirely contrary to the facts and
to common sense. But an Opposition that sought
as its chief object the downfall of the government
acted shrewdly in harping on this string; for the
nation was always ready to listen to the tune. The
English people had not yet acquired, what after-
wards became one of its most admirable character-
istics : generosity was not then the quality that
marked its dealings with other races that owned the
same king. To an ordinary Englishman the Irish,
the Scots and, somewhat later, the Americans were
objects of constant jealousy and occasional detesta-
tion ; but, from the coronation of George the First
to the accession of George the Third, Hanover and
the Hanoverians held the first place among popular
antipathies. The prejudice of the masses destroyed
their sense of proportion. In their ignorance of
European affairs they were ready at once to conclude
that any policy that had the appearance of confer-
ring a benefit on Hanover must necessarily result in a
sacrifice of British interests. This was very rarely the
case. What the people never realised was that every
minister who held office from 1714 to 1760 stood
constantly on his guard against German encroach-
ments and entanglements. It happened occasionally,


however, that small favours to Hanover, and sops
to satisfy the greed of Hanoverian hangers-on, were
well worth granting for the sake of keeping the
King in good humour and the administration work-
ing smoothly. It was more often from wisdom than
from weakness that ministers gave a sprat to catch a
mackerel.
Another topic that soon engaged the attention of
the Opposition was the alleged betrayal of Austria
for the sake of a friendly understanding with France.
The Habsburgs, it was said, were Britain’s old and
faithful allies, the Bourbons her natural enemies.
But taking a cool view of the facts, neither the
French King nor the Austrian Emperor was a proper
object for chivalrous consideration. The experience
of half a century had shown that neither government
could be depended on when to keep faith might
conflict with dynastic ambitions and caprices. The
only safe rule for a British administration was the
strict observance of its own undertakings, and
when there was a question of entering into fresh
engagements the right touchstone was the national
advantage. The greatest of British interests at that
time was European peace. The Tories, who had
taken great credit to themselves for making the
treaty of Utrecht, and who had brought dishonour on
the English name by acts of treachery to the Emperor
while he was still our ally, were now quite as vociferous
as Pulteney’s Whigs in denouncing Walpole’s deser-
tion of Austria and in pointing out the danger to the
balance of power which must arise from the aggrand-
isement of the Bourbons. On this subject the King
was not entirely out of sympathy with the Opposition,
but the country refused to take much interest in the


discussion. It was not in one of its panic moods, and
appeals to sentimentality left it cold. The characters
of Charles the Sixth and Louis the Fifteenth were
equally unfit for exciting popular enthusiasm in a
foreign nation.
During the next reign denunciations of Walpole
as sole and despotic minister held the chief place
in the attack. The great increase of his authority
under George the Second and Queen Caroline was a
fact beyond dispute; but the inference the Opposi-
tion would have had the nation draw from it was
somewhat less easy to establish. For the steady
growth of order, confidence and prosperity was hard
to reconcile with the theory that the country was
suffering from a gross abuse of power. People, who
were willing enough to agree that the predominance
of one too powerful minister was a danger in itself
and also dangerous as a precedent, hesitated none the
less to jeopardise their present comfort and security
for the sake of an abstract principle. Could they be
certain of increasing their earnings or of enjoying
a happier lot if Walpole were forced to make way
for Pulteney and Wyndham ? If not, why should
they waste time and temper in order to overturn
an arrangement that on the whole was working
very well ? It might be true that Walpole played
the tyrant, but where were there to be found any
evidences of his oppression ?
In 1733, however, the Opposition succeeded at last
in stirring up a violent tempest of indignation against
the government. Neither SacheverelPs trial nor the
South Sea Bubble had caused an angrier outburst
of fury and unreason than the agitation that was
then directed against Walpole’s Excise scheme. But


the whole profit the Opposition drew from this
promising situation was in forcing the abandonment
of the bill. The public was instantly appeased by
the withdrawal of the obnoxious measure. The
minister’s complaisance discredited the charge of op-
pression. Walpole, whose life had so recently been
threatened by the London mob, and whose popularity
had seemed to be utterly destroyed, regained in a few
months a firm hold upon the national confidence.
Though his opponents had fought and won a sensa-
tional victory on behalf of the people, they earned
no reward. So soon as the danger had passed away,
their services were forgotten ; and in the general elec-
tion that followed shortly afterwards the government
majority was still sufficient.
The Opposition leaders were not more successful in
making capital out of the quarrel 1 between George
the Second and his eldest son. They failed, partly
because both they and their followers were of two
minds when it came to the pinch —the Tories, at a
critical moment, refusing to co-operate with their Whig
allies in supporting the pretensions of the Prince of
Wales. The nation contemptuously refused to take
sides with father or son. It was ashamed and dis-
gusted that the squabbles of the royal family should
be shown to the world, and advertised deliberately
through British ambassadors to every court in Europe.
Quarrels between fathers and sons were a hereditary
failing of the Hanoverian dynasty. A few years
earlier there had been a public scandal when George
the First got to loggerheads with the heir-apparent;
and now that same heir-apparent, having succeeded to
the throne, was engaged in making a worse scandal
1 1737-


than ever with the new Prince of Wales. There was
a ludicrous element in those two episodes which alone
must have deprived them of serious political effect.
Both quarrels were concerned with babies : the first 1
had reference to a christening, the second 2 to a lying-in,
though, in the latter case, money was also mixed up
in the dispute. The cry the Opposition took up was
the parsimony and parental tyranny of the King.
A want of filial duty was the extenuation put forward
by the government. But public opinion was not
moved by either plea. It seemed intolerable that
royal personages should show themselves so lacking
in dignity and good breeding as to trumpet their
grievances against one another through speeches in
parliament and in dispatches signed by the secretaries-
of-state.
Corruption was a cry that carried the Opposition
a good deal further than all its pother about a despotic
minister. The charge of bribery is a topic of eternal
interest. There are no rogues left, for all become
puritans, when a suspicion gets abroad that public
plunder is being divided up in secret. Every man
who has had no share in it is stirred to righteous
indignation. Evidence is not required; indeed
demands for proof are regarded impatiently as
deliberate impediments to the course of natural
justice. Even when in fact there has been no bribery,
it is not difficult as a rule to bring people into a mood
of suspicion. But this was not Walpole’s case ; for
although the charge was general and rather vague,
it was notorious that many members of parliament
were paid directly or indirectly to give their votes
to government. Two things, however, were over-
1 I7i7*
2 x 737»


looked by the simple populace. In the first place
corruption of the most bare-faced character had
existed for many generations before Walpole came
into power. He continued the evil, but was no
innovator. In the second place the Opposition
leaders, if they could have succeeded in ousting
Walpole, had not the slightest intention of abolishing
the vicious system. They were, for the most part,
wholly unconcerned about purity. They felt very
strongly, however, that patronage should be in the
right hands, and that 4 gratifications ’ should be dis-
pensed by themselves instead of by their enemy. In
plain words they were hypocrites, who regarded
hypocrisy very much as politicians have always
inclined to regard it, even in the purest ages ; that is
to say, as a method of attack no more outside the rules
of the game than any of those deceptions that are
practised in the art of war.
Despite its inherent weaknesses the Opposition held
together after a fashion for sixteen years. It survived
the retirement of Bolingbroke in 1735, the discontinu-
ance of The Craftsman in 1736, the death of Wyndham
in 1740. But although, towards the end, it seemed to
be more firmly united than ever before, it was, during
the greater part of its existence, just such an Opposi-
tion as an astute prime minister must always love.
For when the Whig section pressed forward most
eagerly, the Tories were apt to hang back ; and when
the Tory section was all for war to the knife, the
Whigs would usually discover reasons for not pushing
things to extremes.
In politics sixteen years is a long hunt. The
Opposition was an eager pack, containing several
famous hounds ; but it lacked a master. Bolingbroke


was nowhere to be seen. His far-off holloa came
faintly across the valley. Once only—in the eighth
year—did they come close up with their stag; and
then he got safe away while they checked at a fault. In
the fourteenth year they made quite certain of pulling
him down; yet for three sessions longer he stood
at bay. For though the followers of Pulteney and
Wyndham were able to destroy the Excise Bill 1 and
to force the government into war with Spain, 2 they
were foiled in their main object. Walpole still sat
on the treasury bench, broken in health, it is true, and
heavy at heart, but smiling the same old smile of
triumph—to outward appearance as good-humoured,
as contemptuous, as imperturbable as ever.
Making every allowance for Walpole’s consum-
mate gifts as a parliamentary tactician, these successive
failures of the Opposition to draw any permanent
advantage from its various undertakings are evidence
enough that it must have been in a poor way for
leadership. During the long chase it had had its
full share of those opportunities which irresponsible
invective can always turn to account against ministers
who are obliged to weigh their words. The wisest
government must make mistakes ; nay, sometimes
when it has acted with most wisdom it affords the
easiest target for plausible misconstruction. More-
over, the nature of popular favour is to be inconstant,
to love change for its own sake, and to underrate the
virtues of an administration which goes about its
business quietly. Men will ever attend more readily
to a vivacious onslaught than to a sober defence.
The Opposition failed, not because it was too scrupu-
lous, not because the occasions of attack were ill-
1 1733-
2 1739-


chosen, but from want of management, of mutual
confidence and of popular respect.
Until the very end it never succeeded —and then
only for a few days —in producing a leader whom the
country was eager to follow. The great force that
carried it at last to victory—or perhaps, to speak more
accurately, which overwhelmed Walpole in defeat—
was a violent outburst of war-fever, jingoism, or
imperialism. When we come to it will be the time
to consider which of these designations is the most
correct. But the Opposition leaders were less the,
creators of this popular sentiment than merely its
mouthpieces. They were borne along like sticks and
straws in the first wave of the flood when a stream
overflows its banks. For the reason that they were
in front, and for that reason alone, they appeared
to be leaders, and may even have imagined them-
selves to be so. But they led nobody, and they
led nowhere. They were merely units in an excited
crowd. Having no definite aims, they were incapable
of forming any policy or of making any plans. Having
but a meagre stock of executive ability, and being at
sixes and sevens among themselves, they were equally
incapable of acting with energy along the old lines.
Pitt was the solitary exception, and his flashes of
insight were rare and intermittent. Nor was he at
that time one of the acknowledged leaders, but only a
young adventurer whose ignorance was almost equal
to his ardour.
Popular excitement in 1739 was exacerbated by an
outbreak of anti-Catholic prejudice. Its chief cause,
however, was an overweening confidence that had
been produced by a long course of mercantile expan-
sion and by prosperous adventures oversea. London


and the other great seaports had the country behind
them when they protested against the exclusion of
their trade from the vast and profitable area of South
America. They considered it intolerable that the
Spanish king should claim to monopolise what his
subjects showed so little skill and enterprise in develop-
ing. It was clearly the intention of Providence that
the British should be permitted to go freely into
any region whose inhabitants craved the blessing of
their commerce. But our fellow-countrymen made a
double mistake in taking it for granted in the case
of Spain that military weakness might be presumed
from commercial inefficiency; in their own case, that
superiority in arms might be safely inferred from their
success in trade. And indeed they made a third
mistake that of itself must have proved fatal; for at
that time none of the leaders of either political party
was capable of carrying on war.
XIV. —How Balance of Bower is essential to the
sovereign independence of states, and how the
endeavour to maintain it has led to endless wars.
Balance of Power has been a current formula for
something like three centuries; but the problem
it professes to solve is of much greater antiquity.
Ever since the nations of western Europe first came
into existence, they have been haunted by the fear
that one of their number—becoming too powerful,
and making itself still stronger by alliances —might
proceed to deprive the others of their sovereign
independence. The Reformation extended the area
of anxiety eastwards, by loosening the cohesion of


the Holy Roman Empire; and at a later date the
weight of Russia was thrown into the scale. The
idea of overlordship having been intolerable to most
of the nations in nearly every epoch, their determina-
tion to prevent it has produced an amazing variety of
groupings, combinations and treaties ; and these in
turn have led to endless wars. In order to secure
themselves against danger, the nations have aimed at
an equilibrium; but owing to the fluctuations of
their prosperity, the flows and ebbs of their ambition,
the ups and downs of their military puissance, it has
ever been an impossible endeavour to stabilise the
equilibrium of Europe for all time.
Balance of power has served politicians for a
war-cry; poets and philanthropists have derided it
as a scarecrow. Party leaders and their followers
have often misconceived its nature, have worshipped
it as a totem, or have cited it to justify their own
practices ; while good but not very wise men have
execrated it as the monstrous offspring of hypocrisy
and inhumanity. They might as well have execrated
the east wind. The balance of power is not the
true culprit. It is not an end in itself, but only the
means to an end. It is less a political dogma than
merely a condition of things essential to a certain
aim. And the aim is one that from the beginning
of time has ranked among the noblest of national
aspirations. For sovereign independence is not to
be enjoyed except in a balance of power; nor is the
balance of power to be maintained without war, any
more than the palm is to be won without the dust.
Therefore if anything is deserving of execration, if
anything ought to be abandoned and abjured, it is the
idol or ideal of sovereign independence.


There is no warrant for regarding the balance of
power as an illusion peculiar to dynasts. There is
no other matter on which autocrats have more often
been in agreement with their subjects. Constitutional
states like the United Kingdom, republics like Holland
and Venice, have been as much concerned in upholding
it as any king or emperor in Christendom. And if
Europe for the past three hundred years had consisted
entirely of free commonwealths or of oligarchies of
the proletariat, it is tolerably certain that the same
object would have been pursued with the same
zeal, and that the same consequences would have
followed.
Peace is undoubtedly one of the benefits that may
be hoped for during a period of equilibrium; and
as peace is a simpler conception than sovereign
independence it makes a stronger appeal in normal
times to the popular imagination. It is for this
reason that when kings and statesmen have been
engaged in bracing their subjects or fellow-countrymen
to resist some threatened disturbance of the balance
of power, peace has been apt to figure in the discussion,
not as what it really is—an ultimate and contingent
boon, a kind of by-product which may be looked for
in the event of success —but as what it is not —the
immediate and primary object. To this extent the
humanitarian critics are justified when they cry out
against the hypocrisy of rulers and pour derision upon
the incredible folly of the nations. But the charge
does not come to very much after all. In moments of
excitement men are apt, without dishonest intentions,
to give wrong reasons for the courses which they
advocate. If the courses are right, errors in the
argument may be forgiven.


The primary and immediate aim in upholding the
balance of power has rarely been peace, but something
entirely ■ different. Balance of power is one of the
essential conditions of sovereign independence, and it
is undoubtedly the case that endless wars have been
fought in order to preserve it. We have been assured
that if we cease to concern ourselves with the balance
of power there will be no more wars. That may or
may not be true ; but it is quite irrelevant. If we
give up the balance of power there will certainly be
no more sovereign independence. Possibly the time
has come to make this sacrifice. But are the nations
of Europe prepared to make it ? Have the humani-
tarians themselves ever yet been bold enough to
recommend it ?
It is true, however—and here the critics are on
firmer ground—that there have been times when the
love of independence, which is a noble quality, has
degenerated into an ignoble and morbid solicitude.
Walpole’s way of considering the balance of power
was probably not far different from Queen Elizabeth’s,
from William the Third’s, from Marlborough’s, or
even from Bolingbroke’s. Nor was it different in
essentials from the views of those who came after
him—the elder and the younger Pitt, Charles James
Fox, Castlereagh, Palmerston, Disraeli, and the various
foreign secretaries who served under Gladstone. The
idea was certainly not regarded as obsolete either
by Salisbury or by Joseph Chamberlain. It informed
the policy of Sir Edward Grey and was acted upon
consciously or unconsciously by the British nation in
August 1914.
But although this old idea has persisted down to the
present moment, one of the conditions of Europe has


undergone a very remarkable change since Walpole
was chief minister and Townshend secretary-of-state.
Those were freer and less crowded days than these
we live in. There is now hardly a nation in Europe,
except perhaps the Russian, which can yawn or stretch
itself without incommoding and jostling its neigh-
bours. This state of things is not due merely to
increase of population, but also to those develop-
ments in transport, in communications, in the pro-
duction and exchange of commodities, and in the
operations of finance, which began to make themselves
felt within half a century of Walpole’s death, and
which, during the past fifty years, have proceeded at
a break-neck speed. But none other of the conditions
save this alone seems to have changed to any appreci-
able extent. The tempers of men are the same. The
nations are as jealous as ever of their sovereign
independence, as determined as ever to preserve it.
Can any one foresee a time when Europe will cease
to be concerned with the balance of power ? The
formula may drop out of use; but so long as the
nations shall continue to attach supreme importance to
their sovereign independence, the same means to safety
will be sought in the future as in the past, though
possibly under another name. Alliances and wars will
be made with the same objects as formerly, until such
time as the nations shall have come to value some
other possession at a higher rate than their own
separate political existences ; or, looking at the matter
in another aspect, until some new and greater fear
shall have eclipsed the old one.
If Europe would escape from the bondage of
Moloch, there seems to be only one way: her states
must be robbed of their sovereign independence, or.


of their own free-will, they must give it up. The
force of circumstances may some day bring them face
to face with these alternatives. They may be driven
by suffering, exhaustion and defeat to surrender to a
conqueror that which they have clung to so passion-
ately and for so many centuries of resolute endeavour;
and they may find peace and security at last in some
imperial system, vaster and infinitely more complex
than the empire of the Antonines. Or, on the other
hand, their imagination working on their memories
may show them a prospect of evils, in comparison with
which even the loss of their sovereign independence
will appear tolerable—a vision of modern warfare,
glamourless, impersonal, mechanical, übiquitous; a
dismal twilight reddened by bursts of flame ; vapour
settling like a pall on doomed cities ; inventions, and
yet more inventions, threatening a universal destruc-
tion. This vision may be truly prophetic, or it may
only be a mirage that the heats of fancy have con-
jured up; a gigantic spectre or shape of terror
projected against the horizon clouds that cover the
future. In matters of this kind it is not accuracy
of forecast, but intensity of belief, that has most
influence on events. If such a vision ever came
to be believed in firmly, it might lead in time to a
covenanted union of the states of Europe.
As the organisation of society has grown more and
more complex, the freedom of individual men has been
curtailed by little and little. This process has been
so gradual that people sometimes fail to see how far
it has already carried them. For a like reason, as
the interests of states become still more inextricably
interwoven, the sanctity of sovereign independence
may need to be reconsidered in a new light. It is
VOL. I 2 B


a wholesome instinct of mankind which seeks to
preserve the sharp outlines and picturesque contrasts
of national character. For these, the surest of all
pickles is a continuous warlike rivalry. But what
if the pickle should prove itself too strong an acid
—a preservative no longer, but a dissolvent ? It may
be judged better in that case to take the risk of
blurring the beloved outlines and contrasts by political
co-operation, than to face the greater risk of having
them blotted out entirely by a desolation. It is not
the business of this book to determine, or even to
discuss, these issues. It may not be inappropriate,
however, to point out, that the recent war—like those
of Walpole, his predecessors and his successors—was
fought to maintain the balance of power; and also
that, like all former wars, it has failed to produce
an equilibrium which can be regarded either as per-
manent or as naturally stable. Had the Germans
won, we might already be some way along the
road to the imperial solution. Before the League
of Nations can with confidence approach its more
important objects we may have to travel some
considerable distance towards a covenanted union.
XV. — How the adjustment of outstanding differences
among European powers was referred to the
congress of Camhrai, and how at the end of five
years no results had been achieved 1 (1720-1724).
It has already been told how, early in 1720, within
three months of Alberoni’s disgrace, Spain came to
1 The following meagre narrative of a very complicated series of events
may be made more intelligible by reference to certain dates, viz.:
1720. (February) War with Spain ended ; outstanding difficulties to
be referred to an international congress.


terms with the Quadruple Alliance. The settlement,
however, was rather in the nature of a general under-
standing than of a definite agreement. It was devised
in haste, with the object of bringing hostilities to an
end, and as usually happens in such cases a number of
very troublesome differences were left over for future
adjustment. It was most vague precisely where the
danger of leaving anything in doubt was greatest;
for the chief cause of anxiety lay in the clash of interests
between the Austrian and Spanish courts.
Not until a whole year had been spent in diplomatic
1721. (March) Franco-Spanish royal betrothals; (April) ministry of
Walpole and Townshend with Carteret as southern secretary-of-state;
(June) secret alliance between France, Spain and Britain for mutual
defence ; agreed to hold a congress at Cambrai.
1722. (Early) Plenipotentiaries began arriving at Cambrai; Charles VI.
founded the Ostend Company ; (June) Infanta sent to Paris to be educated ;
Don Luis married to daughter of the regent Orleans ; (December) formal
incorporation of Ostend Company.
1723. (August) Death of cardinal Dubois; (December) death of the
regent Orleans ; the duke of Bourbon became prime minister.
1724. (January) Abdication of Philip V.; congress of Cambrai formally
opened ; (April-May) Schaub replaced by Horatio Walpole as ambassador
at Paris ; Carteret replaced by Newcastle as secretary-of-state ; (August)
death of Don Luis ; Philip V. resumed his crown ; (Autumn) Ripperda
sent on a secret mission to Vienna.
1725. (Early) Townshend, confirmed in his suspicions of the Emperor’s
designs, looked round for allies ; (March) Louis XV. betrothed to daughter
of ex-king of Poland ; the Infanta returned to Spain ; the Spanish pleni-
potentiaries withdrew from congress of Cambrai; (April) treaties of Vienna ;
(May) congress of Cambrai broke up ; (September) treaty of Hanover;
marriage of Louis XV.; (November) secret treaty of Spain with the
Emperor ; (December) Ripperda returned in triumph to Madrid.
1726. (March-April) British fleets demonstrated in the Baltic, off the
coast of Spain, and off Panama ; (May) fall of Ripperda ; (June) cardinal
Fleury succeeded duke of Bourbon as prime minister.
1727. (January) George I.’s speech to parliament disclosing designs of
the Emperor and Spain; (February) Spain besieged Gibraltar; (May)
death of Catharine of Russia ; Emperor having refused to help Spain in
the siege of Gibraltar agreed to preliminaries of peace ; Spain informally
did likewise ; (June) death of George I.


correspondence, was it decided that a congress of the
powers should complete the business of pacification
by interpreting the original intention in language free
from ambiguity, and by providing means for carrying
that intention into effect.
Another year went by, and it was only at the
beginning of 1722 that plenipotentiaries began
arriving at Cambrai in a leisurely and stately
fashion.
Affairs of this sort —the aftermath of war—rarely
proceed hot-foot; and at this particular juncture the
pace was a good deal slower than usual, owing mainly
to the fact that Europe did not then contain a single
minister of state or ruler who was capable of imposing
order upon the chaos of international jealousies.
George the First, the regent Orleans and their re-
spective governments were genuinely anxious to
act as peacemakers and had already achieved a part
of their purpose. But the general condition of
Europe was such that it might well have baffled a
diplomacy of greater force and genius. It was
an epoch remarkable no less for the ineptitude
of statesmen, than for the confusion of mind, the
petty objectives and the fickleness of sovereigns.
There was obstinacy, and to spare, but nowhere a
strong will. The lidless eyes of suspicion were ever
on the alert, but no vision was mirrored in them. The
flow of polite circumlocution, copious almost beyond
precedent, deceived only a few and persuaded none.
Sundry large windmills —as it might be—were turn-
ing busily and made a brave show ; but, as they were
geared to nothing, they drew no buckets and they
ground no corn.
For two years after the plenipotentiaries met at


Cambrai, their only occupations were hospitality and
courtesies ; for the courts which had accredited them
were still wrangling about the terms of reference and
other preliminary matters. It was not until the
beginning of 1724 that the congress settled down to
business and addressed itself seriously to the problems
that had brought it into existence.
In the meantime Charles the Sixth had involved
himself in a serious dispute with Britain and Holland.
Soon after the treaties of 1713 and 1714 had put him
in possession of the Spanish Netherlands, he had
begun to concern himself with the development of his
new estate. So early as 1719 a project for founding at
Ostend a company to trade into the East Indies had
drawn strong protests from his former allies, who pre-
viously had shared this rich market between them. But
the Emperor had paid no heed to their representations,
and at the end of 1722 he carried his scheme into
execution without reckoning what it might cost him
in loss of friends. The immediate consequence was
an outburst of indignation among the Dutch and
English traders, who regarded his proceedings as an
infringement of their lawful monopoly and as a viola-
tion of treaties that still remained in force.
So soon as the operations of the Ostend Company
began to affect its rivals adversely, friction rapidly
increased, and produced a crop of British legislation
that aimed at crippling the Emperor’s adventure.
Charles the Sixth was never a man who considered
the advantage of settling with one adversary before
he provoked another. By the end of 1724 he was
on such bad terms with Britain and Holland that
he could no longer count with certainty upon
their good offices at the congress of Cambrai.


Meanwhile troubles of a different sort were drawing
to a head.
The fall of Alberoni and the ending of war
between Spain and the Quadruple Alliance had pro-
duced an important effect upon the policy of the
regent Orleans and Dubois. They had forthwith
set themselves busily to remove all causes of quarrel
between the courts of Versailles and Madrid, and had
aimed at drawing together the two reigning branches
of the house of Bourbon by ties of marriage. In
March 1721, Louis the Fifteenth, then in his twelfth
year, was betrothed to the Infanta, a child of four, who,
in accordance with custom, was shortly afterwards
sent to Paris to be educated in the French fashion. A
marriage was arranged at the same time, and took place
in the following year, between the heir to the Spanish
throne and a daughter of the duke of Orleans. This
growth of friendly relations, as it seemed to provide
additional security for the maintenance of European
peace, had been regarded without alarm by the British
government. The attitude of Stanhope had been
benevolent from the first. When he died early in
1721, when Sunderland resigned, and when a new
administration was formed under Walpole, Towns-
hend and Carteret, the old policy of friendship with
France had been accepted as a valuable legacy by these
successors.
Two years later, in 1723, the direction of French
affairs was disturbed by the deaths of Dubois in
August and of Orleans in December. The alliance
with Britain was maintained, and indeed to outward
appearance was drawn even closer by the new Regent,
the duke of Bourbon, whose relations with the British


government and with its ambassador in Paris were
altogether satisfactory. But Bourbon looked askance
at the Spanish policy of his predecessor, and was
opposed to the project of marrying Louis to the
Infanta. He had public as well as private reasons
for his opinion. As the Princess was then a child of
five, it must be something over twelve years before
there could be a direct heir to the crown of France.
This delay would cause the usual crop of evils that
spring up when there is uncertainty as to the succes-
sion. As Louis was only in his fourteenth year it
would in any case be necessary to wait for some time,
but his marriage ought not to be postponed to a later
date than was absolutely necessary. But Bourbon
looked at the matter also from his own personal point
of view. If the King should die without an heir—
and his health was still very frail—the crown would
pass to the new duke of Orleans, whom the prime
minister regarded with a peculiar detestation. Public
policy might have been the chief motive of the late
Regent for betrothing Louis to a child; but it was
not unnatural for an enemy to imagine that the
ambition of the Orleans family had had something
to do with this decision.
In January 1724 an event occurred which afforded
a topic of conversation to those routs and receptions
whereat the unwearied and unworried diplomatists of
Cambrai beguiled their abundant leisure. But the
proceedings of the congress itself were hardly ruffled,
its trivial though pompous industry suffered no check,
when it became known that Philip the Fifth, in a fit
of misery beyond endurance, had abdicated and retired
into a monastery.


But the cloister was not his destiny; nor peace. In
August the reign of his successor was ended by death.
The Termagant, who fretted in retirement, insisted
that her husband should resume the crown. Nor
would honour have allowed him any other choice.
To the Queen the loss of her stepson was a grief
that contained substantial consolations; for there was
now but one life between her own children and
the succession. The ambassadors at Cambrai shrugged
their shoulders. The return of the Termagant was
likely enough to prove an impediment to diplomacy;
but being well paid they were contented with their
employment, and in the prospect of its indefinite con-
tinuance there was nothing to disturb their serenity.
This comfortable forecast was soon disproved.
In the following autumn the Termagant’s small
stock of patience gave out. She had lately fallen
under the influence of a new favourite, Ripperda,
a Dutch adventurer of vast presumption but of no
genius; a promiser of anything and everything; a
great boaster; a prolific but incredible liar. Ripperda
represented in a glowing light the advantages that
might accrue from sending him on a secret mission to
negotiate directly with the Emperor.
The time was better chosen than the emissary, for
no sovereign in Europe was more tired than Charles
the Sixth of waiting upon the deliberations of the
congress. Though the antagonism between the
Emperor and the Termagant was irreconcilable,
the mutual grievances of these two monarchs had
been assuaged for the time being by the action
of counter-irritants. Years of delay had turned
the current of their displeasure against the other
states of Europe, who were now blamed, somewhat


unreasonably, for having failed to find any formula of
accommodation between their censurers. In addi-
tion the Termagant was incensed against Britain
because an ill-timed request for the restitution of
Gibraltar had been refused. The Emperor, on the
other hand, was equally annoyed by the action of
the Dutch and British governments in the matter of
his Ostend Company. He could no longer doubt
that they were determined to use every means at their
disposal to bring it to ruin. Moreover, the fact that
Townshend, who was an ambitious but not a very
deft negotiator, had already been casting about for
allies who would help him to keep the imperial ambi-
tions in check, may not have been quite so complete
a secret at Vienna as he himself believed it to be. In
spite, however, of these helpful distractions Ripperda,
after several months of sanguine effort, had no more to
show for his labours at Vienna than had the congress
that was sitting at Cambrai. The differences between
the sovereigns of Spain and Austria were in fact
fundamental and no solution was possible unless one
or other would give way.
Ripperda’s presence in Vienna remained a secret
much longer than might have been expected; but
in the end, of course, it was discovered, and his
business there was correctly surmised. It was clear
to Townshend that the Emperor and the Termagant
were engaged in an illicit attempt to settle their own
differences behind the backs of the Great Powers and
without the assistance of the congress at Cambrai.
If they succeeded in doing so France and Britain would
become laughing-stocks ; they would have no say in
the settlement; and it might reasonably be anticipated
that their interests would be neglected and sacrificed.


Townshend, already distrustful of the Emperor, was
now confirmed in all his suspicions.
Such was the situation of affairs at the end of 1724.
It contained a grave danger; for, as the nations of
Europe had now recovered to some extent from their
exhaustion, the moment seemed opportune and the
conditions favourable for putting an end to peace
if any serious disagreement should arise between the
powers.
XVI. —How disagreement arose between the powers,
and how the peace of Europe was threatened by
the treaties of Vienna and Hanover (1725).
The grouping of European states at the beginning
of 1725 was as follows: —On the one side the relations
of Britain with France were close and cordial; Holland
was prepared in most matters to act with them;
Denmark and Portugal were friendly; Prussia and
Sweden on the whole inclined to the same connection,
but, for different reasons, neither could be counted
on in an emergency. Spain had been formally bound
to Britain and France, ever since Midsummer 1721, in
a secret treaty of mutual defence. —On the other side
was the Emperor, autocrat of Austria, Hungary and
the greater part of Italy. He could rely on most of
the kings and princes of the Holy Roman Empire to
support his policy. Russia was disposed to make
common cause with him, chiefly with a view to
keeping the Turks in check, but partly also because
the Empress Catharine had her personal reasons for
disliking the western powers.—Neither of these two
groups cherished aggressive intentions or had any


desire for war. But before the spring was far ad-
vanced, and while the interest of English politicians
was engaged by Pulteney’s revolt and Bolingbroke’s
relief bill, the balance of power and the peace of
Europe were suddenly threatened by a surprising
combination.
In March 1725, while Ripperda, in a great flurry of
self-importance, was busy at Vienna, the duke of Bour-
bon carried his point. Louis, now in his sixteenth year,
was betrothed to a princess of one-and-twenty—Marie,
daughter of the dethroned King of Poland—and the
Infanta was returned to Spain. It would have been
difficult to soften such an insult with fine words, and
nothing of the sort was attempted. The fury of the
Termagant was no fiercer than that of her husband
and the Spanish people. Philip at once recalled his
plenipotentiaries from Cambrai, and Ripperda received
instructions to concede anything the Emperor might
ask as the price of his alliance. At the same time the
British government was urged to break with France,
and the rejection of this demand added another
grievance to the refusal of Gibraltar.
Within six weeks of the affront—on the last day
of April 1725 —a treaty between Spain and the
Emperor was signed at Vienna. The terms of this
agreement set all Europe wondering what might lie
behind it; for even the blindness of anger seemed
inadequate to explain the Spanish concessions. The
sudden reconciliation of two courts, whose bitter
antagonism had kept Europe on tenterhooks for
so many years, their undertaking of mutual support
by land and sea, the air of defiance with which the
new allies seemed to challenge the whole continent,
were unintelligible to diplomatists who viewed the


situation coolly. For why should Spain—even in a
fit of temper —have given so much and taken so little,
unless she had received from Austria secret assur-
ances that brought the bargain to something like an
equality ? The claim on which the Termagant had
hitherto been so resolute—to have the fortresses of
Tuscany garrisoned by Spanish troops, as a security
for the ultimate succession of her son—was abandoned.
The right of the house of Habsburg to the Nether-
lands, and also to Naples, Sicily and Sardinia was
plainly confirmed. The Pragmatic Sanction, whereby
Charles the Sixth, having no sons, sought to override
the Salic law and to secure the succession to his
dominions in the female line, was accepted and
guaranteed. By this concession the reversionary
interests of the Spanish monarchy in the Low Countries
and in the Italian fiefs of the Empire were put beyond
the reach of the Termagant’s maternal aspirations.
The surrender seemed too complete to be accepted
at its face value. The astonishment, curiosity and
misgivings that affected every chancery in Europe were
as prevalent in Spain as elsewhere.
And yet there was not a great deal behind. The
surmise that there must be some undisclosed under-
standing was perfectly correct; but this understanding
went no way towards redressing the inequality of the
bargain, for the advantages of the private arrangement
were more on the side of Austria than of Spain. Two
secret treaties had been signed at the beginning of May.
By the first of these the Emperor undertook to use his
friendly representations with Britain in order to pro-
cure the restitution of Gibraltar; and this harmless
expression of goodwill was really all that Ripperda
took in return for the Spanish concessions. The


second treaty was concerned with commerce, and was
designed to add to the revenues of the Emperor
through the enrichment of the Netherlands. Philip
acknowledged the legality of the Ostend Company,
and allowed it the same privileges of trade throughout
his dominions as were enjoyed by the ‘ most favoured *
nations. In certain respects indeed the merchants of
the two allied countries were placed in a better position
than those of the * most favoured ’ nations; but the
advantage of these arrangements went almost entirely
to the Netherlands, which alone could boast an
important sea-borne trade.
The withdrawal of the Spanish plenipotentiaries
from Cambrai and the publication of the treaty of
Vienna left the congress with nothing to do. It had
taken two years of industrious diplomacy to bring
the delegates together; two years more to settle
the scope of their employment; and the sum and
substance of their achievements had been but fifteen
months of fruitless talking. They now dispersed
in as stately a fashion and as courteously as they
had assembled, as they had awaited their warrant,
and as they had conducted their proceedings from
first to last.
News of the Vienna treaty reached George the
First in Hanover. Townshend, who accompanied
him there, had for some time past been watching the
proceedings of the Emperor with suspicion. His un-
favourable surmises now found full confirmation in
a confidential report which professed to discover the
secret provisions. The information came from a
trustworthy source through the Hanoverian intelli-
gence department, and it was put into the King’s hands
by his electoral ministers, who were by no means


unfriendly towards Austria. Evidence to the same
effect came quickly from other quarters. The original
Hanoverian account was corroborated in the years
that followed by several striking testimonies. It was
never disproven, was never even cast into doubt with
the world at large, until all the persons who had been
concerned in those transactions were dead.
The substance of the supposed agreement was as
follows : —the Austrian heiress, Maria Theresa—at
that time a girl of eight—was to be betrothed to Don
Carlos, eldest child of the Termagant. What mattered
such paltry concerns as the northern duchies, if her son,
through a brilliant marriage might expect the Imperial
Crown, the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and the
overlordship of most of Italy ? It was further pro-
vided that the allies were jointly to demand from Britain
the surrender of Gibraltar and Minorca, and, in case
they met with a refusal, were to proceed by force of
arms. They pledged themselves to attempt the restora-
tion of the Pretender; and, as an extension of this
ambitious programme, they agreed to undertake a
religious war in Germany—and elsewhere, if oppor-
tunity offered—for the depression of Protestantism
and for the spread of the Roman Catholic faith.
Though none of these particulars was true, they were
not mere inventions ; for they accurately described
the policy of Ripperda—if such a term as policy can
be fitly applied to the projects of a mountebank. The
confidential report contained nothing that had not
actually fallen from his lips. But his words were
only boastful indiscretions, or an attempt to force the
Emperor’s hand. As yet there was no secret treaty
or engagement such as Ripperda had published to
his friends. It was not long, however, before the




accuracy of the Hanoverian intelligence seemed to find
confirmation in a formal demand by Spain for the
restitution of Gibraltar.
The position of George the First was not an easy
one. Although at this time he was much incensed
for private reasons against the Emperor, he shrank
nevertheless, as a prince of the Empire, from being
engaged in war against his titular sovereign. He was
even more concerned to avoid any step that might
place Hanover at the mercy of the Imperial troops.
But he could not doubt the evidence that had been
laid before him, and for the sake of British interests he
overcame his own feelings, disregarded the advice of
his electoral ministers, and gave Townshend a free
hand.
With his accustomed energy the secretary-of-state at
once set himself to make a counter-combination. This
was a form of activity in which he delighted, believing
his genius in such matters to be beyond rivalry.
Early in September a treaty was signed at Hanover
between Britain, France and Prussia. The actual
terms were innocent enough, sin,ce they provided
merely that mutual assistance should be given in case of
attack. The purport of the published treaty of Vienna
had been much the same. The danger to peace lay not
in the substance of these two undertakings, but in the
formal advertisement that there were now two groups
of powers in Europe, each of which believed the
intentions of the other to be hostile.
Townshend, the daemonic director of foreign
affairs, reckoned that several of the other European
states would shortly come into the alliance: Holland
out of consideration for her trade; the Protestant
Princes of the Empire from their fear of Roman


Catholic encroachments; the Baltic kingdoms—
Sweden and Denmark—out of regard for the Russian
menace. But the fruition of these hopes was tardy
and incomplete.
The signatories of the treaty of Vienna, on the other
hand, counted on the adherence of Catharine of
Russia, who had recently succeeded to the throne on
the death of her husband, Peter the Great. Motives
of general policy, as well as certain family grievances
against the Elector of Hanover and the King of
Denmark, inclined her to listen sympathetically to
the persuasions of the Emperor and to the promises
of a subsidy from the Termagant.
If George the First erred in giving Townshend
his support, the interests of Hanover were not
what biassed his judgement. It is so common an
incident in politics for men of character and ability
to make statements that are not merely contrary to
truth, but on the very face of them absurd, that we
need hardly wonder to find Chesterfield saying at the
time and Pitt repeating with conviction some years
later that Townshend’s course of action proceeded
from his subservience to the King’s German sym-
pathies. 4 Thus Hanover rode triumphant on the
4 shoulders of England,’ wrote Chesterfield. 4 lt was
‘a treaty the tendency of which is discovered in the
4 name,’ was the taunt of Pitt. 1 Even on the assumption
that the secret information had contained no grains
of truth, these vigorous censures were merely non-
sense. Hanover gained nothing by the treaty to
which it gave its name ; and it stood to lose much in
the event of war. The dangers with which the treaty
of Vienna threatened the Electorate were trifling,
1 Quoted in Coxe’s Life of Walpole, cap. 28.


conjectural and very remote; whereas those con-
tained in the treaty of Hanover were grave and
present. For that country lay open to invasion
and unless Prussia stood firmly by her engage-
ments, which could not be counted on, Hanover
must certainly be overwhelmed by superior forces so
soon as war broke out. Prussia had been bought
with a promise of two duchies which her King
coveted. A more attractive offer from the other
side would as readily detach her. For these excellent
reasons the Hanoverian ministers were utterly opposed
to Townshend’s policy; while they were inclined to
the Emperor because he had had the good sense to
secure their goodwill. They worked accordingly in
his interests and against Britain from first to last.
The pride of George was no doubt galled by the
threat of a Stewart restoration ; but his chief motive
for signing a treaty that he regarded with so much
dislike and apprehension was his sense of duty to the
country that had given him his crown.
On September 5 th—two days after the treaty of
Hanover was signed —the marriage of Louis the
Fifteenth to Marie Lesczynski took place.
Although the treaty of Vienna was the original
cause of all the trouble, Spain and Austria agreed in
denouncing the treaty of Hanover as a provocation.
By another secret agreement, signed in November,
they sought to draw their own alliance tighter; and
in doing so they went a considerable way towards
that policy which the Hanoverian intelligence depart-
ment had already imputed to them. There was a
vague understanding with regard to the Austro-
Spanish marriage. In the event of war, the Emperor
undertook to assist the Spaniards to recover Gibraltar
vol. 1 2 c


and Minorca. King Philip confirmed his promise
with regard to the Ostend Company by a formal
guarantee. A plan was agreed on for the dis-
memberment of France in case of victory. There
was a general clause in which the two allies promised
one another effective help in all possible contingencies ;
and this was understood to have special reference to
the project of a Stewart restoration. But if such a
scheme was indeed contemplated, as the correspond-
ence of the Pretender seems to indicate, the allies
must have been moved thereto by their desire to
injure Britain and uphold the Church of Rome,
rather than by any love for ‘ James the Third.’ For
at this critical juncture that ever-blundering prince
had chosen to quarrel publicly with his wife, which
not only caused much scandal and disaffection among
the British Jacobites, but was resented by the Emperor
owing to his kinship with the lady, and by the Ter-
magant, who looked on it as an affront to her sex.
Before Christmas Ripperda returned to Spain in a
triumphal progress. At each new resting-place he
grew more garrulous and more boastful. Every item
in the secret intelligence that had reached King
George during the summer received confirmation
from the lips of the Spanish emissary before he arrived
in Madrid.
XVII. —How the danger of a general European war
was averted, and how Bolingbroke again failed
in his bid for office (1726-1727).
When Townshend returned from Hanover in
December 1725 the cabinet discussions entered a


new phase. So long as European affairs remained in
the region of diplomacy the secretary-of-state might
claim to be the predominant partner; but when it
became necessary to prepare for war Walpole, whose
business it was to find supplies, could justly insist
on taking the upper hand.
The King’s speech at the opening of parliament in
January 1726 was neither provocative nor conciliatory.
It made no reference to the reports of the intelligence
department with regard to the secret treaties. It
gave the country, however, clearly to understand that
the possibility of war must be considered seriously.
It justified the alliance with France and Prussia by
pointing to that earlier combination—the alliance of
Vienna—which seemed to threaten the peace of Europe.
The treaty of Hanover had been made in order to
maintain the balance of power, and to safeguard the
commercial interests of Britain, which were endangered
by the agreement between Austria and Spain. The
government had hopes that Holland would soon
enter into alliance. War, if it came, would offer the
Pretender a favourable opportunity for attempting
his restoration. Therefore no time should be lost
in putting the nation in a posture of defence.
The House of Commons at once responded to
this appeal and voted the supplies which the govern-
ment asked for. Public opinion was much perturbed ;
the money market reflected and magnified the general
depression ; the condition of trade grew worse from
day to day.
In April 1726 three British fleets went forth.
The first sailed into the Baltic; the second cruised off
the coast of Spain; while the third made the West
Indies, and merely by showing itself discouraged


the Spanish treasure ships from venturing out of
Porto Bello.
The general effect of these dispositions was success-
ful. The Empress of Russia had lately been talking
in the heroic strain, and had ordered her unwilling
ministers, on pain of her highest displeasure, to make
ready for war against the King of Denmark and the
Elector of Hanover. But on the appearance of
Admiral Wager the Russian fleet put back to harbour,
and the immediate danger passed away.
The arrival of Admiral Jennings in southern waters
provoked a violent outburst among the hotheads at
the Spanish court; but to the more sober section it
served as a useful reminder that the capture of Gibraltar
must remain an impracticable adventure so long as
Britain held command of the sea.
The blockade of the Spanish treasure ships was an
admirable stroke of policy, since both Austria and
Russia looked to have the larger part of their expenses
paid by King Philip. As the annual remittances of
bullion were now cut off for more than two years, the
expected subsidies were never received, with the result
that the military projects of the Emperor Charles and
the Empress Catharine came to a standstill for want of
funds. A series of defeats would in some ways have
been less demoralising to the enemy than Admiral
Hosier’s patient vigil.
Walpole was reproached at the time—but with
much greater violence twelve years later—because he
did not order Hosier to attack. A pestilence settled
on the fleet and carried off in a few months four
thousand men and officers. The admiral himself
was one of the victims. But had a military expedition
been fitted out and a landing effected, the losses would


certainly have mounted into far higher figures. Nor
would anything have been gained by such an enter-
prise that was not gained by the blockade. Porto
Bello, even had it surrendered, would have been a
worthless possession. All the gold and silver had
already been sent back across the isthmus into safety.
The true military purpose was neither the capture of
the town nor the possession of treasure, but merely
to prevent the Spanish ships from bringing home
bullion that would have replenished the empty
coffers of Russia and Austria. And this object was
achieved.
In May (1726) Ripperda was at last recognised by
his employers for an impostor: the Emperor denounced
him and the Termagant gave him up. His choice of
sanctuary was a strange one, for he fled to the British
Embassy seeking protection. 1 He paid for his brief
lodging by writing out and signing a full confession
of the secret designs that Spain and Austria had
formed against the peace of Europe. This statement
was valueless as evidence, being prompted solely by
his hopes and fears. Nor did it amount to much
more than a repetition of the boasts he had already
spoken openly. It confirmed, however, the original
Hanoverian reports in every detail.
In the following month 2 the duke of Bourbon also
fell from power. The treaty of Hanover had never
been popular in France. A strong coalition in that
country, partly because it looked with friendlier eyes
on Spain than on Britain, partly because it hated
Bourbon, was anxious to bring about his downfall
1 Despite the protests of the British ambassador, Ripperda was shortly
afterwards seized and thrown into prison.
4 June 1736.


and to break away from the alliance. The prime
minister fell before this attack. He was an incom-
petent, governed in everything by his mistress, and no
one regretted him, save a few who looked to make
their fortunes out of his complaisance. The appoint-
ment of cardinal Fleury to succeed him was welcomed
with enthusiasm, not only by the personal enemies of
his predecessor, but by the friends of Spain, and,
most of all, by the Jacobites, who believed him to be
friendly to their cause, and knew him for a pattern of
the devout Roman Catholic. But Fleury was not one
of those who allow either their personal sympathies
or their religion to upset the balance of their statesman-
ship. He had already formed a very favourable
opinion of both the Walpoles, and since their policy
as well as his was peace he now gave them his con-
fidence as fully as his nature allowed him to give it
to any man. He shared their dread of a European
conflagration. So long as they remained masters of
the situation and could hold Townshend in check,
the understanding with Britain should be firmly
maintained.
Fleury was a churchman of a very different pattern
from Dubois and Alberoni. He had held no previous
employment of state when at a bound he became
prime minister of France. He had been the young
King’s preceptor and afterwards his paternal friend.
He deserved affection and respect, for his whole course
had been virtuous and upright; he had never played
the part of a pander. He was ambitious, but delays
and disappointments had neither disturbed his equa-
nimity nor led him into precipitate actions. He had
avoided quarrels and intrigues during the difficult
period of the regency, and had so borne himself as


to make no enemies and to arouse but few jealousies.
He had a pleasant wit and a serene philosophy. He
was a man of superlative patience who played his
game for power coolly and with great judgement. He
was, not bold, ardent or imaginative; but he seems
to have counted confidently that his sound constitution
and temperate habits would ward off death and decay,
and bring him sooner or later to the highest post by
survivorship and the effluxion of time. He was in his
seventy-fourth year when he became prime minister
of France; an age which most men do not live to see,
and of those who do, the greater part have retired
from active life before they reach it. His administra-
tion lasted for sixteen years—till he was close on
ninety.
Had France at this epoch been fertile in men of
genius, it is unlikely that Fleury would have arrived
at power and quite certain that he could not have held
it. But rivalry was almost non-existent at the begin-
ning, nor afterwards was it ever sufficiently formidable
to bring about his downfall, though it occasionally
succeeded in diverting his policy. He cannot be
classed among statesmen of the first force. He
lacked courage and age had not lessened this infirmity.
As a consequence, though his first intentions were
usually honourable, his word was not trusted by
foreign powers. From the British standpoint his
dealings were often shifty and sometimes treacherous.
But he was a loyal servant of France. If his admir-
able economy degenerated at times into a dangerous
parsimony, his whole policy nevertheless —until, like
Walpole, he was forced to abandon it under the
pressure of royal prejudice and public sentiment—
was informed by a quiet wisdom, a love of peace.


and a determination to repair the exhaustion of his
country. In the last matter his success was incon-
testable. Though he might pinch and pare beyond
safety in the public services, he took nothing for him-
self. His savings in national expenditure went to
relieve the burdens of the peasants and of industry,
in roads and other works of public utility; so that
foreign observers, revisiting France towards the end
of his administration, took notice of an amazing
transformation from privation to prosperity, from
misery to content, both in the country-side and in the
towns. No two cardinals were ever more unlike
in their private lives than were the ribald Dubois and
the saintly Fleury; but their policies had many points
of resemblance and their public acts were directed to
the same end.
In August 1726 Russia adhered in due form to the
treaty of Vienna, and Holland came into the treaty of
Hanover. In October, Frederick William of Prussia
withdrew from his alliance with France and Britain
and took part with the Emperor. He had been bribed
by Charles the Sixth with a shadowy promise that he
should have his heart’s desire—the reversion of the
duchies of Berg and Julich —and this he regarded as
better value than the guarantee to the same effect
which he had already received from the other side.
But it was hardly worth while to change over. The
first undertakers, it is true, were not in a posi-
tion to deliver the goods, but the second under-
taker had no intention whatever of fulfilling his
bargain.
At the end of 1726 there was still no actual war, and
the Spanish treasure fleet still lay at anchor in Porto
Bello.


When the Houses met in January 1727 the King’s
speech was more minatory in tone than it had been
twelve months earlier. Ministers may have felt them-
selves on surer ground since Ripperda’s confession
had been pigeon-holed at the Foreign Office. Parlia-
ment was informed in plain words that one of the
secret articles of the treaty of Vienna provided for an
attempt to restore the Pretender; that the Spanish
demand for the restitution of Gibraltar was to be
supported by force of arms ; that the treaty rights of
Britain had been infringed to the detriment of her
trade.
After communicating with his Court, Palm, the
Austrian ambassador in London, presented an angry
and insolent memorandum which was signed by the
Emperor himself. This disclaimer gave a flat denial
to the first two charges; but it was true only in a
technical sense. Neither of these objects had, in
fact, been specified in the secret articles of the original
treaty; but both had subsequently become a part
of the friendly understanding between Vienna and
Madrid. Palm was not satisfied with notifying his con-
tradiction through the usual official channels, but must
needs issue a public announcement that was con-
strued quite accurately as an appeal from the King to
the people of Great Britain. The fact that this state-
ment was couched in offensive language was merely
an aggravation and not the gravamen of his offence.
There are few things that a nation so surely and
so hotly resents, as when some foreigner ventures
to suggest that its government is not authorised to
speak on its behalf. For this is always taken to be a
slur on the institutions of the country. Any previous
unpopularity of king or minister is at once forgotten.


Notwithstanding that an administration may have been
fiercely assailed by a large section of public opinion
and reproached pretty generally with its unfriendly
attitude towards some other power, that other power
will act most unwisely in taking official notice of these
domestic disagreements. For the immediate effect of
doing so is nearly always to produce a swift and violent
revulsion. If a foreigner wants to make his profit out
of a family quarrel, he should keep very quiet about it,
and allow it to rage and spread itself in its own way.
If he goes to work noisily, on the assumption that the
nation is divided against itself, he will probably wake
up next morning to discover that in twenty-four hours
it has become firmly united against himself. Con-
sidering how notorious are the examples of this
tendency, it is strange that the blunder should have
been so often repeated. The National Convention of
France made the same mistake in 1793, when it appealed
to the British people against its prime minister, and to
the citizens of the United States against their president.
As fast as the mails could carry these incitements, the
one nation rallied to Pitt and the other to Washington,
although, up to that moment, the policies of these
leaders had been angrily denounced by large numbers
of their fellow-countrymen, and had been regarded
with silent misgivings by a great many others. More
ancient as well as more modern instances will occur to
every mind.
Ambassador Palm was a dull-witted fellow, the
counterpart of his master. He was also very ignorant
of British affairs and very credulous when disaffected
politicians paid him court. He had been led to believe
that through his own efforts and the Emperor’s
personal intervention Walpole and Townshend might


be driven from power. The Hanoverian favourites
and the parliamentary opposition wished for nothing
better; they encouraged Palm’s delusion; possibly
their invention had produced it; certainly they shared
it. Many of King George’s German courtiers had
received ‘ gratifications ’ from the Emperor. Ever
since the treaty of Hanover Bolingbroke and Pulteney
had been in close and frequent communication with
the Austrian ambassador, whose ill-advised appeal to
the British people may well have been inspired by
these counsellors. For Bolingbroke, in particular,
loved dramatic flourishes, and was rarely right in his
forecasts of their effect on public opinion.
At the beginning of 1727 the opposition leaders,
the Hanoverian favourites and the Emperor himself
were all very hopeful that the British government
might be overthrown by playing on the King’s
anxiety for Hanover —greater than ever, now that
Frederick William had gone over to the enemy —
and also upon his feudal duty to the Emperor. But
the effect of Palm’s manifesto was precisely the con-
trary of what they had expected. The King naturally
resented being told that the information was false
which he had given to his people, and for the accuracy
of which he was responsible in more than the official
sense. The people, though it had no affection for
the King, at once took to itself the insult that had
been offered to him. Even Shippen and his Jacobites
supported the protest of parliament, and expressed
approval when Palm received his passports and was
sent about his business.
Bolingbroke, however, would not allow himself
to be discouraged by this incident. A few weeks
later he made a new bid for power. The duchess of


Kendal, acting on his behalf, put into the King’s
hands a memorandum asking for an interview, at
which he undertook to show how far Walpole had
gone towards ruining the country and how certain
it was that he would succeed unless speedily removed
from office. The duchess feared to offend the
ministers who supplied her with an ample income;
but her jealousy of their influence with King George
overcame her timidity so far as to induce her to act
as the go-between in this confidential attack. King
George showed the document to Walpole, who
begged his master to grant Bolingbroke’s request.
What happened at the conference that followed is
unknown to us. When Walpole sought for informa-
tion the King was not in a communicative mood. He
summarised the conversation in one word— ‘ baga-
telles I ’ We do know, however, that Bolingbroke
drew, or professed to draw, a favourable augury. We
also know that Walpole was annoyed, if not dis-
couraged, by what had taken place, for he talked
angrily to his friends of resignation. Although the
duchess of Kendal was a stupid woman, her influence
could not be despised. She kept a constant guard
over the King, and it was not impossible that in the
end her favoured candidate might find himself in
office. Might it not be Walpole’s wisest policy to
forestall dismissal ? What he said to his friends on
this occasion may have been merely petulance; but
he was not a man much given to such outbursts.
Walpole knew very well that Bolingbroke had
things to say which the King would listen to atten-
tively. Indeed the chief minister himself had mis-
givings about the course of foreign policy, and on cer-
tain points was more in agreement with Bolingbroke


than he was with the secretary-of-state. It was obvious
that Hanover stood in considerable danger; that it
was a very violent proceeding for an Elector to go to
war with his Emperor; that there were few real causes
of difference between Britain and Austria. On the other
hand, it was unlikely that the conflict of ambitions
between Britain and France would be stayed for longer
than a few years. And when Britain had estranged
all her natural allies for the sake of French friendship,
she might discover too late that the old enmity still
survived and that she had been lured into isolation by
a show of amity that was only feigning.
A leader of Opposition will always say, and will
often believe, that his rival’s triumph must be the
country’s ruin. There is nothing to wonder at, nor
much to blame, if Bolingbroke poured the same
story into the King’s ears that his followers were
telling in parliament and to the country. In those
days the conversion of the country was not the shortest
road to power; parliament as yet took its cue from the
King; so that royal favour was the first essential. Is it
more improbable that Walpole was seriously perturbed
lest Bolingbroke might succeed in seizing this key,
or that Bolingbroke was merely boasting when he
led his followers to expect a speedy change of fortune ?
Shortly before this interview took place there was
an overt act of war. The Termagant, whose fate it
was to be continually misled by braggarts, had found
a foolish general who disbelieved in sea-power and
who gave his word that in six weeks he would take
Gibraltar by storm. The most distinguished soldier in
Spain had already resigned his great position rather
than throw away lives against a manifest impossibility.
The siege began on the nth of February 1727,


and continued fruitlessly for four months. The
Spanish troops lost heavily in their attacks and from
disease. The only hope of success lay in driving
off the British fleet that secured the garrison’s
supplies. Without the co-operation of the Austrian
navy no such attempt was possible. The Emperor
was not inclined to risk his ships in an adventure
that seemed to him impracticable. His refusal to do
so threw the Termagant into a fury, and Walpole’s
foresight was justified; for the unnatural alliance of
Vienna passed forthwith into the first stage of dis-
solution. The Emperor had deserted his ally in her
hour of need; he had been guilty of perfidy; and
she at once restored him to his former position of
enemy-in-chief.
Nor was the balance of European power inclining in
favour of the Austro-Spanish combination. In March,
Sweden had adhered to the treaty of Hanover, her
patriots having been by that date sufficiently bribed.
In May the Empress Catharine died and Russia was
no longer a menace. By this time the Emperor was
thoroughly out of conceit with a war in which he had
done nothing and received nothing. He could see no
alternative to peace, and thanks to the moderating
influence of Walpole and Fleury peace was not hard
to get. The wounds that needed healing had not
cut very deep. As yet France and Britain had not
acted against the Emperor except by making a treaty
for their own defence. Nor had France done anything
whatever against Spain. Even Britain had attempted
no open violence, but had merely made a series of
naval demonstrations. It was not the fault of King
George’s government that the Termagant had chosen
to break her teeth against the Rock.


The pacific Fleury seized his opportunity, and at
the end of May the Austrian ambassador at Paris
signed the preliminaries, agreeing to 4 suspend ’ the
Ostend Company for a period of seven years, which
was tantamount to abandoning it altogether. Shortly
afterwards the Spanish ambassador at Vienna followed
suit. The Termagant, having lost all hope of the
Austrian marriage for her son, had no wish to
continue the war. Her mind was now wholly occu-
pied with thoughts of revenge against the ally who
had duped and deserted her.
XVIII. — In what respects the views of Townshend
and Walpole differed in regard to the treaties of
Vienna and Hanover (1725-1727).
Walpole had accepted the treaty of Hanover as a
disagreeable necessity. Since British interests were
threatened by a hostile coalition, measures must
certainly be taken to protect them. But what
measures ?
Townshend was bent on providing safeguards in
his own way. He was a man of precipitate judgement;
but, as the very existence of the government depended
on his influence with the King, it was out of the
question for Walpole to quarrel with him.
A general European war might be in fact inevitable,
or it might be brought about only by Townshend’s
blundering. In either case Walpole’s policy would be
in danger. The chief minister was nettled and dis-
gusted because matters of the first importance had
been concluded behind his back and over his
head. These resentments put an edge on his criticisms,


but they somewhat blunted his judgement. It is im-
possible to give a clear and consistent account of
Walpole’s motives, for the reason that at the beginning
of this crisis his motives were neither clear nor con-
sistent. He had not as yet taken his bearings in
foreign policy. Although he saw some of the dangers
that arose from the Austro-Spanish agreement, his
mind was by no means free from doubt as to the
wisdom of forcing on a rupture with the Emperor.
He shared a widely spread misgiving that the effect
of Townshend’s diplomacy might be to cut Britain
off from Austria, her natural ally, and reduce her to
dependence on France, whose present friendship,
though a good thing in itself, could only be regarded
as a brief interlude in the rivalry of ages.
The objections that Walpole pressed, however,
were of a practical sort, and did not challenge the
general principle of the Hanover treaty. If war with
Spain was imminent, Portugal ought certainly to have
been brought into the alliance. The large sums
demanded for the purpose of opening the eyes of the
Swedish notables to the cupidity of Russia, and of
bribing them into patriotism, were altogether beyond
reason.
On the other hand, Walpole held even more
strongly than Townshend that it was essential to
suppress the Ostend Company and to preserve ‘ most
favoured nation ’ treatment for British trade both in
the Austrian Netherlands and throughout the Spanish
Dominions. For these ends he was prepared to
go to war if no peaceful solution could be found.
And even if he was not seriously perturbed by the
threat of a Jacobite invasion, he dared not make
light of this cause of alarm lest he should throw


away one of his most useful parliamentary weapons.
As to the supposed conspiracy against the Protestant
religion, it is difficult to believe that he took it
seriously; or that he felt any real concern for the
safety of Gibraltar. There appears, however, to be
no room for doubt that, in common with the rest
of the cabinet, he took for true the alarmist reports
that had been circulated by the Hanoverian intelli-
gence department. 1 But although Walpole must be
taken to have approved the course of action that he
subsequently defended so vigorously in parliament, it
would be unfair to assume that he therefore shared
the ideas that were simmering in Townshend’s brain,
or that he looked favourably upon the bias that his
brother-in-law was endeavouring to give to British
policy.
We must allow something for the fact that Walpole
was now for the first time giving his attention to a
department of affairs in which up to the present he
had not meddled. He seems to have taken the view,
so common among colleagues, that the right thing was
being done in a wrong way. To a man of his tempera-
ment grandiosity and vagueness of conception were
repugnant; impetuosity in action hardly less so. He
saw no advantage in a bold initiative. Precautionary
measures and a patient obstructiveness were in his
opinion the means best suited for dealing with the two
hostile powers. His inclination was not to bring con-
troversy with the Emperor to a head, but to allow time
for the inflammatory particles to disperse. Gradually,
VOL. I
2D
1 Walpole’s statement to parliament nine years later (quoted by Stanhope,
cap. xiii.) is explicit upon this point, Hervey’s conclusion, after discussion
of the whole matter ( Memoirs , caps. iii. and iv.), that Walpole ‘ always dis-
£ approved of the treaty of Hanover,’ seems to be misleading. It is quite true,
however, that he always disliked the treaty of Hanover.


but by no means rapidly, his doubts resolved them-
selves, and his negative criticisms gave place to a
positive policy.
Walpole’s own methods were never hard and fast,
but plastic and accommodating. He had a genius for
turning the foibles of his adversaries to the profit of
his own negotiation. He knew Charles the Sixth for
a heavy-handed blunderer, and judged accordingly,
that if his obstinacy were not awakened or his self-
importance ruffled, he might be relied on never to
make good either his threats or his promises. He
knew the Termagant, on the other hand, for the
creature of sudden and violent impulses ; unreason-
able, exacting and inconstant: whom she embraced
with effusiveness to-day, as likely as not she would be
railing at to-morrow. He reckoned that two such
characters were bound to come to loggerheads sooner
or later, unless they were kept united by the mis-
directed activities of a common enemy. Those causes
of quarrel one with the other, which they had succeeded
for the time being in forgetting, had more substance in
them, and were in their nature much more permanent,
than any grievance that either Austria or Spain had
against the members of the Franco-British alliance.
Why not leave it to time to discover the cracks ?
Walpole agreed that the country should arm and
prepare ; but he was not long in making up his mind
that the government should wait and see. When war
actually came about he refused to engage in a vigorous
offensive. So far as the immediate trouble was con-
cerned, his wisdom seemed to be fully justified by the
event. His dilatory and half-hearted methods would
have served him ill against enemies like Louis the
Fourteenth, Frederick the Great, Napoleon or Prince


Bismarck; but they were admirably chosen for dealing
with the Emperor and the Queen of Spain.
Townshend, having no gift of fine discrimination,
allowed but little for the varieties of human character.
He went to work upon the assumption that mankind
was uniform in texture. His diplomacy drew but little
advantage from the inconstancies, vagaries and absurd-
ities of his opponents, or from their mutual jealousies
and perfidies. He would have dealt with the Emperor
and the Queen of Spain as if they had been a pair of
cool and resolute sovereigns, whose policy was clearly
cut and whose alliance nothing but defeat could shatter.
In his eyes the Emperor was the real head of the hostile
combination, and the Termagant to some extent his
tool. Charles appeared to Townshend to be the more
dangerous, because of his reticence and feigning. He
must be forced to unmask and to come out into the
open. After that he must make an abject submission
or else fight to a finish.
In Walpole’s view this spirited policy of Towns-
hend’s, his determination to smash the hostile league,
would have supplied the pressure which alone was
capable of keeping it together. Townshend was a
self-willed man; but Walpole had a happy knack of
talking him round. At the beginning there was no
opportunity for conference, for the one was in Hanover
and the other in London; but so soon as they came
together again Walpole began to regain his ascendancy,
and the war that followed was conducted in accord-
ance with the views of the chief minister rather than
with those of the secretary-of-state.
On the whole, it seems fortunate that things fell
out as they did—that Townshend went his own way
at the beginning and that, as the crisis developed.


Walpole gradually gained the upper hand. For
although there can be no question as to the superiority
of Walpole’s natural judgement, he was not yet quali-
fied, ’when the treaty of Vienna was signed, to take
control of foreign policy. He was not yet master of
the facts ; his view of the European situation was
not yet clarified; his mind was not made up, and, as
he still doubted, his temperament might easily have
led him into a policy of drift. Under his sole guid-
ance even the commercial interests of Britain might
have been compromised and in the end sacrificed;
while the friendship of France might have been
lost, without any countervailing advantage. The
Emperor’s goodwill and respect were never to be won
by yielding to his pretensions. Alarm was the only
motive that could hold him to his word.
If, on the other hand, Townshend had remained for
long in chief command it is likely that he would have
done much mischief; but the fact that at first he
strode forward with unhesitating steps was a good
thing and not a bad. For his general direction was
right, provided that he did not press too far. It was
greatly for the benefit of the country, as also of
Walpole’s own career, that the friendly relations of
France and Britain were tightened into an alliance;
for their concert had a much stronger vitality and
better expectations of a long and useful life than the
politicians in either country seemed willing or able to
believe.
Ever since the treaty of Utrecht the Emperor
had been sulky, querulous and unfriendly to Britain.
He had been engaged in constant intrigues against
his former ally, while preaching on all occasions
the sanctity of their ancient comradeship. For ten


years past his egotism had been too tenderly con-
sidered by British governments. Their long-suffering
had encouraged him to believe they were afraid. This
delusion might be dispelled if he were openly thwarted.
A draught of wholesome vexation might put his
system into better trim for digesting a reasonable but
unpleasant accommodation. But since a reasonable
accommodation was the prime object, it was important
to watch for the first signs of his weakening, and to
take advantage of it, without pushing the quarrel to
extremes ; above all, without starting a great European
war, in which the interests of a horde of allies on both
sides would complicate and delay the making of peace.
XIX.— Of the various stages through which Walpole's
ideas regarding foreign affairs passed, and how
he came to add a fourth fold to his original
policy (1700-1727).
From his first coming into parliament in the reign
of William and Mary u#itil the accession of George the
First, Walpole’s views on foreign policy had seemed
in no way different from those of any ordinary warlike
Whig. 1 For twelve years or more he had supported
his leaders without protest or apparent misgivings,
when they spun out the war with France for their
own selfish ends and to the injury of the nation. He
was one of the loudest critics of the negotiations at
Utrecht, of the peace with France, and of the subse-
quent efforts to put British relations with that country
on a friendly footing. During that period he was
1 170 X-1714.


not one of the acknowledged chieftains of the Whig
party, but only a young and ambitious politician who
spoke admirably upon almost every subject and who
readily adopted his leaders’ opinions upon all matters
of foreign policy. It was mainly in the departments
of trade and finance, taxation and supplies that his
advice was welcomed; and also in the management
of the House of Commons. He did not seek to
obtrude, or even to formulate, any views of his own
upon the European situation; but was content
to follow the lines of Whig tradition which still
guided the counsels of his party. If he often spoke
as a Jingo, denouncing the Bourbons and other Whig
taboos with vigour and gusto, he only did so because
such was the fashion prevalent at that time among his
political associates.
During the first six years of George the First, 1 there
is nothing to show that Walpole had become con-
verted to a policy of peace, unless his efforts to defeat
a Mutiny bill when the country was in danger may be
taken as evidence of a change of heart. On the
contrary, whenever he happened to be out of office,
his speeches were directed as frequently against
Stanhope’s friendly dealings with France as against
any of the other acts of government. But nothing
he either said or did during that period can be assumed
to represent his true opinions. He was in opposition
and he must oppose. On most occasions his guide
was factiousness. Though he spoke on foreign
affairs with great fluency and vehemence, it seems
certain that he had not yet given this subject his serious
attention. He had become a leader; but he was
still in the irresponsible stage when a score in debate
1 i 714-1720.


or an advantage in some parliamentary manoeuvre
outweighed all other considerations.
For the first four years of his own administration 1
Walpole left Townshend a free hand in foreign affairs.
Townshend’s extreme jealousy of interference and his
favour at court would have made it difficult to do
otherwise. Moreover, during this period Walpole
was fully occupied with the management of the
House of Commons and with his own administrative
work.
The making of treaties and other diplomatic
activities which took place in 1725 produced, however,
an important change in Walpole’s attitude. For the
next five years 2 —two of which fell in the reign
of George the First and three in that of George
the Second —he was engaged in a struggle with
Townshend for supremacy in foreign affairs. The
contest at first was not unifriendly, and the parties to
it would probably have denied that there were any
serious differences between them. The secretary-of-
state stood upon his right of exclusive control; but
at the same time he was willing to consider any
practical suggestions which the First Lord of the
Treasury might have to offer. Walpole went to work
without any appearance of deliberate aggression,
without any acknowledgement of his ultimate aim.
Townshend’s suspicions must not be aroused, his hot
temper must not be fanned into flame, or the govern-
ment would fall in pieces. Walpole showed the
utmost consideration for the feelings of his brother-
in-law ; played the friendly counsellor; and made
the most of his own difficulties as leader of the House
of Commons in order to excuse his claim to be
1 1721-1725.
2 1725-1730.


consulted beforehand on all matters that might pos-
sibly raise opposition in parliament.
Immediately after the accession of George the
Second the situation changed, and the struggle
for supremacy that had hitherto been so carefully
veiled passed into another phase. Townshend was
out of favour with the new sovereign, and Walpole
speedily became all-powerful at court. The most
important reason, therefore, for keeping Townshend
in good humour had ceased to exist, and the chief
minister soon showed plainly that he was no longer
willing to meet such heavy drafts upon his patience
as prudence had forced him to honour in the past.
The death of Lady Townshend in 1726 had removed
a peace-maker. The brothers-in-law grew more and
more estranged, and their differences culminated at last
in the scandal of an assault. Townshend thereupon
resigned and Walpole became in fact, though not in
name, his own foreign minister.
It has already been explained that Walpole’s policy
at the beginning of his administration was of a three-
fold character. He aimed at keeping himself in power,
at keeping the Hanoverian dynasty on the throne, and
at fostering the national prosperity.
Before the disturbances arising out of the treaty of
Vienna were at an end, his policy had become four-
fold. He saw clearly that the whole fabric of his
purpose would be in jeopardy, unless he could pre-
vent his country from becoming entangled in one
of those universal wars that in the past had been
measured, not by years, but by decades.
The conflict with Louis the Fourteenth, which was
raging when Walpole first entered political life, had


lasted with no considerable intermission for four-and-
twenty years—from the accession of William and
Mary almost to the death of Anne. Walpole’s youth-
ful efforts had helped to protract that struggle; but
he had since learned wisdom. Such another era of
destruction would be fatal to his maturer ambition.
Henceforth he was the fireman of Europe, and his
endeavour to quench the flames of war, wherever they
broke out, knew no exception. Gradually his resolute
adherence to peace became the chief bone of conten-
tion between the Opposition and himself, the true
dividing-line between parties, the cause at last of his
losing the King’s favour, of his waning popularity and
of his colleagues’ desertion.
Walpole entered on the conflict with Spain and
Austria disliking it by intuition rather than from
reason. He was wrong in underrating the value of
the French alliance, and he was also wrong in his re-
luctance to take a bold line against the Emperor. But
he was right in his subsequent determination that the
Emperor should not be humiliated beyond the strict
needs of the case, or driven into permanent hostility
by an oppressive peace. Experience soon taught
him, however, that although he had sneered at
Stanhope for his subservience to the Bourbons,
although he had doubted Townshend’s wisdom in
strengthening the understanding between France and
Britain, the greatest security for the peace of Europe,
and consequently for his own policy, lay in cultivating
a firm friendship with the traditional enemy.
The success of Walpole’s administration was largely
due to the conclusions at which he then arrived. The
bent of his nature would perhaps have made it diffi-
cult for him to arrive at any others, even had the


circumstances of the time required a different procedure.
By great good luck, however, his cast of mind was
admirably adapted to the particular epoch in which he
found himself. For twelve years to come no way
could have been better than his for dealing with the
needs and temper of his fellow-countrymen, the
characters of contemporary rulers and the peculiar
conditions of Europe. Since his rules of conduct
proved successful, it matters little that they were not
rules of universal application.
The three aims that Walpole set before him at the
outset of his administration—(i) the maintenance of
his own power, (2) the security of the dynasty and
(3) national prosperity—are not aims that have been
equally dependent at all times and in all circum-
stances upon the preservation of peace.
History shows us many examples of wars that
have been undertaken with the deliberate intention
of strengthening the position of a minister, or of
giving security to a new or an unpopular sovereign.
And occasionally victorious campaigns have attained
one or other of these two objects. In the wars of
the National Convention, of the Directory, of the two
Napoleons, of Prince Bismarck and of a host of
others, ancient and modern, we can trace a motive
common to them all, of confirming the authority of
a king, or of a ruling clique, or of a minister of
state.
War, however, is a very chancy undertaking.
Some wars have succeeded which on all principles
of sound business ought to have failed; some
have failed when seemingly every precaution had
been taken to ensure their success. In truth human


forethought is rarely adequate to such stupendous
computations ; for, as one of the most prosperous
of political adventurers has confessed, 4 it is impossible
4 to see the cards which the Almighty holds in His
4 hand/
The reactions of public opinion are even more
incalculable than the issues of war; and they are apt
to produce out of victory, as out of defeat, the most
surprising and unexpected ferments among the people.
Though the war be won, the King may totter on his
throne, or the minister may be disgraced. Reflective
historians would attribute such paradoxes of fortune
to blind chance, or else to the counter-workings
of some hidden law of nature; but, among the
great actors themselves, how many are there who
have believed, in all sincerity, with Bismarck and
Philippe de Commines, that Providence, of set but
inscrutable purpose, will at one time throw barriers
across the open road, at another will remove mountains
from the way ? This at least is certain —that failure
in such adventures has been a far commoner result than
success.
To a man of Walpole’s temperament disaster would
always have seemed the likeliest issue, if the dregs of
the popular cauldron were stirred up by some great
convulsion. Had he been assured of conquest he
would still have shrunk from the disturbances it
might shortly produce in civil affairs.
The third article of Walpole’s policy—the in-
crease of national prosperity—stands on a different
footing. Here his view is in agreement with the
almost universal opinion of responsible statesmen.
Victory in a great war—one in which the conquering
nation has been obliged to put forth its full strength


—has never led, so far as I can discover, to an im-
mediate growth of national prosperity, but, in nearly
every case, to the reverse. The greater the war that
has been won the longer has been the painful process
of recovery. And yet though this is clear enough to
a king or statesman of even moderate capacity —to all
men indeed who have any knowledge of history—the
contrary view, fanatically held in other quarters, has
been one of the most frequent producers of wars.
Popular opinion has at all times been peculiarly subject
to this delusion. Commercial and financial interests
have frequently been misled by it. It has been the
favourite bait, thrown out to catch the vulgar, by
military cliques and by groups of factious politicians.
But the aftermath of a great and victorious war has
almost always had more in common with bankruptcy
than with prosperity.
This is not to say that a victory, which throws
open new fields of enterprise and fills the people with
self-confidence, may not ultimately lead to a vast
growth of industry and riches. But it will be necessary
to wait until a decade or a generation has passed
away; and Walpole was one who looked for quick
returns. This is not to be imputed to him as
a fault. Every statesman fit to be trusted with the
reins of government will take the same view. It is
only the commercial visionary—the most reckless of
all calculators, the most fallacious of all guides—
who will sneer at him. A wise minister may go
to war, willingly or unwillingly, for a large variety
of sound reasons, but never in order to give a fillip
to trade.
The victories of Louis the Fourteenth brought no
prosperity to France, but only misery. When the


campaigns of Frederick the Great came to an end,
Prussia was burned out, like one who has come through
a long and high fever. It is true that after the wars
of the elder Pitt it was not long before British trade
began to reap a great benefit; but Pitt himself was
then no longer in power. After the wars of his son 1
recovery was very slow; there was much suffering and
dangerous discontent before commercial expansion
came in a full tide. Between 1864 and 1871 Bismarck
waged a series of wars with unbroken success. He
claimed with truth that the actual military costs of
these various undertakings were more than covered by
enemy payments of cash and cessions of territory.
But for all that, the plight of German industry gave
cause for grave anxiety during a period the years of
which numbered many more than the months that
had been spent in fighting.
In none of these cases was immediate material
prosperity the aim of kings or statesmen. The
motives that led them into war were mixed and of a
great variety. All these rulers were concerned with
the intangible rather than with the material interests
of their respective states —with considerations of glory,
honour, safety, freedom or aggrandisement. It is
likely that they found consolation for the immediate
injury to trade and credit which they foresaw, in the
hope that, at some future date—possibly after they
themselves had passed from the scene—a prosperity
that sprang from their victories would outstrip all
previous records. But so remote and so uncertain
a prospect is not what agitators and mobs have
in mind when they clamour for war in order that
commerce may thrive.
1 1 793 _1 8i5- The younger Pitt died in 1806.


There is a sense, however, in which every statesman,
when he is confronted with the issue of war or peace,
is justified in considering the interests of trade. He
is not to be blamed for taking account of the evil
effect that may be produced on national prosperity
by leaving things at a stalemate, by submitting to
encroachments and exclusions, by refusing to recognise
that a nation at certain stages in its growth must have
scope for expansion—as a tree must have head-room,
if it is not to die, or to become stunted and deformed.
But a war to prevent industrial ruin or paralysis is an
altogether different matter from one which is under-
taken in the vain hope of an immediate profit.
If a country will not stand up for its rights it must
certainly lose them. The spirit of giving in is the
most fatal disease to which nations are subject, and it
is apt to attack them, like cancer, when they have
arrived at the meridian. Jingoism itself is less fatal
than the appeal on all occasions to material scales, in
order to decide whether the injury that threatens the
country is likely to be less or greater than the sacrifices
that may be needed to prevent it. Concessions to
unjust or impudent demands have a formidable knack
of breeding. The nation that submits from laziness
or fear, or because it is too short-sighted to detect the
specious fallacies of arithmetic, will certainly lose its
own confidence and the respect of its neighbours ;
and these two things are the very foundations of
national prosperity.
Being neither an imaginative nor an emotional man,
Walpole was unlikely to be tempted by commercial
benefits which he could not foresee, and which, on the
most sanguine calculations, could hardly be expected to
fructify during the lifetime of his own administration.


Moreover he was a distruster of leaps and bounds, a
believer in a steady, rather than in a rapid, growth of
prosperity. It was his admirable ambition to keep the
whole body of rural and urban industry marching
forward together upon a straight, unbroken front.
War, even if it should prove successful, must throw this
movement into disorder. No accretions of wealth
arising out of a lop-sided development could ever
compensate for the evils of a violent dislocation. An
essential element in national prosperity, as Walpole
conceived it, was an equal distribution of well-being
between town and country, between all classes of
industry and ranks of society. A greater sum of wealth
which did not diffuse itself throughout the community,
but which lodged in certain sections of it—as in some
unhealthy bodies all the fat lies round the belly—
might not be prosperity at all, but, in a national sense,
impoverishment.
During Walpole’s administration the annual incre-
ment of riches was probably more evenly apportioned
than at any other period in British history. A rank
growth of fortunes, side by side with unrelieved or
increasing penury, was not one of the curses of his age.
No class was then gaining conspicuously at the expense
of any other. Rents and values were rising ; but the
profits of farmers and traders were rising still more
rapidly; while higher wages and fuller employment
more than counterbalanced any increase there might be
in the costs of living. As a result there was not only
less privation than there had been in earlier times, but
there was also less discontent and envy.
The whole credit for this state of things cannot be
placed to Walpole’s account, for the circumstances
of the time were very favourable to his policy. But


it was given to him to understand those circumstances.
It was in his brain that the policy was conceived, and
by his resolute will that it was carried out. Had there
been no Walpole the opportunity might easily have
been missed. That one so fit for the particular occa-
sion should have succeeded in making his way to the
head of affairs appears in the light of a most fortunate
miracle.
The alternative to Walpole would have been some
Whig aristocrat, possibly an able man, but one who
would have walked in the strait path of his party
traditions, and who would have looked upon domestic
affairs as subordinate to the nobler pursuit of knocking
the heads of kings and emperors together. Such a one,
understanding little or nothing about the conditions
of trade or the management of land, would almost
certainly have sought scope for his ambition in
weaving entangling alliances, and in seeking prestige
by constant intervention in continental concerns.
Had the energies of government been misdirected
into such a channel, it would have needed another
miracle to avert a series of ruinous and purposeless
wars.
Walpole had accepted battle without hesitation,
though very reluctantly, sooner than submit to those
encroachments on British trade which Austria had
contrived and which Spain had assented to. But
the events of 1725 and 1726 produced a moment-
ous effect upon his career. They forced him to
clear his mind upon subjects that hitherto he had
somewhat neglected, with the result that he arrived
at a decision which he never afterwards changed.
He gradually came round to the view that the
greatest of British interests was peace; and that


the way to it might easily be closed by a network
of alliances, by violent pronouncements, immoderate
aims and a determination to deal out poetic justice.
Since Townshend entertained different notions, it
was necessary to contrive that henceforth the chief
minister should have something more than an equal
voice with the secretary-of-state in the management of
foreign affairs.
XX.— Of George Ids character and of the quality
of his kingship.
In the first days of June 1727 —shortly after his
interview with Bolingbroke I —George the First set out
for Hanover; but he fell by the wayside. Not far
from Osnabriick he was seized with an apoplexy of
which he died in a few hours. Thus for a second
time was Bolingbroke’s ambition shipwrecked on a
royal demise. 2
They buried George Lewis where he would have
wished to lie—in Hanover city, with his forefathers.
It was more fitting that he should be laid to rest among
his own people, who loved him—not certainly as a
hero, but as kings are loved when they have shown
themselves just, and brave, and homely—than in
England, where his light went out like a blown candle,
and where the mourning for him was a frigid make-
believe. Among his British subjects the King’s death
caused no deeper emotion than surprise at its sudden-
ness. They were insensible of any loss, callous, on the
whole perhaps more glad than sorry, when the crown
changed heads. How could they pretend to love a
VOL. I
2 E
1 Ante, p. 396.
2 Ante, p. 157.


sovereign who never dissembled his preference for the
country of his birth ? And bearing no affection to
George the First they overlooked the not inconsider-
able debt of gratitude they owed him.
The duchess of Kendal, well laden with spoil,
retired to her villa at Chiswick where one day a raven
flew in at the window. Concluding that the spirit of
the departed king had returned to earth in this solemn
guise, she received the bird with reverence and
cherished it.
During the reign of George the First the commonest
and most vehement complaints against him were that
he subordinated the interests of the United Kingdom
to those of his Hanoverian Electorate; that he mis-
used the strength and prestige of Britain to aggrandise
his position as a German prince ; that he squandered
British money on his foreign favourites.
The last of these charges is of the same sort as those
which have been levelled against every prince and some
princesses who have come as strangers to be crowned
at Westminster. It was made with justice against
George the First and his Germans, but on even better
grounds against William the Third and his Dutchmen,
against James the First and his Scots. Daughters of
France and Spain who became queens of England have
frequently had to bear the same reproaches.
The complaint against George the First was inspired
to a large extent by personal considerations. From
envy, disappointment or malice people were apt to
exaggerate both the amount of his largess and the
evils it inflicted on the nation. It was not in reality
a matter of the first importance. The King had not
been slow to understand that in comparison with


Hanover Britain was a very corrupt as well as a very
rich country. The main object of those native-born
courtiers and politicians whom he found awaiting him
in London seemed to be the obtaining of sinecures and
posts of profit for themselves and their families. Why
should his faithful and frugal Germans have no share
in the pickings ? To say that the resources of the
United Kingdom were dried up or that the exchequer
was to any serious degree embarrassed by these
trumpery depredations was manifestly absurd. In
principle, of course, there was a grievance, but in
practice there was none, for it had long been the
custom to distribute a substantial portion of the
national revenue among people who gave little or
nothing in return. So far as the country was concerned,
it could not matter a great deal whether this dole was
paid exclusively to British parliamentarians and peers,
or whether they were obliged to share it with the
Hanoverian favourites. But the invasion of a mono-
poly, however scandalous, will usually produce an
unreasoning storm of indignation among a large
number of people who have no interest in the transac-
tion. It was easy in this case to raise a clamour, for
the King was unpopular, while his German followers,
from first to last, were objects of mockery and abuse.
George the First was shocked not only by the
insubordination of British statesmen and by their
want of political education, but also by the vast sums
that were paid to them as salaries and perquisites.
In Hanover, thoroughly trained ministers could be
engaged for one-tenth of the price. These German
counsellors were not by nature incorruptible; but
while engaged in treading out the sparse Hanover
corn they were tightly muzzled. Being set free on
VOL. I 2 E 2


their arrival in England, they created much scandal
by the grossness of their appetites and the crudity of
their methods. But they were undoubtedly stuffed
fuller of knowledge than their English equivalents,
much harder-working and by no means lacking in
penetration, especially with regard to the designs of
foreign powers. They were professionals who had
graduated in statecraft, as one takes a degree in law
or medicine. They had served a hard practical
apprenticeship, and had risen to importance solely on
the Elector’s appreciation of their services. By con-
trast the British seemed to him adventurers and
caballers, who forced themselves upon their sovereign,
not by their merits, but by their influence with parlia-
ment. In political science they were amateurs, and,
seeing that they dealt largely in oratory, mountebanks.
On the other hand he came gradually to understand
that they had qualities the others lacked. They were
less encumbered with learning and precepts than the
Germans and, as a consequence of this, they were
usually capable of taking a simpler and truer view of
the general situation when, being in office, it was their
interest to use their faculties for the public advantage.
They were less afraid of responsibility than Bothmer,
Bernstorff and the rest; in action much readier,
though undoubtedly more rash.
The second charge—that George the First misused
the resources of Britain to strengthen his position as a
German prince—rests upon a somewhat slight founda-
tion. None of his political acts was of a heinous
character. He had long hankered after the duchies of
Bremen and Werden, in order that he might round off
his Hanoverian dominions. In the second year of
his reign he obtained possession of these territories,


thanks to British assistance. Denmark, the occupying
power, gave them up in return for a subsidy from
the British exchequer. Sweden, which held the legal
title, was intimidated by the British fleet. But the
annexation of the duchies to Hanover was no injury to
Britain, but a benefit, inasmuch as it opened the rivers
Elbe and Weser to her commerce. The Swedish king
was an enemy, and the coalition with Denmark to
keep him in check had the hearty approval of a cabinet
that included Townshend, Walpole and Stanhope.
The subsequent wrangle between George and the
Emperor over the fees of investiture produced much
ill-feeling, but it cannot be said truly that Britain,
which at that time had grievances of its own against
Charles the Sixth, was in any way a sufferer thereby.
The general charge that George the First sub-
ordinated the interests of the United Kingdom to
those of his Electorate contains just as little substance.
It is true that in every emergency his first thoughts
were for Hanover; but his second thoughts almost
invariably conformed to the views of his English
ministers. On no occasion of real importance did he
act contrary to their counsels, and certainly at one
critical juncture, solely out of regard for the duty he
owed to Britain, he deliberately followed a course of
policy which threatened serious dangers to his German
dominions. 1 The true charge against him touches,
not his loyalty to the United Kingdom, but his intelli-
gence. He could not always see for himself where
his duty lay. He needed to have explained to him at
tedious length things which an Englishman-born
would have understood at the first glance. The sole
difficulty was to make him understand; for when that
1 Ante , p. 384.


was accomplished, no cajolery was needed to bring
him into the line that British interests required him
to take.
The chief cause of the King’s unpopularity among
his British subjects, the real grievance of the parlia-
mentary Opposition that attacked him for his German
proclivities, was much more a matter of sentiment than
of substance. When a foreign prince accepts the
British crown he finds himself in a position of consider-
able difficulty. It is expected of him that he will
show on all occasions a grateful and radiant counten-
ance. When a stern sense of duty calls on him to
revisit from time to time his native land, he must
appear to grudge every day of absence from the
generous people who have chosen him to rule over
them. Had George been able to simulate a love for
Englishmen and Englishwomen, for English institu-
tions, customs and pastimes, or had he even been
able to dissemble his clear preference for all things
German, he might have done far more for Hanover
at the expense of Britain than he ever dreamed of
doing, and no one would have murmured save a
few embittered Jacobites. But our first Hanoverian
king was no play-actor. He could neither simulate
nor dissimulate. The best he could do was to hold
his tongue, and his silence was taken as a proof of
his ingratitude, of his boorish upbringing, of his
aversion.
In his personal appearance, as in his appetites,
George the First was gross—a heavy, fleshy man,
somewhat under the middling height, much addicted
to eating, drinking and women. Nor did he show
himself dainty in any of these matters. He took
pleasure in late suppers and punch, in jokes and


buffoons, and in mistresses whose ample figures
appeared to compensate him for their want of vivacity
and intelligence. But though he freely indulged his
tastes, they never gained the mastery. He was neither
a glutton nor a drunkard. Rarely, if ever, did he
allow his gallantries to encroach on his hours of
business or to influence his policy.
He hated parade and ceremonial, comported him-
self stiffly and without a smile on all public occasions,
which is not the royal road to popularity. He was
taciturn by nature, and his want of English increased
this natural defect. He was not unsociable, however,
in a narrow circle, talking German by preference if his
company understood that tongue, French if they did
not, or turning his pleasantries into dog-Latin for the
benefit of Walpole. He had a certain grim sense of
humour; also at times an unexpected delicacy of
consideration for the feelings of others. Wanting
imagination, he was indifferent to danger; but
beyond this, he was valorous by nature and had
more political courage than is possessed by most
sovereigns.
The men to whose advice he listened did not
belong to the worthless class that is known in
history as royal favourites. He had no fancy for
surrounding himself with insinuating flatterers. He
chose his counsellors not for their servility, but
because he thought well, rightly or wrongly, of
their abilities. Even his Germans were persons of
great industry and considerable attainments. On the
whole he was no bad judge of men, though we are
occasionally puzzled by the order of his preferences.
He thought very highly of Stanhope and Walpole, but
still more highly of Townshend, and he was apt to give


much greater weight to Sunderland’s opinions than
they deserved. The English statesman in whose
society he took most pleasure was Carteret, and it is
to his credit that he did not hesitate to follow the
counsels of Carteret’s opponents, when he became
convinced, as he soon did, that they were sounder
advisers in national affairs. Whatever the faults of
these English ministers may have been, not one of
them was a sycophant; in force of character and
ability they were the very pick of the Whig party.
A great king is a very rare phenomenon; but a
good king—a hard-working man who follows what
he believes to be wise counsels, who has a fairly clear
conception of what the national policy ought to be,
who holds to it as consistently as circumstances will
let him, who puts the honour and interest of the realm
before his own ease, and who, upon the whole, succeeds
in his modest endeavour to leave his country somewhat
better than he found it—such kings have been a good
deal commoner than our history books would lead us
to suppose.
Thoroughly bad kings are only a degree less rare
than great kings ; and if they appear to be more
numerous it is because political writers are apt to
look on mere failure as a proof of crime. Many
of those monarchs against whom fortune has run in
an irresistible tide-race are set down as bad. It is
the same with most of those who, though honest of
purpose, have blundered, who have aimed at things,
not wicked, but impossible in the age they lived in, or
who have chosen the wrong instruments for carrying
out a policy that in itself was sound and patriotic.
When a reign has ended disastrously for a king or for
his subjects the king must bear the brunt.


Since the fall of Constantinople, nearly five centuries
ago, the great kings in Europe may be numbered
on one’s fingers. During that period we have had
in England only one sovereign indubitably great —
Elizabeth —and only one indubitably bad—Richard
the Third. 1 We have had several misguided, in-
competent and unhappy monarchs, such as Charles the
First, James the Second and (during a part of his reign
at least) George the Third; but fortunately we have
not lacked good and serviceable kings, and among
these George the First may certainly be placed.
The virtues which furnish out a great king are not
by any means the same as those which go to make a
good man. Some of them indeed—such as courage,
justice and a few others—are common to both
characters; but, even so, the order of their importance
varies in the two cases. Nor, upon a close inspec-
tion, do the virtues themselves appear quite identical,
except in name. The ideal of kingly courage, for
example, differs widely from the pattern of Bayard.
The sense of justice that would adorn a private
person is tempered to a far greater degree with for-
giveness of injuries than would befit one whose duty
it is to consider the safety of his people. Some of
those qualities that are counted to a good man as
shining virtues such as warm-hearted friendship
—would be matters of indifference, or even of em-
barrassment, in the case of a sovereign. And again,
some of the qualities that have contributed most
powerfully to make kings great are inconsistent with
our notions of a gentleman, of a loyal master, or of a
Christian.
1 If indeed we may accept the traditional estimate of him which has
been called in question by Horace Walpole and other judicious writers.


There is something of chance in the reputations
that are earned by public characters. A king may
be neither great nor good, and yet if he happens to
fit the needs of his time he may gain considerable
popularity in his own day; and this not infrequently
will crystallise into a favourable verdict from history.
On the other hand he may possess sterling qualities and
serve a very useful purpose, and yet receive nothing
but abuse while he lives and little but contempt from
posterity. The latter has been the fate of George the
First, although the opportuneness of his reign and its
substantial success have never been matters of serious
dispute.
George the First possessed certain noble qualities,
some of them by no means common. He was honour-
ably distinguished by his truthfulness, by his sobriety
of judgement, by his fidelity to his word, by his loyalty
to his ministers. His course of action in public affairs
was deflected only to a trifling extent by his prejudices ;
in the main it was determined by his sense of duty.
But he had no pretensions to greatness, for this reason,
if for no other, that he lacked the supreme and rarest
quality of all. Unlike Elizabeth he was incapable of
regarding his kingship as a drama and himself as
the principal actor in it. His inferiority to her in
political capacity is not the whole measure of the
difference between them. Never on a single occa-
sion was he uplifted and his strength increased an
hundredfold by the enthusiasm of his people. His
kingship was a thoroughly matter-of-fact affair. He
jogged along in a humdrum fashion, doing his best
at the head of a very troublesome business. It was a
creditable performance and deserved more gratitude
than it earned.


But Elizabeth was something quite different. She
was the spirit of England incarnate. Her own deepest
and strongest feelings were also the deepest and
strongest feelings of a vast majority of Englishmen,
gentle and simple alike. In her great moments she
brought the whole country to her side with a gesture
or a phrase. The manifestations of her prodigious
influence are clear enough, but the veritable sources
of it are not so easy to discover. Her faults, at this
distance of time, appear as glaring as her virtues. She
was vain, mean, ungrateful, revengeful and perfidious.
Many were her hesitations and delays; they brought her
realm into grave dangers ; but she had the gift to keep
her own counsel so closely that even her vacillations
produced on the minds of most men the impression
that she was playing a deep and patient game. Her
policy was sometimes timid ; but she herself had the
art always to appear bold. In all personal encounters
she was fearless : more than fearless —overawing.
She ruled England as an autocrat, but without an
army. She kept her place in Europe with no more
powerful weapon than a fleet that her avarice starved
and stinted of the most necessary supplies. Her
parliaments were sometimes mutinous and spoke of
grievances real and imaginary. When she dared order
them about their business, she did so ; and they went
away silenced. When she did not dare—owing to
some force of public opinion too strong to be with-
stood—she would give way with a frankness and
apparent bonhomie that delighted the populace, though
it filled the minds of the ringleaders with vague fore-
bodings of a future retribution. When she yielded
most reluctantly she was still the autocrat, and con-
trived to make even her concessions wear the appearance


of commands. What virtue in her produced this
great authority ? It was not simply her sense of the
dramatic, her courage, shrewd judgement, the prestige
of success, or mere good luck. ‘ Personal magnetism ’
is only a coverlet phrase and not an explanation of the
mystery. Whatever her secret may have been, her
successor George the First had no inkling of it.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME
Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh.




