

V- Q, V
friiM tii| Ifinmmu.
APOSTLES’ CREED.
“CHRIST DIED FOR OUR SINS, AND
ROSE AGAIN.”
TUB
REV. THOMAS BINNEY.
Price One Shilling.
SYDNEY:
G. E. ADDISON, 487, BRICKFIELD HILL,
GEORGE STREET SOUTH ;
J. W. WAUGH, 139, GEORGE STREET;
JOHN L. SHERRIFF, 135, GEORGE STREET; •
W. MOFFITT, 89, PITT STREET;
AND TO BE OBTAINED OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.


BINNEY’S SEBMONS.
SALVATION BY FIRE,
SALVATION IN FULNESS.
Price One Shilling ; post free, Fourteen Penny Stamps.
G. R. ADDISON, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street South,
Sydney.
SPURGEON’S SERMONS.
SERMONS, by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, cloth, lettered,
65.; half-roan, 75.; half-calf, Bs.; calf, gilt, 10s.; morocco,
gilt, 10s. 6d. Post free, sixpence extra.
THE CRYSTAL PALACE SERMON, preached by the
Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, in the Crystal Palace, to 24,000
persons, with the Hymns sung, and the Prayers offered up
on that occasion. To which is added a Critique on his
Peculiarities, thirty-two pages. Price Sixpence ; post
free, eight penny stamps.
SPURGEON’S SERMONS, Sixpence each; post free,
eight penny stamps.
“WHY HALT YE BETWEEN TWO OPINIONS?”
An Appeal to the Undecided, by the Rev. H. G. Guinness,
commonly called “ The Irish Spurgeon,” uniform with
and supplementary to “ Spurgeon’s Sermons.” Price
Sixpence ; post free, eight penny stamps.
SIX SERMONS, more or less bearing on the application
of Christian Principles to the circumstances of the Present
Ago. Preached at Brisbane, Moreton Bay, by the Rev.
J.ames Carter, S.A.C., Minister of St. Mark’s Picton, with
the Oaks, and West Bargo, Stitched wrapper, 25.; cloth, 3a.
Post-free, 2d. extra.
G. R. ADDISON, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street
South, Sydney.


THE APOSTLES’ CREED,
ETC. ETC.
I CORINTHIANS, xv. 3, 4.
“I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures ; and that he was
huried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures.”
In the prosecution of this discourse I shall attempt the
following things
I-—I shall, in the first place, state the principle of inter-
pretation on which our subsequent remarks will proceed,
and by which they will be modified.
lI.—I shall, in the next place, bring out from the text,
and set forth, what, on the principle explained, will, we
think, he found in it.
Two or three general observations, suggested by the
subject, will then conclude the discourse.
Our first object, then, is to state, —perhaps to explain,
illustrate, and defend, —the principle of interpretation which
we mean to apply to the text.
Some years ago, one of the writers, in a then noticeable
series of tracts, advanced this position,—or used words to
this effect: —“ It should be remembered, that it is only by
accident, that we have, in the writings of the Apostles, any
h 57


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
distinct statement of Christian doctrine.” This assertion
occasioned, at the time, in some quarters, much excitement;
—indeed, a great outcry. It was thought to be something
very terrible. Certainly the word “ accident” in such a
connection is most inappropriate, and, in fact, offensive.
The opinion, too, which the assertion was intended to sup-
port,—our dependence on unwritten tradition for a full and
definite Christian Creed, —is one which, as Protestants, we
should of course condemn. Being well-considered, however,
—steadily and thoughtfully looked at, —something very
like a truth may be found lying within these strange
words; —something, too, which it may perhaps be important
for us rightly to understand, and constantly to remember.
This may be seen, we think, by recollecting the origin,
character, and object of the Apostolic Epistles.
With the exception of the Epistle to the Romans and
that to the Hebrews, both of which partake of the nature of
set disquisitions, each of them assuming, more or less, the
appearance of orderly and systematic arrangement,—with
the exception of these, the apostolic letters are very informal.
They are not so much adapted directly and simply to explain
to a stranger what Christianity is, as to indicate and make
him feel what it must have been in the apprehension of
those to whom the writings would be intelligible.
The Gospel was preached before it was written. When
the preachers of it began to write, they did not so much
write it, as write about it: for they wrote to people that
believed it; —who had it in their minds as knowledge—who
did not need to have it announced to them, or explained,
but only to have it referred to as something already under-
stood. For several years the Gospel was diffused as a
system of truth, —and Churches were established upon it,
and grew up holding it, as so much distinct, and distinctly
defined, objective belief—without its having been committed
to writing, and without the possibility, therefore, of any
one learning it from written books.


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
I speak only of the Epistles, —as it is with them that we are
at present concerned, —when I say, that the earliest apostolic
writing which we have, could not have been written earlier
than twenty years after Christ’s ascension; and that, so far
as the writer was concerned (Paul), it was not written till
more than half of his apostolic career was past. Previous to
this, the Gospel was in the Church as a tradition; —or as a
deposit in the hands of the Apostles;—or, so far as revealed,
as so much common public thought. It was taught by
word of mouth: —it was received as reported and explained
by those who preached it; its facts, doctrines, beliefs —its
ideas of the Divine, the Spiritual, the Future—all existed
in the mind of the Christian community without their being
formally set forth in any systematic apostolic writing,—or
any apostolic writing at all, —such as the Epistles, at least,
of which we now speak.
Then—after twenty years from the ascension of Christ,
and after more than the half of Paul’s apostolic labours in
vocally publishing the Gospel was over, —after this, when
he began to write, his writings, for the most part, were
called forth from him, so to speak, by local circumstances ;
—they were required, or occasioned, by something that
might seem temporary or accidental. I do, not hold that
there was anything accidental in the matter; but it is
simply a fact, that the letters were occasioned and called
forth by events and circumstances, which the Apostle
noticed in writing from not having opportunity to speak,
or not choosing to wait till he could speak, by the living
voice. His writings must be looked at, therefore, in the
light of this fact, and interpreted according to the relations
which he and those whom he addressed stood in towards
each other. You will observe, then, and mark this important
position,—that, in the Apostolic Epistles, Paul does not
write to persons ignorant of the Gospel,—he does not write
for the purpose of preaching it by the pen;—he does not
write for the purpose of formally explaining it; —but he


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
takes it for granted, and speaks of it as a thing already-
existing, as so much known and admitted truth, in the
minds of those to whom he writes. Hence, the Gospel is
not, properly speaking, revealed to those persons ; declared
as a new thing; or elaborately and minutely set forth, as
for the information of those who knew it not. It is referred
to; appealed to; language is employed which involves it.
All the phraseology is such as indicates that there is some-
thing underlying the phraseology;—something which the
writer and the persons addressed mutually and perfectly
well understood, —but which strangers must in a great
measure infer. Such and such words, we say,—such and
such phrases and allusions, —used by, and passing between,
these people, can only be accounted for on the supposition
of such and such ideas being common to both—being held,
believed, understood, and, after such and such a fashion,
apprehended on both sides. The previous verbal teaching
of the man who now writes, which had formed and moulded
the faith of the people written to, must, we say, have
included such and such statements, or, these written terms
never could have been thought of; —they would not have
been wanted, and they could not have been employed.
Above all other kinds of writing, letters (such writings,
that is to say, as St. Paul’s,) need to be interpreted on the
principle now advanced; —that is, on the implied existence,
on both sides, of knowledge beyond what may be distinctly
stated in the writing itself; which knowledge would make
the writing perfectly intelligible to those who received it;
and which will have to be admitted, assumed, or somehow
made out by others if it is to become intelligible to them.
It may be worth while to illustrate this, by referring to a
passage or two bearing on something of no doctrinal im-
portance, —something out of the range of theological ideas.
—“ The cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, when
thou comest bring with thee.” “ Trophimus have I left at
Miletum, sick.” The Apostle, you observe, does not say, in
60


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
80 many words, that he had been at Troas and Miletum.
He does not inform Timothy of the fact, as of a thing which
he did not know. He does not state the matter as he might
have stated it to a stranger, who was utterly ignorant of
him and his movements, and to whom he wished to com-
municate the knowledge. He does not do this; —yet, with-
out his doing it, it is easy to see that the words must be
interpreted on the hypothesis that, underlying the words,
there was the fact that Paul had heen at the places men-
tioned, and that Timothy knew that. This fact, being
known alike to Paul and Timothy, the words of the one
would to the other be natural, sufficient, and perfectly
intelligible; and to us, too, if we admit the fact, their
import is obvious. If, however, the fact should be denied,
then the words must be explained on some other hypothesis.
That is to say, words, obviously implying that Paul had
personally been at Troas and Miletum, would have to be
explained as not implying any such thing; and it would
have to be shown how he could say that he had left things
at one place, or separated from persons at another, without
there being any necessity for supposing that he had person-
ally been at either of them. This illustration will show
what we are aiming at in these remarks. We mean to say,
and to affirm, that, just as the historical fact referred to,
must be understood as lying beneath the texts now quoted,
so, in many other texts, in the epistolary writings of St.
Paul, facts and doctrines, —great and momentous ideas, —
not themselves distinctly stated, must be miderstood as
lying beneath the phraseology he employs,—either for that
phraseology to be justified in itself, or for us to have any
adequate notion of the way in which it must have been
felt and understood by those to whom it was originally
addressed.
I am well aware that these views may be regarded by
many as somewhat questionable, perhaps dangerous. It
may be thought that if they do not lead us to overlook, or


THE APOSTLES’ CKEED.
to undervalue, the really distinct and positive statements of
Scripture, they may foster the habit and lead us to depend
on the vague issues of inferential reasoning. I am not,
I confess, alarmed by this. That hind of inferential
reasoning for which we contend, is by no means the
questionable thing that some think it. Besides, it is a
necessity, a simple matter of fact, that our study and
interpretation of the apostolic letters must be conducted
with the aid of it, whether we are willing to say so, or
not. Of course, it is to be borne in mind, that these
letters must be taken as a whole; that it is not from
a separate passage, or a single document, that we can
learn everything; that it must be by the comparison of
passage with passage, and of Epistle with Epistle,—the
putting together of all that bears on each topic, in the
dilferent productions,—that we can hope to make out in its
perfect fulness and exact form, that underlying subtratum
of thought on which the language of the Epistle rests, —
which was in the Church before they were written—and
which in every one of them is assumed to be known. In
perfect consistency, however, with this admission of the
necessity of collecting, from every part, the entire sense of
the whole Scripture, we beg to remark, that it may at
times be exceedingly useful to take an isolated passage,—
to notice the peculiarity and pregnancy of its terms, —and
to mark the implications which they suggest. Kindred
passages will, for the most part, need to be referred to, to
confirm, complete, temper, or modify; but, from some sepa-
rate and single statement, we may often obtain very striking
and important results, —the discovery, it may be, of fixed
points, of logical limitations, or guiding lines.
I am willing to hope, that it may not be without its use
for us to illustrate the principles and canons of this first
division of our Discourse by the form into which we shall
now throw our remarks on the words before us. “Moreover,
brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
•unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye
stand; by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory
what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again
the third day according to the Scriptures.”
Our principal business will be with the third and fourth
verses; but we shall probably touch, at one time or other,
the entire context. In dwelling upon the verses indicated,
our object will be to show, from what they express, what
they imply. Looking at what is plainly on the surface, we
wish to point out how much must be understood, and can-
not hut be understood, as lying beneath, to give substance
and significance to what is said. These implications will
be examined and illustrated, only so far as they relate to
two things:— First, to the Apostle himself, as a religious
teacher, —what he professed to be and do: and Secondly,
to his idea of the sort of Eeligion which Humanity needs,
and how it is to he obtained, as indicated by what he did.
In proceeding to the development of these several matters,
it may be permitted us to observe, that you cannot but
notice, at the very outset, how strikingly the whole passage
before us, reading from the beginning of the chapter, illus-
trates the foundation-fact on which the whole of our pre-
liminary discussion proceeded. All along, the Apostle refers
to what the Corinthians knew; to what he had “ preached ”
among them; what they had “received,” and “believed,”
and “in which they stood.” This personal, oral teaching of
his, of which he reminds them, had commenced about five
or six years before, and had continued for about two years ;
—for three or four years he had been absent from Corinth.
During the whole of that time, the Corinthians, so far as we
know, had not in their possession a single apostolic writing,


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
except, it might be, copies of the Epistles to the Thessalo-
nians, which Paul wrote from Corinth soon after his settle-
ment there, and with which his course of sacred authorship
began. Though the Corinthians, however, had no Christian
books, they had the Christian truth. They had no New
Testament, but they had the ideas it was one day to con-
tain, They had no written Evangel, but they had the
Gospel itself:—they “knew” it and “believed” it. Paul
appeals to that knowledge and belief. He refers to the fact
of his vocal instructions and living ministry. He reminds
them of what it was he had “declared” and “delivered” to
them, namely, “that the Christ died’for our sins,” and that,
after being buried, “ he rose again from the dead.”
This statement, then, well considered, w'ill be seen, we
think, to imply much, and that very noticeable, in relation
to the Apostle himself as a religious teacher. It casts light
on his own conceptions of his office, his personal preten-
sions, what he had to do, the sort of knowledge he professed
to impart, and so on.
In the first place: it is very obvious from the words
before us, that Paul, standing up to teach, did not profess to
be a great thinker. He claimed nothing on that ground.
He might have had great thoughts; he may have been a
person of consummate ability,—of large genius, wonderful
originality, profound insight, high culture; one who had
long and deeply meditated on whatever was perplexing or
interesting to man; —but he came with no pretensions
resulting from all this, or resting upon it. He was not a
philosopher, who had reasoned out a system of truth; who
had penetrated, or thought he had penetrated, into the
unseen ; had discovered the secrets of the universe, or could
explain the mystery of life. He made no pretensions to any
such thing. He did not invite men to listen to what, in his
thinkings about the world and man, he had arrived at, as
to the Divine existence, perfections and government,—moral


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
duty,—religious worship,—a future state, —or any other
of the great problems which had exercised the human mind
in all ages, and upon which so many theories were to be
met with in his own. He did not come forth with his
theory. He did not take his stand among his fellow-
mortals who were everywhere asking for some solution of
those things, and say,—“ Listen to my solution. I will tell
you how these matters have come to shape themselves to
me, as the result of frequent and prolonged thought He
did not do that. Great thinkers, or men professing to be
such, or taken for such, have been always very much in
request, and they no doubt have their place and their use.
As a Christian teacher, however, I wish you to observe,
that Paul did not pretend to be one of these, nor in his
apostolic character, is he to be accounted one of them.
Whatever might be the strength of his intellect, the large-
ness of his knowledge, his habits of thought, his earnest
grappling with the mysteries within and the mysteries
without him, he never pretended to have made any dis-
coveries. He did not come forth with something of his
own; —a religious and moral system which he was ready to
teach, —to argue out, or to argue for; which he presented
to the human understanding, and was prepared to urge
upon it by the powers and forces of logical demonstration.
He took what might be thought far lower ground than this.
His, apparently, was a humbler vocation. He said that he
had to speak about some one else ; —he had something to
say respecting him. He had not to utter his own thinkings,
but to tell what he had been told about this person. His
pretensions went no higher than this; —his great anxiety
was to do that I
But, in the second place, Paul not only did not come as a
thinker, professing to have discovered, by native force, the
spiritual system which underlies all visible and human
things;—but he did not even come simply as an inspired


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
prophet, to whom the true and the spiritual had been
revealed hy God. What he professed was, not that the
eternal and the invisible had been unveiled, —that the secret
of existence and the wonders of the universe had been
made known to him, hy the spirit of inspiration,—and that
he was commissioned to teach what he had thus learned.
It was not this that he said. He did not claim atten-
tion because he had been made the recipient of so much
thought, —thought, which had directly passed from the
Divine Intellect to his own—and which would make men
wise and knowing in relation to all truth. He did not say
that he was in possession of certain authentic discoveries
of eternal, spiritual relations and facts; —or that he was
entrusted with divine messages, commands, or promises
only—things which could he conveyed from the mind of
God to the mind of a prophet, and then hy him put into
words. No: he said he had to speak about other matters,
and after another fashion, altogether. He had to make
known the Christ, —the Anointed One, —the Sent and the
Messiah of God. He had to speak about a person; some
one that had actually lived in the world; whose appearance
had been a recent, visible reality,—but whose coming was a
divine act. He had to speak of this ; —that is, the putting
forth of power on the part of God, in sending a Christ into
the world, —not merely the impartation of knowledge by
sending thoughts into an inspired soul. You cannot but
see that the text tells us all this, as plainly as anything
can; —not in so many words, but by necessary and inevit-
able implication. Paul, then, when he stood up as a reli-
gious teacher, neither professed to be a great, original
human thinker; —nor merely to have received, by prophetic
illumination, a discovery of eternal, spiritual truth. It was
not of the eternally true only, but of the recently miraculous
that he had to speak ; —not merely of divine discoveries, hut
divine acts; not thoughts, but things; not what had been
conveyed to him as intellectual entities, but what had been


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
embodied in a personal Messiah. He had to preach Christ,
not Christianity. The word Christianity he might never
have heard; —Christ as a Person he knew. Of Him he
spake;—declaring and testifying, in the words before us,
“ that he died for our sins, and rose again from the dead.”
But a third thing is to be noticed here, —one that neces-
sarily springs out of the Apostle’s statement as to what it
was that he had to say about Christ. Paul, we have shown,
did not come either as a human thinker, or merely as an
inspired prophet; but as one who had to direct men to the
Christ of God. I wish you now to observe, that in telling
us what he had to say about Christ, he did not set him forth
as a thinker or a prophet. He was not himself a philosopher;
nor was he the pupil of one. He did not say that he had
learnt, from a great master of thought, a wonderfully
arranged system of truth, which he was ready to teach as
his. Nor did he say, that the Christ he spoke of had had
revealed to him, by the Spirit of God, all possible or neces-
sary knowledge; —that he was commissioned to teach this ;
—that he had taught it; —that he, Paul, was in possession
of it, —a divine system of thought,—great ideas, originally in
the Divine Mind, —then in Christ’s, by direct inspiration,—
now in his, from his having learnt what Christ had taught.
This was not Paul’s way of putting the thing. It plainly
appears, from the words of the text, that what he had to tell
about Christ was, not what he had spoken, but what he had
done; not what he had thought or what he had said, —but
what he had accomplished. Paul did not carry about with
him copies of Christ’s discourses to give to people, or repeat
and rehearse them in his own, as if that was the thing he
had to do. It was not what Christ had preached that he
preached;—but Christ himself, —what he was, and what he
had done. Not what he had told his hearers in words, —but
what he had effected for the world by his work; —not what
he had revealed of truth to the human intellect, but how he


THE APOSTLES’ CEEEH.
had acted and what he became on man’s behalf; —not what
he had uttered and taught while he lived, but what he had
done and accomplished when he died. Nothing can be
plainer than this in Paul’s own account of his office. It is
involved in the text, —in every line and in every letter.
He had not to speak—or not mainly—of one who thought,
taught, instructed, lived. It was not Christ the Thinker,
—the Speaker,—the Prophetthe utterer of parables,
the giver of precepts, the revealer of the unknown; —one
who spake as having authority;—who exemplified in him-
self the character he drew; —whose words it behoved all
men to hear. That might be, and it was; but it was not
Paul’s great object, or not his first, to tell men this; to
let them know what Jesus had said. He did not call upon
them to listen to Christ; but, so to,speak, to hole at him.
They were not to be instructed by his reported utterances,
—but benefited by his personal acts; —not so much to
believe his words, as to believe in Him. The substance
of Paul’s testimony was, that the Christ died, and rose
from the dead; —that he died for our sins,—was buried,
and revived ; —“ was delivered for our offences, and raised
again for our justification.”
In this way, then, if I do not greatly err, you can see
what the Apostle’s language implies in relation to himself,
—in what light it places him before us as a religious
teacher. He teaches, he says, not his own thoughts,—not
any great human conceptions ; nor does he teach only God's
thoughts,—any great divine conception. He directs the
attention of the world to a person —a Christ—an anointed
one; —a person, too, raised up and sent forth to do some-
thing ; not simply to speak, but to act. And then he tells
us what it was that he did and became. I now advance to
this. I shall take the two parts of Paul’s statement and


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
make a remark or two on each, and we shall see, I think,
from the subject-matter of his teaching, what his idea must
have been of the sort of religion that Humanity needs. This
is the second thing which we intimated would be found to
be involved in and illustrated by the text. “ I delivered
unto you that which also I received, how that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that, on the
third day, he rose again, according to the Scriptures.”
First. “ The Christ died for our sins.” I do not see
how this language can mean anything less than that Christ
died to destroy our sins ; to put them away; to deliver us
from them ; —that is, to secure their forgiveness; to annihi-
late, as it were, both them and their results; what their
results to us would he if they themselves were not cancelled.
This, then, is what Paul had to testify and affirm, —“ the
Christ of God died for our sins.” But now, mark what
that implies. It implies,—that the forgiveness of sin,
according to Paul’s teaching, is not simply a matter of hind
feeling on the part of God, flowing forth on a change of
feeling in man; —hut that it required that something should
he done to put away sin; and that that something was done
when the Christ “ died” on account of it. Whatever, then,
Paul had to teach as to repentance, reformation, prayer, on
the one side, —love, compassion, mercy on the other; he
had, nevertheless, to teach this, —that the forgiveness of
sin depended, besides, on something else, —that something
else being an external fact, a thing done, done by Christ.
“He died for our sins.” It was not, observe, that the pos-
sibility of forgiveness, or God’s willingness to forgive, was
announced by Christ in words, as a divine message,—a
revealed truth, —a thing made hnown; —but that the thing
was secured by him, —secured by what he did; —it was
rendered possible, or it was facilitated, or it was provided
for, by this. As to how the death of the Christ answered
this end; why it was required, and in what manner it


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
operated: whence its external necessity, whence the inherent
secret of its power;—that is not explained here, nor are
those questions at present before us. All that we say is,
that the text implies—and can have no meaning short of
this—that the forgiveness of sin, man’s deliverance from
the burden and the results of it, turned on the occurrence of
a fact , —the fact of the death of the Christ of God.
Hence, then, you will observe that what Paul taught was
not, and could not be, any of the following things. It was
not a pure, Philosophical Theism, It was not simply,—
“ God, —man, —nature, —law, —supreme will, —benevolent
purpose, —all right, —right for every body.” It was not
that. Nor was it a Poetical or sentimental Theism:—
“ God,—man,—nature;—love,—beauty,—trust,— song; all
safe, or very few having anything to fear.” It was not
that. Nor was it a pure, simple, Christian, Theism:—
“ God—man —law—sin; a great prophet; a loving message ;
—a verbal assurance ; —something said, taught; uttered in
words, confirmed and ratified by miracle and martyrdom; a
declaration and promise; repentance on one side, securing,
of itself, forgiveness on the other.” It was not that. It was
not these, or anything like these things. It might include
something belonging to them all, but in itself it was some-
thing more. It was the assertion of a divine act, not merely
the assurance of the divine disposition ; —A work done, not
a thing said; —Something transacted, not uttered;—Some-
thing embodied in a person and a fact, not merely breathed
forth and clothed in speech. It was a supernatural some-
thing,—something done by God in raising up and sending
forth a Christ; something done by the Christ as the sent' of
God. It was the manifested might of a Messiah, —not
merely the word or wisdom of a prophet, however inspired,
and whatever he might reveal!
You know how all this could be enlarged upon; how it
could be further developed and fully confirmed by the quo-
tation of other Scriptures. You know how other passages


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
bring out, in its different aspects, the truth implied in this;
how they cast light upon it, and in a great measure explain
it—the ground of its necessity, its mode of operation, the
nature, vastness, and variety of its results; and so on. You
know that in the apostolic writings the fact before us is to
be met with everywhere. It pervades every important
statement; it starts up from every page ; it stands forth in
all lights and under all circumstances; it subordinates to
itself, lays hold of, touches and colours everything. The
Christ is “the Lamb of God—he “ takes away the sin of
the world;” —“he is set forth a propitiation to declare God’s
righteousness in the remission of sins —that, “ through
faith in his blood,” mefl*might “ be saved,” and God bo
“just and the justifier of him that believeth.” “He who
knew no sin was made sin for us—“ in him we have
redemption, through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins.” “ Without shedding of blood there is no remission.”
“ The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin.” But
we do not enlarge on all this. It is not our object to discuss
the doctrine of atonement and sacrifice. All that we have
to do, is to show how inevitably and necessarily the words
of the text involve and imply it. Whether the thing be
true or not, —whether the first Christians were right or
wrong in teaching and believing it, —it must unquestionably
be admitted, that the language of the New Testament rests
upon it as the mutually understood and recognized belief of
the preachers and the people of the first age. As a religious
teacher and guide, it appears, from his own statement, that
Paul directly addressed himself not so much to the intellect
as to the conscience of Humanity. He came to men, assum-
ing that they had a conscience ; and, with that, a conscious-
ness of sin. He took for granted that they had, and could
put together, the ideas—God, law, transgression, penalty,
fearful looking for of judgment. He came to this conscious-
ness. He said to men—“ You know that you have sinned;
you know, also, that, deep down in those souls of yours,


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
there is this sort of feeling : —‘ Sin is wrong-doing in us ;to
punish sin would be right-doing in God—you know that;
-—and you know that you are oppressed and terrified by
that consciousness,—for you cannot tell how God can do
right, and you escape what you deserve for doing wrong.
I can tell you. Not only can I assure you that it may be ;
but I have to announce to you, that something has been
done that it might be. The Christ of God was raised up,
and sent into the world; —he was sent to do that thing,—
and he did it. He did not come to speak merely, but to
act. He lived, and spoke, and taught, indeed, —but his
great business in the world was to die; —to die ‘for our
sins.’ And he did thus die.’ And now, ‘ through him, all
who believe’ can have their sins forgiven, and ‘be justified
from all things ;’ —and, ‘ being justified by faith, they will
have peace with God.’ ”
Second. “ Christ rose again from the dead.” —All that
these words involved and meant, as used by Paul; all that
they would suggest to and call up in the mind of an
instructed Corinthian convert; cannot be ascertained or
conjectured simply from the words themselves. The bare
words—“ Christ died, was buried, and rose again,”—espe-
pecially if Christ be used as a personal name, and not as an
official title, —these words, in themselves, say no more than
what might have been said about Lazarus. It was as true
of Lazarus as of Jesus, that “ he died, was buried, and rose
again.” In the first part of the statement, however, there
is a clause which could not be applied to Lazarus; —it could
not be said of him that he died “ for our sins though it
could be said “that he died, was buried, and rose again.”
But, besides this, you will observe, that both in the first
and the second part of the statement, there is an expression
which could not be applied to Lazarus. It could not be
said of him, (confining the observation to the second clause,)
that he rose from the dead “ according to the Scriptures .”


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
But that is what is said of Christ; and this, of itself, is
sufficient to show, that some great peculiarity attached
to his rising from the dead. This presumption is strength-
ened by the circumstance, that his resurrection was the
resurrection of the Christ of God, the sent Messiah; it
was probably, therefore, the continuance and completion
of what, as the Christ, he did, or began to do, when “he
died for our sins”—which also was “ according to the Scrip-
tures.” This we know to be the right view of the matter.
The two things, “ dying for our sins,” and “ rising from the
dead,” are parts of a whole, —the two sides of one subject;
—both belong, and both are necessary, to the complete idea
of that “ Gospel” which Paul “ delivered” and “ declared.”
Here, again, then, you observe, the objective truth which
Paul taught and set forth, as that out of which was to
come, and by which was to be originated and sustained, a
religious life in man— this, in the second aspect of it, as in
-the first, is something done; —a supernatural, divine act,
not merely a divine message. A work of God’s hand; not
merely a word from his lips, or an emanation from his
intellect. A positive display and interposition of power, —•
not the utterance, merely, of thought:—“ I delivered unto
you that which also I received, how that the Christ, having
died for our sins, and been buried, — rose again from the
dead, according to the Scriptures.”
What Paul would involve in this expression; what he
associated with the fact of the resurrection of Christ; what
he taught as included in it, and flowing from it; the inti-
mate connection it had with every part of the Church’s
religious life, —its development and progress in the indi-
vidual soul, —its anticipated consummation in the whole
body;—these things, I acknowledge and confess, are not to
be inferred from the statement of the text taken by itself, —
though I can quite conceive that they might all have been
suggested by it to a Corinthian Christian, who, for two years,
had listened to Paul’s spoken instructions. I must here
i 73


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
then he permitted, from an obvious necessity, to refer to
some of the aspects and relations of the resurrection of
Christ, which are brought out in other parts of the Apostle’s
writings. I shall do little more than repeat a few passages,
or only with a brief or occasional comment.
By his resurrection, Christ is said “ to have been declared
to be the Son of God, with power“ he rose again from
the dead, because it was not possible that He should be
holden of it.” He rose, but not like others, to be exposed
again to the stroke of death; —“ death had no more dominion
over him.” He rose “to die no more.” He came forth
from the grave to inherit an exalted, glorious, immortal
life. Again. Having died for our sins,—or, in the explana-
tory words of other Scriptures, “ having been set forth as a
propitiation,” “ that he might put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself,” —he rose again, that he might pass through the
veil of the visible heavens, as the High Priest passed into
the holy of holies; that he might “ appear in the presence
of God for us,” and complete there the presentation of his
sacrifice; —and there “he ever lives to make intercession.”
Again, having been raised from the dead, he is further
raised “ far above all thingsabove every name that is
named.” “All power is given to him in heaven and in
earth.” “Angels and principalities and powers are mads
subject to him ;” —and “ he is to reign till all things are put
under his feet.” Again,—being exalted “he received gifts
for menhe shed them forth; more especially he sent the
Holy Spirit,—the convincer and reprover of the world —the
comforter and sanctifier of the Church, —to be with us for
ever. In connection with this, it is to be observed, that
the resurrection of Christ, his restored and exalted life,
touches, in various ways, and at all points, the spiritual
life of Christian men. Christ’s resurrection, for instance,
is typical of man’s new life—for “ as he was raised from the
dead, so we are to walk in newness of life”——“ as those who
are alive from the dead” too. Then, his present condition,
74


ME APOSTLES’ CREED.
'Consequent on his rising from the dead, is to be felt as a
motive to spiritual-mindedness ; “if ye be risen with
Christ, set your affections on things above, where he is,—
not on things on the earth; —mortify your members that
are on the earth,—-for ye are dead and your life is hid with
Christ in God.” The raised, exalted, living Christ, is to be
the life of our life, the source of our holiness; even as the
dying Christ is the death of our sins. Believing in him, he
lives in us. “ The life that we live by the flesh, we live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himself
for us. He is said to “give repentance and remission of
sins. He is “ called upon,”—answers,—helps,— saves ;
“ power is made perfect in weakness —“ his grace is
sufficient for every need.” The Church “ grows up into
him.” By “ the supply of the Spirit of Christ Jesus” it is
solaced and sustained; —“ the inward man is renewed day
by day-” Because Christ lives, the Christian lives ; —lives
now, and shall live hereafter. Still further. The resurrec-
tion of Christ is at once the pledge and model of our own.
His present condition of glory and blessedness is that to
which we are to be conformed. “To them that look for
him he will come again.” “He will change their vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his- glorious body,”
“ They shall be like him, for they shall see him as he is.”
“So shall they he ever with the Lord.” How, “ every nian
that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure.” “ I declare unto you, brethren, the Gospel, as
I delivered it unto you,—how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures;—and that he rose again ,
according to the Scriptures.”
Such were the two sides of the objective truth which
Paul taught; the reception and influence of which was to
originate and sustain the religious life of man. It was thus
he met the necessities of Humanity;—thus he brought to it
light and guidance. He exhibited a Person, —the Christ of
'God. Of him he asserted two things,—that “he died for


THE APOSTLES’ CREEP.
our sins,” and “ rose again.” By the one fact he met the
condition of men as they are burdened by thoughts of the
past; by a sense of sin and conscious moral degradation.
By the other fact he met them as they are groping after the
divine and the eternal; stirred by vague longings and aspi-
rations after a better life. The one brought peace to the
desponding; hope to the guilty; life to the dead;—the
other nourished that life : purified, exalted it ; provided for
its becoming the source of “ all holy conversation and godli-
ness,” —the commencement of that which, progressively
perfected here, would be finally consummated in the virtue
and blessedness of the upper world. To these two things,
which the Apostle asserted and testified of Christ, every
thing in theology, religion,and morals, —everything belong-
ing to spiritual truth, human duty, hopes and prospects—
may be referred. God, law, sin, penalty; divine government,
future retribution, merciful arrangement;—with all kindred
and correlative truths, gather round the first: —Spiritual
life, sonship, salvation; —access to God, worship, song;
favourable help ; religious virtue; light in darkness, —hope
in death; faith apprehending and laying hold of “ the
things not seen;” —these, and all similar beliefs, expe-
riences, and affections grow out of the second. Well con-
sidered, it ceases to be wonderful that Paul should compress
into these two things the sum and substance of all he
taught; that through them he expected to meet and to help
humanity; to infuse into it a spiritual and divine life, —
“ the life of God in the soul of man.”
The general result of all that we are supposed, in this
discussion, to have learnt and illustrated, of the form and
matter of Paul’s teaching, may be thus stated.—lt would
seem, in the first place, that, according to St. Paul, the
religion needed by Humanity is of such a nature, that no
individual man can possibly attain unto it, by speculation,
intuition, independent thought, or any other exclusively
subjective process; for it must include in it something done


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
—done on man’s behalf, —something external, therefore, —
of which he can only acquire the knowledge by testimony.
Further, it would seem that, according to Paul, the religion
needed by Humanity is not a thing which men as a species
can attain unto, by the gradual increase of light and know-
ledge, the advance of discovery, -and the progressive develop-
ment of the religious faculty from age to age ; —and this for
the same reason—the reason already assigned—because it
must include in it something done ; because, what Humanity
requires, is not simply the discovery of spiritual relations
and eternal truths, but the occurrence or accomplishment
of an event or fact, by the actual interposition of divine
mercy. Hence, the religion of Humanity must result from
faith in what is brought to it, and cannot rest merely on
what it reaches by its own independent investigations and
efforts. Still further, —to put the matter in another light,
—we learn from what Paul did and taught, that, according
to him, the world needed, in order to its really having a
religion worth the name, something more than revelation;
more than divine speech, divine discoveries of the spiritual
and the true. Inspiration was not enough. Seers and
Prophets, however illuminated and however endowed, could
not meet the case. The greatest thoughts from the intellect
of God would not do. More was required than visions of
the Almighty; messages from heaven; communication or
response from the holy oracle; or anything that could be
spoken, or that required only to be put into words. It was
necessary that there should be miraculous acts, as well as
inspired speech : a Christ of God, empowered by him to do
something, —not merely a Teacher sent from God with
something to say. According to Paul, the supernatural,
the miraculous, must not only be admitted in religion, but
it must be admitted not as evidence merely—God’s seal to
the truth or importance of what the human speaker says,—
but as belonging to the very essence of the objective truth
to be believed; the divine facts which are themselves to be


THE APOSTLES’ CUBED;
reported and set forth. It is not—as it is sometimes put—
that Paul works a miracle to confirm and establish some
great saying, discovery, or promise which he attributes to-
God; —no: he has to testify of the miracle which God
wrought,—the wonderful supernatural thing which He
accomplished, when he interposed in our behalf in the-
person of Christ, and clothed truth and promise in the facts
of the Redemption. The grand miracle of the Gospel is the
Gospel itself —that “ God sent forth his Son as a propitia-
tion” that “He was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing to men their trespasses.” That r
with us, is the region of the miraculous and the super-
natural. If God threw a burning mountain into the sea, of
course there would be waves and wonders at the shore,
altogether different from the natural and ordinary course of
things; but the grand miracle would be the central fact, —
the descent of the mountain- from the divine hand. Signs
and wonders, following the steps of apostolic men, and
appealing directly to the eyes of observers, ’we quite admit;
but the great miracle was out of sight;—it was that which
itself constituted the object of faith. Perhaps the material
signs and wonders could not but follow, by some mysterious
law, from the occurrence of the redemptive spiritual facts of
human salvation; —but whether or not, these are the facts
in which Paul teaches us to see the supernatural element as
it most strikingly belongs to the Christian system. “ I de-
clare unto you the Gospel;—that the Christ died for our
sins and that “he rose again from the dead.”
We have thus endeavoured to ascertain and to set forth
what, as it appears to us, the Apostle’s language involves
or implies; we cannot but think that what has been
advanced must of necessity be admitted as lying beneath
it,: —constituting, so to speak, the substratum of thought on.


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
which it rests. The passage is hut one instance among
many of the fulness and pregnancy of the Divine Word.
Leaving, however, what has been said to your individual
judgment, but commending it to your thoughtful considera-
tion, we proceed to the general observations with which we
proposed to conclude the discourse.
1. It is worthy of remark, we think, how, in the text
itself, and in the neighbourhood of it, there occur many
manifest and most striking proofs of the deep conviction
which the Apostle had of the vast importance of what he
taught. These can at present be but rapidly glanced at, or
simply indicated, though they would well repay a large
amount of thought and attention. They might be seen in
such points as the following.
In the first place : the apostolic testimony respecting
Christ,—what Paul had taught the Corinthians at first, and
of which he now reminds them,—is described by him as
constituting, in a very emphatic manner, the Gospel.
(ver. 1,2.) It was that by which men were to be “ saved”
They were to receive it, and abide by it, and keep it in
memory. It was “the good news,” “the glad tidings,”
“ the glorious Gospel of the blessed God. It was the
import and essence of “ the ministry of reconciliation. It
was God’s method of saving the world, not Paul s idea
merely, or any one else’s, of a way to be saved. “ I declare
unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you -—by which
also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached
unto you.”
In the second place: the Apostle assigns to the things
mentioned in the text the highest and most important
position, considered relatively to the whole of his teaching,
(ver. 3.) This is equally true whether you take the phrase
“first of all” as indicating order, or expressing quality.
Whether St. Paul means, that the subjects referred to were
taught first in the order of time, or were taught as the
79


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
first, the chiefest and weightiest things, which he had to
teach, comes very much to the same result. In either case,
a distinct and fundamental importance is attached to them.
This feeling of the Apostle, this implied import of his
language, may be illustrated by the account which he gives,
in the beginning of the Epistle, of the way in which he
commenced and conducted his ministry at Corinth. “I, bre-
thren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of
God. For I determined not to know anything among you,
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified“ The Jews require
a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: but we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and to
the Greeks foolishness: but unto them which are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God.” (Chapter ii. 1,2; i. 22-24.)
In the third place: the Apostle intimates that what he
taught had been the subject of two revelations, (ver. 3,4.)
It was what was “ according to the Scriptures” —the Old
Testament prophecies, which holy men spake “ as they were
moved by the Holy Ghostand it was “ that which he had
also received,” —the knowledge and import of which had
been divinely revealed to him. Paul claimed to be “an
apostle (Gal. i.), not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead.”
“ I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached
of me is not after man. For I neither received it of man,
neither was I taught it— but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.” This Gospel emphatically consisted of the great
central fact that “ Christ died- for our sins.” In declaring
and announcing it St. Paul tells us that he “preached
'Christ crucified;” and in doing that, he seems now to say
to us that he did this: —he set up the cross and called the
world to assemble round it; he then opened, and in one
hand, held up, the previous revelation, the prophetic Bible ;
—with the other he pointed to the high heaven, the dwell-


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
ing-place of God; then, —at once “reasoning out of the
Scriptures,” and speaking as a divinely commissioned
“apostle,”—he asserted that God had “ revealed to him ’
His Son, who, on the cross before which he stood, had
“ died for our sins;” and that this fact was the fulfilment
and realization of what had been “ spoken before,” —which
was “ written in the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms,”
—what they meant who prophesied of “ salvation” and of
“the grace that should come unto us,” when, “by the
Spirit of Christ which was in them,” they “ testified before-
hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should
follow.” There might be things which the Apostle regarded
as indifferent; secondary matters of little or no moment,
respecting which it was enough for every one to be per-
suaded in his own mind; but that truth could not but be
felt by him to have an essential and intrinsic importance,
which was at once the subject and the substance of two
revelations, —which thus stood out, visible and luminous,
in the lights that shone upon it from the former Church
and the upper world.
In the fourth place: he distinctly intimates that if what
he taught was not in itself true, then he was not true,
(ver. 15.) So far, at least, as Christ’s resurrection is con-
cerned—the heavenly side of the central fact which con-
tained his primary dogmatic truth, —he fc put the matter
upon this issue. He had not taught an opinion only, but
had testified to a fact. He professed to have seen and
heard Christ after he was risen from the dead; to have
received communications from him which had filled his
soul with new thoughts, and fashioned his life after a new
model. In asserting this, he was neither, he maintained,
“mad,” nor “dishonest;” he neither dealt “deceitfully,”
nor was he “ beside himself.” While perfectly cool, “ sober,”
and self-possessed, with his senses awake and his wits about
him, intellectually speaking,—he also felt, in his moral con-
sciousness, that “in simplicity and godly sincerity, not


THE APOSTLES’ CEEED.
with fleshly wisdom, he had his conversation in the world.”
If he was true, what he testified was true; if the subject of
his testimony was false, he was false. There was no third
alternative. He would recognize no other. He would not
have his character saved at the expense of his understand-
ing. He rejected the hypothesis of sincere but mistaken
enthusiasm. What he declared was true, and must be
accepted as such, or he himself was a conscious, living lie,
—“ a false witness of God!” The Apostle could not have
spoken in this way of anything on which he had not the
deepest convictions, and which did not assume, in his view,
an aspect of awful and infinite seriousness.
After this, we are prepared to hear (in the last place)
that the Apostle tells the Corinthians, and through them
tells us and all men, that, in his view, if we have not and
hold not the facts and truths to which he refers as the
essential elements of his religious system, we cannot have,
spiritually and beneficially, anything like real religion at all.
(ver. 16.) “If the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:
and if Ctfrist be not raised, your faith is vain ye are yet
in your sins” Some of the Corinthians philosophized about
the resurrection of the body, or the ultimate general resur-
rection of the dead, until they came to deny it altogether.
They denied the possibility of the thing. It could not be.
“ There was no sesurrection of the dead.” They taught,
probably, like some others, (2 Tim. ii. 17,) “ that the resur-
rection was past already,” changing an external truth into
a spiritual experience. Men who have excluded the super-
natural from Christianity, have professed to believe in the
perfect honesty and uprightness of the apostles by supposing
that they mistook their subjective impressions for objective
facts, —or got so completely penetrated and possessed by
them (their mental impressions), that they came to regard
them at last as things that had happened, or that were to
come, and hence their supposed miraculous mundane occur-
rences, their supernatural doctrines in the form of divine


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
facts, and their surprising anticipations about the end of the*
world! The way in which Paid would have felt about and
treated such an hypothesis, if applied to himself, we have-
just seen. The philosophers at Corinth inverted the process,,
so far as they themselves were concerned, resolving a
revealed future fact, into a present, subjective experience,,
and we are now to see how the Apostle deals with that,
the other side, in some cases, of the first error. He takes
the men on their own ground, the ground of a philosophical
impossibility in respect to a resurrection, and he shows how
this, logically carried out, destroys religion altogether—at
least as he taught it,—especially pointing out how it sets
aside that remedial provision which was emphatically the
« Gospel,” and without which the necessities of Humanity
were not met, and could not be. The substance of his argu-
ment, so far as it is applicable to our present purpose, may
be thus put;—lf there can be no resurrection, then there
never could be pne. Then, Christ is not risen. But, if
Christ be not risen, did not rise “ according to the Scrip-
tures,” then he did not die “ according to the Scriptures.
Then he did not “ die for our sins.” But if he did not die
for our sins, then ypur “ faith” in Him with a view to their
removal, “is vain,”—you are yet “in your sins!” This is
true, even though you may have undergone, as some of you
profess to have done, a great subjective moral reformation.
Without an external Christ, to “ die for sin,” there is no-
remission ; guilt must remain. Without this, —a positive,
supernatural, divine arrangement —a real, dying and rising.
Christ —your spiritual necessities are not met, the grand
want of the human conscience is left unsupplied, the burden
that weighs upon it is not and cannot be taken off. “Ye
are yet in your sins.” Human nature needs a Christ; there-
is no Christ, if Jesus be not one; he is not one, if he did
not die for our sins; he did not die for our sins, if he did
not rise from the dead; he did not rise from the dead, if the
dead rise not. If, then, you hold that the dead rise not„
83


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
it follows, —whatever may be said or thought to the con-
trary notwithstanding,—that by doing so you deny that
Christ rose, that he died for our sins, or was in any sense a
Christ at all. You cannot, therefore, have an effective
faith; you cannot have received, or have any ground for
expecting, the pardon of sin. Putting away from you
the fact and doctrine which I “testify” and “declare,”
you put away the only arrangement adequate to your
necessities. You have nothing left worth the name of
religion, —the religion which Humanity, from its moral
condition, aslcs for and needs.
He who thus felt and reasoned must have had the most
profound convictions of the truth and importance of what
he taught. No one can wonder, after weighing his words,
at those other utterances of his, which now and then came
flashing and flaming forth, revealing to us at once his
steady and exultant confidence in the Gospel, and his indig-
nant hostility against those who corrupt it. “I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God
unto salvation, unto every one that helieveth.” “ God
forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” “If any man—if an angel from heaven—
preach any other Gospel unto you than ye have received,
let him be accursed.” “ Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers, beware of the concision. For we are the circum-
cision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Though
I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other
man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the
flesh, I more:—circumcised the eighth day, of the stock
of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee; concerning
zeal, persecuting the Church; touching the righteousness
which is in the law, blameless. But what things were gain
to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and
I count all things hut loss for the excellency of the know-


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
ledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them hut dung that
I may win Christ, and he found in him, not having mine
own righteousness, which is of the law, hut that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith.” Nor should it ever he forgotten how emphati-
cally and constantly the Apostle represents the same fact
and the same truth which provides for the forgiveness of
sin, as the source and instrument of deliverance from its
dominion. It reconciles to God, and it makes like him. It
excites love to duty, and loyalty to law; it renders obe-
dience possible and attractive ; it supplies motives, aids, and
facilities, grace to help and power to pursue, making work
pleasant and service song. “ A man is justified by faith,
without the deeds of the law. Do we then make void the
law through faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the law.'”
—“ For what the law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
wallt not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” “ The grace
of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,
teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, godly, in this present
evil world; looking for that blessed hop>e, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works.” “ I can do all things through Christ which
strengtheneth me.” “ For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice. And he said unto me, ‘My grace is sufficient for
thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness.’ Most
gladly, therefore, will I glory in infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me.” “Brethren, be followers
together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have
us for an ensample. (For many walk, of whom I have told


THE APOSTLES’ GREET).
you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they arc
the enemies of the cross of Christ: whose end is destruction,
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame,
who mind earthly things.) For our conversation is in
heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it
may he fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself.”
2. Our second general observation may refer to the
■central Figure before us, the living Personality, to the facts
connected with whom the Apostle attributes such unspeak-
able importance. Everything in Christianity centres in the
Christ, —is suspended on what he did, on what he is, on
what he is doing, and on what he is to do; on his “ coming
in the flesh,” “the decease which he accomplished” when
he died for our sins,” his “ rising from the dead,” “ his
ascending up on high,” his “ appearance in the presence of
God for us,” and his coming again, the second time, “ with-
out sin unto salvation.”
The language of the New Testament in relation to
Christ, —the way in which he seems to have been regarded
by the primitive Church, —the feelings of which He is the
object,—the hopes and expectations of which He is the
centre, —all this is very wonderful! It is often made a
subject of question and controversy, as to what the idea of
the Christ was which, existing among and held by the first
Christians, would account for the language they used res-
pecting him. Was he a human being like ourselves, only
distinguished from us by his virtue and wisdom, and by the
way in which he was miraculously endowed by God ?—or
was he “ the Son of Ood,” in such a sense, that he can be
the object of worship without infringing on the unity of the
divine nature, or giving the glory of God unto another?
There is no denying that isolated texts present great diffi-


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
culties on both sides; but, the general aspect of the New
Testament, —its usual tone and current phraseology,—are
perfectly astounding on the supposition, or hypothesis, that
he was merely one of the human race ; — one, however illus-
trious and distinguished, in the general aggregate of the
sons of men. If that were the case, it would not be inap-
propriate or profane to say that Christianity became, in the
age of the apostles and by their means, and that it appears
throughout their writings, as a mere system of hero-worship.
It is trust in, love to, adoration of— saint Jesus; —which, if
he were nothing but a saint, is just as offensive to right
feeling, and as much sinfulness and idolatry as the worship
of the Virgin. If “Jesus,” “the prophet of Nazareth,”
was, in himself, nothing more, his followers soon made him
something else, —and, as “ the Christ,” he became virtually
a God to them. This, it is admitted, was the case. But it
was merely, it is said, the result and outgrowth of the
impression made by his sublime virtue. It was of the
nature of a mythical illusion; the subjective exaggeration
of what could not be thought of without wonder! The
gigantic stature of the virtue of Jesus towered so high
above everything in the world, that it threw forward a deep
shadow, or rather a dazzling lustre, on the Church, the
influence of which nourished the growth of ideas of his
divinity,—his priesthood and sacrifice, —his exalted glory
and heavenly dominion, —which in time made him, by a
sort of poetical licence, the devout object of love and rever-
ence, dependence and prayer;—-which, too, we may see
beginning, in the very first age, to tinge and colour the
language even of the apostolic letters. I abide, however,
by the language of those letters. I accept the views of the
person of the Christ which must underlie that language, if
it is to mean anything equal to what it says. “ The Christ”
of God must have been something more than “Jesus the
prophet;” something more than the man of Galilee. He is
not a saved man, —but the “ Saviour ” of men. He is not a


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
part of the Church, “ a member of the Body,”—but “ the
Head” and “Lord” and ruler of the whole. He needs no
“mediator” through whom to approach God; —but “no
man cometh unto the Father but by Him!” The New
Testament Church, as we see it and hear it in the written
word, looks up to Him ; —‘loves and trust, serves and prays;
is replenished by His grace (or thinks it is!); lives by His
life; and at death commits its spirit into His hands. The
Church in heaven is before the throne ; —He is upon it. He
never worships there. He does not head the great com-
pany, the saved from among men, —sympathize with their
feelings, share their services, and lead their songs ! Never.
Yet he ought to do so, if he is one of themselves. Nay, the
more he was distinguished by prophetic gifts or official
nobility when he was on earth, the more might we expect
to see him distinguished for his gratitude in heaven. The
New Testament representation of things—both as it regards
the feelings of the Church in the apostolic age, and the
supposed employment of the Church on high—is one which
is broadly and palpably irreconcilable with the idea of the
simple humanity of Jesus. On this hypothesis, there are
■expressions in it painfully revolting to what would then be
correct and proper Christian feeling. There are many diffi-
culties connected with the idea of the divinity of the Christ;
but, great as they are, that idea is a positive relief—a wel-
come refuge from the mere saint-worship which, without it,
Christianity becomes. I am willing to accept it, with all
its mysteriousness, as it saves me from attributing to the
primitive Church, and saves me from seeing in the Church
in heaven, what, without it, I can only regard as a piece
with the prostration of apostate Christendom before the
shrines of the Virgin and the saints.
3. The last observation we submit is this:—that the
subject of discourse, as it has been placed before us, may
teach us all some important lessons in respect to Christian


THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
teaching and Christian truth. Our religion rests on facts ;
—especially on the great fact of a Personal Redeemer and
Mediator; an external Christ, who “ died for our sins.” We
are bound down to the testimony of Scripture concerning
Him. It is not our province, nor ought it to be our ambi-
tion—in the Church, that is to say, and in relation to reli-
gious truth—to be great thinkers, —inventors and masters
of the original and the new. We are pupils, learners, —the
readers and students of a Book which speaks with authority.
Our object ought to be to have our thoughts just what
God’s thoughts are, as he has set them forth in his own
word. In proportion as they are this, will they have in
them a divine originality and an inherent greatness. When
we look at Paul’s teaching in the passage before us, we
cannot but feel that there was a true philosophy, as well as
deep piety and faith, in good men of olden time crying
out, “ None but Christ,” —“ None but Christ.” Our fathers
were far more philosophical than they knew, when they
used to insist on having “ Christ preached,” “ held forth,”
“lifted up,” as if every minister was a Moses standing and
pointing to the brazen serpent;—or a John the Baptist
exclaiming continually, “ Behold the Lamb of God, that
taketh away the sin of the world.” Every topic, every par-
ticular truth or duty, is to be looked at in its relation to
Christ, and in the light shed upon it from the cross. True,
he is the great Revealer of all that is of deepest interest to
us. But the “revelation,” the “unveiling,” the setting
forth and the casting of light upon the truth is effected far
more by the meaning of his acts, than by the import of his
words. By his great redemptive work, and the salvation of
the sinful “ through faith in his blood,” lessons are taught
to highest natures, which they could never learn from any-
thing besides. On the illimitable scale of the material
universe—in the constitution and relations of all orders of
intelligence,—nothing is inscribed, nothing contained, of
those peculiar discoveries of moral and spiritual truth,
K 89


THE APOSTLES’ CUBED.
which are uttered and taught by the facts of redemption.
“ Into these things angels desire to look.” “To the princi-
palities and powers in heavenly places, is made known by
the Church the manifold wisdom of God.” The sons of
light, the sages of eternity, who had stood and studied, for
periods surpassing all calculation, in the innermost recesses,
the very holy of holies of the temple of Truth, had new and
marvellous revelations made to them through the incarna-
tion and sufferings of the Son of God; —in his death and
resurrection, and the rise and growth of a holy and glorious
Church in the midst of a guilty and apostate species. To
them it may be, but certainly to us, Christ is the central
sun of the spiritual system—the heaven of divine, religious
thought. He is “ the Light of the world.” The source of
illumination is in what he did; for “in him was life, and
the life was the light of men.” May the Father of Glory
“ give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him: the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened; that you may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right
hand in heavenly places, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come; and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him
to he the head over all things to the church, which is his
body, THE FULNESS OF HIM THAT FILLETH ALL IN ALL,”
Amen.


Ruling Mm's Cirristo Storiatinn.
On Saturday next, August 21st, will le published, price
One Shilling ; post-free, fourteen penny stamps,
A LECTURE
HUMAN SYMMETRY,
THE
KEY. F. R. M. WILSON.
FREE € HITECH, VICTORIA.
Delivered before the Young Men’s Christian Associa-
tion, Sydney, 12th July, 1858; printed at the particular
request of some of the members. The profits resulting
from the sale of this Lecture will be wholly devoted to the
funds of the Association.




G. R. ADDISON,
PRINTER, BOOKSELLER, AND PUBLISHER,
Brickfield Hill, George Street South.
Theological and other works, books published by the
English and American Tract Societies, Sunday-school Union,
Bibles, Testaments, and' Hymn Books of all kinds can be
obtained.
All kinds of Printing executed with neatness and des-
patch, and at moderate prices.
Account Books, Envelopes, Letter Paper, and fancy and
plain Stationery always on hand.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS, received by every
MAIL. Particulars of terms of Subscriptions can be sup
plied both in town and country, post-free.
SERMONS, THREEPENCE EACH
POST-FREE, TWOPENCE EXTRA ; BY
The Rev. Thomas Dale, M.A., at St. Bride’s Church,
Fleet Street.
The Rev. Hugh Allen, A.M., of St. Jude’s Church,
Whitechapel, preached at St. Olave’s Church, Old Jewry.
The Rev. J. J. West, M.A., Rector of Winchelsea,
Sussex.
The Rev. John Gumming, D.D., at the Scotch Church,
Crown Court, Drury Lane.
The Rev. James Hamilton, D.D., at Exeter Hall.
The Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel, M.A., at John Street
Chapel, Bedford Row.
The Rev. Hugh Stowell, M.A., at St. Jude’s Church,
St. George’s Road, Southwark.
The Rev. William Brock, at Exeter Hall; and others.
HYMN BOOKS.
BAPTIST HYMN BOOKS; The New Selection, all
bindings, from Is 6d. to 7s. 6d. each.
DITTO; The New Selection and Watts’ Psalms and
Hymns, bound together, all bindings, from 4s. to 12s. 6d.
CONGREGATIONAL HYMN BOOK, roan, 3s. 6d. cf, Bs.
WESLEY’S HYMNS, all bindings.
WATTS’ PSALMS AND HYMNS, all bindings.
G. R. ADDISON, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street
South, Sydney.


SUNDAY SCHOOL PUBLICATIONS.
ADMISSION CARDS, printed in gold, beautifully embel-
lished with texts of scripture, in packets of twelve, 2s.
CERTIFICATE CARDS, for Scholars leaving Sunday
School, beautifully embellished with texts of Scripture,
in packets of twenty-four, 3s.
PACKETS OF PICTURE CARDS FOR THE YOUNG,
Is. 6d.
REWARD CARDS, various colours, in packets of ninety-
eight tickets, Is.
PICTURE REWARD TICKETS, in packs of forty-two, Bd.
THE MOTTO FOR LIFE. A New Year’s Address to
Children, by Rev. John Ctjrwen, 2s. Bd. per 100.
AN ADDRESS TO PARENTS, inviting them to send
their Children to a Sunday-school, 2s. 6d. per 100.
A LETTER FROM THE TEACHERS TO PARENTS, on
the late attendance of their Children, 2s. Bd. per 100.
AN ADDRESS TO PIOUS YOUNG PERSONS, inviting
them to become Sunday-School Teachers, 2s. Od. per 100.
FIRST, SECOND, AND THIRD CLASS READING
BOOKS, 12s. per 100.
INFANT SCHOLAR’S HYMN BOOK, containing 84
hymns, 10s. per 100.
THE SABBATH-SCHOOL HYMN BOOK, 255. per 100.
THE CHILDREN’S HYMN BOOK, 12 in a packet, Is.
THE CHILDREN’S HYMN BOOK, No. 2, 12 in a packet,
Is. 6d.
HAYDEN’S SCRIPTURE CATECHISM OF THE
GOSPEL OF St. MATTHEW, Is.; cloth, 2s.
A PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY OF SCRIPTURE
PROPER NAMES, cloth, 6d.
ROYAL JUVENILE LIBRARY, reward books, embossed
covers, 2d. each.
SELECT MINIATURE TRACTS, by Mrs. H. B. Stowb,
in packets of twelve, 9d.
THE CHILD’S SCRAP BOOK, Nos. 1 to 48, price Is.
G. R. ADDISON, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street
South, Sydney.
CARDS, PRINTED IN GOLD AND BLUE.
GOD IS LIGHT, by the Rev. T. Binnev, 2d. each ; or,
12s. per 100.
SPEAK GENTLY, 2d. each ; or, 12s. per 100.
G. R, Addison, Printer, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Bt. South, Sydney.
