

THE
Horrors of Transportation
BRIEFLY UNFOLDED
TO
THE PEOPLE.
BY W. ULLATHORNE, D. D.
Vicar General of the Vicar Apostolic of New Holland and Van
Dieman’s Land.
PRICE TWO-PENCE.
BIRMINGHAM:
R. P. STONE AND SON, PRINTERS, 36, BULL STREET,
1838




TO THR
PEOPLE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
IRELAND.
My Brethren.
Distressed men have, in their ignorance, com-
mitted crime to be transported, and have even
rejoiced in open court at their success. Whilst
more evil disposed men, under the dominion of
the same ignorance, have committed crime without
fear, fancying that, though detected, no very great
evil on earth was about to befall them. The
poverty and distress which have urged these men
may, I grant it, have been great; but the misery
and degradation which they have now, in their
ignorance, brought upon themselves, is such as to
make their former lot, being compared, an earthly
paradise.
Six thousand persons are, every year, trans-
ported from these kingdoms.
What becomes of them ? You know not. But
you imagine many false notions respecting them.
You imagine that transportation is little more
than a separation from your friends and country.
You imagine that, at the end of the voyage, the
emigrant and the transport are very much in the
same condition. Thus a dreadful delusion is
spread over the land, and the honest man in his
poverty is tempted to envy the wretched convict
|n his guilt. It is in the hope of removing this
a 2


delusion, that 1 now address you It is because
I, who am a Catholic priest, have lived in every
place amongst these convicts ; because, for years,
1 have suffered their sorrows in my own heart,
and have felt the crushing load of their degrada-
tion as if it were my own ; beca'use I have that
intimate knowledge of their sad condition which
you ought to possess; because lam sensible, that
the offences for which these thousands of your
countrymen yearly become convicts, are com-
mitted in utter and entire ignorance of the horrors
which are to come upon them in consequence ;
because I find that not a few even imagine that
they are only procuring themselves a change for
the better, and [ therefore pity them the more ;
because I hope that my statements will be made
to reach those amongst you who may be tempted
to commit such crimes as lead to transportation;
above all, because, with my own eyes, I have seen
how transportation sinks the soul of man into,
beyond all imagination, blacker and fouler perdi-
tion, than the first crimes which cause all this
miserythat I seek to raise the voice of my
experience for your warning.
The emigrant who goes out to New South Wales
or to Van Dieman’s Land is a free man. The
Colonial Government is offering a free passage
to New South Wales, to such young married
labourers and mechanics as prefer living in that
colony ; and, if they continue sober, they may
much better their temporal condition by the change.
. But the transported convictijecomes a slave.
This is the law and the fact. And 1 shall
explain how it is so, in the words of the late Chief
Justice of New South Wales, in a letter laid last
year before a Committee of Parliament. * The
transportation act ” he says, “ directs, that upon
the arrival of the offender (in New South Wales


or Van Dieman’s Land) the governor shall have
a properly in the services of the coronet tor the
t»rm of his transportation, with the potter of
transferring each property to f he mhabilants.
The convict, then, is the property « ®
master, as the slave is the property of his ownei.
The Chief Justice continues : “ Under the power
given to the governor of transferring the services
of the convicts, the greater proportion oft
assigned to the inhabitants, who undertake t
provide them with a certain daily ration, and
yearly quantity of clothing, in consideration of
their labour and earnings p. pS j or
Observe, there are “no earnings , or w ages, 10
the convict —these, as well as the convict KimseK,
are the property of his master; who feeds him,
and works him, from the rising of the sun to his
scorching heats, and under his scorching heats,
even to his downsetting, and then houses him,
like any other slave, and, still more, like a horse.
Let us again listen to the Chief Justice, who is
stm speakfng“ In order to keep the convicts
to their duty, they are subject to a code of la s
framed for such purpose by the local legislator .
These laws create a class of offences pecuha
the condition of the convicts- such as drunkenness,
disobedience, neglect, absconding from servic,
abusive language, (to master or overs» ecr ) » r
disorderly , or dishonest conduct— the bread
which Is liable to be visited with summary, and
h! some cases, severe punishment. The convicts
are also liable to be tried in a summary manner
hv two magistrates, for all offences not capital,
and, upon conviction, to be set to labour in chains
on the public works, or removed to a penal settle-
ment for years, or lor life, according to the nature
of the offence.” . v t
Here are la'V words expressing a long list oi


offences, made expressly for the convict, which
have neither end nor bounds to their meaning, and
which range every where over the deeds of man,
from a mere nothing, up to any thing short of
capital, that is, of death offences. And here also
are a set of punishments, fitted to these endless
offences, which enable one magistrate, or at most
two, without any of the forms of trial, without
any jury, without any defence on the part of the
accused, on the mere deposition of, perhaps, a
prejudiced, and certainly of an interested master:
or, still moie likely, of a passionate and brutal
overseer—a white slave-driver —to inflict any
thing upon a convict short of death. It is sworn
you have been idle at your work, for doing which
you have no pay ; or that you have neglected
something you had no interest in caring for ; or,
that your conduct has been “ disorderly,” or that
it has been “ dishonest,” words which may be made
to mean just any thing, or nothing misunderstood,
words which, as the late Governor of New South
Wales (Sir Richard Bourke) remarks, in a letter
addressed to the Secretary of State, “ would cer-
tainly be out of place in any but a slave code.”
Short work is made. Why need yon speak in
defence? Fom indeed. A convict. And in your
own case too. Is not presumption against you ?
Does not presumption say that the convict is
always ready to do wrong, to rebel, and then to
deceive? Does not this phantom presumption
stand ever at the shoulder ot the magistrate to
mock your vain pretensions of being in any thing
good and true ? You are at once then condemned.
And next comes the scourger, to tie up and lay
bare your back with his bloody 7 lash. Or the gang
is your fate, and you are doomed, your heels
loaded and cankering with heavy irons, to work
the hot and dust-hurling roads, until your flesh is


burnt to a copper, and
human attno? yoTaje daLed to
a p”nal settlement, a punishment wh.ch, «e shall
DAnn cpp is worse than death. .
S T Van oTeman’s Land, for any offence on -
conduct of the kinds aboye .neut.oncd. oo
Justice " it has been stated before a Committee «.
Parliament “ may punish by whipping, exposure
in the stocks, or other corp
l ending to privation of life » by
Uar( \ labour in or out ot chains, or by souicuy
confinement, ’so that no punishment shall exten
in the whole to any period beyond one year,
Z Whipping, in addition to ouch solitary confine-
ment labour, as the case way seem to such
Just £to require. • W hilst
in an enuallv summary manner, extena uius
punishments to three years, add three years o e
original sentence of the convict, or re-transport to
a P When visited Van Dieman’s Land, in
1836 I found that one-third of the convicts tran-
sported to that colony, were undergoing some one
or more of these punishments, in addition to th
first condemnation to a life ot slavery.
We may, then, already conclude, that t a
sportation is something more to be beaded than
a mere separation Irom friends, and a g 0
of the country.* n have
How comes it then, you ask me that you have
heard such very different accounts? You have
heard even that convicts have been known to die
leaving considerable sums ot money.
A few plain facts will sufficiently answer the
convicts, were first sent to New South
Wales, and Van Dieman’s Land, there were no


free emigrants in those countries, none but pri-
soners and those in charge of them. Up to 1820,
there were very few persons to cultivate the soil,
and to work the convicts, but such as had them-
selves been convicts. It was, at that time, the
necessary policy of government, to pardon the
best behaved, after a course of trial, and to give
them free gifts of land along with their pardon, in
order to secure the settlement of the colony, to
obtain a sufficient supply of provisions, and to
have masters to work the remainder of the con-
victs as their slaves:. But, since the year 1820,
so great has been the increase of the number of
emigrants, and persons born in the colony, who
hold property, and whose chief interest it is to
have as many convict slaves as possible, because,
from their sweat and sufferings, the property of
the free is enormously increased ; that —although
the number of criminal convictions is four times
more in the year than it was thirty years since,
yet the demand for the use of slave convicts in
the colonies, is now much greater than the three
kingdoms, with all their crimes, can supply. Thus
you perceive that, though it was once the interest
of those penal colonies to make convicts free after
a time, and to give them land, it is now, on the
contrary, the interest of every free man there, and
most the interest of those who possess most, and
who consequently wield the greatest influence, to
have as few convicts obtain their pardon as possi-
ble, So that now-a-days, a convict, except in
some very extraordinary case, never obtains his
pardon until his sentence is worked out. And
thus it will be seen, that the convicts whom you
have heard of, as being in possession of property,
are not those who have gone out of late years, but
the old convicts of former days.
Only one convict in fifty ever comes back to


his native country. The returned convkt is one
whose sentence has been shortest, whilst ms tor
has fallen lightest. But it is
the chance exception to the rule ot unredeemed
wretchedness. No man even » s “hancc
♦pH nf his own degradation. Whilst his cnance
his fallen out one'of the best in the lottery of
transportation, he also puts it in the very best
light P he magnifies the good, and says nothing
ihont the bad. Ask that chance one in fifty, to
tell you honestly what becomes of the other forty-
”' .letters" I'may°be to!d again, are received from
convicts, by their friends, giving a favourable ac-
cZut of their condition. It is surprising how few
™“ ons hav e seen these letters, though every body
has heard of them. I have, perhaps, mysell had
one of the best opportunities ot comparing letters
received in various places, and 1 state it as a fact,
that'they are commonly filled with alsehoods, in
nrooortion as they are lavourable, in order to ob-
S some selfish end. The tew letters written by
convicts are generally sent soon after they have
arrived in the colony, whilst their feelings lor their
friends continue fresh about them ; but before they
Lave had much experience of the convict’s misery.
No man however bad, likes to inflict unnecessary
on his friends or family. Some of these let-
lers are written expressly for their consolation ;
the most favourable circumstances of a favourable
case”are picked out, put together by themselves,
“ d covered over with the letter writer s own
iwies- the disagreeable truths are passed over,
concealed the letter comes, is joyful y read to a
a whot neighbourhood, busy gossiping tongues
soread the news through a whole county, making
It* bigger as it goes along, until it becomes mon-
strous—for the very wonder of a convict s being
' a 3


w ell off and well to do, as they fancied, made them
think of that part only—and thus any small truth
that may happen to reach the people is buried
amongst a thousand errors; whilst the effect
upon common belief is as great as if, not one false
witness, but fifty true ones, had come over the
seas, and told them every thing about the matter ;
and the truth of the matter only then comes to be
seen, when some miserable victim of the common
delusion finds out, alas, too late ! that he himself
is involved in the frightful reality.
But these letters are most frequently written
with the view of enticing, sometimes a husband,
but more commonly a wife, to follow the trans-
ported party out to the colony. I have seen de-
testable letters of this description. One writes
soon after arrival, when the thing is altogether
impossible, “ I never ivas so well off in my life ; *
another says : “ 1 receive £6O a-yearfor salary ; ”
a third, after telling a long story, concludes : “ I
am so happy , that it only requires you , my dear
wife, to share the good things, to make it perfectly
so,” &c. The miserable wife, by great exertions
and great sacrifices, contrives to reach the colony,
perhaps in a state of destitution. Poor woman !
little did she suspect how transportation, and
slavery, in the company of reprobates, had hard-
ened and brutalized that man’s heart. But now
comes the bitter hour of her distress. Her hus-
band, she finds, on arrival, she has no chance of
joining for many years, whilst he continues to be
a slave not worth one penny for all his work.
Perhaps he is even in the employment of Govern-
ment, which cuts off the last hope of her associ-
ating with him. He may even, before she comes,
have reached a chain gang or a penal settlement.
In short, he is an unredeemable slave, and she a
lone woman basely deceived, and deceived by the


Imsband in whom she trusted, under the idle hope
that her presence in the colony, going about in
grief and affliction, might, by some chance, move
some person to do something for her sake, towards
his being assigned, in the course of time, to his
own wife, instead of to a master —a hope which is
as vague as it is commonly empty. I have ex-
posed the bare-faced falsehood of some of those
letters, and, in so doing, have most probably saved
their receivers from ruin of soul and body.
I wish that those who are captivated with fa-
vourable letters, which they have most likely
never seen, saw a lew of those, in which convicts
describe with sincerity, their desolate state, and
the calamitous condition of those around them.
During the voyage out, the convict, with his
two or three hundred comrades in wretchedness,
is placed under the despotic power of a surgeon
of the navy, and guarded by a military force.
The ordinary punishment for misconduct on board
the ship is flogging. At night, all are huddled
below, half a dozen convicts together on a couch,
without any distinction of crime or character;
the petty thief side by side with the violator; the
burglar close by the murderer; the simple-hearted
man from the country by the gaol-polluted felon,
and the monster from the hulk. Wonder not, if,
in the end, the more decent come to rival the
worst in foulness of manners and corruption of
heart. When arrived, they are stripped naked to
be examined for marks; they are then conveyed
to the convicts barracks, which are the scene of
such monstrous things, that I have known the
blind man thank God for having deprived him of
sight, since these horrors were thus shut out by
one gate from his soul. There ail kindly human
feelings seem to die away ; there men sharpen
their wicked ingenuity to torment each other.


being the only poor revenge that is left them:
there each man carries every little thing he has
in the world about his person, lest it be stolen the
next moment. “Do give me a pair of old shoes
of any sort to show at muster ,” said once a hard,
brown visaged man to me, not without a tear,
having escaped a moment for the purpose, “ for
mine have been stolen, and I am sure to be flogged”
There, nothing is heard, as one passes, but the
hoarse loud brawlings of the imperative overseer;
and there, the gory triangle is incessantly being
ejected for the infliction of punishment.
When the convicts are taken from this place to
be assigned to masters, no-distinction is made, but
whatever be the character or conduct, or age, or
crime, or sentence of the convict, his chance of
falling to a good or bad master, of being put to
this or to that work, is the same as if his master
had drawn for him, out ot the whole ship s num-
ber, by lottery. His master may work him, not
only at what he choses, but for what time he
choses. The West Indian owner of negro slaves
is as careful of his people as he is of his horses,
because they cost a great deal of money, and
fresh ones are not easily procured. But the
owner ot the convict slaves has not the same cause
for care. On receiving him, he pays the sura of
One Pound for the clothes on his back, this is all.
And when one is worked out, another may be
easily had for the asking. In a word, the convict
is, in every sense, his master s creature at his
master’s mercy. His master has seldom any good
opinion of him, and generally imagines, that the
only way of keeping down the swellings of his
discontented spirit, is to coerce and straighten him
as much as possible. Not only is he deprived ot
liberty, but, as the late Governor of Van Dieman’s
Land, Sir George Arthur, stated before a Com


mittee of Parliament, last year, “ The convict is
subject to the caprice of the family to which he is
assigned, and subject to the most summary laws.
He is liable to be sent to a chain gang, or to be
scourged for idleness, for insolent words, for in-
solent looks , or for anything betraying the insur-
gent spirit ”
True, after a year more than the one-half his
sentence, if for seven or fourteen years, and after
a long period, if for life, the convict slave, if he
have behaved well, and his master be pleased to
recommend him, obtains from Government an
indulgence, called a ticket of leave, which gives
him some liberty, and allows him to dispose of his
toil for wages, until he forfeits it by some act of
misconduct. But it is also true, as I know well,
that it is not always good conduct that secures a
master’s recommendation, it being his interest to
hold his slave, and that free of cost, if he be a
good worker, and give little trouble, as long as
possible. And it is also equally true, that by a
law, which Lord Stanley introduced, after he had
declared that he would make transportation
“ worse than death,” no convict, under any cir-
cumstances, even though he have his ticket-of-
leave, can hold any property whatsoever. So that
though the ticket-of-leave-man be allowed, by in-
dulgence, to work for wages, yet his employer is
not bound by law to pay him ; and were some
person to snatch from between his teeth the bread
needful for his existence, yet the law gives him
no redress, or means of recovery in any court
of justice.
Human life being, in New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land, a contest between master and con-
vict—on the master’s part for his own profit; on
the convict’s part for his own ease; and wages,
the usual motive to labour, being out of the ques-


tion ; thn great persuader to work and good order
is the lash.
Before Sir Richard Bourke restrained the power
of single magistrates, one of these could, in a
summary way, sentence a convict, for the most
trivial offences, to receive 150 lashes, at three
separate inflictions. When this power was res-
trained to 50 lashes, for the first offence, a great
outcry was raised by the slave masters against
the Governor ; in consequence of which, and to
shew the severity of even 50 lashes, the police
magistrates were requested to witness themselves,
for one month, the infliction of these sentences
and to report to the Government the bodily injury
and sufferings produced. I have seen the reports
of ten magistrates, describing the effects of 247
floggings, which they had themselves seen in-
flicted in the month of September, 1834. In the
far greater number of cases, the back of the
sufferer is represented as much cut, in a smaller
number as accompanied with bleeding, with much
suffering, sometimes with extreme agony and
violent screams. The back, in other cases, was
dark and livid, whilst some fainted. As you read
the following instances, remember that the instru-
ment used is not the military, but the naval
scourge, so far increased in power, that, as the
person whose invention improved it boasted before
a commitr.ee of Parliment, whatever w r as the con-
dition of the man’s back, he invariably succeeded,
when he himself inspected the punishment, “ in
breaking the skin at the seventh lash. ”
“ Adam Ballatine, disobedience of orders in going to the
hospital under the pretence of sickness; a troublesome
character, 25 lashes. This boy received 25 lashes on the
22nd of July ; he cried out i loudly at every lash ; the
b[ood ran freely from fresh and old sores ; he was se-
verely punished.


{ * Edward Scandrake, neglect of duty by feigning sick-
ness, 25 lashes. He received 50 lashes last Monday week,
but was never flogged before; was sore from his last pun-
ishment ; blood came at the flrst stroke; he screamed
dreadfully at every lash, the blood running freely from the
old wounds; lie lost much blood,
“ Andrew M'Mahon, drunk and disorderly, 50 lashes.
This was an old offender, had been flogged repeatedly ;
this was the flrst time that he was punished with the regu-
lation cat; he bellowed at every lash, and writhed with
agony ; his back was very much lacerated, and more blood
appeared than I had noticed on any other criminal; when
taken down, he seemed much exhausted, and cried like a
child.
“ Francis Hayes, disorderly conduct and neglect of work,
50 lashes. A young man ; had been punished before ; at
the first lash he cried out, which he did during the whole
of his punishment, and struggled most violently, calling out
that he could not stand it, and praying to be taken down ;
about the Bth lash blood came, and he begged for water,
which was given to him; his back was much lacerated, and
he appeared a good deal exhausted when taken down.
“George Delbridge, drunk and disorderly, 50 lashes.
A strong muscular man; previous to being tied up, he
appeared to think lightly of the punishment he was about
to receive ; the first lash, however, caused him to change his
opinion ; he groaned aloud, and let his head fall on his
shoulder after every stripe; blood appeared at the 9th
lash, and his back was very much lacerated at the conclu-
sion of the punishment.
“ John Carroll, neglect of duty by feigning sickness, 25
lashes. This boy received 12 lashes about three weeks
ao-o, and was flogged a short time before that; cried out
loudly at the first lash ; blood came on the 18th lash, and
ran freely throughout the remaining part of the punishment.
He must have felt much pain.
“Thomas Holdsworth, pilfering from his master, 50
lashes. At the first lash the prisoner uttered piercing
screams, continued screaming at each succeeding lash, and
seemed to suffer greatly; the fifth lash brought blood, and


the flesh was considerably lacerated at the conclusion 6f
the punishment. The man says he was never flogged before.
I am of opinion that he was sufficiently punished at the 25th
lash, for his bodily strength was nearly exhausted, as was
manifest by his staggering gait when cast loose.
« William Robinson, drunk and making away with a
part of his dress which was given him by his master, 50
lashes. This man was never flogged before; he cried out
at every lash; the skin was lacerated at the 12th lash ; the
blood appeared at the 20th; this man suffered intense
agony. Twenty lashes would have been an ample warning
to him. . .
“John Green, absconding, 50 lashes. Appeared to,
suffer much, bled freely, and fainted after the punishment.
On this subject, I shall only add further that
in 1836, the convictions in New South Wales
alone, and chiefly amongst convicts, amounted to
nearly 22,000, the whole number of convicts in
that colony being not much more than 30,000.
And that the common punishment was the lash.
Those sent for punishment to the chain gangs
are clothed in a pie-bald dress of grey and yellow,
placed under the watch of a military guard, and
worked in heavy irons by overseers. Speaking ol
the soldiers placed in guard over chain gangs at
work, Colonel Breton states. “ I have kno\yn them
at work when the thermometer was 115 in the sun,
(being about twice the heat ot our climate,} with
a hot wind, and it blew the whole day ; they were
at work the whole day under a broiling sun, and
then two soldiers were brought to me for being
drunk on their post, one of them was one of the
best men in the regiment, and he had got drunk
on his simple ration of spirit (owing, ot course, to
the heat and fatigue)—just the small quantity he
had for a ration.’* At night* these chain gangs*
employed in the interior country, are locked up
in square moveable boxes, some sixteen being
crowded in a space allowing considerably less than


two feet broad to each man. Whilst those
employed about Sidney are conveyed, at night to
a hulk, where some ten or twelve are crowded
together into a cell so small as not to allow them
lying on their backs. The countenances of these
men are shocking to behold.
From February, 1833, up to June, 1836, there
were executed in Sidney 102 criminals; and it is
a fact, which, in some cases, I myself witnessed,
that many oi these men, when they were brought
out to die, thanked God it was a. better fate than
going to live at Norfolk Island.
The penal settlement of Norfolk Island, is a
small island about a thousand miles fr omSidney,
to which convicts are re-transported frotn N. S.
Wales, Port Arthur is also a penal settlement,
to which convicts are re*transported from Van
Pieman's Land. It is a peninsula, cut off from
the rest of the colony except by a neck of land.
This neck is guarded by a detachment of soldiers,
and by a line of very fierce bull dogs, from shore
to shore. These dogs have been so trained, that
on the least noise, they give the alarm, by day or
by night, and so successful has been this guard,
that not more than two prisoners were ever known
to escape; and one of these was taken, the other
is supposed to have perished in the woods. The
general description of this peninsula is exceedingly
desolate, and the convicts are employed in working
coal mines. There are above 1,200 criminals in
Norfolk Island, and nearly as many at Port
Arthur. They are fettered with heavy chains,
harrassed with heavy work, and fed on salt meat
and maize bread. Their existence is one of des-
peration. At Port Arthur there are chain gangs,
in which rigor is pushed to the utmost extreme of
man endurance. * The work,” as Sir G. Ar-
thur informs you, “being of the most incessant and


galling description the settlement can produce;
and any disobedience of orders, or turbulence , or
other misconduct, is instantaneously 'punished with
the lash ” So severe indeed is the privation ot
these men, so dreary and desolate their state ot
mind, cut off from all communication except with
each other, and deprived of every source of hu-
man enjoyment, raising their miseries, as they
herd together, upon each other, without hope as
without help ; so absolute is their despair, that the
most daring attempts, though commonly useless,
are made to escape, and murders are even com-
mitted from a vehement desire of being relieved
from their own intense misery. The late governor
of Van Dieman’s Land, states two cases of the
kind, in one of which the man murdered his dear-
est friend, saying he was weary of life. I myselt
witnessed the execution of one in Norfolk Island,
who had deliberately, and without any malice
against him, split open the scull of his comrade,
with a spade when at work, he pleaded guilty, and
declared that bis sole object was to obtain his own
deliverance out of life. Several such cases have
occured. The late chief justice of New South
Wales, when interrogated by a Parliamentary
Committee, on the convicts of Norfolk Island,
being asked, “ Would it not be better to burn them
alive? ” said, “ 1 cannot say... .if it were put to
myself, 1 should not hesitate a moment in prefer-
ring death under any form that you could present
to me, than such a state of endurance as JSorjolJc
Island
One unhappy man on the same island, when
brought up to receive sentence, wrung the heart,
and brought tears to the eyes of his judge, as he
exclaimed: “ Let a man be what he will when he
comes here , he is soon made as bad as the rest;
the heart of a man is taken from him, and there is
given to him the heart of a beast ”


Of the female convict, I shall only say, that if
she is at all decent, to transport her is to give her
a ticket to infamy.
The female convict is seldom long at service
before she is sent to the factory, or house of cor-
rection, for punishment. Her punishment there
is imprisonment with labour, or solitary confine-"
ment on bread and water.
I may be told by those who know nothing about
the matter, unless from mere idle rumour, that,
whatever else be the calamities of the convict, he
is, at least, well fed and well clothed. Well
clothed ! is not a thick heavy garment an irksome
load in a hot climate? and do not the very shape
and stuff of his clothing mark him out as a crimi-
nal and a slave to eye of every free and honest
man ? Well fed ! Yes. Pray, are not the horses
and cattle you every where see well fed ? And why
so ? But in order to produce a greater amount of
labour out of a greater quantity of toil and sweat.
Bread,then, is given to increase the convict’s blood,
that that doomed blood may be exhausted anew
for his master’s profit.—lf he refuses, then will it
be drawn out again in a different manner, by the
help of the cutting lash. And will this content a
man ? Has he fallen so low, and become so vile,
that this should be considered his happiness ?
Has man (hen become a mere stomach for the
passage of bread and meat ? Has he not a mind
and a heart, and an immortal soul ? a mind to be
fed with pleasant thoughts, and a heaft to be fed
with pleasant feelings, and an immortal soul to be
fed with truth, and light, and happiness ?
Take any one of you, my dear readers; separate
him from his wife, from his children, from all those
whose conversation makes life dear to him ; cast
him on the ends of the earth ; let him there fall
amongst reprobates, who are the lost stain and


disgrace of our common nature ; give him those
obscene-mouthed monsters (or his constant com-
panions and consolers; let the daily Msion o
their progress from infamy to inlamy, until the
demon that inspires them has exhausted invention
and the powers of nature together, be ms on y
example; house him, at night, in a bark hut on a
mud floor, where he has less ot contort than y
cattle in their stalls; awake him from the troubled
dreams of his wretched wife and outcast cml ren,
to feel how far he is from their help, and take him
out at sunrise , work him under a burning sun, an
a heartless overseer, and the threat of the as ,
until the night fall; give him not a penny s wages
but sorrow; leave him no hope but the same
dull, dreary round of endless drudgery (or many
years to come; let him see no opening by which
to escape, but through a long, narrow prospect. ot
police courts, of gaols, of triangles, of deathi cel s,
and of penal settlements ; let him a l the while be
clothed in a dress of shame, that shows to every
living soul his degradation ; and if he dares to sell
any part of that clothing, then flog him worse than
any dog ! And thus, whilst severed from all kind-
ness and all love, whilst the stern harsh voice of
bis task-master is grating in incessant.jars within
his ear; take all rest out of his flesh and plant
the thorn; take all feeling out of his heart, and
leave the withered core ; take all peace out ot his
conscience, and leave the worm of ; and
then let any one come and dare to tell me that the
man is happy because he has bread and meat.
Is it not here, if ever there was such a case, where
the taste of bread is a taste of misery, and where
to feed and prolong life is to feed and lengthen out
sorrow ? And in pondering these things, do not
those strong words of Sacred Scripture bring dowh
their load of truth in heavy trouble to our thoughts


that, “ Their bread is loathsome to their eyes , and
their meat unto their soul.”
Oh! say not, then, that the convict is happy,
because he has bread and meat.
“ I was called to one lately,” writes a clergy-
man to me from New South Wales, “ he had been
but four years in the colony ; but, during that
period, he had, at different times, been 114 days
in solitary confinement; no bed or blanket, half a
black loaf in the twenty-four hours, sometimes
enduring extreme heat, sometimes intense cold,
and had received sixteen hundred lashes. He had
not a bad heart, and when he spoke to me of his
mother, the tears fell abundantly from his cheeks.
His master had, what is here called, a down upon
him . I was called to another—-he had been eleven
years—seven of which had been passed in heavy
irons, besides scourgings. He listened to my little
exhortation, and I observed a struggle coming on,
his chest heaved, and his throat reddened; I be-
came alarmed ; at length a flood of tears relieved
him, and he exclaimed, ‘Oh! sir, this is the first
kind word X have heard for eleven years.’ He
was in despair. And when I promised, it he be-
haved wefl for two or three years, to endeavour to
get him some indulgence, his was a happy heart,
when hope came to it, however distant.”
Having now concluded—lt any one should be
disposed to ask me, what, after ignorance of the
convict’s real fate, is the first great cause that
leads to transportation ? I answer—intemperance.
If you asked me for the second great cause ? I
again answer intemperance. If, for the third
great cause ? I must still answer—intemperance.
And, as often as you ask me, so often shall I con-
tinue to answer —intemperance, drunkenness, fn-»
temperance.
THK END.


appendix.
The following extracts are taken from a letter,
now in my possession, addressed to a gentleman
jn Ireland, a magistrate, by a convict who, having
received a respectable education, and having, as
he himself slates, gone out under* “ comparatively
favourable circumstances,” is to be considered as
representing one of the most favourable cases.
The letter is dated Port Macquarie, (to which
place educated convicts are always sent on arrival
at Sydney,) 2Gth August, 1836
« I was ordered to proceed to Port Macquarie,
as a special constable—a place where all the
invalids of the colony are sent, and which, until ot
late was a penal settlement. Special constables
have no salary, and but a very poor ration, nor
can they be assigned ; unfortunately for them a
little learning is a dangerous thing ; ’ but they can
get 50 or 100 lashes, as soon as the greatest vaga-
bond that ever the mother country produced.
“ My motive, therefore, in writing to you from
this place, is to beg of you, in the name ol all that
is sacred, in the name of that merciful God, at
whose hands the most virtuous shall have one day
to crave mercy, to obtain a pardon for me from
the Irish Government. You are aware 1 was
satisfied with my sentence when I received it
(and I still admit its justice.) I shall now state
the cause of my wish to have it reversed.
“ i V yish to leave this hatctul country, but more
particularly this settlement, because I am hourly ?


by virtue of my situation, under the necessity of
coming in contact with the veriest wretches the
most consummate villains, cither as regards 'their
0r r sent dis P ositions . that ever
f"! 1 ' ln the eye of the law, they are my
equals. A change of situation would be as bad
if not worse : for the slightest offence—the very
ef an offence, in fact, a special will lie
? b "™«ks. amongst the most depraved
ilj j°" ed ° aSS 01 men in tbe world—the
lame, blind, insane, epileptic, &c„ the language
and conduct of whom, is far worse than^hJr
hard L l | n f r T, t h eS ;- 1 mu ; t sa 3 that my fate is too
ard, I feel that it is. I could serve seven years
in confinement alone.-1 could work cheerfully
for the same period, without the least remunera.’
non it i could only meet occasionally with virtuous
IcS l bUt in f Ch a P,ace as this > *« impossible
I could live so long, unaffected by the ridicule or
the the vicious
and the vile of all descriptions, who surround one
I say uncontaminatcd in sober sadness, for no
matter how practised a man may have been in all
if half Went trans P° rtatio «. no matter
it half his lile-tirae were spent in gaols, he is still
a mere novice in such things when he arrives here
Impossible, I repeat, but that I should become
ultimately (and imperceptibly likely, but too
surely) the depraved and degraded being which I
now beho d with so much abhorrence. Farewell
then, to all hope either of present or future happi*
ness.... I have not written to any of my relations
not wishing that they should know of my miser
able situation, after coming out here in such com.
paratively favourable circumstances... Tdo
wish to state most distinctly, that all my’hopes of
future happiness depend on the success of tW s
pplication. If I once get corporeal punishment


and it is one man in 500 who escapes it mints
settlement, it is all over. Every one I see daily
punished, thinks of it no otherwise, than as far as
regards the pain of its infliction, (and the class to
which I belong, are not the least among the I J um "
ber.) To a man on whose mind it would have
a greater effect than on his back, all hopes of his
doing well are at an end. Worse than all, there
are villians, who if they dislike one, will get him
punished at any risk, and sooner than torego their
revenge, they would be punished themselves....
........Those who have served a sentence under
such circumstances are unfit to be admitted into
civilized and virtuous society again. It is
fortunate for Ireland that so few expirees return to
her shores To a man in my situation it
is painful to take a retrospect of by-gone times I
now can appreciate the value of an unh emtshed
reputation. I feel all this. Would that 1 could
feel and think less, ” &c.
R. P. StonTand^on7Pfi n t ers » Bull Street Birmingham.
