

EMPIRE BUILDING
Unity of the English speaking races
of the world.
ALFRED J. TAYLOR.
Hobart,
1913.


(By Alfred J,
In the year 1885 Mr. Edward Freeman,
the historian, drew attention to the mis-
use of the word Imperial, and the diffi-
culty of defining the word Empire. In
his article in ?MacMillan's Magazine"
for the year I have named he writes:
"In the present use of the word there is
always ambiguity. What is the Empire?
The whole of the Queen's dominions some
will answer, as distinguished from the
mere Kingdom of Great Britain and Ire-
land. But in what sense is this an Etn-
pire? The word is clearly not used in
the old sertee anywhere but in India. . . .
The Empress of India is Lady over de-
pendent princes and nations in India,
. . . . but this does not apply to the
Queen?s dominions in America and Aus-
raiia; it Hardly applies to her dominions
in Africa. ... As long as the word was
a mere figure or flourish, designed simply
as a vague name for a great extent of
territory, it was needless to ask its strict
meaning, and could not mislead anybody.
But now that it has become a technical
term, we have a right to ask its exact
meaning. . . . The Queen is not Empress
anywhere but in India; the title may
not even be used in the United Kingdom.
. . . . The word as now used seems in-
tended to mean the interests of the whole
of the Queen's dominions, as opposed to
the interests of any particular parts of
them."
Now, in this paper I intend to use the
word Empire as embracing something
even wider than the whole of the Queen's
dominions.
I intend to use the word as embracing
the higher ideal of the union of all the
English-speaking peoples of the world;
for, to quote once more the words of
Freeman, ?1 cannot help looking on such
a lasting friendly union of the English
and English-speaking folk as an im-
measurably higher object than the main-
tenance of any so-called ?British' Em-
pire."
Tennyson had even a higher ideal than
this?one which would have its realisa-
tion in a ?Parliament of Man" in the
?Federation of the World." He looked
forw aid to a single race, a single tongue,
and a warlegs world: ?
?I have seen her far away, for is not
earth as yet so young?
Every tiger madness muzzled, every/ser-
pent passion killed,
Every grim ravine a garden, every blaz-
ing desert till'd,
Eobed in universal harvest, up to either
pole she smiles.
Universal Ocean softly washing all her
warless isles."
But there are many steps to be taken,
many moral triumphs to be won before
that era will dawn.
3BL
Taylor.)
And no one realised this more fully
than Tennyson did. His immediate
longing was for the most intimate union
of every part of Great Britain and the
British dominions. ?He believed,"-
wrote one of his biographers, ?that every
different member so united Avould, with
a heightening of individuality to each
member, give such strength and greatness
and stability to the whole as would make
our Empire a faithful and fearless leader
in all that is good throughout the
world."
.In some respects it may be said that
this ideal at least is being realised in our
own lime. The loyalty to the Mother-
land, on the part of the States and Do-
minions under British rule, during a
recent period of stress, has been evinced
in such a remarkable manner as to afford
a guarantee of the help she may look for
in any hour of danger; and it should be
the aim of statesmen in the Parliament
of Britain, and of those who are repre-
sentatives in the States and Dominions,
to strengthen this feeling of something
more than patriotism that has been mani-
fested in the direction indicated. I say
something more than patriotism, because
I realise that back of all practical ex-
pressions of loyalty in the way of gifts
of Dreadnoughts and personal sacrifice
there is an undercurrent of sentiment
that means that there is a soul in it all
?and that mystic touch of nature that
will some day make the whole world kin.
?Sentiment," wrote W E. Foster, in the
?Nineteenth Century" for 1885 ?when
these subjects were occupying some pub-
lic attention ??sentiment has ruled the
world since the world began; and, more-
over, history informs us of this note-
worthy fact that wherever there is a deep
and prevailing and powerful national
sentiment, there is almost sure to be
found strong and economical and ma-
terial grounds in its favour."
The effect of the sentiment I am re-
ferring to is well illustrated in an inci-
dent that came under my own notice when
I was on a visit from Tasmania to London
some eight years ago. I was talking to
a labourer who had just left his work,
and I happened to ask him which party
he was supporting, the Conservatives or
the Liberals; and I shall never forget
the earnest look that came into his face
as he laid his hand upon my arm, and
said, "I do not care which side is in
power, sir, so long as the Empire is kept
up." I thought that was simply splen-
did. It may be considered as only so
much sentiment, but, as I have said be-
fore, sentiment rules the world; and in
it we find the touch of Nature that
makes the whole world kin. I shall hgive
occasion to refer to this element of sepjti-
ment once more when I deal with
relations to the United States.
EMPIRE BUILDING.


THE BUILDING OP EMPIRE.
Now, lot me say what I have to say
about the building of Empire, always
remembering that what I mean by Em-
pire is the unity of the English-speaking
people of tlie world.
A writer in the June number of the
?Round Table? (a quarterly review of the
politics of the British Empire) has well
said that the conception of an Empire,
?welded into a strong and enduring poli-
tical union, must be shown to be the
mutual and necessary satisfaction of the
moral interests of its members. It must
appeal convincingly as an ideal of moral
welfare to the ardour and imagination of
a democratic people;? that it must be
grounded ?not on a desire for wealth or
glory, but upon the essentials of civilisa-
tion,? and that the problem of Empire is
to be determined by the standard of na-
tional well-being.
Now. the very core of Democracy is the
shibboleth that in life all men should be
afforded equal chances in the struggle for
existence, and this is the objective for
which all true democrats are fighting.
Bur there can be no equal chances for
human beings unless there is a moral
foundation for the social life, and the
idea of moral well-being includes the
existence of proper conditions for the de-
velopment of a wholesome and happy
social life.
If we ask ourselves whether such con-
ditions exist at the present moment
among the English-speaking peoples of
the world it will not be a difficult matter
to give an emphatic answer in the nega-
tive.
NEED OF SOCIAL REFORM.
We have only to turn to statistics and
official reports relating to poverty and
crime to realise with horror the brutalis-
ing conditions under which many of our
fellow beings have to pass through life.
The average age at death among the
people of the West-End of London is 55
years. The average in the East-Elnd is
30 years. In the West-End 18 per cent,
of the children die before five years of
age. In the East-End 55 per cent, of
the children die before five years of age.
And there are streets in London where,
out of 100 children born in a year, 50 die
during the next year; and of the 50 that
remain 25 die before they are five years
old (Jack LondoiCs ?People of the
Abyss?). And all of this is due to the
social conditions under which the in-
habitants of the poor in the East-End
are compelled to live. The following
extract is taken from the report of a
Liverpool medical officer:
?In many instances little, if any, sun-
light could get to the courts, and the at-
mosphere within the dwellings was al-
ways foul, owing largely to the saturated
condition of the walls and ceilings, which
for so many years had absorbed the ex-
halations of the occupants into their
porous material. Singular testimony to
the absence of sunlight in these courts
was- furnished by the action of the Parks
and Gardens Committee, who desired to
brighten the homes of the poorest class
by gifts of growing flowers and window
boxes. But these gifts could not be made
in courts such as these, as flowers and
plants were sirsceptible to thfe unwhole-
some surroundings, and would not live.?
Now, this may seem incredible to some
of my readers; but I can assure them
that I can say, from my own personal
knowledge, that the statement is a mere
statement of fact. During my stay in
London in 1905 1 visited the East-End,
and in one of the slums a poor woman
asked me with some show of pride if I
would like to see her ?flower garden.?
She look me into a small back yard, and
there showed me two sickly plants in a
little patch of ground about 2ft. by 4ft.,
and an equally sick-looking plant, a
geranium, which she was endeavouring to
cultivate in a pot. None of the leaves
of these plants were green. There was
no suqlight in that court to make them
green. And this she called her ?gar-
den!? It was pathetic and pitiful; and
1 could hardly restrain my tears at the
pathos of it.
A medical man, in a recent book, pub-
lishes the following incident: ?I was
called out to a confinement last night. I
found the woman lying on a dirty mat-
tress. A three-year-old child lying beside
her w'as suffering from pneumonia. In
the corner of the room lay the dead body
of a child that had died from pneu-
monia; and between her pains the mother
kept calling to a five-year-old child not
to keep on fingering the little corpse!?
Jack London has told us in his ?People
of the Abyss??and his figures are taken
from official sources?that 1,800,000 people
in London live on the poverty line and
below it, and that 1,000,000 live with one
week's wages between them and pauper-
ism; that in all England and Wales 18
per cent, of the whole population are
driven to the parish for relief, while 959
out of every 1,000 in the United Kingdom
die in poverty; that 8,000,000 souls live
on the border of starvation; that on any
one day, in the United Kingdom, over
1,000,000 people are in receipt of poor-
law relief; and that one in 11 of the
whole working-class receive relief in the
course of the year. This was the case
in 1902. In a recent leading article in the
London ?Times? it is stated that if
poverty is to be measured by the amount
of relief granted by organisations ap-
pointed for the relief of suffering, then
it must be confessed that in England
poverty has more than doubled during
the past decade!
And now I wish to ask my readers if
it is likely that Empires can be built out
of material such as that I have been re-
ferring to?
Does not the truth force itself upon our
attention that it is first of all necessary
that we should prepare the proper ma-
terial before we can hope to build up an
Empire?.
But there is an obstacle, even larger
than the one I have dealt with, that must


?ever stand in the way of the building of
an Empire that is to have the elements
of stability in its constitution. I refer
to the ?white slave traffic.?
What is known as ?The Social Evil?
exists to an extent in English-speaking
communities that would be beyond be-
lief if it were not for the official reports
and official statistics that are within the
reach of those who care to give attention
to the subject; and, apart from the im-
morality of this, there are physical evils
associated with the social evil that must
bj faced by the political economist who
undertakes to deal with the question of
Empire building. That statesmen are be-
ginning to wake up to the importance of
dealing with the transmission of a loath-
some disease, that is blasting the physi-
cal health of present generations, and the
physical health of generations yet un-
born, is indicated in legislation that was
practically rushed through both Houses
of the British Parliament recently (but
which deals with one aspect of this awful
question only), by the numerous books
that are being issued from the press, call-
ing attention to a subject the discussion
of which has only too long been tabooed
by the Church, the public platform, and
in our homes; and t y the resolutions
passed at the Medical Congress just con-
chided in London.
As Miss Wrench pointed out in one of
her excellent addresses in Hobart, the
object of the Empire-builders must be not
only to bring about closer political unity,
but to make better the individual life of
each unit, physically and morally, as well
as politically.
It is because I heartily agree with Miss
Wrench in this respect that I have em-
phasised so strongly the necessity for en-
deavour that shall lie in the direction ot
improving the character of the human
life out of which we hope to build up a
stable Empire that shall have all that
stands for the higher civilisation in its
character and being.
It is awful to remember that thousands
of the women who become victims to the
?social evil? die in five years, and often,
in France, after two years. In those five
years they have communicated broadcast
.a disease the effects of which will be felt
by at least two generations, and even be-
yond that?if there are still victims born
-to suffer from it. The victims of the
?social evil? form an army more de-
structive of life than all the armies of
the world that have fought with bayonet
and cannon. And the battle with this
army has to be fought and conquered in
the process of Empire building. The
battle can only be won by instilling into
the minds of the young a sense of per-
sonal honour, and causing them to realise
the degradation that the ?white slave
traffic? brings upon the man and woman,
and by imparting to parents the know-
ledge that will aid them in protecting
their children from the greatest curse
that can fall upon their lives when they
-attain to manhood and womanhood, I
?cannot touch further upon the subject
now; but I would earnestly exhort those
" ho have the moral welfare of the risirw
generation at heart to speak more openly
upon this question; and, in order that
they may be equipped for such teaching
as that which .[ am now advocating, I
would recommend them to read two
works recently published?? The White
Slave Traffic,? by the authoress of ?The
Soul Market,? and ?Daughters of Ish-
mael,? by Reginald Kauffman. They will
also do well to place in the hands of their
children the literature of the White Cross
League, all of which may be obtained of
the local booksellers. By taking this sub-
ject in hand the mothers may render very
effectual help in the great work of Em-
pire building.
ENGLAND AND AMERICA.
And now let me turn to a very different
aspect of the question with which I am
dealing. Let me say something about our
relationship to the United States of
America.
For any ill-feeling that may exist be-
tween the English and the Americans I
blame that portion of the press that has
helped to keep alive the spirit of jingo-
ism and political jealousy, which should
have been permitted to die out long
ago.
When I publicly expressed the opinion,
some short time ago, that, in the event
of a final crisis, that would jeopardise
the supremacy of the British Empire,
Americans would be found taking sides
in her defence, a military officer said, ?I
do not agree with you, Mr. Tajdor. Not
one of them would stand up for us. They
would stand by and see our downfall
without stretching out a hand to save
us.
I would be sorry indeed to take this
view of the case. What I feel about the
matter may be best illustrated if I relate
an incident that occurred some time ago,
and quote a poem written by Ella
Wheeler Wilcox after the wreck of the
litamc.
It happened that an American function
was in full swing; and, of course, there
was a great display of the Stars and
Stripes. A half-drunken sailor, carrying
a [j mon Jack, found his way into the
crowd and shouted, ?Up with the Union
Jack. He was scoffed at by some and
threatened by others. But he still per-
?sisted in his cry, ?Up' with?the Union
?'act; At last he was told if he did
not hold his tongue he would be ducked
in the river. But he still continued to
cry, Up with the Onion Jack.? At last
he was seized and thrown into the water
As he struggled to the surface he cried,
in half-suffocated tones, ?Up with the
Union Jack.? He was thrown in once
more, and as he again rose to the surface
he repeated his cry. An American who
was among the lookers-on, said, ?After
all, it was the spirit that is in that man
that won tor us our freedom at Bunker
after a]l we are of the same
blood. His remarks seemed to ?catch
on/ tor the fickle crowd veered round,
and, carrying the sailor with them, thev
fastened his flag below the Stars and
Stripes. And just after this had been


done a great blast of wind came it becomes us one and all to do our
twisted the flags together, tore them from ? part in the work. I may be pardoned.
the mast, and carried them away out of
sight; and another American who was
standing by said, "It seems to me that
?God Almiglaty has tangled those flags to-
gether so that they shall never be separ-
ated again/? And I think it will be real-
ised to be so, if ever a supreme moment
of danger comes to the Mother Land.
After the wreck of the Titanic, when
some hundreds of heroes went bravely
and calmly to their deaths?in order that
the women might be saved ?Ella Wheeler
Wilcox published the following lines:?
THE ENGLISHMAN.
Born in the flesh and bred in the bone.
Some of us harbour still
A New World pride; and we flaunt, or
hide.
The Spirit of Bunker Hill.
We claim our place, as a separate race:
Or a self-created clan:
Till there comes a day when we like to
say,
"We are kin of the Englishman/?
For under the front that seems so cold.
And the voice that is wont to storm.
We are certain to find a big, broad mind,
And a heart that is soft and warm.
And they carry their woes in a lordly
way.
As only the great souls can:
And it makes us glad when in truth we
say,
"We are kin to the Englishman.??
He slams his door in the face of the
world.
If he thinks the world too bold;
He will even curse; but he opens his
purse
To the poor and the sick and the old.
He is slow in giving to women the vote.
And slow to pick up her fan:
But he gives her room in the hour of
doom,
And dies?like an Englishman.
I believe that these lines embody the
spirit that lies at the root of true Ameri-
can sentiment, and that, should oc-
casion arise, the "flesh of our flesh? and
the "blood of our blood? will be found
working with us in the struggle for a
victory that will guarantee the future
peace of the world. ;So let us cultivate
the Empire spirit; not only with the
units of an Empire bound together under
one form of government, but with all
units of the English-speaking race.
OUE AUSTRALIAN STATES.
In these our Australian States we are
beginning to reap the responsibilities of
independence. AVe have to make provision
against the possibility of attack. And not
only so, but we have to be prepared to
help the Mother-Country, which has given
to us the freedom we are now enjoying.
1 think it only right, therefore, that
every man should be trained to defend
the country of his adoption and the coun-
try of his birth. We must be prepared
for war if we are to retain our heritage;
13/6272 Mercury
perhaps, if 1 express an opinion that, if
the Commonwealth to which we belong:
had commenced training the able-bodied
men from 21 to 35 years of age, and also
the men from 35 years of age to 50, before
compelling the youth of 14 to train as
soldiers, it would have been the wiser
course. The first division I have sug-
gested would have given the Common-
wealth a trained army of 250,000 soldiers,
and the second division a reserve force of
250,000, while the cadets were training to
fill places in the first division when tlie-
proper time came.
Be that as it may, there is one direction
in which we may all help in the work
of Empire building. By doing our best
to bring about reforms that will increase
the comforts of living for the masses, and
striving to improve the morality of the
people, we shall be creating the factors
that have most to do with the stability of
an Empire, and be best fitting it for the
lasting good it can effect in the world?s
welfare.
I Was glad to hear the Wrenches de-
nouncing the damnable doctrine of "My
country, right or wrong,? and to hear
them advocating the better course of try-
ing to put right the wrong where present,
and so establishing the country to which
we may belong upon a foundation of
truth and righteousness.
Only so may we hope to bring to frui-
tion the aspirations that urge towards the
building of an Empire greater and better
than the world has yet seen.
THE TIME El PE FOE ACTION.
The time is now ripe for action; for
even those who were once our foes
are joining hands with us. How much
more, then, should those of the same
speech unite in a brotherhood that shall
make them one in spirit and in dead.
Let me conclude in words of Tennyson
that embody my faith for the future: ?
"Ah, tho? the times when some new
thought can bud
Are but as poets? seasons when they
flower,?
Yet seas, that slowly gain upon the-
shore.
Have ebb and flow, conditioning their
march.
And slow and sure comes up the golden
year;
When wealth no more shall rest in
mounded heaps.
But smit with freer light shall slowly
melt
In many streams to fatten lower lands,
And light shall spread, and man be liter
Thro? all the season of the golden year.
Fly, happy sails, and bear the Press;
Fly happy with the mission of the Cross;
Knit land to land, and blowing heaven-
ward,
With silks, and fruits, and spices clear
of toll.
Enrich the markets of the golden year/??


t .
?
