

Pern
2-t)
( yireA ,
, f )
*\*




QUEENSLAND BLACKS.
SEVENTEEN YEARS AMONG THEM.
JAMES MTIRRELLS’S NARRATIVE.
(By E. B. Kennedy.)
Part I.
If readers of this narrative take a map
of Northern Queensland, and find Cape
Bowling Green, in* latitude 19deg. 20nvin.
south, where James Murrells was wrecked,
it will assist them in tracing his wander-
ings among the wild tribes with whom he
lived for 17 years, and who always treated
him with kindness. The account is unique,
and, as- I heard portions of it from his
own lips, it may be accepted as true. Mur-
rells gave me the booklet—written by Mr.
E. Gregory at his dictation—from which
I now give his history. I was serving in
the Black Police of (Queensland in 1864
when I met Murrells at Port Denison, since
known as Bowen. This was after our re-
turn from a patrol which extended from
Mount Elliott—a great hill which overlooks
the mouths of the Burdekin —to Cape Bowl-
ing Green and Cleveland Bay. Turning
from the coast at the latter spot we pro-
ceeded westerly to the watershed on the
Burdekin River, and so home to our snug
bark-roofed barracks or, the Don, situated
not far from Port Denison. These exten-
sive districts comprised
Murrells’s Wanderings,
so that I learnt much of interest in con-
versing with him. He was shy at first, and
could not a Sways express himself clearly
having lost much of the English tongue.
1 now turn to the narrative in the book-
let. James Murrells was born in the parish
of Heybridge, Essex, in 1824. After 17
years of bush-life he had almost forgotten
his own name; though he told me that he
would sit for hours sometimes in the bush
trying to trace his name on his knee or
write it on the sand, and read it to his
black companions, to their great amuse-
ment. His father was an engineer and
wheelwright, and carried on business in
Swan Yard in connection with a relative
.named James Hayes. When the lad was
about fourteen years old, a pilot named
Firman, who piloted craft down the Black-
water, used to take Jimmy with him. The
novelty of these trips and the yarns and
songs of the sailors made so powerful an
impression on him that he expressed a de-
sire to become a sailor. His parents told
him frequently of the troubles of a sea life,
but ho was nothing daunted. On one of
these occasions the captain asked the
pilot whether he should take the lad with
him there and then. Jimmy was consulted
and agreed to go ; an<j thus, without fur-
ther reference to his parents, he went on i
weather permitting, he called all hands to-
gether, and read the Bible to them and
conducted a religious service. Everything
went on well during that voyage, and the
lad’s ardour for a sailor’s life increased.
He made many short and long voyages;
and at length he left home for the last
time, arriving in Sydney on February 24,
1846, and shipped on board the ill-fated
vessel Peruvian, Captain George Pitkethly.
We continue the narrative in his own
words: —“Having been only a few days i
out, in the neighbourhood of Horse Shoe !
Reef, and encountering bad weather,
We Struck with Great Force on Rocks, j
and at length we were lifted by the seas I
to lh e top of them. The sea then swept |
one of the boats and the second mate over-
board. At daylight a terrible scene pre-
sented itself; as far as the eye could reach
there were the points of the rocks awash,
but no friendly land in view. The cap-
tain ordered th e jolly-boat to be got over
the side; but she was stove to pieces in
the broken wat#r. We had now only the
long-boat left, which, was old and shaky;
and the spray and broken water filled her
as she hung' in the tackle'. The captain
ordered some hands into her to bale her
out, but it was so unsafe that none would
risk their lives in her except the first mate,
who was the captain’s brother. Before he
had got out a couple of bucketfuls the
stern-post was jerked out of her, when she
broke adrift, and was carried away by the
force of the current. Lines were thrown
out, but none reached her. The mate sat
calmly in the bows of the boat, and bade
good-bye to his brother and sister, and
awaited the will of God. Presently ho
disappeared from sight,
“Our position being now apparently hope-
less, the captain called us into the cabin,
where w © engaged in religious exercises,
and commended ourselves to God in prayer.
We then contrived to make a raft with
masts and spars, and with groat labour
managed to get it off the ship’s quarter on
to the rock and then into the water. All
the bread and nearly all the preserved
meat had been washed away, and only a
small keg could be found to hold water.
All the provisions we could muster were a
few tins of meat, the small keg of water,
and a little brandy. During the night the
force of the current caused the raft to
part her mooring, and w e were carried to
sea. On the raft were three ladies, two
children, two gentlemen passengers, the
captain, the crew, and stowaways, in all
21 souls. All wept on as well as could be
expected for 22 days; at first we caught
a few birds, drank their blood, and their
raw flesh was eaten with gusto. The
weather was fine throughout.
“On the twenty-second day out the first
death occurred, a man named James Mur-
ray. Ho was stripped and thrown over-
board, ard the sharks devoured him m-
his first voyage in the brig Royal Sailor, ! ’ a ™. the , sl j™ ,
belonging to the Maldon Shipping Com- We caught a coupb of ck
pany. The captain was a very pious man. It then rained, am vv e g
and a Wesleyan. Every night at 8 o’clock! 1 51 few dro l >s of water - aftcr the salfc




I been washed out of the sail. The infant 0 f them returned the salutation, and after
[ child of Mrs. Wilmot was the next to sue- a while came among us and felt us all over
cumb, then the other little girl, and next f rom head to foot. They satisfied bhem-
Mrs. Wilmofc herself. Her husband then selves we were human beings, and, hearing
took off what clothing she had on, which TIS talk, asked by* signs where we had
was only a nightdress, and threw her into j come from We pointed across the sea,
the sea. At this time the castaways drop-
ped off one by one very rapidly, and the
burial service was read over each; but I
was so exhausted that I forget their names.
We next began to think how we should
obtain fcod. Our only fishing-line had
been carried away. There were plenty of
sharks about, and the captain devised a
plan to snare them with a running bow-
knot, as follows: —We cut off the leg of
one of the men who died, and lashed it at
the end of the oar for a bait, and on the
end of the other par we put thp snare so
that the fish must come through that to
get at .the bait. Presently one came,
which we captured, and killed with the car-
penter’s axe, and made a fine meal off him.
Wc caught more in the same way, which
we cut into strips and dried. Shortly
after this we made the Barrier Reef, and
two days later came in sight of land,
which appears to have been Cape Upstart.
, Two or three days later the sea-breeze
I drove us inshore once more, and eventually
about midnight we landed on the southern
point of Cape Cleveland. There we lay
down on the sand and went to sleep. Prc-
, sently it came on to rain, and we filled
our tins from the holes in the rocks.
Whilst on the raft th e captain had cut a
notch in a piece of wood every* day, and
on counting them there were 42. Of the
21 who left the wreck alive only seven had
survived.
“In the morning, when the sun arose, wc
washed and dried a piece of white rag,
took a magnifying glass out of the spy-
glass, made a fire, and boiled some dried
shark’s flesh, which, with a drink of clear
fresh water, made an excellent breakfast.
At low water the captain, being the strong-
est, sallied forth in quest of food, and
shortly afterwards returned, bringing rock
oysters, which were very plentiful, sticking
in great clusters to the rocks, and, like
limpets, required no opening. Some of us
crawled about and got a few; but three
of ray mates were so exhausted that they
died. After wc had been 14 days on shore
we were seen by some of the natives. It
appeared that for several nights they had
observed falling stars in one particular |
|.direction —the direction of the rock* on |
whi’.h we were. When I returned in the j
evening the captain’s wife said that she had ;
heard the natives jabbering; and 10 min-•
utes later, after the captain came home, ■
she heard the noises again. Jumping up, j
she went outside, and looked up on the j
rocks, and there, sure enough, were
A Number of the Naked Blackfelfows.
‘Oh, George, wc have come to our last
now r she exclaimed.
“At first the blacks were as afraid of us
as wo were of them. Presently we held
np our hands in supplication for help. Some
come from We pointed across the sea,
and, seeing how thin and emaciated we
were, they took pity on us, and asked us,
as well as we could understand, where we j
were going to sleep, as it was getting dark, i
We showed them the place in the rock, i
They came in with us, and we wer go- |
ing to give them some of our things; but |
while we were talking others had been in i
and relieved u» of everything. Eventu- ;
ally about 10 of the old men came into the |
cave wc had made our oamping-place, to
sleep with us, and separated us by lying
between us. They kept up a constant jab-
ber among themselves, which led to a sec-
ond and more minute examination of our
persons to ascertain our sex, which seemed
necessary to them because we wore cloth-
ing. The captain's wife strongly resisted
this; but they persisted, and when they
found that, like themselves, we were male
and female, they were satisfied, and did not
further trouble us. Next morning there
was a great discussion) among the blacks
as to what should be done with us. There
were representatives of two different tribes.
The boy and myself were claimed by one
tribe, whose permanent caraping-placc was
about Mount Elliott; and the captain and
his wife were similarly claimed by the
tribes belonging to Cape Cleveland.
Then they commenced to strip us; but,
pointing to the sun, we showed it would
bill us if we were naked; so they allowed
us to retain our clothes. They gave us
small roots to eat, which we enjoyed very
much; they also pointed to the bush to toll
us that if we came with them they would
give us plenty to eat and drink. Me sig-
nified our intention to go with them. They
were very glad, and wanted us to join with
them in a corroborec; but. as we could not,
we thought we should please them by sing,
ing a hymn. I accordingly gave out the
words of a hymn I knew, beginning
God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform,
which wc sang to the end, and which
amazed them very much. We soon began
to make preparations to move off towards
the camp. Seeing that the boy was unable
to walk, one of them picked him up and put
him on his shoulders, with his legs hang-
ing down, just as they carry their children.
Their camp was on the edge of a plain,
where they had made a small fire, and
when we came up we saw men sitting
around it. We recognised them as stran-
gers, powerful men, who seemed to be sit-
ting in state, as they did nob move. Groat
fear seized hold of me. and when they
came to lead me up I thought that I was
to be cooked and oaten; but seeing the
fire was so small, and not observing any
weapons, 1 suffered myself to be led up.
They looked at me, and observing me shake
with fear, warmed their hands at the fire
and put them on my face and all over my




to reassure me; at wUicU X took I tlie V u<wu 01 Cleveland, wnere our
again. Meanwhile some were sent on had landed. A little later another v
ahead to the camp to have plenty for us to
eat, and to prepare for a grand corroboree.
We were examined by fifty or sixty men, wo-
men, and children. At first they scampered
off in all directions, as the sight of white
people wearing clothes produced a panic.
After their curiosity had somewhat sub-
sided they led us to a gunyah, and gave us
abundance to eat and drink. For eight
evenings successively representatives from
the more distant tribes came in to see the
wonderful people. They would not allow
us to go out and get food while we were
so weak, but gathered sufficient for all our
wants.
“As we got stronger we spent our time in
wandering about with the blacks on their
fishing excursions and in learning to snare
ducks, wild turkeys, and other wildfowl, in
which after a while I became much more
expert than the - natives themselves, be-
cause I took more care in making strong
string for the nooses and in choosing the
exact places to #efc them; also, being a
sailor, I was able to make better knots
than they did. This made them very
strongly attached to me. Time wont on,
and
Strange Natives Began to Collect
in large number. When they had all
arrived they numbered considerably over a |
thousand, a larger number than I have ever
seen since. They belonged to about ten 1
different tribes. We learned that some of
the tribes belonged to the country far j
south of where we were, which determined
us if possible to go away with them when
they returned, and so perhaps reach some
white settlement. They had a grand cor-
roboree which lasted three days, and they
went through the rites and ceremonies ot
the “boree.” After it was all over we
stole away, and went with the tribe that
was going south. We got distributed, one
to one tribe, and one to another. The tribe
I was in was located on the present site
of Port Denison- Nearly two years after
we had been living with them we heard
that the boy was dead, and that they bad
burnt his remains, as they do with the re-
mains of their own dead. Then we heard
that the captain sickened and died; the
death of the boy, 1 believe, preyed on, his
mind, and also the degraded state of his
wife, for up to this time she had managed
with great difficulty to keep herself partially
covered. It was too much for him, and he
sank under it. The sight was also too much
for mo when I saw her, and it almost broke j
my heart. I was forced to leave, and go on
a hunting and fishing expedition to divert
my mind from the painful feeling of isolation
and despair of ever being restored to civili-
sation. Being in e strange tribe I felt
lonely, and determined to go back to the
tribe that claimed me as its own. After
several months I reached it and were
ail very glad to see me.
“Shortly after this, while I was on Mount
Elliott looking for honey and bread-fruit
(which was not quite ripe), a report, was
brought to me that a vessel was seem on
4\, . - i . <• rrt 1
was seen, and I was told that the men from
the vessel went on the rocks, looked through
a glass, and-brought the sun down to the
water. I had previously told the ua ves
if ever they saw a white man again th jcy
to make him understand that there was a
white man living there with them. On this
occasion they remembered my wish, and
tried their hardest, but seem to have failed,
as the white men became alarmed, thinking
they meant mischief, whereas it was only
their earnestness in trying to make them-
selves understood. The report of the pro-
ceedings of the Government schooner Sp't-
firc, in 1860, mentions that upon landing,
the natives made an attack, which was re-
pulsed. Then, shrieking and yelling most
diabolically, the blacks retired to the
beaches and hills-”
Murrells added this to the shortened ac-
count: —“Nothing is said in tbc report about
shooting the natives; but one raw-boned,
stout, ablc J bodied blackfellow, a friend of
mine, was shot dead by someone in the
boat, and another was wounded. The hideous
yelling was the noise they usually make
over their dead. About three years ago I was
informed bv the blacks of a distant tribe
that
A White Man Had Been Seen
with two horses. Some of the tribe were
lamenting the death of an old man; and
while they were doing so this white man
fired in among them and shot the son of
the old man, who was lying on his father’s
dead body. The rest ran away; but
eventually the blacks pretended to make
friends with the white man, and got him
off the horse. Then, by a preconcerted
signal, they massacred him, and tried to kill
the horses also, thinking they could speak
and do mischief, as the man had done, but
the animals escaped. Mr. P. Somers, of Port
Denison, told me that the white man was
probably a Mr. Humphrey, who was out in
search of runs. After this four stray
cattle were seen in our district; but I
was on the coast with one of the blacks,
making a ’possum-skin rug. When I came
back they showed me the tracks of the
cattle. When I questioned them they said
that three of the animals had teats and one
had none; thus they must have been
three cows and a bull. I told the blacks
these were what white men eat, and they
chaffed mo about their great size, long tails,
big cars, and horns. These reports made
me feel uneasy, and I began to think
that civilised life was drawing nearer.
Soon afterwards it was reported in the
camp that a lot of white and black men
on horseback were near Cape Upstart,
shooting down the trible I had been living
with when the captain died at Port Deni-
son. They explained to me about the
saddles, bridles, guns, smoke, and the noise
made by the guns when fired. 1 ex-
plained it all to them, to their great sur-
prise. On hearing this I travelled south
to the Burdekin River (or Pall Mall, the
native name), thinking that my chances
would be treater on the river than at




■which was half a mile from the station
called Jarvisfield, which I' was soon to
reach.”—“Chambers’s Journal.”)
(To be Concluded.)
QUEENSLAND BLACKS.
SEVENTEEN YEARS AMONG THEM.
JAMES MURRELS’ NARRATIVE.
(By E. B. Kennedy.)
Part 11.
“When we got to the hill we spread our
nets and commenced work, and while we
were hunting the old women went down
a s spies to look for the white men. They
soon came back, and I made out from
their report that there was a large hut,
and that they had seen red and white
blankets hanging on stockyard fences, and
heard a dog bark, and the bleating of an
old sheep which was tied up to a tree. I
wanted to go and see for myself; but the
man I was living with was not willing to
permit this unless somebody was with
me; so he made his gin go with me. When
we got clear of the hill, going down in
the direction of the hut, we saw the
sheep feeding, and the sight so frightened
the gin, who has! never seen such animals
before, that she ran away. I went farther
on, and came to a waterhole, where I
washed to make myself as white as pos-
sible. Going on still farther. I came to
the sheep-pens, and saw the blankets and
the sheep the gin had spoken of. Then I
called out loud, ‘What cheer, shipmate?’
When the men heard me, one of them
came out saw me there, naked, and
neither white nor black. Looking sur-
prised, he went into the hut and spoke to
nis mate. I understood him to say, ‘Come
out, Bill; here’s a red or yellow man sit-
ting on the rails, naked. He’s not a black
man. Bring the gun.’ But. being dread-
fully afraid they would use the gun, I
said, ‘Do not shoot me. lam a British
subject, a shipwrecked sailor,’ One of the
men was named Hatch; the other,
Wilson, had been a sailor. They told me
to come round the stockyard, and they met
me halfway. They cross-questioned me,
and I told them when and where I was
wrecked. They asked me if I knew what
day and date it was. I told them I did
not; then they told me it was Sunday,
January 25, 1863. They reckoned back to
1846, when I was lost, and told me that it
was seventeen years, and asked me if I
though]; it was so long! I said, ‘No, nor
half so long.’ After talking some time,
they took me into the hut and gave me a
piece of bread, asking me whether I knew
what it was. I told them that it was made
of flour. I tried to eat a piece, but was so
overjoyed that it stuck in my throat. How-
ever, I was not hungry, for we had caught
twenty small gray wallabies during the
day. I had some tea, and again they asked
me if I knew what it was. I replied £hat
I did, but that it was too sweet, as I had
not been accustomed to sugar; so they
added some water. After I had been in
the hut for some time they told me to look
out and tell them what I saw. I saw a
large flock of sheep, with their third com-
panion—a Scotsman named Creek—coming
home. They wanted to give me some
clothes; but I told them that I had better
go back just as I was as the natives, who
were on ,the hills in the distance, where
we had been hunting all day, and tell them
to go away toward the sea-coast; then I
would return in the morning. This they
agreed to, and they instructed me to tell
them that ‘if they did not interfere with
us we would not interfere with them.’ They
also told me that if I did not come back
in the morning they would conclude I had
told them a lie, and they would put the
black trackers on our trail, and shoot us.
“When I left the sheep-run I went back
to the blacks, who surrounded rao and ask-
ed mo about the white people. I told
them that if they went near they would be
killed, and that the white men had come
to take their land. So, believing me, and
bowing at once to the force of might, they
told me to ask the white men to leave them
all the ground to the north of the Burde-
kin. and to let them fish in the river; also,
to leave thorn the low grounds where they
live, to get tho roots. They asked me
what I intended to do. I told them I was
stood behind the yard tor some minutes, going to stay that night; but in the morn-
trying to think what I should say. Pre- jng 1 must go back, or they would track
sently I took courage, and got on the 11S U p there and shoot us all. Next morn-
tence out of the way of the dogs, and ing they all came round me again and ask-




ed mo whether I would como back in a few j castes. When born they are nearly win be,
days. I told them no; 1 should bo away I but when they are three days old the gins
quite three or four moons. They then / ru b charcoal into their skins to make them
said, ‘You will forget us altogether.’ And / black and shining. They have sunken eyes,
when 1 was coming away the man I was broad flat noses-—which are flattened by
living with wept, and so did his gin and their parents in infancy-~-and very l a ' r £ e >
several of the other gins and men. It was broad mouths. The infants arc suckled
.. , . . . r _ AtrAm Itll +UnTT OVA A M
a wild, touching scene. The remembrance
of their past kindness came full upon me
and quite overpowered me. There was a short
struggle between the feeling of love I had
for my old friends and companions and the
desire once more to lead a civilised life
which can be better imagined than de-
scribed. I then left them, and came on
to the hut. The men were glad to see me,
and took me down to the waterhole, washed
me with soap, and gave me gome clothes. I
remained a fortnight in case the natives
should come to me, but non© of them ever
came in sight. I gave myself up to Mr.
Myers, who left me in the charge of Mr.
Salting, of Riffling cattle-station, until the
return of the Commissioner’s orderly from
the Fanning River, who accompanied me
safely \into Port Denison. I experienced
great kindness from Mr. W. H. Thomas and
Mr. P. Somers, who gave me clothes and
collected a subscription for me in my neces-
sity.”
Murrells became a freeholder at Port
Denison and a general favourite with the
inhabitants. His personal appearance was
somewha striking. Exposure to a tropical
sun had mad© his skin very dark. At in- ,
tervals for some years be suffered from i
large rheumatic swedings in various parte J
of his body. This malady carried him off,
as recorded in the “Port Denison Times”
thus: —“It is our mournful duty to record
the
Death of th e Pioneer White Man
in the north, James Murrells, from rheu--
matism ending jn inflammation and fever.
During his last illness he was attended un-
ceasingly by Dr. W. S. Smith. Jimmy was
devotedly attached to his wife and child,
and his only care seemed to be how they
should be provided for in future. He was I
a general favourite throughout the district,
and when his death became' known in the |
town the flags of all the ships in the har- j
hour and at the various stores in town j
were lowered to half-mast. During the read-
ing of the solemn and beautiful service of
the Church of England by the Rev. E.
Griffiths many an eye glistened with un-
bidden tears as some act of kindness by
the departed was recalled.” James Mur-
rells was not an old man,
years of ago; but he was prematurely
aged by the troubles and hardships he had
encountered during his adventurous life.
Could the Mount Elliott blacks have learn- ;
ed that their pale-faced brother was dead,
what howling and woe there would have
been! Murrells described the aboriginal
tribe he had been living with so long as a
vastly superior race physically and in
general appearance to any he had seen in
the more southern - part of the continent.
Nevertheless, they are treacherous, jealous,
and exceedingly cunning. They are not
black, but more of the colour of half-
for a very long time, even till they are old
enough to get their own food. Murrells
had seen a child sucking at the breast
with its next younger brother or sister.
The women have very few children, sel-
dom exceeding four, and very seldom more
than one at a time. He knew of about
four cases of twins. He also remembered
that when a boy and a girl were born,
the father killed the boy and spared the
girl to save the trouble of bringing both
up, for these blacks are very lazy. The
women go into the swamps to gather food
the day after their confinement, as though
nothing had happened. The men have,
several wives—in some instances as many
as eight or nine—and this causes war,
single combats, and feuds; they steal the
women, and frequently lend or sell them
for a -time for a slight consideration. It
was Murrell’s early knowledge of this that
made him very careful. They never stay
long in one locality; when the food in one
place is exhausted they travel to another.
In the wet and cold season they put up
small, temporary gunyahs for shelter, but
in no particular order. They live in
tribes, each tribe speaking a different
dialect, which can hardly be called a different
language. Murrells could speak eight of
the dialects. They have no regular chiefs,
and the strongest man is th© best. They
get food by fishing, hunting, digging in
the earth for roots, or gathering fruit.
They eat anything, even sharps and alli-
gators, besides shell-fish and fish of all
kinds, kangaroos, rats, wallabies, seakes,
grubs, snails, and all sorts of creeping
things, as well as wild duck, geese, and
turkeys. Murrells gives us native
names, descriptions, and places of habitat
of hundreds of edible roots. He con-
tinues: “There is plenty of the honey of
wild bees in the hollows of trees. The
natives eat honeycombs, bees and all, if
they are hungry There is plenty to eat
if they are not too lazy to fetch it. |
Human flesh cannot be considered part of
their food, although they sometimes eat it.
They eat the bodies of young men slain
in battle or killed by accident, and also
of young women and children, but never
those_ of their enemies. They cut their
enemies up in strips, dry them, and distri-
bute the pieces through the- tribe, by
which means they think their enemies’
strength is added to their own, and that-
ihey will be lucky in hunting and fishing.
They have no written language whatever,
and very little tradition. The language is
very guttural in sound and extremely lim-
ited in power of expression. Of course
they have no means of 'teaching their lan-
guage but by imitation and memory, as-
sisted by their wants. The different ani-
mals are arranged according to the size of
their feet; hence sheep have the same




name as the wallabies (cargoon). All kinds
of sailing ships have the same name as
their canoes, because they float on the
water (woolgoora). The heavenly bodies
are named differently. The sun is ingin,
which they think is a body of fire because
of its warmth, and especially since they
saw us light a rag with a burning-glass.
Tlie moon (werboon-burra), they say, is a
human being like themselves, and comes ;
down on the 'earth, and they sometimes
meet it in some of their fishing excur-
sions. They believe that one triba throws
it up, and it gradually rises an r | then
comes down again, when another tribe
catches it to save it from hurting itself.
They accordingly think there is a new sun
and moon every day and night.”
About six years before Murrells's restora
tion there was a total eclipse of the sun,
tho only one he saw; at about 4 o’clock in
the afternoon. He asked an old man
what it meant, and he told him that his
son had hit it (the sun) to frighten an-
other of his tribe. But they were very
uneasy during its continuance; they pick-
ed up a piece of grass and bit it, mak-
ing a mumbling noise till the eclipse was
over. They are very frightened of thunder
(teegoora) aud lightning (timulba). They
have no knowledge of how they came into
existence: they thitik they live and die like
dogs, but there is a kind of innate fear
of death, and they have "some thought that
they will jump up white-fellows. They
1 told me that their forefathers witnessed
! a great flood, and nearly all were drown-
\ ed; only those who got on a very high
! mountain —Bibbiringda, which is inland of
the north bay of Cape Cleveland—were
saved. He understood them to refer to the
flood mentioned in Scripture, egiiecially as
Urey say only a few were allowed to go up.
They can only count five; woggin,
1; ” boobray, 2; goodjeo, 3; mun-
wool, 4; murgai, 5. For any
number beyond these they put up their
ten fingers together, beyond that again the
ten fingers of another person, and so bn for
i three or four persons, till they come to a
moon. When they make reference to fish,
roots, or things in general, they commonly
say a ‘few’ or ‘plenty.” They measure
time by moons and wet and dry seasons. The
language is very irregular, and it seems to
be totally impossible to systematise it in any
j way.” Here follow about 100 of the prin-
cipal words in native and English.
The natives obtain fire easily by friction.
Tho wood used is that of the black fig after
it has rotted and become almost powder
with age. The ceremony of
Making the Lads Young Men
takes place about once every six years. Mur-
rells remembered four different occasions
when there were great meetings for the
above purpose while he was with them.
"For eight or nine months previously the
lads have to go into the bush to provide
j wholly for themselves, during which time
1 they are never allowed to see a female; th’s
is to test their fitness to take a wife. If
they do see a female accidentally they think
that they will waste away. After the nin -
months are over they are brought into the,
camp, and cane rings arc put on tbeir arms
and tightened very much, so as to stop the
circulation of the blood. Their arms swell
very much, which puts them in great agony.
They are then left in that torture all night
and their cries are terrible. To keep their
fingers from contracting and thus deforming
them, they sit with their hands and fingers
spread out on tho ground, with their heels
tightly pressed on them. In the morning
they are brought out in the presence of their
mothers, sisters, and relatives; and just
above and below the marks of the oane rings
on their arms small incisions are made to
let the blood flow, which is simply to
prevent inflammation. While this is being
done their mothers and relations arc cry-
ing and cutting themselves from head to foot
with sharp stones in token of joy at seeing
them. When the swelling has subsided some-
what they retire to places provided for them
to sleep under, with boughs to shade them
from the sun. as of course they could get
no sleep during the night. While they are
sleeping the old gins go into the swamps and
get roots to make cakes for them when they
get up in the evening. The men get all the
spears the young men have been carrying
with them during the nine months they have
been away, and fix them in the earth, on a
clear space in a semicircle, fastening the
spears head to head with grass festoons. In
the evening, all being ready, the young men
wake up, generally about 80 in number, and
are all seated under a festoon in a reclining
position. Then their sisters or female cou-
sins lie with their heads on their swollen
arms to pr*as down the swollen and cut
places. While they are lying there a lot of
cakes are thrown up and scrambled for by
the lookers-on, who had gone through the
ceremony before them. In the morning they
are taken into the bush again, and dressed
up with shells, and the down of birds stuck
on their heads, painted, and made to look to
the best advantage. They are then brought
back to choose and take their sweethearts,
and the whole ceremony closes with a grand
corroboree. After this is over there is a
good deal of quarrelling and fighting among
them. They steal the wives of the old and
weak men, and daughters from their par-
ents, which leads to fighting, and often ex-
tends to two tribes, and then there is a war,
which, however, is not very sanguinary. They
often ’ get some terrible blows, and some-
times one is killed; but they cannot keep
this up many hours, for they are forced to
go and get supplies of food in the swamps.
They seldom renew the conflict. They are
Very Strict in Their Relationships.
When girls are about ten years old they arc
not allowed to sleep with the brothers at the
same fire; as families they are very distinct.
They burn their dead, and carry the re-
mains tied up in a sheet of bark for abort
12 months; but when tired of this they
throw them into a waterhole. Their toma-




hawks (bulgoo) are made of stone, thougn
latterly they have got a good deal of iron
from wrecks. There is a very fine flax grown
there, which they ruse in making fishing and
hunting nets, and very good mesh nets, too
Murrells’s description of the country was
inviting and most interesting.
He Described the Country
about Mount Elliott, where he mostly lived,
to be well grassed and watered. At the top I
of the mountain there is a never-failing
spring of beautiful water, which finds its
way down both sides. The waters are fre-
quented by alligators, and dozens of his
companions fell victims to these animals. He
also described the snakes as very venomous,
and said the natives had no antidote against
! their bite. He had been scared by an alli-
gator and bitten by a whip-snake, from both
of which ho had a narrow escape. The pro-
cess of extinction is going gradually bub j
surely on among the aborigines, 'i’he tribe
Murrells was living with were far
numerous than twjjea he first went among
them. What wuth the wars, fights, destruc- !
tion by the settlers and black police, and ;
natural deterioration in the people them- J
selves, they were fast disappearing. While !
he was with the natives he suffered a great ;
deal from rheumatism, which had left its [
mark upon him, so that be was so reduced I
in strength that he ifelt he would not have j
lived much longer if ho had not come away j
from his nomadic associates. I happened to j
bo talking with Dr. W. S. Smith, when he j
pointed out Jimmy. Those who knew Port |
Denison in the sixties will remember 1
Dr. Smith, a man of herculean proper- ■
tions, who always dressed in a suit of
white flannels. I enjoyed chats with
Jimmy. One day we had taken a long
walk to the sea-coast by way of Salisbury
Plains, where some members of his eld
tribe were fishing. If was amusing to see
him casting his eyes on the gum-trees as
wo walked, looking for wild honey. The
conversation between us referred to the
kind of hair grown by the aborigines. As
he pointed out, there were some with hair
almost straight, if it were combed out,
others had curly hair, but none had kinky
or negroid hair. 1 was glad to hear him
corroborate ray own observation in this
matter, an c i have often wondered why Aus-
tralian blacks are referred to as “niggers.”
In no sense do they, merit this distasteful
term.—“ Chambers's Journal."
[The End.]


