

TWO LETTERS
WRITTEN IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
SHEWING THE
OPPRESSION AND TYRANNY,
OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF THAT COLONY.
LONDON:
ELLIOT, PRINTER, 18, WYCH STREET, STRAND.
1835.


TO THE READER.
It may be considered strange, that only two subjects
should form this Pamphlet —but these are the two first of a
series of letters in a state of publication.
There are, unhappily, hundreds of such cases of oppres-
sion and injustice, yet to be recorded.
THE EDITOR.


TO HIS EXCELLENCY
COLONEL GEORGE ARTHUR,
LIEUT. GOV. OF THE ISLAND OF VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
&c.&c. &c.
Sir,
It is the bounden duty of every fountain-head of authority,
to administer justice with impartiality, and therefore is it that
I request the attention of your Excellency to the few observa-
tions I am about to offer to your notice. My thus addressing
you, through the medium of the public press, may perhaps
be considered as not paying- sufficient courtesy to the esta-
blished etiquette; but your Excellency will please to recol-
lect, that your decision has already nominally been given upon
the subject to which 1 am about to allude, and therefore no
other channel than the public press is open to me —and fur-
ther, I might urge, that another reason compels me to adopt
this mode of proceeding —it is the private influence which has
such weight on so many occasions with your Excellency, I
am fully convinced that you never could have decided, as you
have lately done, had not representations of some kind or
other been made to you of an exparte nature, which have
been the means of misleading your judgment, and causing you
to decide contrary to former decisions under almost similar
circumstances.
One of the greatest evils threatening the Colony is, that
system of absenteeism which has reduced Ireland to what she
now is ; and in order to prevent this, I conceive it to be the
duty of every well-wisher to the Colony, and 1 am sure I may
consider your Excellency as one to oppose as much as possible
the inroads such a system would make upon our prosperity ;
it is with this view that no absentee landholders should be
permitted. It is now in the power of Government to check
this absentee system, but if once openly sanctioned, the end of
all this will be, that the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land will
be slaves to landlords, whose incomes will be spent away
from the Colony.
One of the most glaring cases of this description, I lately
brought officially before the attention of your Excellency, but I
fear, from the private influence, or private feeling
myself personally, a very different answer was returned to
me to what might possibly have been the case, had some one
of more consideration than myself addressed the communica-
tion.
Your Excellency, and the public generally, are aware that a
Mr. William Anley had a large portion of land located to him
in the immediate neighbourhood of a rapidly improving town


ship. This gift , for I can call it nothing 1 else, took place in June,
1830. What claims this gentleman had for an estate of two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres in Van Diemen’s Land,
I know not, but no doubt his claims were then sufficient to
procure him his location order. Perhaps your Excellency is
not aware that Mr. Anley is a lawyer, with a pretty good bu-
siness, either in Calcutta, or its immediate neighbourhood—
but no matter what or who Mr. Anley is, excepting that he is
not a settler in Van Diemen’s Land. According to all the
regulations respecting land in this Colony, “Settlers,” are
those only who it is intended should become possessed of
landed property—and very properly so. But lam told, that
Mr. Anley obtained this location of two thousand five hun-
dred and sixty acres, with the express understanding, that he
was forthwith about to leave India, and become a “ Settler ,”
in this Colony. Four years have elapsed, and now that gen-
tleman has forwarded to Mr. Commissary Carr, a power of
attorney to act as his agent. Mr. Anley has never been in the
island, and his empowering an agent to act for him has
not the appearance of his being in a great hurry to live on his
landed property in Van Diemen’s Land. Mr. Anley’s Agent,
knowing what little right his principal ought to have to the
land in question, is using every endeavour to obtain a grant,
so that Mr. Anley may rest secure in Calcutta—may enjoy the
handsome income of the Indian lawyer, and be at the same time
an absentee landholder in this Colony, Did the Land Board,
who approved of Mr. Anley’s claim for the location, or your
Excellency, who sanctioned the same, ever contemplate that
you were granting the land to an absentee, who never in-
tended to reside upon it? The Government regulation of Ja-
nuary 31, 1832, clause 14, says, “ In all instances in which
the land shall have been originally obtained by means of de-
ception of any kind, it will be resumed without any distinction
of cases or persons.” Has there been any deception practised,
or was Mr. Anley’s land granted to him as an absentee on this
occasion ? Has there been any distinction of persons ?
Let me draw your attention to almost a similar case of Cap-
tain Wight’s. About the year 1828, that gentleman applied
personally, in the usual manner, for a grant of land. He
proved to the Land Board, that he had sufficient property in
the island to entitle him to a large grant; your Excellency
was pleased to sanction the order, and 2,000 acres were
granted him. He had a free overseer, (who was, while in
that capacity, and during the absence of Captain Wight),
speared by the natives. Part of the land Captain Wight en-
closed, with a substantial fence; he expended considerable
sums of money on the property, and in purchasing stock ; yet
within two or three years afterwards, the same land was


granted to Mr. Henry Nichols, who almost immediately sold
it. It cannot be possible that the land could have been re-
sumed without your Excellency’s sanction: and if the landed
property of a man who has done so much good to the Colony,
as Captain Wight, could be resumed, how much more advisa-
ble would it be to resume the land of an absentee lawyer,
who has never been in Van Diemen’s Land, and who, to this
moment, has not one inch of his large grant in cultivation—
who has not a single hut or dwelling on his property —who
has not one head of cattle or a single sheep depasturing there-
on—but who simply draws some sixty or eighty pounds per
annum rental, from a poor man who acts in the double capa-
city of Mr. Anley’s overseer and Mr. Anley’s tenant. But
Captain Wight’s is not a solitary case. The late Mr. Ham-
mond’s might be instanced, as also Captain Kerr’s, and several
others.
1 have said, that a grant has been applied for, and fpr why ?
The reason must be most apparent; when the grant is once
given, the land may be legally transferred, and Mr. Anley, or
his agent, if he so wishes it, may dispose of his grant —with-
out ever having seen it, without ever having improved it—
perhaps for the sum of some eight hundred and odd pounds,
which he would extract from the pockets of the Colonists.
I am, in my own mind, fully convinced, that your Excel-
lency has not been made acquainted with the real facts of the
case, —that private influence has had its way to your Excel-
lency’s ears ; and in order to shew the links of the chain, let
me further draw your attention to the correspondence with the
Government Offices, which has taken place relative to Mr.
Anley’s claim to the land in question. The land of this gen-
tleman hems in thirteen or fourteen smaller grants, located to
individuals, all of whom, I believe, have expended considera-
ble sums upon their properties —at all events, they are all re-
sidents in the vicinity, or upon the spot. It was the wish of
several of these individuals, that as no improvements were be-
ing made on Mr. Anley’s grant, and no probability of that
gentleman’s arival in the Colony, after four years anxiously
waiting for him, that application should be made to have the
same put up for sale, by which the government would be be-
nefited as well as the purchasers, who would thus be enabled
to get rid of so large an “ absentee” monopolist in such a
quarter. I was requested to make the application—and un-
fortunately so, for the interest of the applicants. The following
letter was forwarded to the surveyor general, requesting that
the land might be put up in small portions, so that every one
of the hemmed-in settlers might have a fair chance of purchas-
ing land adjoining his own.


May 3, 1 £ 34.
££ Sir, —Two thousand five hundred and sixty acres of Land
in the immediate neighbourhood of New Norfolk, having been
located to a Mr. Wm. Anley, on the sth June, 1830, and that
individual having never yet been in the Colony, (and, conse-
quently, not residing thereon,) I have to request you will, as
early as possible, cause to be put up, the whole of the same,
for sale by public auction, in areas, according to His Ma-
jesty’s instructions, of six hundred and forty acres each. I
have the honor to be, Sir, your humble servant,
H. MELVILLE
<£ To the Surveyor General.”
To which I received the following reply ;
££ Survey Office, slh May, 1834.
££ Sir, — I have this moment received a letter from you,
dated the 3rd inst., requesting me to cause the whole of Mr.
Anley’s grant of Land to be pfU up for sale by public auction
as early as possible.
££ In reply to your communication I have to state, that I
have no intention of putting up Mr. Anley’s property for sale
by public auction. —1 have the honor to be. Sir, your obedient
servant.
G. FRANKLAND
Surveyor General .”
“ Mr. Henry Melville.”
Finding- that my application was not listened to by the Sur-
veyor General, I immediately soug-ht the attention of your
Excellency, through the medium of the Colonial Secretary—l
wrote to him, therefore, as follows :
“ May 9, 1834.
££ Sir, —Having addressed an official letter to the Surveyor
General, requesting that he would be pleased, in accordance
with the rules adopted in other cases of non-residence, to can-
cel Mr. Anley’s grant at New Norfolk, and put the same up
for sale, that gentleman not having ever yet been in the
Colony, although the Land was located to him four years
since—and the Surveyor General having replied to me on the
instant, that he had no intention of disposing of the Land, 1
beg leave now to address you on the subject, and have to
request you will be good enough to lay this letter before the
Lieutenant Governor, in order that His Excellency may be
pleased to come to some determination on the subject.—l have
the honor to be. Sir, your humble servant,
H. MELVILLE.
44 To the Honorable John Burnett.”


To this application, I cannot but express my surprise, under
all the circumstances previously detailed of resumption of
land, to receive the following answer •*—
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office , May 31, 1834.
“ Sir,—With reference to my letter, No. 11,092, of the
29th inst., I am now directed by the Lieutenant Governor, to
inform you, in reply to your letter of the 9th of the month,
relative to Mr. Anley’s grant, that as the Government does not
intend to resume this location, your application to have it put
up for sale, cannot be complied with.—l remain, Sir, your
very obedient servant.
J. BURNETT.
“ Mr. Henry Melville”
Fully convinced that your Excellency has not been made
acquainted with the real facts of the case, I now address you
through the only channel which is left me, and which I do
verily believe, can become the fair medium of communication
to your Excellency. If the numerous instances of resumption
of land which have taken place, in order to bestow them gra-
tuitously upon other locatees, have received your Excellency’s
approbation, why should there be a refusal to resume for the
purpose of sale (not gratuitous gift) the land of an absentee,
who has not fulfilled any one of the Government regulations T
In the name of the adjoining landholders to the absentee’s
(Mr. Anley) grant, I do pray that Justice may be done, and
that I may not be compelled, in their name, to seek redress
from the Right Honorable the Secretary of State, who will
otherwise be called upon to decide this question. If Mr. Anley’s
land is not to be resumed, then, indeed, ought compensation to
be made to every individual who has had land taken from him
for non-compliance with the Government regulations. Re-
sumption of land ought to be as the Government order of
January, 1832, expresses it, “ without distinction of cases or
persons .’ ’
Having thus publicly drawn your Excellency’s attention to
this important subject, 1 have no doubt a further enquiry will
be instituted, when the real merits of the case will induce the
decisions on all similar occasions, to be of a similar descrip-
tion ; and what is law for Messrs. Wright, Kerr, Hammond,
and others, will also be law for the absentee Mr. Anley.
Having to apologize for thus requesting you to break through
your avowed practice of never reading any of the Colonial
newspapers, I have the honor to be, your Excellency’s very
humble servant,
H. MELVILLE.
Hobart Town, June 3, 1834,


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
LORD BROUGHAM AND VAUX,
LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR.
My Lord,
An act, which in point of unpopularity perfectly eclipses
all former acts of the present administration, has recently been
committed by the Local Government of this Colony, and
which, as evincing the nature of the system of arbitrary sway
and summary jurisdiction, pursued by the Authorities upon
exparte statements, I select from a host of others for the
present consideration of Your Lordship.
In the year 1824, a Mr. William Bryan, a gentleman of
first-rate connections in Ireland, emigrated to Van Diemen’s
Land with a very considerable capital. On his arrival he
located himself upon a tract of land granted him in considera-
tion of his capital, and pursued with great spirit and energy
the cultivation and improvement of the soil— residing upon
his land, and superintending every thing in his own person.
In the year 1830, Mr. Bryan was placed in the Commission of
the Peace; and no gentleman ever held that dignity in Van
Diemen’s Land with greater or more general esteem and respect.
Being a man of education and experience, however, Mr. Bryan
could not fail soon to discover the unsoondness of the exist-
ing system, as well as the hollowness of the pretensions of
some of our most influential personages,which, as a man of high
spirit and true honour, he of course could not suffer to escape
without animadversion and censure. The consequence was,
that he shortly gave mortal offence to the Local Government,
and became a “ marked man .” As it may be requisite that I
should explain to Your Lordship the meaning of the term I
have just used, I will here observe, that it is one of the points in
Colonel Arthur’s system, to keep an account of every emigrant
in the Island ; and His Excellency has, or very recently had,
a book in which all the Emigrants and other free Colonists are
enrolled, and against each name certain remarks are placed,
as to the character, principles, &c., of the respective parties,
founded upon the exparte statements of a few favourites who
happen to possess the ear and confidence of the Chief
Authority. In this book those who have, by their political
principles or otherwise, obtained for themselves the disap-
probation of the Lieutenant Governor, have a double or red
cross placed against their names ; and this is what is understood
by becoming a marked man. With what motive these marks
may be made, it is not possible for me to say ; but this I can
assure Your Lordship, from actual observation, that his Ex-
cellency never forgets an offence, and that a man once marked
might as well pack up and leave the Colony; as he will be


unable to continue in it with any degree of comfort or security.
Not that such proceedings as I am about to detail frequently
occur; but such is the intimidation of the people under the
influence of the secret system, that a marked man will be
almost shunned by his fellow-colonists ; for, by a presumed
intimacy with him, they draw down upon themselves the displea-
sure and visitation of power. In this, perhaps, consists the worst
feature of the present Government of Van Diemen’s Land,
since the operation of the system spreads its influence through
the mass of the people, that like an insidious disease, its ap-
pearance is not indicated until too late for remedial measures
to be applied with any chance of success. Moreover, it is
only by laying hold on something tangible, like the case which
I shall presently have the honor to lay before Your Lordship,
that it is possible even to explain the evil of which we com-
plain ; and then only a faint illustration can be afforded without
actual observation. It is not so much the number of the acts of
oppression actually committed by Colonel Arthur, that
renders him unpopular, as it is the dread of visitation, which
prevails among the people, and the striking and frightful
instances which occasionally come before them—instances
which indicate so arbitrary a spirit, and such unmitigated
severity in the character of the Lieutenant Governor, that really
1 assure Your Lordship it is an actual fact, there are few men
in the Island who dare even speak publicly of their own in-
juries, lest they should thereby be the means of encreasing
them tenfold.
From what I have now said, Your Lordship will be enabled
to gather sufficient to understand clearly the position of Mr.
Bryan, as a “ marked man,” I shall, therefore, without
further comment, proceed with the details of that gentleman’s
most extraordinary case. Although lying under the secret
displeasure of the Government, nothing was suffered to
transpire openly. He was not told that he had offended,
nor to this day can he tell in what his original offence con-
sisted, Still the mark was against his name, and a circum-
stance soon occurred which proved the use made of the cross,
if it does not shew the motives which induced the adoption of
the system.
A man named Arnold, formerly an assigned servant to Mr.
Bryan, had as a mark of his good conduct, received the in-
dulgence of a ticket-of-leave; that is, a permission to employ
himself in any lawful occupation for his own benefit, subject
to very severe restrictions, and revocable on misconduct. This
lc ticket” is, however, esteemed as prima facie evidence of
good character, as from the general efficiency of the Police,
it is impossible almost for a ticket man to escape detection if
guilty of a misdemeanor ; and, as such, unlikely that a bad


man would hold the indulgence —which extends the right of
holding property to the recipient. Mr. Bryan, from his previous
knowledge of the man, as well as from the implication of
good behaviour, by the possession of the ticket-of-leave, was
induced to receive Arnold into his service. Some little time
afterwards, Arnold was charged with cattle-stealing, and
prosecuted to conviction, when this circumstance was taken
advantage of to open an attack upon Mr. Bryan, which was
first commenced by the second Police Magistrate, Mr.
Lyttleton, formerly an officer in the 73rd Regiment, who,
after the trial of Arnold, it would appear, thought proper
to make some public remarks on Mr. Bryan, to the effect that
he, and not\Arnold, should be hanged for the transaction then
before IheCourt. This being reported to Mr. Bryan, he requested
a friend of the name of Lewis, a gentleman who had been a
merchant in Launceston, to wait upon Mr. Lyttleton for the
purpose of ascertaining whether he had used the offensive ex-
pressions imputed to him, and to obtain an explanation why
he had done so. Mf. Lewis accordingly waited upon Mr.
Lyttleton, who* however, refused to give any explanation, or
in any way to account for the words said to have been used by
him. Mr. Bryan, finding himself thus morally attacked,
instantly wrote to the Local Government, tendering his re-
signation of his Commission in the Peace ; but to his great
astonishment, in place of the Lieutenant Governor receiving
such resignation, and instantly instituting an enquiry into the
circumstances, the Colonial Secretary is commanded to inform
Mr. Bryan, through the medium of the Gazette, that “ the
circumstances under which his resignation was tendered,” had
been considered in the Executive Council, and were such as
to induce His Excellency, with the advice of the Executive
Council, not to accept the resignation, but to cause Mr. Bryan’s
name to be erased from the list of Magistrates. Upon this
extraordinary notification, Mr. Bryan instantly wrote, begging
to be informed what the circumstances were which could
cause His Excellency to adopt such a summary course of
proceeding ; and was informed, that certain matters connected
with the trial of the man Arnold, the intemperate letters
which Mr. Bryan had written in the newspapers, and the dis-
respectful deportment towards the Police Magistrate (Mr.
Lyttleton, were circumstances, which, in His Excellency’s
opinion, proved Mr. Bryan to be an unfit person to be en-
trusted with the duties of a Magistrate, as well as to have the
charge of convicts ; and that His Excellency therefore had felt
it his duty to direct the Principal Superintendant of Convicts
to withdraw all Mr. Bryan’s assigned servants ! To these
charges, so singularly chosen, upon exparte statements,
as grounds upon which to raise a series of oppressive severites


towards an individual against whom even the tongue of
calumny had not dared to say aught, Mr. Bryan of course re-
plied with becoming- spirit, but without producing- any chang-e
in the determination of His Excellency ; for forthwith the
threat of removing his servants was put into execution ; and
in the middle of harvest, and at the most critical time of the
year for stock-owners and graziers, thirty working men were
suddenly and forcibly taken away from Mr. Bryan, whose corn
in consequence rotted on the ground for want of reapers—his
sheep were left without their shepherd, to become a prey to
sheep-stealers and native dogs—his cattle to wander, or be
stolen in like manner; and his family without so much as a
domestic servant! Besides which, contracts which Mr. Bryan
had undertaken could not be completed —his buildings were
put a stop to, and, in a word, his whole establishment was ef-
fectually broken up, as it were, by a single stroke of Colonel
Arthur’s pen: entailing a loss upon Mr. Bryan of upwards of
£15,000, independent of the personal inconvenience of his fa-
mily—the stigma cast upon his reputation, and the official in-
sult offered to him by the non-acceptance of bis resignation !
Here then, My Lord, the Colonists had a frightful example of
the power and inclinations of the existing Government to
crush in a moment every individual against whom an official
prejudice might have been formed, or the covert accusations of
the secret slanderer might go forth. Every man in the Island
was astounded; —and the triumph of intimidation seemed
complete ; but owing to the perseverance of one of the Colo-
nial Journals, in which all the circumstances were commented
on as they occurred, the terror which so unprecedented an act
at first inspired, gave way to a general spirit of constitutional
indignation,which, although it exhibited no loud and turbulent
declamation, was nevertheless apparent in the establishment
of a greater unity among the people than had previously pre-
vailed, which was more especially evinced by the altered tone
of the several Journals; as the public writers at this time
began to entertain a more cordial feeling, one towards another,
and laid aside that malignant personality which had for a long
time disgraced their several writings. So far the evil was
productive of some good, as it paved the way for those after
measures which have established the fact, that the British
character is not extinguished among the people of Van Die-
men’s Land.
Among the many marks of the public disapprobation of the
measures of the Local Government, Mr. Samuel Bryan, a bro-
ther of the Gentleman who had been so harshly entreated,
returned to Government the whole of his convict servants,
with a most spirited letter, addressed to His Excellency
the Lieutenant Governor, expressive of his reasons for so


doing’, which were to the effect, that after the treatment
which his brother had met with, he did not consider it safe
for any man to leave himself so completely in the power of
the Government, as to trust to convict servants, which, it
seemed, the Lieutenant Governor possessed, or perhaps I
should say with greater propriety, exercised, the power of
withdrawing - at his pleasure. Mr. Sumuel Bryan’s letter was
replied to with a sneer , and the Superintendent of Convicts
directed to assign the men to “ respectable settlers,” thus
adding to the injuries of Mr. W. Bryan an uncalled-for and
unprovoked insult to his brother, who, without in the least
identifying himself with Mr. William Bryan’s case, merely
did what it is much to be lamented more did not do —viz.,
returned those servants in the possession of whom he felt
himself insecure. But what of that ? He was the brother of a
“ marked man ,” and he had evinced a spirit of real independ-
ence, two circumstances which may possibly account for the
treatment he received. Certain it is, that all who were in any
was connected witlvMr. William Bryan were made to share
his mortification, as the sequel will shew.
Mr. Bryan finding the storm of official visitation pelting so
pitilessly around him, determined to seek redress from the
laws of his country; and accordingly commenced legal pro-
ceedings against the several instruments of power employed
by the Government in the forcible removal of his assigned ser-
vants, and also a separate action against Mr. Lyttleton for de-
famation. No sooner were these actions commenced, when
the Attorney General (who, Your Lordship must understand,
practises very extensively as a barrister in private cases, and
who was retained as counsel for the defence of Mr. Lyttleton)
adopted one of the most inexplicable courses imaginable. In
his public capacity of Attorney General, Mr. Stephen, upon
the application of Mr. Lyttleton, (his private client) filed a
criminal information against Mr. Lewis, of whom 1 have be-
fore spoken, for carrying Mr. Bryan’s message to Mr. Lyttle-
ton, which message the information stated was delivered with
the/intention of exciting Mr. Lyttleton to tight a duel. Upon
this information a Bench warrant was issued aginst Mr. Lewis,
upon which he was apprehended and brought from Launceston
to Hobart Town, and compelled to give bail to the amount of
£2OO, to abide his trial, which took place on the 9th of May,
before Mr. Justice Montagu and a Military Jury. As the par-
ticulars of that trial are now in course of publication, and will
without doubt meet Your Lordship’s eye in the pamphlet, I
shall not trouble you with details here, merely observing, that
Mr. Lyttleton on that trial positively swore that he did not
make use of the offensive expressions towards Mr. Bryan,
which caused Mr. Lewis to be sent to Mr. Lyttleton for an


explanation, and for which Mr. Bryan had commenced his ac-
tion of defamation, thus enabling- the Police Magistrate to
deny on oath having used the defamatory words. Nor was
this the worst—for Mr. Lewis was prevented calling witnesses
to contradict him in such denial.
In order the more fully to see through the ingenuity of this
scheme, I must here inform your Lordship that Mr. Lewis
was himself one of those who heard Mr. Lyttleton make use
of the defamatory language against Mr. Bryan, and as such,
a material witness in Mr. Bryan’s action against Mr. Lyttleton,
who was by these previously unheard of measures, made an
evidence in his own case; while Mr. Lewis’s testimony, he
not being able to disprove that of Mr, Lyttleton, was at-
tempted to be rendered questionable. Fortunately for the
ends of justice, however, there were other gentlemen present
when the offensive words were used, who are ready at any
moment to prove them to have been uttered, and consequently
that Mr. Lyttleton, in swearing to the contrary, must have
most egregiously forgotten himself. Still this circumstance
does not at all alter the facts, or lessen the injustice, seeing
that although Mr. Lewis was not allowed to adduce evidence
of what passed between him and Mr. Lyttleton, on the occa-
sion of the latter gentleman hazarding the intemperate lan-
guage towards Mr. Bryan, (which went to imply that Mr.
Bryan deserved to be hanged) on the grounds that no pro-
vocation given to Mr. Bryan could excuse Mr Lewis for seek-
ing an explanation with his friend, Mr. Lyttleton was, never-
theless, permitted to give his own evidence in reference to
the same transaction, and to deny the provocation which Mr.
Lewis was not suffered to prove. lam no lawyer, nor am I
versed in the rules of practice in respect of evidence, but as a
plain man common sense tells me that such a proceeding was
monstrous, as it is perfectly clear that if the transaction in
question was irrelevant as regards Mr. Lewis’s defence, it was
pari cesu irrelevant as regards his prosecution. Mr. Lewis,
not being permitted to make a defence, was of course con-
victed, and sentenced to be imprisoned for eighteen months,
and to pay a fine of £l5O, and to be further imprisoned till
such fine were paid!—A moderate sentence, your Lord-
ship will allow, for the monstrous crime of carrying a pa-
cific message. But Mr. Bryan had yet more to endure.
The sacrifice of his property —the sacrifice of his friend—the
insult to his brother, and the injury of his own character, was
not enough; for on the hour approaching for Mr. Bryan’s
actions to come on, the Solicitor General made an affidavit
that the public had been so excited by the writings in the
newspaper, that it would not be safe for the Government, the
defendants de facto, to go to trial, upon which affidavit the


Attorney General moved that the trial might be postponed
for another term ; and also shewed cause against a Jury
being granted to try the issues. On this occasion not only the
Attorney General but the presiding Judge made use of very
extraordinary language, directly insinuating that twelve honest
men could not be found in Hobart Town, who would do jus-
tice between Mr. Bryan and the Government, in consequence,
as they declared, of the influence which the published writ-
ings must have had upon the public mind ! The result was,
that Mr. Bryan was denied a Jury of his Peers, to try the
causes between him and the Crown, which put a finishing
stroke to the awful picture of accumulated wrongs he had
already suffered, at the hands of the Local Government.
As an illustration of this truly astonishing case, Ido myself
the honor to annex, for your Lordship’s perusal, a series of
addenda , comprising the correspondence and other docu-
ments, to which I have above referred, and
With all respect, I have the honor to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,
THE EDITOR.
ADDENDA.
Sir,
Certain unfounded insinuations having been malignantly
circulated against me during my absence in Hobart Town,
emanating, as I have reason to believe, from a fellow Ma-
gistrate, who declines affording me the satisfaction, which,
under such circumstances, is due from one Gentleman to
another, I could not, without degradation to myself, allow
my name to continue with his upon the Roll of Justices of the
Peace for this Colony ; and, ‘ having’ tendered to His Excel-
lency the Lieutenant Governor, my resignation as a Magistrate,
I feel it due to myself, to publish this correct statement, to
prevent the misconceptfon arising from those ‘ Reports/ which
invariably appear in times of espionage and slavery ! —I am,
Sir, your most obedient servant,
Launceston , Nov. 7, 1833.
WILLIAM BRYAN.
GOVERNMENT NOTICE.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Nov. 28, 1833.
William Bryan, Esq. having on the 7th Nov, instant, ten-
dered his resignation, as a Justice of the Peace of this territory,
under circumstances which, in the opinion of the Executive
Council, render the acceptance of the same impossible ; His
Excellency, with the advice of the Council, has directed Mr,
Bryan’s name to be erased from the Commission of the Peace.
By command of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor,
J. BURNETT.


Colonial Secretary’s Office, New. 29, 1833.
Sir,
1 am commanded by the Lieutenant Governor to inform
you, that, in consideration of the circumstances under which
you tendered the resignation of your Commission as a Justice of
the Peace of the territory, upon the 7th inst., as well as from
the facts elicited by the several depositions in the caseofSamuel
Arnold, taken in the Police-office at Launceston —your most
improper conduct to the Police Magistrate there —and your
advertisement in the public papers, His Excellency, with the
advice of the Executive Council, is under the painful neces-
sity of refusing to accept your resignation, and of directing
your name to be erased from the Commission of the Peace.
I am, therefore, to intimate to you, that his Majesty has no
further occasion for your services as a Magistrate.
I am also to add, that it has appeared indispensable to the
Government, that the convicts assigned to your service should
be forthwith withdrawn. —I have the honor to be, Sir, -your
very obedient servant,
W. Bryan, Esq.
J. BURNETT.
Derwent Hotel, Nov. 30, 1833.
Sir,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of a letter from the
Colonial Secretary, addressed to me, “ By command of your
Excellency,” intimating- your refusal to accept my resignation
as a Justice of the Peace of the territory, and alleging for
such refusal: —First, “ The circumstances under which I ten-
dered my resignation Second, “ Facts elicited by the
several depositions in the case of Samuel Arnold Third,
“My most improper conduct to the Police Magistrate And
Fourth, “ My advertisement in the public papers.”
These are the alleged grounds for ‘ refusal,’ and form a
pretext for offering me a wanton and gratuitous insult; and
I am accordingly informed, that “your Excellency, with the
advice of the Executive Council, is under the ‘ painful neces-
sity’ of directing my name to be erased from the Commission
of the Peace.” With regard to the first observation, contained
in the Colonial Secretary’s letter, I have merely to remark,
that I acted from a sense of what was due to my character, as
a Gentleman and a man of honor, and 1 still feel, notwith-
standing your Excellency’s displeasure, that, if I had pursued
any other course, I should have forfeited the esteem of every
honorable mind. As I am in utter ignorance as to the nature
of the second allegation, it is out of my power to offer any
observation thereupon; and I can only regret, that your Ex-
cellency should have deemed it expedient to withhold from
me all information, and the opportunity—which concealment
precludes—of offering explanation.


The £ .secret* examination of a 4 convict,’ under a charge of
felony, by a 4 personal and a malignant enemy’ (who may
perhps have the means of procuring 4 free pardons,’ as irt the
case of the late Mr. Humphrey), cannot fail to excite alarm !
And I have a well-grounded reason to’ apprehend, that the
4 facts’ elicited in Arnold’s case, may have been the effect of
intimidation, or the hope of reward. Uhder these circum-
stances, I can only 4 challenge investigation,’ and express my
utter abhorrence of the ‘ system’ of c Secret Inquiries’ and
4 Free Pardons,’ to procure evidence from prisoners, as sub-
versive of all security, and affecting the peace and welfare of
society.
You are pleased to assert, 44 that my conduct to the Police
Magistrate at Launceston was most improper.” As this charge
is without the slightest foundation in fact, I am bound to
believe your Excellency has been led into some error.
The advertisement in the public papers contains, in my
opinion, a very sufficient reason for its publication.
lam induced to hope, from the decision of the 4 Sydney
Judges,’ that the Law will protect me from your Excellency’s
power, in the design you have formed of wresting from me
my convict assigned servants. To hold out such a threat upon
4 exparte statement,’ and without affording me even the means
of refuting the allegation, leaves me no hope of redress but
from the Law.
The Government and General Order, which you have caused
to be published, with a view to cast a reproach upon my
character, adds one more to the many arbitrary acts, of which
the Colonists have so much reason to complain.
I cannot, however, allow myself to suppose, that your ob-
ject was to defeat my actions against 44 the Police Magistrate
of Launceston,” for defamation in one case, and in another
for conspiracy; although the 4 Order’ is calculated to have
such a tendency, emanating as it does from your Excellency:
and Mr. Chief Justice Pedder, before whom my actions will,
in all probability, be judicially investigated, and who will
then have to sit as a Judge between the parties, having pre-
viously decided upon the question by exparte matter, and to
a certain extent become a party to the very acts from which
I am seeking redress.
I have the honor to be. Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
WILLIAM BRYAN.
To His Excellency Lieutenant
Governor Arthur, fyc. fyc. See.
Elliot, Pi inter, M'liite Lion Court, 18, Wyeli Street, Strand.
