

' '-"V*
CHRISTIAN
PATRIOTISM
Being Four Addresses delivered in St. John's Cathedral,
Lent, 191 S.
ST. CLAIR G. A. DONALDSON
D.D* D.C.L.
ARCHBISHOP OF BRISBANE.
CHURCH BOOK DEPOT,
ANN STREET. BRISBANE.


it
4 1
E
T
i
I v'
7
I
k
I ?!
•[
I
; r 1
\ ' >
!
I t i:( ' V
' f
i ■ 4
[' F


4 V#
i
I
< L
p
CLOYD
f prlsbant


NOTE
I should not have thought it worth
while to print these addresses I am
doubtful about it even now were it
not that they embody certain ideas
which seem to me important but have
not yet found a lodgment in the public
mind.
Our object in these days should be to
create an enlightened public opinion
which may direct the policy of our
leaders when peace comes in sight:
and that public opinion depends upon
the earnest prayers and calm thinking of
citizens who are not only patriots but
also Christians.
ST. CLAIR BRISBANE.


Christian jpatriotism.
F HE FUNDAMENTAL ASSUMPTION
MUST begin this course of addresses
with a few words as to their scope.
The object of our gatherings will
not be directly the worship of God:
for that ample opportunities are
provided in this place at other times.
Nor will my aim be to lead you to
t
f
think of those great things which Lent more
especially brings to our minds. Of these I
hope to speak more directly on the next six
Sunday evenings.
My object on these Thursdays is in some
sense a special one. The times are abnormal,
and while undoubtedly they cannot fail to affect
every single one of us in one way or another,
the danger is less we miss the greatness, the
epoch-making greatness of the crisis we are
passing through, lest now that the hour of trial
is upon us we should fail in the test.


In what sense are we under trial? On the
outward political, military side of things it is
easy enough to describe it. We are at war,
and the war will tax the resources of our Empire
to the very uttermost, both in wealth and in
human life : and we are on our trial in that it
will now be shewn whether we are prepared
to endure right to the end the suffering and
struggle which must inevitably be the price of
our Empire's freedom. Assuredly our first duty
is to school ourselves in a way we have hardly
begun to do as yet to make sacrifices for the
common weal
t
\
4
But the trial which has come upon us on the
unseen and spiritual side of life is very much
more difficult to describe, very much more com-
plex in its character and infinitely harder to
confront worthily. I cannot state it better than
in some recently uttered words of Bishop Gore
of Oxford. " The duty has come upon us," he
says, "of seeking to interpret the purpose of
God in this tremendous crisis of the world's
history, and to organise in the Nation a com-
mon mind among those who above all things
are anxious to know our Lord's will, and so to
prepare that the issue of the war may serve the
purposes of the Kingdom of God."
The war is testing our Christianity. It will
now be known whether the crisis has caught us
unprepared, unwatchful, unable to feel rightly
about so great a thing. It has come to try our


Faith in God's Purpose : it will search out our
readiness to sink self and all personal desires
in the paramount desire that His will may be
done. And the test comes in another way;
our practical effectiveness as Christians is to be
tried in the face of a great crisis of evil. We
hold a faith which is capable of lighting up and
explaining the most perplexed passages of
human life. We believe that we share a life
which has a dynamic force upon all evil every-
where, and we find ourselves to-day like a
break-down gang on the railway that has just
arrived at the scene of a ghastly railway acci-
dent. It is our duty to understand what has
happened, to work unceasingly at the grim task
of delivering the crushed and quivering human
frames of the victims out of the savage confu-
sion of the broken machinery It is our business
to clear up that same machinery, to renew it, to
piece it together for the beneficent use of man.
In a word, we are called to-day in the power of
Christ to get to work upon the broken debris
of civilised society, to turn evil into good, to
stop the present mischief as soon as may be
and to make it serve the purpose of the King-
dom of God.
This is the searching trial which is now
before God's people. It is a trial of a moral
and spiritual kind, and so is far more difficult
to meet than any mere call to arms. And we
can only hope to come worthily through the


ordeal if we are prepared earnestly and patiently
to enquire of God, to endeavour to understand
His general purpose and to test our own pre-
conceived notions, by the teachings of our
faith. It is my object in these lectures to con-
front this task. It is a complex task : for not
only our mind, but our heart and will is con-
cerned. Not only must we discern the facts
before us: we must think rightly, and feel
rightly about it. And to begin with, we must
use our imagination to estimate the gravity
of the crisis. This is an elementary duty
and would not be so necessary if we Austra-
lians were living nearer to the grim realities.
But it seems that, do what we will, we
cannot stir ourselves to measure the issues
at stake. We must try, then, to realise the
greatness of the crisis, and we must view it as
it concerns ourselves. " What is required of
me, how can I help, what can I give?" But
there awaits us a far more difficult duty than
that. We must face the crisis in a right spirit.
The Christian conquers the world not so much
by his actions as by the spirit in which he acts.
"This is the victory which overcometh the
world," says St. John, "even our faith." And
our faith means more than a mere belief that
God will help us. It reveals to us God's pur-
pose and the spiritual side of political events,
and so brings home to us our own duty in view
of these spiritual facts. And then, conscious of


the spiritual issues at stake, we must try to
think out our relations as an Empire with the
nations of the earth. We must clear our mind
as to the principle for which we are fighting
and which we seek to leave established in the
peace which is to follow. For indeed it is not
too early to be thinking of peace. If we wait
until peace is in sight, our chance will be gone.
It will be too late to learn our duty. It is now,
while the awfulness of struggle and suffering is
upon us, that we shall most truly and completely
ascertain the will of God.
You will see then that a difficult task is before
us; and for my part, I have been reluctant to
speak on so great a thing ; but the call was
imperative, and I know that if only a few of us
are earnestly trying to view the crisis aright,
God will enlighten us, and others perchance by
our means. Accordingly I have undertaken to
speak upon Christian patriotism. In my second
address I hope to speak of our obligation to
our Country viewed from a Christian standpoint,
and then we will examine the religious meaning
of our Empire, and in the last address we will
endeavour to probe the future and recognise the
price we have to pay for our Empire's progress
and the particular duties which will be involved
in our efforts to secure a lasting peace.
But to-day I must pause over the funda-
mental assumptions upon which all our duties


and all our aspirations are built up, for every-
thing depends upon this. Our outlook upon
the world, our judgment of it, our conduct in it
all depend ultimately on our creed, and human
creeds are really the basis of all human actions.
It is true that often in modern Christian
society a man may act upon Christian principles
although his real beliefs are quite materialistic :
he is carried with the stream and appreciates
the conclusions, even though he cannot accept
the premises, of the Christian argument. But
ultimately the Christian is able to pitch his
ideals higher than the materialist simply
because he forms them on the assumption that
spiritual help is available for the realising of
them while the other does not. It is natural
that a man who has no hope of help from any-
where outside himself will be less bold in his
spiritual adventure than a man who says " I
can do all things through Christ which
strengtheneth me." Thus in considering our
obligations as Christian patriots everything
depends upon our grasp upon the Christian
assumptions with regard to the conduct of the
world and the trend of human history : and
you must bear with me if I seem in what
follows to digress far from the subject in hand.
Indeed it is not a digression, but vital to our
whole view of the subject. All that I shall
have to say in future addresses depends upon
what I am going to say now.


fTißdame;Rt®r Gssampti^ra.
The one great fundamental assumption upon
which all Christian thinking must be based is
that, behind the visible order of things, in-
spiring, permeating, directing all is the will of
a Personal Being. We believe that the whole
universe is just the expression of His mind,
and that His mind and will is in every particle
s and detail of it. We assume that He gave
•existence to this great order of things with a
definite purpose, a purpose of love, and that
this purpose of love is as a matter of fact being
worked out on a scale infinitely beyond our
ken, yet including all that we see and know
and experience. We believe that in the prose-
cution of this purpose of love the human race
bears a part : that in the slow evolution of the
world the human race was to appear on earth
according to the counsel of God, to play some
glorious and wonderful part in the drama.
-*4 (3 (|>©d -00 US.
This is the fundamental assumption. We
believe that there is a God of love and that in
spite of all the confusions and perplexities we
see, He is working out in the universe His
great beneficent purpose. Without this assump-
tion the world would be a chaos : it lies at the
base of the Christian creed.


«|)&e " Fail."***-
But the Christian believes that the purpose
of God is passing through a particular stage,
an episode, as we may call it, in the Drama
of the universe. He believes that the purpose
of God has suffered hindrance through the sin
and wilfulness of man, and that whereas the
Divine counsel contemplated a steady upward
course in the development of creation from the
lower to the higher, from the beast to the man
and from man material to man spiritual—a
check has occurred; material man has not
gone on to the higher spiritual status ; he has
remained stationary, endowed indeed with
spiritual capacity but enslaved also to the
material. This is the ancient doctrine of the
" Fall," and although in modern days we have
been led greatly to modify the drapery in
which human thought has clothed that far-off
and mysterious event, yet nevertheless it
remains true that fallen greatness —a spiritual
career corrupted—is the best explanation of
the contradictions and confusions which we all
know are characteristic of human nature. If
you want to see this thesis magnificently
stated, I would commend to your notice the
" Thoughts" of Blaise Pascal, from whom I
can only quote a brief extract.
" What a chimera, then, is man! what
novelty, what monster, what chaos, what a


T
i
contradiction, what prodigy!—judge of all
things, imbecile worm of the dust, depository
of the truth, sink of uncertainty and error, the
glory and refuse of the universe. Who shall
unravel such a tangle ? . . . We have an idea
of happiness and cannot attain to it ; we have
a conception of an image of truth, and only
are in possession of falsehood : capable of
absolute ignorance and certain knowledge,
thus much is manifest, that we were once in
some degree of perfection from which we have
unhappily fallen."
Since Pascal's time the theory of evolution
has arisen, but while that theory has modified
our thinking it has in no way excluded Pascal's
postulate of the Fallen Greatness of Man.
The Christian evolutionist looks back to the
dim past and sees man gradually emerging from
the lower creation, developing, not further
capacities of the body, but instincts for the
higher life, a new and undreamed of conscious-
ness of himself, the impulse to rise to the
divine. But all the while he feels the pull of
the lower nature too, and he uses his nascent
freedom to choose the lower and reject the
higher and so begins to oppose his will and
purpose to the will and purpose of God. This
is the beginning of the trouble and this is the
fundamental truth about human nature which
is taught us in the allegory of the Garden of
Eden.


She ¥**-
sre:at Process ©f Reeaper<ati©ra.
But that is not all. The Christian holds that
man has not been forsaken in his collapse. A
great recuperative process is at work. Since the
Incarnation, the spirit of Christ is operating in
the world, bringing men back to the original
purpose of God. We contemplate the Ball of
man without despair, because we believe in his
redemption. It is as though a great rebellion
had taken place in a well ordered State. An
official is appointed to restore order, but the
task is long and arduous. It is only by steady
perseverance, by the slow development of the
spirit of loyalty permeating the population that
order can be restored. One by one the citizens
must learn obedience, but meantime the official
remains in office. That is St. Paul's view of
the world in its present stage. The confusion
is being unravelled : there are many sets back ;
but in the whole there is progress. Meanwhile
the power of Christianity is undiminished
though not yet finally victorious. "He must
reign,'' he says of Jesus, " until He hath put all
His enemies under His feet." But in another
place we read, "We see not yet all things put
under Him."
Q ©f cj>ransiti@R. ¥»•
Here then is the fundamental assumption
with which we Christians look out upon the


world to-day. It is in a state of transition. It
is gradually passing out of the wild state of
lawless rebellion into conformity with the
original purpose and Will of God. Ihe process
will be a long one, and we are not taught to
expect that all enemies will be put under His
feet at any period within the ken of living man :
but our faith teaches us to believe that sin will
at last be conquered here on earth and that
then (if I read St. Paul aright), man being at
one with God, will gain the Spiritual nature
originally intended for him and so will rise
superior to death, " For as by man came death,
by man came also the resurrection from the
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive."
We have travelled far away from the main
subject. But I think you will have marked
the connection. We must see clearly the
Purpose behind human affairs before we can
rightly play our part in those human affairs :
and my point is that races and nations are called
to co-operate in the furtherance of the great
purpose of God for the world. That is what
they exist for : and their prosperity and great-
ness, as well as the happiness of the world, is
involved in the faithful obedience with which
they fulfil their destiny. But of this I shall
have more to say in my next address.
Meanwhile our duty is plain as the followers
of Christ whether corporately or individually,


whether as citizens of a nation, and members
of a Church, or as individual souls working out
our personal destiny, we know that the duty of
duties is to seek the Will of God and make it
the purpose of our life to conform to that. The
one priceless possession given to us here on
earth is the power to choose : and so the real
battle in every life (a battle which is only won
through constant conflicts and many failures) is
to choose the thing in life which is really worth
doing, to surrender our own personal will in
loving obedience and unfaltering trust to Him
who made us. It is not merely that we must
accept things which happen to us in that spirit;
we must dedicate our energies, we must conse-
crate the creative power which is ours in the
same direction. In His great struggle for the
conquest of evil to-day, Christ calls for the co-
operation of every one of us, and He is content
with nothing less than the loyal offering of
our will. " Sacrifice and meat-offering, Thou
wouldest not: but mine ears hast Thou opened.
Burnt offering and sacrifice for sin, hast Thou
not required : then said I, 10, I come. In the
volume of the book it is written of me that I
should fulfil Thy Will O my God : I am con-
tent to do it: yea Thy law is within my heart."


®UR ©BLIGATION TO ®UR iOUJTTRY
F my object in these addresses were
merely to kindle patriotic enthus-
iasm, I think I should spend my
whole time to-day in telling you
stories about Ancient Rome.
Roman history teems with fine
stories of patriotic devotion, and
the example of those sturdy Roman patriots
appeals perhaps in a special degree to the
congenial British character. I will, however,
content myself with only one.
Marcus Atilius Regulus was a Roman
General and Consul in the 9th year of the first
Punic war, B.C. 256. After several brilliant
victories Regulus was completely defeated in
the year 255, and taken prisoner by the Car-
thaginians. After five years' captivity he was
sent, in the year 250, to Rome on parole
to initiate a peace, or at least an exchange of
prisoners ; but the fierce old soldier lent all his
energies and all his eloquence to defeat the
Carthaginian proposal. " There must be no
peace," he said, " and no prisoners must be


exchanged. The discomfort, the sufferings,
even the death of a few of Rome's sons in the
land of their enemies is nothing compared with
Rome's present opportunity of crushing Car-
thage : let there be no truce, no consideration
of individuals so long as the Senate can secure
the peace and well-being of Rome.'' Such was
the spirit of Rome's life and death struggle
with Carthage. The friends and relatives of
Regulus pleaded with him for some compro-
mise. But he turned a deaf ear and presently
went back in fulfilment of his word to an
unknown death in the land of his enemies.
Later and perhaps less authentic stories relate
in detail the tortures which the Carthaginians
inflicted in their disappointed rage upon the
obstinate Roman who had defeated their
schemes. They are probably without founda-
tion, but I begin with this story to-day because
it throws into relief the principle upon which
all great patriots act, viz., that our country has
a right to everything we have: our money,
energies, well-being, our health, and even our
life itself. That since we have adopted the
social ideal and chosen to live as members of
a State, we must pay the price of our privi-
leges. The State can only exist if we
recognise this principle. It can only remain
happy and peaceful in so far as the citizens
readily and cheerfully accept this paramount
and solemn obligation.


But we must not suppose from this that
patriotism is a mere contract: merely the price
we pay for certain privileges such as protec-
tion, peace and civilized life. Rather it is a
fundamental instinct sown in our hearts. The
love of one's country is in some ways parallel
to a man's love for his mother. It is a natural
instinct. The capacity for love no doubt varies
with the individual ; it is certainly stronger in
some than in others, and for aught I know
there may be some few who lack it altogether,
but as a general rule the capacity is there, and
we deem him something less than a man who
is without it. I think I may state it as an
axiom without fear of contradiction that the
love of one's country is an essential element
to the noblest character and that through this
channel, more perhaps than through any other,
there has been opened a road to heroism and
self-sacrifice even to those characters whose
previous moral record has been elementary or
confused.
But if patriotism is capable of mending the
broken wares of Society, how much more does
it transfigure and glorify the average citizen ?
And for this cause I confess to a certain
jealousy for the character of the citizens of
Queensland. Of the general soundness of our
patriotism I have no doubt at all; and we must,
I suppose, admit that we cannot reasonably
expect the same alertness of mind, the same


poignancy of emotion, or the same prompt
readiness to act in the inhabitants of the bush
districts of Queensland that we find in parts of
the Empire which are more directly threatened
by the enemy. Moreover, when calculated by
financial tests or by the actual numbers sent to
the firing line, the share of Australia in the
Empire's struggle, though obviously far below
what it might be and far below what Britain
itself is providing, is calculated to win the
commendation of Imperial authorities. But I
confess that I am not satisfied. Considering
the weakness of our youth as a nation and our
utterly unprotected coast-line, the present con-
fidence of Australia suggests not self-reliance
so much as childish ignorance. The fate of
Australia, the fate of Queensland is now being
tested upon the battle-fields of Europe and in
the North Sea, and I cannot but feel it strange
in such circumstances to note the apathy and
self-content aye and sometimes the self-conceit
of many of our people. I commented the other
day upon the absence of recruiting in a certain
bush district and asked the reason why no
young men were forthcoming. The answer
was that they " reckoned that they might get
killed." In connection too with the proposed
defence force of senior citizens, I heard of a
cricketer who asked, " Will this defence force
interfere with our cricket ?" These two in-
stances are certainly not typical of the general


feeling, but they do suggest that even now our
people are not alive to the crisis ; they do not
yet see that when the national existence is at
stake it is unmanly to cling to the amenities of
life. They have not yet learnt that patriotism
is something more than an exhilarating emotion
and means sacrifice.
But I must not linger on this subject. It is
very familiar to you, and the outward and
secular side of our country's demand is on all
lips. If I have felt obliged to say familiar
things over again, it was because I simply could
not speak about our obligation to our country
without delivering my soul.
But my object to-day is altogether different
from this. Our subject is Christian Patriotism,
and it is time I made clear what I mean by the
term. Patriotism, as we all know, is not an
exclusively Christian virtue. I have already
spoken of it as an instinct of human nature,
and I need only point to the example of Japan
in its war with Russia to show how deeply this
noble passion can stir a non-Christian nation.
But Christian patriotism is a more spiritual
thing. It appears when the natural instinct
is blended with certain presuppositions about
the conduct of the world, certain convictions
about man's relation to God : and when these
ideas and instincts are blended together the
old human quality begins to shine with a new
radiance.


Here then I take up the thread of my theme
of a fortnight ago. The Christian's funda-
mental assumption, I said, was that God has a
purpose of love for the world, and that that
purpose is working itself out, in spite of
sets back and confusion in all directions, through
the steadily operating force of the Spirit of
Christ working among men. This purpose,
we believe, is finding its fulfilment, among
other ways, through the medium of nationality
and race. I cannot now stop to discuss the
fascinating question of the origin of these great
phenomena. I dare not even attempt defini-
tions. But my meaning is, I think, sufficiently
clear when I claim that not only individuals
but races and nations often develop obvious
distinctive characteristics and capacities, through
which they are able to contribute to the world's
progress. History gives abundant instances
of this. Rome , for instance, has left an in-
delible mark upon the civilization of the world,
and its characteristic gifts to the world have
been due to its genius for law and government.
Greece's impress upon the world has been no
less indelible, but Greece's strength has been
in the direction of art and philosophy. The


Hebreivs distinctive genius has been the
capacity for knowing God and realising man's
true relation to him. If we could analyse our
modern civilisation, we should find how utterly
different our mental equipment would have
been if any of these three races had been
omitted from history. To each of them we
owe an incalculable debt : and we could not
have achieved our present stage of progress
without them. And we can extend our review
into modern times. The Teutonic race has
some plain characteristics. On the one hand
its intellectual activity, and on the other hand
its mysticism, has enriched the world. The
French nation, the most vigorous of the Latin
races, has an intellectual and artistic leadership
of its own among modern nations, but perhaps
its most characteristic contribution to the
modern world has been its spirit of relentless
logic, both in thought and in practical life.
The impetuosity —I had almost said the
violence —which characterises French history
is due to this tendency to press things to their
logical conclusion. And herein lies a speaking
contrast between them and the Anglo-Saxon
with his instinct for compromise. But I must
not enlarge upon the contribution which seems
to be characteristic of the British race, for that
will occupy us, 1 hope, next week. I am
only concerned now to insist that races and


nations, in so far as they are true to them-
selves, have each a characteristic contribution
to give to the world's progress, and that this
is part of the larger purpose of God. And if
any doubt remains as to the teaching of our
religion in this matter, 1 would advise you to
turn again to the witness of the Old Testament.
Throughout the early history of Israel, the
Patriarchs, the Judges and the early Monarchy,
we trace the principle of selection : the selec-
tion, that is, first of individuals and then
nations not to privilege but to service, not
merely to worldly greatness but to oppor-
tunities for contributing to the well-being of
humanity. The call of Abraham was essentially
a spiritual thing. There was indeed a promise
of worldly prosperity, but the object set before
him in plain language was that in him and in
his seed all nations of the world should be
blessed. So it is all through the history of
the Old Testament. Even Gentile nations
were recognised as called and used of God.
" For this cause have I raised thee up,"
Jehovah is made to say to the representative
of the Egyptian nation, "to shew in thee My
power." And in the case of Israel itself the
sense of vocation steadily grows. The pro-
phets are full of it, and the whole principle is
re-stated with memorable fervour by St. Paul
in his Epistle to the Romans.


(pEree;
®f t&is Prißeipfe;.
If all this is true you will see that the
Christianising of patriotism throws a new and
transforming light upon much of our ordinary
thinking. It teaches us that God calls Nations
as well as individuals to His Service : thus it
corrects current ideas as to what patriotic duty
really is ; it teaches us new things about the
spirit of our prayers in war time, solving inci-
dentally some familiar problems, and it points
us with new emphasis to old and familiar duties.
It offsets oar Probers. ¥*-
(i) I would begin with our prayers. The
very moment war begins men are thrown back
at once, so to speak, upon their spiritual
reserves. They seek to claim the highest
sanction they know for the justice of their
cause : they fly to prayer. And herein lies a
difficulty. When Christian nations are at war,
both sides are turning to God. At the present
moment, days of prayer and humiliation are
a being held in Germany as well as among us,
and I need hardly remind you that this fact is
eagerly taken up by the scoffer and the cynic.
• In the Boer War an atheist lecturer in a London
Park sneeringly said that Boer and Briton alike
are appealing to their God, but it is all waste


of time because victory will go to the big
battalions. And I was surprised and I confess
rather disgusted to read the other day an article
in the 'North American Review' for October
last taking the same line. The writer pictures
the hurry and confusion in the courts of heaven
as the prayers come soaring up from bellig-
erent nations. "In the meantime," he writes,
"prayers continued to accumulate in the outer
" courts and it became a crying question, ' What
"is being done about them ?' Particularly as
" those human beings, steeped to the lips in the
"blood of their fellow men and kneeling on the
" festering heaps of those they had slain had all
" been praying to the same God, the God of
" peace, the God of truth, the God of righteous-
" ness and love and mercy. They came to their
" altars reeking ofslaughter, their faces lurid with
" the smoke of powder and the flames of the
" peaceful cities and villages they had burned.
Yet something must be done about
" their prayers for victory ; these prayers could
<' not all be turned down ; they could not all be
" granted. The most embarrassing phase of the
" affair was their praying, friend and foe alike, to
" the same God, and claiming Him their Cham-
" pion with implicit belief in His devotion to
"their interests." All this is very unpleasant
and cynical and we might well be surprised that
a great periodical like the ' North American


Review' should descend to such cheap stuff,
if it were not a fact that the current ideas
among Christians about prayer do not seem to
reach to a much higher level. Undoubtedly
the ordinary man's idea is that prayers in time
of war are necessarily prayers for victory. He
has not thought enough on the subject to take
a deeper view, but the deeper souled Christians,
wherever they may be, in Germany, Russia or
England, are praying less for victory and more
that Gods Will may be done whatever it be.
The more the Christian progresses in his
Christian course, the more his prayers tend to
take this form. The object of our life is to
co-operate with God's purpose and for the
mature Christian I suppose God's Will and his
own personal happiness tend to coincide. We
must bear this in mind in our prayers about the
war. I do not for a moment suggest that we
cannot conscientiously pray for victory, but I
plead for a wider outlook, a truer spirit of
surrender. Our object is that the Will of God
may be done : 44 Thy Will be done on earth as
it is in heaven " ; that is our daily prayer, but
that Will of God might conceivably involve the
defeat of our arms. It might conceivably be
that the things we love and the interests which
concern us are the things which must go to
Calvary for the world's good. It is hard to
contemplate such things, but as Christians
would we not a thousand times rather have it


so than win a victory against God's Will ?
God's Will is the essential thing : it is the key
to the world's happiness and progress, our own
as well as others, and after all, in the seeking
of God's Will lies our national progress and
well-being, even though national defeat and
disaster were an incident in the process.
Whichever way it be, through success or
failure, through victory or defeat, the Christian
must eagerly, self-forgettingly, whole-heartedly
be striving after God's Will. Does this seem
a high and impossible line of prayer ? Surely
not if we have taken hold of the truth of
national vocation. If nations and races are
called to a God-given career, if each has some
contribution to give to the world's progress,
then surely our prayers in war time are regu-
lated by due safeguards. We pray that no
nation's vocation may be frustrated by the
tyranny of man, whether through the oppres-
sion of the weak nation by the strong, or
through the intemperate use of victory when
the war draws to a close. Again we shall pray
that no nation's vocation may be frustrated
through its own transgression or failure in duty.
If our own British policy is selfish, though we
know it not, or ambitious or prompted by
avarice, we pray God to shew us our fault and
to bring us to repentance and amendment.
" Faithful is He that calleth you who also will
do it."


It affects our Political Qttitade. ¥*-
(2) And that leads on to another corrollary
of the principle of national vocation. It throws,
as I said, a new and transforming light upon
our current ideas of patriotic duty. It reminds
us that for the Christian the love of his coun-
try cannot be a mere blind love. I compared
the love of one's country to the love of one s
mother, and after all a noble son's love of his
mother is a discriminating thing. If he sees
her falling into some degrading temptation, the
very love he bears her prompts him to interfere.
A tragic situation may indeed arise in conse-
quence, but his very love nerves his will and
many a noble son of a drunken mother has
faced the ordeal to the end. Even so, the
doctrine of "my country right or wrong must
always be abhorrent to the Christian. It is not
mere territorial expansion or increased wealth
or fame and reputation which he desires ; he
longs to see his country take the upright line
and stand always for what is noble and good.
In other words, believing in his country s
vocation, he desires above all things to see her
walk worthily of that vocation and to come
short in nothing.
And for this reason there are times when a
Christian patriot may be called upon to face
bitter opposition and obloquy, for the lower
pagan sort of patriotism is still far too common


amongst us. Much that goes by the name of
patriotism among us is merely selfishness mas-
querading under a false name. There are
commercial men whose hunger for fresh markets
is the real impulse of their patriotism. There
are promoters of great schemes of territorial
development, promoters of great railway
projects and so forth, whose patriotism is self-
regarding and whose desires have never con-
sidered the well-being of neighbouring nations.
Against such influences, from time to time the
Christian patriot is called upon to protest. The
Old Testament gives us a noble archetype
upon which to model our conduct in this matter.
The prophet Jeremiah represents the tragedy
of the situation in its acutest form, and thank
God few of us indeed are called upon to take
his stand. He preached the surrender of his
native city and incurred the undying obloquy
of all his countrymen in consequence, though
indeed his love for Jerusalem was deeper than
that of all his opponents. But he knew that in
surrender lay the best hope for his country, and
subsequent events proved that he was in the
right. It was a terrible and tragic ordeal, and
we shall all hope and trust that we may be
spared such an experience. The mere possi-
bility of it however ought to make us very
tender and patient to those who, however
misguided they may seem to us, feel it their


duty to oppose the national policy. You
remember the bitterness shewn against the
pro-Boers during the Boer War and Mr.
Ramsay Macdonald and Mr. Keir Hardie are
facing a like opposition to-day. Ido not wish
in any way to associate myself with these
statesmen. I am totally unable to conceive
their position, and the arguments with which
they have defended it seem extraordinarily
weak ; but I do with all my heart admire their
courage. They happen to be on the wrong
side as we view the case, but we must never
forget that from time to time Christian patriots
are called to stand up in the breach and stem
the tide when the current of national opinion
is setting to what is wrong.
if offsets
oar QttHads towards flJorfL
(3) But the occasions for such protests will
naturally grow rare as the standard of Christian
thought and feeling rises in the nation and this
leads me to the third and concluding corrollary
of our principle of national vocation. The
surest way to secure national faithfulness is to
promote national religion and this promotion of
religion, if you think it out, becomes a duty
of every single patriot who claims to be a
Christian. We come here on to very familiar
ground, but I should be untrue to my message


if I did not say over again in this context, what
we Christian preachers are saying times without
number in all contexts and in all connections.
The national life, the national strength and
well-being is based upon the fear of God, and
there is no question more crucially important
for the statesman to consider than that of the
sound encouragement of national religion. It
is true that our unhappydivisions have imported
new difficuliies into the task, but the fact
remains that the raising of the religious stan-
dard of the people is the most important of all
the elements of national well-being. And this
in plain language to you and me means the
support of the Church. lam not ignoring the
obligation felt by those of the Christian com-
munity who are not of us. The obligation is
upon them as it is upon us and as we are
debarred through our own sin and disputing
from the inestimable benefit and strength of a
single national Church, it remains for us to pro-
mote each our own expression of our Christian
faith as best we can. And in this work of
cleansing and raising the national life who can
doubt that the Church of England is called
upon to play a pre-eminent part ? She is rich
with the treasures of the past. In every age
of our national history she has played a great
and generally a faithful part. She is holy with
the record of a great line of saints, whether
kings, statesmen, doctors, or priests. She is


strong with the sturdy strength of the race
which she has moulded into a nation. She is
living, yes still living as we know by countless
experiences, with the life of Her Lord which
first called the Church into being and is ever
manifested to us in the sacraments. Can we
be blamed if we look to our mother Church of
England as the hope of the great Australian
Nation to be ? Can we expect forgiveness if
we cease to work and pray that that Church
may grow and take root and be strong and
fruitful in this new soil for the healing of the
nation as it grows, for the enriching of the
world, and for the glory of God ?


III. *
CHRISTIAN IMPERIALISM
n the year 1 788, in the presence
of a great company representing
the flower of the nation, Edmund
Burke,in Westminster Hall, opened
his memorable impeachment of
Warren Hastings. Warren Hast-
ings had recently returned from
India, having laid down his office of Governor-
General. He had done more perhaps than any
living man to lay the foundations of an Empire
in that sorrowful and stricken land. But he
had been a Governor of the old Roman type.
He had mingled with his supreme capacity for
governing an evil strain of cruelty and extortion,
and so on his return, Edmund Burke was
determined that he should be brought to book,
and the greatness of that long struggle in West-
minster Hall lay not merely in the calibre of
the men opposed to one another, but in the
clash between two ideals of Empire which there
came to a head. Edmund Burke's nine days
speech on the impeachment of Warren Hast-
ings may be taken as marking the dawn of
modern British Imperialism.


What is Imperialism ? Since Burke's day
the British Empire has spread all over the
world, and Britain's fame and influence and
commerce have penetrated far beyond where
her flag flies. But I must at the very outset
distinguish between the British Empire and
what it stands for: between Britain as a political
organization and British Imperialism as the
force behind. The former is a political combi-
nation ; it is a matter of territories, peoples and
government. The latter is an ideal, and it is
the ideal about which I am to speak to-day,
I hope to shew that Imperialism in the sense
that I shall presently define it, is characteristic
of our race ; an instinct which, after lying dor-
mant for awhile is now coming out into full
consciousness, the secret force to which we owe
all that is best and noblest in our history.
More than that, I hope to shew that this
instinct implanted in our race is a sacred trust
committed to us by God, a gift entrusted to us
for the good of mankind, a talent for which we
must give account.
(pße BrifisK Empire Umqae;. ¥**-
Imperialism then is the formative ideal-
Empire is the embodiment. And if we would
study British Imperialism, we must first look
at the British Empire in which it has found


expression. "By their fruits ye shall know
them." And in the story of the British Empire
we have the fruits of British Imperialism, the
characteristic expression of its inward nature.
It is a great, moving spectacle and to under-
stand it fully we must get behind the great
panorama of noble lives and actions which have
brought it to its present position : we must dis-
cern by a comprehensive view the underlying
principles: and then it is, and not till then,
that we shall marvel at the mighty experiment
which is going on at this moment before our
eyes. The British Empire as we see it to-day
is unique in the world's history. 1 here has
been nothing like it since the dawn of time,
and it was with full intention that I just now
used the word "experiment.' We cannot claim
as yet that the Empire is more than an
experiment, but the more we study it, the more
hopeful we are of the future, the more certain
we are that the experiment is worth trying.
The unique character of our Empire is seen
when we compare it with those which have
gone before. History tells us of many :of
Babylon and Assyria, of Egypt and Persia, of
Greece and Rome, of Spain under Philip 11.
and France under Napoleon. All these Powers,
though widely different in their setting, may
claim I suppose to be Imperial, but differing as
they do, there is one characteristic common to
them all and in sharp contrast with our Empire


of to-day. Between them and us there is a
great gulf fixed, and it goes down to the funda-
mental ideas upon which their Power is reared
up. The old conception is passed away : a
new spirit, a new idea has been behind the
Empire-building of Britain. What was that
old conception, the characteristic of all conquer-
ing nations of the past ? It was this. All other
Empires have been based upon the extinction
of Nationality. With the Assyrians and Baby-
lonians this, as you all know, was a settled and
conscious policy. The Assyrians deliberately
removed the whole population of Israel and
dispersed it in Halor and in Habor and in the
cities of the Medes, that the national tie might
for ever be dissolved. Nebuchadnezzar in like
manner transported the population of Judah and
with a like intent. Imperial Rome, throughout
the period of her dominance, crushed out nation-
ality with a heavy hand, and sought to establish
Roman citizenship as the one and only Imperial
connection. And she succeeded so completely,
she mixed the races throughout Italy, Greece,
Egypt and the East so thoroughly that a chaos
of races ensued through the centuries succeed-
ing her fall which only the new nationalities
surging up in modern Europe have been able
to shake off. And Napoleon's policy was the
same. His motive was selfish ambition, and
in his schemes of conquest nationality found no
place : there was no lingering sense of respon-


sibility for the people he conquered, and wher-
ever he applied a constructive policy, he applied
it in the interests of the governing and not of
the governed State. And so we might go on.
The old ideal of Empire was power, wealth,
and dominance, and the first step to this was
always the destruction of nationality.
But the British Empire is founded upon
liberty. With the British race the word
"Empire" has come to bear a new meaning.
The old definition no longer applies and our
Empire of to-day stands upon a foundation far
above the Empires of the past. In that one
word Liberty we find the secret of Britain's
moral greatness, aye, and also the safeguard of
her strength.
"=4 £jiberts. ¥*•
There is indeed more than that, but liberty
is the main foundation, and we must trace the
influence of liberty in the history of our race
before we pass on. Ihe ideal indeed has been
with us from the first, and the love of liberty
has been mingled with our blood from the dawn
of our existence : but we can point, I think, to
a definite crisis in our history when we learned
to apply our instinct in dealing with others.
It was our American colonies who taught us
the lesson. Up to the end of the eighteenth
century we had not as yet learned the true


principle of Empire. In dealing with our
American colonies we were prepared, like all
our predecessors in Empire, to be self-regarding,
to govern them in London in London's inter-
ests and not their own. But our American
Colonies rose in revolt, and in throwing off our
yoke they schooled us to a new and better
ideal. We did not make the same mistake
twice. Colonies began to spring up in other
parts of the world and England had her chance
again. To these new and vigorous communi-
ties the Motherland spoke with a new and
different voice. " Realise yourselves,'' she said,
"develop your resources, grow into nations and
" I will protect your coast line from attack.
" Look to me as your Mother. I will expect
" no return from you in the days of your weak-
" ness. My reward will be to see you nations
" like myself." England learned to substitute
the policy of liberty for the policy of dominance
and so laid the foundations of an Empire such
as the world has never seen before. It is still,
I admit, an experiment. Never before have a
number of free nations attempted to act perma-
nently in common. Never before have peoples
far asunder from one another been bound to-
gether by mutual confidence in the purest
spiritual bond, the bond of their common pas-
sion for freedom. We are attempting in the
British Empire to reconcile two words which
the world has hitherto regarded as mutually


exclusive—Empire and Freedom. The experi-
ment may fail, but I ask you in God's name, is
it not worth the attempt ?
But the Empire stands for more than
this Freedom is for grown men. The atmos-
phere of freedom is too strong for the tender
spirit of children. They must be under author-
ity during their tender years, that they may
qualify for the freedom of manhood through a
period in statu pupillari. As with children, so
it is with the child races of the world, and no-
where is the Imperial instinct of our race shewn
to better advantage than in shepherding the.
child races which have come under our care.
What is the secret of this ? Let me here say
in parenthesis that I do not ignore the darker
side of our history. All British statesmen,
soldiers, and merchants, have not been true to
type, and there are many dark spots in the
history of our expansion which no comprehen-
sive view could possibly ignore. But I am
not here giving a comprehensive view of our
history. I am seeking to emphasize the main
features of British rule and in my conscience I
believe that the picture I am drawing is sub-
stantially true. What then is the secret of
Britain's marvellous influence upon all subject
races? It would be hard to answer this
question briefly and I will content myself with


mentioning the main ingredient in her success.
British influence is due mainly to British justice.
Wherever the native races learn really to
know the British governing classes, they know
Britain is to be trusted. A British official keeps
his word. A British official judges justly and
moreover is not to be bought with money.
This has been the secret of our influence. We
have no doubt done a great deal of fighting in
India, but the peoples of India have come
under British rule not so much through con-
quest as through the conviction they themselves
have felt that in Britain they would have an
assured protector and a ruler under whom they
might live in prosperity and peace. Within our
own memory Egypt has afforded an example
of the same process, not less eloquent than
India. What is the significance of the twenty
years administration of Lord Cromer in Egypt ?
It is just a triumph of Britain's integrity, a
triumph of her unselfish devotion to the well-
being of the poor and backward over the
injustice and oppression, the selfishness and
incapacity of the Ottoman rule. But I need
not multiply instances, for the facts are plain to
you already. The British Empire is built upon
justice as well as liberty and the policy we have
pursued is assuredly vindicated before the
whole world to-day. We seem to be reaping
our reward. From the very beginning of the
war we knew that one objective of our enemies


would be the seduction of our subject races
from their allegiance. That objective has been
pursued with persistence and skill. Nothing
seems to have been omitted in the attempt to
foster disaffection in India, P-gypt, and else-
where, and the end of it all so far as we can
see is unshaken loyalty to British rule. This
is no small thing : it means that our work has
not been in vain. For generations we have
given them of our best; hundreds of statesmen,
civil servants, officers and financiers have toiled
and sacrificed their health and often their lives
in the service of the millions of our coloured
fellow-citizens : it is no small reward in these
days of the Empire's stress and danger to find
that our coloured fellow-citizens do not forget.
I believe that when posterity reads the lessons
of this war in their true proportion, the loyalty
of our native races will stand out as a final and
convincing testimony to the integrity and jus-
tice of Imperial Britain.
So then freedom and justice—for these
things the British Empire stands. It is by
virtue of these two shining characteristics that
our race has expanded over the world, has
shewn so unparalleled a permanence and
cohesion and has exerted so magic a power in
the development of subject races. How then
shall we define Imperialism ? What is the
ideal, the instinct at the back of it all ? It
seems to me some innate, unexplained, in-


evitable tendency to concern ourselves in the
affairs of other peoples. Not as busybodies,
not from motives of self-seeking ; but because
of an instinctive conviction that we are able to
help. You have seen a jibbing horse in Queen
Street. The crowd looks on inactive, but one
man comes out of the crowd and helps the
driver in his distress. What makes him more
active than the others? It is that he knows
that he can help. Even so, there is an instinct
in our race which understands the desires and
aspirations of other nations. We know we can
help, and so we are impelled by a sort of
destiny to mix in their affairs. Imperialism has
been defined* as patriotism transfigured in the
light of the aspirations of humanity. I am
content to leave it at that.
(pffe Umpire, ***-
Responsibility.
We see then that British Imperialism is an
instinct implanted in our race, which marks us
off from other nations, not by any superiority,
for they too have their talents, but as giving us
a distinctive task to perform in the progress of
humanity.
* Professor Cramb.


Whence did it come and what is its spiritual
significance for us Christians ? We are in no
doubt as to our answer. It is the gift of God.
It is a talent bestowed upon us, not merely for
our own well-being or wealth, still less to
minister to our pride, but as a means of helping
the world ; and a great responsibility is
attached to it. We cannot glance over the
history of our race without growing increasingly
conscious of a Divine purpose linking together
the epochs and the fortunes of successive
generations into a consistent whole. If we
believe in the general purpose of God for the
world, if we believe that God uses nations and
races, as I tried to shew you last week, for the
fulfilment of some part of his plan, then a
glance at hlnglish history will convince us
beyond gainsaying that Britain is a case in
point. We look back to the beginnings of the
Nation in England and we know how our
Anglo-Saxon and Celtic forefathers were left
to consolidate their national life for generations
undisturbed from outside. Once they had
landed, the sea they had crossed preserved
them from interference. Thus independent
national characteristics could grow in strength
and simplicity. Then we see how the nation
grew through the long centuries, nourishing in
its soul the thoughts of liberty and expressing
itself in that direction time and again when
potentates at home or abroad seemed to


challenge its spirit, until through the bitter
struggles of civil war the people of Flngland in
the 17th Century made themselves finally
masters of their own destiny. So the great
turning point approached. Having won liberty
to themselves it was inevitable that the people
of Britain should eventually secure it for others.
It is not for nothing that all through the 18th
Century British adventurers were swarming all
over the globe, carrying with them the national
love of freedom. Burke first gave formal
expression to the thought of Britain's mind,
and all the political combinations which have
sprung up in the 19th Century, the self-
governing dominions in Canada, South Africa,
New Zealand and Australia have but embodied
the principles which he first heralded to the
world.
Can we mistake the lesson ? Can we shut
our eyes to the purpose which has directed this
great process ? Can we doubt that in the
Divine counsels for the progress of the world
Britain is called in the providence of God to
play a great and noble part ? This is the faith
of the Christian Imperialist. With the historian
and politician he marks and rejoices in the
racial characteristics ; but on his own account
he recognizes that these characteristics con-
stitute a solemn call to serve the world, a
responsibility given of God.


111.
(p£e; larger Ptatrietism. ¥**
If I have made myself clear to-day you will
see that our study of Christian Imperialism has
laid upon us a new obligation. With the
obligations of patriotism in the narrower sense
I think we are already familiar, and no one can
live long in Australia without knowing that the
love of his country is a living and a burning
motive to the Australian citizen. I believe
that the Australians are prepared to give their
all for the safety of Australia. That is as it
should be, and I thank God for it.
But to-day we are contemplating a wider
patriotism. The obligation to the Empire is
not so easily grasped as the obligation to our
country. It is a more spiritual thing. It has
its home chiefly in the world of ideas and is not
like the narrower patriotism rooted in the soil
we tread, in the air we breathe. Consequently
I doubt whether the average Australian is as
yet alive to the obligation which rests upon
him as a member of an Imperial race. He
does not as yet understand how he himself is
involved in the fortunes of England and
Canada and South Africa. Still less can he
conceive that the contribution of Britain to the
world's progress depends upon the moral and
spiritual attitude of such as he. I believe a


great deal of education is needed before we can
reach this point, and my main objective in
delivering these lectures has been to call atten-
tion to the subject. Our Imperial destiny is
threatened by other foes than those who are
fighting us in Europe. It is threatened by the
ignorance, the carelessness, the narrowness of
mind of so many of our citizens. Great as are
the possibilities of the future, it is certain that
they cannot be realized by the dreams or the
labours of a few outstanding men. If the
Empire is indeed to be used of God in the
future for the good of man, the first essential
is that the Imperial idea should permeate the
national life and grip the mind and heart of the
average citizen. We have to take the spiritual,
the Christian view of Empire. We must rise
above the more selfish view which is so
commonly taken, at all events in Queensland,
that the Empire is a convenient safeguard
to Australia against possible enemies. We
must rise to the thought that, as a race we
have a great calling from God and that that
calling can only be realized by efforts on our
part in two main directions. First we must
promote the unity of our scattered dominions
in order that, united closely together, we may
keep alive the spiritual ideals which at present
we hold in common. The Empire is worth
maintaining, not merely because of its value as
a means of defence against military attack, but


far more because it is the shrine of a sacred
flame which must be preserved in the interests
of the world. And secondly, following from
this, we should be prepared to defend it against
all attacks. Men usually go to war for causes
which are tangible and concrete ; but wars are
sometimes waged for an idea, and in the
strength of an idea men will fight as they cannot
fight for a meaner cause. It is not altogether
in self-defence that we are now at death grips
with the power of Germany. Deep in the
heart of the British race there is an idea, and if
we are faithful to our trust now, that idea will
bear fruit and multiply among our descendants
in the generations to come.


'THE PRICE OF
IMPERIAL PROGRESS.
E have heard a good deal in the
past few years about the decadence
of the British race. Things have
happened in the past six months
which have effectually put a stop
to talk of this kind. But neverthe-
less it is natural to wonder at times
ir Empire has passed its youth. As
whether our
in the life of the individual, so in the life of a
race, youth is shewn in the capacity for enthus-
iasm for a great ideal. "Capacity to frame,
resolution to pursue, devotion to sacrifice all to
a great political end." So also, when a race
becomes incapable of unselfish enthusiasm and
wedded to self-interest, when its individual
members become self-centred and cynical, then
the process of decadence has begun. Can we
estimate in this sense the present age of our
Empire? Professor J. A. Cramb, of Queen's
College, London, in his book, " The Origin and
Destiny of Imperial Britain," makes a carefully


drawn comparison between the rise of the
Roman race and that of our own, and he sums
up his enquiry as follows :—" If the question
" were asked, ' With what period in the history
"of Rome does the present age correspond ?'
" I should say, roughly speaking, it corresponds
" with the period of Titus and Vespasian when
" Rome has still a course of three hundred
" years to run." But he goes on to guard himself
against prophesying about the future. " The
" British Empire may be said to have reached
" to-day a stage represented by the age of
" Vespasian and Titus in ancient Rome, but the
" difference in the circumstances of the two
" Empires makes it impossible for us to pro-
" duce the lines of parallel into the future."
At the same time while the inscrutable dark-
ness of the future prevents our promising
ourselves another three centuries of active life,
that same future may have things in store
for us which may prolong and develop the
Empire's career far beyond that period. Fresh
blood adds new energy to effete stocks. The
self-recuperative powers of the race have been
strengthened in the past. They may be
strengthened again and again in the future.
We hope they are being strengthened by this
war. At least we may believe that the Empire
has not yet passed its prime and that, given
certain conditions, a great and ever expanding
future lies before her.


Given certain conditions. It is the price of
Imperial progress to which I seek to direct your
attention to-day. I remember when I was an
undergraduate, hearing the late Mr. W. E.
Forster address a great meeting in Cambridge on
the subject of Imperial Federation. The idea
was new in those days and perhaps the vast
audience of undergraduates stirred the blood of
the old statesman, for I have never forgotten and
I do not think I ever shall forget the emphasis
and the emotion with which he directed us to
the future. "We often hear it said," he spoke
somewhat to this effect, " that our Empire
" must inevitably go the way of all Empires,
"it must grow old and crumble and die. But
" what has brought past Empires to their down-
" fall ? Has it been the mere effluxion of time,
" or has it not rather been the luxury and self-
" indulgence, the vice and selfishness into which
" they allowed themselves to fall ? But these
" things are not beyond our control. The future
"of the Empire depends upon you. If you
" will follow Rome in her self-indulgence you
" will hasten your Empire's end ; but set before
" yourselves the ideals of your fathers : follow
" duty and self-discipline, preserve humility
" and the fear of God, and the Empire may yet
" grow beyond our dreams in the generations
"to come." That was the substance of Mr.
Forster's appeal to us undergraduates, and we
know that history corroborates his words. The


issues at stake in the Empire's life are not
physical, but moral and spiritual, they lie not
in the world of politics or commerce, but in the
world unseen.
And we have the corroboration of our view
from a direction quite other than history.
Our fundamental assumption throughout these
lectures is that the world is directed by the
purpose of God. We are regarding the career
of nations and races from the Christian point
of view as dependent upon their obedience to
the Divine will, and we believe that the same
penalty follows disobedience with them as with
individuals. Like the individual, the race
which has ceased to fulfil the Divine will is
removed out of its place. " Every branch that
" beareth not fruit, He taketh away, but every
" branch that beareth fruit He purgeth that it
" may bring forth more fruit." The progress
of our Empire in the future depends upon the
moral and spiritual standard we achieve.
(pie; 6omiß<g (pest.
If I am not greatly mistaken, the moral and
spiritual standards of our race are shortly to be
probed and tested to the quick. Before many
months are out we may hope, the great prob-
lems of the peace settlement will be coming
before us, and that period will bring with it a
trial far more searching than the trial of war.


In war it is the material strength of the nation
which is put to the test and the human quali-
ties which war brings out, the spirit of sacrifice,
courage, endurance, patience, are all indirectly
connected with material things. We are all of
us thanking God that so far our race has come
triumphantly through this ordeal. But after
all, what a common thing courage is ! Every
incident reported of the war seems to include
some deed of heroism. In this, all nations
seem alike. There seems little to choose be-
tween German and British, Frenchman and
Turk. The German troops can advance majes-
tically to certain death singing the 4 Wacht am
Rhein,' and German sailors as well as British
can line up on board their sinking men-of-war
and face death with a cheer. Heroic courage
is no rare thing. But at the close of the war
we shall be called to a more difficult task than
the task of dying well. Whatever the peace
settlement may be, a challenge will be made to
the choicest and rarest gifts of the human soul.
The possibility of our defeat hardly bears think-
ing of; but this much is sure, that if it should
come the Christian element in our patriotism
must be to the fore, or we shall perish indeed.
In national calamities the distinction between
true and false patriotism will inevitably shine
forth. If you want a speaking example of the
contrast between the two, read over again the
story of the revolt of Ishmael the son of


Nethaniah, after the destruction of Jerusalem,
and compare it with the silent, passive, yet
undying patriotism of Jeremiah. In his insen-
sate revolt and the murder of the Governor
Gedaliah, Ishmael believed he was playing the
part of a patriot, but it was a false patriotism
and only brought further disaster upon the
country he claimed to love. May God deliver
us from any such experience. But I pass from
this contingency to the other and I plead that
we should prepare ourselves to judge rightly in
case victory crowns our arms. Let us assume
that Britain is in a position to speak with
weight with regard to the final settlement. Let
us assume for the sake of argument that she is
free to impose or remit burdens upon the van-
quished, to take or leave for herself as she
pleases. What, in this contingency, in view of
our position in the world, in the light of the
vocation of our race, are the principles for
which we should stand ?
(i) First and foremost we must bear steadily
in mind the great principle which we have
proclaimed to the world as the ground of our
intervention. We are lovers of liberty, and
when we sent our ultimatum to Germany on
account of the violation of Belgium we were
proclaiming the sacredness of Nationality ; we
were claiming the freedom of every nation and
race to realise itself, to develop and preserve
its full maturity, to make its appointed contri-


bution to the world's progress. This claim for
freedom has ever been conspicuous in our
relations with the smaller races of Europe.
When in 1821 Greece began her long strug-
gle for independence from the Ottoman yoke,
the sympathy of Great Britain took a practical
form in the operations of the British fleet.'
Then in 1832 the national spirit of Belgium
claimed separation from the alien rule of Hol-
land, and again England helped and joined in
guaranteeing her as a neutral State by a treaty
—that scrap of paper of which we have heard
a good deal in the past six months. Poland,
partitioned by the Congress of Vienna, has
constantly chafed at the disintegration of her
national unity and again British sympathy has
been with her more than once, though practical
help has been impossible. And what shall we
say of Italy ? England thrilled with the first
vibration of national unity which stirred Italy
in the forties and England stood by her with
staunch and cordial sympathy until in 1866 the
cession of Venice to the Italian monarchy com-
pleted the establishment of Italian nationalism.
Yes, we believe in a nation's right to realise
itself and however much the inexorable logic
of facts has at times deterred, and rightly
deterred us, from embroiling ourselves, yet the
sympathy has been there; the principle has
been there, and it is ours to-day. But we must


apply it all round. Germany too has her rights,
and supposing the day were ever to come when
the future integrity of Germany depended,
however indirectly, upon British policy, we are
bound by our past history and by our present
convictions to respect her national integrity
as a sacred duty. Her present insolent
pretensions must not blind us to the truth of
her Divine vocation. What we are fighting
is not the true German spirit, but a monstrous
perversion of it. We must indeed take no risks
in our efforts to ensure the future peace of the
world, and if Germany cannot be taught to
renounce her dreams of world domination by
force, we are bound to go on until we render
these dreams impossible or perish in the
attempt. But Germany also has a contribution
to offer to the higher wealth of humanity and
we must respect that contribution, if ever the
occasion arises, as no less sacred than our own.
(2) And what then ? We must not indeed
allow ourselves to be too optimistic with regard
to the final abolition of war. The Congress at
Vienna which met in 1815 after the Napoleonic
Wars, believed that it was establishing a reign
of universal peace, yet the war drum was heard
again in Europe within six years ; and even if
the menace of Germany were removed, the
possibility of war would exist in a dozen other
directions. But nevertheless it is impossible
not to hope great things at the end of this war,


and we may surely expect a far greater step
forward in the direction of peace than has ever
been taken before in the world's history. When
the war is over the world will be in a chastened
mood, and it is surely safe to predict that
nations will enter the Council Chamber this
time with a quite unexampled willingness to
listen to reason. It is true that after other
wars exhaustion and suffering have taught men
reason, but this time surely there will be more
than the mere exhaustion of war. In the first
place for a generation now the civilised world
has been growing more and more impatient of
armaments. Everywhere there is a growing
determination that, whatever happens, we will
never return to the insane, wicked, wasteful
accumulation of arms which had reached its
reductio ad absurdum in recent days. Peace
when it comes must somehow preclude for all
future time the insane folly of national competi-
tion in armaments. Militarism was beginning
to make life impossible.
And there will be another motive if I am not
mistaken, deeper than this. The last century
has seen surely a wonderful change in the
general conscience of Christians on the subject
of war. We have grown more tender —softer
if you will—towards physical suffering ; and
the sufferings of war, brought home to us now-
adays with all the vivid accuracy of the camera
and the stop press cable have a direct effect


upon us which was unknown to our fathers.
The career of Florence Nightingale stands out
as a landmark in the course of this develop-
ment. The opposition, indeed the indignation,
with which her work of mercy was at first
received among soldiers of the old school is on
record as an indication of the rapidity with
which our feelings have developed. But it is
not only on the physical side. Men are begin-
ning to feel in their conscience that war is
wrong and in this war at least the new spirit
has been unmistakably shewn. We have lost
the old self-confidence, the loud swashbuckling
spirit, which was formerly the fashion in war
time. Instead of that there are inward mis-
givings, conflicting emotions, regret mingled
with our indignation at our enemies ; we are
conscious of contradictory impulses to kill them
and shake them by the hand. In all our war
preparations there is a noble inconsistency.
We hate war, yet we are giving all we have to
prosecute it. We long for peace, yet we refuse
under present conditions even to consider it.
With one hand we are spending unheard of
millions upon engines of destruction, while
with the other we are pouring out millions to
provide amenities and mitigations of the horrors
of war. Our whole attitude is becoming more
and more illogical. The war spirit is coming
under the scrutiny of the Christian conscience ;


the animal ferocity in man is being challenged
by human compassion : and conscience and
compassion are gaining ground.
There is reason therefore to expect that the
step forward toward the abolition of war will
be a far greater one this time than ever before,
and meanwhile it may be allowable to consider
the actual measures which it may be possible
to take towards the establishment of a perma-
nent peace.
A good deal has been said already about the
establishment of a reconstructed Hague Tribu-
nal which shall be in a position to enforce its
findings by the weight of civilized public
opinion, backed by a definite international force.
It is an attractive idea, but I fear hardly
practical politics yet. International armies have
not been a success in the past, and an inter-
national force placed at the disposal of the
Hague Tribunal could be controlled by no real
authority and would never survive the jealousies,
intrigues and misunderstandings of the nations
for more than twelve months. Only if the
nations of Europe were grouped together in a
single government could such a force be per-
manently organised. But meanwhile two great
principles must somehow find expression in the
new Europe if peace is to be stable—the
principle of the sacredness of nationality and the
principle of organized co-operation between


nations. Perhaps our own Empire, of which I
spoke last week, has the one lesson to teach
which Europe most needs. This thought is
cogently expressed in an article of the current
number* of the " Round Table Review," from
which I quote :
" There are two main conditions of progress
" towards European stability and peace.
" On the one hand, all Europe must abandon
" the doctrine that any nationality has the right
"to denationalize or extirpate another: in
" other words, every nationality must have the
" right to use its own language, develop its own
" culture, and follow its own domestic way of
" life. On the other hand, it must be recognized
" that this interpretation of national right does
" not, in equity or of necessity, demand expres-
" sion in a separate sovereign State. Liberty
" is the child of law, and law has no sufficient
" sanction except that exercised within its own
" borders by a sovereign government. Even
" such a government, moreover, must be strong
" enough to maintain its right against other
" governments ; and many National States, if
" sovereignty were delimited by nationality,
" would never have that strength. It follows,
" therefore, that the British method of uniting
" nationalities freely within a larger State, which
" secures their common interests without deny-
January, 1915.


" ing their individual rights, is, in fact, the only
" sure road of progress towards a European
" polity in which the rights of nationalities will
"be securely fixed. English and Scotch in
" Great Britain, British and French in Canada,
" British and Dutch in South Africa, are all
" examples of the manner in which this may be
" achieved."
Be that as it may, we look, if not for the final
abolition of war, at least for its removal to a far
more distant background than it has ever
occupied before in the history of man. We
believe this not only on account of the outward
indications upon which I have already touched,
but because of our inward convictions as Chris-
tians. We profess to believe in prayer. We
profess to believe that the spirit of the Prince
of Peace is striving with the unruly souls of
men. Shall we not believe that the prayers of
Christ's people throughout the world are going
to bear fruit ? There are many unprecedented
things about this war, and among them is the
fact, which I think is indisputable, that Christian
people everywhere are praying with a new
spirit. They are praying, not in a spirit of
intolerance and enmity—as the evidence shews
that most of our forefathers prayed—that their
own side might win, and that Cod would abate
their enemies' pride, assuage their malice and
confound their devices, but with a new spirit of
\ •


charity and humility men are praying for a
rightful issue, for the return of the true spirit
of Christ, for a peace which shall unite the
nations for ever. This I claim is a new thing
in the inner history of war and I cannot help
feeling that we Christians will be false to our
creed if we are timid in our anticipations. Let
us realise the difficulty, let us admit that human
wilfulness and selfishness will take a long time
to conquer ; but let us beware of the folly, the
faithlessness, aye, the presumption of those who
shake their heads and say "you will never stop
war." At least the policy of Christians must
be the policy of those who mean to try.
t
*
(3) And a further obligation comes upon us,
born of what I am constrained to believe is the
besetting temptation of our race. We must
" take heed and beware of covetousness. ' It
is ever the temptation of the victorious to enrich
themselves unfairly at the expense of a helpless
foe, and times without number in Britain's
wars, both great and small, the nett result has
been increased territory or increased wealth.
The temptation will assuredly be with us again;
may God keep us from falling. We went into
this war with clean hands ; let us keep them
clean when the settlement comes. Of course
in any case, if victorious we stand to gain.
Germany's trade has had a set-back which
should open wide the door to British commerce.


#
ft
It will be our own fault if we fail to take the
opportunity. But the eager inflow of commerce
to markets unexpectedly thrown open is a
different thing altogether from the policy of
avarice which seeks to seize new markets by
political means. And moreover the question
of annexation of territory will have to be faced.
Have we not already at least our fair share of
the surface of the globe ? Can it be part of
our mission to the world to be ever seizing new
land to the exclusion of other expanding nations
who have a colonizing instinct ? I know that
a very cogent reason can be urged in each
separate case for our permanent occupation of
German territory which we have captured.
But we must not decide upon annexation
until we have looked at the matter in its largest
issues. Other nations besides Germany are
watching us. Other nations need expansion as
much as we and they see that we fail to fill the
lands we have, while there is not much room
left in the temperate parts of the earth outside
our Empire. When peace comes in sight the
nations ol the world will be watching to see
whether we are really fighting for principle as
we allege, or whether after all it is markets and
territory and power for ourselves. Let us
" take heed and beware of covetousness." Let
us lay down the sword as we have taken it up
with clean hands.


111.
It is always interesting to anticipate the
future. It may not always be profitable and
our forecasts are constantly wrong. Often we
are too optimistic and often, too, the storms we
anxiously anticipate do not break. But such
anticipations are not necessarily waste of time
and at least we ought so far to forecast the
future as to be able to face it with honest and
conscientious resolve. This has been my object
to-day and in this whole course of lectures upon
Christian patriotism. I have been conscious of
my unfitness to handle so great a subject and it
is likely enough that I have expressed opinions
with which many would disagree : but this is a
secondary matter. The one thing that really
matters is that Christian men and women should
learn to apply their Christian principles to the
world of practical life and I can think of nothing
at this moment of more crucial importance than
that the Christian conscience should make itself
felt to-day throughout the length and breadth
of Christendom. The world's future for gene-
rations, perhaps for all time, depends upon it.
The future of our own Empire depends upon it
and my appeal to you is that, over and above
all the material things that you are doing to
serve your nation and the Empire at the present
time, you should add this supreme and para-
mount contribution of your own soul , fortified


f
»
t
by prayer to God, consecrated by honest
attempt at obedience to His Will and boldly
bearing witness before the world for the ideal
of our race. If in our generation we can set
ourselves to discern the purpose of God working
in the world, if we can reverently trace the
signs of His plan for our nation and race, if
discerning His plan we can learn with whole-
hearted obedience to conform ourselves, our
national policy, to His Will ; we shall be doing
our part to safeguard the Empire and to pro-
mote the progress of the world. But the first
step is the battle of surrender in our own hearts,
for it is only through our obedience that our
spiritual vision will be cleared to discern the
Truth. This is our hope. In the sanctifying
of democracy, in the individual conversion of
the mass of the citizens to the obedience of
Christ lies the hope of our race. " Thy people
also shall be all righteous : they shall inherit
the land for ever, the branch of my planting,
the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.
A little one shall become a thousand, and a
small one a strong nation : I the Lord will
hasten it in his time."


I
:
f.


r
k
A
J|
I §
*
(
w
i
r
'
N
1


5 R a 7
r '*
k-
»'!
1
. /
►
i r
•
t
i ♦
II '
I
i■
<% V
I
V
r
# / »
;
•
i
4
vnvHisnv JO Auvuan
(V
1VN0I1VN
If
1
rfv
lr\
\£> (N _ =
o
CO
«•>
r-
i
i
■■
N
, N. M
,
T-
co
CM
O
co
r->
in
me:
VJ1
__— T*
CO


.. r ** "
i f
I
,
V & • ' , * .
'TS.
' m X
L * 1
' * • £ I
*'" '" 1 » ' '"*' '■■ '' : ''•■ 3 d
i r 1
V fl
1
H I
: '
1
iJ '•! ■■ ' ' 1
• ! *\ |
i
-M
-. .. -- '"*** — - _ i _


d
I'
1
