

EMIGRATION AND TRANSPORTATION
RELATIVELY CONSIDERED;
IN A LETTER,
DEDICATED, BY PERMISSION, TO EARL GREY.
BY MRS. CHISHOLM.
LONDON:
JOHN OLLIVIER, 59, PALL MALL.
1847.




TO THE
EIGHT HON. EARL GREY,
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
MY LORD,
If the subject which I am desirous of advocating
be not of sufficient importance to plead my apology
for thus addressing you, there is nothing which I could
say that would make the act excusable.
At a season of such unparalleled misery and distress
—at a time when England groans with the burden of
her redundant population—the subject which I have
chosen increases in importance and responsibility. The
system so long pursued of peopling Australia with pri-
soners, naturally raised strong prejudices against free
emigration, and which nothing but the extraordinary
success and prosperity of her people could have re-
moved; but the period has now arrived when a free
passage to these Colonies is eagerly sought for by honest
men and respectable families. It must be left to com-
mon sense to solve the financial question, as to whether
it is better to endeavour to support the overburdened
labour market of the United Kingdom by the instru-
mentality of Government works which are not required,
n 3


and by an augmentation of the poor rates; or whether it
would not be more in accordance with the sound spirit
of political economy to give a free passage to her Ma-
jesty’s Colonies, to such eligible families as should vo-
luntarily come forward and solicit this boon.
Several thousand applications have been made to me
for a passage to New South Wales and Port Phillip,
and a great proportion of the applicants have inti-
mated their wishes to me at the requisition of their
relatives there; and were a free passage granted, num-
bers, instead of being as they are now, an encumbrance
to the State, or having to be supported by poor rates,
the produce of the industry of others, would shortly in
themselves become an industrious population, and
would contribute to the commercial revenue of Great
Britain annually from 7/• to 10/. per head.
The cost of emigration to New South Wales is com-
puted at 18/. per head for every adult; and if we sup-
pose GOOO persons so provided for at the cost of the
Government, we have a charge of 108,000/., which
would be raised at 89| per cent, (the rate of the recent
loan for Ireland), in
Stock 3 per Cent. Consols .£120,670
4 years’ interest thereon 14,480
Total cost £135,150
On the other hand, it will be conceded that the con-
tribution of every adult labourer, —indeed of all above
fourteenyears of age, may be taken at the rate of 4/. *Js.
per head per annum; the return which would therefore
be made to the general revenue of the Colony by these
6000 emigrants during the last eight months of the


first year, (allowing four months for the passage,) would
amount to £17,400
and for the remaining three years to 78,300
Total receipts in 4 years £95,700
The number which I have named, my Lord, must not
be considered as the total number our Australian Colo-
nies could provide for, as it is merely intended to show
the economy of emigration even on a small scale. The
demand for labour in New South Wales, Port Phillip,
and South Australia, is urgent and increasing. Is it
not a lamentable thought, then, my Lord, that deaths
should daily result from starvation among British
subjects, while in this valuable colony good wheat
is rotting on the ground for the want of hands to
gather it in;—that tens of thousands of fine sheep,
droves after droves, thousands upon thousands of fat
cattle are annually slaughtered there and “ boiled
down in order to be rendered into tallow for the
European market, while the vast refuse is cast into
the fields to be devoured by dogs and. pigs, and yet
no effort is made by England to provide for her strug-
gling people by a humane system of colonization. Let
me then, in the name of suffering humanity, entreat
of your Lordship to take into mature and immediate
consideration, this demand for labour—this fearful waste
of human food, and withal the vast capabilities of our Aus-
tralasian Colonies, (nearly equal in size to all Europe);
and let me hope that the result of your Lordship’s
deliberation, and that of other friends of humanity, will
be to give to some of our starving peasantry a passage


to a country admirably adapted to the hard-working
man. lam aware that one Noble Lord has said, that
we have land enough to support our population, and
from a national feeling of vanity I wish to believe this
true. Waste lands are to be cultivated by the poor!
An undertaking which our capitalists do not deem a safe
investment, is proposed as a wise measure for a half-
famished population ! To give a poor man the chance
of getting good land, is a proposal that has never been
made; surely, it can never be said that one of the
strongest impediments in the way of emigration, is the
dread that the poor would too soon become rich ? I am
alive to the fact, that to all applications for a free passage
to the Australian Colonies the constant reply is, “ No
funds.” This is true; but if land be not put up for
sale, land cannot be sold; consequently there are no
funds. When land was required by the large capitalists,
or men merely land jobbers, land was put up for sale,
and funds were raised; aye, even when it was known
that gambling was being carried on to a frightful ex-
tent, land was put up and sold, when men bought on
chance with accommodation paper; nor did the sales
cease until the Colonial Banks rocked like cradles, and
the Insolvent Court was open. But, fortunately for
the Colony, this money was expended by Sir George
Gipps, its Governor, in the transport of emigrants;
and the moderate rate of wages for labour caused
thereby, enabled the colonists to recover from the panic
in an incredibly short space of time. The love of pos-
sessing land is so strong a feeling in man’s bosom,
that it requires caution on the part of a Government
lest it should be charged with feeding a spirit of thrift-


less speculation. It appears to me, however, that a
very safe principle to go upon, is to meet the demand
of the money market. If this were done, the cry of
“ No funds” would soon cease, for the labour market of
New South Wales at this time is positively glutted with
the small capitalists ; but at the mere mention of a farm,
the cry immediately is, “We should have Ireland the
Second.” Much do I wish to see this groundless dread
removed; the absurdity of which, I am certain, your
Lordship has too much discernment to participate in.
To use the words of an enlightened yeoman of Austra-
lian birth, “Where the nature of every thing is to
spread, more room is always required.” The poorest
man in the Colony would not rest content with ten
acres, although my experience justifies me in stating
that ten acres of good land are sufficient to enable a poor
man to supply his family abundantly with all the neces-
saries of life.
The overwhelming and increasing burden of the re-
dundant population of Great Britain, particularly of
Ireland, seems to paralyze the stoutest heart. If the
position of the starving peasantry of Ireland, and some
parts of Scotland, is looked upon by the eye of humanity
and benevolence, a feeling heart is overcome by the
apparent difficulty. I say apparent, for if this excess
be viewed simply as a matter of business, the difficulty
will only appear imaginary; notwithstanding, there is
work to be done, sufferings to be relieved, and energies
to be roused.
I make every effort I can to banish from my mind
the sufferings of the people. I endeavour in every
possible manner to look calmly on this mass of misery


and woe, in order that I may the more clearly point out
a remedy for an existing evil, and which is gathering
strength every day. Whether I look to Ireland or to
Scotland, the first view is one of a very harrowing cha-
racter, —ghastly beings obstruct my vision; and when I
consider the modes of relief which have been adopted
to remedy this appalling misery—the anxious solicitude
of the paternal Government—the long debates in both
Houses of Parliament, —the subject increases in diffi-
culty, and magnifies in proportion. But if I look on
this mass of human beings in a financial point of view—
at the immense amount of dormant capital involved
therein—at the millions of consumers, —the matter as-
sumes a more simple form. It is at once evident that
the consumers must become producers before any good
can be done.
The experience which I have gained, as a practical and
unpaid agent in the labour market for many years in New
South Wales, has enabled me, when I look on a mass
of my fellow creatures at home, to consider their finan-
cial value; —the poor who know me will be aware, that
my taking a pecuniary view of this matter is not from
a disrespectful feeling to them, but from my strong
desire to advance their interest and improve their con-
dition. At this moment, my Lord, let me ask you the
pecuniary value of an able labourer in Ireland. One
poor man, in writing to me, says, <c It’s easier for a gen-
tleman to get into the House of Commons, than for a
poor man to obtain B d. a day.” Another writes :
“ There is nothing here but hunger, misery, and death;
all I can earn gives me only one meal a day, and the
little ones would starve but for English charity.”


I need not trespass on your Lordship’s time by
quoting extracts; for it is a well known and deplorable
fact, that all that England can do, or the most humane
landlords can attempt, will never be able to provide for
the superabundant population of Ireland and some
parts of Scotland; consequently the severe pressure
must be removed, ere any permanent good can be
effected. We cannot by any Act of Parliament set up a
boundary to God’s providence, and say, “So far shall
you go, and no further;” nor can free subjects of Great
Britain be confined to any particular locality. While
England gives a free home to the persecuted and af-
flicted of all nations—one of England’s greatest glories
—she cannot exclude those whose misfortune is their
poverty, conjoined to a strong desire to better their
condition by the sweat of their brow. The public feeling
of this country is too humane, too just, to withhold
their sympathy, their aid, and their compassion, from
an unhappy race who are struggling to prolong life.
Are wretched starving beings to die without an effort ?
Are the ports of England to be closed against our own
subjects and our brethren in search of bread for their
famished children ? Nature and common sense point
out the right path to pursue : “ When there is no room
for thee in one city, flee to another.” But the present
circumstances of the poor in England can ill bear the
effects of having this vast body of people thrown into
the English labour market; wisdom should therefore
interpose before this dangerous collision takes place, or
wages will be reduced by this competition to so low an
ebb, that a poor man in England will be quite unable
to support his family by his labour; —poor-rates will
then increase, and crime will augment in fearful proper


tion. Oh ! if England would but take advantage of her
outlets —her Colonies—how much misery would be
relieved, and how much crime would be prevented!
I will venture here to furnish your Lordship with an
estimate of the Colonial value of a man able and willing
to work, either in New South Wales, Port Phillip, or
South Australia.
I will take on presumption a man with his wife and
family consisting of four children, say ages from 4 to 12
years. As a shepherd or farm labourer, he and his wife
would readily be engaged for £25. per annum, a rate
considerably lower than the present standard of wages,
with a weekly ration as follows: —
20lb. Flour at 2 d. would be in the year £8 13 4
20lb. Meat, 2c? 8 13 4
4lb. Sugar, 3 \d 3 0 8
£lb. Tea,2s 2 12 0
House rent-free —say the value per week
Is. 6c? 3 18 0
Water 6c? 1 6 0
Wood Is. 6c?. 3 18 0
Wages 25 0 0
The amount total in the year would be £57 1 4
Consequently his labour —i. e. his capital —calculating
at the rate of five per cent., is worth £1,150; so that
an individual arriving in the Colony as a small capitalist,
must have eleven hundred and fifty pounds sterling,
before he can procure for himself the same amount of
comforts as a common labourer who had arrived without
a farthing!
If we thus take 6,000, at that value, the amount of


dormant capital would come to £342,400 per annum,
and of this one third would be expended in articles of
British manufacture. It is needless then to comment
upon the advantages which would accrue from this idle
capital, were it brought into active operation. Were
even a moderate portion of the tens of thousands of the
now starving poor in Ireland and in the Northern parts
of Scotland, but to find a footing there, how vast would
be the capital which they would produce, instead of
consuming, as they do now, the capital of others.
But, it may be asked, were emigration to be resumed,
how could the millions be provided for ? The question
indeed is made so difficult and mystified a matter of
by theorists in general, that I must at once come to a
practical conclusion, viz.—temper the supply to the
demand. Labour, it may be seen, will create capital;
that capital will bring out emigrants, and find employ-
ment for them; thus a self-creating and a co-operating
system would, in a shorter time than is calculated upon,
provide for hundreds of thousands. The late consumer
in Europe now becomes a producer in Australia; he finds
a remunerative return for his labour; he transforms it
into capital, and that capital enables him in his turn to
employ labour.
With respect, however, to public works, the political
economist ought immediately, at the first sound of the
Government hammer, to call out “ stop.” When such
a mode is resorted to for the relief of the poor, it
may be considered as a sure index that something is
radically wrong —that there is something that requires
looking after —a something which public works cannot
remedy. It would be as easy to restore confidence to


an insolvent bank by an issue of more paper, as for the
present pressure of the labour market to be remedied
by such a factitious channel of employment. Any at-
tempt to relieve such distress by unproductive works,
must eventually increase the evil sought to be removed.
At a season of calamity like the present one, it would
be cheaper, if economy were the object, to feed the
people, than to employ them on expensive public
works. If public works are required, let the public
pay a fair price for them, and give employment to those
men who understand the work to be performed. Pauper
works are ruinous to all concerned; —they lower the
value of the good workman, and tempt men to abandon
agricultural pursuits. Public works have a legion of
interested advocates. Place hunters like public works ;
all idlers like public works; inferior workmen like
public works, for they pick up some knowledge from
men who have served a regular apprenticeship under
experienced masters. On the first pressure in the
labour market, the worst class suffer first, namely, idle
and inferior workmen; —next, good men with large fami-
lies; —and finally, theyoung and able men. The sufferings
of the above classes force into the crowd, from motives
of self-preservation, the small capitalists ; if they did not
plead poverty, they would soon be poor indeed: their
relations would, as they have often told me, “ eat them
up, if they did not put on a poor face.”
If, my Lord, emigration were to commence now to
the Australian Colonies, due care should be taken to
grant this boon equitably; and, although I look upon
the separation of families as one of the greatest evils
connected with our present system of emigration, yet.


under the difficulties of the case, it may be to the inte-
rest of all concerned, since the whole cannot procure
a passage at the same time, that heavy families should
be permitted to send two or three of their elder and best
disposed children at once, —say from the ages of 22, 20,
and 18; and who, on an average, would receive £2O per
annum with rations and lodgings. These, assuming they
would be receiving wages six months previous to the
arrival of their parents and the younger branches of the
family, would be in a position to help them on their
arrival in the Colony.
The course so long adopted by Her Majesty’s
Government in sending convicts in such numbers to
these Colonies, makes it almost impossible to introduce
the subject of emigration without touching upon the
system of transportation ; they have been so amalga-
mated together, that viewing the one, we cannot over-
look the other. It is not, believe me, my Lord, in the
spirit of captiousness that I venture thus to take up the
subject; I intensely feel the solemnity and the re-
sponsibility of the question; I view prospectively the
fate of thousands of my fellow creatures as being
involved in the mode which may be now pursued,
whether for good or for evil. While, then, I tremblingly
contemplate the progress of the deliberations upon this
weighty matter, it is my painful conviction, that there
is not a more certain, or a more speedy way for a poor
man just now of obtaining a free passage to the Colo-
nies of New South Wales, than the present plan of
transportation ; it is, in fact, an inducement to commit a
crime, in order to gain admission into a jail, as a prepara-
tory step to his being ultimately transferred to one of those


establishments which have been called, by a very high
authority, “the portal to the Colonies;” his passage is
then paid, and he is landed as a freeman upon the Aus-
tralian shores. To illustrate the feeling abroad upon this
point, I must again venture, my Lord, to quote from
one of my humble authorities. A poor Scotchman, in
expressing to me his anxious desire to emigrate, calls
this “a very sore temptation.” If transportation to our
Colonies be continued, or to some parts renewed, the
system ought to be maturely weighed; so that a retribu-
tive justice to the public, a reformatory process to the
offender, and a certain renumerative return to the coun-
try, may be kept in view. Morality and philanthropy
should supervise the working of it; while a moiety
or so of the value of his labour should be guaranteed to
the poor prisoner as he advanced in the path of honest
industry. If such should be the resumption of trans-
portation, the assignment system should on no account
be revived; the wealthy benefit thereby, while the poor
suffer. As for the poor prisoners themselves, the best
disposed men often have to endure most; self-interest,
alas! but too often controls the fate of the poor convict,
and prolongs his bondage year after year; until hard
work, unpaid service, and the bitterly contemptuous
invectives of overbearing and petty authority, break
down the most resolute and best intentioned mind. If,
my Lord, we trace his history further, we shall not
unfrequently either find him driven by desperation and
a galling servitude to Norfolk Island; or, after his
twenty years’ hard labour, cast off as useless without a
penny, and begging his way hundreds of miles, to seek,
now for the fewness of his days, a resting place for his


woe-worn body and oppressed mind in the Benevolent
Asylum. It is true there are many bright exceptions,
and I could name them; —masters who have done jus-
tice to their assigned servants, got them their liberty,
and helped them on; but, alas! the preponderance is
too great on the other side. Mercenary pursuit is the
prevailing passion of man ; what will he not do to gain
this object, and what chance has the poor assigned
prisoner with this bar in his way ? His case becomes
the more hopeless when he finds himself in the vast
wilds of the interior, shut out from the observing eye
and the strong sympathy of the public.
Transportation, as it is conducted in the present day,
cannot be viewed as a punishment; for, to give a man
disposed to work (supposing he is a common labourer)
a free passage to any of the Australian Colonies, is equal
to placing the interest of JllsO at his disposal! A
highly respectable gentleman at Port Phillip, and who
is an advocate for the renewal of transportation, in
speaking of that splendid Colony, calls it u the Rogues
Paradise.” Intimately acquainted as I am with the
feelings of the emancipists and “ ticket-of-leave men,”
I am compelled, in common justice to a British public,
to state, that the general feeling amongst them is one of
deep gratitude for having been sent to a Colony wherein
they can procure abundance of food and every reason-
able comfort. Often, my Lord, have I heard the
emancipist, at family prayer, return thanks to Almighty
God that his children were not in a country where they
might be tempted by hunger to perpetrate crime. Any
attempt, therefore, to deter men from the commission
of crime by speaking of the horrors of transportation
under the present “exile” system, is like frightening


little babies to sleep by telling them “the boo-man will
take them away.” In making this admission in favour
of the Colony, supported, as I can corroborate it,
with the voluntary statements of the Australians,
emigrants, ticket-of-leave men, and emancipists, I
make no allusion to those unhappy men who have
become victims to an ill-devised system ; men whose
hearts had been hardened by harshness ; whose
domestic feelings had been destroyed, until they have
sunk into a state more like beasts than human
beings. Their deplorable condition has at length
been made a subject of humane consideration and
enquiry by Her Majesty’s Government. In all the
systems, and every system which has hitherto been
tried, I do not, as far as my observation has gone, see
much to approve; on the whole, I am bound to say,
that the ease with which men can earn a living honestly,
has done more for the reformation of the prisoner than
any other observable cause. One of the most demo-
ralizing evils of the old system, has been the separation
of the men from all domestic influence—rending for
ever asunder the links of nature. The spirit of British
justice never contemplated to sever for ever those whom
“God had joined together;” nor is it in accordance
with the dictates of religion and pure morality, that
such a state of things should exist, as to doom men to
be for years incarcerated together by hundreds, like
a menagerie of wild beasts, or to live a solitary hopeless
life in the bush; but so it is, thousands upon thousands
are thus victimized, and destined to undergo all the
frightful and deteriorating effects of this more than
savage life.
Painful experience then has, by this time, exempli-


fied to Her Majesty’s Government the frightful conse-
quences attending the aggregation of so many men in a
state of close and galling bondage in Norfolk Island,
Port Arthur, &c. If those unhappy victims to a prin-
ciple promulgated but too successfully by a modern
popular author, and who, I hesitate not to say, iniqui-
tously tried to depreciate and thwart the decrees of
Providence in the propagation of the human race, be so
far sunk in the scale of humanity as to give but little
prospect of their reformation ; yet I have every reason
to hope, that their truly lamentable condition may
excite your Lordship’s commiseration, and dispose you
to co-operate with those good Christians and philan-
thropists who in all faith believe that while there is
hope of heaven, there is hope on earth; so that those
who have escaped—and I am happy to think, vast
numbers have escaped—this ‘ evil communication,’ and
have gained through the force of an innate virtue, and
the interposition of a merciful providence, a respectable
position in the ranks of social life; may receive from
the hands of Her Majesty’s Government that moral
consideration, that degree of justice, .which their
domestic wrongs require.
No individual, perhaps, has had so many opportu-
nities as I have had of becoming acquainted with the
people of New South Wales. Wandering for hundreds
of miles in search of suitable homes and eligible em-
ployment for the emigrant families and ticket-of-leave
men, I had been accustomed at nightfal to find shelter
at the nearest hut; as one of the family I have shared
in the hospitality of all classes, whether rich or poor;
consequently, I have had opportunities of gaining an
c


intimate knowledge of the peculiarities and feelings of
the people, and these justify what might otherwise
appear uncalled for—my recording here my humble
testimony to the sterling worth and exemplary con-
duct, as a body, of the emancipists of New South
Wales. At a time when slander outruns truth and
charity, as regards the moral character of that people,
I must honestly tell your Lordship, that as parents,
their extreme—nay, I must call it, nervous anxiety,
regarding the moral and religious welfare of their
children;—the efforts they make to educate themthe
miles they travel to attend a place of worship on the
Sabbath j—their deep sympathy for the unfortunate;—
their Christian liberality and charity; their open-hearted
hospitality, have endeared numbers of them to my
remembrance. Amongst this class it may be truly
said, ‘ the schoolmaster is abroad/ I only wish that
the noble Lord who has immortalized this saying, had
the domestic opportunities I have had of witnessing
the efforts made by this class. When engaged at one
time in providing for some emigrant families in the
interior, I was accommodated at a farm-house, where
both the heads of the family happened to have been
sent out by Her Majesty’s Government; neither could
read or write. Here I found a man engaged as
teacher; certainly not the person you would wish to
see trusted with the tuition of a promising young
family of boys and girls. Their parents, a few weeks
previous to my seeing them, had sent a few bushels of
wheat to market, just to find them tea and sugar, until
they could go to Sydney to sell their regular crop;
they sold to the amount of 355.; sixteen shillings of


this sum were expended on books and stationery for
their children. The books were handed to me by the
mother, who remarked; “ they cost a good bit, but we
could not do better we our money.” One of the
books was the life of ; the hero of this tale dis-
tinguished himself by his prodigies of adroit exploits
in Newgate and its environs, —a wild story of facts and
fiction. I remarked that I had been informed it was
a dangerous book; that it made what was bad look like
good ; was particularly enticing to youths of a certain
turn of mind. “Now, do you say so? How glad Jack
will be you called—what a Providence!” and before I
could even be aware of her intention, it was in flames
on their hearth-stone. It never entered into her mind
it could be exchanged, re-sold; that my opinion might
be wrong; but, at the mere mention of apprehended
danger, the book was destroyed. It was dashed into
the fire, as if a venomous reptile had clung to a part of
her garments. Is not this, my Lord, a bright example
for imitation ? I knew an emancipist father refuse his
daughter in marriage to a respectable emigrant, until
he had paid some debts he had contracted before he
emigrated; he was willing to pay the sum out of the
portion he intended for his daughter, remarking, “ Their
prosperity would be greater, when no man could say
they had wronged him.” This scrupulous regard for
property was entertained by a man who was once a
notorious London pick-pocket. e A pick-pocket!’ yes,
we must not scorn or think lightly of those who have
returned from the path of evil to the course of recti-
tude. I crave your Lordship’s patience a little longer;
for while I love to linger on those little domestic
c 2


incidents—those traits and fruits of returning virtue,
and like to point them out to others as matters deserv-
ing their pious contemplation, I wish to bring to your
Lordship’s notice one of those facts which ought to
appear to the moralist and to the philanthropist, as one
of paramount interest. Shortly before I left Sydney,
the father of a large family came a journey of upwards
of a hundred miles to see me. The object of his mission
was a serious one. If, my Lord, you are pressed for
time, lay down this letter, for the prayer of his request
deserves a tranquil moment; one that I would like you
to think about, when, having for a time bid adieu to
the cares of State, you seek the solace of domestic
society; his prayer is one that I would like to cling
about your heart, as one of your own household honey-
suckles. It must not meet you at your office; but
you must take it with you wherever you go. I would
fain obtain for it a clinging place in your recollection,
that when you think of your own dear ties, the wish of
the emancipist father should present itself to your
remembrance. He sought a wife for his son ! a girl of
good fame ! “ If,” said he, “ you could only get me a
good girl; if I could see my son married to a good
woman, then I should die in peace.”
You have heard enough, my Lord, of the horrors
that have resulted from the Penal system; a system
which has doomed thousands and tens of thousands to
the demoralizing state of bachelorism. Calmly consider
the evil which has thus been created, and in common
justice to the virtuous part of the community there,
remedy it, by giving a due encouragement to a
respectable system of female emigration. Think you,


my Lord, that the most abandoned of the female race
are fit companions for the children of such men; a class
of men who are, perhaps, more sensitively alive than
any other to connecting their families in marriage to
doubtful characters. No one more fully appreciates
virtue than the reformed. I repeat, what I have
frequently stated, that to send abandoned women to
our Colonies is an act of cruelty to them. Few, indeed,
will be sought for as wives; respectable families will
not receive them as servants. If Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment be really desirous of seeing a well-conducted com-
munity spring up in these Colonies, the social wants of
the people must be considered. If the paternal Govern-
ment wish to entitle itself to that honoured appellation,
it must look to the materials it may send as a nucleus
for the formation of a good and a great people.
For all the clergy you can despatch, all the
schoolmasters you can appoint, all the churches you
can build, and all the books you can export, will never
do much good, without what a gentleman in that Co-
lony very appropriately called “ God’s police”—wives
and little children—good and virtuous women. Oh! it
is frightful to look upon the monster evil which our
penal policy has entailed upon that country, and which
the Emigration Rules have in some degree cherished.
It is full time that a subject of such high national and
religious importance should occupy the attention of all
well-thinking men, and that the regulations affecting emi-
grants should not be dictated by those who deem cheap
labour as the chief consideration. To grasp at this, young
children are placed in a position which may separate them
from their parents; and aged parents (if they are even


only 40), are torn from their natural supporters as age in-
creases upon them. Children in the Colonies are found
without teachers ; for this class are not looked upon as
eligible emigrants. Flocks, again, at times without a
clergyman. This system is one that demands a remedy.
If for a moment the religious and moral claims of an
infant Colony are not regarded as of sufficient impor-
tance to make the Government do what appears to be
a plain duty, the political consequences of this neglect
may become one day of a very serious and irremediable
character. Ignorance amongst the poor is a national
source of lamentation ; but ignorance among a moneyed
class is a much more serious evil. I have often looked
upon it as a cause of regret and apprehension, to find
many men of substance, in a country so constituted and
situated as New South Wales is, in a manner totally
ignorant of many subjects of high political importance ;
and it has frequently occurred to me, that lectures
occasionally in the various districts, at convenient
seasons and localities, explanatory of the laws and
constitution of England, might be attended with great
advantage. To understand and appreciate the political
blessings we enjoy requires a certain degree of know-
ledge. Men often throw away what they would cherish
if its intrinsic value were known to them; children will
throw away a diamond for a sugar-plum ; and ignorant
and uninformed men are, in the hands of a designing
politician, but children of a larger growth; he gives
them acorns to quarrel about, while he tears up the oak.
I shall now venture to submit for your Lordship’s
perusal a few simple statements. (They will be found
in an Appendix.) They are the voluntary information


of the people of New South Wales, —the verbatim lan-
guage and sentiments of the respective individuals,
written as they spoke it. The statements here given
are not picked ones, but showing a fair average of the
prosperity which has attended the persevering industry
of a very humble class of British subjects. The suc-
cessful results of their assiduous labour will, I hope,
convince your Lordship and others, that a free passage
to Australia, under the present penal system, is the
highest premium on crime that a State can hold out,
and the best reward to industry a State can bestow on
a free labourer.
The evidence which I now beg to tender for your
Lordship’s consideration, may not prove the less inte-
resting, when I mention, that every statement of con-
sequence is attested by the relators, by some little family
token or incident known to their relatives at home, with
the design that this should stand as a guarantee to those
here that the statements in question are not fictitious,
and that their friends might place confidence in my
opinion or advice, should they wish to emigrate. Be-
lieving that the poor would not inadvertently or wil-
lingly deceive their own relations, as it would only entail
trouble upon themselves, I deemed that it would be an
insult to their general character for veracity, to have
these their narratives certified by the signatures of ma-
gistrates and others. Let a man stand or fall by his
own testimony; their own relatives ought to know
them best.
The collection of this information (a small portion of
which I now publish) was attended with great labour


and considerable expense. I had to contend with
difficulties of no ordinary character; but the hope that my
efforts might prove useful to the friends of a national
system of Colonization, cheered me on in my lengthened
journeys in visiting the emigrants and others at their
homes. The discontent that at one time existed in Syd-
ney, by the immigrants imagining, without considering
the fluctuations in the labour market, that they had a
claim on the Government for the rate of wages named
in the Hon. the Land Emigration Commissioners 5
Circular, caused much embarrassment to the local
Government at the time, and made it extremely
difficult to influence the immigrants for their own
good, or to induce them to move into the interior.
It then occurred to me that if authentic information
could be obtained from the small settlers and emi-
grants to circulate amongst their own friends, much
good might result from it. This plan met the ap-
proval of Sir George Gipps and Lord Stanley, then
in office, who did me the honor, in his Despatch, No. 84,
31st May, 1844, to His Excellency, to convey to me
his thanks for the services which I had rendered to the
emigrants. At the time of taking these Statements,
it was understood that I was to give publicity to
them, so that they might be circulated amongst the
relatives and friends of those who had furnished the in-
formation. At the same time I was earnestly requested
to visit Scotland and Ireland, in order to render all
the aid in my power towards the re-union of families*
The destitution in the Highlands—the appalling misery
in Ireland—made me defer doing this, as I was told


that the circulation of the facts —the knowledge of the
prosperity of their friends there —would create too
strong a feeling in favour of emigration; but as the
mass is now moving to Canada and the United States,
the separation of families will in hundreds of cases be-
come final, if I delay longer the object of my mission,
for the interests of thousands are involved in this infor-
mation. To those who are overwhelmed with distress,
and who wish to emigrate, even a distantprospect of better
things may tend to cheer and support them under their
present weight of want and woe; at all events, there is
nothing to justify, or any longer excuse, my silence.
The demand for labour in all the Australian Colonies is
now urgent;—w’ages are rising beyond what the flock-
masters, with a prospect of a fall in wool, can meet; —
this will make the London agents and capitalists exert
their interest in favour of emigration. The system of
relief now under deliberation may dispose the Scotch
proprietors and Irish landlords to give their attention
to the subject, and induce them to co-operate with the
Government in organizing and carrying out a sound
and humane system of Colonization.
The cost of emigration to Australia in comparison to
that of Canada, is always brought in favour of the
latter Colony; but if that cost is to be estimated
by results, it will be found it is not so great; for it
must be borne in mind that the value of consumption
of British produce is greater in the Australian Colonies
than in any other part of the world. It is estimated
that the consumption of British manufacture, stands as
follows, per head:


United States
£ s. d.
... 0 5 0
... 0 1 5
0 0 8
... 0 0 6
Colonies generally
North America
West Indies
1 14 6
1 5 0
2 17 6
3 2 9
Australia, New South Wales ..
.. £7 to £10.
And as a further reason why no prejudice against
Australia ought to exist on the plea of expense, I must
further beg to call your Lordship’s notice to the fact,
that supposing 100 emigrants were sent to Australia, 99
remain there, —cost of passage,
At £lB each, would be £IBOO.
If 100 emigrants are sent to Canada, at a cost of £6
each, 35 only remain there; 65 go over to the United
States, so that the cost ought to be put down at 600/.
for the 35 emigrants who absolutely remain there, in
which proportion 99 would cost 1697 L ? 80 the
difference is by no means of the extent alleged, or
taken for granted.
The subject, then, of resuming emigration to the
Australian Colonies, is one which imperatively demands
the mature and immediate deliberation of the Imperial
Parliament, or a species of slavery will creep into our
British possessions. Gentlemen, and men of large
capital, having their all at stake, must and will have
labour from some where. The neglect attending the
urgent want of the labour market did much in former


days to rivet the chains of slavery. Free emigration and
slavery cannot for any length of time have being in the
same country; the presence of one gradually does away
with the other; it is the safe, the cheap, the natural
mode pointed out by Providence; and though it may
not be considered prudent policy to enrich a rival State,
still the sacred cause of humanity pleads strongly in
this case. We hear the wailings of our fellow beings,
and their aspirations for the full right of man, liberty.
Emigration, then, systematically and judiciously pur-
sued, to Canada, will do much for the slaves in the
United States; it will loosen the links, by lowering the
value, of slave labour; and thereby draw out one of the
strongest staples, which now holds fast in accursed
thraldom a large portion of the human race.
I have the honor to be,
MY LORD,
Your obedient humble Servant,
CAROLINE CHISHOLM.
London, June 17, 1847.




Appendir.
VOLUNTARY INFORMATION OF THE PEOPLE OF
NEW SOUTH WALES; COLLECTED BY MRS.
CHISHOLM.
Statement No. 1, —John O , Commercial Road,
London.
I arrived at Sydney in 1833 ; lama married man, have
two children; I am now working at the sugar manu-
factory at Canterbury, five miles from Sydney, earn about
£2 a week. I bought nearly three acres of land at Can-
terbury, for which I paid at the rate of £IOO the acre ;
have nine cottages my own, built them myself; they are
rented at two shillings a week each ; I have a garden. I
have 47 head of cattle running upon Mr. Cooper’s land;
our agreement is, he is to have half the increase. Ido
not know the number I have now—it’s five years they
have been on his run. When I arrived in Sydney I had
only one penny. When I sailed from Liverpool I had
only this penny. I tell you the whole truth. I worked
hard when I arrived, as bricklayer, plasterer, or any work
I could get. I have two brothers, they are working at
Fairlie and Brothers’ sugar manufactory. Commercial
Road; their names are Thomas and Michael; also my
brother-in-law, Thomas Anderson; the name of my sis-
ter’s (Mary) husband I forget; they all work under the
same firm. I am at this present time earning £2. 5s a
week; have been offered £3 to leave, but shall keep where
I am. I have 700 acres of land on the north shore, this
is now let at £2O a year; I paid five shillings an acre for


it. My brothers live about four roods from the manu-
factory, which stands at the corner of Church Lane. The
captain of the ship, the carpenter, and all the sailors will
remember me by the mention of the penny piece. A copper
rivet was wanted for the wheel, and the carpenter said,
“ What, amongst so many, have you not one penny piece ?”
Now mine, do you see, was in my pocket all the time; but
not to seem poor for the honour of the Irish, I ran down
below and then returns, handed him the penny piece ; says
I wm one do you ?” Well, he cuts a piece olf, and then
hands me back the penny; and I have it now, and the bit is
off, do you see. Now I have money enough, do you see, and
my wife makes you a present of the very penny piece for
luck to your family. Now be sure you tell my brothers
to be wise, and not delay. There is no mistaking the
token I had sent them. My brother Mick lives in Plumer’s
Row, Commercial Road. Now be sure you see them, and
do all you can to get them out.
Sydney, 10th February, 1846.
C. C.
Statement No. 2.— Ellen W , London.
Mrs. Chisholm knows exactly how lam situated. lam
married, making a comfortable living. My sister lives at
No. , Westminster, My friends have written for me
to go home, but I think it would be better for them to
come here j and if I was to go home, it would be with the
intention of coming out again. As a token I send by
Mrs. Chisholm a dress for my sister, just to shew my
feeling.
C. C.
Statement No. 3. — Widow D , Perthshire.
It’s a good mistress 1 have, Mrs. W , long may
she be spared. Don’t say I am married. £2O and
double rations, milk and every thing here, done real
well. Am with Mrs. J. W , say how happy I am
with this noble lady; say every body can’t expect to


find the same luck ; she is from the city of Glsagow. It
would be thought strange at home how I should get mar-
ried, but it’s two or three times I might have been mar-
ried. I was a widow from twenty-two. It’s very remark-
able, but it was my luck. I am sure I’ll recommend my
master and mistress, it’s good and kind they have been to
me. I fancy, I need not care because they are rich, but
there is one Mr. , of Glasgow,—but no, I need not
care, he is a great gentleman,—it’s long since I saw him, —
no, it’s the poorer relations at Perth I would send to; let
them know it’s a good country to live in, —at home it was
a hard difficulty,—l could no more live now than I could
fly on the living I had at home ; the living was coarse at
home j here meat, bread, milk, eggs, butter, cheese, in
plenty, sugar and tea as much as I can use : plenty milk,
plenty cows. I never need take a hoe in my hands now
to hoe turnips ; it’s not much toil with what I get. You
will give a long description of this place. It’s a very good
country for good girls, —at home they toil for sixpence a
day. Fine country this, good wages, higher than £lO and
£ls a year. They don’t toil much for it, they win it with
all manner of ease, compared to what they get in Scotland.
Mention this, my Lady, and, if you please, mem, read it
over that I may see it’s correct—That’s very nice, very
nice, mem—that will do. How astonished they will be
when they hear I am married !
New South Wales, 19th Dec. 1845.
C. C.
Statement No. 4. —George B , London.
I have been working for my own benefit about ten years
in this colony, am single,—it’s sharp work to meet with a
wife here,—rent a farm, pay £lO a year for twenty acres j
have a dray (waggon), and a good team of bullocks, ten
cows, twenty all sizes; make a good living; come from
London, parish of Cripplegate. My parents lived at Lon-
don Wall, opposite a chapel; my father was a carpenter,


and my brother Thomas was apprenticed to a man named
Robinson, a carpenter, —he lived in Ford or Fort Street,
Cripplegate. William was a shoemaker. I had also two
other brothers, Edward and John; two sisters, Ruth and
Martha. Oh, if they will come, write to me, and as sure
as I receive your letter I’ll go to Sydney to meet them. If
Edward would come I would give him a home, and go to
meet him, or, indeed, anyone of them. I would put them
in the way of doing. Never heard from one of them. I
left England in 1827- There is a living, and an easy one,
to be got in this country. Of course a man must work,
but it is easier to make out a living than at home. Have
not long left Sydney. See, I have purchased for myself
one chest of tea, one bag of sugar, one cwt. of salt, three
good shirts, a new hat, jacket, and other clothing. Have
just taken a load of wool to Sydney, 30 cwt., distance 190
miles ; got seven shillings the cwt.; was three weeks on
the journey. Have now on my dray as return carriage
one ton at four shillings the cwt.; it’s not so far I have to
take it. Manage my farm, and go three times a year to
Sydney. It takes me about £3 to clear all road expenses
up and down.
Emu Swamp, on the road to Bathurst,
19th Dec., 1845.
C. C.
Statement No. s. —Ellen W , London.
I arrived in 1833 ; I am married to George W ;
my maiden name was T ; we are doing well ; I
wish to have out my sister, she was apprenticed from St.
Giles’s parish; she now belongs to Islington, where you
will most likely hear of her. Her mistress’s name is Cox ;
she did live at No. 12, Pleasant Row, Islington. Her
name is Emma; she is about twenty-two years of age;
will give her a comfortable home. Now mind you tell
her that her sister Mary Ann is married well, and lives in
the Goulbnrn District. My brother is doing well. Neither


of us have wanted for any thing in this country. Two of
my brothers were sent as parish apprentices to the Cape
of Good Hope. We pay eight shillings a week rent, but
it is well we get on. Oh, what a difference there is be-
tween this country and home for poor folks. I know I
would not go back again,—l know what England is.
Old England is a fine place for the rich, but the Lord help
the poor.
Sydney, L Ith March, 1846.
C. C.
Statement No. 6. —William C , Limerick.
I arrived in 1841 ; have every reason to be satisfied; 1
am doing pretty well—cannot complain. I wish to have
my mother out, widow Catherine C.; it would be in our
power to make her very comfortable. Married in this
country. I have arranged with Captain Chisholm for
paying the passage for my mother.
My wife sends her, by Mrs. Chisholm, a few articles,
which will help a little towards making her more comfort-
able for the voyage, if she will undertake it, and I hope
she will; if not, I leave it to you and Captain Chisholm to
point out what I can best do for her at home.
Sydney, February 17th, 1846.
C. C.
Statement No. 7. —John C , Argyleshire.
New South Wales, 17th December, 1845.
Arrived in New South Wales in about 1828. My
brother-in law and myself lives here as partners : have a
farm; cultivate fifteen acres; get twenty five bushels of
wheat to the acre ; have a good dray, (waggon) paid £lO
for it; have a set of working bullocks, ten; pigs and
poultry : make a good living—want for nothing ; go to
Sydney four times a year : get Ss. the cwt. for carriage;
as much loading as I like to take back ; carriage the same
—now, cast that up. Use one chest of tea a year ; four
D


cwt. of sugar. I think any man who wishes to work can
do well here. Have not the same here as at home, not in
debt to the landlord. I come from a place about sixty
miles from Fort William. Thomas M'Donell, Esq., the
banker, knows me well. I was seven years in his service ;
as a token it was through Mr. M‘Donell I came to this
Colony. Have now forty head of cattle ; have never wanted
for anything hut money in this Colony, and then not to
pay debts, but buy something. lam a good deal better
off here than I could have been at Fort William ; it’s far
better for my children.
Statement No. 8.— Henry L > Leicestershire.
New South Wales, 20th October, 1845.
Have been here four years; came in the ship Earl of
Durham; engaged at £25 per annum and rations; but
my wife had to work. I have six working bullocks, one
horse, six cows, four pigs, and abundance of poultry. Mr.
James M ‘Arthur is ray landlord ; I rent ninety-two acres
of land from that gentleman on a twenty-one years
lease ; have been on this land one year and nine months;
have built this house twenty-six feet by fourteen ; chimney
stone lined ; made a fine rail stock yard and a good barn,
sixty feet by twenty, with a thatched roof; have cleared
fifty-eight acres ; have forty-two under crop with wheat and
barley, and the other will be ready for Indian corn ; have
had one crop of corn off my land, about 700 bushels; sold
it at 2s. 6d. to 2s. 9d. One of my boys can work ; he is
now gone with his mother to Camden to deliver some corn ;
I employ five men; give a ploughman from Bs. to 0
wages weekly, and his food and lodging ; farm labourers
6s. and their food. lam from Leicester ; my mother lives
at High Cross street, next door to the Jail; by trade lam
a woolcomber ; was nine years in Yorkshire ; Mr. William
Higgs was my master. We buy tea by the half chest; use


about three pound a week : buy 100 weight of sugar at a
time; cannot say how much we use; when the bag is
empty we get more, that is all I know about it. My
brother George is a locksmith. I think he would do pretty
well here ; he lives in High Cross street; keeps a tin-ware
shop. This country is a deal better than England for any
labouring man. lam confident and sure any industrious
man that is sober, may do well. There is an orphan child
of a brother of mine I would like you to get out. As a
token, they know something regarding my little finger, that
occurred at brace manufactory, Belgrave Gate,
Leicester; William and Samuel Kelly will remember the
first joint of my little finger, right hand.
Statement No. 9.— Robert L , Fifeshire,
New South Wales, 6th November, 1845.
I arrived in the Colony in the year 1837, by the ship
John Barry; am a carpenter by trade; remained six
months in Sydney, and then removed to „ and
after a time settled down here ; bought half an acre of land
and the house as it stands; have three cows, one horse,
three calves, and three steers ; rent forty-eight acres, more
for a run for the cattle than anything else ; only cultivate
three acres ; have four children ; pay ss. a quarter for the
education of each child—school quite convenient. I employ
one man, pay him 245. a-week. It would be a great ad-
vantage to tradesmen if any encouragement was given to
people to buy land ; good houses would then be built; the
cost of a slab house, twenty-four feet by twelve, would be
about £2O, built in a neat and substantial manner. lam
from County Fife, Scotland; was apprenticed to C. Gower,
who emigrated to America ; I am well known to Alexander
Leslie, and to Mr. Robert Leslie, spirit merchant, Dundee.
Would like to hear from my relations. Have I done better
here than at home, do you say ? Oh ! yes, yes.
n 2


Statement No. 10.—John D , Kildare.
New South Wales, 1 6th December, 1845.
I am from the parish of Allen, County Kildare 5 arrived
here in 1840 3 went to service one year, then rented twenty
acres, rent £lO 3 had to clear the land 3 make a good living
by it; have now near 100 head of cattle ; have a small run
for them j have ten horses, six pigs, and poultry are so
plenty we don’t count them. lam now carting wool to
Sydney; Mr. Benjamin Boyd is to pay me £l2 for the load
of wool. We use one chest and a half of tea a year; it’s been
a good country to me. I brought some money to the
country with me, but I lent it, and lost it; have made most
of my money by my farm, and job work. I had £3O when
I left service. lam well known to Bill Welch. If my two
brothers were here it would be better for them ; their names
are Michael and Thomas. I think there can be no better
country ; if I liked to go to service now I could get £24 a-
year, but I can do better as I am ; a man that is farming
can do better, but he must be industrious and stick to it;
my family get plenty of meat, butter, and eggs; and as a
token there can be no mistake about, John Ginger, the
piper, was with me the night I came away.
Statement No. 11. — Patt D , Kildare.
New South Wales, 29th January, 1846.
It is six years since we arrived in the ship •; we
brought two children with us and left one at home, named
P. D 3 he is about ten years of age. Oh ! how we was
pushed to get out when the money was to be paid; the fact
was we could only find money for one. Well, what did we
do ? There was a poor woman who wanted to get to her
husband, a prisoner in New South Wales, and she had one
child, so we agrees to take her child as our own, and she
goes out as a single woman in the same ship j for this she
gives us £I, besides the pound she gave us to pay for her


child, and this saved us from leaving two children at home
instead of one, as it paid the agent.
We are, thank God, well to do now. We have seventeen
cows. Well, I sends home £5 for this boy, and it is above
three years I did this, but it is never a line I had ; it was
by I sent it, and its all the particulars I give to
you. Then now, when the emigrant ship was going
home, we gave him £2 to give our child for clothes, and a
note of hand for £lO if he obtained a passage for our
child. Well, he returns in a ship without the child, and
not a bit of proof about the child ; then he demands the
£lO, according to the promissory note, but we goes bang to
Court, and the gentlemen, long may they live, made him
give us the £2 back again ; this £2, you see, he charged us
for coach expenses. We leaves our child wi’ a poor widow
woman, one Betty Hurley; she did live in Barrack-street,
thirty-two miles from Dublin. Don’t rest till you find
him, and may God reward you if you send my poor child
to me.
Statement No. 12.— William K , Kildare.
New South Wales, 20th October 1845.
I arrived here by the ship Sir Charles Napier; was
single; engaged as labourer to Mr. William Lawson,
Prospect; wages £lB per annum, with a weekly ration of
nine pound flour, nine pound of meat, two pound of sugar,
and three ounces of tea; remained in his service two years
and six months; entered into partnership with J. K
from King’s County; taken a farm from Mr. James
M'Arthur, of Camden; expect to get on very well; Mr.
Lawson was a good master to me; he gave the full of my
agreement. Got married to a native of King’s County.
Have four bullocks ; employ one labourer, give him 7s. per
week, and his food. What do I think of this country ?
Why, I think very well of it; I think I’ll get on better
here ; a man that is willing to work will get on here; my


father is in this Colony. My relations may judge for
themselves j I have one sister, if she were here I should be
proud. Wife says, “ I think well of the country ; better off
here.”
Statement No. id. —J. S , Cork.
New South Wales, 19th February, 1846.
I arrived in 183 d, by the Java. lam in the service of
Mr. P , and get 7s. a week, and my food and lodgings.
I have saved about, —here, look at the paper I have from
the Savings Bank—
Last Year’s Account, 1844.. .. 5 11
October ditto 1843. ... 32 18 6
£76 4 5
And I have more from this year’s wages. I save every
farthing to make a home for my wife. It is not my inten-
tion to leave my present service, having a fine master ; indeed
I never had a bad one. Men’s wages run from 7s. to 10s.
a-week, with food and lodgings. Girl’s wages run from
4s, 6d. to ss. 6d. a week. There is a scarcity of men-ser-
vants now, but more particularly women. My wife lives at
Bandon, County of Cork ; her name is Mary j my
children’s, Elizabeth, Johannah, Ellen. As a token, I give
you a letter received from my wife. As another token, my
wife, her sister, and husband came to see me when I received
sentence of death, for taking fire-arms from a constable in a
tithe row I was sent here as a lifer. I am now
on my Ticket—not yet received my emancipation. The row
I was engaged in took place at Ballawerthen, twelve miles
from Bandon. This was about 1832. J. K was sent
here with me for the same offence. Here it is all quiet—
Catholics and Protestants live here quiet: never saw a fight
between a Catholic and a Protestant here on the score of
religion. Look at my character —they are both down to-
gether to help me get my wife j and now Parson R


said to me, “Tell Mrs. Chisholm to get her out,” and the
Priest signed my paper; that’s proof of what I say. It is
a quiet, comfortable country.
Statement No. 14. — William C , Surrey.
New South Wales, November, 1845.
I am from Surrey ; married two months after my arrival
to Jane M •; per ship Lady Newtown. Left two mar-
ried sisters at home; they belong to Lambeth parish, close
to Tunbridge Wells; one is married to Henry H , a
sawyer, the other to George S ,at Fen, near Strond,
Chatham.
Wife says, “ Father and mother came with me, and have
done comfortably well.” Have thirty acres of wheat in,
nine acres of corn ; have eight bullocks, one cow, a good
many pigs,—they are very comfortably doing now. This is
our first year on land. We have one cow, one heifer, and
six pigs, and every thing that we want. lam a great deal
better off than at home : I would not go home again, would
you ? We have our land on a five years’ clearing lease, and
our landlord is a native-born gentleman. We bake our
own bread, English fashion; have meat, bread, butter, and
tea three times a day, and plenty of eggs. My husband
jobs a little; makes money handy, if we wants it. We use
a pound and a half of tea a week, but if you tell that in
your book, they’ll think it so terribly out of the way, so
better say one pound ; sugar eight pounds a week. We use
quite thirty pounds of meat a week; I’m blessed! if you
say forty pounds you’ll be on the right side. We are not
obliged to spare, —have as much plain food as we can
make use of. My sister Matilda cannot mistake the token
I send her. Ask her if she remembers the beating father
gave her. My other sister, Harriet, has three children ; the
one token will do for both.


Statement No. 15. —Mr. B , an Australian.
New South Wales, 10th October, 1845.
I am a native of the Colony ; my father was an English-
man, from Kent; was reared on a farm by my parents ;
never in service ; a better country cannot be for a working
man. Lots of room for men and money, I have made what
I have got by hard labour, very hard labour. Now, before I
tell you any thing about the sheep, I just want to ask you a
word Then it’s 3,000 sheep I have, 700 head
of cattle here and at my Station; sixteen horses, four mares,
twenty pigs, and poultry in abundance ; have three hives
of bees. This farm is my own property. Come, since I
know the tack you are on, I’ll satisfy you of the truth of
what I say. Here, examine these title deeds; we keep
these things at home here. Now this farm of seventy acres
was left me by my father; it was a grant to him. This
ground has been in cultivation twenty-five years. I plough
with two pair of bullocks and one man one acre a-day.
I pay my men .£l5 a year, and they board and lodge in
the kitchen —have what they want. Three of my daughters
are well married. Two sons help me. I sold my wheat
for 4s. 3d. the bushel; it was rather pinched, or would have
sold for more. I pay £4. 1 os. for a chest of good tea ; we
use three chests a year, and one ton and a half of sugar, —
that is the stock I lay in for my family. There are about
twenty of us, including children. Five of my children go
to the Society’s school, and we pay threepence each per
week ; and besides that, we help the schoolmaster in little
things.
Do I subscribe to any public institutions ? To be sure I
do, —to all. I did take in a newspaper, but we got it so
irregular, that we gave it up. We cure beef for sale, and
it is very good.


Statement No. 16'. —T. F ■, Galway.
New South Wales, 4th August, 1845.
We came as emigrants in the ship United Kingdom, in
1841. Our names are Thomas, William, Peter, Edward,
and James. Our youngest brother is in good service, quite
handy to us. Both our parents died before we emigrated.
We came to this colony to make money. We were en-
gaged the second day after our arrival by Squire B ,
near Liverpool. He employed us as farm-labourers, wages
£“2O per annum, with a weekly rations of ten pounds of
flour, ten pounds of meat, a pound and a half of sugar, and
three ounces of tea. Now each of us had this wages and
allowance. Mr. B behaved like a rale gentleman to
us ; he is a Protestant, but never mind that, he is the man
to pay properly ; has no tricks—a poor man may take his
word ; and if I had a relation coming out, I would like him
get Squire B for a master. He is a Protestant, but
never attempted to influence his men in their religion, and
that is what I call honest. The rations were of good quality,—
I may say capital. Indeed, he is a rale gentleman, for
though we was engaged by the year, during the harvest he
paid us the same as he paid his job labourers; this made
the wages about £29. Indeed we did work, but such a
master deserved all we could do. We remained in his
service two years and six months. We be Catholics.
Why once when the wife was weakly he lent us the cart to
take her to church; indeed, he seemed right glad when a
man acted up to his religion. Our master, when we left
the ship, purchased for us in Sydney bedding and blankets,
one knife and fork, and four tin cans ; but all these were
charged for and deducted from our wages. The blankets
were 15s., —I forget the price charged for other articles.
Willy married a settler’s daughter she had thirty-five head
of cattle. Mr. Burke, Market Street, Galway, knows us
well; we are known to hundreds there, and those who
know us will have no doubt of our speaking the truth. I


had about £3O saved when Mr. B got us this farm.
Three brothers are partners in it. Five of us work on the
farm ; we also employ one labourer—pay him in cattle.
There are three wives on the farm, and five children. The
highest wages any of us received in Ireland was £5. that
was only for a period—l had only £3. I would be dubious
about advising any person to emigrate; we chanced it;
others may do the same. We think it right to speak of
the Colony as we have found it; and our statement we
would advise our friends who know us to read, but on no
account whatsomever would we advise, and then we can t
be blamed. We are very comfortable now. We pay £3 a-
year for a pew in church. Many perhaps would not like
the hard work we had at first; we have been obliged to
work early and late for the comforts about us. We com-
menced at day-light, and worked until dark. A farmer is
busy all the year here. We are fifty times better off than at
home. Our three wives on this farm work well; they
cook, wash, and attend to the dairy. We don’t want our
wives to do out-door work. Mrs. O’Neil, who resides
twenty-five miles from Galway, knows Tom’s wife very
well. Mrs. Chisholm has a sure token for her; besides
this, Mrs. Chisholm can show my wife’s mother a sample of
wheat and Indian corn grown from our farm. There are
700 acres of land in this farm. When we came here, thirty-
five were cleared. —now we have seventy. We have built
three dwelling-houses, three barns, three stock-yards, and
have made a large water-hole. We have put up a side line
fence of near a mile,—a two-rail fence, all our own hand-
labour. In addition to this, we put a three-rail fence round
sixty acres. This year our crop of corn was 1,000 bushels ;
we had 200 bushels of wheat; we have about eighty head
of cattle, four mares, —two of these are at the present time
worth £4O, the others about £l3 each ; have one foal, two
colts, two working horses. The last wheat we sold tor five
shillings per bushel. The distance to Sydney is about fifty


miles ; this takes a man going and coming five days. We
pay for tea Is. 6d., and sugar 2}d. the pound. We live
pretty well here. Now put it down in three rows, —it will
look better when it is printed, —we have—
For Breakfast... Bread, Meat, Tea ;
Dinner Bread, Meat, Tea;
Supper Bread, Meat, Tea;
with milk, butter, and eggs; in truth, we live well. We
grows potatoes, but don’t eat so many as we did at home,
REMARKS BY MRS. CHISHOLM.
Size of dwelling-house occupied by Thomas, his wife,
two children, two brothers, Edward and James, and one
farm labourer. This is a neat slab-house, 32 feet by 16 ;
the roof covered in with bark. The chimney lined with
stone ; size 8 feet by 3|. The house consists of three rooms,
each distinct from the other. The opening between the
slabs is filled up with plaster, and the whole neatly white-
washed. There is a mantel-piece with shells on it, and a
side shelf tastefully fitted up with crockery.
Size of the barn, which is about 40 feet from the house,
is about 45 feet by 18, with a thrashing-floor of 18 feet; and
a two-stall stable. Height of the side wall, JO feet. It is
built of strong materials, and is put well together. The loft
of this building is used as a store-room for corn. The im-
provements made on the farm determined the landlord to
reduce the rent.
Statement No. 17- —John F , Galway.
I arrived in 1840, by the ship Margaret; my wife’s
maiden name was Power, her Christian name Julia. lam
from the County of Galway. lam now employed by
Messrs. Pite and Preston, Pitt-street, Sydney; make about
£l. or £l. 16s. per week. Some false reports were sent home
by -, saying I was in a poor way, and that my wife was
barefoot selling apples in the street, at the same time I am


doing well. I have been able to purchase property to the
amount of £350 3 and Mr, Councillor Coyle knows this, for
he advised me to purchase the property which is in Sussex-
street, and it is now of much more value than it was 3 indeed
neither myself or wife have ever wanted for food, shelter,
or clothes ; my wife merely manages the house for me, she
is not obliged to work for money; I can keep her. The
letters I give you will prove to my friends you have seen
me ; it will be a sure token ; they came from themselves.
Mr. Godfrey Mitchell will remember me. My step-brother’s
name was Devot, I wish to have out my relations, but am
so afraid of their not liking the country or getting on, that
I should be afraid to advise them. I have told them the
truth of myself, and they may judge a little from that. If
my sister was to come, or either of my relations, they
would be sure of all the help I could give them ; at the
same time I am very dubious in saying come, so much
depends upon how they are now. In this country there is
often a struggle at first 3 this is what lam afraid of. I
wish you to see my mother and father, and tell them you
have seen me 3 they live about fourteen miles from Galway.
I have a relation there of the name of Goode, Abbey Gate-
street, Galway j my father and mother-in-law live in the
same street; they are pawnbrokers. Tell my mother she
will hear from me by and bye ; she may expect a trifle from
me.
Sydney, 11th March, 1846.
Statement No. 18.
Sydney, September the sth, 1846,
My dear Mother and Brother,— We take the oppor-
tunity of sending these few lines to you, hoping this will find
you all in good health, as this leaves us at present, thanks
be to god for all his mercies to us.
My dear Mother, —i did not intend to rite to you until
i would be able to send more money than what i can at


the present time, But i find that my application for the
child is gone home, and the lamentable news that i hear
from ireland obliges me to rite now, and send what i can,
hoping that part of it might be of some relief in the present
distress—it is a bill of seven pounds to Ballyhaise, to Patt
M . i told Pat M when he would get it cashed to
give two pounds of it to you to give to my mother—i hope
she may be living to receive it, the other five i told him to
keep for purpose of preparing the child to send her to me,
which i hope he will not fail in doing while there is an oppor-
tunity—there never will be another opportunity again. My
dear Brother, when you receive this letter go to Bally-
haise, and get these two pounds, and give them to my poor
broken-hearted mother. My dear Brother, i depend on you
to make all the exertion in your power to send us the child—
i hope her grandmother will have no hesitation in sending
her—if she do not send the child to us she will deceive us
very much, but i hope she would not be so inhuman as not
to send her—she will have no excuse as i sent them what
will prepare her, and that is all that is required. Govern-
ment will give them all a free Passage, and Mrs. Chisholm
will see that she will be taken care of on the voyage. She
has given us all her word when she was leaving Sydney, that
she would behave as a mother to them. My dear Brother,
i am sorry to hear the distressing news that i hear from
ireland, of starvation—sickness—i thank my god for leaving
it the time i did. i wish that all my friends w'ere out of it,
for it is always in poverty. At a meeting held in Sydney on
last Monday, there was a collection of five hundred pounds
made for the relief of the poor in ireland, and they expect
to collect three thousand before they stop. This is a fine
plentiful country—there is no person starving here—i am
sure that the dogs in Sydney destroys more beef and bread
than all the polTt* in ireland can aford to eat —there is one
good thing in Sydney, that the poor man can eat as good
beef and mutton as the rich man—we are very comfortable,


thanks be to god for it, if we had our dear little child, Mary
Ann, with us, and i hope you will make all exertion in your
power to aford us that comfort. There is as good an oppor-
tunity in Sydney for a person to attend their religious duty
as ever there was in ireland. Let me know what time my
child will leave home, so i may be on the look out for her
arrival in Sydney. Anne and me, Catherine and Margaret,
sends our love to my mother, to you and your family, to all
my sisters and brothers, and all our enquiring friends in
general. I remain your affectionate Son,
PETER R.
Letter, —To K. R , &c. &c. Co. Cavan.
No fictitious names are entered in these Statements, —
reasons that may be readily surmised dictate the Initials
only being given in many cases. Parties interested may
refer to Mrs. Chisholm, (if by letter, post-paid, enclosing a
stamp for a reply) for further information.
J. Ollivier, 59 Pall Mall.




