

ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL
THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD
HARRINGTON CLARE LEES
ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE
1921 —T 929
ENTERED INTO THE FULLEST LIFE
JANUARY 10th, 1929
“ Then said he, I am going to rny Fathers, and tho ’
with great difficulty lam got hither, yet now Ido not
repent me of all the Trouble 1 have been at to arrive
where I am. My Sword I give to him that shall
succeed me in my Pilgrimage and my courage and
skill to him that can get it. My marks and scars I
carry with me, to be a witness for me that I have
fought His Battles who now will be my Rewarder.
When the day that he must go hence was come many
accompanied him to the Riverside into which as he
went he said , ‘Death, where is thy sting ? ’ and as
he went down deeper he said, ‘ Grave, where is thy
victory 1 * So he passed over and all the trumpets
sounded for him on the other side.”
—Pilgrim’s Progress


ORDER. OF SERVICE
“And he ms not ; for Qod took him.”
IKpmn:
Praise, my soul, the King of Heaven,
To His feet thy tribute bring;
Ransom’d, heal’d, restored, forgiven,
Evermore His praises sing;
Alleluia! Alleluia!
Praise the everlasting King.
Praise Him for His grace and favour
To our fathers in distress; .
Praise Him still the same as ever,
Slow to chide, and swift to bless;
Alleluia! Alleluia!
Glorious in His faithfulness.
Father-like; He tends and spares us.
Well our feeble frame He knows;
In His hands He gently bears us,
Rescues us from all our foes;
Alleluia! Alleluia!
Widely, yet His mercy flows.
Angels in the height, adore Him;
Ye behold Him face to face;
Saints triumphant, bow before Him,
Gather’d in from every race;
Alleluia! Alleluia!
Praise with us the God of grace. Amen.
“I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord:
he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live: and he that liveth and believeth in me
shall never die.”—St. John XI., 25, 26.
“Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many
mansions: If it were not so I would have told you. I
go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, ye
may be also.”—St. John XIV., 1, 2.
'“Neither death, non life, nor angels- nor princi-
palities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
powers, nor heights, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Rom. VIII., 38, 39.
“The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are
the everlasting arms.”—Deut. XXXIII., 27.


psalm :
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion;
then were we like unto them that dream.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter; and our
tongue with joy.
Then said they among the heathen: The Lord hath
done great things for them.
Yea, the Lord hath done great things for us
already: whereof we rejoice.
Turn our captivity, 6 Lord: as the rivers in the
south.
They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.
He that now goeth on his way weeping, and beareth
forth good seed: shall doubtless come again with joy,
and bring his sheaves with him.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the
Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall
be: world without end.. Amen.
Übe Xesson.
%ct us prap.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven
praters:
0 Almighty God, who hast knit together Thine elect
in one communion and fellowship, in the mystical body
of Thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us grace so to
follow Thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly
living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys,
which Thou hast prepared for them that unfeignedly
love Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ’
O God in Whose sight the death of Thy Saints is
very dear, and in Whose hands are the issues of life
and death; we thank Thee for the work that Thou hast
accomplished in Australia and the Home Land, through
Thy servant, Harrington Clare Lees. We commit him
to Thy gracious keeping, that the good work which
Thou hast begun in him may be perfected unto the day
of Jesus Christ. We pray Thee that the spirit of love
and service which inspired him may continue in all
those who are called to serve Thee; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
Almighty God Who art afflicted in the afflictions of
Thy people: regard with Thy tender compassion the
bereaved (especially Thy servant, Joanna Mary Lees):
bear their sorrows and cares: give them comfort and
peace in Thee: supply all their manifold needs: and
help them by Thy grace to leam the lessons of sorrow •
through Jesus Christ our Lord.


0 Lord, our Saviour, Who hast warned us that Thou
wilt require much of those to whom much is given:
grant that we, whose lot is cast in so gcodly a heritage,
may strive together the more abundantly, by prayer,
by almsgiving, and every other appointed means to
extend to others what we so richly enjoy; and as we
have entered into the labour of other men, may we so
labour that, in their turn, other men may enter into
ours, to the fulfilment of Thy Holy Will and our own
everlasting salvation.
O Lord, support us all the day long of this troublous
life, until the shades lengthen, and the evening comes,
and the busy world is hushed, the fever of life is over,
and our work done. Then, Lord, in Thy mercy, grant
us safe lodging, a holy rest, and peace at the last,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
twmn: Jesus Triumphant.
Jesus triumphant when the storm-clouds break,
And the loud thunder bids the soul awake;
When biting blasts lay earthly projects low,
And one by one the fondest treasures go.
Jesus triumphant thro’ the fleeting years;
Jesus triumphant, spite of blinding tears;
High over all, to hear Thy loving voice,
Which bids the heart look upward and rejoice
Jesus triumphant all along the line;
Triumphant Saviour, all Thy triumph mine;
For since I am a partner in Thy love,
My life on earth is lived through Thee above.
Jesus triumphant as I fall asleep,
No fear of death to those whom Thou shalt keep;
Jesus triumphant the body dies,
And earth in earth, all that is mortal lies.
Jesus triumphant when the spirit wings
Upward and heavenward to the King of kings ;
And through the last great triumph of Thy grace,
Triumphant saints shall see Thee face to face.
XTbe Blesstna
Now the God of Peace, Who brought again from the
dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
by the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you
perfect in every good work to do His will, working in
you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through
Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.
