

2- BXD
# CHURCH JUBILEE
(DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE)
Bishop Perry consecrated June 29th, 1847.
sailed ... Oct. 2nd, 1847.
landed ... Jan. 23rd, 1848.
IReport
Wmoiouß PAMS.
Of the British Representative of the Melbourne
(Eburcb jubilee jfunfc, 1897
Dear Fellow Christians, Fellow Colonists, and Fellow Churchmen in England.
I address these few lines (1) To those among you who, upon reading the stirring Jubilee Letters of
my Bishop and his three Archdeacons, have so kindly responded as below * ( 2 ) To thllZ
copies of these letters were addressed, but who have not yet been moved by G Ss Holy Spirit fo aidllT
part.cu.ar direction ; and (3) To those with whom , havfnow the honour o" tresp” dingCthe fi s tim"
To refresh and to encourage all. I would very briefly re-state the position. ■■ The Bishop of
Melbourne s Fund is the ■■ Home Mission" Fund of the Diocese, needs a year to maintain its
"lTnd C R 3" b l COnS “! er c d fr ° m every conceivab| o point of view as vitally important Until the
Land Boom of 1892 and the disastrous Bank Failures of 1893. the Fund consisted of two pans -
fur’ Consdlt a ed nU F a und^ * ” UoUS > dividual and local and £l ,ooo a year interest on £20, 000 of
our Consol dated Fund. Owing, however, not to any fault in the administration, but to wide-spread
mcxneiar digress, this £20,000 has ceased to be. Having been let out to Trustees, Committees, Vestries etr
or the erection of new Schools, Parsonages and Churches, it did good work in its time, yielded ’large
interest, and in due time came back to its source, to re-issue again as occasion required. Thefe
gentlemen though jointly and severally liable, having (with the congregations to which they belonged)
ome utterly impoverished, can neither pay principal nor interest. Now if this £20,000 can be
estored, it will do a similar twofold good work again ;-promote building, and yield £l,OOO a year
income. Hence the Bishop’s Appeal, and my Mission to England.
It is quite true that local Jubilee Offerings may be “ear-marked” for special objects, and
may yet form part of our Jubhlee Fund as a whole ; but I pledge myself that whatever is given in the
British Islands will go to “Home Mission” Capital or Income only.
d r ate lading (June 24) was, to human eye, most unfortunate—too late to participate
m the magnificent gifts of the “ Sixty Years’ Reign,” and too early to start a new enterprise! Now,
however that new months are coming round, with re-filled purses and fresh causes of gratitude, and as the
Fund will be kept open, whether I am present or absent, till January 31, 1898, I venture to hope that
Melbourne, once so “ marvellous ” for the gold that perisheth, now so marvellous for its sudden calamity,
may be “ marvellously helped ” from the mother country to establish itself on an Immutable
Foundation.
Believe me, dear friends in God,
London
Yours very faithfully,
Nov. 1897.
H. B. MACARTNEY, M.A.
N.B.—Correspondence (hitherto sent to the kind care of Sir Andrew Clarke, Agent-General for
Victoria) should be addressed :
Rev. H. B
MACARTNEY,
c/o F. Larkworthy, Esq.,
35, Belsize Avenue, London, N.W.
£ s. d.
Adamson, Mrs. Travers ... 1 1 o
Allen, Mr. Richard 1 1 o
Allen, Mr. Thomas ... ... c o o
Alien, Mr. 1 nomas ... ... 500
Anonymous ... ... ... . o 2 6
Baker, Mr. Henry ... ... 1 1 o
Brooke, Mr. J. Arthur -. 25 o o
Brooke, Mr. Thomas 50 o o
Brown, Mrs. Arthur c. o o
orown, ivirs. Arthur ... ... 500
Garble, Mr. Hildred e 0 o
Laruie, Mr. tludred ... ... 500
Cave, Miss ? o o
iviiss ... ... ### 500
Clanwilliam, Lady 200
Clarke, Mr. W. J. T. ...' ... 1 o o
fiance, Mr. w. j. 1. ... ... j 0 0
Darling, Lady ... 10 o o
Davies, Mrs. Thomas 1 1 o
1 1 o
List of Contributors.
£ *■ d.
Ellis, Mr. Arthur M. ... ... 300
Fair, Mr. J. W. ... ... 1 x o
fair, Mr. J. W. ... 1 x o
Firebrace, Mr. R. F 100 o 0
Firebrace, Mr. R. f. ... ... 100 o 0
Gedge, Mr. Sydney, M.P. 220
Grun, Mr. R >. 1 1 o
Guinness, Mrs. Howard ... 500
Hall, Rev. W. ... ,j. 220
Hemphill, Mr. W J, x 1 o
Huggard, Mr, J. T .1 010 o
Isaacson, Rev. C. S j. X 1 o
Kingsale, Lady x o o
Learmonth, Mrs. S. Livingstone 1000
Manchester, the Bishop of ..}. 10 o o
Maxwell, Miss t 100
£ s. d.
Moorhouse, Mrs. 500
Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. John ... 20 o o
Power, Mrs. P. B. ... ... 500
Stovin, Mrs V 1 o
Strong, Rev. A. 1 1 o
Sykes, Mr. A. H x o o
Tricks, Mr. F. C 5 5 0
Webber, Mr. W. D too
Wilsmore, Mr. Norman
10 o o
Wynne, Mr. Alfred H.
I I o
Total £3Ol 13 6




CHURCH JUBILEE
(DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE).
{The Bishop's
Bishopscourt,
East Melbourne,
Lent, 1897.
Dear Fellow Churchmen and Churchwomen,
I appeal to you for your kind sympathy and help in a great enterprise which has long been
in contemplation, and which is now about to be taken in hand.
St. Peter’s Day, June 29th, will be the Jubilee of our Diocese— Charles Perry, the first Bishop
of Melbourne, having been consecrated on that day in Westminster Abbey, in the year 1847.
This will be a fitting opportunity for the presentation of a Thankoffering to God for His
goodness to us during the last fifty years. Besides the many Churches, Schools and Parsonage
houses, which have been erected during this period, I may point to the Church Assembly as the
special memorial of Bishop Perry ; to our stately Cathedral as marking the Episcopate of his
distinguished successor, Bishop Moorhouse; and to the formation of the See of Ballarat, as a conspicuous
example of the zeal of Victorian churchmen during the period in question. Above all we have cause
to thank God for the Ordinances of His Church and the preaching of His Word continued among us.
As long ago as 1894, the Assembly resolved that it was desirable that steps be taken to celebrate
this Jubilee. Accordingly, at a special session held in February last, it was resolved that a fund,
to be called “ The Church Jubilee Fund,” should be raised, and that it should be appropriated as
follows :—£s,ooo to the income of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund for 1897-8, and the balance
to be divided equally between the Superannuation Fund, the extinction of Parish Debts, and the
capital of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund.
Of these objects, the claims and needs of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund are well known to
you all. The Superannuation Fund is that to which many of the Clergy subscribe year by year, in
order that when age and infirmity overtake them, they may be able to retire upon a definite pension.
But of late well-grounded fears have been entertained lest this Fund should prove inadequate to
meet the just expectations of the subscribers, unlessdt receives assistance in the manner now proposed.
Parish debts have reached so large a sum that the total, or even the partial extinction of them
would be a great relief to the Church,
In order to give effect to this resolution, I ask you for the sum of ,£25,000
Many years may elapse before so favourable an opportunity occurs for placing the Church in a
position to carry out more effectually her Master’s work. If the scheme now laid before you should seem
to any to be too ambitious, I reply that if the Church as a whole will take it up (as I trust she will),
if all ranks and classes in the community will unite in helping it forward, its success will be assured.
Let each one among us make it the subject of earnest prayer to God, remembering that the work
which we seek to promote is His work. Let each try to interest others in it, to circulate information
respecting it, and to obtain offerings in aid of it. Let me also suggest that copies of this appeal
might be sent to your friends in England and other countries; thus will sympathy be evoked and
co-operation secured.
Relying on that generous support which has not been wanting to me during the ten years
of my episcopate,
I am,
Your faithful Servant in Christ,
F. F. MELBOURNE.




CHURCH JUBILEE
(DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE).
Hppeal
ON BEHALF OF THE
(Iburcb jubilee Jfunb, 1897.
On S. Peter’s Day, 29th June, the Diocese of Melbourne will complete the first 50 years of its existence,
and we venture to think that an event so nearly synchronising with the Diamond Jubilee of our beloved
Queen, should be marked by all loyal Churchmen by an act of practical piety, setting forth our gratitude to
Almighty God for these most signal blessings.
Our Church began her corporate life here, few in numbers, poor and ill-furnished. Bishop Perry
found, on his arrival, only three clergy and three churches. There was no Cathedral ; there was no
capitular body; there was no organised machinery for supplying the spiritual wants of the inland settlers.
Like the primitive Church, we were a “ feeble folk.” Tc-day , a splendid fane is erected on the site of one of
our earliest buildings, equipped with a full staff of Dean, Canons (regular and lay), and a choir admittedly
the finest in the Southern Hemisphere. A devoted body of clergy, 180 in number, spread over two-thirds
of Victoria, minister to nearly sixty thousand people, who regularly attend her services; three times that
number receive their visits. Twenty-two thousand communicants participate at the Holy Board. * She
has a Sunday-School attendance of almost thirty thousand. In 790 buildings her solemn services of prayer
and praise are offered up. Further, the important Diocese of Ballarat has been established, and vigorous
work is carried on by an efficient staff of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, embracing a total of 54 clergy; whilst
its complement of churches, schools, and vicarages is fully proportionate to our own supply. Such results,
“exceeding magnifical,” ought to draw forth our profound thankfulness, and to inspire us with lofty hopes
for the future of the Church in our colony.
But they entail heavy responsibilities. It surely devolves upon us to transmit to the next
generation a fuller endowment of spiritual blessings than we have received from our fathers. The present
time is opportune for a new departure of spiritual activity. It is a fresh epoch in our local history. Let
us inaugurate, then, another era of progress, of endeavour, of high devotion, which shall commemorate
the Heaven-spared life of an unequalled Sovereign, and the second half-century of Victorian Church life.
The Church Assembly at its last session was fully seized of the fitness of the time for a forward
movement. It was resolved that a sum of should be raised to memorise our Jubilee —partly for
the endowment of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund, partly for the Superannuation Fund, and partly for the
Extinction of Church Debts. It was believed that a liberal response to this resolution would result in
renewed diocesan activity—in the encouragement of the pastors of the Church by securing a slight, but
certain, provision for their declining days,.and in the partial, if not total, remission of parochial burdens


I
which in many instances are pressing out the heart and energy from our Vestries and Boards of Guardians.
Let our members remember how the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund is the vertebral column of the Diocese,
which, if impaired, will paralyse more than half our parishes; let them remember that a healthy Super-
annuation Fund means the suppression of such grievances as infirm clergy remaining at their posts long
after they have become unfitted for active work ; let them remember that the burden of debt cripples not
merely individual Parishes, but also locks up Diocesan Funds which might otherwise be used for most
needed Church Extension ; let these considerations be duly weighed, and we doubt not that there will be
a noble response to our effort.
We deeply realize, however, that it is not alone by multiplied or endowed assistance that our
Church is to do her duty at the present juncture. Not on the arm of flesh, not on might or strength, does
she rely, but on the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, for her permanent and ultimate success. We beg
therefore your earnest prayers, as well as your financial help. And so we heartily commend both aspects
of her need to your affectionate and timely sympathy, humbly trusting that He who has made of “this
little one” “a great nation ” will so fire the heart of the present generation of our people that they may
take courage and go forward in the great work of the conversion of the world, and the edification
of the Church. Amen.
H. A
J. C.
T. H
LANGLEY, Archdeacon of Melbourne.
MacCULLAGH, Archdeacon of Sandhurst.
ARMSTRONG, Archdeacon of Gippsland.
Mid-Lent 1897.
S. Paul’s Cathedral Buildings,
Melbourne.
