

language incorrectly rendered in English by a single word,
namely, Sun: one is shaimesh, the orb or body of that
luminary; the other chaumo, its heat, the last Tmur, its
light; whilst there are two for the moon, one yoriawcJi,
signifying the orb, the other L’vono, her pale or white light;
but there is not any implying her heat; the word choudesh
is sometimes given in English as the moon, but this literally
signifies new, in reference to her change only. Thus . the
knowledge of Philosophy amongst the Jews appears to have
been coeval with their very existence as a people; and the
instances I have brought to your notice are but a drop in
the ocean of similar cases occurring in the language.
XIY.— On Two Alpine Furylim of the Australian Continent .
By Dr. Ferdinand Mueller, Government Botanist of
Victoria, fyc.
The present splendid elaboration of the Tasmanian Flora by
Dr. Joseph Hooker, together with the light thrown by this
laborious and learned botanist on the vegetation of New
Zealand and the Antarctic Islands, render the knowledge
of the Alpine Flora of these Islands, which was formerly
but so scantily investigated, now nearly complete.
In three successive seasons I attempted to ascertain the
analogies and the differences of the alp-plants of the Austra-
lian continent compared with those of the adjacent Islands,
and in the transactions of the Philosophical Society of the
227
Alpine Furylia of the Australian Continent.


colony of Victoria I explicated those forms which seemed
new, whilst I pointed in my annual reports to those iden-
tical with species of Van Diemen’s Land or New Zealand, or
of both conjointly.
With a view of completing gradually those fragmentary
notes, I beg to transmit to the Royal Society of Tasmania,
accompanied with specimens, the definitions of two fine
Eurybise peculiar to the Australian alps, being under the
impression that the plants comprehended in this interesting
genus are particularly valuable to the botanists of Tasmania,
since the Eurybise-species are so beautifully developed in
that Island,
Eurybia megalophjllob; Ferd. Mueller, gen. rep. p. 14,
absq. diagn.
E. foliis oppositis coriaceis petiolatis planis oblongis ova-
tisve intigerrimis obtusiusculis basi rotundatis, supra niten-
tibus glabris reticulato-venosis, subtus cum petiolis ramu-
lisque tomento alampro velutino fulveseente obductis;
capitulis subcorymboso-paniculatis ; pedunculis elongatis ;
involucri obconico hemisphserico, squamis inferioribus laxis
remotiusculis oblongis obtusis dorso dense tomentosis, intimis
acutis glabrescentibus ; ligulis suboctonis; acheniis angu-
latis striatis estate glabratis; pappi setis scabris biseriatis,
exterioribus insequalibus brevioribus, interioribus apice bar-
bellatis.
In clivis seopulosis minime humidis alpium Australia;.
Frutex pulcher pluripedalis oligocladus, ramis strietis.
Folia utplurimum 3 3 un. interdum ultra 4 un. longa, in var.
oblongifolia 6 9 un. lata, in var. ovatifolia duplo latiora, sur-
sum per gradus angustata, juvenilia supra tomentosa.
Petioli semipollieares et longiores. Pedunculi oppositi et
alterni, inferiores ssepe ad 4 un. longi, nudi vel superne folio
unico bracteisve pluribus parvis instructi, basi folio minori
328
Alpine Euryliee of the Australian Continent.


suffulti. Involucri squamae interiores 3 un., exteriores 2 tin.
longse, margine vix scariosse. Flores radii albi vel rosei,
lamina oblonga circiter 4 un. metiente. Flores disci circiter
3 un. longi, ad trientem longitudinis quinquefidi. Antheras
semiemergentes, styli ramis superatse, basi sagittatae. Styli
rami papillosi, dorso convexi. Achenia glandule annular!
insidentia, juvenilia parve villosula, matura glabrata fusca
sulcata 14 un. longa, basi attenuata. Pappus albidus fulves-
cens, setis interioribus 3 un. longis.
In systema prope Eurybiam chrysophyllam inserenda.
Floret fine veris et initio aestatis.
Evrybia alpicola ; Ferd. Mueller, secund. gen. rep. absq.
diagn.
E. f'oliis oppositis breviter petiolatis crassocoriaceis lanceo-
lato-vel angusto-oblongis elongatis integerrimis margine
leniter recurvis in basin et apieem sensim angustatis acutius-
culis, supra glabris nitentibus subtile reticulato venosis,
subtus cum petiolis ramulisque tomento tenui sericeo albido
obductis; capitulis subcorymboso-paniculatis; pedunculis
elongatis, involucri campanulati squamis exterioribus ovato-
lanceolatis sericeis, interioribus lanceolato-linearibus acutis,
margine atro-purpureis, dorso glabrescentibus; ligulis sub-
senis, acheniis subcompressis glabris striatis; pappi setis
scabriusculis biseriatis, exterioribus brcvioribus insequali-
bus, interioribus apice incrassatis.
In alpibus et montibus subalpinis Australise serus fontes
et torrentes; e.g. Gibbo-Range, Cobboras Mountains,
Limestone River, Freestone River, Berrima, Pinchmoun-
tains, alibique.
Frutex speeiosus 5 8 pedalis strictus. Folia pleraque
3—4 un. longa, interdum semipedalia, 3 6 un. raro ad 1 un.
lata, juvenilia supra parve tomentosa. Petioli vix ultra
229
Alpine Eurybice of the Australian Continent.


3 un. longi. Paniculse fragrantis polycephalse rami alterai
et oppositi graclles teretes incani, inferiores pluripol-
licares, superiores gradatim abbreviati, fere semper nutii,
ad basin folio bracteali minor! suifulti. Involucri squamss
inferiores EJ un., exteriores vix 1 un. longse, illse margine
scariosse eiliolatse acutiuscul®. Flores radiales albi, lamina
angusto-lanceolata ad tres lineas metiente. Flores disci
pene 3 un. longi, ad trientem longitudinis quinquefidi.
Antherse breviter exsertss, styli ramis demum superatse.
Stylorum rami linearis obtusiusculi, dorso convexi, sursum
densius papillosi. Acbenia jam primo initio glabra, cano-
fulva, eirciter un. longa, basi attenuata glandulse annu-
lar!, insidentia. Setse pappi albidss, inferiores un. longa;.
B. rhodocJueta ;
Foliis lanceolatis, pedunculis abbreviatis, involucris angus-
tioribus, squamis intimis densius sericeis, ligulis subternis,
pappi setis roseis.
In tractu Cobboras Mountains.
Species bene limitata, aliis notis ad Eurybiam megalo-
phyllmn, aliis autem ad E. argophjllam approximans.
Floret sestate.
Botanic Gardens , Melbourne ,
January 1857.
230
Alpine Ewryhim of the Australian Continent.


XV. —On Australian and Tasmanian Umbelliferous Plants,
By Dr. Ferdinand Mueller, Government Botanist of
Victoria.
Of the numerous paradoxical plants which characterize the
Flora of Australia to such a great extent, those of the
Umhelliferse are not the least interesting; and I heg to
review briefly on this occasion the various members of this
order, which, through .the exertions of many a naturalist,
became successively known from Australia and Van
Diemen’s Land.
In Labillardiere’s Novae Hollandice Plantarum Specimen,
(published in 1804), we meet with the first account of the
curious genus Aclinotus. He describes and figures also Daucus
ImcUatus Sieber, (under the name Scandix glochidiata) ,
Apium prostratum (the native celery), Eryngium vesicu-
losum, and three species of Trachymene as Azorellas, to
which genus, indeed, they are closely allied. In 1805 a
second species of Actinotus from New South Wales was
defined by Sir James Smith with the original one, under
the name of Eriocalia, but it was reduced to the older
genus of Labillardiere by the illustrious llobt. Brown, in
his appendix to Capt. Flinders’voyage (1814). To Budge
we owe in a paper issued by the Linnean Society of London,
(1811), the proper definitions of the genera Trachymene
and Xanthosia, and Sprengel, Sieber, and De Candolle added
to the former genus, Cavanilles having previously referred
one species to Azorella. Achilles Bichard added (in 1820) to
our knowledge of these plants various species of Hydrocotyle,
principally supplied by Bobt.Brown; and Allan Cunningham


characterized in Field’s Geographical Memoirs of New
South Wales (1825), his Eryngium ovinum. The invaluable
Prodromus of De Candolle brings in the fourth volume (pub-
lished in 1830) important additions; the genera J Dimetopia
and Astrotricha are here for the first time distinguished,
and new species are added to Hydrocotyle, Trachymene,
Xanthosia and Eryngium; and Helosciadium leptophyllum
is shown to be an Australian plant; Sir William Hooker
having previously given in the Botanical Magazine,
(t. 2875), publicity to two species of De Candolle’s genus
Bidiscus. From the collections of Bauer, Cunningham
and Baron Huegel, new contributions were made to the
Australian Unibelliferae by the labours of Bentham, in-
corporated in the Emmeratio Plantarum Novae Hollandice
Austro-occidentalis of Huegel (1837), by which the genera
Hydrocotyle, Bidiscus, Trachymene, Leucolcena or Xanthosia,
Astrotricha and Actinotus became augmented. The Austra-
lian species of Caldasia (Caldasia eriopoda of De Candolle’s
Prodromus) a plant which exhibits the most extraordi-
nary varieties, changed its preoccupied generic name into
Oreomyrrhis in Endlicher’s celebrated Genera Plantarum
(1840); Pentapeltis, previously (18?7) published as Leucolcena
by Hooker, and afterwards elevatedby Bunge to generic rank,
forms here a sub-genus ; whilst Cesatia, a genus seemingly
near to Bidiscus, received its characteristics by the same
author in the annals of the Vienna Museum. In the import-
ant work, edited 1845 by Lehmann, on the Plants of Preiss
from Western Australia, a work so replete with novelties,
Bunge made us acquainted not only with new Hydrocotyles,
Trachymenes, and Xanthosias, and with two Eryngiums,
perhaps also new, but he discriminates also the genera
Schaenohzna and Platysace, and unites Pritzelia of Walper
to Birnetopia. Mr. Ronald Gunn’s and Dr. Milligan’s


zealous investigations of the Tasmanian Flora enabled Dr.
Joseph Hooker to elucidate with his usual skill the new
genera Hemiphues, Biplaspis and Microsciadium in the sixth
volume of the London Journal of Botany (1847), together
with new Tasmanian Hydrocotyles; the same famous Botanist
having introduced Bidiscus Jiumilis and Xan thosia dissecta
into the leones Plantanm a while before; and in his admir-
able Flora of New Zealand he identifies the Australian
6 srantzia with an American species.
In the year 1847 we find proved in Schleehtendal’s
Linncea the existence of the European Slum angustifoUum in
Australia, from specimens sent by Dr. Behr; and we observe
nearly simultaneously an account of a new Bimetopia by
Bunsre in SchlechtendaFs and Mohl’s Botanische Zeitwng;
two other species of that genus are noted by the same
acute botanist the year before in an index of plants culti-
vated in the Botanic Garden of Dorpat. The next contri-
butions are chiefly from the West Australian collections,
prepared by the venerable Drummond, which offered to
Turczaninow the opportunity of enriching the system of
umbelliferous plants with additional species of Hydrocotyle,
Bidiscus, (referred by him to Bimetopia), Trachymene,
Xanthosia and Platysace, the diagnostics of which appeared
in the 22nd volume of the Bulletin de la Societe Imperials
des Naturel de Moscow, and are reprinted by Walpers
in his useful Annal. Botan. System., a periodical which we
regret seeing discontinued after the death of its laborious
and ill-supported author, and which was formerly the
principal source of information to botanists abroad and to
travellers who had no direct access to numerous botanical
works, for which the Bepertorium and the Annales of
Walpers formed a valuable substitute. In the Ist volume of
the latter, (issued 1849), we observe the genus Microsiadium
233
Australian and Tasmanian Umbelliferous Plants.


inserted as Oschatzia, since the Hookerian appellation was
pre-employed by Boissier for the distinction of a new oriental
umbellate.
During the botanical exploration of the colonies of South
Australia and Victoria, (from 1847 till 1855), it fell to the
share of the author of this memoir to disclose new forms
of Hydrocotyle, Didiscus, and Dimetopia, to point out the
range of the Tasmanian genera Dichopetalvm, Oschatzia and
Diplaspis, as far as the alps of the Australian continent;
and also the occurrence here of Pozoa, Seseli and Aciphylla,
the latter eombinable with Gingidium, both established
simultaneously in Forster’s Characteres Genenm Plantamm
as early as 1775. Definitions of the last mentioned species
are partly given in the 25th volume of the Linncea, and
partly in the Transactions of the Philosophical Society of
Victoria, or of those of the Victorian Institute. Dr. Joseph
Hooker refers the genus Pozoopsis of the leones plantamm,
as a second species, to Diplaspis, in his Flora of Tasmania,
and states the approximate number of Australian Umbelli-
ferce as 120, from which remark it appears that several
plants of this order continued undescribed, although existing
in herbaria; and, indeed, several unknown to botanists are
mentioned in the works of travellers. Thus, Allan Cunning-
ham speaks of a North-west Australian Azorella in the
appendix to King’s Inter-tropical Survey of Australia as being
“ remarkable for its gigantic herbaceous growth.”
The last expedition through the intra-tropical zone of this
country, so ably conducted by Mr. Augustus Gregory, has
but furnished a limited number of plants belonging to
umbellate ; yet, perhaps, even more than might have been
expected from the known geographical distribution of this
order. As new, I may mention a Hydrocotyle, two Dryngia,
four Didisci, and a genus which may be distinguished (as
23 i
Australian and Tasmanian Umbelliferous Plants.


Tlatycarpidium) from Astrotricha in deciduous petals, from
Trachymene in flat and smooth carpels, from Platysace, as
far as the immature state of the fruit permits me to judge,
by the want of vittse, and from Eidiscus and most of the
allied genera by a tall shrubby habit, so unusual in this
order, and, finally, in a paniculate disposition of its umbels,
of which the greater number, notwithstanding their being
hermaphroditical, remain perfectly sterile.
Besides the description of the new Eryngia, I beg to sub-
mit an enumeration of all the species of Eidiscus with which
we are at present acquainted. Those of the sub-genus
Hemicarpus have been considered formerly by the author of
this treatise as constituents of a new genus, and are described
as such in Hooker’s Kew Garden Miscellany of this year.
Observing, however, on a re-examination of all the material
now at my command, that one of the mericarps, sometimes
in several species of Eidiscus, and often in Eidiscus pilosus,
remains undeveloped,—l prefer now to reduce Hemicarpus
to this genus.
Thus another is added to already numerous instances to
prove how much often the best characteristics, which are
adopted in botanical science for the division of species into
groups, fluctuate. Nature, which created but species, steps
with an easy pace over the arbitrary generic limits within
which we narrow and unite for the facilitation of study every
complixity of closely allied forms. We will ever, therefore,
remain at variance in opinion what limits to assign to
genera, but we ought by useful research to arrive at last at
one and the same result as to the true precincts of species.
Eryngium plantagineum.
Erect, glabrous; stems furrowed, the lower part leafless, the
upper part paniculate; radical leaves long or lanceolate-
linear, entire or with remote- thorny teeth or with narrow


segments; leaves of the stem pinnatifid, with linear seg-
ments; flower-heads cylindrical, on long peduncles, terminal,
crowned by simple pale®; leaflets of the involucre linear,
mueronate, reflexed, scarcely of the length of the flower-
head, as well as the pale® undivided ; pale® linear-subu-
late, but little longer than the flowers ; papul® of the fruit
blunt.
On the fertile basaltic downs around Peak Range,—Ferd,
Mueller.
Amongst Australian species nearest approaching to E.
angustifolium (D. C. Prodr. iv. p. 95); but nearer allied yet
to the South American E. coronatum (Hook, and Am. Rot.
Misc., iii. 350).
Eryngium expansum.
Procumbent, glabrous; stems streaked; radical leaves
rhomboid-cuneate, deeply toothed ; stem-leaves broad-rhom-
boid, deep-trifid; their lobes broad-cuneate, incised-
dentated; flower-heads small, nearly globose, axillary and
terminal, on very short peduncles or sessile ; leaflets of the
involucre longer than the flower-heads, linear-subulate, as
well as the pale® undivided; papul® of the fruit acutely
pointed.
On the banks of the Dawson and Burnett Rivers.—Ferd..
Mueller.
Similar to E. vesiculosum (Labill. Nov. Holl. Specim,, i.
p. 73).
Bidiscus. D. C.
Sect. I. Teleiocarpws; Ferd. Mueller. Both mericarps
fertile or one rarely undeveloped.
1. Bidiscus ccerulews ; Hook. Bot. Mag., t. 2875.
Western Australia.
2. Bidiscuspilosus j Benth. in Hueg. Emm. Plant,
Nov. Holl. Austro-occid., p. 54. Port Phillip,
230
Australian and Tasmanian Umbelliferous Plants,


Ferd. Bauer; Tasmania, Gunn; Gipps’ Land,
Ferd. Mueller; Mooni River, tributary of the
Barwan, Sir Th. Mitchell.
B. pjarviflorus; Ferd. Mueller. Myall Lake,
New South Wales, C. Moore.
3. Bidiscus alhiflorus ; Cand. Prodr., iv., p. 72.
Port Jackson. try •,
4. Bidiscus procumbens ; Ferd. Mueller. Stems
slender, prostrate; all leaves Bor 5 parted, scan-
tily hispidulous, segments bifid or trifid : their
divisions rhomboid or ovate-lanceolate, deeply
dentated; leaflets of the involucre imperfectly
laciniated, glabrous, of equal length with the
smooth capillar pedicels ; teeth of the calyx trian-
gular, blunt; petals white ; mericarps minutely
tuberculated.
Rare on the Brisbane River; W. Hill; Ferd.
Mueller.
Fjasily to be distinguished from the preceding
species in its flaccid, procumbent, distinctly
striated stems, in nearly uniform leaves, broader
leaflets of the involucre, and in blunt but not
subulate teeth of the calyx.
5. Bidiscus htmilis ; J. Hooker in leones Plantarum,
t. 304.
Sub-alpine localities of Van Diemen’s Land;
Backhouse, Gunn, Milligan, Lawrence, Stuart.
Australian alps in humid grassy vallies at an eleva-
tion between 4000 and 6000 ft.—Ferd. Mueller.
Sect. 11. Hemicarpus ; Ferd. Mueller. One mericarp fer-
tile, the other always undeveloped. (Bimetopia, sect.
Anisocarpcea, Turczaninow in Bulletin de la Societe des
Naturel de Moscou, xxii., part ii., p. 29. Hemicarpus , n. g.,
Ferd. Mueller in Hooker’s Kew Garden Miscellany , 1857,
fasc. i.)


6. Bidiscus setwlosus; Ferd. Mueller. Ilernicarpus
didiscoides; Ferd. Mueller, L. C. On barren
plains and ridges of Arnhem’s Land; Ferd.
Mueller.
7. j Didiscus anisocarpus ; Ferd. Mueller. Bimetopia
anisocarpa ; Turcz., L. C. Western Australia;
Drummond.
8. Bidiscus glandulosus; Ferd. Mueller. Annual,
glandulously pubescent; radical leaves dissected ;
lower stem-leaves 3-parted, upper ones trifid, divi-
sions lanceolate or ovate-cuneate, in front deeply
toothed or jagged; leaflets of the involucre from
13 to 20, linear-setaceous, fringed, of the length
of the pedicels; petals white; fertile mericarp
roundish-ovate, with a narrow keel, sterile one
with two short subulate teeth.
On the sandy banks of the Nicholson River,
(Gulf of Carpentaria), and on Newcastle Range;
Ferd. Mueller.
B. leiocarpws. Nearly glabrous, segments of the
leaves more numerous and narrower, fertile meri-
carp without tubercles.
On the Burdekin River; Ferd. Mueller.
9. Bidiscus villosus; Ferd. Mueller. Ilernicarpus
villosus ; Ferd. Mueller, L. C. Sandstone table-
land at the head of Sturt’s Creek, N. W. Austra-
' lia ; Ferd. Mueller.
10. Bidiscus (jrandis; Ferd. Mueller. Bimetopia
grandis ; Turczaninow, L.C. Western Australia;
Drummond.
11. Bidiscus glaucifolius; Ferd. Mueller, in Schlech-
tendal’s linneea, xxv., p. 395. Rocky declivities
of Elder’s Range, near Lake Torrens, very rare.
Ferd. Mueller.
238
Australian and Tasmanian Umbelliferous Plants.
