

IM^^
•v«®-*» •'■?•■ jT\ I
J, urt
J*f , > yj
HH| f: .^^^ 5pi|<i .. . ■ ' ~]


♦
I
f


N




I


CINTRA DANCED UP TO THEM.
Page 18.


PRINCESS CINTRA
MRS. STACY WADDY.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE GENERAL LITERATURE
COMMITTEE.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.;
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.
BRIGHTON: 129, north street.
New York ; E. & J. B. YOUNG AND CO.


PRINTED BY
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
LONDON AND BECCLKS*


A 7/6 fOOi
PRINCESS CINTRA.
CHAPTER I.
ON BOARD THE “GLENCOE.”
A ROUGH awning was spread over the end of
the poop of the ship Glcucoc to protect the
passengers from the almost vertical rays of
the sun. Beyond the shade of the awning the tarry
calking of the deck-planks bubbled up in the
midday heat, and Edith Giffard asked herself lazily
whether it was worth while to leave her comfort-
able deck-chair, cross the band of sunshine, and
go down the companion to her cabin below to
replace the book, which she had been reading to the
girl by her side, with one more congenial to her
own tastes.
Then a crowd of flying fish swept along the
surface of the water, and Miss Giffard sat up, that
she might have the better view of their lovely
colours flashing in the sunlight.


“ Seven bells, Miss Gifford.”
The captain’s voice preceded him up the com-
panion, and before it was followed by his sun-
helmet, grizzled beard, and shirt sleeves, Edith had
opened her sunshade and struck the seven sharp
notes on the bell before the wheel. The answering
sound come from the bell on the fo’csle, and the
watch below prepared to turn out for dinner.
“Can I take the sun to-day?” Edith asked, as
the captain made ready his sextant.
He shook his head, adjusted the glass to the
horizon, and then came and sat down under the
awning.
“ How’s the knitting, Miss Neville ? ” he asked
the girl in the other chair. “ I’m afraid those com-
forters and muffetees won’t be ready for the men
before we get into the Roaring Forties.”
“I’ve been asleep,” said Miss Neville, yawning.
“ Edie, that was a deadly dull book. We will save
the rest of it till one of us gets insomnia. Captain,
why don’t you catch a whale or find something
interesting? I am so tired of this dull, dull
voyage.”
But the captain was humming cheerfully to
himself as he drew a belaying pin from the rails
and began to belabour one corner of the deck.
« What are you making that noise for, Captain ? ”
“To wake the mate. It’s time he came on deck.
I want a good sight with the sextant to-day,
certain sure, to test the chronometers.”


Edith looked interested. She had spent much
of the past six weeks in learning navigation of the
rough and ready sort in use on board the Glencoe .
There was nothing else to do. She and Miss
Neville were the only passengers, both taking the
sailing voyage ter their health, and the doctors
had forbidden Edith to read much till she had
j
completely recovered from the bad nerve break-
down which had resulted from a year of overstrain
in a London newspaper office.
After five minutes’ steady knocking, the mate
appeared with a second sextant. Both officers
stood motionless, with the glasses levelled at the
horizon ; then the captain glanced at his watch,
made a note with his pencil on a painted ventilator
by his side, looked through the sextant again, and
waved his hand to Miss Giffard.
“ Eight bells,” he said, and went below.
Edith struck eight bells, and strolled along to
the bridge to watch the whole crew coming for
their daily allowance of lime-juice served out by
the steward.
Presently she followed the captain below, and
sat down quietly at the opposite side of the saloon
table till he shut up the calculating books with a
bang, and spread out a big chart of the Atlantic.
“ It’s a clear day,” he said at last. “We ought
to sight land about half-past one o’clock ; anyway,
before four bells.”
“ What land is it, Captain ? ” Edith inquired.


“ I didn’t think vvc should see any until wc reach
Australia.”
The captain pointed at the chart.
“Trinidad?” she said. “Isn’t Trinidad in the
West Indies ? ”
“ The big island is,” he answered slowly, measur-
ing off with his compasses the miles the ship had
traversed since the day before, and making a dot
on the chart close to the place where Trinidad lay.
This is just a rock in the ocean. We have been
running straight for it just to see if the chrono-
meters are right and all going well.”
“I see,” said Edith. “If we sight this rock at
the right moment, it will show that all your calcu-
lations are correct. But here is the steward to set
the dinner-table, Captain. Shall I roll up the
chart ? ”
She went up on the poop again, and looked long
and steadily towards the south, but no land was
in sight when the cabin dinner-bell rang.
It was nearly two o’clock when the man on the
look-out forrard shouted, “ Land ahead ! ” and the
captain brought his glasses on deck to assure
himself that all was well.
Is there anything on the island except sea
birds ? ” Edith asked.
“Not on this side,” he said; “it’s too rocky.
Round the other side it slopes a bit to the sea, and
there is some fresh water. They did put a few
goats thcie at one time, in case of shipwrecked


crews seeking shelter and food, but I don’t know
if they are there still. There are ship-masters so
mean they will go and rob stores like that, as they
do the provisions in the islands further south that
are buried in known places for whalers in distress.”
“ Have you ever found a shipwrecked crew,
Captain ? ”
“Not on Trinidad, Miss Giffard, I always take
a sweep round with my glasses when near the
equator to look out. When I was apprentice on
board the Mac Cullurn More , my first vessel, the
skipper was taking a sight in the afternoon, and
just as he got the sextant fixed he saw a black
speck. He rubbed the glass and looked again, but
the speck was still there, and it turned out to be a
boat from a lost ship, and five starving men aboard.
You can call me if you see anything, Miss Giffard ;
I am going to turn in below.”
Edith read a little, worked a little, yawned a
great deal, and watched the island at intervals.
As the sun got lower the heat was less, and she
started a walk up and down the poop —twenty-one
steps here, twenty-one steps back again. It was
past five when the Glencoe came abreast of the
island ; it was but a rock, but intensely interesting
to watch after six weeks at sea. There was a
different kind of gull, too, flying about, and some
smaller birds.
Tea in the stuffy state-room below was rather a
bore, but soon over, and the two passengers perched


themselves up near the wheel-box with the mate’s
glasses to get a good view of the “ other side ” of
Trinidad before the sun went down.
It was the mate’s watch on deck —the dog-watch,
when there was little work going on.
“Mr. Morgan,” Edith called, straining her eyes
at the glasses, “ is it fancy or can I see something
white fluttering there ? ”
o
The mate took the glasses. “ There’s something
white,” he said. “ And there’s figures; but the
sun’s nigh gone, miss, and I can’t well see. Call
the captain, Tommy,” he said to the boy who was
watering the too dry planks of the poop-deck.
The Captain could just make out something,
and, in spite of the fair wind, he bade the mate
slacken sail and put the ship about.
It was dark before a boat was launched, with the
second mate and six men on board.
“ I suppose I can’t go ? ” Edith asked.
The captain shook his head. They stood listen-
ing to the plash of oars, and when that had died
away, leaned on the rail, straining their eyes and
ears in the darkness for any sight or sound.


CHAPTER 11.
THE SECOND MATE’S BURDEN.
IGHT bells struck at the end of the second
dog-watch, and then the regular sounding
of the half-hours began for the night
watches.
Miss Neville went below at nine o’clock. Edith
stayed on deck, watching for the first hint of
moonrise in the tropical night.
The moon rose, like a burning ship on the horizon,
at about half-past nine. Still they watched as the
light grew stronger, but it was more than an hour
later, when a movement could be seen from the
land. Six bells, seven bells, and then just before
twelve o’clock the boat’s light could be seen moving
towards the Glencoe .
Edith leaned over the rail.
“There are more men in the boat, Captain.”
“ Nine,” he said.
Nine ; she could count for herself now, and one
of them had a bundle on his knee. They came
up the side of the ship one by one. The second


mate took the bundle, half buttoned it inside his
coat, half supported it with one arm, and swung
himself on deck.
Two strange sailors followed him, the boat was
hauled up, the captain gave orders for all sail to
be made again, and called the new-comers into the
cabin to tell their story.
Not much could be elicited at first. They were
Portuguese, and knew no French even, still less
any of the northern tongues.
The second mate released the bundle from his
coat and laid it on the table. It wailed feebly, and
Edith came fonvard and took it in her arms.
“ It’s a baby,” she cried. “At least, a good big
girl. She must be three or four years old. But
poor little thing, how worn and wasted she looks.”
“ Well, we beached the boat,” the second mate
was explaining to the captain. “ And these here
men came forward jabbering as hard as they could.
I couldn’t understand a word of their lingo, nor
could the fellows with me. They led us up a bit
on shore to where this child lay, and then they
took us to a new-made grave, and by pointing,
and a word or two, we made out that it was the
child’s mother that had died. They had a few
stores, and the battered-in old boat they came
ashore in.
“ Was there any name on the boat ? ” the
captain interrupted.
“ Cintra on the bow, and we brought in a life-


belt with Cintra on it too ; that was all there was
to bring, the child had nothing but that rag of
a nightdress, and seems like to follow the mother,
poor kiddy.”
They were standing in a group round Miss
Giffard as she held the child, and the captain
came and took its tiny wrist tenderly in his great
roueh hand. There had been a wife and children
with him on many a voyage, and he knew much
about childish ailments.
“ It’s the starvation fever most likely,” he said.
“ Pork and biscuit, and water for a babe that ought
to be getting a pint and a half of milk a day. She
should be put to bed.”
“ May I take her to my cabin ? ” Edith asked.
“ Poor wee motherless girlie ! ”
The steward fetched bedding for the spare berth
in Miss Giffard’s cabin, while Edith took off the
ragged nightdress, washed the little wasted body,
wrapped it in a soft silk skirt of her own, and
poured a little diluted condensed milk into the
fevered mouth.
It was stuffy in her cabin, and the child seemed
to gasp for air, so the captain carried her on deck,
and they made a little bed for her of one of the
folding chairs.
Edith moistened her lips with the milk and
water, but the child still tossed and wailed. All
through the next day, and the next, and the next,
she seemed to hang between life and death*


The captain added brandy to the milk, and
helped the two ladies to nurse the sick child with
a tenderness they would not have expected from
the rough old sailor.
A little more light was thrown on the wreck of
the Cintra, by the first mate who understood a
little Portuguese.
She was a vessel trading between Lisbon and
Brazil, and carrying a few passengers when they
presented themselves. More passengers than usual
had been aboard that voyage ; several gentlemen
and four ladies. Two of the ladies had children
with them.
When the alarm of fire came, the four boats were
filled. Most of the passengers had been put in
the first; indeed it was over crowded, and had
foundered as the third boat, containing half a
dozen common sailors, was launched. They had
picked up one lady and a child, and shared with
them the scanty supply of water on board. The
lady had given nearly all her ration of water to the
child, who cried piteously for it during the six long
days they drifted under the burning sun.
Four men had died of fever, brought on by sun-
stroke and want of water, while they were in the
boat. On the seventh day they sighted Trinidad
more by good luck than good management, landed
towards evening and found fresh water. It was too
late to save the lady ; she was delirious with fever,
and died two days later. They buried her, and


did their best to look after the child, but the food
they had was almost worse than nothing for her.
On the evening of the twelfth day they saw the
Glencoe coming round the island, and waved their
clothes, and began to light a fire to attract atten-
tion. That was all.
They did not know the lady’s name. She was
Portuguese, and promised them money in Lisbon,
if they would give her more water for the child.
The Cintra belonged to a firm of shipowners in
Lisbon and was on her way there from Brazil.
“We shall find the child’s friends through the
owners,” the captain said. “ The Portuguese
Consul at Adelaide will help—if she ever gets
there,” he added doubtfully, bending over the rest-
less little body in her rough bed.
But as they went farther south the air became
cooler, and the child slept. She was carried into
Miss Giffard’s cabin again, and, as she seemed to
be gaining strength, Edith began to consider the
question of clothing. Miss Neville’s knitting
needles were set to work in earnest now, and little
vests grew under her quickened fingers. Edith
turned over the stock of old clothes she had
brought for the voyage, and contrived garments
out of nightdress, skirts, and a dressing-gown.
The child lay very quietly in her berth, in those
early days of convalescence; her great grey eyes
watching Edith as she worked or read.
“ What shall we call her ? ” Laura Neville asked


one day, and Edith suggested “ Cintra,” after
the lost ship, until they found out the poor waif s
real name.
They could make nothing of her broken foreign
talk, even aided by the Portuguese* sailors and
the ready mate. Little Cintra picked up English
quickly from Edith, and by the time they neared
Adelaide she seemed to forget her old language.
She was, of course, a great favourite on board
the Glencoe . The captain tried to spoil her, but
she did not understand or care for all his ways.
It was quaint to see her dignified look of dis-
approval, when he tried to give her some dainty
off his own plate. The big eyes would regard him
gravely, and then she would turn to Edith —she
sat between them at meals—as though appealing
for protection.
Cintra, and Mr. Morgan were great friends, but
her first Glencoe acquaintance, the second mate,
was her chief playmate.
When his was the earlier dog-watch on deck
they had great games together, racing and chasing,
and shrieks of delight. On Sundays, too, when
there was no unnecessary work done, after the
captain had read the morning service, they would
run up and down the poop, and sometimes, when
the weather grew stormy and big waves broke
over the main deck, Cintra was not allowed out at
all, unless Mr. Sorby tied her to him with his long
woollen muffler, and carried her up the companion.


On the worst days, when even Miss Gtftard
might not go on deck, the steward would bring
the ship’s cat up from the hold to bask by the
stove. Edith and Cintra would sit on the matting
by the stove, and try to make friends with poor
sandy Tom —not an easy task, as the useful pussy
was more accustomed to the society of the rats
below.
On these stormy days, Cintra had often to clutch
Edith’s skirts to stop herself from being rolled to
the lee side of the ship as a big wave thumped
on the deck above them. But that was part
of the fun ; and the wee maid soon found the
safest plan was to sit down plump, if she felt
herself falling.


CHAPTER 111,
BOATS.
“/'''■APTAIN, what will become of the child
V-' when we get to Adelaide?” Edith asked
one day.
The captain shook his head in doubt.
“ 1 don’t rightly know, Miss Giffard. It is an
odd case. If it was in England, now, she could
go to the workhouse while her friends were being
communicated with, but there are no workhouses
in Australia. Destitute children are boarded out
by the State, and the State’s not too anxious to
support a child from outside.”
“ But you said there was a Portuguese Consul
at Adelaide ; won’t he help ? ”
“ I’ll go and see him when we land; but
I doubt if he’ll take the child. Poor little miss !
one can see she s been brought up dainty
like, but she’ll likely have to rough it in the world
after all.”
They heard a merry laugh as the captain spoke,
and Cintra danced up to them, trying to sing some


words the second mate had taught her. She had
the tune well enough, such as it was ; the child
was undoubtedly musical, but the words were a
difficulty.
“ Oh, when I was single
My money did jingle,
La la-la la, la-la la, la."
She climbed on Edith’s knee and looked at her
roguishly.
“ Boats,” she said. “ Boats, Edie,” imperatively.
“We are going too fast for yacht-racing, you
imperious princess.
Cinfra ran to the rail, and looked at the quick
rush of water as the Glencoe speeded east.
“ One knot,” she said gravely. “ Boats, Edie.”
Edith laughed.
“More like ten knots, I think. But, see, we
will make the boats and put them away till the
wind drops a little before we sail them.”
She tore the advertisement sheets out of the
magazine on her lap, and the child came and
watched in silence till eight little paper boats
were ready.
“ One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,”
said Edith; and the child repeated the words
after her.
“ Eight boats,” and she took a little gleeful
dance, and then began what Edith called lessons.
“ Chair, rail, board, glass, wheel, mast ” she
began, touching each object in her march round


the poop. « Rope, and— ” (with an effort) “ b’layin’
pin ! ” }
“ Who taught you that ? ” Edith asked ; but the
child went on.
“ Skylight, capstan o-o-o.”
She ran to Edith and cried “ Boats ” again. One
by one the boats were taken away, and then Cintra
came and pulled at Edith’s skirts.
“ Boats, bed,” she said.
“Put the boats to bed?” asked Edith, turning
round. “ Why, you ingenious child ! ” *
For the eight little boats were stored in the
eight holes in the capstan where the bars would
go when it was working.
That evening, when Cintra was in bed, Edith
saw the mate carefully remove the paper boats
and store them under the skylight cover for
safety.
“ It may ram in the night, you see, Miss Giffard ”
he said apologetically, “and I would not have
her disappointed, no, not for a new ship of mv
own. '
Poor princess 1 > thought Edith, as she joined
the sleeping child in the cabin below, “poor little
Cintra. 'She’ll likely have to rough if the
captain said, and how can I help her? ” '
Next morning they sighted land, the first since
Trinidad, eight weeks before, and a fair wind
carried them up to Port Adelaide before nightfall
The pilot came on board, and the Customs officer


followed with letters for the passengers and sailors
—home letters, eagerly devoured after more than
three months at sea.
There was a letter for Edith from her employers
in London, offering her a better position and less
trying work, on the staff of a new weekly they
were bringing out, if her health would allow her
to return within three months. As she read it,
Cintra came up to her knee attracted by the little
pile of papers.
“ Boats/’ she cried. “ Boats, and boats, and
boats.”
Edith caught the child in her arms and hugged
her close.
“You shan’t go to a workhouse, my pet,” she
cried. “You shall go home with Edie, and stay
with her too if your stupid friends don’t want you.”
She had not dared to think of it before, yet the
tiny arms round her neck, and the imperative
voice of the little “ Princess ” had come to mean
so much to her that it would have been a fearful
wrench to part with the child in doubt as to the
sort of treatment she would receive. Friends
would turn up, that was certain. The captain
saw the Portuguese Consul, and reported all known
particulars as to the wreck of the Cintra , and
Edith wrote herself to the owners of the ship at
Lisbon, saying that she would take care of the
child till they sent for it, and giving her address
in London.


Then she took little Cintra to the city, beautiful
Adelaide, with its wide streets, and green trees
so refreshing to the sight after a long sea voyage,
and bought more suitable clothing for her than
the ship could provide.
“ The little lady repays trouble spent on her,”
the shop-girl said ; and, indeed, little Cintra, in a
cashmere frock, dainty shoes and socks, and a
white straw hat on her dark curls, looked more
like a princess than ever.
Edith counted her supplies carefully, and engaged
a passage for herself and the child in the next
Orient Line mail-boat homeward bound.
They had a few days in Melbourne and Sydney,
where Edith spent all her spare money on various
useful and pretty things for the child.
“ Going home so soon, and to an assured position,
I will be extravagant,” she said, and Cintra took
everything like a princess, as her right.
The passenger list of the S.S. Cintra on her last
voyage from Brazil awaited Edith Giffard at
Plymouth on her way home.
Four ladies’ names were there. Two, Mrs.
Gordon, wife of an English merchant in Brazil,
and Senhora Busaco, had children with them. The
child with Senhora Busaco was a little girl, three
years old. The mother was a widow, returning
to friends near Lisbon. The child in Miss Giffard’s
charge was no doubt little Inez Busaco. The
agent promised to communicate with her family


and let Miss Giffard know what proposals they
would make for taking charge of the little girl.
But the Busaco family declined to undertake
the charge of the child, or to furnish funds for
the purpose of bringing her to Portugal. The
mother had been left penniless, the child was
quite unprovided for, and they did not want a
dowerless girl on their hands.
Edith was secretly pleased, though she con-
demned them as heartless, and Cintra would have
been pleased too, had she realized how narrowly
she had escaped being separated from her Edie.
After the homage and attention she had received
from every one on board ship the princess found
her life in a London flat rather dull at first.
In the early morning there was fun enough,
getting breakfast with Edith,'and perhaps a walk
in the street or on the roof. Then Edith went
away for the whole long day and left Cintra in
the charge of a little dressmaker, who lived in
the flat above them, and had not too much work
to give time to the child.
Saturday and Sunday were the days of joy,
when Edith had no tiresome office to go to,
Saturday often began with a pillow fight and a
late breakfast, then a stroll in Chelsea Gardens,
or a voyage of discovery up or down the river in
a penny steamboat. Once they went to the Zoo
in a dark and dreadful train when Cintra had to
clasp Edith’s hand tightly all the way. The joy


of seeing all the wonderful beasts and birds soon
made her forget all the terrors of the journey, and
coming home she slept all the way and cared for
nothing.
On Sunday mornings she lay snug in bed while
Edith went out to the early service and came
back to get breakfast. It w*as a promise that the
princess should not stir out until she heard her
Edie s own tap at the door, w T hen she might jump
out of bed and just come to the door in her
nightgown to open.
Later they went off to church together, then
for a walk, and back to dinner. Then up on to
the roof with a book of Sunday pictures, which
were helping Cintra to read as well as learn the
Bible stories.


KML r ,j€. 7 * jNn h v -Kw - ijngi
DQQU V »7 7 y of JQ I w I -|ymj
CHAPTER IV.
IN MOSELY FLATS.
CINTRA and Miss Willis, the little dressmaker
in flat 59, soon made friends, though at first
the princess had not at all approved of Ediths
plan to leave her during the day.
Picking up the pins on the floor proved fascinat-
ing work, however, and there seemed an unending
supply every morning to be replaced in the saucer
with the picture of Queen Victoria on it. They
were better than the boats as a counting lesson,
and the princess sang the numbers over to herself
as she picked them up.
“ One -two, thr ee-four, five-six, s'en-eight," till
even the Royal Crown was covered, and the saucer
back on Miss Willis’s table.
Visitors did not often come. Most of Miss
Willis’s customers were tried on in the evening,
when Cintra was in bed ; but occasionally there
was a knock at the door and an order given.
When the weather grew warmer, Miss Willis
left the door on to the stone landing open, in order


to get all the air possible, as the little flats were apt
to be stuffy in summer. Then Cintra found a
new amusement beside which boats and pins were
forgotten.
At the other side of the landing the little door
had a notice upon it Miss Esther Taylor, teacher
of the violin and piano and from the first
morning when Cintra heard the notes of a
violin floating across the stone passage she was
entranced.
Sometimes it was the piano instead that was
next best, unless the playing was slow and
laboured and displeasing to the tiny critic outside,
through its want of harmony. When the music
was very gay Cintra danced amongst the pins
with glowing cheeks and waving curls, and when
it was sad she leaned against the doorpost and
listened with all her might.
“ Please open the door,” she said to Miss Willis
one morning.
“ It’s too cold, dearie.”
Please, plccisc ) in the insistent little voice that
was wont to be obeyed. “ Cintra wants you to.”
Miss Willis put down her work and opened the
door.
“ What a child it is! Do you want to hear the
music, dearie ? ”
Cintra nodded her head to the tune the piano
was playing, and Miss Willis went back to her
seat.


'‘Don’t go outside, Cintra. Stay where Miss
Willis can see you,” she said. “ Why, poor Miss
Willis wants some pins, and no one to pick them
up for her ! ”
No notice from the listening figure at the door.
Cintra watched a girl of about fifteen come up the
stairs and knock at the "tinkle door” as she called
it. Music of any kind was “ tinkle ”to the princess
just then.
The piano ceased abruptly,'the door was opened,
and soon Cintra heard an exercise begin.
“ One and, two and, three and, four and ”
She sighed ; this was dull, and there was Miss
Willis asking for pins again.
" I will pick up pins now,” said the princess,
graciously. "The Queen saucer, please, Miss
Willis.”
She knelt amongst the pins, and began to croon
to herself as the simple notes came across from
the tinkle door —one and, two and, three and, four
and
" One and, two and, three and, four and,” sang
Cintra, and then laughed as gaily as if she had
been on board the Glencoe again.
It was such a nice new way of counting. You
had just time to pick up a pin while saying
"and” and to pop it into the saucer at the one,
two, or three.
She was so absorbed with this new play, that she
did not notice the music stopping, and the opening


and shutting twice of the “tinkle door.” There
was a little tap at Miss Willis’s door, and in answer
to the dressmaker s “ come in ” such a pretty lady
appeared. Cintra stopped her singing and looked
at the new-comer with her great grey eyes.
“ Are you very busy just now, Miss Willis ? ”
“ No, madam, not just now, not over full of
work,” the dressmaker said.
“ I am Miss Taylor from the flat opposite, and I
should be very much obliged if you will come in
for a few hours and alter an evening gown for
me.”
“ I am afraid I can’t leave, Miss Taylor.”
“ Oh, please',' said the girl, if you possibly can.
We can leave my door open and hear if any one
asks for you. I can’t spare a minute now to bring
the work across as another pupil will be here at
once, and I want the dress unexpectedly this
evening to wear at a concert.”
She looked so distressed that Miss Willis was
inclined to consent. But then there was Cintra.
She glanced at the child on the floor.
“You could bring the little girl with you,” Miss
Taylor said. “ What a handsome child ! What is
your name ? ” —to Cintra.
“ Cintra,’ >
“ What a pretty name! Will you come to my
room with Miss Willis, Cintra, and I will find some
picture-books for you ? ”
She held out her hand, and Cintra took it


confidently. She was such a pretty lady, and every
one was kind to the princess.
Miss Willis surrendered her last misgiving, put
away her work, lifted Queen Victoria and the pins
on to the table, and locked the door of her little
flat as Miss Taylor and Cintra crossed the landing.
Miss Taylor took out her own key and fitted it
into the lock.
“ This is the tinkle door,” said Cintra, wondering.
“Are you the tinkle lady? ”
“ What does tinkle lady mean ? ” asked Miss
Taylor, puzzled.
“ Tinkle. One and, two and, three and, four
and,” chanted Cintra.
“ Oh, I see. Yes, I suppose I am the tinkle
lady.”
“She means music, Miss Taylor. The child’s
just mad about music,” Miss Willis explained.
She will stand for hours listening to you playing
or your pupils ! ”
They were in Miss Taylor’s room now, a dainty
little room with the piano across one corner, and
a big pile of music at the side. Two violin cases
and a ribbon-decked guitar lay on a settle, and
there were books and flowers, and pictures on the
walls.
Cintra caught sight of a pin on the carpet and
made for it at once.
“ One and, one and,” she hummed, trying to find
another, but failing in her search.


“What a quaint little thing,” said Miss Taylor.
“ Who is she ? ”
“A little Portuguese girl without any friends.
She was a sea waif, and Miss Giffard, the journalist
on the floor below, has adopted her. Miss Giffard
is out all day, so she leaves the child with me. It
a piece ! if e\ei theie was one. The things that
child says ! ”
“Poor little thing. But we must get to work
Miss Willis.”
In a few minutes the dressmaker’s quick fingers
were busy over Miss Taylor’s pink silk dress, and
the music teacher looked relieved. To be asked
to play at Herr Friedhelm’s concert was so great
an honour that she wished to make a good im-
pression. The great German musician had been
her teacher, and she owed more to his help than
would be possible to estimate.
She looked at the clock on the mantelshelf.
Her next pupil would not be here for ten minutes
at least, long enough to allow her to try that new
piece on the piano. She sat down, and ran her
fingers over the notes for a moment, forgetting the
child on the rug.
But at the sound of the “ tinkle ” Cintra was up
and by the player’s side. She watched Miss
Taylor’s hands run up and down with a look of
awe and wonder.
Miss Taylor stopped playing and lifted the child
on to her knee.


“ You dear little music lover,” she said. “ See
if you can play yourself.”
She helped the small fingers to strike one note
after another, and Cintra’s delight when she found
herself producing “tinkles” was extreme. Both
tiny hands stretched out to strike the keys, but
the result was not satisfactory ; the two together
made discord and Cintra shook her head.
“ I wish all my pupils felt like that when they
made mistakes,” Miss Taylor said. “ You wonder-
ful infant! how I should like to teach you.”
The pupil arrived just then, and Cintra’s first
music lesson was over.
She was established on the hearthrug with a
picture-book, but her big eyes stared all the time
at Miss Taylor and the pupil who was learning
the violin. When Miss Taylor took the instru-
ment to show how a particular bar should
be played Cintra danced with joy, and hummed it
over to herself in exact time.
The teacher’s quick ear heard the child, but she
had no time to take further notice of her then.
At one o’clock the dress was finished, Miss Taylor
had to go out, and Cintra turned to her pin gather-
ing on INl iss Willis’s floor without any pretty
“ tinkle ” to interrupt her labours.
Herr Friedhelm’s concert was not over till nearly
eleven o’clock that night, and it was late when Miss
Taylor climbed the stairs at Mosely Flats.
A light was still burning in the outer room oi


Xo, 55, and a sudden impulse made Miss Taylor
stop and knock lightly at the door.
Edith Giffard was working later than usual;
she had just finished an article ready for the press
next day when the step outside and tap at her
door roused her attention.
“ Who is there ? ”
“I am Esther Taylor. It is very late, but I
thought if you were still up you could see me
now.”
Edith opened the door. “ Please come in, Miss
Taylor, she said. “I have to thank you for your
kindness to my sea waif to-day. She brought me
wonderful stories of her “ tinkle lady.” You made
a deep impression on her.”
“ She made a deep impression on me,” Miss
Taylor said. I never saw a child with such
decided musical talent. I want you to do me
a great favour, Miss Giffard, and let me teach her.”
“ It is very good of you,” Edith said doubtfully.
“ I can’t take a refusal, Miss Giffard, I simply
can’t. Partly because it will be a real pleasure to
have her, but chiefly because it is so important
that she should be well trained from the first.
She has the makings of a fine musician. Oh,
please don’t refuse.”
“ I can’t, when you put it like that,” said Edith,
smiling. “ But, indeed, I was not thinking of a
refusal, only your offer took me by surprise. You
know the child’s history ? ”


“Miss Willis told me a little ; that she is Portu-
guese by birth and you saved her from the wreck.
It is a most romantic story.”
“ Her real name is Inez Busaco; she is an
orphan, and her relations in Portugal refuse to
help her in any way. I took charge of her to
save her from the workhouse. The real reason
why I hesitated, Miss Taylor, is that I am not
exactly rich myself, and at present I could not
pay for music lessons.”
“I suppose if we were rich,” Miss Taylor said,
“we should not stay in Mosely Flats and make our
own beds. We are just workers and ready to help
one another, and you must let me teach the child.
If she has no provision for the future it is all the
more important that she should have a profession,
and that it should be the musical profession I
cannot doubt. May I have her to-morrow morn-
ing, Miss Gifford ? ”
And Edith said “ Yes.”
That was the way in which Princess Cintra
began her musical education when she was four
years old.


CHAPTER V.
MR. SORBY AGAIN.
A/T . we S° to the Abbey to-day, Edie? ”
»J- Cintra asked one Sunday morning.
One of Cintra’s greatest treats was to
go to \\ estminster Abbey and hear the sweet boy
voices ringing through the arches, and the ever-
varying notes of the organ.
‘ : Are those your commands, Princess?” asked
P-dith, stroking the dark curls.
It was more than four years since Cintra had
been found, and she must have been eOht years
old at least—tail for her age, and possessed of a
quaint dignity that made her title Princess Cintra
singularly appropriate.
They went off to Westminster that afternoon on
the top of an omnibus, and entered the Abb°v
by the little door in Poet’s Corner. Opposite to
them the North Transept, where most people so
m, was almost full already, for the preacher was
popular, and the anthem from the “ Messiah "
Cintra listened entranced as a boy’s voice went


up and up, like a bird’s, in I know that my Re-
deemer liveth,”
She leaned forward over the desk in front of
hci, her straw hat pushed back, her great grey
eyes raised to the rose window opposite.
More than one of the congregation in the north
transept noticed the child. A tall distinguished-
looking man watched her intently for a time with
a troubled expression on his face, and when the
anthem was over he remained standing looking at
the child, still lost in thought, till his neighbour
pulled at his sleeve and he remembered where he
was and knelt down.
A young man in a blue serge suit and with a
somewhat nautical air also watched Cintra with
deep .interest, looked from the child to
who was by her side, and from Edith back aea'in
to Cintra, and evidently recognized them with
pleasure.
They did not see him. Cintra’s mind was’ full
of the music as the service went on, Edith’s with
the sermon.
Her life had not been an easy one lately, and
she had no one to tell her anxieties to, the obvious
comment of relations being, “ Why did she spend
time and money over a foundling who ought to
have been sent to the workhouse ? ” and the words
of the preacher on “ Cast thy bread upon the
waters, for thou shalt find it after many days,”
brought comfort and hope.


How could she cast aside the waif who had
been thrown on her care and protection ? In the
preachers words was justification for her action,
and when he went on to speak of trust in God—
“ Be not anxious for the morrow, be not anxious ”
she was soothed and comforted, and some simple
verses with which he ended his sermon rang in her
ears as she turned to go away.
“ So, for to-morrow and its needs
I do not pray,
But keep me, guide me, hold me, Lord,
Just for to-day.”
Cintra s hand was in hers as they went out
amongst the little crowd, neither speaking. They
walked round into Parliament Square to get the
Chelsea omnibus again, when the blue-clad young
man came up to them, smiling all over his face.
“Miss Giffard, don’t you remember me? And
is this young lady the Princess of Trinidad Island ?
She has grown, to be sure.”
“Why, it is Mr. Sorby of the Glencoe!” said
Edith. “I do indeed remember you. You must
come back and have tea with us. This is Princess
Cintra. Cintra, do you remember your old play-
mate ? ”
Perhaps Cintra remembered him more from the
story of her discovery which never wearied Edith
or herself in the hearing or telling 5 perhaps she
had some real recollection of her old friend. She


gave him her hand, and looked up at him in the
winning way she had.
“Kind Mr. Sorby, who buttoned me into his
coat,” she said.
“I couldn’t do that now, missie. You’re grown
too big, but that night you snuggled in as if you
belonged there.”
He laughed out loud at the recollection—so
loudly that two or three people turned to look at
the little group, and the tall man who had been in
the Abbey advanced towards them. He had been
looking for them in the crowd ; but before he had
time to come up to them the omnibus was there,
the three got in, and the vehicle lumbered off,
leaving him on the pavement. He called a cab
with the impulse to follow them, but changed his
mind as quickly.
“It was only a fancied likeness,” he said to
himself. “My poor little one lies at the bottom
of the Atlantic with her mother.”
And when the cabman asked “ Where to, sir ? ”
he said—
“Travellers’ Club.”
They had a gay tea-party at the flats that after-
noon, hearing all Mr. Sorby’s adventures since
they last met. He was first mate of the Glencoe
now, and had just returned from another Austra-
lian voyage.
“ Did you pick up any more shipwrecked
people ? ” asked Cintra,


“ T °.” he said ; “ never sighted one of them,
though you can think how I look out each time
we near Trinidad, or any other land where one
would be possible. When we have passengers
they never tire of hearing how I found you, missie,
and I often wished I knew where you and Miss
Giffaid lived, so as to get news of you when I
came ashore.”
“ Where is the Glencoe now ? ” asked Edith.
“ Lying at London Docks, Miss Giffard. It’s a
black place, and she’s all dirty now with unlading,
or I’d be proud to ask you on board.”
"You have the first mate’s cabin now, of
course, said Edith. “Do let us come some day.
I should like Cintra to see the ship, so that she
shall really remember it—not only half remember
with her baby mind.”
“ It’ 3 not a baby mind now,” said Cintra. “ Edie,
may I play to Mr. Sorby?”
She took the little violin out of its case and
played—“ Sunday music,” as she told him. Mr.
Sorby did not know much about music except the
“ shanties ” and sailor songs he had tried to teach
to Baby Cintra years before, but his ear caught at
once the air of the anthem solo that afternoon.
“ I shall always remember that,” he said. “ They
were just tuning up when I caught sight of you,
missie, in the Abbey. I was afraid I’d miss you
outside.”
“But you didn’t, you see,” said Cintra, “so it


is all right. And now you must come to see us
whenever you come ashore.”
Mr. Sorby promised, and gladly kept his promise,
too. They went down to London Docks to see
the Glencoe on the following Saturday, and had
tea with the mate in the well-remembered cabin ;
for Cintra did remember when she saw the old
scenes again.
She danced about in the old way, touching
things.
“ Stove, chair, bench, rail, table.” And then, in
stentorian tones, or the nearest approach to them
her voice could reach, “ Belay there ! I can speak
English now, can’tT, Mr. Sorby ? ”


CHAPTER VI.
CINTRA MEETS HERR FRIEDHELM.
TT ERR FRIEDHELM was giving a concert,
A A and Miss Esther Taylor was to play.
She had left the Mosely Flats and moved
into one of the more imposing "Mansions” in
Kensington, as being more convenient for her
pupils. It was not far from Herr Friedhelm’s
house, and some alteration being necessary in the
programme of his concert, he stopped there on his
way eastward one morning, to tell Miss Taylor of
the change.
The maid admitted him to a small room near
the door of the flat, and went to tell Miss Taylor.
Some one was playing the violin, and as she opened
the door of an inner room the sound came clearly
down the passage. The German was interested
and, as Miss Taylor came in, he inquired at once
who her pupil was.
“ Come and see,” she said, smiling.
She led the way along the passage, and lifted a
curtain hanging over a door at the end.


CINTRA MEETS HERR FRIEDHELM. 41
Near the big piano stood Cintra, her chin raised
her dark curls thrown back, in the graceful position
possible to violinists, her eyes fixed on the music-
stand in front of her. Quite unconscious of obser-
vation, she played to the end of a by no means easy
piece of music. Miss Taylor dropped the curtain,
and took Herr Friedhelm back.
He was excited and spoke rapidly.
“ Wonderful, marvellous ! That child ! I would
not have believed it possible. Where did you pick
her up ? ”
Esther told him all she knew of the child and
how she had come to meet her.
“There was no doubt of her musical capacity
from the very first day,” she said. “ Through all
the drudgery of teaching stupid pupils, it has been
such a pleasure to have this child to train. Why,
from the first day she knew a false note as well as
I do, and now—”
“She must come to me,” Herr Friedhelm said.
“ I will take her myself three times a week. She
must work, she must practice, she will take the
world by storm in ten years’ time—less than that,
you say she is nine years old now. Where is her
guardian ? ”
Esther gave him the address at Mosely Flats
and also of Edith’s office. Herr Friedhelm glanced
at his watch.
“ I will go there now, this morning; but I will
speak to the little one first.”


Cintra was playing again as they went down the
passage. She laid down her fiddle at the sound
of footsteps, and cleared the music-stand for the
next pupil. It was not a pupil, however; it was
the'great Herr Friedhelm, whom she had seen at
concerts, but never quite close up like this.
He v/as coming towards her, and holding out his
hand.
“So this is the little fiddler. What is your
name, my dear ? ”
“Cintra,” she said, and laid her little hand
readily in his. How kind he looked when he
smiled like that.
“Well, Cintra, will you come and have lessons
from an ugly old man like me, or do you prefer
pretty Miss Taylor?”
“ Lessons from you ! ”the child cried.
She had been sufficiently in the musical world
with Esther Taylor to know what that meant.
“ Lessons from you, Herr Friedhelm ? Oh! ”
He smiled yet more. This ingenuous flattery
was more gratifying than flattery usually was to
him.
“Of course I love Miss Taylor best,” the child
said, running to her friend’s side and taking her
hand. “But I should like to learn from you, Herr
Master.”
It was his pupils’ title for him, learnt from Miss
Taylor, and seemed to come very naturally from
the childish lips.


“I am going to see Miss Giffard,” Herr Fried-
helm said, “To know if she will let you learn
from me.”
Cintra’s face clouded for a moment. She crossed
over to Herr Friedhelm’s side and put her hand in
his again.
“It won’t cost much, will it, Herr Master?
Because Edie has not very much money to spend,
I know, and if it was to cost her anything I would
rather you did not ask her and I went without the
lessons.”
He put his big hand on the dark curls.
“All is right, little one; no difficulties about
that. I will wait for payment till you earn enough
money yourself.”
The child smiled up at him.
“ I shall some day,” she said. “ I will have
pupils, I will play at concerts.” She drew herself
up and waved her hand with a charming gesture.
“ I will play before the Queen.”
The musician was delighted.
“Will you come and drive with me now to see
Miss Giffard ? ” he asked.
So, in a few minutes they were driving through
Knightsbridge, Cintra talking and laughing at the
German’s funny stories as they went.
“ What shall I write on my card, to show that
you are with me?” he inquired, as they stopped in
front of a big office in one of the streets off the
Strand.


“Just put ‘ Princess Cintra,’ ” she said, “ and Edie
will know.”
So the card went up to Edith
“Princess Cintra
and
Plerr Friedhelm.”
And she came down to the waiting-room, wonder-
ing. Cintra ran to her at once.
“This is Herr Friedhelm, Edie,” she said, “and
he wants to know if he may teach me. Please, oh,
please, let him. To be his pupil gives one such a
good standing, you know.”
She was evidently quoting from some grown-up’s
speech, and the musician laughed.
He talked to Edith with a growing admiration.
To think of this slip of a girl, working hard to earn
her own living, taking charge of this charming child
to save her from the workhouse. Cintra’s little
speech about the want of funds had told him much
and when he thought of what Miss Giffard was
doing in real charity he felt ashamed of his own
small attempts to help his neighbours.
Anything he could do for the child he would •
it was possible to help her. Anything he could
do for Edith Giffard he would ; but what could be
done ?
He thought it over all the afternoon when he
left them after arranging to take Cintra three


mornings a week for lessons, but it was not till
evening that any plan occurred to him.
“ I don’t altogether like the idea,” he said to
himself. “ But that girl is working too hard, and
needs help, and there is no other way to do it
that I can see. The child is undoubtedly a fine
musician, too, and it would attract the public. A
few hundreds now would help with her education.
All the same I don’t like it. I never did approve
of infant prodigies.”
*
But approve or not approve, Herr Friedhelm
matured his scheme.
While the great musician was planning her future,
Cintra enjoyed herself in a rare visit to the City.
They lunched at Edith’s Club, and then Cintra
came and sat like a mouse by Edith’s desk in the
office where two or three men were working too.
O J
and watched them all until the office-boy took her
into his little room at the door, and she helped to
make tea with a spirit lamp, and heard all about
himself and his family.
He told her that he sang in the choir at the
Savoy Chapel, and she begged him to sing to her
there and then, at which he grinned, and said it
was as much as his place was worth.
He gave her some tea in his own mug, and a
biscuit, and so the time passed till Edith could get
away ; and they went eastward to St. Paul’s Cathe-
dral to the four o’clock service.
Cintra was awed by the vastness of the building


and delighted with the music, but she did not like
it as well as her dear Abbey at Westminster.
They came back by steamboat from London
Bridge after another tea at an aerated bread shop,
as Cintra said—
“ The office boy was very kind to give me his
mug of tea, and of course I drank it; but it was
rather dusty and officey, Edie, and real tea would
be nice to take away the taste.”
They looked down the river towards the shipping
lying in the hazy evening light—with red-gold
patches on the water.
“ I wonder where Mr. Sorby is now,” Cintra said.
“ It is nearly two months since he came to see us
last—perhaps he is near Trinidad. Was it an
evening like this when you found me, Edie? I
wonder if I shall ever see the little island again,
and the place where my mother was buried. But
the real she isn’t there, is she, Edie ? Oh, I wonder,
I wonder if the singing in Heaven will be better
than in St. Paul’s! ”


CHAPTER VII.
cintra’s first concert.
/"''INTRA’S violin lessons went on regularly in
Herr Friedhelm’s music-room, and the child
progressed rapidly under his teaching.
He was an exacting master ; always kind to
Cintra, but always severe. His older and more self-
conscious pupils found his manner trying some-
times, and had been known to leave him in tears ;
but Cintra never thought of his being vexed with
her when anything was wrong with the music. It
was the fiddle, or the hands that were too small for
a perfect grasp—all would be remedied with time
and practice.
Edith Giffard and Esther Taylor, both workers,
had taught her well, and she was wonderfully
shrewd and sensible. She had been naughty and
capricious sometimes with Miss Taylor, and
insisted on having her own way; but Herr Fried-
helm was an authority too far above her to be
questioned.
One thing he was very careful to teach her, and


found it much easier than with his older pupils.
Whatever interruptions might come from outside,
visitors coming in, a servant with a message, or
good Mrs. Friedhelm, Cintra was to go on playing
as if no one was there.
“ No matter how many people there are in the
room, my child, you and I know what we owe to
the music and to its composer. We play not for
the people who listen, but to be correct, to put into
it the meaning that makes it live.”
Cintra drank in all the words of her oracle, and
forgot herself and her surroundings in her music.
It came to mean no more to her than if it was the
cat curled up on the hearthrug who listened to her,
or half a dozen of the Herr Master’s friends; and
when he saw this, the Herr Master was pleased.
“ How old are you, little one ? he asked one
day.
“Ten and a bit,” said Cintra. “I don’t know
my birthday. We keep the day that Edie found
me instead, and add three years to that.”
“ I want to see your Miss Giffard and talk to
her. Will you stay with my wife to-day ? And I
will send a message asking Miss Giffard to come
here to fetch you this afternoon.
Cintra gladly assented. The musician’s heart
and soul within her had not done away with the
child’s love of cakes and sweets, and there was no
one like the Frau Mistress, as she had christened
Mrs. Friedhelm, for making dainties of that sort.


So, her lesson being over, she descended to the
kitchen where they made wonderful cakes in
plaits and letters, Cintra shaping six into her own
name letters, and then into the drawing-room to
sew, and eat some of the stores of candied fruits
and fondants that the Frau Mistress excelled in
making.
The time passed very rapidly till Cintra heard
Edith’s voice in the hall and sprang up to go
to her.
“ I think Herr Friedhelm wantsTo see her first/’
his wife said. “So we can wind another ball of
wool for my knitting.”
They wound another, and another, two—three-
four —before the maid came to say that Miss Cintra
was wanted in the music-room.
“ You say her real name is Inez Busaco,” Herr
Friedhelm was saying as Cintra came in. “ A
good name, a very good name.”
“ Couldn’t it be just ‘Cintra’ on the bills?”
pleaded Edith. “ There is not much fear, of course,
but those Lisbon people might try to get hold of
her, if they heard of this and thought a profit
might be made out of her. I did not like the tone
of their letters at all.”
“Princess Cintra?” the musician said, smiling.
9 o
“Just ‘ Cintra/ perhaps. That is good too. Well,
‘ Cintra ’ it shall be, for her debut concert, at any rate.
Come along, little one ; your poor Herr Master is
in difficulties. He wants to have a concert, and


he can’t get any one he likes well enough to play
the violin. Will you play for him ? ”
The child laughed up at him. “ I play at a
concert, Herr Master ? Why, yes, of course.”'
It was an excellent joke and Cintra ran for her
violin.
“ Here is the platform, and I stand thus, and
thus; and then I bow so”—with a graceful little
curtsey “ and retire. And the queen will send
for me to her royal chair to kiss her hand.”
Isn t she pretty ? ’ Edith said, in an undertone.
“My sea waif! ”
“Tou will have to practise hard, little one, and
play your very best, though I am afraid the queen
will not be there.”
Cintra looked grave again and ran to his side.
Do you mean it really, Herr Friedhelm ? But
no one would care to listen to me.”
“ Is tha t why you and I play our fiddles ? ”
“ No,” said the child. “We play so that we can
express the meaning of the music and make it live
as the composer wished.”
The Herr Master nodded approval and went on
with his examination.
“ Does it matter whether six people or six
hundred come to hear us ? ”
“ No, we play our best in any case.”
“I will add something to that teaching.
Audiences like best to listen when the player is
thinking only of the music and the composer—


not of them. Will you remember that. Fraulein
pupil ? ”
“ I will do for the Herr Master anything he
likes,” the child answered.
‘‘ Then that is settled, Miss Giffard,” said Herr
Friedhelm, turning to Edith. “ Next month, I
think, October 25th or 26th. It is the best time of
year. If she is a success we will have the con-
certs at intervals through the winter, and there will
be a good sum for education by the spring.
“ It: is very, very good of you, to take so much
trouble and interest in her,” Edith said, with tears
in her eyes.
“Ah! My dear young lady! and what have
you done? Now, come downstairs, and my wife
will give us tea.”
So Cintra’s first concert was arranged.
There were paragraphs in the papers about Herr
Friedhelm’s wonderful child pupil who would play
at St. James’s Hall on October the 25th, and a good
deal of interest was excited.
Mr. Sorby saw one of them, in an evening paper
put on board at Liverpool as he brought the
Glencoe safely up the Irish Channel for the Clyde
and Glasgow.
He determined to be in London by the twenty-
fifth ; but a head wind decided the matter otherwise,
and he was too late to form part of the audience
and encore the child performer as he had intended.
Miss Willis, who was prospering in a most


fashionable part of London now, also saw one in a
ladies’ paper. She went down to the Flats that very
evening with congratulations and a beaming face
to know if she might have the privilege of pro-
viding the child-violinist with the dress for her debut.
The subject had already been largely discussed
by Edith, Cintra, and the Frau Mistress, who took
a great interest in the child’s first appearance, and
advised a pretty red and green plaid silk! It
would go so nicely with her dark hair.
But Edith thought white, and Miss Willis
thought white, so white it was—a soft white silk
with a white sash and ribbon in her hair, and very
sweet and pretty Cintra looked as she came on to
the platform and bowed to the crowded audience
in St. James’s Hall.
The Herr Master was at the piano to accompany
her —a rare honour; and she thought far more of
pleasing him than the other people, indeed, they
hardly counted. “ People ” mostly said they liked
Cintra’s playing, but the Herr Master’s approval
was another thing. It was his pupils’ greatest
pleasure when he looked satisfied. That meant
much.
So Cintra played for him and for the music’s
sake, once—twice —thrice. There was applause
for the Herr Master at the piano, of course. There
were a few bouquets thrown, and Cintra ran for-
ward, picked them up and laid them in Herr
Friedhelm’s arms.


He put one back into her hand and bade her
bow to the people before them, and then took her
off the platform to Edith and Miss Taylor who
were waiting in the wings.
“Take her home now,” he said. “ Yes, all that
could be wished,” in answer to an anxious inquiry
from Miss Taylor.
The clapping died away ; some one began to
sing. Cintra’s first appearance was over.


CHAPTER VIII.
cintra’s second concert.
THERE were many paragraphs about the
child violinist, true and untrue, in the
papers during the next few weeks.
Several published a photograph of her, and to
Edith’s annoyance had somehow got hold of the
whole story of the finding of the child on Trinidad
and her name, Inez Busaco, and printed it all with
additions of their own. However, it was no use
objecting, and all these notices would attract
people to the next concert, which was of course
to be desired. Yet Edith felt uneasy about the
publication of the Busaco name, and could only
console herself by thinking that this particular
English paper was not likely to reach Portugal.
Before the second concert they had a visit from
Mr. Sorby, who was proud of his sea waif, and
delighted beyond measure at her success.
Nothing should keep him away when she made
her next appearance, he said, and when Cintra


told him it was to be in a fortnight, and got a
complimentary ticket for him from Herr Friedhelm,
he was overjoyed.
He confided in Edith that he had intended to
bring half a dozen young fellows, sailors like him-
self, to the shilling seats, and “wouldn’t they just
applaud and encore the Princess! ” but she dis-
suaded him. Violent and indiscriminate applause
would hardly help Cintra, though it might let off
Mr. Sorby’s feelings.
The second concert came early in December,
and was as great a success as the first.
Great ladies had already been entreating Herr
Friedhelm to let his child pupil play at their
musical evenings, and it was clear that if he
allowed her to do so for the next six months, the
little violinist would earn enough to pay for years
of the steady education she needed.
Mr. Sorby’s face was a study as he sat in the
front seats, waiting for the concert to begin. After
it had begun, the seat next him was filled by a
tall distinguished-looking man, who seemed as in-
different as Mr. Sorby himself to a piano solo and
song with which the concert began.
Cintra, the child violinist, was next on the bill,
and as she came on to the platform with the
Herr Master, the stranger started, and said half
aloud—
“It is the child I saw at Westminster.”
Mr. Sorby was clapping too hard to hear. He


was only silent while Cintra played, and then
broke out again.
Cintra played again, and then some one sang.
There was to be an interval, and then the child
violinist’s name was down again on the programme.
“You know the child, I think?” the tall man
said to Mr. Sorby.
“Know her! Yes. I’ve known her since she
was little enough to be buttoned into my coat.”
“ Can you tell me if the story of her being found
on the island of Trinidad is correct?”
“Why, yes,” said Mr. Sorby. “None better
than me, sir, for it was I who found her. We
were sailing south in the ship Glencoe , seven years
ago, that was ”
Mr. Sorby was fairly started on his favourite
story, and nothing but the entrance of Cintra
herself could have stopped him. She played her
third piece, then a short encore, and then, her
second success assured, bowed to the clapping
crowd, and retired with the Herr Master.
“ Come out with me,” the tall man said. “ I
want to see the child, and if she is gone, you will
give me her address ? ”
Cintra and Miss Giffard had driven off in Herr
Friedhelm’s carriage. Mr. Sorby hesitated a
moment over giving the address. He looked the
tall man in the face.
“ You mean well by her, sir ? ”
“ I do, indeed.”


“You look all right anyway. It’s 55, Mosely
Flats, Chelsea, and the lady she lives with is Miss
Gifford.”
“ Thank you ; here is my card ; and your name
is ”
“ Sorby, sir—James Sorby of the ship Glencoe, ”
The tall man called a cab and was gone. The
sailor looked at the card.
“Mr. Edward Gordon,
Travellers’ Club.”
“ He looked straight enough,” he said.
And then Mr. Sorby walked down to Charing
Cross to save his penny, and clambered on to a
Whitechapel omnibus.


CHAPTER IX.
UNCLE MIGUEL.
HERR FRIEDHELM’S carriage made short
work of the drive to Mosely Flats, and a
hansom driving furiously behind it had
enough to do to keep it in sight.
By the time the occupant got out and ran up
the steps after Edith and Cintra, the two entered
their flat, and the door was shut.
The man hesitated outside the door for a moment
and looked at his watch. It was past ten o’clock.
“ Better not try to-night,” he muttered. “ They
would be suspicious if I came so late. To-
morrow ”
He took the number of the door, and went down
the stairs again, turned into a public-house at the
corner of the next street, and asked for a bed.
It was Saturday night. Sunday would be a good
day to find the occupants of the flat at home, he
argued. He would stroll round there early, and
keep a look out; but there seemed to be no man
with them, only the child and the pale little lady
who took care of her.


He dressed himself with unusual care next morn-
ing, shaved, and brushed his clothes ; but at the
end his appearance was not prepossessing. Not
the sort of man, for instance, to whom Mr. Sorby
would have given an address.
As he turned in at the gateway of the flats he
saw Edith coming out with a book in her hand.
The child was not with her, and a new idea occurred
to him.
“ These people have a proverb,” he said to him-
self, “‘Possession is nine points of the law.’ I will
go up and see the child, and—who knows ?—she
may come with me. I could get her to Madrid
in a few days, have her taught dancing, and with
that and the violin she might bring me in two
thousand a year. She is a mine of wealth to some
one ; why not to her uncle, Miguel Busaco ? ”
Edith had gone as usual to the early service at
a neighbouring church. Cintra was up, and making
preparations for breakfast, when a tap came at the
door. She went to open it and saw a stranger there,
a man with dark hair and eyes, and a way of
staring which the Princess did not at all like.
“ Miss Giffard is out,” she said.
The stranger held out both his hands. “ Inez,
my little Inez, I have found you at last. My poor
brother’s orphan, my little niece ! ”
Cintra shrank back into the room, and he entered
promptly, and shut the door behind him.
“ Why shrink from me, little one ? ” he said,


with that unpleasant look in his eyes again. “ I
am your uncle, Miguel Busaco, who wants to love
you and take care of you.”
He held out his arms again and tried to kiss
her, but she ran away from him.
“ Oh, please don’t, please don’t. Wait till Edie —
Miss Giffard comes in. She will be here very soon.”
The child glanced at the clock, and knew that
Edie would not be back for nearly an hour. She
was desperately frightened, but tried to conceal
her fear.
“ Well, I will not touch you yet ; only come
and sit near your poor uncle, and tell him all
about your life.”
Cintra sat down with the table between them.
He laughed, a disagreeable laugh, and brought
a chair round to her side.
“ You must learn to love me better, little niece,
so that you will like to come and live with me.
We shall be so happy together. You shall play
and you shall dance, and kind Uncle Miguel will
give you pretty toys and dresses and sweets, and
a carriage with ponies all of your own, and every-
thing you wish for. You shall travel, you shall
see the world —ah, you will like that, little Inez,
and your uncle will love you so.”
His persuasive voice had no effect on Cintra.
“ I don’t want to leave Edie,” she said.
“Your Edie shall come with you, then,” said
Uncle Miguel. “She shall have the pretty dresses


and the carriage too. No more hard work, no more
poky flats; but life, life in the great world, and
always kind Uncle Miguel to take care of you.”
Cintra turned to him with a new look of interest.
“Would you really give Edie pretty frocks, and
save her from working so hard, and take care
of her ? ”
“ Why, yes, of course,” he said quickly, seizing
on the one point which seemed to affect the child.
“ Edie shall have the happiest life of all the three
of us. She has done so much for his little niece,
that Miguel Busaco will devote his life to make
her happy.”
Cintra looked more friendly, but she was not
too sure of the stranger yet.
“ Edie will soon be in, and then you can tell her.”
“ Shall we go and meet her and tell her the
glad news at once ? Put on your hat, little Inez,
and come with me.”
“You can go,” said Cintra, grasping readily at
a chance of dismissing him. “I must stay and
get the breakfast.”
“Never mind about breakfast. We will have
breakfast at my hotel. Let us go and meet Edie,
and take her with us there, and we will have such
a happy day.”
Anything seemed better than staying in the
little room alone with Uncle Miguel, so Cintra
put on her hat and gloves, fastened the door, and
went downstairs with him.


“It is this way to the church,” she said. “We
ought to see Edie soon.”
Uncle Miguel looked up the street, fervently
hoping that they would not see Edie. Then a
hansom which had just dropped its fare turned
slowly round a corner, and he hailed it with a
look of relief.
“Jump in, Inez, we shall soon meet Edie now.”
He said something to the cabman that Cintra
could not hear, and gave him money, then jumped
in after her and shut down the glass doors. The
cab turned, and drove rapidly in another direction,
rattling so over the pavement that Cintra could
hardly make her voice heard.
“ Stop, stop ! ” she cried. “ This isn’t the way
to Edie’s church.’’
“It is all right, my dear, quite right. We are
going to my hotel to order breakfast, and then
we shall get back in plenty of time to meet Edie
and take her with us.”
Cintra was silenced, though not convinced. As
they drove along eastward by the Embankment,
almost deserted on that early Sunday mornin cr ,
she saw it would be no use to protest or cry out.
She determined when they stopped to call a
policeman, and ask him to send her back to Edie.
As she was so quiet, Busaco opened the glass
doors, and let in a little of the much-needed air. He
chatted gaily to Cintra, who sat straight up in the
hansom with a grave face, and did not answ r er him.


They turned into the city, the quiet Sunday
city, and drove along broad streets and then
narrow ones, but still there was no policeman
to be seen. The horse was going more slowly
now' —past huge warehouses and the tall w'alls
and gates leading to the wharves.
I don t suppose you have been here before,
my dear, Uncle Miguel said. “I have friends
near who w ill take care of you and give you
breakfast while I go back and fetch Edie.”
Cintra knew he did not mean to fetch Edie.
Oh, if she could see a policeman. But none came
within call. Perhaps when they stopped, the
cabman would listen to her and take her back.
She had been down this way before several times
with Edie to see Mr. Sorby and the ;but
she did not tell Lncle Miguel so. Poor Edie, w T ho
must be back at the flat now and finding it all
deserted. What would she do ?
The cab turned up a narrow street, where many
of the dingy houses had “Lodgings to Let” in
the windows, and stopped before one of these.
Uncle Miguel got out, and held his hand to
help Cintra ; but she remained in her seat.
“ Cabman,” she called. “ Oh, please, kind cab-
man, don’t let him take me away. I am Cintra,
who plays the violin, and Herr Friedhelm and Miss
Giffard will give you money if you take me back.”
Uncle Miguel caught hold ofherwrist. “Be quiet,”
he said fiercely, “or it will be the worse for you.”


“ I suppose it is all right, sir,” said the cabman,
doubtfully, eyeing the sovereign Busaco had
hastily put in his hand as Cintra spoke.
“Of course it is all right,” he said. “I am her
uncle and her natural guardian. It is these others
who have tried to steal her from me.”
He pulled Cintra out of the cab, struggling and
screaming, but helpless in his grasp, and set her
on the pavement.
Several people opened their windows and looked
out, but seeing only a crying child, took no further
notice. The cab drove off, and the door they had
stopped before opened, and Busaco took Cintra’s
arm to pull her inside. Suddenly, with a violent
jerk, she broke from him, and ran up the street
towards an advancing figure.
“ Mr. Sorby, Mr. Sorby ! don’t let him take me
away! ”
The young sailor had been out early that
morning to a service in one of the churches near
the Docks, and was returning to the Glencoe to
relieve the second mate of his duty for the day.
His utter surprise at seeing Cintra in such a
neighbourhood can be imagined. He put his
arm round the child, and faced the indignant
Busaco who hurried after her up the street.
“ Don’t cry, Miss Cintra, don’t you worry; you are
safe now, whoever this may be. What have you been
doing with her ? ” he said sternly, turning to Busaco.
“ I do not know who you are,” said the enraged


foreigner, “but this is Inez Busaco, my niece, and
I am taking charge of her.”
“ Where is Miss Giffard ? ”
“ Oh, Mr. Sorby, take me back to Edie,” Cintra
cried. “ This dreadful man stole me away this
morning while she was out, and she will be so
anxious. Please, please, take me back.”
“All right, Miss Cintra, don’t you worry. Get
away, you coward —to frighten a child like this!
If you try to follow us I’ll give you in charge;
and knock you down first,” he added, as Busaco
drew nearer.
“But I have a legal claim on her—no one can
contest it.”
“ Then, prove it in a court of law,” said Mr. Sorby.
“ If it is true, you won’t have done yourself any
good by trying to kidnap her first. Come, missie.”
He took her hand and walked up the street,
Busaco following them at a safe distance, mutter-
ing to himself. He had had her safely in his
grasp. Once inside that door and he could have
got her away at night, and no one would have
been the wiser, if this sailor had not turned up.
Who could have foreseen that the child would
know a passing sailor in an East London street ?
It was hard, hard.
Mr. Sorby met three or four friends presently, and
sent a message by them to the Glencoe . He hurried
Cintra off to the nearest underground station, and
they were soon on their way to Sloane Square.


CHAPTER X.
CINTRA FINDS A NEW PROTECTOR.
WHEN Edith Giffard returned from church
that morning, and found the Flat door
closed, she was much puzzled.
She had no key with her, so had to get the
Superintendent to open the door with his master
key. Then they could find nothing to account
for Cintra’s absence. Her hat was gone, so she
must be out.
The Superintendent knew nothing of her. The
porter, when asked, said, he thought he had seen
her go out with a gentleman soon after Miss
Giffard had gone to church. Edith left a message
with him in case Cintra came back, and hurried
off breakfastless to Herr Friedhelm to know if
Cintra had been there.
But the Herr Master knew nothing of his little
pupil. He volunteered to go and inquire of Miss
Taylor while Edith returned to the Flats, feeling in
reality more anxious about the loss of the child


than Miss Girard herself. With her talents Cintra
would be so well worth kidnapping by some
unscrupulous theatre manager.
There was no one at the Flat when Edith
returned, and no news of Cintra. She was going
out again, with a heavy heart, when, to her joy,
she saw the child coming along the street with
Mr. Sorby.
“ Oh, Cintra darling, how could you ” she
began ; but the child threw herself into Edith’s
arms, and the story was told.
They went back to the Flat with Mr. Sorby, and
Edith heard all the morning’s adventures at greater
length. Then Herr Friedhelm came and was
rejoiced to find his pupil, but felt alarmed on
hearing it was a supposed uncle who had decoyed
her away.
While they were still talking, another rap came
at the door, and Miguel Busaco walked in with a
friend as unprepossessing in appearance as himself.
Busaco had expected to find Mr. Sorby, but the
presence of Herr Friedhelm was a surprise. He
bowed to Edith and addressed her at once.
I have come to thank you, madam,” he said,
“ for the care of my niece during the past years.
It was not my wish that you should have had the
charge of her. It was arranged by my mother at
Lisbon while I was from home. But lam deeply
grateful to you, and feel that she could not have
been in better hands during her early years. Now


however, I am prepared to take charge of her, and
my solicitor, Mr. Broom” —he waved his hand
in the direction of the man behind him —“will prove
to you that I am legally her guardian.”
Mr. Sorby started up.
“You’ve spoilt your case, you coward, by
kidnapping the child first,” he began ; but Herr
Friedhelm laid a hand on his arm and stopped
him.
“If this—this gentleman is really the young
lady’s uncle, he no doubt has some claim on her ;
but, by your leave, sir,” he added, bowing to Busaco,
“this is not the time to discuss the merits of the
case. Miss Giffard and myself are at present the
guardians of the child, and will discuss the matter
freely with your solicitor,” he bowed to Mr.
Broom, “ any afternoon you like to mention at his
office, but not on a Sunday, and not here, and not
in the presence of the young lady who has been
slightly—‘agitated,’ shall we say? by her uncle’s
attention.”
Busaco hit his clenched fist on the table.
“ I do not leave this room without the child,” he
said. “Miss Giffard may come too if she wishes it,
but I take charge of my niece, Inez Busaco. Do
you think I am going to let you steal her away, and
make a pile of money out of her, while I, her uncle
her dead father’s own brother, am bereaved of her ?
No; Ido not leave this room without her.”
“Shall I kick the fellow downstairs ?” asked Mr.


Sorby, with an evident longing to make himself
useful in that respect.
Xo one had noticed that they had another listener
besides the silent Mr. Broom.
A tall distinguished-looking man had come up
the stairs and stood in the open doorway some
minutes before. With an apology to Mr. Broom,
whom he pushed gently aside, he now came forward
and laid a packet on the table.
He bowed to Edith and Herr Friedhelm, he
smiled and nodded to Mr. Sorby, he gave one
long glance at Cintra, and then he faced Miguel
Busaco.
My name is Edward Gordon,” he said. “You
will forgive this intrusion ” —to Edith—“ when you
know my business. I take it,” he went on, looking
Busaco full in the face, “ that this gentleman will
have no difficulty in proving that he is Miguel
Busaco of Lisbon, and brother to Emanuel Busaco,
the father of the child Inez, who was supposed to
have been rescued from the wreck of the Cintra
seven years ago.
“I am that man,” Busaco said. “ And the natural
guardian of the child who stands there.”
“The natural guardian of Inez Busaco,” quietly
corrected the tall man. “ Then, as her uncle and
natural guardian, you will much regret to learn that
Inez Busaco was drowned in the Atlantic seven
years ago, when the Cintra w T ent down.”
Edith gave a little cry.


“ Then, who ” she began.
Busaco’s face grew livid with anger.
“Your proofs ? ” he said.
“ I have ample proofs,” said Mr. Gordon, sternly,
“which I will show at some appointed date to
your solicitor. With the man who was implicated
in the Jose swindling case in Lisbon three years
ago, I have nothing to do.”
Busaco’s expression changed to one of fear. Mr.
Sorby edged round the table.
“Do you want any help down the stairs,” he
asked, “or will you go without? ”
Rather to Mr. Sorby’s disappointment the man
went out, followed by Mr. Brocm, of whose parting
bows those left behind took no notice—did not
notice, indeed, for they were waiting breathlessly
to hear what Mr. Gordon had to say.
He opened the packet on the table, and took out
a water-colour drawing and some photographs.
“These were pictures of my wife,” he said
simply.
Edith took them one by one, looked from each
portait to Cintra, and from Cintra back at the
picture. She handed them to Herr Fricdhelm,
and then, without speaking, went to her desk in the
corner of the room.
Cintra stood on one side of the table wondering,
Mr. Sorby on the other. After a few moment’s
search in the packet, Mr. Gordon took out another
photograph and gave it to Mr. Sorby.


“ Did you ever see the original of that, my
friend ? ” he said.
“ See her ? I should think I did. Didn’t I button
her into my coat, and bring her aboard ? Didn’t I
play with her, and see her grow up well and strong,
and just like this ? Princess Cintra ! ”
Edith came up and looked also.
“Yes,” she said. “It is undoubtedly the child.
Mr. Gordon, I think I am beginning to understand.
Here is the correspondence I had with the owners of
the Cintra seven years ago, and the passenger list.
Senora Busaco and child ; Mrs. Gordon and child.
The Portuguese sailors who were saved from the
Cintra told us it was a lady of their own nation
who was buried in Trinidad, and we all thought,
consequently, that it was Senora Busaco’s little
girl who was saved with them. The child herself
was too ill to give us any particulars, and by the
time she recovered from the fever she had forgotten
the past/’
“Then, your wife, sir, was Portuguese also?”
Herr Friedhelm said.
“Yes,” said Mr. Gordon, gravely. “ I married her
when I was quite a young man in Lisbon, and we
went to Brazil and lived there for four years. There
a little daughter was born to us, whom I called Mary,
after my mother. At the end of the four years
my wife had a fancy to visit Lisbon, and as I was
obliged to go inland on important business which
would keep me away several months, I took a


passage for her in the ill-fated Cintra . She it is who
lies buried in Trinidad, and her child was taken on
board the Glencoe —her child and mine.”
He held out his hand, and Cintra went to him
wondering. There was that look in his grey eyes
that children invariably trust.
He took her on his knee, and for a moment
buried his face in her dark curls. Then, still
holding her, he went on with his story.
“ I was travelling about inland when the news
reached me —a simple notification from the owners
of the loss of the Cintra , and that my wife and
child had gone down with her. I never doubted
it; I had no reason to doubt it at the time. The
first doubt that crossed my mind was three years
ago in Westminster Abbey. I had gone there for
the afternoon service one Sunday, and was sitting
in the North transept. Opposite to me was a child
so like my dead wife that for a moment I thought
she must be our child. They were singing ‘ I
know that my Redeemer liveth,’ and the child was
listening with all her being.”
Cintra sat looking at him with a strange light in
her eyes.
“I remember,” she said. “That was the day
Mr. Sorby came.”
“ I nearly made up my mind to speak to you, but
it seemed impossible that little Mary should have
been saved. The next time I came to England I
saw the paragraphs about Cintra the Child Violinist,


her photograph, and the story of Trinidad and
the Cintra . I inquired further from the owners of
the Cintra, and found how slender a reason they
had for supposing the child to be Inez Busaco—she
might as well be Mary Gordon. I went to the
second concert and was convinced that she was my
Lucias child. This gentleman was there and
furnished me with your address, Miss Giffard, and
I came to-day at an opportune moment to save
you from the unpleasant attentions of that
scoundrel Busaco whom I know well by name.
That is all.”
There was silence for a moment in the little
room. Then Herr Friedhelm, said —
“You are, then, Cintra’s father?”
“Yes,” and he bent his head and solemnly
kissed the child. “Will you learn to love me,
Cintra ? ”
“Yes,” she said. “I think so. You are kind.
That other man was hateful ; but I like you.”
Edith stood watching them with a little jealous
pang at her heart. Would the child leave her and
forget her ! That would be hard.
“ Dear little one,” Mr. Gordon was saying almost
reverently, as he stroked the dark curls. “ Will
you call me ‘ father ’ ? ”
“ Father,” said Cintra, looking up at him in her
winning way. “Dear father, if you will take care
of my Edie as well as me.”
“ She deserves all the care I can give her,” said


the father. “And all your love, little one; only
you must spare a corner of your heart for me,”
Edith’s eyes filled with tears. She came round
to where they were sitting and kissed the child,
who clung to her, still sitting on her father’s knee.
Herr Friedhelm spoke again.
“It has been a trying day,” he said. “The loss
of the little maid, and all that has happened since.
If you will come home with me, sir, we will talk
about business matters, and leave Miss Giffard and
the child to rest.”
Mr. Gordon lifted Cintra off his knee, kissed her
again, and rose to go. He clasped Edith’s hand
warmly.
“Good-bye, now,” he said. “I shall be here
again to-morrow ; but please understand that I
have no wish to separate you from the child.”


CHAPTER XI.
MUST WE PART?
R. GORDON heard a story from Herr
Friedhelm that evening, that made him
thank Heaven that his child had fallen into
such good hands—a story of loving self-denial on
the part of a complete stranger, that made him
regard Edith Giffard with a deep reverence when
he visited Mosely Flats next day. Herr Fried-
helm had not spared his praises of the sweet-faced,
patient English girl, who had so large a heart and
so generous a spirit.
They were gayer, lighter in their talk, as was
natural, in a second interview.
Edith had many stories to tell of Cintra’s baby-
hood on board the Glencoe , and the kindness of
Miss Taylor and Herr Friedhelm, not forgetting
little Miss Willis. Then she had to leave them to
go to her work. Mr. Gordon would take care of
his daughter that day.


Edith’s heart was rather heavy. She saw that
there must be a separation between Cintra and
herself, however kindly Mr. Gordon strove to soften
it. He had said he would not part them, but it
was only natural that he should have the child
with him, and the child was beginning to love him
too, and to like being with him, though she did
love her Edie best.
Mr. Gordon was anxious that the child should
get used to him, and came to see her and take her
out every day.
Edith was glad in a way. She was too unselfish
not to rejoice in what was so much for her
darling’s good, and she could not help liking Mr.
Gordon. But her heart was rather sore as she
thought of the happy home in the old Scotch
house, Mr. Gordon told them of; or of the delight
he would have in taking a child as observant and
charming as Cintra to foreign countries, or in her
education, and musical talent.
They would be happy, and Edith would learn
to be happy without her Princess, but at present
in the prospect her heart felt very sore, and the
thought of loneliness oppressed her. Her work
seemed like mere drudgery with no one to work
for after these years of happy anxiety.
So she grew pale and looked sad and worried
sometimes in spite of her efforts to be pleased with
Cintra’s new-found happiness.
Mr, Gordon said nothing about taking the child


away as the days went on ; nothing about future
plans at all, save to paint bright pictures of future
travels. Edith began to talk to him one day
about Cintra’s education, and he asked her advice,
stating his intention of keeping her at home, not
sending her to school, and continuing the lessons
with Herr Friedhelm, if the musician would be so
good, though of course the public performances
would cease.
“ I am so very, very glad, to see how the child
loves you already,” Edith said gently, “ because of
course it is inevitable that she and I should part —
not altogether, but the old close relationship cannot
be maintained, and I shall so gladly surrender her
into your keeping.”
She had tried to say the words many times and
failed, but now at last she had the courage.
“ You must tell me when you would like to take
her away,” she added.
Mr. Gordon stood looking down on her for a few
moments without speaking.
“I hope that will be never,” he said at last.
Before he could say more, Cintra danced into
the room with a letter in her hand.
Mr. Sorby sails on Saturday,” she cried, “ And
he wants my daddy to see the Glencoe before he
leaves, and us all to go to tea with him to-day.
May we, Edie ? You can come after your tiresome
work is over.”
“ ( May we/ means ' You must/ when the Princess


speaks,” said Edith looking at the child with her
half-sad smile. “ Yes, darling, we will go, certainly.
You shall call for me at the office at four o’clock
and we will go down together.”
So it was arranged ; and after driving to the
docks —Cintra pointing out the scene of her adven-
ture with “ Uncle Miguel” on the way —they were
received on board the Glencoe by Mr. Sorby.
He was rather grimy, but, as he explained,
London Docks is not the cleanest place in the
world, and he had been working hard all day.
They were a merry party at tea in the state-
room, pointing out to Mr. Gordon every object of
interest connected with the memorable voyage
when the Princess was found. He looked at the
berth in the little cabin where the baby Cintra had
lain moaning and tossing in the days of fever
following her rescue, and he called Edith back
when she would have followed Mr. Sorby and
Cintra on deck again.
“ So you think I would ask you to part with the
child after all you have done for her? Seven of
the best years of your life lavished upon her and
to be rewarded like that! ”
“ They were very happy years,” said Edith.
" And anxious years, too,” he said. “ I hope
there are many happier ones coming yet, Miss
Giffard ; richer in love, and without the worry a
hand to mouth life always brings when you have
too much of it.”


He was speaking so earnestly that Edith hardly
knew how to answer him. All the time the
thought of losing Cintra lay like a dead weight on
her spirits.
“ I could never ask you to give Cintra up, even
to her father,” Mr. Gordon went on, “ but I do ask
that you will let me come and share her with you.
Give me that right, Edith. I cannot say how
deeply I love and reverence you.”
“Is it for Cintra’s sake you say this?” Edith
asked, almost in a whisper.
“ No,” he said. “If you will come to me and be
my wife, I shall count the joy of finding Cintra,
great though it is, but a small part of the happiness
this year has brought me. It is for my own sake,
and yours, for I believe I can make you happy.
But though it is not for Cintra’s sake, yet it will
crown her life.”
So there, in the little cabin where Edith had
so often watched over his child, those two found
happiness.
* * * * *
“ How happy you look, Edie,” Cintra said as
they were driving home after saying good-bye to
Mr. Sorby. “Don’t her eyes smile and shine,
Daddy ? ” with a loving pressure on his knee.
“And do I look happy too?” he asked. “I
ought to.”
“Yes,” said Cintra. “There is a sort of twinkle
in your eyes too ; but why ought you to be happy,


Daddy. Just when we have said good-bye to Mr.
Sorby too.”
“Because Edie says I may come and live with
you two, and it was just what I wanted most to
happen/’
“ There won’t be room for you,” protested Cintra.
“ What, in your hearts ? ”
“No, you funny Daddy, in Mosely Flats, unless
you took one on another floor.”
“ I am afraid that would not do,” he said.
“Why shouldn’t we live in my beautiful Scotch
home, Cintra, when we are not flying about the
world together ? ”
“ That will be lovely,” said Cintra. “ But we
shall be living with you, not you with us,” she
objected.
“ And won’t that do as well ? ”
“Yes,” said the Princess, decidedly. “As long
as Edie and you and I are together, nothing else
matters.”
THE END.
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.


PUBLICATIONS
THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
G. MANVILLE FENN.
Cloth boards, s s. each.
CHIHO, THE CHINAMAN, and his Middy Friends.
FKAKa. AND fAXON : A Tale of the Days of Good Qneen Bom
CROWN AND SCEPTRE: A West Country Story,
GIL THE GUNNER; or, The Youngest Officer in the East,
JACK AT SEA; or, All Work and no Play made him a Dull Boy.
HASS’ GEORGE; or, A Boy’s Adventures in the Old Savannahs.
NED LEGER; The Adventures of a Middy on the Spanish Main-
PLANTER JACK; or, The Cinnamon Garden,
SAIL HO! or, A Boy at Sea,
THE PERIL FINDERS.
THE SILVER SALVORS: A Tale of Treasure Found and Lost,
THE VAST ABYSS. Being the Story of Tom Blount, his Uncles
and his Cousin Sam.
TO THE WEST.
UNCLE BART, The Tale of a Tyrant,


SPECIFIC SUBJECTS.
Fcap . B vo y limp cloth , 4 d, each ,
ALGEBRA. By W. H. H. Hudson, M.A.
(Answers to the Examples given in the above, limp cloth, 6 d.)
EUCLID. Books 1 and 2. Edited by W, H. H. Hudson, M.A.
ELEMENTARY MECHANICS. By W. Garnett, M.A,
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY, By the Rev. T. G. Bonney, M.A.
MANUALS OF ELEMENTARY SCIENCE.
Fcap . 8 vo t limp cloth , u. each.
ELECTRICITY. By the late Professor Fleeming Jenkin.
PHYSIOLOGY. By A. Macalister, LL.D., M.D., F.R.S,
GEOLOGY. By the Rev. T. G. Bonney, Sc.D., LL.D., F.G.S.
CRYSTALLOGRAPHY. By Henry Palin Gurney, M.A.
ASTRONOMY. By W. H. M. Christie, M.A., F.R.S.
BOTANY. By the late Professor Bentley.
ZOOLOGY. By Alfred Newton, M.A., F.R.S.
MATTER AND MOTION. By the late J. Clerk Maxwell, M.A.
SPECTROSCOPE AND ITS WORK, THE. By the late Richard
A. Proctor.
HEROES OF SCIENCE.
Crown B vo, cloth boards , 4 s. each ,
ASTRONOMERS. By E. J, C. Morton, B.A. With Diagrams.
BOTANISTS, ZOOLOGISTS, AND GEOLOGISTS. By Prof. P.
Martin Duncan, F.R.S.
CHEMISTS. By M. M. Pattison Muir, Esq., F.R.S.E. With
Diagrams.
MECHANICIANS. By T. C. Lewis, M.A.
PHYSICISTS. By William Garnett, Esq., M.A., D.C.L.


THE ROMANCE OF SCIENCE.
This Series shows that Science has for the masses as great interest
as, and more edification than, the romances of the day,
Post B vo, with numtrous illustrations , cloth hoards ,
COAL, AND WHAT WE GET FROM IT. By Professor K.
Meldola, F.R.S., F.I.C. 2s. 6d.
COLOUR MEASUREMENT AND MIXTURE. By Sir W. de W.
Abney, K.C.B, R.E., F.R.S. 2s. 6 d.
DISEASES OF PLANTS. By Professor Marshall Ward, zs. 6d.
OUR SECRET FRIENDS AND FOES. By Percy Faraday
Frankland, Ph.D., F.R.S. Fourth edition. 3 j.
SOAP-BUBBLES, AND THE FORCES WHICH MOULD THEM.
By C. V. Boys, A.R.S.M., F.R.S, 2s. 6d.
BOUNDING THE OCEAN OF AIR, Lectures delivered before the
Lowell Institute of Boston, by A. Lawrence Rotch, 5.8.,
A.M. 2 s. 6d.
SPINNING-TOPS. By Professor J. Perry, M.E., F.R.S. 2s, 6 d.
TIME AND TIDE: a Romance of the Moon. By Sir Robert
S, Ball. Fourth edition, revised. 2s. 6d.
THE MACHINERY OF THE UNIVERSE. Mechanical Con-
ceptioni of Physical Phenomena. By Professor A. E.
Dolbear, A.8., A.M., M.E., Ph.D. 2 s.
THE MAKING OF FLOWERS, By the Rev, Professor G.
Henslow, M.A., F.L.S., F.G.S. 2 s. 6d.
THE STORY OF A TINDER-BOX. By the late C. Meymott
Tidy, M.8., M.S, 2 s.
THE BIRTH AND GROWTH OF WORLDS. A Lecture by th«
late Professor A. H. Green, M.A., F.R.S. is.
THE SPLASH OF A DROP, By Professor A. M. WORTHINGTON,
M.A., F.R.S. is. 6d,


MRS. EWING’S WORKS.
SNAPDRAGONS, and OLD FATHER CHRISTMAS. Illustrated
by Gordon Browne. Small 410, paper boards, is.
THE PEACE EGO, and A CHRISTMAS MUMMING FLAY.
Illustrated by Gordon Browne. Small 4to, paper boards, is*
MARY’S MEADOW, and LETTERS FROM A LITTLE GARDEN.
Illustrated by Gordon Browne. Small 4to, paper boards, is.
LOB LIE-BY-THE-FIRE; or, The Luck of Lingborough. Illus-
trated by the late R. Caldecott. SmaH 4to, paper boards, is.
STORY OF A SHORT LIFE (THE). Illustrated by Gordon
Browne. Small 4to, paper boards, is.
DADDY DARWIN’S DOVECOTE : a Country Tale. Illustrated by
the late R. Caldecott. Small 4to, paper boards, is.
DANDELION CLOCKS, and other Tales. Illustrated by Gordon
Browne, and other artists. Small 4to, paper boards, is.
JACKANAPES. With Seventeen Illustrations by the late Ran-
dolph Caldecott. Small 4to, paper boards, is.
BROTHERS OF PITY, and other Tales of Beasts and Men.
Crown Bvo, with numerous Illustrations, cloth boards, 2s. 6 d.
OLD-FASHIONED FAIRY TALES. Fcap. 4to, with numerour
Woodcuts, ornamental paper boards, 31. 6d.
Library Edition of “Jackanapes,” “ Daddy Darwin’s Dovecote,”
and “Lob Lie-by-the-Firc.” In one volume. Small 410,
cloth boards, 5/.
JULIANA HORATIA EWING AND HER BOOKS. By lloratia
K. F. Gatty. With a Portrait by G. Reid, R.S.A. Illus-
trated by facsimiles from Mrs. Ewing’s Sketches, and a cover
designed by the late R. Caldecott. Sm. 4to, paper boards, is*


UNIFORM LIBRARY EDITION OF
MRS. EWING’S WORKS.
Crown Svo, half clothe is, 6d. each ; or complete in accaste t 28->.
Vol. I. contains—“ Melchior’s Dream,” “The Blackbird’s Nest/*
“A Bit of Green,” “ Friedrich’s Ballad,” etc.
Vul. 11. contains—“ Mrs. Overtheway’s Remembrances,” “ Ida,**
“Mrs. Moss,” “The Snoring Ghost,” etc.
Vol. 111. contains —“Old-fashioned Fairy Tales.”
Vol. IV. contains —“ A Fla*. Iron for a Farthing.”
Vol. V. contains —“The Brownies,” “The Land of Lost Toys,
“ Three Christmas Trees,” “ An Idyll of the Woods,” etc.
Vol. VI. contains —“Six to Sixteen.” A Story for Girls.
Vol. VII. contains —“ Lob Lie-by-the-Fire,” and other Tales,
“Timothy’s Shoes,” “ Benjy in Beastland,” “So-So,” etc.
Vol. VIII. contains —“Jan of the Windmill.”
Vol. IX. contains —Verses for Children, Songs for Music, and
Hymns. With numerous Illustrations,
Vol. X. contains —“The Peace Egg,” “A Christmas Mumming
Play,” “ Snapdragons,” “ Old Father Christmas,” etc.
Vol. XL contains —“A Great Emergency,” and other Tales, “A
very 111-tempered Family,” “Our Field,” “ Madam Liberality.”
Vol. XII. contains —“Brothers of Pity,” “Father Hedgehog and
his Neighbours,” “ Toots and Boots,” “ The Hens of Hen-
castle,” etc.
Vol. XIII. contains —“ We and the World,” Part I.
Vol. XIV. contains —“ We and the World,” Part 11.
Vol. XV. contains —“Jackanapes,” “Daddy Darwin’s Dovecote,”
“ The Story of a Short Life.”
Vol. XVI. contains —“ Mary’s Meadow,” and other Tales of Fields
and Flowers.
Vol. XVII. contains —Miscellanea, including, “The Mystery of the
Bloody Hand,” “ Wonder Stories,” “ Tales of the Khoja,” etc.
Vol. XVIII. contains—“ Juliana Horatia Ewing and her Books, 11
with a Selection from Mrs. Ewing’s Letters.


THE PENNY POCKET LIBRARY OF PURE
LITERATURE.
128 (or more)pages , double columns , Id. each.
By J. Fenimore Cooper. By Robert M. Bird.
Lionel Lincoln.
The Spy.
The Pilot.
Sea Lions.
The Borderers.
The Water Witch.
The Last of the Mohicans.
By Captain Mayne Reid.
The Desert Home,
The Rifle Rangers.
By Dana.
Two Years before the
Mast.
By Captain Marryat.
Poor Jack,
The Phantom Ship.
The King’s Own.
The Little Savage.
The Pirate and the Three
Cutters.
The Children of the New
Forest.
Nick of the Woods.
By Robert Southey,
The Life of Nelson.
By Sir Walter Scott.
The Talisman.
Castle Dangerous and
Surgeon’s Daughter.
The Legend of Montrose,
By W. H. G. Kingston.
Ned Garth.
Owen Hartley.
The Cruise of the
“ Dainty.”
The Mate of the “Lily.”
The Two Shipmates,
By F. Frankfort Moore.
The Ice Prison,
The Mutiny on the
“ Albatross,”
By J. R. Cleig.
The Subaltern.


PENNY LIBRARY OF FICTION.
32 pages, demy Bvo, with Pictorial Wrapper. Price id. each.
Volumes I. —V., each containing Six Stories , paper boards , 6d. each .
By G. Manville Fenn,
In Mid-Air.
Lord John.
Staunch.
In Marine Armour.
His Old Chum’s Son.
Mutiny of the “ Helen Gray.*
By S. Baring Gould.
Fifteen Pounds.
Golden Feather.
The Two John Brents.
By B. L, Farjeon.
Three Times Tried,
The Death Trance.
By G. A. Henty.
The Plague Ship.
The Ranche in the Valley
By L. B. Walford.
The Last Straw.
The Jerry Builder.
The Little Elevenpence
Halfpenny.
By C. Phillips-Wolley.
My Soldier Keeper.
The Brave Old Breed.
By J. Maclaren Cobban.
By Telegraph.
By Author of “ Victa Victrix.
Slipping Away.
By Helen Shipton.
Saved by the Skin of His
Teeth.
By Mrs. Henry Clarke, M.A*
Saved from Himself.
By Mrs. Newman.
Brought to Light.
By Mrs. J. H. Riddell,
For Dick’s Sake.
By Katharine S. Macquoid,
Gone.
By Jessie M. E. Saxby.
Constable Ai.
By F. M. Holmes.
The Silent Ship.
By the late R. M. Ballantynr
Reuben’s Luck.
By James Greenwood.
A Fiery Ordeal.
The Sole Trustee.
A Living Apparition.
A Terrible Inheritance.


MANUALS OF HEALTH.
A Set of Manuals for Household Use,
Pcap . B vo, limp cloth, is. each.
VOTES ON THE VENTILATION AND WARMING OF HOUSES,
CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, AND OTHES BUILDINGS.
By the late Ernest H. Jacob, M.A., M.D. (Oxon.)
ON PEESONAL CAEE OF HEALTH.
By the late E. A. Parkes, M.D., F.R.S.
AIB, WATEE, AND DISINFECTANTS.
C, H. Aikman, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E
HEALTH AND OCCUPATION.
By the late Sir B. W. Richardson, F.R.S., M.D.
THE HABITATION IN RELATION TO HEALTH.
By F. S. Francois di Chaumont, M.D., F.R.S,
NATURAL HISTORY RAMBLES.
Intended to cover the Natural History of the British Isles in a man-
ner suited to the requirements of visitors to the regions named.
Fcap. Svo, with numerous Woodcuts, cloth boards, 2s. 6d. each.
IN SEARCH OF MINERALS. By the late D. T. Ansted, M.A.
LANE AND FIELD. By the late Rev. J. G. Wood, M.A.
MOUNTAIN AND MOOR. By J. E. Taylor, Esq., F.L.S,
PONDS AND DITCHES, By M. C. Cooke, M.A., LL.D.
SEA-SHORE (THE). By Professor P. Martin Duncan,
UNDERGROUND. By J. E. Taylor, Esq., F.L.S,
WOODLANDS (THE). By M. C. Cooke, M.A., LL.D,


STORIES BY THE LATE REV. P. B. POWER.
Illustrated. Demy Zvo. Pictorial Paper Wrapper, 14. each.
BORH WITH A SILVER SPOON IN HIS MOUTH.
IT ONLY WANTS TURNING ROUND.
THE CHOIR BOY OF EARLESTONE MINSTER.
“HE'S GONE YONDER.’*
A CHRISTMAS SURPRISE.
THE GOLD THAT WOULDN’T 60.
“HE’S OVERHEAD."
HOUSE AND HOME.
TEE MIRAGE OF THE STREETS.
THE OILED FEATHER.
THE VANISHING OPAL.
THE DEVIL DRINK FAMILY.
THE DEAD MAN’S SPECS.
DINAH’S FIDDLESTICK ; and “ I QUITE FORGOT."
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FATHER CHRISTMAS.
THE FLAG AND THE TUNNEL; and TEE TALKING FIRE-
IRONS.
REMNANTS OF DR. DAWES; and THE SONG OF THE IRON
GOING ON WHEELS ; and MR. CLIPSTICK’S CLOCK. [ WIR E.
TRUE TO TRUST; and CROAKING KATE AND CHIRPING
JANE.
THIS DAY MONTH; and THE FIFTH "F."
Vol. 1., containing Six Stories, Paper Boards, 6d.


TALES
FOR THE
NURSERY and the YOUNG.
Fully Illustrated. Crown Buo, Cloth Boards.
The following books are reprints, with attractive Illustrations,
of famous children’s stories. They never can become an-
tiquated, and each one has some healthy lesson to enforce.
LITTLE GOODY TWO SHOES.
Attributed to Oliver Goldsmith. 6 d.
EYES AND NO EYES,
And other Stories. By Dr. Aiken, Mrs. Barbauld, Mrs.
Marc at, and Jane Taylor. 6d.
NURSERY RHYMES.
Being Mother Goose’s Melodies, arranged in order of
Attractiveness and Interest by C, Welsh, ir.
DOLPH HEYLIGER.
A Story of Bracebridge Hall. By WASHINGTON Irving. 9 d.
THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES.
Adapted from George Chapman's translation of the
“ Odyssey,” by Charles Lamb. 9 d.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROBINS.
Mrs. Trimmer. 9 d.
WASTE NOT, WANT NOT,
And other Stories. By Maria Edgeworth, Jane Taylor,
and Mrs. Barbauld, 9 d%


BY MRS. HENRY CLARKE, M.A.
Crown B vo. Illustrated, Cloth boards.
HONOR PENTEEATH.
JAMES GODPEET’S WIFE. p.
JENNIFER’S FORTUNE, p. 6 i.
MATTHEW PAEKYN. 31. 6 d.
REUBEN THORNE’S TEMPTATION. 2s.
ROSCORLA FARM, p. 64
F. FRANKFORT MOORE.
Crown B vo. Illustrated, Cloth boards.
CORAL AND COCOANUT. The Cruiee of the Yacht " Firefly •»
to Samoa. 31. 6
FIREFLIES AND MOSQUITOES. 3/. 6 d.
FROM THE BUSH TO THE BREAKERS, p.
BAILING AND SEALING. A Tale of the North Pacific. 3 64
THE FATE OF THE “BLACK SWAN.” 31.
THE “GREAT ORION.” ns,
TEE ICE PRISON, p.
THE MUTINY ON THE “ALBATROSS.” Jf.
THE SLAYER OF ZANZIBAR, as. 64
THE TWO CLIPPERS, p. 6 d.
TRE, POL AND PEN. as. 6 d.
WILL’S VOYAGES. 3 1.


BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.
Crown Zvo. Illustrated . Cloth hoards, y. 6 d. tat A,
JACK BERESFORD’S YARN.
THE CRUISE OF THE “ESMERALDA.”
THE HOMEWARD VOYAGE.
THE PIRATE SLAVER.
THE LATE W. H. G. KINGSTON.
Illustrated. Cloth boards.
MICHAEL PENGUYNE; or, Fiihor Lift on ths Cornish Coast
Crown Bvo, ir.
MOUNTAIN MOGGY ; or, Ths Stoning of ths Witch. Post Bvo, 9 d.
NED GARTH; or, Made Prisoner in Africa. A Tale of the Slave
Trade. Crown Bvo, 2s. 6d,
OWEN HARTLEY; or, Ups and Downs. Crown Bvo, 2 s. 6 d,
ROB NIXON, TEE OLD WHITE TRAPPER. A Tale of Central
British North America. Post Bvo, 9 d.
SUNSHINE BILL. Crown Bvo, is. 6 d,
THE CRUISE OF THE 11 DAINTY.” Crown Svo, is, 64.
THE LILY OF LEYDEN. Post Svo, 9 d.
THE FRONTIER FORT; or, Stirring Times in the North-West
Territory of British America. Crown Svo, is, 6d,
THE GILPINS AND THEIR FORTUNES. A Talc of Australia.
Crown Bvo, is, 6d,
THE LOG HOUSE BY THS LAEE. A Tale of Canada. Post
Svo, 9 d.
THE MATE OF THE “LILY.” Crown Svo, 1/,
TEE SETTLERS. A Tale of Virginia. Crown Svo, 2s. 6 d,
THE TWO SHIPMATES. Crown Svo, is.
THE TWO WHALERS. Post Svo, 9 d.


BY MRS. MOLESWORTH.
A CHARGE FULFILLED. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, 2s, 6 d.
A HOUSE TO LET, Coloured Illustrations. Small 4to, 2s. 6 d,
FAMILY TROUBLES. Coloured Illustrations. Small 410, 1/,
FIVE MINUTES’ STORIES. Coloured Illustrations. 4to, 2s. 6 d
FRIENDLY JOEY. Coloured Illustrations. Small 4to, 2 s. 6 d.
GREAT UNCLE HOOT-TOOT. Illustrated. Small 4to, 2s,
LETTICE, Illustrated. Crown Bvo, is, 6d.
OPPOSITE NEIGHBOURS. Coloured Illustrations. Small 4to,
2 s. 6 d.
THE ABBEY BY THE SEA. Illustrated. Post Bvo, 9 d.
THE LUCKY DUCES. Coloured Illustrations. Small 4to, 2 s. 6d.
THE MAN WITH THE PAN-PIPES, etc. Coloured Illustrations.
Small 4to, 2s, 6 d.
TWELVE TINY TALES. Coloured Illustrations. 4to, 2s. 6d.
GORDON STABLES, M.D., C.M., R.N.
Crown B vo. Illustrated, Cloth boards.
BORN TO COMMAND. A Tale of the Sea and of Sailors. 5/.
CAPTAIN JAPP ; or The Strange Adventures of Willie Gordon. 5/.
CHILDREN OF THE MOUNTAINS. s*.
“FROM GREENLAND’S ICY MOUNTAINS.” A Tale of the
Polar Seas. 2 s.
HARRY WILDE. A Tale of the Brine and the Breeze. 2 s. 6d.
IN TOUCH WITH NATURE. Tales and Sketches from the
Life. 2s.
ROCKED IN THE CRADLE OF THE DEEP. A Tale of the Salt,
Salt Sea. 2 s. 6 d.


BY AUSTIN CLARE.
A DREAM OF RUBENS, is.
A GUIDING STAR. 9 d.
A LOCAL LION. The Story
of a False Estimate. 3 s.
A PEARL IN THE SHELL.
A Tale of Life and Love in the
North Countrie. is. 6 d.
AN ILL-MATCHED PAIR.
The Story of a Marriage of
Convenience. 2 s. 6 d.
ANOTHER MAN’S BURDEN.
A Tale of Love and Duty.
3 s. 6 d.
BY LANTERN LIGHT, y. 6d.
IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN.
An Old Story retold to Chil-
dren. 9d.
LEFT IN CHARGE. Being
the History of my Great Re-
sponsibility. is. 6 d.
ONE STEP ASTRAY. 3*. 6d.
OUT OF THE NET; or, The
Change in Robert Holt.
Crown Bvo. 2 s.
STANDARD BEARERS. A
Story of Church Defence.
IS. 6d.
STOLEN FROM TEE SEA.
A Story of Farm Life in Brit-
tany. is. 6d.
THE CARVED CARTOON. A
Picture of the Past. 2 s. 6 d.
THE ROYAL BANNER. A
Tale of Life before and after
Confirmation. 2 s.
THE SIEGE PERILOUS. How
I learnt to sit in it. Being the
History of his Selfish Youth.
By Roger Jamieson, y. 6d.
TWO WAYS OF LOOKING
AT IT. Being the Views of
James Elliott, Miner, and Daisy
Meadows, Schoolmistress.
is. 6d,
UNDER THE DOG STAR. A
Tale of the Borders. 3J. 6 d.
FREDERICK HARRISON, M.A.
14 1779.” A Story of Old Shoreham. Large Crown Bvo, cloth
boards, y.
FROM PLAYGROUND TO BATTLEFIELD. Large Crown Bvo,
cloth boards, 6d.
THE BOYS OF SPARTAN HOUSE SCHOOL. A Story of School
and Adventure. Large Crown Bvo, cloth boards, y. 6d.
EMILY PEARSON FINNEMORE.
DAHLIA PEPLOE'S HEAPING, Large Crown Bvo, cloth
boards, 2s.
JOHN LOBBY’S BETTER NATURE. Crown Bvo, cloth boards, 2s.
THE POST WOMAN. Crown Bvo, cloth boards, y. 6d.
UNCLE ISAAC’S MONEY. Crown Bvo, cloth boards, y. 6d.


BOOKS, HANDSOMELY BOUND.
Suitable for Presents.
FIFTY SHILLINGS.
THE STRUGGLE OF THE NATIONS. Egypt, Syria,
and Assyria. By Professor Maspero. Edited by the Rev.
Professor Sayce. Translated by M. L. McClure. Half
morocco, gilt edges.
THE PASSING OF THE EMPIRES. 850-330 b.c. By
Professor Maspero. Edited by the Rev. Professor Sayce.
Translated by M. L, McClure. Half morocco, gilt edges.
FORTY-EIGHT SHILLINGS.
THE DAWN OF CIVILIZATION. Egypt and Chaldaea.
By Professor Maspero. Edited by the Rev. Professor Sayce.
Translated by M. L. McClure. Half morocco.
FORTY-SEVEN SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.
THE HOLY GOSPELS. With Illustrations from the Old
Masters of the XlVth, XVth, and XVlth Centuries. The
work contains 384 pages and over 350 Illustrations, 48 of these
being separate Plates, printed in two tints. Half bound, paste
grain roam. (Whole bound, 56J.)
FOURTEEN SHILLINGS.
FLOWERS OF THE FIELD. By the late Rev. C. A.
Johns. 30th Edition, entirely Re-written and Revised by
Professor Boulger, F.L.S., F.G.S. Half calf, gilt.
THE LAND OF ISRAEL, By Rev. Canon Tristram,
Half calf, gilt.
READINGS ON THE FIRST LESSONS FOR SUN-
DAYS AND CHIEF HOLY DAYS. In 2 vols. By
the late Rev. Peter Young. Half calf, gilt,
TWELVE SHILLINGS.
HISTORY OF INDIA. By L. J. Trotter, Esq. Half calf.
COMMENTARY ON THE BIBLE. Seven Volumes. In
whole calf, marbled edges, 12s. each.


Books, Handsomely Bound—
TEN SHILLINGS.
Half calf, extra, gilt edges
COMMENTARY ON THE BIBLE. Seven Volumes,
ioj. each.
THE ANIMAL CREATION. A popular introduction to
Zoology. By the late T. Rymer Jones.
BIBLE PLACES. By the Rev. Canon Tristram, D.D.,
LL.D., F.R.S.
BRITISH BIRDS IN THEIR HAUNTS. By the late
Rev. C. A. Johns.
A DEVOTIONAL LIFE OF OUR LORD. By the late
Rev. E. L. Cutts, D.D.
FOREST TREES OF GREAT BRITAIN. By the late
Rev. C. A. Johns.
A HISTORY OF THE JEWISH NATION. By the
late E. H. Palmer.
BUCKLAND’S HISTORY OF BRITISH FISHES.
GOSSE’S EVENINGS AT THE MICROSCOPE. New
and Revised Edition by Professor Jeffery Bell.
NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BIBLE, By the Rev,
Canon Tristram.
SEVEN SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE .
THE OCEAN. By the late Philip H. Gosse. Half calf,
gilt.
THE MESSAGE OF PEACE, AND OTHER CHRIST-
MAS SERMONS. By the late Dean Church. Imitation
crushed morocco.
VERSES. By the late Christina G. Rossetti. Limp
morocco. (In roan, 5/.) <*>
sotic tp fur gramattng Cfjr(3ttan Eutatolrhgt,
London: Northumberland Avenue, W.C,


*


ft VW • 2
VkO \ fr


#


