

A
SERMON;
PREACHED IN THE INDEPENDENT CHAPEL,
PITT STREET, SYDNEY;
ON
SUNDAY EVENING, FEBRUARY 18, 1838.
FAREWELL DISCOURSE.
BY
THE REV. W. JARRETT.
SYDNEY:
JAMES SPILSBURY, COLONIST OFFICE,
AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE BUILDINGS.
1838.




To the Members of the Church and Congre-
gation assembling in the Independent Chapel, Pitt
Street, Sydney, the following Discourse is respect-
fully and affectionately inscribed, by their Friend and
Servant,
THE AUTHOR.




A
SERMON,
&C., &C.
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have re-
ceived mercy, we faint not; but have renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the word of God deceitfully: but by mani-
festation of the truth, commending ourselves to every
mans conscience in the sight of God. — 2 Corin-
thians, iv. 1, 2.
This, dear brethren, as you will readily suppose, is to
me a period of deep and painful interest, called as I am
to terminate my labours among you, and to bid fare-
well to those whose spiritual and everlasting welfare
has been to me an object of the deepest solicitude :
and my situation at the present moment is in no slight
degree embarrassing, from the number and variety of
the subjects which appear meet to be introduced at such
a season ; and this difficulty is increased from the pain-
ful nature of some of the topics to which I shall feel
myself called upon to advert. I can assure you, bre-
thren, I have endeavoured to prepare myself for the
task by divesting myself, as far as possible, of all
feelings of an ungenerous and uncharitable kind, and
by sifting well the motives under the influence of which
I speak. It is possible that I may have erred in my
judgment both of and things, but if so, I have
not erred deliberately and intentionally; should I there-
fore offer anything this evening which does not com-
A


mend itself to your impartial judgment, regulated as
that judgment ought to be by a regard to God’s word,
not only do I hold you at liberty to reject it, but I call
upon you to do so.
The passag-e I have read to you is one in which the
apostle Paul is led to advert to the glory and excellency
of the ministry to which he had been called, as well
as to the honesty and faithfulness of purpose which
had distinguished him in the performance of its duties.
I have selected this passage as the foundation of my
present remarks, from its full correspondence with the
intentions and motives from which I have acted in the
discharge of my ministry among you. Therefore seeing
we have this ministry , as we have received mercy, we faint
not ; but have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty ,
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God de-
ceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending
ourselves to every mans conscience as in the sight of God.
I would call attention to three topics included in the
text:—
I. The nature of the ministry the apostle had received.
11. The manner in which he had discharged it, and
111. The support and encouragement afforded to him.
Consider—
I. The nature of the ministry the apostle had received.
A part of the preceding chapter is occupied with a
comparison of the two dispensations, the Mosaic and
the Christian, and to this comparison the apostle was
led by the course of thought in the former part of the
chapter; “ God,” he says, at the 6th verse, “hath made us
able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter,
but of the spirit, for the letter killeth, but the spirit
giveth life.” The whole of the following part of the
chapter seems to be a parenthesis, in which the com-
parison only glanced at in the 6th verse is enlarged
upon and more fully illustrated, in accordance with
the apostle’s usual style; aitd the course of remark
ending at the 6th verse, is again resumed at the be-
ginning of the chapter before us. The ministry there-


fore which the apostle had received, was the ministry
of the gospel, in distinction from the ministry of con-
demnation. This ministry affords :
1. An illustrious display of the divine character.
So indeed did the ministry of condemnation as the
apostle himself admits. Under the Mosaic economy,
God appeared glorious for his holiness, fearful for his
power, and adorable for his majesty ; nay, even under
this he appeared glorious for his mercy also. But “if
the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more
doth the ministration of righteousness,” or justification,
“ exceed in glory.” Under the latter, God’s holiness is
exhibited in still brighter lustre, together with every other
attribute of his nature : but the main and distinguishing
feature of the gospel, is its revelation of Jehovah as a
just God and yet a Saviour. This is a moral wonder
surpassing every other, —a wonder which can be solved
only by a reference to the infinite wisdom and love of
him with whom we have to do.
Constantly as this great truth has been insisted on
during my ministry, it may suffice now to quote the
language of the apostle. “ Being justified freely by
his grace through the redemption which is in Christ
.lesus: whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time,
his righteousness : that he might be just, and thejustijkr
of him which believeth in Jesus.” By this grand ex-
pedient the claims of divine justice have been satisfied,
and a free channel opened up for the exercise of the
divine mercy. The subjects of the former dispensa-
tion saw this great truth but indistinctly shadowed
forth by the daily animal sacrifices, and by that pre-
sented annually on the great day of atonement; but
“ before our eyes Jesus Christ is evidently set forth
crucified for us.” While, therefore, to the Israelite,
the exercise of God's mercy might appear to be the
result of a mere temporary appointment, to us it ap-
pears to be an essential characteristic of his moral go-


vernment towards our fallen race, and all apprehension
and doubt are obviated, by a reference to the great
atonement for sin, by which the ends of justice are
secured in connexion with those of mercy.
2. This ministry reveals Jehovah's grand designs of
love towards our race.
All that stupendous and expensive moral machinery
to which we have just adverted, is employed for one
simple object,—the salvation of man! And what
does this salvation embrace ? Deliverance from con-
demnation. As a convicted sinner man lies under Je-
hovah’s curse, and this curse sentences him to present
suffering and misery; in consequence of it he is doomed
to feel the penalty of sin to the latest moment of his
present existence. Nor is this all: this curse follows
him into another world, and binds him down to an
eternity of woe. “ There is, however, no condemna-
tion to those who are in Christ Jesusthey are for
ever secured against the penal consequences of their
transgression, through their interest in him who “bore
their sins in his own body on the tree.”
But the salvation of the gospel includes far more than
this. Those who are the subjects of it are made
“ new creatures in Christ Jesus.” They are sanctified
by the Holy Spirit, so that “ they have their fruit unto
holiness and the end everlasting life.” They are led,
under his influence, to mortify sin, and to cultivate the
graces and dispositions of God’s children, and the final
result is the subjection of every thought and imagina-
tion to the obedience of Christ.
Believers are endowed, moreover, with the most
exalted privileges. They are “ the sons of God,” and
“while it doth not yet appear what it shall be, this
they know, that they shall be like him, for they shall
see him as he isthere is in reserve for them “ a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.”
Now this salvation is freely offered. “He that be-
lieveth shall be saved.” This is the declaration of the
God of truth ; a declaration which has never yet been
falsified, which never will and never can be. Paul had


believed the gospel: he knew, therefore, by personal
experience, the glory of this salvation, and hence
gloried in that ministry which revealed it, and which
he had received. There is accordingly a peculiar em-
phasis in his expression, “as we have received mercy,"
both as referring to his own personal experience, and
as indicating the mercy in store for all who regarded
the end of his ministry.
It is plain, moreover, that the ministry which Paul
had received, did not pertain to him in his apostolic
character merely. The same ministry, —“ the minis-
try of reconciliation,” —is committed to all the servants
of Christ, and it is equally open to them to rejoice that
they “ have received mercy,” and this consideration
may well support them under the pressure of the trials
to which they are subject in the performance of their
work.
11, Having considered the nature of the apostle's minis-
try, I come next to notice the manner in which he dis-
charged it. “ But have renounced the hidden things of disho-
nesty, sc.” Some regard the apostle as presenting in the
first clause of the verse, a tacit acknowledgment, that
at a former period he had countenanced and employed
“ the hidden things of dishonesty :” but this is by no
means a necessary inference. The word rendered,
“ renounce” means, to eschew, deny, repudiate; when
therefore, we bear in mind the strict conscientiousness
which distinguished the apostle even before his con-
version, and the undeviating rectitude which cha-
racterized him ever after, there can be no doubt that
he intends to intimate merely his settled and deep-
rooted aversion to those deceitful arts by which some
sought to ingratiate themselves into popular favour,
and to accomplish their anti-christian projects. To
such arts the Judaizing teachers often resorted; it is
not therefore improbable that the apostle has them
particularly in view. His opposition would extend, how-
ever, to every thing opposed to the simplicity of the gos-
pel, and the sincerity and purity of motive it inculcates.
The apostle would accordingly sternly reprobate—


L A careless and inconsiderate exhibition of the truth.
lhat there may be such an exhibition apart from
any dishonesty of purpose may be admitted; but im-
mense mischief may be expected to result from it not-
withstanding-. If the truth is the means of converting
the soul to God, as well as the means of sanctification
to the believer, it is surely of the last importance that
it be clearly and correctly presented to the mind. It
js therefore incumbent on every preacher of the truth,
to back all his statements by an appeal to the sacred
record: nor is it enough that he be able to produce
passages from it which seem to present a verbal cor-
respondence with his statements, but he must show
that the passages he adduces as proofs really are such,
when considered in their real scope and connexion, and
when taken in conjunction also with other parts of
holy writ. It is a fault of no trifling magnitude,— a
fault which will probably be attended with the most
pernicious consequences,—when a preacher advances
statements which have little more than the colour of
support from scripture, and which have often none from
those parts of it to which he makes his appeal. He is
thus likely to mislead the unwary, and to beget the
impression on the unreflecting, that the scripture is a
chaotic mass, without order, arrangement, and cohe-
rence ; and that it is not, “ profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, and instruction in righteous-
ness, according to the degree in which it is studied,
and according to the candour and impartiality with
w hich its statements are received. Such conduct ap-
pears plainly inconsistent with that honesty with which
the book of God ought to be “handled:” for surely
that man is not honest, who does not use the best means
m his power for attaining to a correct acquaintance
w ith it, and who does not also use his best endeavours
to lead others to a similar acquaintance with it.
Another practice opposed to the apostle s sentiment
ls * That of those who distort the truth for the support
of system.
This is a practice still more at variance with the


honesty which should distinguish “ the stewards of the
mysteries of God and it is a practice perhaps of
which few are wholly guiltless. Few are proof against
the prejudices of education; although accordingly a
man may have obtained a knowledge of divine truth
generally accurate and consistent, there may with this
be an admixture of error in reference to some points of
doctrine, from which he can never afterwards deliver
himself. Finding that the more prominent doctrines
he has received are scriptural, he does not perhaps
trouble himself to enquire into the correctness of others.
The sentiments he holds mav be in accordance with
those of the persons around him, and he may hear
them constantly reiterated, and thus take for granted
their correctness; —or he may have embraced them
during the heat of controversy without careful and im-
partial examination; or he may carelessly have adopted
them on the apparent warrant of one or two isolated
passages of scripture, without reference to the analogy
of faith. In these ways, and in many others, may
erroneous doctrines be embraced, and having been
once embraced, they are not easily renounced. Hence
the attempt made by some preachers of the gospel to
make the scriptures square with their theological sys-
tem, instead of forming their theological system by the
scripture: they are for ever looking for support for
preconceived theories, instead of desiring “as new-
born babes the sincere milk of the word.” This is
surely “ handling the word of God deceitfully .”
Great respect is undoubtedly due to the recorded
sentiments of the wise and the good transmitted from
age to age, and it may be conceded without doing
homage to the papacy, that the unanimity which has
prevailed among them in reference to points of doc-
trine, is a presumptive argument in favour of their
correctness of their opinions : accordingly the current
confessions of faith are entitled to regard in the expres-
sion of our sentiments upon scripture doctrine; but
while they may perhaps be used with advantage in ex-
pressing our sentiments, they should not be used to


modify them. The scripture is the fountain-head of in-
struction, there only can it be found in its purity ; and
it were well if the words which the Holy Ghost useth
were as much in repute with many as the decisions of
their “ truly apostolic church /” Such a deference to
creeds and confessions of faith as serves to impose a
restraint upon a man in his examination of the truth of
God, and in the avowal of the result of his enquiries,
is a grievous and intolerable insult to its inspired au-
thority. What is it but “handling the word of God
deceitfully ?” “ Buy the truth, and sell it not,” is the
injunction of the sacred penman, and surely the truth
is not to be bought by him who keeps back part of the
price.
3. The word of God is “ deceitfully handled ” when its
doctrines and requirements are intentionally withheld.
We are naturally inclined to hope, in charity, that
examples of this kind are exceedingly rare : nay, we
would believe it: but knowing as we must do, that when
left to themselves, men are capable of any wickedness,
and that temptations to this particular sin are always
to be met with, it cannot be too attentively considered
in order to its just and fitting reprobation.
The time will come, the apostle assures us, when
men “ will not endure sound doctrine, when they will
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears.” A
man must have received “ the love of the truth,” before
he will desire to have the truth constantly enforced,
and he must be sincere in his desires after holiness,
before he will heartily approve of the enforcement of
the obligations to holiness. Of those who take upon
themselves the Christian name, it is to be feared, that
many are very insincere in their profession. We see
those who profess to seek “ a city which hath founda-
tions whose builder and maker is God,” laying all their
plans and directing all their efforts for the acquisition
of a name and possessions upon earth :—those who
acknowledge that “without holiness no man shall see
the Lord,” exhibiting and tolerating grievous impro-
prieties of conduct:—those who profess tojevere the


authority of Christ, and to recognise the validity of all
his appointments, grievously impatient and mortified
if their own will is not deferred to by all around them.
Here then are the temptations to the ministers of
Christ, to swerve from the line of honesty and plain
dealing, in their exhibitions of scripture truth, beside
those which arise from the open and avowed opposition
of others. Men who are conscious of inconsistencies
of conduct do not ordinarily desire to have their faults
exposed, and their deceit and hypocrisy laid bare:
that man is not likely to be much in favour with them
who desires to cut up their sins by the roots, and to
disturb their quiet while they indulge them. Such in-
consistent professors desire their teachers to prophesy
smooth things, so they love to have it, and so they often
do have it, alas, to their own destruction. But woe to
the man who dares to compromise God’s message,—
who resorts to wheedling and finesse to gain general
favour, rather than to a bold opposition to every thing at
variance with the-simplicity which is in Christ; —who
dares to withhold the injunctions of scripture on ac-
count of their unpalateableness to those to whom he
ministers. Such a man incurs an awful amount of
guilt, and has by no means renounced “ the hidden
things of dishonesty.” The ministers of Christ are
bound to declare the whole counsel of God, without
regard to the prejudices and partialities of their
hearers, —to preach the truth “ whether they will liear
or whether they will forbear.”
4. The word of God is deceitfully handled when it is
employed as a means of securing self - applause.
At the first establishment of Christianity, there was
little inducement presented to men to enrol their
names among its disciples and teachers. The profes-
sion of the truth was too frequently the precursor of
the dungeon and the stake, and at all times the least
likely method of securing fame or worldly aggrandize-
ment. Such, however, has been the success and in-
direct influence of the gospel, that the Christian name
is no longer a badge of disgrace. A man is no longer
B


liable to be pointed at because he avows his faith in the
Saviour of the world, and takes upon him the profes-
sion of his disciple. Would that the reception of the
gospel and the conduct worthy of it, were always cor-
respondent with its profession ! But alas, such is the
deceitfulness of the human heart, that it is often as-
sumed as a cloak to the most unworthy designs: and
what is worse than all, men are not unfrequently
found who make the preaching of the gospel subser-
vient to the gratification of their vanity and pride, (and
not seldom to worse than this). Can any thing be
conceived more awfully and inexcuseably wicked than
this, —that a preacher of the truth should be a minis-
ter of sin ?
And thus it is.—The pastor, either vain
By nature, or by flattery made so, taught
To gaze at his own splendour, and to exalt
Absurdly, not his office, but himself.
Such is the character of the gospel message, that it
might be thought impossible that any could pervert it
to ends so base and so sinful. It is a message both of
life and of condemnation ; to him who believes it, it is
a savour of life unto life ; while to him who rejects it,
it is a savour of death unto death. This is so apparent,
that he who runs may read. He therefore who pro-
mulgates it heartlessly, or for any unworthy purpose,
does but proclaim his own doom, and become charge-
able with the blood of souls! The design of the gos-
pel, moreover, is plainly to magnify Christ: how enor-
mous, then, is the guilt of him who, by the manner in
which he exhibits it, aims to magnify himself! The
guilt of such conduct is so manifest and so heinous, as
to prevent, one would think, so awful a prostitution of
the sacred calling: but in addition to this, the folly
of it is so apparent, that we are led to wonder it should
ever be practised, for this reason alone. So distinct is
the earnestness and simplicity of the man who is sin-
cere in his ministry, from the false eloquence of the
man who preaches himself, that the most obtuse and
dull can detect the difference :


For ghostly counsel, if it either fall
Below the exigence, or be not back’d
With show of love, at least with hopeful proof
Of some sincerity on the giver’s part;
Or be dishonour’d in the exterior form
And mode of its conveyance, by such tricks
As move derision, or by foppish airs
And histrionic mummery, or let down
The pulpit to the level of the stage;
Drops from the lips a disregarded thing.
The weak perhaps are moved, but are not taught,
While prejudice in men of stronger minds
Takes deeper root, confirm'd by what they see.
It was observed, that the preaching of the gospel is
not unfrequently prostituted to worse ends than these,
but enough perhaps has been said already on this part
of the subject: and it is better to draw the veil over
that which will not bear the light!
“ We,” says the apostle, “ have renounced the hidden
things of dishonesty, &c.and how true this observa-
tion was the most cursory reader may judge. In the
sth verse, he says “We preach not ourselves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves, your servants
for Jesus sake.” And in the former of these epistles,
“ And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with
excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto
you the counsel of God. For I determined not to know
anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him cruci-
fied.” In parting with the elders of Ephesus, he said,
“ I take you to record this day that I am pure from the
blood of all men: for I have not shunned to declare
unto you the whole counsel of God,” while his whole
life evidenced the sincerity of his declaration, —“ Nei-
ther count I my life dear unto me, so that I may finish
my course with joy and the ministry I have received.”
The manner in which he exhibited the truth may be
gathered from his character, and from the specimens
with which he has presented us. We are warranted
to conclude that it was in every way worthy of him-
self, or rather, of the gospel he had received. One of
the three things Augustine desired to see was Paul
while preaching ; and what to any minister in present


times could be more instructive, or replete with re-
proof?
Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul
Were he on earth, would hear, approve and own,
Paul should himself direct me. I would trace
His master-strokes, and draw from his design.
I would express him simple, grave, sincere ;
In doctrine uncorrupt; in language plain,
And plain in manner; decent, solemn,chaste,
And natural in gesture ; much impress’d
Himself, as conscious of his awful charge,
And anxious mainly, that the flock he feeds
May feel it too: affectionate in look,
And tender in address, as well becomes
A messenger of grace to guilty men.
Having now considered both the nature of the apostles
ministry ; amd the manner in which he discharged it. I
shall notice briefly.
111. The support and encouragement afforded him.
“As we have received mercy we faint not.” One of
the most distinguishing traits in the apostle’s character
was his humility. Though not a whit behind the chief
of the apostles, he was fain to regard himself as the
chief of sinners. Though he had laboured more abun-
dantly than they all, he was most concerned that it
should be remembered, that it was not he, but “ the
grace of Christ” which was with him. And his en-
couragement, as you perceive, at the time he dictated
this passage, was drawn from the mercy of God. It
was this that preserved him from fainting, and not any
confidence in his own inherent power.
“ Hut what need had he of encouragement?” In
what danger was he of fainting ? Let his peculiar and
pressing trials be considered and the question is easily
answered.
The apostle s trials may be included under five par-
ticulars. 1. Personal imperfection.
Though so holy a man, Paul was no stranger to the
influence of indwelling corruption. If we are to under-
stand him as speaking in his own name in the seventh
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, his trials from this
source were most poignant and severe. “ 1 find then


a law, that when I would do good evil is present with
me. For I delight in the law of God after the inward
man. For I see another law in my members warring
against the law of my mind, and bringing me into cap-
tivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death.”
That the apostle stedfastly resisted evil inclinations
is apparent from this passage itself: but he elsewhere
declares positively, “ I keep under my body and bring
it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have
preached the gospel to others, I myself should be a
castaway:” and again, “ I am crucified with Christ.”
But though so sincere in his desires and efforts after
holiness, he was as other men, constantly beset with
temptations to sin; and to a mind so feelingly alive to
the obligations under which Christ had laid him to
practise holiness, the trial would be felt to be most op-
pressive. Anxious as he was to win Christ, and to
attain to the prize of his high calling, every sinful
emotion would be the cause of the deepest mental suf-
fering, opposed as it was to the habitual bent and dis-
position of his soul.
There can be no doubt, moreover, that the apostle
suffered severely from the influence of “ the law in his
members,” tending, as it did, to impede him in the
prosecution of his ministry, and to mar his work and
render it imperfect. Hence he so feelingly declares,
“ we are not sufficient of ourselves to think any thing
as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God:” and
“ I can do all things through Christ strengthening
me.”
2. The apostle’s trials arose also from the impenitence
and unbelief of those to whom he preached the gospel.
How painful must it have been to him to witness
the obstinacy of men to whom he was anxious to be-
come instrumental to their salvation,—to know that he
had in his possession a panacea for all their spiritual
maladies, and to see them determined in rejecting it:
to know too that the gospel he had received must


prove to them, if not the savour of life unto life, a
savour of death unto death. To a benevolent mind,
such as the apostle possessed, the spectacle of sinners
perishing with the means of life within their reach,
would be heart-rending and afflictive in the very high-
est degree. “ I would to God,” he exclaimed to
Agrippa, “ that not only thou, but also all that hear
me this day, were both almost and altogether such as
I am, except these bonds.”
The apostle’s trials arose, 3. From the endurance of
physical hardship.
*' I n labours more abundant, in stripes above mea-
sure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned,
thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have [
been in the deep; In journeyings often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the
city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea,
in perils among false brethren; In weariness and pain-
fulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Beside those
things that are without, that which cometh upon me
daily, the care of all the Churches.”
4. In the trials which the apostle endured, must be
included slander and reproach.
Nothing is so painful to an ingenuous mind as the
misrepresentation of its intentions, and the perversion
of all its declared purposes; yet to this the apostle
was exposed in common with other servants of Christ.
It was “slanderously reported” of him, that he did
evil that good might come; though no man’s moral
principles could be sounder and more correct; he was
represented by some crafty and designing teachers as
a mere pretender to the apostleship, and as one who
sought to gain his own ends by preaching the Gospel
of Christ; though “the signs of his apostleship”
were found in almost every part of the Roman empire,
and though self-denial and devotion to the glory of


Christ pre-eminently distinguished him through his
whole course: while malignant detraction was resorted
to by a host of persons who have thus gained for them-
selves an infamous notoriety in the Church of God in
all succeeding ages. But remembering the Saviour’s
admonition; “Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake,” he observes, “ being reviled we bless ;
being persecuted we suffer it; being defamed we in-
treat.”
5. To these trials must be added persecution.
By persecution, I mean the more open, deliberate,
and combined efforts of the enemies of Christ to injure
and crush the apostle as his servant; and to these,
perhaps, he was more exposed than any other of his
colleagues, on account of his bold and determined acts
of aggression upon the empire of Satan. The perse-
cution endured by Paul, will readily occur to your me-
mory from the details of the Acts of the Apostles.
Scarcely had he taken upon himself the Christian name
than he was beset by enemies, who, enraged at his
apostacy from their cause, were determined if possible
to compass his destruction. And not to mention par-
ticularly, the imprisonment he suffered at Philippi, and
his hair-breadth escapes during his preaching tour
through the countries of Greece and Asia Minor, he
no sooner returned to Jerusalem than he was arrested
and deprived of his liberty, and at length forwarded a
prisoner to Rome upon his own appeal to Caesar ; and
there, —although he appears to hive enjoyed a tempo-
rary respite,—he was again imprisoned; and finally,
as would appear from the records of church history,
he suffered martyrdom under Nero.
Such were the apostle’s trials: yet although many
of them had already come upon him, and the rest were
in prospect, he declares, “as we have received mercy
we faint not." But what is his meaning, “as we have
received mercy ?” I have already alluded to the humi-
lity of the apostle, and to the deep sense of personal
unworthiness which he cherished ; I must accordingly


conclude his meaning to be, that such was his sense of
God’s amazing goodness in calling him into the fellow-
ship of his son Jesus Christ, that all which he endured
in the discharge of his ministy was not sufficient to
cool his ardour, or quench his courage. That this is
his meaning appears probable, moreover, from his lan-
guage, 1. Timothy, i. 12—14. “And I thank Christ
Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry ; who
was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and inju-
rious : but I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly
in unbelief. And the grace of Our Lord was exceeding
abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus,
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners;
of whom lam chief” Because he had received mercy
from God, it mattered little to him that men had no
mercy for him, —that they cast out his name as evil,
that they misconstrued his intentions, maligned his
character, counteracted his designs, and plotted his
destruction. “ None of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto me, so that I may finish my
course with joy and the ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of
of God.”
It now remains, my brethren, that I should offer a
few remarks upon the dissolution of the relation in
which I have stood to you as a pastor, and that I
should bring before my own view, and before yours,
the reflections it is adapted to excite.
Interested as I have felt in your spiritual welfare, I
cannot close my labours among you, without advert-
ing to the manner in which my ministry has been received.
It is cause of severe and devout gratitude to God,
that I have not laboured among you in vain. I have
been privileged to know that several have been brought
to a knowledge of the truth, and that not a few have
received important spiritual benefit by the exercise of
my ministry among you ; and rare as are the instances
of spiritual good effected in this land of iniquity, I


cannot but regard the fact as highly expressive oi
God’s goodness to me, and I do feel myself infinitely
more than repaid for all that I have attempted, and foi
all that I may have endured in the whole course of my
ministry. But concerned as lam for God’s glory, in
the salvation of souls, I do not feel myself satisfied:
knowing, as I do, the duty of men to believe the gos-
pel, I cannot rest content while any reject it: know-
ing, as I also do, that the gospel will become a savoui
of death unto death, if it do not become a savour of
life unto life, I cannot, from the instincts of common
humanity, remain content while any put from them
the offer of life.
The number of those present who have believed the
gospel, can be known only to the searcher of hearts;
but must I not conclude, my hearers, that the very
great majority of you have not believed it? I speak
especially to those who have statedly attended on
my ministry, though not exclusively to them; must I
not conclude, from the worldliness of spirit I see, and
from that conformity to the maxims and customs adopted
and encouraged by the ungodly—from that exclusive
devotion to business which is so apparent, that many
of you have not exercised that faith “which over-
cometh the world ?” Must I not conclude, from the
habits of dissipation of others, that they ha.ve not be-
lieved the gospel? from the carelessness, frivolity, and
spiritual unconcern of others, that they have not ? And
if my judgment be accordant with truth, what must I
feel, and what can I say ? Shall I tell you again, as I
have often told you before, that I can know no higher
joy than that which would arise from your salvation?
O that I could concentrate in my language all the ear-
nestness of the apostle himself; and, above all, that I
could command the influence of the Spirit of God to
render my appeal effectual! —My hearers, are you
resolved deliberately to consign yourselves to the pit
of destruction ? are you resolved upon ruin ? If not,
repent! Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ! Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ! Believe on the Lord
c


Jesus Christ! I beseech you my impenitent hearers,
1 beseech you be reconciled to God! With the
tenderest affection, and the deepest earnestness, I
entreat you, reject not the gospel, and disregard not
my last words among you. “ Turn from your evil
ways for why will ye die?” Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and ye shall be saved!
Some of you profess to have received the Lord Jesus;
do you so walk in him as ye have received him. Is your
life consistant with your profession? or do you exhibit
inconsistencies which render it questionable whether
you have known the truth at all ? Are you careful
that men should have no evil thing to say against you?
o you act as becometh the gospel ? Are you not
earthly in your desires, and in a great degree conformed
to the world ? Is this so, or is it not, my brethren ?
ouiier the word of exhortation, 1 pray you, and “ ex-
amine yourselves whether ye be in the faith .” “ Judo-e
yourselves brethren that ye be not judged of the Lord/’
And if you can assure yourselves that you are in Christ
Jesus, beware that you become not stumbling blocks
in the way of the ungodly, either by open and glaring
inconsistencies, or by an ill-concealed indifference to
the obligations under which Christ has laid you.
Brethren, “ let us not sleep as do others.” “It is
high time that ye awake out of sleep, for now is your
salvation nearer than when ye believed.” “ Watch
ye, therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour
when the son of man cometh.”
In the second place; may I not be allowed a few words
on tue manner in which J have discharged my minis-
try among you. This is necessary for various reasons
which I need not explain.
I beg then, brethren, that you will understand, that
a w ich I have advanced in the present discourse
upon the manner in which the functions of the Chris-
tian ministry required to be discharged, accords with
my deliberate sentiments. All that I have commended
ave studiously and prayerfully endeavoured to
practice, and all that I have condemned I have as
studiously endeavoured to avoid.


Believing it, as I do, to be of the utmost importance
that the truth should be distinctly and clearly presented
to the mind, I have through my whole ministry devoted
much time to the study of the sacred scriptures. De-
sirous as I ever have been of presenting other than
crude and ill-digested notions in my expositions of the
truth of God, I have carefully endeavoured to ascer-
tain the mind of the spirit, both by study and by
prayer : and I do not remember to have, in more than
one or two instances, discoursed upon passages, of the
scope and meaning of which I have not been previously
satisfied by careful and diligent examination. Nor
do I think, that I have been at all cramped in my views
of divine truth by theological system; I have endea-
voured to apprehend it by direct reference to the
scripture itself, unincumbeiied by the trammels im-
posed by human authority. I may be allowed to add,
moreover, that I do not remember to have composed a
single sermon without first imploring the divine direc-
tion and aid, and without seeking for the same aid in
commending it to you. It is perhaps too much to as-
sume that every view I have taken of scripture doctrine
has been correct, but I feel the utmost possible confi-
dence that the tenor of my preaching has been fully in
accordance with the truth of God.
Of the manner in which I have proclaimed among
you “ the unsearchable riches of Christ,” you your-
selves are the judges. I can only say that while I have
laboured among you “ in weakness, and in fear, and in
much trembling, ” I have aimed to “ commend myself to
every mans conscience as in the sight of God,” and that
I have endeavoured to employ the most likely methods
of rendering my message effectual; at the same time,
that I have clearly recognised the truth that Paul may
plant and Apollos water, but God must give the in-
crease : while all who have been familiar with my sen-
timents can bear witness to my expressed anxiety to
have the prayers of my people, that the seed sown
might be productive of much fruit to the glory of God.
Nor have I confined myself to the declaration of


“ the truth from the pulpit. I have both sought for,
and embraced, opportunities of pressing upon the con-
sciences of my hearers individually, the things which
belong to their peace. I am aware, for I have fre-
quently heard the complaint, that I have not been
famous for what are frequently misnamed pastoral
visits. I have always entertained a great suspicion of
those systematic calls of compliment in which some
ministers indulge, apparently for the purpose of keeping
their hearers in good humour with themselves, or for
some other end equally worthy. From the feeling to
which I have adverted, I may have fallen into the other
extreme, and certainly, if this be the case, I desire to
correct the error without falling into the practice I
have censured.
I might allude to laboiys of a more miscellaneous
ind, but I think it unnecessary : I am quite sure that
those who are disposed to do justice to my intentions
and efioits will not require it, and those who are not so
disposed, would not be at all likely to be changed in
sentiment by any apology however laboured, or how-
ever just. But perhaps some will doubt the propriety
ot these allusions at all ; to such I can only say, that
circumstances, and the occasion, seemed to me to de-
mand it; and if I need an apology for the practice, I
can only refer to the example of the apostle himself,
who was by no means indifferent, whether his inten-
tions and motives in the discharge of his ministry, were
understood or not. And I can with confidence make
my appeal to you, that I have not been in the habit of
indulging in such a strain.
I might also allude to trials I have endured. Some
of these have been already glanced at. The principal
of these have arisen from the awful and discouraging
spiritual indifference, which prevails among those who
profess the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The ne-
glect of meetings for social prayer, and for the pro-
motion of a spirit of brotherly correspondence and
fellowship among Christians, as well as a general
me i erence to all that pertains to the kingdom of


Christ, have proved to me the severest of the trials I
have been called to suffer. That these evils are not
confined to this Christian community I am well aware,
but as they have existed among us, it becomes me
again, and for the last time, to advert to them. 1 pray
you to lay the matter seriously to heait, and to remem-
ber that the most infallible means for promoting the
prosperity of a Christian Church, is the cultivation of a
spirit of prayer among its members.
That we have not realised all the advantages of union,
is a necessary consequence of that low state of religion
to which I have just adverted; and that the evils at-
tendant upon disunion should press with special force
upon the pastor of a Christian Church, is but natural.
That we have suffered too, from the influence of men of
an unstable, overbearing, and factious spirit, is, I fear,
but too notorious; and that all these evils should have
a direct bearing upon myself, was naturally to be ex-
pected, from the form of church polity to which we are
attached. I know that men of opposite views will
charge these evils upon the system: I am satisfied,
however, that they are the accidents of the system, and
not its essential results. The best things are liable to
abuse ; and while it is admitted that under the congre-
gational system, men of an improper spirit sometimes
acquire an undue ascendancy, it needs but ordinary
intelligence among its members, sincere piety, and cor-
dial love to Christ, and respect for his laws, to ensure
all those high and important results intended to be
answered by his church : and without these, of what
worth is any system of church government whatever?
“ Alexander, the coppersmith, did me much evil,”
says the apostle, but how he has not told us. It is pro-
bable, however, that it was by means of detraction, and
by the indulgence of malicious invective, by which he
aimed to destroy the apostle’s influence among those
who were favourably disposed towards his ministry.
That the disciples of the coppersmith should be found
in this hemisphere, need occasion no surprise; and that
they should exercise their honourable vocation, is not to


be wondered at. “The Lord will reward them ac-
cording to their works.” “He that despiseth you, des-
piseth me; and he that despiseth me, despiseth him
that sent me.”
The resignation of my pastoral charge has been
contemplated for some time past, and was rendered
necessary by circumstances to which I have alluded,
as well as by others, to which I need make no particu-
lar reference. I might, however, remark upon the
manner in which my resignation was accepted, and the
circumstances attending it, but that I do not wish to im-
pute feelings and intentions which are disavowed. The
future may perhaps reveal both men and things in a
different light to that in which they appear at present.
“Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
who will both bring to light the hidden things of dark-
ness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and
then shall every man have praise of God.”
I have alluded, brethren, to personal trials, and many
know that they have been neither few nor light, but
“ seeing ” I have this ministry, as I have received mercy ,
I faint not. “To the mercy of God I feel my-
self everlastingly indebted, and I can never regard that
discipline severe which tends to accomplish the designs
of that mercy. On the mercy of God would I now
throw myself, under a deep sense of personal unworthi-
ness, and of the imperfect manner in which I have dis-
charged my ministry among you. While before men
I may, and do, justify myself; before God I am deeply
sensible I should lie in abasement of spirit. I pray
God, to pardon all the errors and infirmities, which have
distinguished my labours in his service, and in his
mercy to accept what has been intended for his glory.
And I do now solemnly and deliberately avow my
agreement in the sentiment of the excellent Philip
Henry : I hope and expect to be saved, not as a perfect
saint, but as a poor sinner!
“And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly;
and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body,
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord


Jesus Christ.” “ Now the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shep-
herd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.
THE END.


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY J. SPIESEUKY,
